THE WORKS OF THE FAMOUS Nicholas Machiavel, CITIZEN and SECRETARY OF FLORENCE.

WRITTEN Originally in ITALIAN, and from thence newly and faithfully Translated
into ENGLISH.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, Charles Harper, and John Amery, at the
Miter, the Flower-de-Luce, and the Peacock, in Fleetstreet. 1680.

LICENSED

Febr. 2. 1674.
THE SEVERAL TREATISES Contained in this BOOK.
1. THe History of Florence. 2. The Prince. 3. The Original of the Guelf and
Ghibilin Factions. 4. The Life of Castruccio Castracani. 5. The Murder of
Vitelli, etc. by Duke Valentino. 6. The State of France. 7. The State of
Germany. 8. The Discourses on Titus Livius. 9. The Art of War. 10. The Marriage
of Belphegor, a Novel. 11. Nicholas Machiavel's Letter in Vindication of
Himself and his Writings.
THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER Concerning the following LETTER.
Courteous Reader,
IT has been usual with most of those who have Translated this Author into any
Language, to spend much of their time and paper in taxing his impieties, and
confuting his errors and false principles as they are pleased to call them, if
upon perusal of his Writings I had found him guilty of any thing that could
deceive the simple, or prejudice the rest of Mankind, I should not have put
thee to the hazard of reading him in thy own Language; but rather have suffered
him still to sleep in the obscurity of his own, than endanger the world; but
being very well assured of the contrary, and that the Age will rather receive
advantage than damage by this Publication, I did yet think that it was fit to
say something in a Preface to vindicate our Author from those Slanders which
Priests, and other biased Pens have laid upon him; but still I thought, that
it might prove a bold and presumptuous undertaking, and might excite laughter,
for a person of my small parts and abilities, to Apologize for one of the
greatest Wits and profoundest Judgments that ever lived amongst the Moderns: In
this perplexity, I had the good fortune to meet with this Letter of his own
writing; which has delivered me from those scruples, and furnished me with an
opportunity of justifying this great person by his own Pen. Receive then this
choice Piece with benignity, it has never before been published in any
Language, but lurked for above 80 years in the private Cabinets of his own
Kindred, and the Descendents of his own admirers in Florence, till in the
beginning of the Pontisicat of Vrbane the 8th. it was procured by the Jesuits
and other busybodies, and brought to Rome with an intention to divert that
wise Pope from his design of making one of Nicholas Machiavel's Name and Family
Cardinal, as (notwithstanding all their opposition) he did, not long after.
When it was gotten into that City, it wanted not those who had the judgment and
curiosity to copy it, and so at length came to enjoy that privilege which all
rare Pieces (even the sharpest Libels and Pasquils) challenge in that Court,
which is to be sold to Strangers, one of which being a Gentleman of this
Country, brought it over with him at his return from thence in the year 1645.
and having translated it into English, did communicate it to diverse of his
friends, and by means of some of them, it has been my good fortune to be
capable of making thee a present of it, and let it serve as an Apology for our
Author and his Writings, if thou think he need any. I must confess I believe
his Works require little, but rather praise and admiration; yet I wish I could
as well justify one undertaking of his not long after the writing of this
Letter; for we find in the Story of those times, that in the Month of August
following; in the same year 1537. this Nicolo Machiavelli (except there were
another of that name) was committed Prisoner to the Bargello, amongst those who
were taken in Arms against Cosimo at the Castle of Montemurli, notwithstanding
all his Compliments in this Letter to that Prince, and professed Obligations to
him; if this be so, we must impute it to his too great zeal, to concur with the
desires of the universality at that time, in restoring the liberty of their
Country, which has so far dazel'd the judgments even of great and wise men,
that thou ^eest many grave Authors amongst the Ancients have even commended and
deified the ingratitude and Treachery of Brutus and Cassius. But certainly this
crime of his would have been much more unpardonable, if he had lived to see his
own Prophecy fulfilled in the Persons and Descendents of this great Cosimo,
for there was never any succession of Princes since the world began, in which
all the Royal virtues and other qualities necessary to those who rule over men,
were more eminently perspicuous than in every individual of this line; so that
those people have as little cause as ever any had to lament the change of their
Government; their great Dukes having been truly Fathers of their Country, and
treated their Subjects like Children, though their power be above all
limitation, above all fundamental Laws; but they having no Law, are a Law to
themselves, I cannot choose but instance in some few of their benefits to their
people, first the making the River Arno Navigable from Pisa to Florence in a
year of Dearth, that so the Poor might be set on work and have Bread, and the
Traffic of both Cities infinitely facilitated, their making at their own
charge a Canal from Livorne to Pisa, their erecting at Pisa a famous
University, paying the Professors, who are eminent for Learning, and
discharging all other incidencies out of their own Revenue, besides the raising
stately Buildings for Schools and Libraries, their founding a renowned Order of
Knighthood, and keeping the Chapter in the same City, and ordering a
considerable number of Knights constantly to reside there, both which were
intended and performed by them, to increase the concourse, and restore the
wealth to the once opulent Inhabitants of that place. Their new Building
fortifying and enfranchizing Livorne, that even by the abolishing their own
Customs they might enrich their Subjects; and make that Port (as it now is) the
Magazine of all the Levant Trade. And lastly, Their not having in 140 years
ever levied any new Tax upon their people, excepting in the year 1642. to
defend the Liberties of Italy against the Barbarini. These things would merit a
Panegyric if either my parts, or this short Advertisement would admit it, I
shall conclude then after I have born a just and dutiful testimony to the
merits of the Prince who now governs that State, in whom (if all the Princely
virtues and endowments should be lost) they might be found and restored again
to the world: As some ingenious Artists in the last Age, retrieved the Art of
Sculpture by certain bas relievos remaining on some Pillars and Walls at Rome;
The Prudence, Magnanimity, Charity, Liberality, and above all the Humanity,
Courtesy, and Affability of this Prince, though they exceed my expressions,
yet they are sufficiently known, not only to his own Subjects (the constant
objects of his care and goodness) but even to all Strangers, more particularly
to our Nation, he having undertaken a troublesome Journey to visit this
Kingdom, and to make it witness and partaker of his transcendent generosity and
bounty, which he has continued ever since, as can be testified by all who have
had the honor to wait upon him in his own Country, or the good fortune but to
see him in ours. I my self who have been so happy to be admitted into his
presence, and have been honored since in having his Highness my customer for
many choice Books to increase (not his knowledge, for that is beyond receiving
any addition by Books) but his curiosity, and his Library, do think my self
bound in Duty to take this poor opportunity of testifying my gratitude and
devotion to this excellent Prince. As to this Letter I have nothing more to
say, but that thou may see how right this Author was set in Principles of
Religion, before he could have the information, which we have had since from
the Pens of most learned and rational Controversists in those points, and
therefore thou may admire the sagacity of his Judgment. Read him then, and
serve God, thy King, and thy Country, with the knowledge he will teach thee.
Farewell.

NICHOLAS MACHIAVEL'S LETTER TO ZANOBIVS BVONDELMONTIVS IN VINDICATION Of
himself and His WRITINGS.
THE Discourse we had lately (dear Zenobio) in the delightful Gardens of our
old deceased Friend Cosimo Rucellai, and the pressing importunity of Guilio
Salviati, that I would use some means to wipe off the Many aspersions cast upon
my Writings, gives you the present trouble of reading this Letter, and me the
pleasure of writing it; which last would be infinitely greater, if I were not
at this day too old, and too inconsiderable, and by the change of our
Government wholly incapable of performing, either with my brain or my hand, any
further service to my Country; for it has ever been my opinion, that whosoever
goes about to make men publicly acquainted with his actions, or apologize to
the world for imputat^ons laid upon him, cannot be excused from vanity and
impertinence, except his parts and opportunities be such, as may enable him to
be instrumental for the good of others, and that he cannot atchieve that
excellent end, without justifying himself from having any indirect and base
ones, and procuring trust from men, by clearing the repute of his justice and
integrity to them. But although this be far from my case; yet I have yielded
(you see) to the entreaty of Guilio and the rest of that Company, not only
because I am sufficiently (both by the restraint of our Press, and the
discretion of the person I write to) assured that this Letter will never be
made public; but for that I esteem it a Duty to clear that excellent Society,
from the Scandal of having so dangerous and pernicious a person to be a member
of their conversation; for by reason of my Age, and since the loss of our
Liberty, and my sufferings under that Monster of lust and cruelty Alexander de
Medeci, set over us by the Divine vengeance for our sins, I can be capable of
no other design or enjoyment, than to delight and be delighted in the company
of so many choice and virtuous persons, who now assemble themselves with all
security, under the happy and hopeful Reign of our new Prince, Cosimo, and we
may say, that though our Commonwealth be not restored, our slavery is at an
end, and that he coming in by our own choice, my prove (if I have as good Skill
in Prophesying as I have had formerly) Ancestor to many renowned Princes, who
will govern this State in great quietness, and with great clemency; so that our
Posterity is like to enjoy case and security, though not that greatness,
wealth, and glory, by which our City has for some years past (even in the most
factious and tumultuous times of our Democracy) given Law to Italy, and bridled
the ambition of foreign Princes, But, that I may avoid the Loquacity incident
to old men, I will come to the business. If I remember well, the exceptions
that are taken to these poor things I have published, are reducible to three.

First, That in all my Writings, I infinuate my great affection to the
Democratical Government, even so much as to undervalue that of Monarchy in
respect of it, which last I do, not obscurely in many passages, teach, and as
it were, persuade the People to throw off.

Next, That in some places I vent very great impieties, slighting and
villifying the Church, as Author of all the misgovernment in the world, and by
such contempt make way for Atheism and Profaneness.

And Lastly, That in my Book of the Prince I teach Monarchs all the execrable
Villainies that can be invented, and instruct them how to break faith, and to
oppress and enslave their Subjects.

I shall answer something to every one of these; and that I may observe a right
method, will begin with the first.

Having lived in an Age when our poor Country and Government have suffered more
changes and revolutions, than ever did perhaps befall any people in so short a
time, and having had till the taking of Florence, my share in the managing of
affairs, during almost all these alterations, sometimes in the quality of
Secretary of our City, and sometimes employed in Embassages abroad, I set my
self to read the Histories of Ancient and Modern times, that I might by that
means find out whether there had not been in all Ages the like vicissitudes and
accidents in State affairs, and to search out the causes of them, and having in
some sort satisfied my self therein, I could not abstain from scribbling
something of the too chief kinds of Government, Monarchy and Democracy, of
which all other forms are but mixtures, and since neither my Parts nor Learning
could arrive to follow the steps of the Ancients, by writing according to
Method and Art, as Plato, Aristotle, and many others have done upon this
Subject, I did content my self to make slight observations upon both; by giving
a bare Character of a Prince, as to the Monarchical frame, and as to the
popular choosing the perfectest and most successful of all Governments of that
kind upon earth, and in my Discourses upon it, following the order of my
Author, without ever taking upon me to argue problematically, much less to
decide which of these two Gov^rnments is the best; if from my way of handling
matters in my discourses upon Livy, and from those incomparable virtues, and
great Actions we read of in that History, and from the observations I make, men
will conclude (which is, I must confess my opinion) that the excellency of
those Counsels and Achievements, and the improvement which Mankind, and as I
may so say, humane nature it self obtained amongst the Romans, did proceed
naturally from their Government, and was but a plain effect and consequence of
the perfection of their Commonwealth; I say if Readers will thus judge, how
can I in reason be accused for that; it would become those who lay this blame
upon me to undeceive them whom my Papers have missed, and to show the world to
what other causes we may impute those admirable effects, those Heroic
qualities and performance, that integrity and purity of manners, that scorning
of riches and life it self, when the public was concerned: If they please to
do this, they will oblige my Readers, who will owe to such the rectifying their
Judgments, and not at all offend me, who have reasoned this matter impartially
and without passion, nor have possitively affirmed any thing. But what if this
part of my accusation had been true? Why should I be condemned of Heresy or
indiscretion for preferring a Commonwealth before a Monarchy? was I not born,
bred, and employed in a City, which being at the time I writ, under that form
of Government, did owe all wealth and greatness, and all prosperity to it? If I
had not very designedly avoided all dogmaticalness in my observations (being
not willing to imitate young Scholars in the^r Declamations) I might easily
have concluded from the premises I lay down, that a Democracy founded upon good
orders is the best and most excellent Government, and this without the least
fear of confutation; for I firmly believe, that there are none but Flatterers
and Sophisters would oppose me, such as will rest Aristotle, and even Plato
himself, to make them write for Monarchy, by misapplying some loose passages in
those great Authors, nay, they will tell their Readers, that what is most like
the Government of the world by God is the best, which wholly depends upon his
absolute power; to make this comparison run with four feet, these Sycophants
must give the poor Prince they intend to diefie, a better and superior Nature
to humanity, must create a necessary dependence of all Creatures upon him, must
endow him with infinite wisdom and goodness, and even with omnipotency it self.
It will be hard for any man to be misled in this Argument by proofs wresled
from Theology, since whosoever reads attentively the Historical part of the Old
Testament, shall find that God himself never made but one Government for men,
that this Government was a Commonwealth (wherein the Sanhadrim or Senate, and
the Congegation or popular Assembly had their share) and that he manifested his
high displeasure when the rebellious people would turn it into a Monarchy; but
that I may not strike upon the rock I profess to shun, I shall pass to that
which is indeed ^it to be wiped off, and which if it were true, would not only
justly expose me to the hatred and vengeance of God, and all good men, but even
destroy the design and purpose of all my Writings, which is to treat in some
sort (as well as one of my small parts can hope to do) of the Politics; and
how can any man pretend to write concerning Policy, who destroys the most
essential part of it, which is obedience to all Governments. It will be very
easy then for Guilio Salviati, or any other member of our Society, to believe
the Protestation I make, that the animating of private men either directly or
indirectly to disobey, much less to shake off, any Government how despotical
soever, was never in my Thoughts or Writings; those who are unwilling to give
credit to this, may take the pains to assign in any of my Books, the passages
they imagine to tend that way, (for I can think of none my self) that so I may
give such person more particular satisfaction; I must con^ess I have a
discourse in one of my Books, to encourage the Italian Nation, to assume their
ancient valor, and to expel the Barbarians, meaning (as the ancient Romans
used the word) all Strangers from amongst us; but that was before the Kings of
Spain had quiet possession of the Kingdom of Naples, or the Emperor of the
Duchy of Milan; so that I could not be interpreted to mean that the people of
those two Dominions should be stirred up to shake off their Princes, because
they were Foreigners, since at that time Lodovic Sforza was in possession of
the one, and K. Frederick restored to the other, both Natives of Italy; but my
design was to exhort our Countrymen not to suffer this Province to be the
Scene of the Arms and ambition of Charles the 8th. or K. Lewis his Successor,
who when they had a mind to renew the old Title of the House of Anjou to the
Kingdom of Naples, came with such force into Italy, that not only our Goods
were plundered, and our Lands wasted, but even the liberty of our Cities and
Governments endangered, but to unite and oppose them, and to keep this Province
in the hands of Princes of our own Nation, this my intention is so visible in
the Chapter it sell, that I need but refer you to it. Yet that I may not answer
this imputation barely by denying, I shall assert in this place what my
principles are in that which the world calls Rebellion, which I believe to be
not only rising in Arms against any Government we live under, but to
acknowledge that word to extend to all clandestine Conspiracies too, by which
the peace and quiet of any Country may be interupted, and by consequence the
Lives and Estates of innocent persons endangered. Rebellion then so described,
I hold to be the greatest crime that can be committed amongst men, both against
Policy, Morality, and in foro Conscientiae; but notwithstanding all this, it is
an offense which will be committed whilst the world lasts, as often as Princes
tyranize, and by enslaving and oppressing their Subjects make Magistracy, which
was intended for the benefit of Mankind, prove a Plague and Destruction to it;
for let the terror and the guilt be never so great, it is impossible that
humane Nature, which consists of passion as well as virtue can support with
patience and submission the greatest cruelty and injustice, whenever either the
weakness of their Princes, the unanimity of the people, or any other favorable
accident, shall give them reasonable hopes to mend their condition, and provide
better for their own interest by insurrection. So that Princes and States ought
in the Conduct of their Affairs, not only to consider what their people are
bound to submit to, if they were inspired from Heaven, or were all Moral
Philosophers, but to weigh likewise what is probable de facto to fall out, in
this corrupt age of the world, and to reflect upon those dangerous Tumults,
which have happened frequently not only upon oppression, but even by reason of
Malversation, and how some Monarchies have been wholly subverted and changed
into Democracies by the Tyranny of their Princes, as we see (to say nothing of
Rome) the powerful Cantons of Swisserland brought by that means a little before
the last age, to a considerable Commonwealth, Courted and sought to by all the
Potentates in Christendom. If Princes will seriously consider this matter, I
make no question but they will Rule with Clemency and Moderation, and return to
that excellent Maxim of the Ancients (almost exploded in this Age) that the
interest of Kings, and of their people is the same, which truth it has been
the whole design of my Writings to convince them of.

I am charged then, in the second place, with impiety, in villifying the
Church, and so to make way for Atheism. I do not deny but that I have very
frequently in my Writings, laid the blame upon the Church of Rome, not only for
all the misgovernment of Christendom; but even for the depravation and almost
total destruction of Christian Religion it self in this Province; but that this
Discourse of mine does, or can tend to teach men impiety; or to make way for
Atheism, I peremptorily deny: and although for proof of my innocence herein, I
need but refer you and all others to my Papers themselves, as they are now
published (where you will find all my reasons drawn from experience, and
frequent examples cited, which is ever my way of arguing) yet since I am put
upon it, I shall in a few lines make that matter possibly a little clearer; and
shall first make protestation, that as I do undoubtedly hope, by the merits of
Christ, and by Faith in him, to attain eternal Salvation; so I do firmly
believe the Christian profession to be the only true Religion now in the world:
Next, I am fully persuaded, that all Divine verities, which God then designed
to teach the world, are contained in the Books of Holy Scripture, as they are
now extant and received amongst us. From them I understand that God created man
in purity and innocence, and that the first of that Species, by their frailty,
lost at once their integrity and their Paradise, and inta^l'd sin and misery
upon their posterity; that Almighty God to repair this loss, did out of his
infinite mercy, and with unparalled grace and goodness, send his only
begotten Son into the world, to teach us (...), to be a perfect example of
virtue, goodness, and obedience, to restore true Religion, degenerated amongst
the Jews into Superstition, Formality, and (...) for the salvation of Mankind,
and in sine, to give to us the Holy Spirit, to regenerate our Hearts, support
our Faith, and lead us into all Truth. Now if it shall appear, that as the
lusts of our first Paren^s did at that time disappoint the good intention of
God, in making a pure world, and brought in by their disobedience the
corruptions that are now in it; so that since likewise the Bishops of Rome, by
their insatiable ambition and avarice, have designedly, as much as in them
lies, frustrated the merciful purpose he had, in the happy restoration he
intended the world by his Son, and in the renewing and reforming of humane
Nature, and have wholly defaced and spoiled Christian Religion, and made it a
worldly and a Heathenish thing; and altogether incapable, as it is practiced
amongst them, either of directing the ways of its Professors to virtue and good
life, or of saving thus Souls hereafter. If, I say, this do appear I know no
reason why I, for detecting thus much, and for giving warning to the world to
take heed of their ways, should be accused of Impiety or Atheism, or why his
Holiness should be so enraged against the poor Inhabitants of the Valleys in
Savoy, and against the Albigesi for calling him Antichrist; but to find that
this is an undoubted truth, I mean that the Popes have corrupted Christian
Religion, we need but read the New Testament (acknowledged by themselves to be
of infallible truth) and there we shall see, that the Faith and Religion
Preached by Christ, and settled afterward by his Apostles, and cultivated by
their Sacred Epistles, is so different a thing from the Christianity that is
now professed and taught at Rome, that we should be convinced, that if those
Holy men should be sent by God again into the world, they would take more pains
to confute this Gallimaufry, than ever they did to Preach down the Tradition of
the Pharisees, or the Fables and Idolatry of the Gentiles, and would in
probability suffer a new Martyrdom in that City under the Vicar of Christ, for
the same Doctrine which once animated the Heathen Tyrants against them. Nay, we
have something more to say against these Sacrilegious pretenders to Gods power;
for whereas all other false worships have been set up by some politic
Legislators, for the support and preservation of Government, this false, this
spurious Religion brought in upon the ruins of Christianity by the Popes, has
deformed the face of Government in Europe, destroying all the good principles,
and Morality left us by the Heathen themselves, and introduced instead thereof,
Sordid, Cowardly, and impolitick Notions, whereby they have subjected Mankind,
and even great Princes and States, to their own Empire, and never suffered any
Orders of Maxims to take place where they have power, that might make a Nation
Wise, Honest, Great or Wealthy; this I have set down so plainly in those
passages of my Book which are complained of, that I shall say nothing at all
for the proof of it in this place, but refer you thither, and come to speak a
little more particularly of my first assertion, that the Pope and his Clergy
have depraved Christian Religion. Upon this subject I could infinitely wish,
now Letters begin to revive again, that some Learned Pen would employ it self,
and that some person versed in the Chronology of the Church (as they call it)
would deduce out of the Ecclesiastical Writers, the time and manner how these
abuses crept in, and by what arts and Steps this Babel that reaches at Heaven,
was built by these Sons of the Earth; but this matter as unsuitable to the
brevity of a Letter, and indeed more to my small parts and Learning, I shall
not pretend to, being one who never hitherto studied or writ of Theology,
further than it did naturally concern the Politics; therefore I shall only
deal by the New Tes^ament as I have done formerly by Titus Livius; that is,
make observations or reflections upon it, and leave you and Mr. Guilio, and the
rest of our Society to make the judgment, not citing like Preachers, the
Chapter or Verse; because the reading of Holy Scripture is little used, and
indeed hardly permitted amongst us. To begin at the top, I would have any
reasonable man tell me, whence this unmeasurable power, long claimed, and now
possessed by the Bishop of Rome, is derived, first of being Christ's Vicar, and
by that (as I may so say) pretending to a Monopoly of the Holy Spirit (which
was promised and given to the whole Church, that is, to the Elect or Saints) as
is plain by a Clause in St. Peter's Sermon, made the very same time that the
miraculous gifts of the Spirit of God were first given to the Apostles, who
says to the Jews and Gentiles; Repent and be Baptized every one of you in the
name of Jesus Christ for the remission of Sins, and you shall receive the gift
of the Holy Ghost, for this promise is to you and to your Children, and to all
that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call, Next, to judge
infallibly of Divine Truth, and to forgive Sins as Christ did. Then to be the
Head of all Ecclesiastical persons and causes in the world; to be so far above
Kings and Princes, as to Judge, Depose, and deprive them, and to have an
absolu^e jurisdiction over all the Affairs in Christendom, in Ordine ad
Spiritualia; yet all this the Canonists allow him, and he makes no scruple to
assume, whilst it is plain that in the whole New Testament there is no
description made of such an Officer to be at any time in the Church, except it
be in the Prophecy of the Apocalypse, or in one of St. Paul's Epistles, where he
says, who it is that shall sit in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is
God. Christ tells us his Kingdom is not of this world, and if any will be the
greatest amongst his Disciples, that he must be servant to the rest, which
shows that his followers were to be great in sanctity and humility, and not in
worldly power.

The Apostle Paul writing to the Christians of those times; almost in every
Epistle commands them to be obedient to the higher Powers, or Magistrates set
over them, and St. Peter himself (from whom this extravagant Empire is
pretended to be derived) in his first Epistle, bids us submit our selves to
every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King, or, etc.
and this is enjoined although it is plain, that they who governed the world in
those days, were both Heathen, Tyrants, and Usurpers, and in this submission
there is no exception or proviso for Ecclesiastical immunity. The practice as
well as Precepts of these Holy men shows plainly that they had no intention to
leave Successors, who should deprive Hereditary Princes from their right of
Reigning for differing in Religion, who without all doubt are by the
appointment of the Apostle, and by the principles of Christianity, to be obeyed
and submitted to (in things wherein the fundamental Laws of the Government give
them power) though they were Jews or Gentiles. If I should tell you by what
Texts in Scripture the Popes claim the Powers before mentioned, it would stir
up your laughter, and prove too light for so serious a matter; yet because
possibly you may never have heard so much of this Subject before, I shall
instance in a few: They tell you therefore that the Jurisdiction they pretend
over the Church, and the power of pardoning Sins, comes from Christ to St.
Peter, and from him to them. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my
Church. I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; whatsoever thou
shall bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose
on Earth, etc. From these two Texts ridiculously applied, comes this great Tree
which has with its Branches overspread the whole Earth, and killed all the
good and wholesome Plants growing upon it; The first Text will never by any man
of sense be understood to say more, than that the Preaching, Suffering, and
Ministry of Peter, was like to be a great foundation and Pillar of the Doctrine
of Christ; the other Text (as also another spoken by our Savior to all his
Apostles, whose sins ye remit they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain they
are retained) are by all the Primitive fathers interpreted in this manner,
wheresoever you shall effectually Preach the Gospel, you shall carry with you
Grace, and Remission of Sins to them which shall follow your instructions; but
the people who shall not have these joyful Tidings communicated by you to them,
shall remain in darkness, and in their Sins. But if any will contest, that by
some of these last Texts, that Evangelical Excommunication, which was
afterward brought into the Church by the Apostles, was here praesignified by
our great Master, how unlike were those censures to those now thundered out (as
he calls it) by the Pope? these were for edification, and not destruction, to
afflict the flesh for the salvation of the Soul; that Apostolical ordinance was
pronounced for some notorious Scandal or Apostasy from the Faith, and first
decreed by the Church; that is, the whole Congregation present, and then
denounced by the Pastor, and reached only to debar such person from partaking
of the Communion or fellowship of that Church, till repentance should readmit
him, but was followed by no other prosecution or chastisement, as is now
practiced. But suppose all these Texts had been as they would have them, how
does this make for the Successors of St. Peter or the rest? or how can this
prove the Bishops of Rome to have right to such succession? But I make haste
from this subject, and shall urge but one Text more; which is The spiritual man
judges all men, but is himself judged of none; from whence is inferred by the
Canonists, that first, the Pope is the Spiritual man; and then, that he is to
be Judge of all the world, and last, that he is never to be liable to any
judgment himself; whereas it is obvious to the meanest understanding, St. Paul
in this Text means to distinguish between a person inspired with the Spirit of
God, and one remaining in the state of Nature, which latter he says cannot
judge of those Heavenly gifts and graces, as he explains himself when he says,
The Natural man cannot discern the things of the Spirit, because they are
foolishness unto him. To take my leave of this matter wholly out of the way of
my Studies, I shall beg of you Zenobio and of Guilio, and the rest of our
Society to read over carefully the new Tes^ament, and then to see what ground
there is for Purgatory (by which all the wealth and greatness has accrew'd to
these men) what color for the Idolatrous worship of Saints, and their Images
and particularly for speaking in their hymns and prayers to a piece of wood
(the Cross I mean) S^lve Lignum etc. and then fac nos dignos beneficiorum
Christi, as you may read in that Office, what color, or rather what excuse for
that horrid unchristian, and barbarous Engine called the inquisition, brought
in by the command and authority of the Pope, the Inventor of which, Peter a
Dominican Friar having been slain amongst the Albigesi, as he well deserved, is
now Cannoniz'd for a Saint, and styled San Pietro Martine: In the dreadful
Prisons of this Inquisition, many faithful and pious Christians (to say nothing
of honest Moral Moors or Mahometans) are tormented and famished, or, if they
outlive their sufferings burnt publicly to death, and that only for differing
in Religion from the Pope, without having any crime, or the least misdemeanor
proved or alleged against them, and this is inflicted upon these poor
Creatures, by those who profess to believe the Scripture, which tells us, that
faith is the gift of God, without whose special illumination no man can obtain
it, and therefore is not in reason or humanity to be punished for wanting it:
And Christ himself has so clearly decided that point in bidding us let the
tares and the wheat grow together till the Harvest, that I shall never make any
difficulty to call him Antichrist, who shall use the least persecution
whatsoever against any di^^ering in matters of faith from himself, whether the
person so dissenting, be Heretic, Jew, Gentile, or Mohammedan: Next, I beseech
you to observe in reading that Holy Book (though Christian fasts are doubtless
of Divine right) what ground there is for enjoying fish to be eaten (at least
flesh to be abstained from) for one third part of the year, by which they put
the poor to great hardship, who not having purses to buy wholesome fish, are
sujected to all the miseries and diseases incident to a bad and unhealthfull
diet, whilst the rich, and chiefly themselves and their Cardinals, exceed
Lucullus in their Luxury, of Oysters, Turbats, tender Crabs, and Carpioni
brought some hundreds of miles to feed their gluttony, upon these penitential
days of abstinence from Beef and Pork. It may be it will lie in the way of
those who observe this, to enquire what St. Paul means when he says That in the
latter days some shall depart from the faith forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats which God has created to be received with
thanksgiving; but all these things, and many other abuses brought in by these
Perverters of Christianity, will I hope e're long be enquired into by some of
the Disciples of that bold Friar, who the very same year in which I prophesied
that the scourge of the Church was not far off, began to thunder against their
Indulgencies, and since has questioned many tenets long received and imposed
upon the world. I shall conclude this discourse after I have said a word of the
most Hellish of all the innovations brought in by the Popes, which is the
Clergy; these are a sort of men under pretense of ministering to the people in
holy things, set a part and separated from the rest of mankind (from whom they
have a very distinct, and a very opposite interest) by a humane Ceremony called
by a divine name, viz. Ordination, these wherever they are found (with the
whole body of the Monks and Friars, who are called the regular Clergy) make a
Band which may be called the Ianizaries of the Papacy, these have been the
causers of all the Soloecisms and immortalities in Government, and of all the
impieties and abominations in Religion, and by consequence of all the disorder,
villainy, and coruption we suffer under in this detestable Age,; these men by
the Bishop of Rome's help, have crept into all the Governments in Christendom,
where there is any mixture of Monarchy, and made themselves a third estate;
that is, have, by their temporaliti^s (which are almost a third part of all the
Lands in Europe given them by the blind zeal, or rather folly of the Northern
people, who overran this part of the world) stepped into the throne, and what
they cannot perform by these secular helps, and by the dependancy their vassals
have upon them, they fail not to claim and to usurp, by the power they pretend
to have from God and his Vicegerent at Rome. They exempt themselves, their
Lands and goods from all secular jurisdiction; that is, from all Courts of
Justice and Magistracy, and will be Judges in their own Causes, as in matters
of tithe, etc. and not content with this, will appoint Courts of their own to
decide Soveraignly in testamentary matters, and many other causes, and take
upon them to be sole Punishers of many great Crimes, as Witchcraft, Sorcery,
Adultery, and all uncleanness; to say nothing of the forementioned judicatory
of the Inquisition: in these last cases they turn the offenders over to be
punished (when they have given Sentence) by the secular arm, so they call the
Magistrate, who is blindly to execute their decrees under pain of Hell fire; as
if Christian Princes and Governors were appointed only by God to be their
Bravo's or Hangmen. They give Protection and Sanctuary, to all execrable
offenders, even to Murderers themselves (whom God commanded to be indispensably
punished with death) if they come within their Churches, Cloisters, or any
other place, which they will please to call Holy ground; and if the ordinary
justice, nay, the Sovereign power, do proceed against such offender, they
thunder out their Excommunication; that is, cut off from the body of Christ,
not the Prince only, but the whole Nation and People, shutting the Church
doors, and commanding divine offices to cease, and sometimes even authorizing
the people to rise up in Arms, and constrain their Governors to a submission,
as happened to this poor City in the time of our Ancestors, when for but
forbidding the servant of a poor Carmelite Friar (who had vowed poverty, and
should have kept none) to g^ armed, and punishing his disobedience with
imprisonment, our whole Senate with their Gonfalonier were constrained to go to
Avignon for absolution, and in case of refusal, had been massacred by the
people. It would almost astonish a wise man to imagine how these folks should
acquire an Empire so distructive to Christian Religion, and so pernicious to
the interests of men, but it will not seem so miraculous to them who shall
seriously consider, that the Clergy has been for more than this thousand years
upon the catch, and a formed united corporation against the purity of Religion,
and the interest of mankind, and have not only wrested the Holy Scriptures to
their own advantage (which they have kept from the laity in unknown languages,
and by prohibiting the reading thereof) but made use likewise first of the
blind devotion and ignorance of the Goths, Vandals, Huns, etc. and since of the
ambition and avarice of Christian Princes, stirring them up one against
another, and sending them upon foolish errands to the Holy Land, to lose their
lives, and to leave their Dominions, in the mean time, exposed to themselves
and their Accomplices. They have besides kept Learning and Knowledge among
themselves, stifling the light of the Gospel, crying down Moral virtues as
splendid sins, defacing humane policy, destroying the purity of the Chistian
faith and profession, and all that was virtuous, prudent, regular and orderly
upon earth; so that whoever would do good, and good men service, get himself
immortal honor in this life, and eternal glory in the next, would restore the
good policy (I had* almost said with my Author Livy the sanctity too) of the
Heathens, with all their valor, and other glorious endowments; I say, whoever
would do this, must make himself powerful enough to extirpate this cursed and
apostate race out of the world, and that you may see this is lawful as well as
necessary, I shall say but one word of their calling and original, and then
leave this subject. The word Clergy is a term, wholly unknown to the
Scriptures, otherwise than in this sense; a peculiar People or Gods lot, used
often for the whole Jewish Nation, who are likewise called a Kingdom of Priests
in some places. In the New Testament the word Cleros is taken for the true
Believers, who are also called the Elect, and often the Church, which is the
Assembly of the faithful met together, as is easily seen by reading the
beginning of most of St. Paul's Epistles, where writing to the Church, or
Churches, he usually explains himself, To all the Saints in Christ; sometimes,
To all who have obtained like faith with us; sometimes, To all who in all
places call upon the Name of the Lord Jesus, etc. by which it appears, that
neither the word Church nor Clergy was in those days ever appropriated to the
Pastors or Elders of the flock; but did signify indifferently all the people
assembled together; which is likewise the literal construction of the word
Ecclesia, which is an assembly or meeting; in these Congregations or Churches
was performed their Ordination, which properly signifies no more than a decree
of such Assembly; but is particularly used for an Election of any into the
Ministry. The manner was this, sometimes the Apostles themselves in their
Perigrinations, and sometimes any other eminent Member of the Church, did
propose to the Society (upon vacancy, or other necessity of a Pastor, Elder, or
Deacon) some good Holy man to be Elected, which person is he had parts or
gifts, such as the Church could edify by, was chosen by the lifting up of
hands, that is by suffrage, and oftentimes hands were laid upon him, and Prayer
made for him. These men so set apart did not pretend to any consecration, or
sacredness more than they had before, much less to become a distinct thing from
the rest of mankind, as if they had been metamorphos'd, but did attend to
perform the several functions of their calling, as prophesying; that is,
Preaching the Gospel, visiting the sick, etc. and never intermitted the
ordinary business of their Trade or Profession, unless their Church or
Congregation was very numerous, in which case they were maintained by alms or
contribution, which was laid aside by every member, and collected the first day
of the week by the Deacons, this was said to be given to the Church, and was
employed by suffrage of the whole Collective Body to the poor, and to other
incidencies, so far was it from Sacrilege in those days to employ Church goods
to Lay uses. From these words, Church, Clergy, Ordination, Pastor, (which last
has been translated of late years Bishop) you see what conclusions these men
have deduced, and how immense a structure they have raised, upon so little a
foundation, and how easily it will fall to the ground, when God shall inspire
Christian Princes and States to redeem his truths, and his poor enslaved
Members out of their Clutches, to bring back again into the world, the true
original Christian faith, with the Apostolical Churches, Pastors, and
Ordination, so consistent with moral virtue and integrity, so helpful and
conducing to the best and most prudent Policy, so fitted for obedience to
Magistracy and Government, all which the world has for many years been
deprived of, by the execrable and innate ill quality, which is inseparable from
Priestcraft, and the conjuration or spell of their new invented ordination; by
which they cry with the Poet, Iam furor humanum nostro de pectore sensum
Expulit and totum spirant praecordia Phoebum.
Which makes them so Sacred, and Holy, that they have nothing of integrity, or
indeed of humanity left in them. I hope I shall not be thought impious any
longer, upon this point, I mean for vindicating Christian Religion from the
assaults of these men, who having the confidence to believe, or at least
profess themselves the only instruments which God has chosen or can choose to
teach and reform the world (though they have neither Moral virtues, nor Natural
parts equal to other men for the most part) have by this pretense prevailed so
far upon the common sort of people, and upon some too of a better quality, that
they are persuaded their salvation or eternal damnation depends upon believing
or not believing of what they say. I would not be understood, to dissuade any
from honoring the true Apostolical Teachers, when they shall be re-established
amongst us, or from allowing them (even of right, and not of alms or courtesy)
such emoluments as may enable them cheerfully to perform the duties of their
charge, to provide for their Children, and even to use hospitality as they are
commanded by St. Paul. But this I will prophecy before I conclude, that if
Princes shall perfom this business by halves, and leave any root of this Clergy
or Priestcraft, as it now is, in the ground; or if that famous reformer, fled
some years since out of Picardy to Geneva, who is of so great renown for
learning and parts, and who promises us so perfect a reformation, shall not in
his model wholly extirpate this sort of men, then I say I must foretell, that as
well the Magistrate as this Workman, will find themselves deceived in their
expectation, and that the least fibra of this plant will overrun again the
whole Vineyard of the Lord, and turn to a diffusive Papacy in every Diocese,
perhaps in every Parish: So that God in his mercy inspire them to cut out the
core of the Ulcer, and the bag of this imposture, that it may never ranckle or
fester any more, nor break out hereafter, to diffuse new corruption and
putrefaction through the body of Christ, which is his Holy Church, nor to
vitiate and infect the good order and true policy of Government.

I come now to the last branch of my charge, which is, that I teach Princes
villainy, and how to enslave and oppress their Subjects, in which accusation I
am dealt with as poor Agnollo Canini was, who, as they report, being a very
learned Practiser of the Laws, and left the only man of this profession (one
Autumn) in our City, the rest of the Advocates being fled into the Country for
fear of a contagious Disease which then reigned, was commanded by our Judges to
assist with his Counsel both parties, and to draw Pleas as well for the
Defendant as the Plantiff, else the Courts of Justice must have been shut up.
In the same manner my accusers handle me, and make me first exhort and teach
Subjects to throw off their Princes, and then to instruct Monarchs how to
enslave and oppress them; but I did not expect such ingratitude from mine own
Citizens, or to beserved as Moses was, when he was upbraided for killing the
Egyptian, by one of his own people for whose sake he had done it, whereas he
believed they would have understood by that action, that he was the person whom
God intended to make use of in delivering them from the horrid slavery they
were then under. If any man will read over my Book of the Prince with
impartiality and ordinary charity, he will easily perceive, that it is not my
intention therein to recommend that Government, or those men there described,
to the world; much less to teach them to trample upon good men, and all that is
sacred and venerable upon earth, Laws, Religion, Honesty, and what not; if I
have been a little too punctual in designing these Monsters, and drawn them to
the life in all their lineaments and colors, I hope mankind will know them the
better to avoid them, my Treatise being both a Satyr against them, and a true
Character of them; I speak nothing of great and honorable Princes, as the
Kings of France, England, and others, who have the States and Orders of their
Kingdoms with excellent Laws and Constitution to found and maintain their
Government, and who reign over the hearts as well as the persons of their
subjects; I treat only of those vermin bred out of the corruption of our own
small Commonwealths and Cities, or engendered by the ill blasts that come from
Rome, Olivaretto da Fermo, Borgia, the Baglioni, the Bentivoglii, and a hundred
others; who having had neither right nor honorable means to bring them to
their power, use it with more violence, rapine, and cruelty upon the poor
people, than those other renowned Princes show to the Boars, the Wolves, the
Foxes, and other savage beasts which are the objects of their chase and
hunting: whosoever in his Empire over men is tied to no other rules than those
of his own will and lust, must either be a Saint to moderate his passions, or
else a very Devil incarnate; or if he be neither of these, both his life and
reign are like to be very short; for whosoever takes upon him so execrable an
employment as to rule men against the Laws of nature and of reason, must turn
all topsie turvy, and never stick at any thing, for if once he halt, he will
fall and never rise again: I hope after this I need say little to justify my
self from the calumny of advising these Monsters to break their faith, since to
keep it is to lose their Empire, faithfulness and sincerity being their mortal
enemies, an Ugucceone della Faggivola to one who upbraided him, that he never
employed honest men; answered, Honest men will cut my throat, let the King use
honest men, meaning the King of Naples, who was established in his Throne, and
had right to it, But that I may have occasion to justify my self against a
little more than I am accused of, I will confess, that in a work where I
desired to be a little more serious, than I was in this Book of the Prince, I
did affirm, that in what way soever men defended their Country, whether by
breaking or keeping their faith, it was ever well defended, not meaning in a
strict moral sense, or point of honor, but explaining my self that de facto
the infamy of the breach of word, would quickly be forgoten and pardoned by the
world, which is very true, Nay, what if I had said that good success in any
interprize (a far less cosideration than Piety to our Country) would have
cancelled the blame of such perfidy as Caesar (whom I compare to Cataline) used
toward his fellow-Citizen, not only nor detested by posterity, but even crowned
with renown and immortal fame; insomuch as Princes to this day (as I have
observed elsewhere) think it an honor to be compared to him, and the highest
pitch of veneration their flatterers can arrive at, is to call them by the name
of one who violated his faith, and enslaved his Country. I hope that in showing
as well these Tyrants as the poor people who are forced to live under them,
their danger, that is by laying before the former, the hellish and precipitous
courses they must use to maintain their power, by representing to the latter,
what they must suffer, I may be instrumental, first, to deter private Citizens
from attempting upon the liberties of their Country, or if they have done it,
to make them lay down their ill gotten authority; and then to warn the rest of
the Nobility and people, from these factions and malignancies in their several
commonwealths and Governments, which might give hope and opportunity to those
who are ambitious amongst them, to aspire to an Empire over them. However it
prove, I hope I am no more to be blamed for my attempt, then that excellent
Physician of our Nation is, who has lately taken so much pains to compose an
excellent Treatise, of that foul Disease which was, not long since, brought
from the new world into these parts; wherein though he be forced to use such
expressions as are almost able to nauseate his Readers, and talk of such
Ulcers, Boyls, Nodes, Botches, Cankers etc. that are scarce fit to be repeated,
especially when he handles the causes of those effects, yet he did not intend
to teach or exhort men to get this Disease; much less did he bring this
lamentable infirmity into the world, but describes it faithfully as it is, to
the end men may be bettered, and avoid the being infected with it, and may
discern and cure it, whenever their incontinence and folly shall procure it
them. I shall say no more in this matt^r; but to conclude all make a
protestation, that as well in this Book, as in all my other Writings, my only
scope and design is to promote the interest and welfare of mankind, and the
peace and quiet of the world, both which I am so vain as to believe, would be
better obtained and provided for, if the principles I lay down were followed
and observed hy Princes and People, than they are like to be by those Maxims
which are in this Age most in vogue. For my self I shall only say (and call you
all to witness for the truth of it) that as by my Birth I am a Gentleman, and
of a Family which has had many Gonfaloniers of Justice in it; Chief Magistrate.
so I have been used in many employments of great trust, both in our City and
abroad, and at this hour I am not in my Estate one penny the better for them
all, nor should I have been, although I had never suffered any losses by the
seizure of my Estate in the year 1531. for my carriage it has ever been void
of faction and contention; I never had any prejudice against the House of
Medici, but honored the persons of all those of that Family whom I knew, and
the memory of such of them as lived before me, whom I acknowledge to have been
excellent Patriots and Pillars of our City and Commonwealth. During the
turbulent times of Piero, and after his expulsion out of Florence, though my
employments were but Ministerial, my advice was asked in many grave matters,
which I ever delivered with impartiality and indifference, not espousing the
heady opinions of any, much less their passions and animosities; I never sided
with any Party further than that the Duty of my charge obliged me to serve the
prevailing Party, when possessed of the Government of our City; this I speak for
those changes which happened between the flight of the said Piero de Medici,
and the horrid Parricide committed by Clement the 7th. upon his indulgent
Mother, joining with his greatest enemies, and uniting himself with those who
had used the most transcendent insolence to his own person, and the highest
violence and fury the Sun ever saw to his poor Courtiers and Subjects, that so
accompanied he might sheath his Sword in the bowels of his own desolate
Country. At that time, and during that whole Seige, I must confess I did break
the consines of my Nutrality, and not only acted as I was commanded barely, but
roused my self, and stirred up others haraunging (in the Streets places of the
City) the People to defend with the last drop of their blood, the Walls of
their Country. and the Liberty of their Government; taking very hazardous
Journey to Ferruccio, and then into the Mugello and other parts, to bring in
Succors and Provisions to our languishing City; and acting as a Soldier (which
was a new profession to me) at the age of above sixty, when others are
dispensed from it. For all which, I had so entire a satisfaction in my mind and
conscience, that I am persuaded this cordial made me able to support the
sufferings which befell me after our Catastrophe, and to rejoice in them so
far, that all the malice and cruelty of our enemies, could never draw one word
from me unsuitable to the honor I thought I merited, and did in some sort
enjoy, for being instrumental to defend (as long as it was possible) our Altars
and our Hearths. But all that I have undergone, has been abundantly
recompensed to me by the favor and courtesy of the most excellent Signior
Cosimo, who has been pleased to offer me all the preferments the greatest
ambition could aspire to, which I did not refuse out of any scruple to serve so
incomparable a Prince, whose early years manifest so much Courage, Humanity,
and Prudence, and so Fatherly a care of the public good, but because I was
very desirous not to accept of a charge which I was not able to perform, my
years and infirmities having now brought me to a condition in which I am fitter
to live in a Cloister than a Palace, and made me good for nothing but to talk
of past times, the common vice of old Age: So that I did not think it just or
grateful to reward this excellent person so ill for his kindness, as to give
him a useless Servant, and to fill up the place of a far better. This is all I
think fit to say of this matter, I choose to address it to you Zenobio, for the
constant friendship I have ever entertained with you, and formerly with your
deceased Father, the companion of my Studies, and ornament of our City. And so
I bid you farewell.

The first of April, 1537.
THE HISTORY OF FLORENCE, CONTAINING An account of the Heroic Enterprises,
Public and Private Transactions; with the Civil Dissentions, Changes and
Alterations in that GOVERNMENT ALSO AN Account of the Affairs of ITALY, and the
Actions, Designs and contrivances of most of the PRINCES and STATES therein*

IN Eight Books.

By NICOLAS MACHIAVEL.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, Charles Harper, and John Amery, at the
Miter, the Flower-de-Luce, and the Peacock, in Fleetstreet. 1680.

THE EPISTLE TO CLEMENT, VII
BEing commanded by your Holiness (whilst in a private condition) to writ the
History of Florence, I addressed my self to it with all the art and diligence
wherewith nature and experience had enduced me. Having deduced it to the times,
in which, upon the death of Magnifico Lorenzo de Medici, the whole form and
model of Italy was altered; and being to describe the height and importance of
what followed in a loftier and more vigorous style, I judged it best to reduce
what I had written till those times into one Volume, and present it to your
Holiness, that you might at least have a taste of the fruit you had sown your
self, and of my labor and cultivation. In the perusal of this work your
Holiness will see first, to what ruin and convulsions our Country was exposed
for many ages by the variations of Governments, after the declension of the
Roman Empire in the West. You will see how your Predecessors, the Venetians,
the Kingdom of Naples, and the Dukedom of Milan took their turns of Empire and
Sovereignty in this Province. You will see your own Country refusing obedience
to the Emperors, by reason of the divisions, and those divisions continuing
till under the protection of your Family, it began to settle into a Government.
And because it was your Holiness particular command, that in my character of
your Ancestors, I should avoid all kind of flattery, truepraise not being
morepleasing to you, than counterfeit is ungrateful; fearing in my description
of the bounty of Giovanni, the wisdom of Cosimo, the courtesy of Piero, the
magnificence and solidity of Lorenzo, I may seem to have transgressed your
holiness direction, I do most humbly excuse my self, both in that, and whatever
else in my descriptions may appear unfaithful to your holiness dissatisfaction;
for finding the memoirs and relations of those who in sundry Ages made any
mention of them, full of their commendations, I must either present them as I
found them, or pass them by as if I envied them. And if (as some write) under
their great and egregious exploits there was always some latent and ambitious
design, contrary to the interest and liberty of the public. I know nothing of
it, and am not bound to relate it: for in all my narrations I never desired to
cloak or palliate a dishonorable action, with an honorable pretense; nor to
traduce a good action, tho to a contrary end. But how far I am from flattery,
is to be seen in the whole course of my History, especially in my speeches, and
private discourses, which do plainly, and without reservation, describe with
the sentences, and order of their language, the dignity and humor of the
persons. I avoid likewise in all places such words as are impertinent to the
verity, or reputation of history, so that no man who considers my writings
impartially, can charge me with adulation; especially if he observes how little
or nothing I have said of your holiness own Father, whose life was too short to
discover him to the world, and I too downright to expatiate upon it.
Nevertheless had he done nothing more but given your holiness to the world,
that very thing outweighs all the actions of his Ancestors and shall leave more
ages of honor to his family, than his malevolent fortune took years from his
life. I have endeavored, (Most Holy Sir) as far as might be done without
blemish to the truth, to please all people, and it may so fall out I have
pleased no body. If it should, I should not wondder, seeing in my judgment it
is impossible to write any thing of our own times, without offense to several.
Yet I come forth cheerfully into to the field, hoping that as I am honored and
employed by your holiness goodness I shall be defended by your holiness
judgment; and then with the same confidence and courage as I have writ now; I
shall pursue my engagements if my life lasts, and your holiness continues
amongst us.

The Author's INTRODUCTION.
WHen I first took upon me to write the History of Florence, and its
transactions both at home and abroad, I thought to have begun at the year 1434,
at which time the Family of the Medici (exalted by the merits of Cosimo, and
his father Giovanni) was in greater authority that any other in that City;
believing that Messer Leonardo d' Arezzo, and Messer Poggio, two excellent
Historians, had given particular description of all the passages before. But
upon diligent perusal of their writings to inform my self of their orders and
methods, that thereby my own might have better approbation, I found that in
their narratives of the Florentine Wars, and foreign negotiations, they had
been accurate enough; but in their civil dissentions, their intrinsic
animosities, and in the effects which followed them, they were either totally
silent, or where any thing was mentioned, it was with such brevity and
abruptness as could yield neither profit nor recreation to the reader. Which I
conceive they did, either out of an opinion, that they were inconsiderable, and
unworthy to be transmitted to Posterity; or else they apprehended a necessity
of reflecting upon some great persons, whose family would be disobliged
thereby; both which arguments (if I may speak it without offense) are beneath
the grandeur and magnanimity of a great person. For if any thing in History be
delightful or profitable, it is those particular descriptions; if any thing be
useful to such Citizens as have the Government in their hands, it is such as
represents the feuds and dissentions in the Cities, that thereby they m^^be
enabled to maintain their own unity at other peoples expense; if the example of
any Commonwealth moves a man, certainly that which is written of ones own makes
a much stronger impression; and if the factions of any State were ever
considerable, the factions in Florence were not to be pretermitted; the
greatest part of other States have not had above one, which sometimes has
advanced, and sometimes ruined the Government; but Florence has had many
divisions. Everybody knows how in Rome after the expulsion of their King, there
arose division betwixt the Nobles and the people, which continued till one of
them was oppressed. So it was in Athens, and all the Commonwealths which
flourished in those times; but in Florence the first dissension was betwixt the
Nobles; the next betwixt the Nobles and Citizens; and then betwixt the Citizens
and the Plebs: in all which, one was no sooner superior, but it divided again;
and the effects of those divisions were Murders, and Banishments, and
dispersion of families, such as never occurred in any City, that can be
remembered. And truly in my judgment, nothing demonstrates the power of our City
so much as the consequences of those divisions, which were enough to have
subverted and destroyed any other in the world. But ours grew still greater
thereby; so remarkable was the courage of the Citizens, and so efficacious
their industry for the advancement of their Country, that those few which
survived the miseries of their Predecessors, did more by their constancy and
courage toward the advancement of their interest, than the malignity of those
accidents could do to depress it. And doubtless had Florence been so happy
after it had freed it self from the Empire, to have assumed such a form of
Government as would have preserved it in unity, I know not any commonwealth,
either ancient or modern, that would have exceeded it, or have been comparable
to it, either in riches or power. For it is observable, after the Ghibilins
were driven out of the Town in such numbers as all Tuscany and Lombardy were
full of those exiles; the Guelfs, and such as were left behind in the
expedition against Arezzo (which was the year before the battle of Campaldino)
were able to drawout of their own Citizens 1200 Horse, and 12000 Foot, And
afterward in the war against Philippo Visconti Duke of Milan being to try
their fortune rather withtheir riches than their arms (which at that time were
very much weakened) in five years space (which was the length of that war) the
Florentines expended five millions, and 500000 Florens; and when that War was
composed, to ostentate and publish the power of that Commonwealth, they marched
out with an army, and besieged Lucca I do not see therefore, for what reason
these divisions should not be worthy of relation; and if those Noble Authors
were restrained by fear of offending the memory of such as they were to speak
of, they were mightily out, and seem not to have understood the ambition of
mankind, and their desire to have the names of themselves and ancestors
transmitted to Posterity; nor did they remember that many people, not having
opportunity to make themselves eminent by good and laudable acts, have
endeavored to compass it by any way, how scandalous and ignominious soever.
Neither did they consider that the actions which carry greatness along with
them, as those of Governments and States, what ends soever they, have and which
way so^ever they are described, do still leave more honor than infamy to their
Family; the consideration of which things prevailed with me to alter my design,
and to begin my History from the very foundation of the City: and because it is
not my intention to transcribe what has been done before by other people, I
shall relate such things only as occurred within the City to the year 14^4,
mentioning the accidents abroad only so far as will be necessary for the
intelligence of the other; after which year I shall give a particular
description both of the one and the other. Besides, for the better and more
lasting understanding of this History, before I treat of Florence, I shall
discourse of the means by which Italy fell under the dominion of those
Potentates which governed it at that time; all which shall be comprehended in
my four first Books: the first shall give a short recital of all transactions
in Italy, from the dissolution of the Roman Empire to the year 1434. The second
shall give an account of all affairs from the foundation of the City of
Florence, to the end of the War against the Pope, which commenced upon the
expulsion of the Duke of Athens: the third shall conclude with the death of
Ladislaus King of Naples: and in the fourth we shall end with the year 1434,
from whence afterward to our present times we shall give a particular
Narrative of all proceedings both within the City and without.

THE TABLE OF THE Florentine History.
Book I.
THe Northern Nations healthful and prolifick page 1 Their Method of evacuation
upon their excessive increase ibid. Their excessive increase, the ruin of the
Roman Empire ib. The Western Goths the first invaders of that Empire ib. Rome
sacked by them under the command of Alaricus 2 Boniface Governor of Africa for
the Emperor ib. Gallia overrun by the Franks, and from them called France ib.
The H^nni conquer and denominate Hungaria ib. Britain called Anglia from the
Angli ib. The Hanni invade Italy under Attila ib. Attila besieges and takes
Aquilegia ib. He advances to Rome, but retires at the request of the Pope 3 The
Hanni driven back over the Danube, return home ib. The first residence of the
Roman Emperors at Ravenna ib. New Emperors elected by the Romans upon the
non-residence of their old ib. The Lombards invade Italy ib. Odoacres called
King of Rome, and the first of the Barbarians which thought of fixing in Italy
ib. The old Empire divided into Cantons ib. Theodorick invades Italy, slays
Odoacres, calls himself King of Rome, and held his residence at Ravenna ib.
Theodorick dies 4 Ballasarius General for Justinian the Emperor ib. Totila
takes, sacks, and burns Rome ib. Nars^tes a new General for Juskinian ib.
Longinus alters the Government in Italy ib. Albo^ns killed by the conspiracy of
his Wife ib. The authority of the Bishops of Rome began to increase ib. Bishops
of Rome employed as Ministers by the Emperors and Kings, and sometimes executed
by them 7 The Eastern Empire destroyed in the times of Heracleus the Emperor
ib. The King of France exempts the Pope from all humane jurisdiction 8 Pascal
created Pope ib. The original of Cardinals ib. Eugenius the second Pope ib.
Ospurcus made Pope, changes his name ib. The original of Pisa ib. The
Government of Italy, anno 931 ib. Agabito Pope 9 Gregory the fifth Pope,
expelled and restored, devests the Romans of their power of creating Emperors,
and confers it upon six Princes of Germany ib. Clement the second Pope ib.
Nicholas the second Pope, excludes the Romans, and renounces the Papal
Elections to the suffrage of Cardinals only ib. Schism and anti-Popes in the
Church ib. The difference between Henricus and the Pope, the ground of the
Guelf and Ghibilin factions ib. The original of the Kingdom of Sicily ib. Urbin
the second Pope ib. The first Croissade ib. Pascal the second Pope 11 Alexander
the third Pope ib. A new Antipope ib. The Pope's penance to King Henry of
England, upon the complaints about Thomas Becket ib. Celestin the third Pope 12
Honorius the third Pope ib. The Orders of St. Dominick and St. Francis
instituted, 1218. ib. The Titles of King of Naples and Jerusalem annexed ib.
The house of the Esti made Lords of Ferrara. 13 The Guelfs side with the
Church, the Ghibilins with the Emperor ib. Innocent the fourth Pope ib. Clement
the fifth Pope ib. Adrian the fifth Pope ib. Nicholas the third of the house of
Ursin 14. The first introduction of Popes Nephews. ib. Martin the tenth Pope
ib. Pope Celestine resigns to Boniface the eighth ib. The first Jubilees
ordained by Boniface every 100 years 15 Benedictus chosen, dies, and is
succeeded by Clement the fifth, who removed his residence into France, 1036.
ib. John the 22th. Pope ib. The Visconti a great Family in Milan, made Princes
of that City by the extirpation of the Torri ib. The first Duke of Milan ib.
The Dukedom of Milan falls to the Flora's 16 The original of the Venetians ib.
Candia given to the Venetians by the French 17 Benedict the twelfth Pope ib.
Clement the sixth Pope ib. The Iubilee reduced to 50 years 18 Avignon given to
the Pope by the Queen of Naples ib. Innocent the sixth Pope ib. Urban the fifth
Pope ib. Gregory the twelfth Pope ib. The Pope returns to Rome after 71 years
residence in France ib. Urban the sixth Pope ib. Clement the seventh Antipope
ib. Guns first used between the Genoeses and Venetians ib. Urban and Clement
succeeded by Boniface the 9th. and Benedict the 13th. ib. Boniface dies,
Innocent succeeds him; and Gregory the 12th. Innocent 19 Alexander the fifth
elected, and succeeded by John the 23d. ib. Three Popes at once ib. Martin the
fifth ib. The Queen of Naples calls in the King of Arragon to her assistance,
adopts him, and makes Braccio de Montone her General 20 The state of Italy ib.
Book II.
THe convenience of Colonies 22 The Original of Florence 23 The denomination of
Florence ib. The first division of Florence 24 The Guelf and Ghibilin Faction
in Florence ib. The Union and Government of the City of Florence 25 The Antlani
ib. The Captain of the People and Podesta ib. Their Militia ib. A generous
Custom ib. Manfredi King of Naples, a great Patron of the Ghibilins ib. Carlo
d' Angio called into Italy by the Pope 26 A new model of Government in Florence
ib. New commotions in Florence ib. A second model by the Guelfs 27 Gregory the
tenth Pope ib. Florence under excommunication ib. Innocent the 5th. ib. The
jealousy of the Pope ib. Nicholas the third Pope ib. The Ghibilins return ib.
Martinus Pope 28 The Government of Florence reformed by the Citizens ib. The
three Priors to govern two months; to be chosen out of the City indifferently
ib. The Signori ib. Discord between the Nobility and People ib. The Priory and
Gonfalonier ib. Persuasions to the Nobility to be quiet 29 The same to the
People ib. New reformation in Florence, 1298 30 The difference in the Family of
the Cancellieri, the occasion and consequence ib. The Bianchi and Neri ib.
Charles of Valois made Governor of Florence 31 New troubles occasioned by Corso
Donati 32 The Medici and Giugni 33 Florence burned, 1304. ib. Corso Donati
condemned 34 His Death ib. New divisions in Florence 35 Castruccio Castracani
36 The Council of the Signori to sit forty months, whereas before it was
occasional 37 Election of Magistrates by Imborsation. ib. Romondo da Cordona
General of the Florentines ib. The Duke of Athens Governor of Florence ib.
Lodowic the Emperor called into Italy 38 The death of Castruccio and the Duke
of Calabria ib. New reformation in Florence ib. The Florentines quiet at home
ib. Their Buildings ib. A Captain of the Guards 39 Maffeo da Marradi ib. Lucca
sold to the Florentines 40 Taken from them by the Pisans ib. The Duke of Athens
ib. The Speech of one of the Senators to the Duke of Athens 41 The Duke's
Answer 42 The Duke of Athens chosen Prince by the People ib. His practices in
Florence ib. Three conspiracies against the Duke at one time 43 Commotion in
France 44 The Duke expelled 45 His character ib. New reformation 46 The
Nobility deposed ib. The Nobility attempt to recover their authority 47 The
people arm against them ib. The Nobility utterly depressed 48
Book III.
EMulation betwixt the middle and the meaner sort of people 50 The Citizens
Oration to the Senate 51 New reformation 53 Gregory the 11th. holds his
residence at Avignon ib. New Commission for the management of the War ib. A
conspiracy of the Guelfs 54 The conspiracy defeated ib. The Speech of Salvestro
de Medici 55 The Balia ib. Reformation again 56 Luigi Guicciardini 's Oration
ib. New troubles 57 The Speech of a Plebeian 58 The people rise again 59 The
demands of the people 60 Michaele di Lando, a Carder of wool. ib. Michael
overcomes the multitude 62 The popular faction distinguished from the Plebeian
ib. Another reformation 64 The Commons expelled from the Government 65 Michael
Lando imprisoned ib. Benedetto's Speech to his friends upon his going into
banishment ib. He dies at Rhodes 66 Very de Medici 's Speech to the Senate 67
Donato Acciaivoli confined 68 A new conspiracy defeated ib. The Duke of Milan
practices against the City of Florence 69 Several Families banished ib. The
King of Naples dies ib.
Book IV.
PEace betwixt Florence and Milan 72 Imola taken by the Duke Philip 73 The
Florentines overthrown ib. Rinaldo Albizi's exhortation to be quiet 74 Giovanni
de Medici 's reply to Rinaldo 75 The factions of Urano and the Medici 76 The
great courage of Biagio del Milano ib. The cowardice of Zenobi del Pino ib.
Piccinino revolts 77 Carmignuola General of the League ib. Peace betwixt the
League and the Duke 78 Giovanni de Medici's Speech to his Sons at his death ib
Cosimo heir to his Father 79 Volterra revolts ib. Recovered again by the
Florentines ib. Rinoldo persuades to war with Lucca 80 Urano opposes it ib. The
cruelty of Astorre 81 Rinaldo accused 82 His Speech to the ten 83 Pagolo Lord
of Lucca deposed 84 The Florentines defeated ib. Peace between the Florentines
and the Lucchesi ib. Florence in confusion 85 Cosimo Medici deposed and
imprisoned 87 Federigo's Speech to Cosimo his Prisoner ib. Cosimo banished 88
Rinaldo's Speech to his friends ib. Eugenius the Pope labors a Peace 90 Cosimo
recalled ib. Rinaldo's answer to the Pope ib.
Book V.
THe Soldiers in Italy distinguished into two parties 93 The Duke of Milan
promises his Daughter to Count Francis Sforza ib. The Pope invaded, makes Peace
with Sforza ib. Wars in Romagna ib. Sforza General of the Pope's League 94
Peace betwixt the League and the Duke ib. New Ordinances in Florence ib.
Alphonso King of Arragon defeated by the Genoeses, and brought Prisoner to Duke
Philip 95 The Duke and his authority in Genoa. ib. Genoa delivered to the Duke
of Milan 96 How it recovered its liberty again ib. Rinaldo's Oration to the
Duke of Milan ib. The speech of a Citizen of Lucca to the People 98
Controversies between the Greek and Roman Churches 102 Determined at Florence,
by the submission of the Greek ib. The Pope deluded, and his Country invaded by
Nich. Piccinino 103 The Speech of Neri, a Citizen of Florence, to the Venetian
Senate 104 Nicolo Piccinino defeated by Count Sforza 106 He scapes to Fenna,
and from thence very strangely to his Army ib. Verona surprised by Nicolo 107
Recovered again by the Count ib. The Duke of Milan encouraged in his Expedition
into Tuscany by Nicolo and the Florentine Exiles 108 The Patriarch of
Alexandria General for the Pope ib. The Pope discovers intelligence between the
Patriarch and Nicolo, and resolves to secure him ib. Is secured by Antonio
Governor of the Castle at Rome, and dies 109 Commissioners from the Venetians
to the Count ib. Nicolo makes a diversion into the Territories of Florence The
Count desirous to follow him, but is hindered by the Venetians ib. Of Nicolo's
proceeding after he left Lombardy 110, 111 Nicolo's practices to surprise
Crotona 112 Brescia relieved by the Venetians ib. The Duke of Milan's Fleet
defeated by the Venetians ib. Nicolo engages the Florentines at Anghiari, and
is defeated by them ib. The Speech of Count Poppi to the Florentine
Commissaries 114 Neri's answer ib.
Book VI.
THe Duke of Milan proposes a Peace to Count Sforza, and offers his Daughter
in Marriage to the Count 116 The ingratitude of the Venetians ib. Micheletto
General for the League ib. Nicolo's insolence to the Duke of Milan 117 Peace
between the Duke of Milan and Count Sforza ib. Naples taken by the King of
Arragon 118 Florence reformed 119 Nicolo Piccinino dies of grief; a courageous,
but unfortunate General ib. A new War in Lombardy 121 Count Sforza courted by
all parties ib. The Duke of Milan dies ib. The Count made General for the
Milanesi 122 The Venetians ambitious of the Duchy of Milan. ib. Alphonso
invades the Florentines ib. Retreats out of Tuscany 123 The Venetians fall upon
Count Sforza in his Trenches at the Siege of Caravaggio, and are totally routed
by the Count 124 Peace between the Venetians and the Count, by which the
Venetians were obliged to assist the Count in his obtaining the Duchy of
Milan. 125 An Oration made by one of the Milan Ambassadors to the Count ib. The
Count's answer 126 Cosimo de Medici a friend to the Count 127 The Venetians
assist the Milanesi against the Count 128 The Milanesi reduced to great straits
by Sforza ib. Milan delivered to Sforza, and he made Duke thereof, enters into
a League with the Florentines 129 The King of Arragon and the Venetians enter
into a League ib. Their Embassy to the Florentines ib. The Florentines answer.
ib. The Florentines prepare War 130 Federigo the Emperor comes into Italy to be
Crowned, and enter Florence ib. The King of Arragon invades Tuscany ib. The
strange conceit and undertaking of a Citizen of Rome 131 Peace between the Duke
of Milan and the Venetians ib. The King of Arragon enters into the League 134
The Pope solicits a War against the Turk ib. A prodigious Tempest ib. The
Genoesi invaded by the King of Arragon 135 Genoa delivered to the French ib The
King of Arragon dies ib. Calisto the third dies, and Pius the second chosen
Pope 136 The Genoesi revolt from the French ib. Naples invaded by Giovanni d'
Angio ib. The King of Naples defeated ib. He recruits his Army, fights and
defeats Giovanni ib. Giovanni being defeated, and deserted of his Soldiers,
flies into France ib.
Book VII.
COsimo de Medici, and Neri Capponi, the two great Citizens in Florence 138
Cosimo dies 139 His children, riches, honors, and actions described 139, 140,
141 Giacopo Piccinino murdered 142 Francesco Sforza Duke of Milan dies 144. The
Florentines invaded by the Venetians 148 Peace between the Florentines and
Venetians 149 Piero de Medici's Speech to the Florentines ib. His death 150
Thomaso Soderini in great favor with the Florentines ib. Lorenzo and Guiliano
de Medici made Princes of the City of Florence. ib. A conspiracy of the Nardi
151 Bernardo defeated, and taken 152 The Duke of Milan in Florence ib. Tumults
in Volterra ib. Volterra surrendered and sacked 183 Italy in two factions 154
Troubles in Tuscany ib. A conspiracy against the Duke of Milan takes effect,
and the Duke slain 155, 156
Book VIII.
A Nimosity between the Parri* and the Medici in Florence (...) A conspiracy to
destroy Lorenzo and (...) de Medici ib. Rinati del Pazzi disswades from the
enterprise, but in vain 159 The conspiracy miscarries 161 The Pope and King of
Naples make war upon the Florentines 162 Lorenza de Medici's Speech to the
Florentines ib. The Pope and King invades their Territories 164 Genoa rebels
against the State of Milan ib. The gratitude of the Florentines 165 The Pope's
Army defeated 166 Lodovico Sforza Governor of Milan 167 Lorenzo de Medici
arrives at Naples 168 The Isle of Rhodes assaulted by the Turks 169 The Duke of
Calabria defeated 171 A new League ib. Castello besieged by the Army of the
Pope 172 The Coloni provoke the Pope, and are (...) in Rome (...) The company
of S. Giorgio (...) Aquila rebels against the King of ^^^ples (...) Is
protected by the Pope (...) The Genoe^es (...) The Venetians defeated (...)
Count Girolamo (...) His death revenged by his (...) Galeotto Lord of Faenza
(...) Wife (...) The character of Lorenzo de (...) His death (...)
A TABLE Of the several Chapters in the PRINCE.
CHap. I. The several sorts of Governments, and how they are obtained 199 Chap.
II. Of Hereditary Principalities ib. Chap. III. Of mixed Principalities 200
Chap. IV. Why the Kingdom of Darius, usurped by Alexander, did not rebel
against his successors after Alexander was dead 203 Chap. V. How such Cities
and Principalities are to be governed, who before they were subdued, lived
under their own Laws and Constitutions. 204 Chap. VI. Of Principalities
acquired by ones own proper conduct and arms 205 Chap. VII. Of new
Principalities acquired by accident and supplies from other people 206 Chap.
VIII. Of such as have arrived at their dominion by wicked and unjustifiable
means 209 Chap. IX. Of Civil Principalities 211 Chap. X. How the strength of
all Principalities is to be computed 212 Chap. XI. Of Ecclesiastical
Principalities 213 Chap. XII. The several forms of Military discipline, and of
those Soldiers which are called mercinary 214 Chap. XIII. Of Auxiliaries,
mixed Soldiers, and Natives 217 Chap. XIV. The duty of a Prince in relation to
his Militia 218 Chap. XV. Of such things as render men (especially Princes)
worthy of blame or approbation 219 Chap. XVI. Of Liberality and Parsimony 220
Chap. XVII. Of cruelty and clemency, and whether it is better for a Prince to
be loved, or feared 221 Chap. XVIII. How far a Prince is obliged by his promise
222 Chap. XIX. Princes are to be cautious of making themselves either odious,
or contemptible 223 Chap. XX. Whether the building of Citadels, and other
things that Princes many times do, be profitable, or dangerous 227 Chap. XXI.
How a Prince is to demean himself to gain reputation 229 Chap. XXII. Of the
Princes Secretaries 230 Chap. XXIII. How flatterers are to be avoided 231 Chap.
XXIV. How it came to pass that most of the Princes of Italy have lost their
dominions 232 Chap. XXV. How far in human affairs fortune may avail, and in
what manner she may be resisted 233 Chap. XXVI. An exhortation for the delivery
of Italy from the Barbarians 234 The original of the words Guelf and Ghibilin.
236 The life of Castruccio 239 The Relation of the murder committed upon
Vitellozzo Vitelli Oliveretto da Fermo, Pogolo, and the Duke de Gravina, (all
of the house of the Ursini) by the machination and management of Duke Valentine
253 The State of France in an Abridgment 256 The State of Germany in an
Abridgment 265
A TABLE OF THE DISCOURSES.
Book I.
CHap. I. What have been generally the Principles of all Cities, and
particularly of Rome 268 Chap. II. The several kinds of Commonwealths; and
under which kind the Roman is comprehended 270 Chap. III. Upon what accidents
and tumults in Rome the Tribune of the people was created, by which that
Commonwealth became more perfect 272 Chap. IV. The dissentions betwixt the
Senate and the People of Rome, were the occasion that Commonwealth became so
powerful and free 273 Chap. V. Where the Guardianship of liberty may be most
securely deposited, whether among the People or Nobility: and which has greater
occasion to tumultuate, he that would acquire more, or he that would defend,
and keep what he has 274 Chap. VI. Whether in Rome such a form of Government
could be established, as should take away the animosities betwixt the Senate
and the People 275 Chap. VII. How necessary it is for the conservation of a
State, that any Citizen be securely accused 277 Chap. VIII. Unjust calumnies
are no less pernicious to a Commonwealth, than legal accusations are profitable
and good. 278 Chap. IX. How much a single person is necessary for the
establishment of a new Commonwealth, or the reformation of an old 279 Chap. X.
As they are to be praised who lay the foundations of any Republic or Kingdom,
so they are to be condemned who set up a Tyranny 281 Chap. XI. Of the Religion
and Ceremonies of the Romans 282 Chap. XII. How necessary for the preservation
of a State it is, that Religion be in esteem, and how much Italy has suffered
for want of it, by means of the Church of Rome 284 Chap. XIII. How the Romans
pretended Religion many times to regulate their City, to prosecute their Wars,
and to pacify their tumults 285 Chap. 14. The Romans were wont to interpret
their Auspices with accommodation to their own pleasures and designs; and when
at any time they were forced to transgress, they managed it wisely, and
pretended to be very precise; and if any body rashly despised them, he was sure
to be punished 286 Chap. 15. How the Samnites in the extremity of their
affairs, as their last refuge, had recourse to Religion 287 Chap. 16. A people
accustomed to the dominion of a Prince, though by accident they may acquire
their liberty, yet it is with great difficulty, if they maintain it 288 Chap.
17. A people wholly corrupted in their manners, may possibly recover their
liberty, but they will find insuperable difficulty to maintain it 289 Chap. 18.
A corrupt City having made it self free, how its liberty may be maintained; and
not having made it self free, how its liberty may be procured 290 Chap. 19.
Though a weak Prince succeeds an excellent the Government may stand; but if one
weak Prince succeeds another, it is impossible 292 Chap. 20. Two good Princes,
immediately succeeding, may do great things; and well-grounded Commonwealths
having always a virtuous succession, their Conquests and Acquisitions must of
necessity be according 293 Chap. 21. How much that Prince or Commonwealth is to
be condemned, which neglects to train up Soldiers of its own ib. Chap. 22.
What is to be observed from the Combat betwixt the three Roman Horatii, and the
three Alban Curia^ii 294 Chap. 23. That our whole fortune is not to be ventured
upon part of our force, and that for that reason the keeping of passes is many
times dangerous ib. Chap. 24. In well ordered Governments, offense and desert
are never set one against the other, but he who does well, is rewarded, and he
who does otherwise, is punished 295 Chap. 25. Though it is many times
convenient to reform the old Fundamental Customs of a free City, yet it is
convenient still to retain some shadow and appearance of their ancient ways 296
Chap. 26. A new Prince in a new Conquest, is to make every thing new ib. Chap.
27. Men are as seldom perfectly bad, as they are perfectly good 297 Chap. 28.
For what reasons the Romans were less ungrateful to their Citizens, than the
Athenians ib. Chap. 29. Whether the Prince, or the People, is most subject to
be ungrateful 298 Chap. 30. What rules a^e to be observed by a Prince or
Commonwealth to avoid this vice of ingratitude, and how a General or great
Citizen is to demean himself to elude it 299 Chap. 31. That the Romans used no
extraordinary punishments toward their great Captains, when they committed an
error of ignorance, or malice, pr^vided the Government was not damnified by it
300 Chap. 32. A Commonwealth or Prince is not to defer his beneficence till the
necessity of the object requires it 301 Chap. 33. If an inconvenience increases
either within a State, or against it; it is better to temporize and comply,
than to endeavor to remove it by violence 302 Chap. 34. The Dictatorship was
useful, not hurtful to the Commonwealth of Rome; and how that Power which is
usurped, and illegally assumed, is pernicious to a State, not that which is
conferred legally by the suffrage of the people 303 Chap. 35. How it came to
pass that the creation of the Decem-virat was prejudicial to the liberty of
that State, though it was done freely, and by public suffrage 304 Chap. 36.
Citizens who have executed the greatest Offices, ought not afterward to
disdain or scruple the less 305 Chap. 37. What troubles and offense was created
in Rome by the Agrarian Law; and how dangerous it is to make a new Law opposite
to an old Custom, with too much retro-spection ib. Chap. 38. Weak Commonwealths
are generally irresolute, and ill advised, as taking their measures more from
Necessity than Election 307 Chap. 39. Diverse people have many times the same
Accidents 308 Chap. 40. The creation of the Decem-virat in Rome; what things
are most remarkable in it; and how far such a Constitution may be useful or
pernicious to a Commonwealth 309 Chap. 41. For a mean man to grow immediately
insolent, or a meek man immmediatly cruel, without just steps of gradation, is
both imprudent and unprofitable 311 Chap. 42. How easily men's manners are
corrupted ib. Chap. 43. Those Soldiers which fight for their own honor are
the best, and most to be trusted 312 Chap. 44. A multitude without an Head is
altogether unserviceable; nor is any man to threaten that has any thing to
desire ib. Chap. 45. It Is a thing of ill example to break a new Law, especially
for the Maker: and it is no less dangerous to the Governor of a State, to
multiply injuries, and repeat them every day 313 Chap. 46. How men leap from
one passion to another, and how they who at first aim at nothing but
self-preservation, when secured of that, grow oppressors of other people 314
Chap. 47. Though the people, in things that are discussed in general, are many
times mistaken, yet when they are reduced to particulars, they are more
sensible and judicious 317 Chap. 48. To prevent the advancement of mean people
to the Magistracy, it is particularly to be contrived that the competition be
betwixt the best and most noble, and the wickedist and most abject 318 Chap.
49. If those Cities which have been free from their foundation (as Rome) have
found it difficult to contrive such Laws as might maintain them so. Those which
have been always servile, will find it almost impossible 319 Chap. 50. No
Magistrate or Council ought to have power to check or control the public acts
of the City 320 Chap. 51. A Prince or Commonwealth that is constrained to do a
thing, is to seem to do it frankly, and without any compulsion ib. Chap. 52.
The best and most secure way to repress the insolence of an ambitious and
powerful State, is to preclude and stop up those ways by which he would come to
his greatness 321 Chap. 53. The people (deceived with a false appearance of
good) do many times desire that which turns to their destruction: and how great
hopes and large promises do easily debauch them 322 Chap. 54. How great the
authority of a grave man is, to assuage the tumultuousness of the people 323
Chap. 55. How easily things are managed in a City where the Commons are
incorrupt; how hard it is to erect a principality where there is not an
equality; and where it is not, a Commonwealth is impossible 324 Chap. 56. Great
accidents, before they happen to any City or Province, are commonly
prognosticated by some sign, or predicted by some men 326 Chap. 57. The
multitude united, is fornidable and strong, but separated, is weak and
inconsiderable ib. Chap. 58. That the multitude is wiser, and more constant
than a Prince 327 Chap. 59. What Leagues or Confederacies are most to be
trusted; those which are made with Princes, or those which are made with free
States 329 Chap. 60. How the Consulship, and other Dignities in Rome were
conferred without respect of age 330
Book II.
CHap. 1. Whether the virtue or fortune of the Romans was the occasion of the
greatness of their Empire 333 Chap. 2. With what Nations the Romans contended,
and with what obstinacy those Nations resisted 335 Chap. 3. It contributed much
to the grandeur of the City of Rome, that they ruined the neighboring Cities,
and admitted strangers to their own dignities and privilege 337 Chap. 4. There
are three ways which Commonwealths have taken to enlarge their Territories 338
Chap. 5. The variation of Religion and Languages, with the accidents of Deluges
and Plagues, have been the cause that many great things have been forgotten 340
Chap. 6. How the Romans proceeded in making of War. 341 Chap. 7. What
proportion of Land the Romans allowed to every man in their Colonies 342 Chap.
8. What it is that disposes some people to leave their native Countries, to
dispossess other people ib. Chap. 9. What those occasions are which do most
commonly create War among Princes 344 Chap. 10. That, according to the common
opinion, money is not the sinews of War ib. Chap. 11. It Is not discretion to
enter into strict amity with a Prince, whose reputation is greater than his
strength 346 Chap. 12. Upon an apprehension of being invaded, whether it be
better to make War, or expect it ib. Chap. 13. That from mean to great fortune,
people rise rather by fraud, than by force 348 Chap. 13. Many people are
mistaken, who expect with meekness and humility to work upon the proud 349
Chap. 15. Weak States are irresolute and uncertain in their Councils, and slow
Councils are most commonly pernicious 350 Chap. 16. How much the Soldiers of
our times do differ from the Discipline of the Ancients 351 Chap. 17. How the
Armies of our times are to judge of Artillery, and whether the general opinion
of it be true 353 Chap. 18. How by the authority of the Romans, and the
universal Discipline of the Ancients, the Foot are more serviceable than the
Horse 355 Chap. 19. The Conquests of Commonwealths that are ill governed, and
contrary to the model of the Romans, do conduce more to the ruin than
advancement of their affairs 357 Chap. 29. No Prince or Commonwealth, without
manifest danger, can employ foreign Forces, either Auxiliary, or Mercenary 359
Chap. 21. The first Praetor which the Romans ever sent out of their own City,
was to Capua, and that was 400 years after they began first to make War 360
Chap. 22. How uncertain the judgment of most people are in things of greatest
importance 361 Chap. 23. How the Romans upon any accident which necessitated
them to give judgment upon their Subjects, avoided always the midway 362 Chap.
14. That in the generality, Castles and Citadels do more mischief than good 364
Chap. 25. To attempt a City full of intestine divisions, and to expect to carry
it thereby, is uncertain and dangerous 367 Chap. 26. He who contemns or
reproaches another person, incurs his hatred without any advantage to himself
ib. Chap. 27. Wise Princes, and well governed States, ought to be contented
with victory; for many times whilst they think to push things forward, they
lose all 368 Chap. 28. How much it is for the interest of all Governments, that
all injury be punished, whether against the public, or particular persons 369
Chap. 29. Fortune casts a mist before peoples eyes, when she would not have
them oppose her designs 370 Chap. 30. Princes and Republics that are truly
magnificent, do not make their Leagues and Alliances with money, but by their
virtue, reputation, and force 372 Chap. 31. How dangerous it is to believe
Exiles too far 373 Chap. 32. How many several ways the Romans used to conquer
their Towns 374 Chap. 33. How the Romans upon any Expedition, gave their
Generals general Commissions 375
Book III.
CHap. 1. That a Sect or Commonwealth be long-lived, it is necessary to correct
it often, and reduce it toward its first Principles 377 Chap. 2. It Is the part
of a wise man sometimes to pretend himself a fool 379 Chap. 3. The liberty
newly acquired, could not have been preserved, but by the execution of Brutus
his Sons 380 Chap. 4. A Prince is never safe in his new Conquests, whilst they
are in being, whom he dispossessed 381 Chap. 5. How a King may lose his
Kingdom, though he comes to it by inheritance ib. Chap. 6. Of Conspiracies 382
Chap. 7. How it comes to pass that in the changes of State, from liberty to
servitude, and from servitude to liberty, some are very innocent, and others
very bloody 391 Chap. 8. He who would change the form of a Government, is to
consider seriously upon what grounds he does it, and the disposition of the
subject 392 Chap. 9. How he that would succeed, must accommodate to the times
393 Chap. 10. A General cannot avoid fighting; when the enemy is resolved to
engage him upon any terms 394 Chap. 11. One person that has many enemies upon
his hands, though he be inferior to them, yet if he consustain their first
impression, carries commonly the Victory 396 Chap. 12. A wise General is to put
a necessity of fighting upon his own Army, but to prevent it to his enemies 397
Chap. 13. Whether we are more safe in a good General with a bad Army, or a good
Army with a bad General 398 Chap. 14. What strange effects new inventions have
sometimes in a Battle, and how new noises have the same 399 Chap. 15. One
General is best for an Army, and that to govern it by Commissioners, is not so
good 400 Chap. 16. That in times of difficulty, virtue is in esteem; in times
of ease and luxury; men of riches and alliance are in greatest request 401
Chap. 17. A man is not to be disobliged, and employed afterward in any matter
of importance 402 Chap. 18. Nothing is more honorable in a General, th^n to
foresee the designs of his enemy 403 Chap. 19. Whether for the Government of
the multitude, obsequiousness and indulgence be more necessary than punishment
404 Chap. 20. One instance of humanity wrought more upon the Falisci than all
the force of the Romans 405 Chap. 21. How it came to pass that Hanibal, by
methods quite contrary to what were practiced by Scipio, did the same things in
Italy that the other did in Spain ib. Chap. 22. How the austerity of Manlius
Torquatus, and the humanity of Valerius Corvinus gained each of them the same
honor and reputation 406 Chap. 23. Upon what occasion Camillus was banished
from Rome 409 Chap. 24. The prolongation of Commissions brought Rome first into
servitude ib. Chap. 25. Of the Poverty of Cincinnatus, and several other
Citizens of Rome 410 Chap. 26. Women are many times the destruction of States
411 Chap. 27, How the civil discords in a City are to be composed, and of the
falsity of that opinion; that the best way to keep a City in subjection, is to
keep it divided ib. Chap. 28. A strict eye is to be kept upon the Citizens; for
under pretense of officiousness, and piety, there is hid a principle of Tyranny
413 Chap. 29. That the transgressions of the people do spring commonly from the
Prince ib. Chap. 30. A Citizen who would do any great matter by his own
authority, must first extinguish all envy. In what matter things are to be
ordered upon the approach of an enemy, and how a City is to be defended 414
Chap. 31. Powerful States, and excellent Persons, retain the same mind and
dignity in all kind of conditions 416 Chap. 32. The ways which some people have
taken to prevent a Peace 417 Chap. 33. To the obtaining a Victory, it is
necessary your Army has a confidence not only in one another, but in their
General 418 Chap. 34. What vogue, fame or opinion disposes the people first to
favor some particular Citizen; and whether they, or a Prince, distributes
their offices with most prudence and judgment 419 Chap. 35. What dangers they
incur, who make themselves authors of any enterprise; and the more
extraordinary the design, the greater the danger 420 Chap. 36. The reason why
at the first Charge, the French have been, and still are accounted more than
men, but afterward less than women 422 Chap. 37. Whether fighting in small
parties, or pickeering before a Battle be necessary; and how the temper of a
new enemy is to be found without them 423 Chap. 38. How a General is to be
qualified, that his Army may rely upon him 324 Chap. 39. A General ought to
know the Country, and how to take his advantage in the ground 425 Chap. 40. How
fraud in the management of War is honorable and glorious 426 Chap. 41. That
ones Country is to be defended by all means, and whether honorable or
dishonorable, it imports not, it is well defended ib. Chap. 42. That forced
promises are not binding. 427 Chap. 43. Those who are born in the same Country,
retain almost the same nature through all the variety of times ib. Chap. 44.
Confidence and boldness does many times obtain that which would never be
compassed by ordinary means 428 Chap. 45. Whether in a Battle it is best to
give or receive the Charge 429 Chap. 46. How it comes to pass that in a City
the same family retains the same manners and customs a long time ib. Chap. 47.
A good Citizen is to forget all private injury, when in competition with his
love to his Country 430 Chap. 48. When any enemy commits any grand fault, it is
to be suspected for a fraud ib. Chap. 49. A Commonwealth which desires to
preserve it self free, has need of new provisions every day; and upon what
score Fabius was called Maximus. 431
A Table of the Art of War.
CCap. I. How the Seigneur Fabritio Colonna being refreshing himself one
evening with some other Gentlemen in a beautiful Garden, took occasion to enter
upon this discourse of War. 435 Chap. 2. A person of Honor and Condition is
not to make War his profession 438 Chap. 3. How a Commonwealth ought not (in
prudence) to permit any of its Citizens to make War their profession 439 Chap.
4. That a King ought not to permit his Subjects to make Arms their profession,
for the mischiefs which do frequently ensue 440 Chap. 5. In what Countries the
best Soldiers are to be raised 442 Chap. 6. Whether it be best to choose you
men out of the Cities, or Country 443 Chap. 7. Of the inconvenience, and
convenience of Trained-Bands, or a settled Militia 444 Chap. 8. Of what sort of
people an Army is to be composed. 445 Chap. 9. How the Romans raised their
Legions 446 Chap. 10. Whether it is best for a Militia to consist of a great
number or a small 447 Chap. 11. How the inconveniences which follow great
Armies, may be prevented 448 Chap. 12. Of the Cavalry. 449
Book II.
CHap. 1. What Arms were most used by the Ancients in their Wars. 450 Chap. 2.
Of the Arms which are used at present, and of the invention of the Pike 451
Chap. 3. Whether the ancient or modern is the best way of arming. ib. Chap. 4.
How Foot should be armed, and of the force and convenience of Men at Arms 453
Chap. 5. The difference betwixt men at arms and foot, and upon which we are
most to rely 454 Chap. 6. How the Soldiers were exercised 455 Chap. 7. Of what
number of men, and of what arms a Battalion is to consist; and of exercising in
Companies to make them ready either to give a charge, or receive it 456 Chap.
8. Of three principal ways of drawing up a Company, and putting them into a
posture to fight 458 Chap. 9. The manner of rallying Soldiers after a rout,
and to make them face about a whole Company at a time 459 Chap. 10. To range a
Company in such order that it may be ready to face the enemy, on which side
soever he comes 460 Chap. 11. To draw up a Company with two horns, or another
with a Piazza, or vacuity in the middle 461 Chap. 12. Of the Baggage and Train
belonging to a Company; how necessary it is that they have several Officers,
and of the usefulness of Drums 462 Chap. 13. A discourse of the Author about
military Virtue; and how it is become so despicable in our days 463 Chap. 14.
What number of horse are to be put into a Battalion, and what proportion is to
be observed for their baggage 465
Book III.
CHap. 1. The order observed by the Roman Legions when a Battle was presented
466 Chap. 2. The form observed in their Battles by the Macedonian Palanx 467
Chap. 3. How the Swisses ordered their Battalions ib. Chap. 4. How the Author
would make use of both Greek and Roman Arms for his Battalion, and what was the
ordinary Army of the Romans 468 Chap. 5. The way of drawing up a Battalion,
according to the intention of the Author 469 Chap. 6. The description of a
Battle 470 Chap. 7. The Author's reasons for the occurrences in the Battle 471
Chap. 8. The Exercises of an Army in general 476
Book IV.
CHap. 1. The considerations and subtilties to be used in the drawing up an
Army to fight 478 Chap. 2. The Arts which are to be used during the Fight 481
Chap. 3. Stratagems after the Fight 482 Chap. 4. Two other ways of ranging an
Army to Fight ib. Chap. 5. Of the constraint and advantage a man may have to
Fight 483 Chap. 6, Directions for a General 484 Chap. 7. Which way a Battle is
to be avoided, though pressed never so earnestly by the Enemy ib. Chap. 8. How
Soldiers are to be encouraged to fight; and how they are to be cooled and
assuaged when their courage is too high 485 Chap. 9. A General ought to be
skilful and eloquent to persuade or dissuade as he sees occasion ib. Chap. 10.
Certain considerations which encourage Soldiers, and make them as virtuous as
valiant 486
Book V.
CHap. 1. How the Romans marched in an enemies Country, and in what manner they
are to be imitated 487 Chap. 2. How an Army is to be marshalled to march in an
enemies Country 488 Chap. 3. How to put an Army presently into order, and draw
it up, so as if upon a march it should be attacked, it may defend it self on
all sides 489 Chap. 4. Of commands derived by word of mouth, by Drums and
Trumpets, and of the nature of Pioneers 491 Chap. 5. Of the Provisions that are
necessary for an Army ib. Chap. 6. How the Ancients divided the spoil; and of
the pay which they gave to their Soldiers 492 Chap. 7. To know the surprises
which are contriving against you upon your march 493 Chap. 8. One is to know
the Country perfectly well through which he is to pass, and keep his enterprises
secret ib. Chap. 9. Of certain things which are requisite upon a march 494
Chap. 10. How to avoid fighting near a River, though pressed by the enemy; and
in what manner you may pass it ib. Chap. 11. How to make your passage through a
straight, though you be pressed by an enemy 495
Book VI.
CHap. 1. What kind of places the Greeks and the Romans chose out for their
Camps, with a short recapitulation of what has been said before 496 Chap. 2.
The form of a Camp 497 Chap. 3. Of the several Watches and Guards about the
Camp 501 Chap. 4. To observe who goes and comes to the Camp ib. Chap. 5. Of
Military Justice, and the method used by the Ancients in the punishment of
offenders ib. Chap. 6. The Ancients had neither Women, nor Gaming in their
Armies; and of the manner how they discamp'd 502 Chap. 7. The safety and health
of a Camp is to be regarded, and it is by no means to be besieged 503 Chap. 8.
Directions as to Provisions ib. Chap. 9. How to lodge more or less than four
Battalions, and what number of men is sufficient to make Head against an enemy,
be he as numerous as he may 504 Chap. 10. Certain Artifices and Advertisements
of War ib. Chap. 11. How to rid ones self of an Army that is pressing upon ones
h^els 505 Chap. 12. How a man may make a Princes Favorite suspected, and
divide his Forces 506 Chap. 13. In what manner seditions and mutinies in an
Army are to be appeased 507 Chap. 14. How the Ancient^s relied much upon their
auguries, and other accidents ib. Chap. 15. That we are not to fight with an
enemy reduced to despair; and several arts that may be used to surprise him 508
Chap. 16. How a suspected Town or Country is to be secured, and how the peoples
hearts are to be gained 509 Chap. 17. War is not to be continued in the Winter
ib.
Book VII.
CHap. 1. How Towns or Castles are to be fortified 510 Chap. 2. What order is
to be observed by him who shuts himself up in a Town, with resolution to defend
it 513 Chap. 3. Advertisements for such as are distressed for provisions within
a Town, and for such as besiege them, and would reduce them to that necessity
514 Chap. 4. Other advertisements both for the Besiegers and the Besieged ib.
Chap. 5. A man is not to depend upon the countenance of the enemy, but is
rather to suspect what even he sees with his eyes 515 Chap. 6. How to
disfurnish a Garrison of its men, and to bring a terror upon a Town ib. Chap. 7.
To corrupt a Garrison, and take it by treachery 516 Chap. 8. Good Guard is to be
kept in all places and times ib. Chap. 9. Ways to write privately to ones
friends 517 Chap. 10. How to repair a breach, and the way to defend it ib.
Chap. 11. Of Mines 518 Chap. 12. Good Guards are always to be kept, and your
Soldiers not to be divided ib. Chap. 13. That when one sees himself blocked up
on every side, it is good to expose ones self now and then; and of the
advantages which have ensued ib. Chap. 14. General Rules to be observed in
Military Discipline 519 Chap. 15. The way to have many Horse in your Country
520 Chap. 16. A General is to invent of himself, and not follow altogether the
practices of his Predecessors 521 Chap. 17. The Author returns, and with a
short Discourse concludes his Book ib. The Marriage of Belphegor 524
The First Book OF THE HISTORY OF FLORENCE.
By NICHOLAS MACHIAVEL.
To His Holiness CLEMENT the VII.
THE people which live Northward beyond the Rhine and the Danube, being born
in a healthful and prolifick Clime, The Northern Nations healthful and
prolifick.
do many times increase to such insustainable numbers, that part of them are
constrained to abandon their Native, in quest of new Countries to inhabit. When
any of those Provinces are overcharged, and disposed to disgorge; the Order
they observe is, to divide into three parts, so equally that each of the three
consists of a just proportion of Noble and Ignoble, Their method of evacuation
upon their excessive increase.
Rich and Poor. After which they cast Lots, and that part to whose fortune it
falls, marches off to new Quarters where they can be found, while the other two
disburden'd of their supernumeraries remain behind, and enjoy their own
Patrimonies in peace. Their excessive increase, the ruin of the Roman Empire
These inundations and redundancies of people were the destruction of the Roman
Empire, to which the Emperors themselves gave great opportunity; for having
forsaken Rome, the ancient Seat of the Empire, and removed their Residence to
Constantinople, they left the Western Empire more weak, as being more remote
from their inspection, and by consequence more obnoxious both to their
Governors and Enemies. And indeed, for the destruction of an Empire founded
upon the blood of so many brave men, there could not be less carelessness in the
Princes, less treachery in the Ministers, nor less force and impetuosity in
those who invaded: for one inundation being unable, several conspired and at
last effected its ruin.

The first from those Northern Countries who invaded that Empire, The Western
Goths, the first invaders of that Empire.
(after the Cimbri which were vanquished by Marius a Citizen of Rome) were the
Visi Goti or Western Goths, who after some Skirmishes and Conflicts upon the
Consines of the Empire, were by concession of the Emperors assigned, and for a
long time permitted quietly to possess a part of the Country along the Danube.
And although upon several occasions, and at sundry times they invaded the Roman
Provinces; yet by the vigilance and power of the Emperors they were always
repelled. The last that overcame them so gloriously, was Theodosius, who having
subdued them to his obedience, they did not (as formerly) create themselves a
King, but contented themselves with his Government and Pay, they submitted to
both, and served him faithfully in his Wars. But Theodosius being dead, and his
two Sons Arcadius and Honorius succeeding; not inheriting his Virtue and
Fortune as well as his Crown, the Empire began to decline, and the times (as
their Emperor) to grow worse and worse.

To the three parts of the Empire, Theodosius in his lifetime had preferred
three Governors; Ruffinus to the East, Stilico to the West, and Gildo to the
South; who all of them after the death of Theodosius despising the Title of
Governors, resolved to make themselves Kings. Gildo and Ruffinus miscarried in
their first Enterprise and were ruined: But Stilico being better at Hypocrisy
than his Brethren, endeavored to insinuate and work himself into a confidence
with the Emperors, yet with design so to perplex and disturb their Affairs,
that he himself might afterward with more ease leap up into the Saddle. To
incense the Visigots, and provoke them to mutiny, he counseled the Emperors to
abate and retrench their former allowance; and least they should not be
sufficient for the molestation of the Empire, he contrived that the Burgundi,
Franchi, Vandali and Alani, (Northern people like the other, and in motion for
new Quarters) should fall likewise upon the Roman Provinces.

The Visigoti as soon as they found themselves retrenched, that they might be
in better order to revenge it, created Alaricus their King, under whose conduct
they assayl'd the Empire; Rome sacked by them, under the command of Alaricus.
and after several Rencounters and accidents, they overran all Italy, and
sacked Rome. Not long after, Alaricus died, and was succeeded by Ataulfus, who
marrying Placidia the Emperors Sister, Articled upon the Match, to assist in
the Relief of France and Spain, which Provinces were at that time much infested
by the Vandali, Burgundi, Alani, and Franchi upon the aforesaid occasion.
Ataulfus undertook only the Vandali, who having possessed themselves of that part
of Spain called Betica, being pressed hard by the Visigoti, and distressed
beyond all remedy, they were called over by Boniface (who at that time Governed
Africa for the Emperors) to come and plant there, Boniface Governor of Africa
for the Emperor.
for those Provinces being then in rebellion, he was afraid his ill
Administration might be discovered. This invitation and their own Exigence
concurring, the Vandals embraced that Enterprise, and performed many memorable
and brave things in Africa, under Gensericus their King.

In the mean time Theodosius the Son of Arcadius succeeded to the Empire, who
regarding but little the Affairs of the West, gave those Nations the first
thoughts of fixing in their New Conquests. Accordingly the Vandali in Africa,
the Alani and Visigoti in Spain, began to set up for themselves, Gallia overrun
by the Franks, and from them called France.
and Lord it over the Natives. The Franchi, and the Burgundi, not only overrun
and possessed themselves of France, but according to the parts they possessed,
they gave it their Names; one of them being called Francia, and the other
Burgundia. The success of their Camrades inviting new multitudes to the
subversion of the Empire, the Hunni fell upon Pannonia (which is a Province
upon the banks of the Danube) and giving it their Name, The Hunni Conquer and
Denominate Hungaria.
have denominated it Hungaria to this very day. Then as an addition to the
disorders, the Emperor finding himself attacked in so many places, to contract
the number of his Enemies; he began first to treat and capitulate with the
Vandals, then with the Franks, which Treaty increased the Authority of the
Barbarians, and diminished his own. Nor was the Island of great Britain (called
England at this day) exempt from its troubles: For the Britains grown
apprehensive of the people which had Conquered France, and not discerning which
way the Emperor would be able to defend them, called in the Angli (a Nation in
Germany) to their assistance. Britain called Anglia from the Angli.
The Angli, under the Conduct of Vortiger their King, undertook their defense,
and at first behaved themselves faithfully; afterward their Opportunity
increasing with their Power, they drove the Natives out of the Island,
possessed themselves of it, and gave it their Name in commutation for its
liberty. Being robbed of their Country, and made Valiant by Necessity, though
they were not able to recover their own, the Britains began to think of
invading some other, and planting themselves there. In this Resolution they
crossed the Seas with their whole Families, and possessed themselves of those
parts which lie upon the Coasts of France, and are called Britain to this day.
The Hunns (who as was said before) had overrun Pannonia, being straightened and
disturbed in their Quarters by other Nations, viz. the Zepidi, Eruli, Turingi
and Ostrogoti (or Eastern Goths) they rose again, and put themselves once more
in motion for New Habitations. Not being able to force their way into France,
which was at that time defended by the Barbarians, The Hunni invade Italy under
Attila.
they fell into Italy under Attila their King, who not long before (to rid
himself of a Partner in the Government) had slain Bleda his own Brother, and by
that means made himself absolute. Andaricus King of the Zepidi, and Velamir
King of the Ostrogoti remained as his Subjects. Attila having in this manner
made his inroad into Italy, he besieged Aquilegia, Attila besieges and takes
Aquilegia.
lay (without interruption) two years before it, wasted the Country round
about it, and dispersed the Inhabitants, which (as we shall afterward declare)
was the occasion of building the City of Venice. After he had taken, sacked and
demolished Aquilegia, He advances to Rome, b^t retires at the request of the
Pope.
and several other Towns, he advanced toward Rome, but forbore the destruction
of it upon the intercession of the Pope, for whom Attila had so great a
Reverence and Veneration, that upon his single persuasion, he withdrew out of
Italy into Austria, where he died. After Attila's death, Velamir King of the
Ostrogoti, with the Commanders of other Nations, The Hunni driven bac^ over the
Danube, return home.
took up Arms against Tenricus and Eurius, Attila's Sons. One of them they
killed, and forced the other with the Hunni back again over the Danube into
their own Country: Upon which the Ostrogoti and Zepidi placed themselves in
Pannonia, and the Eruli and Turingi remained upon the Bank of the Danube.

Attila being departed out of Italy, Valentinianus at that time Emperor of the
West, had a design to repair that Empire; The first Residence of the Roman
Emperors at Ravenna.
and for his Capacity of defending it with more Ease and Convenience against
the irruptions of the Barbarians, he quitted Rome, and settled his Residence at
Ravenna. The Calamities wherewith the Western Empire had been oppressed, were
the occasion that the Emperor residing at Constantinople, had many times
transferred the possession of it to other people as a thing of great danger and
expense, many times without the Emperor's permission; New Emperors elected by
the Romans, upon the nonresidence of their old.
the Romans seeing themselves deserted, had created new Emperors in order to
their defense; and sometimes other persons taking advantage of their own
Interest and Authority, Usurped, as it happened when Maximus a Citizen of Rome,
got possession of it after the death of Valentinianus, and forced his Widow
Eudoxa to take him for her Husband, who desirous of revenge, and disdaining
(being of Imperial extraction) the Embraces of so inferior a person, she
invited privately Gensericus King of the Vandals into Italy, remonstrating the
Easiness and Utility of the Conquest; who allured by the Prize, was without
much difficulty persuaded. He entered Italy with his Army, marched up to Rome,
found it abandoned, sacked it, and continued in it fourteen days; after which
he took and plundr'd several other Towns, and having laden both himself and his
Army with the Spoil, he returned into Africa. The Romans returning (upon his
departure) Maximus being dead, they made Avicus (a Roman) Emperor. After many
occurrences both within Italy and without, and the death of several Emperors,
the Empire of Constantinople fell into the hands of Zeno, and the Empire of
Rom^ (by Stratagem and Artifice) to Orestes, and Augustulus his Son, who,
preparing to defend it by force, were invaded by the Eruli and Turingi (placed
as we said before upon the Banks of the Danube) Confederate for that Expedition
under the Command of Odoacres their General. The Lombards invade Italy.
Of such places as they had thought good to baulk and leave empty, the Lombards
possessed themselves, a Northen Nation like the rest, and Commanded by Godoglio
their King, which were the last People that plagued Italy, as shall be shown in
its place. Odoacres having made his way into Italy, he encountered, vanquished,
and slew Orestes near Pavia, but Augustulus got off Odoacres called King of
Rome, and the first of the Barbarians which thought of fixing in Italy.
After this Victory, that the Title might change with the Government, Odoacres
caused himself to be called King of Rome, and was the first Chieftain of those
Nations (which at that time overran the whole World) that thought of fixing in
Italy; for (either suspecting their abilities to keep it, by reason of the
easiness and facility wherewith it might be relieved by the Emperor of the
East, or for some other secret cause) the rest had ravaged and plundered it,
but they always retired, and sought out other Countries for their Establishment
and Plantation.

In those days, The Old Empire divided into Cantons.
the ancient Empire of Rome was reduced under these Princes. Zeno Governing in
Constantinople, Commanded the whole Empire of the East. The Ostrogoti Commanded
Mesia: The Visigoti, Pannonia: The Suevi and Alani, Gascoigne and Spain: The
Vandali Africa: The Franchi and Burgundi, France: The Eruli and Turingi, Italy.
The Kingdom of the Ostrogoti was devolved upon a Nephew of Velamir's called
Theodorick, who retaining an Amity with Zeno Emperor of the East, writ him
word, That his Ostrogoti being in Valor superior to other Nations, they
thought it injust and unreasonable to be inferior in Territory and Command,
and that it would be impossible for him to confine them within the Limits of
Pannonia. That being therefore necessitated to comply, and suffer them to take
up Arms in quest of New Countries, he could do no less than give him timely
advertisment, that he might provide against the worst, and if he pleased assign
them some other Country, which by his Grace and Favor they might inhabit with
more Latitude and Convenience. Whereupon Zeno partly out of fear, and partly
desirous to drive Odoacres out of Italy, Theodorick invades Italy, slays
Odoacres, calls himself King of Rome, and held his residence at Ravenna.
directed Theodorick against him, and gave him that Country for his pains,
when it was his fortune to catch it. Theodorick accepts the Proposition,
removes from Pannonia (where he left the Zepidi his Friends) and marching into
Italy, slew Odoacres and his S^n, called himself King of Rome by his Example,
and made Ravenna his Residence, upon the same Reasons as had prevailed before
with Valentinian: Theodorick was an excellent person both in War and Peace. In
the first he was always Victor, in the last a continual Benefactor, as that
City and that Nation experimented often. He divided his Ostrogoti into several
Countries, appointing Governors over them, that might Command in time of Wars,
and Correct in time of Peace. He enlarged Ravenna, and repaired Rome, and
restored all its Privileges, except its Military Discipline. Without any noise
or tumult of War, by his own single Wisdom and Authority, he kept all the
Barbarian Princes (who had Cantonized the Empire) in their just bounds. He
built several Towns and Castles between the Adriatick-Sea and the Alps, to
obstruct any new Incursion by the Barbarians; and had not his many Virtues been
sulli'd and eclipsed toward his latter end by some Cruelties he committed upon
a jealousy of being deposed (as the deaths of Symmachus and Boethius, both of
them virtuous men, do sufficiently declare) his Memory would have been this day
as honorable, as his Person was then: for by his Virtue and Bounty, not only
Rome and Italy, but all the rest of the Western Empire was freed from the
continual Conflicts, which for so many years it endured by the frequent
irruption of the Barbarians, and reduced into good Order and Condition: And
certainly if any times were ever miserable in Italy, and those Provinces which
were overrun by the Barbarians, they were the times betwixt the Reigns of
A^cadius and Honorius, and his; for if it be considered what inconveniences,
and damage do generally result to a Commonwealth or Kingdom upon alteration of
Prince or Government, especially if effected not by foreign force, but civil
dissension: If it be observed, how fatal the least Changes prove to
Commonwealth or Kingdom how potent soever, it may easily be imagined how much
Italy and other Provinces of the Roman Empire suffered in those days, losing
not only their Government, but their Laws, Customs, Conversations, Religions,
Language, Habits, and even their Names! The thoughts of any one of which things
(without so great an accumulation) would make the stoutest heart to ache, much
more the seeing and feeling of them. And as this was the destruction, so it was
the foundation and augmentation of many Cities. In the number of those which
were ruined was Aquileia, Luni, Chiusi, Popolonia, Fiesole, and many others.
Among those which were new built, were Venice, Siena, Ferrara, l' Aquila, and
several other both Towns and Castles, which for brevity sake I omit. Those
which from small beginnings became great and considerable, were Florence,
Genoa, Pisa, Milan, Naples, and Bolonia, to which may be added the ruin and
reparation of Rome, and several other Cities which were demolished and rebuilt.
Among these devastations, and inroads of new people, there sprang forth new
Languages, as is visible by what is used both in France, Spain, and Italy,
which being mixed with the Language of their Invaders and the ancient Roman, is
become new, and clear another thing to what it was before. Besides not only the
Provinces lost their Names, but particular places, Rivers, Seas, and Men;
France, Italy, and Spain, being full of new Appellatives, quite contrary to
what they were of old; as the Po, Garda, and Archipelago, for Rivers and Seas;
and for Men, in stead of Caesar and Pompey, they began to be called Peter, John,
Matthew, etc. But among all these Variations, the changing of their Religions
was of no less impor^ance: for the Custom and Prescription of the ancient
Faith being in combat and competition with the Miracles of the New, many
tumults and dissentions were created, which had the Christian Church been
unanimous and entire, would never have happened: but the Greek, the Roman, the
Church at Ravenna being in contention, and the Heretic, with the Catholic as
furiously zealous, they brought great misery upon the World, as Africa can
witness, which suffered more by their Arrianism (which was the Doctrine of the
Vandals) than by all their avarice and cruelty. Whilst men lived exposed to so
many persecutions, the terror and sadness of their hearts was legible in their
faces; for besides the multitude of Calamities they endured otherwise, great
part of them had not power to betake themselves to the protection of God
Almighty (who is the surest refuge of all that are in distress) for being
uncertain whither their devotions were to be directed, they died miserably
without any.

Theodorick therefore deserved no small praise, who was the first which gave
them respite from the multitude of their Evils, and restored Italy to such a
degree of Grandeur in the thirty eight years which he reigned there, that there
was scarce any thing to be seen of its former desolation: Theodorick dics.
but when he died, and the Government devolved upon Atalaricus the Son of
Amalasciunta his Sister, in a short time (the malice of their Fortune being not
exhausted as yet) they relapsed, and fell over head and ears into their old
troubles again: For Atalaricus dying not long after him, the Kingdom fell into
the hands of his Mother, who was betrayed by Theodate, (a person she had called
in to assist her in the Government.) She being removed, and he made King, to
the great dissatisfaction of the Ostrogoths, to whom that Usurpation had made
him insufferably odious; Justinian the Emperor took courage, began to think of
driving him out of Italy, and deputed Bellisarius his General for that
Expedition, who before had Conquered Africa, driven out the Vandals, and
reduced it under that Empire again. Having first possessed himself of Sicily,
and from thence passed his Army into Italy, Bellisarius recovered Naples and
Rome. The Goths foreseeing their destruction; Bellisarius General for Justinian
the Emperor.
killed Theodate their King as the occasion of all, and elected Vitegetes in
his place, who after several Skirmishes was at length besieged and taken in
Ravenna by Bellisarius, who (not prosecuting his Victory as was expected) was
called back by Justinian, and his Command given to Johannes and Vitalis, who
were much short of him both in Virtue and Conversation; so that the Goths took
heart, and created Ildovado their King, who was at that time Governor of
Verona: and being killed shortly after, the Kingship fell to Totila; who beat
the Emperors forces, recovered Tuscany, and subdued the Governors of all
those Provinces which Bellisarius had reduced. Upon which misfortune
Iustinianus thought it necessary to send him again into Italy; but returning
with small Force, he rather lost what he had gained before, than acquired any
new Reputation. For Totila (whilst Bellisarius lay encamped with his Army at
Hostia) besieged Rome, Totila takes, sacks, and burns Rome.
and took it as it were under his Nose; and then upon consideration that he
could neither well keep nor relinquish it, he demolished the greatest part of
it, forcing away the people, and carrying the Senators as Prisoners along with
him, and taking no notice of Bellisarius, he advanced with his Army into
Calabria to encounter and cut off certain supplies which were sent out of
Greece to reinforce him. Bellisarius seeing Rome abandoned in this manner,
addressed himself to a very honorable Enterprise, and entering the City,
repaired the Walls withal possible Celerity, and re-invited the Inhabitants
when he had done. But Fortune concurred not to the nobleness of his design: for
Iustinianus being at that time invaded by the Parthi, Bellisarius was called
back to repel the Invasion. In obedience to his Master, he marched his Army
out of Italy, and left that Province to the discretion of the Enemy, who seized
again upon Rome, but used it not so barbarously as before, being wrought upon
by the prayers of Saint Benedict (a person very eminent in those times for his
Sanctity) he applied himself rather to repair than destroy it. In the mean time
Justinian had made a Peace with the Parthi, and resolving to send new Supplies
into Italy, he was diverted by a new Alarm from the Sclavi (another Northern
people) who had passed the Danube, and fallen upon Illyria and Thrace: So that
Totila had his full swing, and was in a manner in possession of all Italy. As
soon as Justinian had Conquered the Sclavi, and settled the Countries which they
had invaded, he sent a new Army into Italy under the Conduct of Narsetes an
Eunuch, Narsetes a^ new General for Justinian.
a brave Captain, and of great experience in the Wars. Being arrived in Italy,
he fought, beat, and killed Totila, after whose death the remainder of the
Goths retired into Pavia, and made Teia their King. On the other side, Narsetes
after his Victory took Rome, and than marching against Teia he engaged him
about Nocera, defeated his Army, and slew him among the rest: By which disaster
the very Name of the Goths was well near extinguished in Italy, where they had
reigned from the time of Theodorick, to this Teia, full seventy years. But
Italy was scarce warm in its Liberty, when Iustinianus died, and left his Son
Justinius to succeed, who by the Counsel of his Wife Sophia, recalled Narsetes
out of Italy, and sent Longinus in his place. Longinus, according to the
Example of his Predecessors, kept his Residence at Ravenna, in other things he
digress'd, Longinus alters the Government in Italy.
and particularly by introducing a new form of Government in Italy, not
constituting Governors in every Province as, the Goths had done before, but
deputing a Captain in every City or other Town of importance, with the Title of
Duke. Nor in this distribution did he show any greater favor to Rome, than to
the rest; for removing the Consuls and Senate (Names which to that time had
been sacred among them) he constituted a Duke which he sent every year from
Ravenna, and his Government was called the Dukedom of Rome. But lie that more
immediately represented the Emperor at Ravenna, and had the Universal
Government of Italy, was called Esarco. This division not only facilitated the
ruin of Italy, but hastened it exceedingly by giving the Lombards opportunity
to possess it. Narsetes was much disgusted with the Emperor for calling him
off from the Command of those Provinces which by his own Virtue, and effusion
of his blood he had acquired: And Sophia not thinking it injury sufficient to
get him recalled, had given out contumelious words, as if she would make him
Spin among the rest of the Eunuchs. Whereupon in great disdain Narsetes
encouraged Alboino King of the Lombards, (who at that time Governed in
Pannonia) to invade Italy and possess it.

As was shown before, the Lombards were entered and had taken possession of
such places upon the Danube as had been deserted by the Eruli and Turingi, when
Odoacres their King conducted them into Italy. They had continued there some
time, till their Kingdom fell to Alboino, for a daring and courageous man,
under whom passing the Danube, they encountered with Commodus King of the
Zepidi (a People planted in Pannonia) and overcame him. Among the rest Rosmunda
one of Commodus Daughters was taken Prisoner, whom Alboinus took for his Wife,
made himself Lord of her Country, and moved by the barbarousness of his
nature, he caused a Cup to be made of her Father's Skull, and in memory of that
Victory, drank out of it very often. But being called into Italy by Narsetes,
with whom he had retained a Friendship in his Wars with the Goths; he left
Pannonia to the Hunni (who as we said before, returned into their own Country
after the death of Attila) marched into Italy, and finding it so strangly
Cantoniz'd and divided, he possessed (or rather surpised) Pavia, Milan,
Verona, Vicenza, all Tuscany, and the great part of Flaminia (called now
Romagnia); So that presuming from the greatness and suddenness of his
Conquests, all Italy was his own, he made a solemn Feast at Verona, where much
drinking having exalted his Spirits, and Commodus his Skull being full of Wine,
he caused it to be presented to Rosmunda the Queen, who sat over against him at
the Table, declaring (and that so loud she could not but hear) that at a time
of such hearty and extraordinary Mirth, it was fit she should drink one Cup
with her Father. Which expression touching the Lady to the quick, she resolved
to be revenged; and knowing that Almachilde, a young and valiant Lombard, had
an intrigue with one of her Maids, she prevailed that she might personate her
one night, and lie with him her self. Accordingly Almachilde being introduced
upon a time into a very dark place, he enjoyed Rosmunda instead of her Maid.
The Business being done, Rosmunda discovered her self, told him what was
passed; That now it was at his Choice, whether he would kill Alboino, Alboino
killed by the Conspiracy of his Wife.
and enjoy her and her Kingdom, or be killed himself for vitiating his Wife.
Almachilde had no fancy to be slain, and therefore chose the other Proposition
of killing his Master; but when they had killed him, they found themselves so
far from acquiring the Kingdom, that they were afraid of being made away by the
Lombards, out of the affection they bare to the Memory of Alboino; for which
cause packing up with all the Jewels and Treasure they could make, they marched
off to Longinus at Revenna, who received them honorably.

During these Troubles, Justinius the Emperor died, and Tiberius was elected in
his Place; but being employed in his Wars against the Parthians, he was not at
leisure to send Relief into Italy. Which Longinus looking upon as an
opportunity to make himself King of the Lombards, and of all Italy besides, by
the help of Rosmunda and her Treasure; he imparted his Design to her, and
persuaded her to kill Almachilde, and take him afterward for her Husband. She
accepted the Motion, and having in order thereunto prepared a Cup of Poison,
she gave it with her own hand to Almachilde as he came thirsty out of a Bath,
who having drank off half, finding it work, and great Convulsions within him,
concluding what it was, he forced her to drink the rest, so that in a few hours
both of them died, and Longinus lost all hopes of making himself King. In the
mean time at a Convention of the Lombards at Pavia (which they had made their
Metropolis) they created Clefi their King, who re-edified Imola, that had been
destroyed by Narsetes. He conquered Rimini, and in a manner all up as far as
Rome, but died in the middle of his Cariere. This Clefi behaved himself so
cruelly, not only to Strangers, but even to the Lombards themselves, that the
Edge of their Monarchical inclination being taken off, they would have no more
Kings, but constituted Thirty, they called Dukes, to Govern under them. Which
Counsel was the cause the Lombards extended not their Conquests over all Italy,
nor dilated their Dominion beyond Benevento, Rome, Ravenna, Cremona, Mantua,
Padua, Monfelice, Parma, Bolonia, Faenza, Furli, Cesana; some of them defended
themselves for some time, other never fell at all under their subjection. For
having no King, they were first rendered unapt for the Wars; and when
afterward they reassumed their Old Government, and created Kings again, the
small relish and taste the people had had of Liberty, rendered them less
obedient to their Prince, and more contentious among themselves, and not only
put a stop to the Cariere of their Victories at first, but was the occasion
afterward, that they were driven out of Italy. Things being in this posture
with the Lombards; The Romans, and Longinus came to terms with them, and it was
agreed, that Arms should be laid down on all hands, and each enjoy what was in
their proper possession.

About this time the Bishops of Rome began to take upon them, and to exercise
greater Authority than they had formerly done. The Authority of the Bishops of
Rome began to increase.
At first the Successors of Saint Peter were venerable and eminent for their
Miracles, and the holiness of their Lives; and their Examples added daily such
numbers to the Christian Church, that to obviate or remove the Confusions which
were then in the World, many Princes turned Christians, and the Emperor of
Rome being converted among the rest, and quitting Rome, to hold his Residence
at Constantinople; the Roman Empire (as we have said before) began to decline,
but the Church of Rome augmented as fast. Nevertheless, until the coming in of
the Lombards, all Italy being under the dominion either of Emperors or Kings,
the Bishops assumed no more power than what was due to their Doctrine, and
Manners; in Civil Affairs, they were subject to the Civil Power, Bishops of
Rome employed as Ministers by the Emperors and Kings, and sometimes executed
by them.
employed many times by the Emperors and Kings, as their Ministers; and many
times executed for their ill Administration. But Theodorick King of the Gothi,
fixing his Seat at Ravenna, was that which advanced their interest, and made
them more considerable in Italy; for there being no other Prince left in Rome,
the Romans were forced for Protection to pay greater Allegiance to the Pope.
And yet their Authority advanced no farther at that time, than to obtain the
Preference before the Church of Ravenna. But the Lombards having invaded, and
reduced Italy into several Cantons; the Pope took the opportunity, and began to
hold up his head: For being as it were Governor and Principal at Rome, the
Emperor of Constantinople and the Lombards bare him a respect, so that the
Romans (by mediation of their Pope) began to treat and confederate with
Longinus and the Lombards, not as Subjects, but as Equals and Companions; which
said Custom continuing, and the Popes entering into Alliance sometimes with the
Lombards, and sometimes with the Greeks, contracted great reputation to their
dignity: But the destruction of the Eastern Empire following so close under the
Reign of the Emperor Heracleus, The Eastern Empire destroyed in the time of
Heracleus the Emperor.
in whose time the Schiavi (a people we mentioned before) fell again upon
Illyria and overran it, and called it Sclavonia, from their own Name. The
other parts of that Empire being infested first by the Persians, afterward by
the Saracens, out of Arabia, under the Conduct of Mahomet, and last of all, by
the Turks, and having lost several Provinces which were members of it, as
Syria, Africa, and Egypt: The Pope lost the convenience of the Emperors
protection in time of Adversity, and the power of the Lombards increasing too
fast on the other side, he thought it but necessary to address himself to the
King of France for assistance; so that the Wars which happened afterward in
Italy, were occasioned by the Popes, and the several inundations of Barbarians,
invited by them; which manner of proceeding having continued to our times, has
held, and does still hold Italy divided and in^irm. But in my description of
Occurrences betwixt those times and our own, I shall not enlarge upon the ruin
of the Empire, which in truth received but little assistance from the Popes, or
any other Princes of Italy, till the days of Charles the 8th. but discourse
rather how the Popes with their Censures, Comminations and Arms, mingled
together with their Indulgences, became formidable and reverenced, and how
having made ill use both of the one and the other, they have lost the one
entirely, and remain at the discretion of other people for the other. But to
reurn to our Order. I say that Gregory the Third being created Pope, and
Aistolfus King of the Lombards; Aistolfus contrary to League and Agreement,
seized upon Ravenna, and made War upon the Pope: Gregory not daring (for the
reasons abovesaid,) to depend upon the weakness of the Empire, or the fidelity
of the Lombards (whom he had already found false) applied himself to Pepin the
Second, who from Lord of Austracia and Brabantia, was become King of France,
not so much by his own Virtue, as by the Chivalry of his Uncle Pepin, and
Charles Martel his Father: For Charles Martel being Governor of that Kingdom,
gave that memorable defeat to the Saracens near Torsi upon the River Totra, in
which above 200000. of them were slain; upon the reputation of which Victor'y
under the discipline of his Father, and his own deportment in it besides, Pepin
was afterward made King of that Kingdom; to whom, when Pope Gregory applied
himself for Relief against the Lombards, Pepin returned Answer, that he would
be ready to assist him, but he desired first to have the honor to see him, and
pay his personal respects. Upon which Invitation Pope Gregory went into France,
passing through the Lombards Quarters without any interruption, so great
Reverence they bare to Religion in those days. Being arrived, and honorably
received in France, he was after some time dismissed with an Army into Italy;
which having besieged Pavia, and reduced the Lombards to distress, Aistolfus
was constrained to certain terms of Agreement with the French, which were
obtained by the intercession of the Pope, who desired not the death of his
Enemy, but that he might rather be converted and live. Among the rest of the
Articles of that Treaty, it was agreed, That Aistolfus should restore all the
Lands he had usurped from the Church. But when the French Army was returned
into France, Aistolfus forgot his Engagement, which put the Pope upon a second
Application to King Pepin, who re-suppli'd him again, sent a new Army into
Italy, overcame the Lombards, and possessed himself of Ravenna, and (contrary
to the desire of the Grecian Emperor) gave it to the Pope, with all the Lands
under that Exarchat, and the Country of Urbino, and la Marca into the bargain.
In the interim Aistolfus died, and Desiderio a Lombard, and Duke of Tuscany,
taking up Arms to succeed him, begged Assistance of the Pope, with Promise of
perpetual Amity for the future; which the Pope granted, as far as the other
Princes would consent. At first Desiderio was very punctual, and observed his
Articles to a hair, delivering up the Towns as he took them to the Pope,
according to his Engagement to King Pepin, nor was there any Exarchus sent
afterward from Constantinople to Ravenna, but all was Arbitrary, and managed
according to the pleasure of the Pope. Not long after, Pepin died, and Charles
his Son succeeded in the Government, who was called the Great, from the
greatness of his Exploits. About the same time Theodore the First was advanced
to the Papacy, and falling out with Desiderio, was besieged by him in Rome. In
his exigence the Pope had recourse to the King of France (as his Predecessor
had done before him) and Charles not only supplied him with an Army, but
marching over the Alps at the Head of it himself, he besieged Desiderio in
Pavia, took him and his Son in it, sent them both Prisoners into France, and
went in person to Rome, to visit the Pope, where he adjudg'd and determined,
That his Holiness being God's Vicar, could not be subject to the Judgment of
Man. For which the Pope and people together, declared him Emperor, and Rome
began again to have an Emperor of the West; and whereas formerly the Popes
were confirmed by the Emperors, The King of France exempts the Pope from all
humane Jurisdiction.
the Emperor now in his Election was to be beholding to the Pope; by which
means, the power and dignity of the Empire declined, and the Church began to
advance, and by these steps to usurp upon the Authority of Temporal Princes.
The Lombards had been in Italy 222 years, so long as to retain nothing of their
original Barbarity but their name. Charles being desirous to reform Italy, in
the time of Leo III. was contented they should inhabit and denominate the parts
where they were born, which since then, have been called Lombardy: and because
the name of Rome was venerable among them; he appointed that part of Italy
which was adjacent, and under the Exarchat of Ravenna, should be called
Romagnia. Moreover, he created his Son Pepin King of Italy, extending his
Jurisdiction as far as Benevento; all the rest was continued under the dominion
of the Grecian Emperor, with whom Charles had made an Alliance. During these
Transactions, Pascal created Pope. The Original of Cardinals.
Pascal the First was elected Pope, and the Parish Priests in Rome, by reason
of their propinquity and readiness at every Election, to adorn their power with
a more illustrious Title, began to be called Cardinals; arrogating so much to
themselves, (especially after they had excluded the Voices of the people) that
seldom any Pope was created but by them, out of their own number. Pascal being
dead, he was succeeded by Eugenius the Second, of the Order of Santa Sabina.
Italy being in this manner under the Authority of the French, Eugenius the II.
Pope.
changed its Form and Economy in some measure; for the Pope having incroach'd
upon the Temporal Authority, created Counts and Marquesses, as Longinus
Exarchat of Ravenna, Ospurcus made Pope, changes his Name.
had made Dukes before. After some few, Ospurcus a Roman succeeded to the
Papacy, who not satisfied with the uncomliness of his Name, called himself
Sergius, and gave the first occasion for the changing their Names, which has
since been frequently practiced at their several Elections. About this time
Charles the Emperor died, and his Son Lodovic succeeded, yet not so quietly,
but that there arose so many and so great differences betwixt his Sons, that in
the days of his Grandchildren, the Empire was wrested from his Family,
restored to the Almans, and the next German Emperor was called Ainolfus. Nor
did Charles his Posterity by their dissentions lose only the Empire, but their
Sovereignty in Italy likewise; for the Lombards resuming Courage, fell foul
upon the Pope and his Romans, who not knowing to whose protection to betake
himself, was constrained to make Berengarius (Dukeof Friuli) King of Italy.
Encouraged by these Accidents, the Hunni (who at that time were planted in
Pannonia) took heart, and invaded Italy, but coming to a Battle with
Berengarius, they were overthrown, and forced back again into Pannonia, or
rather into Hungaria, it being at that time called by their Name. At that time
Romano was Emperor of Greece, who being General of his Army had usurped upon
Constantine, and forced the Government out of his hand; and because during
these innovations, Puglia and Calabria (which as I said before, had subjected
themselves to that Empire) were then in Rebellion; enraged at their insolence,
he permitted the Saracens to possess those Countries, if they could gain them;
who invading them thereupon, immediately subdued them, and attempted upon Rome.
But the Romans, (Berengarius being employed against the Hunni) made Alberigo,
Duke of Tuscany, their General; by whose Valor their City was preserved, and
the Saracens raising their Siege retired, built a Castle upon the Mountain
Gargano, and from thence Lorded it over Puglia and Calabria, and infested all
that part of Italy besides. Thus it was that Italy in those times was
marvelously afflicted toward the Alps by the Hunni, toward Naples by the
Saracens; and it continued in that Agony several years, under three Berengarii
successively; during which time the Pope and the Church were under no the less
perturbation; having no refuge to fly to, by reason of the dissension among the
Western Princes, and the impotence of the Eastern. The Original of Pisa. The
Government of Italy, Anno 931.
The City of Genoa, and all its Territory upon the Rivers, were overrun by the
Sara^ens, which, by the resort of multitudes (driven thither out of their own
Country) was the foundation of the Grandeur of Pisa. These Accidents happened
in the year DCCCCXXXI. But Ottone Son of Enricus and Matilda, and Duke of
Saxony, coming to the Empire, and being a man of great reputation for his
Conduct and Prudence, Agabito the Pope addressed himself to him, imploring his
Assistance in Italy against the Tyranny of the Berengarii. Agabito Pop^.
The States of Italy in those days were Governed in this manner. Lombardy was
under the Jurisdiction of Berengarius the Third, and Albertus his Son. Tuscany
and Romania under the Dominion of a Governor deputed by the Emperor of the
West. Puglia and Calabria were part under the Greek Empire, and part under the
Saracens. In Rome, two Consuls were created out of the Nobility every year,
according to ancient Custom, to which a Prefect was added to administer
Justice to the people. They had moreover a Counsel of Twelve, who provided
Governors annually for all Towns under their Jurisdiction. The Pope had more
or less power in Rome, and in all Italy, according as his favor was more or
less with the Emperor, or other persons which were more potent than he.
Ottone, to gratify his request, came into Italy with an Army, fought with the
Berengarii, drove them out of their Kingdom (which they had enjoyed 55 years)
and restored the Pope to his former dignity. Ottone had a Son, and a
Grandchild of his own Name, both which, one after the other, succeeded in the
Empire, and in the time of Ottone the Third, Pope Gregory the Fifth was
expelled by the Romans. Gregory the 5. Pope, expelled and restored; devests the
Romans of their power of creating Emperors and consers it upon six Princes of
Germany.
Ottone undertook a new Expedition into Italy in his behalf, and having once
again reestablished him in his Chair, the Pope to be revenged of the Romans,
took from them the power of Creating the Emperors, and conferred it upon six
German Princes; Three Bishops, (...), Treves and Colen, and Three temporal
Princes, the Duke of Brandenburg, the Prince Palatine of the Rhine, and the
Duke of Saxony; and this happened in the year 1002. After the death of Ottone
the Third, Enrico Duke of Bavaria was created Emperor by the said Electors,
and was Crowned twelve years after by Stephanus the Eighth. Enricus and
Simeonda his Wife, were eminent for their Piety, having as a Testimony of it,
built and endowed several Churches, and among the rest that of S. Miniato, near
the City of Florence. In the year 1024, Enrico died, was succeeded by Corrado
of Suevia, and he by Enrico II, who coming to Rome, and finding a Schism in the
Church, and three Popes in being at the same time, he degraded them all,
Clement 2d. Pope
and causing Clement II. to be elected, was Crowned Emperor by him. Italy was
then governed partly by the People, partly by Princes, and partly by the
Emperors Ministers, the chiefest of which (to whom the rest did in all matters
of importance refer) had the Title of Chancellor. Among the Princes, the most
powerful was Gottifredus, Husband to the Countess Matilda, who was Sister to
Enricus II. She and her Husband had the possession of Lucca, Parma, Reggio, and
Mantua, with all that Countery which is now called the Patrimony of the Church.
The Popes at that time had no small trouble upon their hands, by reason of the
ambition of the people of Rome; who having at first made use of the Papal
Authority to free themselves of the Emperors, as soon as the Popes had taken
upon them the Regiment of the City, and reformed things as they thought good
themselves, of a sudden they became their Enemies; and they received more
injury from the people, than from any other Christian Prince whatsoever,
Rebelling and mutining at the same time the Popes by their Censures, made the
whole West to tremble; nor was the design of either of them less than to
subvert the Authority and Reputation of the one and the other. Nicolas II.
arriving at the Popedom, as Gregory V. had taken from the Romans the privilege
of creating the Emperor; Nicolas ^d Pope, excludes the Romans* and reduces the
Papal Elections to the suffrage of Cardinals only.
so he deprived them of their concurrence to the Election of the Pope,
restraining it wholly to the suffrage of the Cardinals; nor contented with
this, by agreement with the Princes which Governed at that time in Puglia and
Calabria, (for reasons which shall be mentioned hereafter) he forced all the
Officers sent thither by the people, to assert their Jurisdiction, to pay
Allegiance to the Pope, and some of them he displaced. After Nicholaus was
dead, there happened a great Schism in the Church: Schism, and Anti-Popes in
the Church.
The Clergy of Lombardy would not yield obedience to Alexander II. who was
chosen at Rome, but created Cadalo of Parma, Antipope. Enrico detesting the
extravagant dominion of the Popes, sent to Alexander to resign, and to the
Cardinals, that they should repair into Germany, in order to a new Election; so
that he was the first Prince which was made sensible of the effects of their
Spiritual Fulminations; for the Pope calling together a new Council at Rome,
deprived him both of his Empire, and Kingdom. Some of the Italians following
the Pope's, and some of them the Emperors party, was the foundation of that
famous Faction betwixt the Guelfs and Ghibilins, in so much that for want of
foreign inundations by the Barbarians, The difference betwixt (...) and the
Pope, the ground of the Guel^s, and (...).
they turned their Arms upon themselves, and tore out their own Bowels. Enrico
being Excommunicated, was forced by his own Subjects to come into Italy, where
barefooted, and upon his knees he begged his Pardon of the Pope, in the year
MLXXX. Notwithstanding all this, not long after, there happened a new quarrel
betwixt Enrico and the Pope; whereupon, provoked by a new Excommunication, he
sent his Son Enrico with an Army, who by the Assistance of the Romans (whose
hatred the Pope had contracted) besieged him in his Castle; but Roberto
Guiscardo coming from Puglia to his relief, Enrico had not the courage to
attend him, but raised his Siege and retired into Germany. However the Romans
continued obstinate, and Robert was forced to sack the Town, and reduce it to
its ancient Ruins, from whence by several Popes it had been lately restored.
And because from this Roberto, the Model of Government in the Kingdom of Naples
did proceed, it will not (in my judgment) be superfluous to give a particular
Narrative, both of his Country and Exploits. Upon the differences betwixt
Charlemain's Heirs (as is said before) a new Northern people called Normans
took occasion to invade France, and possessed themselves of that part of it
which is now called Normandy. Of this people, part went into Italy, in the time
when it was infested by the Berengarii, the Saracens, and Hunns; settling in
Romania, and performing very valiantly in all those Wars. Of Tancred, one of
the Princes of those Normans, were born several Sons, among which, William
called Ferabar, and Roberto called Guiscardo, were two. William arrived to be
Prince, and the Tumults in Italy were in some measure composed: But the
Saracens having Sicily entire, and daily invasions made upon Italy, William
entered into Confederacy with the Princes of Capua, and Salerno and with
Milorcus a Grecian (who by the Emperor of Greece was deputed Governor of
Puglia, and Calabria) to invade Sicily, and in case of Victory, it was agreed
among them, that both Prey and Country should be equaly divided. The
Enterprise was prosperous; they beat the Saracens, drove them out of the
Country, and possessed it when they had done. But Milorcus causing more Forces
to be transported privately out of Greece, seized the Island for the Emperor,
and divided only the Spoil. William was not a little disgusted, but reserving
his indignation for a more Convenient time, he departed out of Sicily with the
Princes of Capua and Salerno; who having taken their leaves of him to return to
their Homes, in stead of marching to Romania, as he pretended to them, he faced
about with his Army toward Puglia, surpised Melfi, and behaved himself so
well against the Forces of the Emperor, that he made himself Master of most
part of Puglia and Calabria, which Provinces at the time of Nicolas II. were
Governed by his Brother Roberto; and because he had afterward great Contention
with his Nephews about the inheritance of those States, he made use of the
Pope's mediation, who readily complied, being desirous to oblige Roberto, that
he might defend him against the German Emperor, and the people of Rome; and it
afterward happened (as we have said before) that at the instance of Gregory
VII, he forced Enrico from Rome, and suppressed the Sedition of the
Inhabitants. Robert was succeeded by two of his Sons, Roger and William; to
their Inheritance they annexed the City of Naples; and all the Country betwixt
it and Rome; besides that, they subdued Sicily, of which Roger was made Lord.
But William going afterward to Constantinople, to marry that Emperor's
Daughter, Roger took advantage of his absence, seized upon his Country, and
elated by so great an acquest, caused himself first to be called King of Italy;
but afterward contenting himself with the Title of King of Puglia and Sicily,
he was the first that gave Name and Laws to that Kingdom, The Original of the
Kingdom of Sicily.
which to this day it retains, though many times since, not only the Royal
Blood, but the Nation has been changed; for upon failure of the Norman Race,
that Kingdom devolved to the Germans; from them, to the French; from the
French, to the Spaniards; and from the Spaniards, to the Flemens, with whom it
remains at this present. Urban II. though very odious in Rome, was gotten to be
Pope; but by reason of the dissentions there, Urban 2d. Pope.
not thinking himself secure in Italy, he removed with his whole Clergy into
France. Having assembled many people together at Anvers, he undertook a
Generous Enterprise, and by a learned Oration against the Infidels, kindled
such a fire in their minds, they resolved upon an Expedition into Asia against
the Saracens, which Expedition (as all other of the same nature) was called
afterward Crociate, because all that went along in it carried a red Cross upon
their Arms, The first Croisade.
and their Cloths. The Chief Commanders in this Enterprise were Gottofredi
Eustachio, Alduino di Buglione Earl of Bologna, and Peter the Hermit, a man of
singular veneration both for his prudence and piety. Many Princes and Nations
assisted with their Purses, and many private men served as Volunteers at their
own Charges. So great an influence had Religion in those days upon the Spirits
of Men, encouraged by the Example of their several Commanders. At first the
Enterprise was very successful, all Asia minor, Syria, and part of Egypt fell
under the power of the Christians; during which War, the Order of the Knights
of Jerusalem was instituted, and continued a long time in Rhodes, as a Bulwark
against the Turks. Not long after the Order of the Knights Templers was
founded, but it lasted not long, by reason of the dissoluteness of their
Manners. At sundry times after these things, upon sundry occasions, many
accidents fell out, in which several Nations, and particular men signalized
themselves. There were engaged in this Expedition, the Kings of England and
France, the States of Pisa, Venice, and Genoa, all behaving themselves with
great bravery, and sighting with variety of Fortune, till the time of Saladine
the Saracen; but his Courage and Virtue improved by intestine differences among
the Christians, robbed them of the glory they had gained at the first, and
chased them out of a Country, where for Ninety years they had been so
honorably, Pascal ^d*
and so happily placed. After the death of Pope Urban, Pascal II. was chosen to
succeed him, and Enrico IV. made Emperor, who coming to Rome; and pretending
great friendship to the Pope, took his advantage, clapped both him and his Clergy
in Prison, and never discharged them till they had empowered him to dispose of
the Churches in Germany as he pleased himself. About this time Matilda the
Countess died, and gave her Patrimony to the Church. After the deaths of Pascal
and Enric, many Popes and many Emperors succeeded, Alexander 3d.
till the Papacy fell to Alexander III. and the Empire to Frederick Barbarossa
a Swede. The Popes of those days had many Controversies with the people of
Rome, and the Emperors, which till the time of Barbarossa, rather increased
than otherwise. Frederick was an excellent Soldier, but so haughty and high, he
could not brook to give place to the Pope. Notwithstanding he came to Rome to
be Crowned, and returned peaceably into Germany. But that humor lasted but
little, for he returned shortly into Italy, to reduce some Towns in Lombardy,
which denied him obedience. In this juncture, Cardinal di S. Clemente (a Roman
born) dividing from Pope Alexander, was made Pope himself by a Faction in the
Conclave. Frederick the Emperor being then encamped before Crema, A new
Antipope.
Alexander complained to him of the Antipope: Frederick replied, That they
should both of them appear personally before him, and that then, hearing
faithfully what each of them could say, he should be better able to determine
which was in the right. Alexander was not at all satisfied with the Answer, but
perceiving the Emperor inclining to the Adversary, he Excommunicated him, and
ran away to King Philip of France. For all that, Frederick prosecuted his Wars
in Lombardy, took and dismantled Milan. Which put the Cities of Verona, Padua,
and Venice, upon a Confederacy for their Common defense. In the mean time the
Antipope died, and Frederick presumed to Create Guid^ of Cremona in his place.
The Romans taking advantage of the Pope's absence, and the Emperor's diversion
in Lombardy, had re-assum'd something of their former Authority, and began to
require Obedience in the neighboring places which had been anciently their
Subjects. And because the Tuscans refused to submit, they marched confusedly
against them, but they being reinforced by Frederick, gave the Roman Army such
a blow, that since that time Rome could never recover its old Condition either
for Populousness or Wealth. Upon these Events, Pope Alexander was returned to
Rome, presuming he might be safe there, by reason of the Animosity the Romans
retained against the Emperor; and the Employment his Enemies gave him in
Lombardy. But Frederick postponing all other respects, marched with his Army to
besiege Rome. Alexander thought it not convenient to attend him, but withdrew
into Puglia to William, who upon the death of Roger (being next Heir) was made
King. Frederick being much molested, and weakened by a Contagion in his Army,
raised his Siege, and went back into Germany. The Lombards which were in League
against him, to restrain their Excursions, and streighten the Towns of Pavia
and Tortona; caused a City to be built (which they intended for the Seat of the
War) and called it Alexandria, in honor to Pope Alexander, and defiance to the
Emperor. Guido the new Antipope died likewise, and John (of Fermo) was chosen
in his room, who by the favor of the Imperial party, was permitted to keep his
Residence in Monte Fiascone, whilst Alexander was gone into Tuscany, invited by
that people, that by his Authority they might be the better defended against
the Romans. Being there, Ambassadors came to him from Henry King of England, to
clear their Masters innocence in the death of Thomas Becket, Archbishop of
Canterbury, with which he was publicly and most infamously aspersed. The
Pope's penance to King Henry of England, upon the complaints about Thomas
Bec^et.
To inquire into the truth, the Pope sent two Cardinals into England, who
(notwithstanding, they found not his Majesty in any manifest guilt) yet for the
scandal of the Fact, and that he had not honored the said Archbishop with the
respect he deserved, they prescribed as a Penance, That he should call all the
Barons of his Kingdom together; swear his Innocence before them, send 200
Soldiers to Jerusalem, to be paid by him for a twelvemonth, and himself follow
in person with as great a Power as he could raise, before three years were
expired; that he should disanul all things passed in his Kingdom in prejudice
to the Ecclesiastic liberty, and consent, that any of his Subjects whatever,
should appeal to Rome, when, and as often, as they thought it convenient: all
which Conditions were readily accepted, and that great Prince submitted to a
Sentence there is scarce a private person but would scorn at this day. But
though his Holiness was so formidable to the Princes abroad, he was not so
terrible in Rome; the people in that City would not be ^oaksed, nor persuaded
to let him live there, though he protested he would meddle no farther than
Ecclesiastical matters; by which it appears, things at a distance are more
dreadful, than near at hand. In the mean time Frederick was returned into
Italy, with resolution to make a new War upon the Pope* but whilst he was busy
about his preparations, his Barons and Clergy gave him advertisement, that they
would all forsake him, unless he reconciled himself to the Church; so that
changing his design, he was forced to go and make his submission at Venice; and
pacification being made, the Pope in the Agreement divested the Emperor of all
the Authority he pretended over Rome, and named William King of Sicily and
Puglia, his Confederate. Frederick being an active Prince, and unable to lie
still, embarked himself in the Enterprise into Asia, to spend his Ambition
against the Turk, which he could not do so effectually against the Pope. But
being got as far as the River Cidvo, allured by the clearness and excellence of
the Waters, he would needs wash himself in it, and that washing gave him his
death. Those Waters being more beneficial to the Turks, than all
Excommunications to the Christians; for whereas these only cooled and asswag'd
his Ambition, they washed it away, and extinguished it quite.

Frederick being dead, nothing remained now to be suppres'd, but the contumacy
of the Romans. After much argument and dispute about their Creation of Consuls,
it was concluded, the Romans, according to ancient Custom, should have liberty
to choose them; but they should not execute their Office, till they had sworn
fealty to the Church. Upon this accord John the Antipope fled to Monte Albano,
and died presently after. In the mean time, William King of Naples died also;
and having left no Sons but Tanacred a Bastard, the Pope designed to have
possessed himself of his Kingdom, but by the opposition of the Barons, Celestin
3d. Pope.
Tanacred was made King. Afterward Celestin III. coming to the Papacy, and
being desirous to wrest that Kingdom from Tanacred, he contrived to make Enrico
(Fredericks Son) King, promising him the Kingdom of Naples, upon Condition he
would restore such Lands as belonged to the Church, and to facilitate the
business, he took Costanza (an ancient Maid, daughter to King William) out of a
Monastery, and gave her him for his Wife; by which means the Kingdom of Naples
passed from the Normans (who had founded it) and fell under the dominion of the
Germans. Henricus the Emperor having first settled his affairs in Germany, came
into Italy with his Wife Costanza, and one of his Sons called Frederick, about
four years of age, and without much difficulty possessed himself of that
Kingdom, Tanacred being dead, and only one Child remaining of his Issue, called
Roger Not long after Enricus died in Sicily, he was succeeded in that Kingdom
by Frederick; and Otto Duke of Saxony, chosen Emperor by the assistance of
Pope Innocent III. But no sooner had he got the Crown upon his Head, but
contrary to the opinion of all men, he became Enemy to the Pope; seized upon
Romania, and gave out Orders for the assaulting that Kingdom; Upon which being
Excommunicated by the Pope, and deserted by his Friends, Frederick King of
Naples was chosen Emperor in his place. The said Frederick coming to Rome to
be Crowned, the Pope scrupled it, being jealous of his power, and endeavored
to persuade him out of Italy, as he had done Otto before; which Frederick
disdaining, retired into Germany, and making War upon Otto, overcame him at
last. In the mean time Innocent died, who besides other magnificent Works,
built the Hospital di Santo Spirito at Rome. Honorius III. succeeded him, in
whose Papacy were instituted the Orders of S. Dominick and S. Francis, Honorius
3d. Pope.
in the year MCCXVIII. Honorius Crowned Frederick to whom John, The Orders of
S. Dominick, and S. Francis, instituted 1218.
descended from Baldwin King of Jerusalem (who commanded the remainder of the
Christians in Asia, and retained that Title) gave one of his Daughters in
marriage, and the Title of that Kingdom in Dower with her; and from that time,
whoever is King of Naples, has that Title annexed. In Italy at that time they
lived in this manner: The Romans had no more the Creation of Consuls, The
Titles of King of Naples and Jerusalem annexed.
but in lieu of it they invested sometimes one, sometimes more of their
Senators with the same power. The League continued all the while, into which
the Cities of Lombardy had entered against Frederick Barbarossa; and the Cities
were these; Milan, Brescia, Mantua, with the greater part of the Cities in
Romagna, besides Verona, Vicenza, Padua, and Trevigi. The Cities on the
Emperors side were Cremona, Bergamo, Parma, Reggio, Modena, and Trenta: The
rest of the Cities of Lombardy, Romagna, and the Marquisate of Trevizan, took
part according to their interest, sometimes with this, sometimes with the other
party. In the time of Otto III, one Ezelino came into Italy, of whose Loins
there remaining a Son, called also Ezelino, being powerful and rich, he joined
himself with Frederick II, who (as was said before) was become an Enemy to the
Pope. By the encouragement and assistance of this Ezelino, Frederick came into
Italy; took Verona and Mantua, demolished Vicenza, seized upon Padoua, defeated
the united Forces of those parts, and when he had done, advanced toward
Toscany, whilst in the mean time Ezelino made himself Master of the Marquisate
of Trevizan, Ferrara they could not take, being defended by Azone da Esti, and
some Regiments of the Popes in Lombardy. The House of the Esti made Lords of
Ferrara.
Whereupon when the Siege was drawn off, his Holiness gave that City in Fee to
Azone da Esti, from whom those who are Lords of it at this day are descended.
Frederick stopped, and fixed himself at Pisa, being desirous to make himself
Master of Tuscany, and by the distinctions he made betwixt his Friends and his
Foes in that Province, raised such ammosites, The Guel^s side with the Church,
the Gibilins with the Emperor.
as proved afterward the destruction of all Italy: For both Guelfs and
Gibilins increased every day, the first siding with the Church, the other with
the Emperor, and were called first by those Names, in the City of Pistoia.
Frederick being at length removed from Pisa, made great devastations, and
several inroads into the Territories of the Church; in so much that the Pope
having no other remedy, proclaimed the Croifada against him, as his
Predecessors had done against the Saracens. Frederick (left he should be left
in the lurch by his own people as Frederick Barbarossa, and others of his
Ancestors had been before,) entertained into his Pay great numbers of the
Saracens, and to oblige them to him, and strengthen his opposition to the Pope,
by a party that should not be afraid of his Curs^s, he gave them Nocera in that
Kingdom, to the end that having a R^treat in their own hands, Innocent 4th Pope.
they might serve him with more confidence and security. At this time Innocent
IV. was Pope, who being apprehensive of Frederick, removed to Genoa, and thence
into France, where he called a Counsel at Lions, and Frederick designed to have
been there, had he not been retained by the Rebellion of Parma. Having had ill
Fortune in the suppressing of that, he marched away into Tuscany, and from
thence into Sicily, where he died not long after, leaving his Son Currado in
S^evia, and in Puglia, his natural Son Manfredi, whom he had made Duke of
Benevento. Currado went to take possession of the Kingdom, died at Naples, and
left only one l^^tle Son behind him in Germany, who was called Currado, by his
own Name. By which means, Manfred first as Tutor to Currado, got into the
Government, and afterward giving out that his Pupil was dead, he made himself
King, and forced the Pope and Neapolitans (who opposed it) to consent. Whilst
Affairs in that Kingdom were in that posture, many Commotions happened in
Lombardy, betwixt the Guelfs and the Gibilins. The Guelfs were headed by a
Legate from the Pope, the Gibilins by Ezelino, who at that time had in his
possession all that part of Lombardy on this side the Poe. And because while he
was entertained in this War, the City of Padoua rebelled, he caused 12000 of
them to be slain, and not long after, before the War was ended, died himself in
the thirtieth year of his age. Upon his death, all those Countries which had
been in his hands, became free. Manfredi King of Naples continued his
malevolence to the Church, as his Ancestors had done before him, holding Pope
Urban IV. in perpetual anxiety, so that at length he was constrained to convoke
the Crociata against him, and to retire into Perugi^, till he could get his
Forces together: but finding them come in slowly and thin, conceiving that to
the overcoming of Manfred, greater supplies would be necessary, he addressed
himself to the King of France, making his Brother Charles Duke of Angio, King
of Sicily and Naples, and excited him to come into Italy, and take possession
of those Kingdoms. Clement 5th Pope.
Before Charles could get to Rome, the Pope died, and Clement V. succeeded in
his place. In the said Clements time, Charles with 30 Galleys arrived at Ostia,
having Ordered the rest of his Forces to meet him by Land. During his residence
at Rome, as a Complement to him, the Romans made him a Senator, and the Pope
invested him in that Kingdom, with condition that he should pay 50 thousand
Florins yearly to the Church; and published a Decree, that for the future,
neither Charles, nor any that should succeed him in that Kingdom, should be
capable of being Emperors. After which Charles advancing against Manfred,
fought with him, beat him, and killed him near Ben^vento, thereby making
himself King of Sicily, and that Kingdom. Corradino (to whom that State
devolved by his Fathers Testament) gathering what Forces together he could in
Germany, marched into Italy against Charles, and engaging him at Tagliacozza,
was presently defeated, and (being afterward discovered in his flight) taken
and slain. Italy continued quiet, till the Papacy of Adrian V. who not enduring
that Charles should continue in Rome, and govern all ((...) he did) by virtue
of his Senatorship, he removed to Vit^rbo, Adrian 5th Pope.
and solicited Ridolfus the Emperor to come into Italy against him. In this
manner, the Popes sometimes for defense of Religion, sometimes out of their own
private ambition, called in new Men, and by consequence new Wars into Italy.
And no sooner had they advanced any of them, but they repented of what they had
done, and sought immediately to remove him, nor would they suffer any Province,
(which by reason of their weakness they were unable themselves to subdue) to be
enjoyed quietly by any body else. The Princes were all afraid of them, for
whether by fighting, or flying, they commonly overcame, unless circumvented by
some Stratagem, as Boniface VIII. and some others were by the Emperors, under
pretense of Friendship and Amity. Ridolfus being retained by his War with the
King of Bohemia, was not at leisure to visit Italy before Adrian was dead.
Nicholas 3d. of the House of (...).
He which succeeded him was Nicolas the III. of the House of Ursin, a daring,
ambitious man; who resolving to take down the Authority of Charles, contrived
that Ridolfus the Emperor, should complain of Charles his Governor in
Tuscany, of his siding with the Guelfs, who after the death of Manfred, had
been received and protected in that Province. To comply with the Emperor,
Charles called away his Governor, and the Pope sent his Cardinal Nephew to
take possession of it for the Emperor; to recompense that Kindness, the
Emperor restored Romania to the Church, which had been usurped by his
Predecessors, and the Pope made Bartaldo Orsino Duke of Romagnia: growing more
powerful by degrees, and believing himself strong enough to look Charles in
the face, he began to expostulate, turned him out of his Senatorship, and
published a Decree, that no person for the future of Royal Extraction should
ever be Senator in Rome. Not contented with this, he carried his Designs
farther, and was in the mind to have droven Charles out of Sicily; to which
end, he held secret intelligence with the King of Arragon, who effected it
afterward in the time of his Successor. He designed likewise to have made two
Kings out of his Family, one of Lombardy, the other of Tuscany, by whose power
and assistance the Church might be defended from the incursions of the Germans
abroad, and the oppression of the French at home. But he dying before any thing
could be done, was the first Pope that gave so manifest demonstration of
Ambition, or that, under pretense of advancing the Church, designed only to
exalt and magnify his own Family; The first introduction of Popes Nephews.
and though from this time backward no mention is to be found of Nephew, or any
other of his Holiness Kindred, yet forward all History is full of them; and as
formerly the Popes have endeavored to leave them Princes, they would leave
them Popes now adays if they could, and make the Papacy hereditary.

But the Principalities they erected, have been hitherto short-lived; for the
Popes seldom living long, the first gust of wind shakes them, for want of their
Authority and Courage to sustain them. Martin 10th. Pope.
This Pope being dead* Martin X. succeeded, who being born a Frenchman, was a
friend to the French, and Charles (in the Rebellion of Romania) sent an Army to
his Assistance, who having besieged Furli, Guido Bonatti an Astrologer being in
the Town, appointed the Garrison a certain time to sally upon them; and
following his direction, they did it with such success, that the whole French
Army was either taken or killed. About this time, the practices betwixt Pope
Nicholas and Peter King of Arragon, were put in execution; the Sicilians by
that means killed all the French they found in that Island; and Peter made
himself Lord of it, upon pretense it belonged to Constansa, Manfreds Daughter,
whom he had married; but Charles in his preparation for its recovery, died;
left Charles II. his Son, at that time a Prisoner in Sicily, who for his
enlargement, promised to surrender himself again, if in three years time he
prevailed not with the Pope to invest the House of Arragon with the Kingdom of
Sicily. Ridolfus the Emperor, in stead of coming into Italy himself, to
recover the reputation of the Empire, sent an Ambassador thither with full
power to enfranchize such Cities as would buy out their Freedom: Upon which,
many Cities redeemed themselves, and changed their Laws, with their Liberty.
Adulfus Duke of Saxony, succeeded in the Empire, and in the Popedom, Piero del
Murone, by the Name of Pope Celestine; Pope Celestine resigns to Boniface 8th.
but having been a Hermit, and exceedingly devout, in six months time he
renounced, and Boniface VIII. was chosen in his room. The Heavens (foreseeing
the time would come Italy should be delivered both from the Germans and French,
and remain entirely in the hands of its Natives; that the Pope though freed
from foreign impedidiments, might not be able to usurp, and establish himself
in the Power which he exercised then) raised up two great Families in Rome, the
Colonni, and the Ursini, that by their Authority and Alliance they might be
able to circumscribe his Holiness, and keep him within his bounds. Pope
Boniface was sensible of them, and applied himself very zealously to have
extirpated the Colonni, excommunicating them first, and then proclaiming the
Crociata against them; which, though it might be some prejudice to them, was
more to the Church: For those Swords which had been drawn in vindication of the
Gospel, and done honorable things; when for private ambition they were
unsheathed against Christians, they lost their first sharpness, and would not
cut at all; and so it came to pass, their immoderate desire of satiating their
Appetite, by degrees lessened the Popes power, and disarmed them.

Two of that House which were Cardinals, he degraded; Sciarra (the chief of
them) escaping in disguise, being discovered, was taken by the Spanish
Privateers, and clapped to an Oar; but being known at Marsellis, he was rescued,
and sent away to the King of France, who by Boniface was Excommunicated
thereupon, and deprived of his Kingdom. Philip King of France, considering very
well that in all open Wars with the Popes, he had either run some eminent
danger* or come home by the loss; began to look about for some Artifice, and at
length, pretending great readiness to comply, and counterfeiting a Treaty, he
sent Sciarra privately into Italy, who being arrived at Anagnia (where at that
time the Pope had his Residence) gathering his Friends together in the night,
he seized upon his Holiness, who (tho enlarged afterward by the people of the
Town) died shortly in a Dilirium with mere sense and indigation. This Boniface
was the first Pope which ordained Jubilees in the year M.CCC. The first
Jubilees ordained by Boniface every 100 years
and decreed they should be celebrated every hundred years. These times
produced many troubles betwixt the Guelfs and the Gibilin's, and Italy being
forsaken by the Emperors, many Towns recovered their liberties, and many were
usurped. Pope Benedict restored their Caps to the Cardinals of the House of
Colonni, absolved King Philip, and gave him his Blessing. Benedict chosen,
dies, and is succeeded by Clement 5th. who removed his residence unto France,
1306.
Benedict was succeeded by Clement V. who being a Frenchman removed his Court
into France, Anno MCCCVI. During these Transactions Charles II. King of Naples
died, and left the Succession to Robert his Son. The Empire was in the mean
time fallen to Arrigo of Luxemburg, who came to Rome to be Crowned, though the
Pope was not there; upon whose arrival many commotions followed in Lombardy,
and all banished persons, whether Guelfs or Gibilins, being restored to their
former Habitations, conspiring to supplant one another, they filled the whole
Province with the Calamities of War, notwithstanding the Emperor employed his
utmost power to prevent it. Arrigo removing out of Lombardy by the way of
Genova, returned to Pisa, with design to have driven King R^b^rt out of
Tascany, but not succeeding in that, he marched to Rome, but continued there a
few days only, for the Ursini by the help of King Robert forced him to remove,
and he marched back again to Pisa, where, for his more secure Warring upon
Tuscany, and supplanting that King, he caused it to be assaulted on the other
side by Frederick King of Sicily. But in the height of his Designs, when he
thought himself sure both of Tuscany and its King, (...)
he died, and the succession went to Lodovick of Bavaria. About this time John
XXII. was created Pope, in whose Papacy, the Emperor ceased not to persecute
the Guelfs, and the Church, but King Robert and the Florentines interposing in
their defense, great Wars ensued in Lombardy, under the Conduct of the Visconti
against the Guelfs, and against the Flor^ntines in Tuscany, The (...) a great
Fami^y in Milan, made Princes of that City by the extirpation of the Torri.
by Castruccio di Lucca. And because the Family of the Visconti were the
Original of the Dukedom of Milan, one of the five Principalities that governed
all Italy afterward, I think it not amiss to deduce it a little higher. After
the League amaong the Cities in Lombardy (which I have mentioned before) for
their mutual defense against Frederick Barbarossa Milan being rescued from the
ruin that impended; to revenge it self of the injuries it had received,
entered into that Confederacy, which put a stop to the Emperors career, and
preserved the Churches interest in Lombardy for a while. In the process of
those Wars, the Family of the Torri grew very powerful, increasing daily more
and more, while the Emperor's Authority was small in those parts. But
Frederick II. arriving in Italy, and the Ghibilin Faction (by the assistance of
Ezelino) prevailing, it began to dilate and spread it self in all the Cities,
and particularly in Milan; the Family of the Visconti ^iding with that party,
drove the Family of the Torri out of that Town: But long they were not
banished, for by an accord made betwixt the Emperor and Pope, they were
restored. Afterward when the Pope removed with his Court into France, and
Arrigo of Luxemburg came to Rome to be Crowned, he was received into Milan by
Maffeo Visconti, the Head of that House, and Guido della Torre, the Chief of
the other. Yet how kindly soever they carried it outwardly, Masseo had a secret
design, by the Emperor's being there, to drive out the Torri, believing the
Enterprise the more practicable, because Guido was of the Enemies Faction. He
took the advantage of the peoples complaints against the behavior of the
Germans, encouraging them slily to take Arms, and rescue themselves from their
barbarous servitude. Having disposed things as he desired, he caused a tumult
to be raised by one of his Confidents, upon which the whole Town was to be in
Arms, and pretendedly against the Germans. The Tumult was no sooner begun, but
Maffeo, his Sons, Servants, and Partisans were immediately in Arms, and ran to
Arrigo, assuring him that Tumult was raised by the Torri, who not content with
their private Condition, took that occasion to ruin him as an Enemy to the
Guelfs, and make themselves Princes of that City. But he desired him to be
secure, for they and their party would not fail to defend him, when ever he
required it. Arrigo believed all to be true that Maffeo had told him, joined
his Forces with the Visconti, fell upon the Torri (who were dispersed up and
down the City to suppress the Tumult) killed those of them which they met,
banished the rest, and seized their Estates: So that Maffeo Visconti made
himself Prince. After him, there succeeded Galeazo, and Aza, and after them
Luchino and John, who was afterward Archbishop of that City: Luchino died
before him, and left two Sons, Barnardo and Galeazo; Galeazo dying not long
after, left one Son, called Giovan Galeazo, The (...) Milan.
Conti di Virtue, who after the death of the Archbishop, killed his Uncle
Barnardo, made himself Prince, and was the first that took upon him the Title
of Duke of Milan. He left two Sons only, Philip, and Giovan Maria Angelo, who
being slain by the people of Milan, The Dukedom of Milan falls to the Sforz^s.
the Government remained wholly to Philip. He dying without issue Male, the
Dukedom was translated from the House of the Visconti, to the Sforza's; but of
the manner and occasions of that, hereafter. To return therefore, where I left.

Lewis the Emperor, to give reputation to his party, and to be formally
Crowned, came into Italy, and being at Milan, to drain the City of its Money,
he pretended to set them at Liberty, and clapped the Visconti in Prison.
Afterward, by the Mediation of Castruccio da Luca, he released them, marched
to Rome, and (that he might more easily disturb the tranquillity of Italy) he
made Piero della Carvaro, Antipope: by whose reputation, and the interest of
the Visconti, he presumed he should be able to keep under both the Tuscans, and
Lombards. But Castruccio died in the nick, and his death was the Emperors
ruin, for Pisa and Lucca rebelled out of hand. The Pisans took the Antipope,
and sent him Prisoner to the Pope into France, so that the Emperor despairing
of his Affairs in Italy, he left them all as they were, and retired into
Germany. He was scarce gone, before John King of Bohemia came into Italy with
an Army (being invited by the Ghibilins in Brescia) and possessed himself both of
that City and Bergamo. The Pope (however he dissembled it) was not averse to
his coming, and therefore his Legate at Bologna favored him privately, looking
upon him as a good Antidote against the Emperors return. These underhand
practices changed the Condition of Italy; for the Florentines and King Robert,
perceiving the Legate a favourer of the Ghibilin Faction, turned Enemies to all
people that professed themselves their Friends. In so much as without respect
to either Ghibilins or Guelfs, many Princes associated with them; among the
rest were the Families of the Visconti and Scala, Philippo di Gonsaga of the
House of Mantua, the Families of Carara and Este, whereupon the Pope
Excommunicated them all. The King apprehensive of their League, returned home
to reinforce himself, and coming back with more Force into Italy, found his
Enterprise very difficult notwithstanding; so that growing weary of the
business (though much to the dissatisfaction of the Legate) he returned into
Bohemia, leaving Garrisons only in Modena and Reggio, recommending Parma to the
Care of Marsilio, and Piero de Rossi, who were eminent men in that City. As
soon as he was departed, Bologna entered into the Confederacy, and the
Colleagues divided the four Towns that were remaining to the Church among
themselves, Parma to the Scali, Reggio to the Gonzagi, Modena to the Esti, and
Luca to the Florentines. But many differences followed upon that division,
which for the greatest part were composed afterward by the Venetians. And now
I speak of the Venetians, it may appear indecorous to some people, that among
all the occurrences and revolutions in Italy, I have deferred speaking of them,
notwithstanding their Government and Power places them above any other
Republic or Principality in that Country.

That that Exception may be removed, and the occasion appear, it will be
necessary to look back for some time, to make their Original conspicuous, and
the reasons for which they reserved themselves so long from interposing in the
Affairs of Italy. The Original of the Venetia^s.
Attila King of the Hunni having besieged Aquilegia, the Inhabitants after a
generous defense, being reduced to distress, and despairing of Relief,
conveighing their Goods, as well as they could, to certain Rocks in that point
of the Adriatic Sea which were not inhabited, they escaped after them
themselves. The Padouans seeing the fire so near them, concluding when
Aquilegia was taken, his next visit would be to them, sent away their Goods,
Wives, Children, and unserviceable people to a place in the same Sea, called
Rivo Alto, leaving the young men, and such as were able to bear Arms, for the
defense of the Town. The Inhabitants of Montfelice, and the Hills about it,
fearing the same destiny, removed to the same Islands Aquilegia being taken,
and Padoua, Montfelice, Vicenza, and Verona overcome and sacked by A^tila's
Army; those which remained of the Padouans, and the most considerable of the
rest, settled their Habitations in certain Fenns and Marshes about the aforesaid
Rivo Alto: and all the people about that Province, which was anciently called
Venetia, being driven out of their Country by the same Calamities, joined
themselves with them; changing (by necessity) their pleasant and plentiful
Habitations, for rude and barren places, void of all Commodity and Convenience.
But their number being great, and their Quarter but small, in a short time they
made it not only habitable, but delightful; framing such Laws and Orders to
themselves, as secured them against miseries of their Neighbors, and in a
short time made them considerable, both for reputation and force. So that
besid^^ their first inhabitants, many people resorting to them from the Cities
of Lombardy, upon occasion of the Cruelty of Clefi King of the Lombards, they
multiplied so fast, that when Pepin King of France at the solicitation of the
Pope, undertook to drive the Lombards out of Italy, in the Treaties betwixt
him and the Emperor of Greece, it was agreed that the Duke of Benevento and
the Venetians, should be subject neither to the one nor the other, but enjoy
their Liberty to themselves. Moreover, Necessity having determined their
Habitations among the Waters, having no Land to supply them, it forced them to
look about which way they might live, and applying to Navigation, they began to
trade about the World, and not only furnished themselves with necessary
Provisions, but by degrees brought thither such variety of Merchandise, that
other people which had need of them came to them to be supplied. At first,
having no thoughts of Dominion, they were wholly intent upon what might
facilitate their Trade, and in order thereunto, they acquired several Ports,
Candia given to the Venetians by the French.
both in Greece and Syria, and in their passage into Asia the French making use
of their Ships, they gave them (by way of Recompense) the Island of Candia.
While they lived at this rate, their Name was grown formidable at Sea, and so
venerable at Land, that in most Controversies betwixt their Neighbors they
were the only Arbitrators: as it happened in the difference betwixt the
Confederates upon the division of the Towns, where the cause being referred to
them, they awarded Bergamo and Brescia to the Visconti. But having afterward
in process of time conquered Padoua, Vicenza, Trivegi, and after them Verona,
Bergamo and Brescia, besides several Towns in Romagna and else where, their
power began to be so considerable, that not only the Princes of Italy, but the
greatest and most remote Kings were afraid to provoke them. Whereupon, entering
into a Conspiracy against them, the Venetians lost all in one day, that in so
many Years, and with so vast Expense they had been gaining; and though in our
times they may have recovered it in part, yet not having regained their
Reputation and Power, they live at the mercy of other people (as indeed all the
Princes of Italy do.) Benedict 12th Pope.
Benedict XII. being Pope, looking upon Italy as lost, and fearing that Lodovic
the Emperor should make himself Master of it, he resolved to enter into strict
Amity with all those who held any Lands that belonged formerly to the Empire,
presuming their fear to be dispossessed, would make them faithful in the
defense of Italy, and zealous to keep him out: accordingly he published a
Decree to confirm all the usurped Titles in Lombardy, and to continue their
Possession. But that Pope died before his Promise could be made good, Clement
6th Pope.
and Clement VI. succeeded him. The Emperor observing with what lib^rality the
Pope had disposed of the Lands belonging to the Empire, that he might not be
behind him in so generous a point, he gave all Lands that had been usurped from
the Church, to such persons as had usurped them, to hold them of the Empire, as
the other of the Pope. By which Donation Galeotto Maletesti and his Brothers
became Lords of Rimini, Pesaro, and Fano, Antonio da Montefeltro of la Marca
and Urbin, Gentil da Varano of Camerino, Giovanni Manfredi of Faenza, Guido di
Polenta of Ravenna, Sinebaldo Or delaffi of Furli and Cesena, Lodovico Aledosi
of Imola, besides many others in other places: so that of all the Lands which
belonged to the Church, there was scarce any left without an interloper; by
which means, till the time of Alexander VI. the Church was very weak, but he
recovered its Authority in our days, with the destruction of most of their
Posterity. At the time of this Concession, the Emperor was at Taranto, where
he gave out, his Design was for Italy, which was the occasion of great Wars in
Lombardy, in which the Visconti made themselves Lords of Parma. About this
time, Robert King of Naples died, and left two Grand Children by his Son
Charles, (who died not long before) leaving his eldest Daughter Giovanna Heir
to the Crown, with injunction to marry Andr^a, Son to the King of Hungary, who
was his Nephew. But they lived not long together, before Andrea was poisoned by
her, and she married again to Lodovic Prince of Taranto, her near Kins-man. But
Lewis King of Hungary, Brother to Andrea, to revenge his death, came into Italy
with an Army, and drove Giovanna and her Husband out of the Kingdom. About
these times there happened a very memorable passage in Rome; One Nicholas di
Lorenzo Chancellor in the Capitol, having forced the Senate out of Rome, under
the Title of Tribune made himself head of that Commonwealth, reducing it into
its ancient form, with so much Justice and Virtue, that not only the
neighboring Provinces, but all Italy sent Ambassadors to him. The ancient
Provinces seeing that City so strangely revived, began to lift up their Heads,
and pay it a respect, some out of fear, and some out of hopes. But Nicholas,
notwithstanding the greatness of his Reputation, not able to comport with so
great an Authority, deserted it himself; for being overburthen'd with the
weight of it, he left it in the very beginning, and without any constraint,
stole privately away to the King of Bohemia, who, by the Popes Order, in
affront to Lewis of Bavaria, was made Emperor, and to gratify his Patron, he
secured Nicholas, and Clapped him in prison. Not long after, as it had been in
imitation of Nicholas, one Francesco Baroncegli possessed himself of the
Tribuneship, and turned the Senators out of Rome: so that the Pope, as the
readiest way to suppress him, was glad to discharge Nicholas of his
imprisonment, and sent him to Rome, to resume his old Office; whereupon,
Nicholas undertook the Government once more, and caused Francesco to be
executed. But the Colonnesi becoming his Enemies by degrees, he himself was put
to death by them, and the Senate restored to the Exercise of its former
Authority. In the mean time of the King of Hungary, having deposed Queen
Giovanna, returned to his own Kingdom: But the Pope desired to have the Queen
his Neighbor, rather than that King, and ordered things so, that the Kingdom
was restored, upon Condition her Husband Lewis renouncing the Title of King
should content himself with that of Taranto. The Jubilee reduced to 50 years.
The Year MCCCL. being come, his Holiness thought fit that the Jubilee
appointed by Pope Boniface VIII. to be kept every hundred years, should be
reduced to fifty, and, having passed a Decree to that purpose, in gratitude for
so great a Benefit, the Romans were contented he should send four Cardinals to
Rome, to reform their City, and create what Senators he pleased. After which
the Pope declared Lodovic of Taranto King of Naples again, and Giovanna, highly
obliged by that favor, Avignon given to the Pope by the Queen of Naples.
gave the Church Avignon, which was part of her Patrimony. By this time Luchino
Visconti being dead, John Archbishop of Milan remained sole Lord, and, making
several Wars upon Tuscany and his Neighbors, became very considerable. After
his death, the Government fell to his two Nephews, Bernardo and Galeazzo, but
Galeazzo dying a while after, he left his Son John Galeazzo to share with his
Uncle in the State. In these days, Innocent 6th Pope.
Charles King of Bohemia was created Emperor, and Innocent VI. Pope, who
having sent Cardinal Giles (a Spaniard) into Italy, by his Virtue, and the
excellence of his Conduct, he recovered the reputation of the Church, not only
in Rome and Romagna, but all Italy over. He recovered Bologna, that had been
usurped by the Archbishop of Milan. He constrained the Romans to admit a
foreign Senator every year of the Popes nomination. He made an honorable
Agreement with the Visconti. He fought and took Prisoner John Aguto an
Englishman, who with four thousand English was entertained in Tuscany, Urban
5th Pope.
upon the Ghibilin account. After these Successes, Urban V. being Pope, he
resolved to visit both Italy and Rome, where Charles the Emperor came to meet
him, and having continued together several Months, Gregory 12th Pope.
Charles returned into his Kingdom, and the Pope to Avignon. Urban died, and
Gregory XII. suceeded, and because Cardinal Egidio was dead, Italy relapsed
into its former distractions, occasioned by the Caballing of the people against
the Visconti. The Pope returns to Rome, after 71 years absence in France.
Whereupon the Pope at first sent a Legate into Italy with six thousand Britans,
after whom he followed in Person, and reestablished his Residence at Rome, in
the year MCCCLXXVI. after it had been kept in France, LXXI. years.

After the death of this Pope, Urban VI. was created. Not long after at Fondi,
ten Cardinals quarrelling with his Election, Urban 6th Pope: Clement 7th
Antipope.
and pretending it was not fair, created Clement VII. The Genoveses in the mean
time (who for several years had lived quietly under the Government of the
Visconti) rebelled. Betwixt them and the Venetian, there happened great Wars
about the Island of Tenedos; Guns first used betwixt the Genoveses and Venetians
in which War by Degrees all Italy became concerned, and there it was that
great Guns were first used, they being a German Invention. Though for a while
the Genoveses were predominant, and held Venice blockt up for several Months
together; yet in the conclusion, the Venetian had the better, and made an
advantageous Peace, by the assistance of the Pope. In the year 1381 (as we have
said before) there was a Schism in the Church, and Giovanna the Queen favored
the Antipope. Whereupon, Pope Urban practiced against her, and sent Carlo
Durazzo (who was of the Royal House of Naples) with an Army into her Kingdom,
who possessed himself of her Country, and drove her away into France. The King
of France undertaking her quarrel, sent Lodovic d' Angio to repossess the
Queen, and force Urban out of Rome, and set up the Antipope. But Lodovic dying
in the middle of the Enterprise, his Army broke up, and returned into France.
Urban thereupon goes over to Naples, and claps nine Cardinals in Prison, for
having sided with France and the Antipope. After that, he took it ill of the
King, that he refused to make one of his Nephews Prince of Capua, but
concealing his disgust, he desired Nocera of him for his Habitation, which as
soon as he was possessed of, he fortified, and began to cast about which way to
deprive him of his Kingdom. The King taking the Alarm, advanced against Nocera
and besieged it, but the Pope escaped to Genoua, where he put the Cardinals
which were his Prisoners to death. From thence he went to Rome, and created 28
new Cardinals. In the mean time Charles King of Naples went into Hungary, was
proclaimed King there, and not long after killed. He left the Kingdom of Naples
to his Wife, and two Children he had by her, one called Ladislao, and the other
Giovanna.

John Galeazzo Visconti in the mean time had killed his Uncle Bernardo, and
possessed himself of Milan, and not content to have made himself Duke of Milan,
he attempted upon Tuscany; but when he was in a fair way to have conquered it,
and to have made himself King of all Italy, Urban and Clementn succeeded by
Boniface 9th and Benedict 13th.
he died. Urban VI. died also, and was succeeded by Boniface IX. Cl^ment VII.
the Antipope died likewise at Avignon, and Benedict XIII. was created in his
room. Italy all this while was full of Soldiers of Fortune, English, Dutch, and
Britans, some of them Commanded by Princes, which upon several occasions had
been invited thither, and some of them which had been sent by the Popes, when
their residence was at Avignon. With this medly of Nations the Princes of Italy
maintained their Wars many times, till at length Lodovico da Conio Romagnuolo
having trained up a Party of Italians, called the Soldiers of Saint George, by
his Valor and Discipline lessened the Reputation of the Foreigners, and made
them afterward more useful and considerable in the Italian Wars. The Pope upon
certain differences which arose betwixt him and the Romans, removed to Scesi,
where he remained till the Jubilee in the year 1400. at which time, to invite
him back again for the ben^fit of their City, the Romans condescended that he
should have the annual nomination of a foreign Senator, and be permitted to
fortify the Castle of St. Angelo; upon which Conditions being returned, to
enrich the Church, he ordained, That in every Vacancy, each Benefice should pay
an Annat into the Chamber Ecclesiastical. After the death of John Galeazzo Duke
of Milan, though he left two Sons Giovan-Mari-Angelo, and Philip, the State was
divided into many Factions. In the troubles which followed, Giovan-Mari-Angelo
was slain, and Philip for some time kept Prisoner in the Castle of Pavia; but
by the Valor and Allegiance of the Governor, he escaped. Among the rest who
had seized the Cities which belonged formerly to John Galeazzo, William della
Scala was one, who having been banished, and retiring to Francesco de Carrara
Lord of Padua, by his means he recovered the State of Verona, but he enjoyed it
a short time; for Francesco caused him to be poisoned, and assumed the
Government himself. The Vicentini hereupon (having till then lived quietly
under the protection of the Visconti) growing jealous of the greatness of the
Lord of Padua, submitted themselves to the Venetians, who at their instigation
made War upon him, and beat him first out of Verona, and at length out of
Padua. By this time Pope Boniface died, and Innocent VII. Boniface dies,
Innocent 7th succeeds him, and Gregory the 12th. Innocent.
was elected in his place. The people of Rome made a solemn Address to him for
the Restitution of their Liberty and Forts, and being denied, they called in
Ladislans King of Naples to their Assistance; but their differences being
afterward composed, the Pope returned to Rome, from whence for fear of the
people he fled to Viterbo, where he had made his Nephew Lodovic, Conte della
Marca; after which he died, and Gregory XII. succeeded, upon Condition he
should resign when ever the Antipope should be persuaded to do the same. At
the intercession of the Cardinals, to try whether it was possible to
accommodate their differences, and reunite the Church, Benedict the Antipope
came to Porto Veneri, and Gregory to Lucca, where many Expedients were
proposed, but nothing concluded; whereupon the Cardinals forsook them both, of
one side and the other, Benedict retired into Spain, and Gregory to Rimini. The
Cardinals by the favor of Baldassare Cossa, Cardinal and Legate of Bologna
called a Counsel at Pisa, in which they created Alexander V. who immediately
excommunicated King Ladislaus, invested Luigid' Augio with his Kingdom, and by
the assistance of the Florentines, Genoueses, Venetians and Baldassare Cossa
the Legate, they assaulted Ladislaus, and drove him out of Rome. Alexander 5th
elected, and succeeded by John 23d.
But in the heat of the War, Alexander died, and Baldassare Cossa was created
Pope, with the name of John XXIII. John was created at Bologna, but removed to
Rome, where he found Luigi d' Angio with the Forces of Provence; having joined
himself with him, they marched out against King Ladislaus, fought with him, and
routed his Army; but for want of good Conduct, not persuing their Victory, King
Ladislaus rallied, recovered Rome, and forced the Pope away to Bologna, and
Luigi to Provence. The Pope casting about with himself which way he might
restrain and lessen the power of King Ladislaus, caused Sigismund King of
Hungary to be chosen Emperor, invited him into Italy, to which purpose they
had a Conference at Mantua, where it was concluded, a General Council should be
called for uniting the Church; upon the accomplishment of which, it was
presumed they should be better able to defend themselves against the
encroachments of their Enemies.

At this time, Three Popes at once.
there were three Popes in being at once; Gregory, Benedict, and John, which
kept the Church very low, both in force and reputation. The place appointed for
their Convention was Constance, a City in Germany, contrary to the intention of
Pope John; and though by the death of King Ladislaus, the great Reason was
taken away that moved the Pope to that proposition, nevertheless, things being
gone so far, and he under an obligation, he could not handsomely come off, but
was forced to go to it. Being arrived at Constance, it was not many months
before he found his Error, and endeavored to have escaped; but being
discovered and taken, he was put in Prison, and compelled to renounce. Gregory,
one of the Anti-Popes renounced by Proxy, but Benedict, the other Antipope
refused, and was condemned for a Heretic; at last finding himself abandoned by
all the Cardinals, he renounced likewise, and the Counsel created a new Pope,
Viz. Oddo of the House of Colo^ma, Martin 5th.
who took the name of Martin V. upon which, the Schisms were composed, and the
Church united, after it had been divided forty years, and several Popes living
at one and the same time. As we said before, Philip Visconti was at this time
in the Castle of Pav^a. But upon the death of Fantino Care (who in the troubles
of Lombardy had made himself Lord of Vercelli; Alexandria, Novara; and Tortona,
and contracted great wealth) having no Sons, he bequeathed his Dominions to his
Wife Beatrix, injoyning his Friends to use their utmost endeavor to Marry her
to Philip; by which Marriage, Philip being much strengthened, he recovered
Milan, and all the whole Province of Lombardy: after which, to recompense her
great Benefits (according to the example of other Princes) he accused his Wife
Beatrix of Adultery, and put her to death. Being arrived at that height both of
Power and Grandeur, he began to contrive against Toscany, and pursue the
designs of his Father John Galeazzo. Ladislaus King of Naples at his death, had
left to his Sister Giovanna (besides his Kingdom) a formidable Army Commanded
by the chief Captains in Italy, and among the rest, by Sforza da Contignuolo, a
person of particular repute for his Valor in those Wars. The Queen (to clear
her self of an aspersion of too much intimacy with one Pan^olfello which she
advanced) took to her Husband Giacopa della Marcia, a Frenchman, of Royal
Extraction, but upon condition he should content himself to be called Prince of
Taran^o, and leave the Title and Government of the Kingdom to her. But the
Soldiers as soon as he was arrived in Naples called him King, which occasioned
great differences betwixt him and the Queen, sometimes one prevailing, and
sometimes the other. But at length the Government rested in the Queen, and she
became a severe Enemy to the Pope. Whereupon Sforza to drive her into a
necessity, and force her to his own terms, laid down his Commission, and
refused to serve her against him; by which means being (as it were) disarmed in
a moment, The Queen of Naples calls in the K. of Arragon to her assistance,
adopts him, and makes Braccio da Montone her General.
having no other remedy she applied her self to Alphonso King of Arragon and
Sicily, adopted him her Son, and to Command her Army, she entertained Braccio
da Montone, as Eminent a Soldier as Sforza, and an Adversary of the Popes, upon
account of certain Towns (as Perugia and others) which he had usurped from the
Church. After this, a Peace was concluded betwixt her and the Pope; but
Alphonso suspecting least she should serve him, as she had done her Husband,
began privately to contrive how he might possess himself of the Forts: But the
Queen was cunning, and prevented him by fortifying her self in the Castle of
Naples. Jealousies increasing in this manner, and nobody interposing, they
came to an Engagement, and the Queen by the help of Sforza (who was returned to
her Service) overcame Alphonso, drove him out of Naples, abdicated him, and
adopted Lodovic d' Angio in his place. Hereupon new Wars ensued betwixt Braccio
(who was of Alphonso's party) and Sforza (who was for the Queen,) In the
process of the War Sforza passing the River Pescara, was by accident drowned.
His death was a great prejudice to the affairs of the Queen, who thereupon
would have run great hazard of being droven out of her Kingdom, had not her
loss been supplied by Philip Visconti, Duke of Milan, who forced Alphonso back
again into Arragon. But Braccio, not at all discouraged at Alphonso's
departure, continued War upon the Queen, and besieged Aquila. The Pope looking
upon Braccio's greatness, as a diminution to the Church, entertained Francisco
(the Son of Sforza) into his pay, who marching with an Army to the relief of
Aquila, engaged Braccio, routed his Army, and slew him. Of Braccio's party,
there remained only Otho his Son, from whom the Pope took Perugia, but left him
the Government of Montone. But he also was not long after slain in Romania, in
the Florentine assistance; so that of all those who fought under the Discipline
of Braccio, Nicholas Piccinino was the man now of greatest reputation. Being
come thus near with our Narrative to the times we designed, that which remains
being considerable in nothing but the Wars which the Florentines and the
Venetians had with Philip Duke of Milan, (of which, our Relation shall be
particular when we come to treat of Florence,) we shall forbear to enlarge any
farther, and only in short, reduce it to Memory, in what state and posture
Italy then stood with its Princes, and Armies. Among the principal States, The
State of Ittaly.
Queen Giovanna held the Kingdom of Naples, La Marca, the Patrimony, and
Romagna. Part of their Towns belonged to the Church, part to their particular
Governors, or others which had Usurped them: as Ferrara, Modena, Reggio, to
the Family of the Esti, Faenzi to the Manfredi, Imola to the Alidosi, Furli to
the Ordelaffi, Rimini and Pesaro to the Malatesti, and Camerino to the House
Varana. Lombardy was divided, part under Duke Philip, and part under the
Venetian. All the rest who had had any sovereignty or principality in those
parts, being extinct, except only the House of Gonzagua, which governed in
Mantua at that time. Of Tuscany the greatest part was under the Dominion of the
Florentine; Lucca only, and Siena lived free under their own Laws: Lucca under
the Guinigi, and Siena of it self. The Genoueses, being free sometimes,
sometimes under the Authority of the French, and sometimes of the Visconti;
they lived without any great reputation, and were reckoned among the meaner and
most inconsiderable states of that Country. Their principal Potentates were
not themselves in Command, but their Armies managed by their Generals. Duke
Philip consined himself to his Chamber, and not being to be seen, his Wars were
managed by Commissioners. The Venetians altering their Scene, and making War by
Land, they disbarqued that Army which had made them so glorious by Sea; and
according to the Custom of their Country, gave the Command of it to other
people. The Pope, being a Religious person, and Giovanna Queen of Naples a
woman, were not so proper to Command in person, and therefore did that by
necessity which others did by indiscretion. The Florentines were under the same
necessity, for their frequent divisions having exhausted their Nobility, and
the Government of the City remaining in the hands of such as were bred up to
Merchandise; in their Wars they were forced to follow the fortune and direction
of strangets: So that the Armies all Italy over, were in the hands of the
smaller Princes, or such as had no Sovereignty at all. Those smaller Princes
embracing those Commands, not from any impulse or stimulation of Glory, but to
live plentifully and safe. The others Education having been small, not knowing
what other course to take, they took up Arms, hoping thereby to gain either
Honor or Estate. Among these the most eminent were Carmignuola, Francisco
Sforza, Nicholo Piccinino, brought up under Braccio, Agnolo della Pergola,
Lorenzo, and Micheletto Attenduli, Il Tartaglia, Giaccopaccio, Ceccolino da
Perugia, Nicolo da Tolentino, Guido Torello, Antonio dal Ponte ad Hera, and
many others. With these may be reckoned those Princes which I have mentioned
before, to which may be added the Barons of Rome, the Orsini, Colonnesi, and
other Lords and Gentlemen of the Kingdom of Lombardy, who depending upon the
Wars, had settled a kind of a League and Intelligence betwixt themselves,
modeled it with that artifice, and temporized so exactly, that most commonly
who ever were Enemies, both sides were sure to be losers. By this means, the
Art of War became so mean and unserviceable, every little Officer that had but
the least spark of Experience could have easily corrected it. Of these lazy
Princes, and their despicable Officers shall be the subject of my ensuing
discourse; but before I come to it, it will be necessary (according to my
promise at first) to deduce Florence from its Original, and give every one a
clear prospect what was the State of that City in those times, and by what
means it arrived at it, thorough the imbroilments of a thousand years, in which
Italy was involved.

THE HISTORY OF FLORENCE.
Book II.
AMong the great and admirable orders of former Kingdoms and Commonwealths
(though in our times it is discontinued and lost) it was the Custom upon every
occasion to build new Towns and Cities; and indeed nothing is more worthy and
becoming an excellent Prince, a well-disposed Commonwealth, nor more for the
interest and advantage of a Province, than to erect new Towns, where men may
cohabit with more Convenience, The Convenience of Colonies.
both for Agriculture, and Defense. For besides the Beauty and Ornament which
followed upon that Custom, it rendered such Provinces as were Conquered, more
dutiful and secure to the Conqueror, planted the void places, and made a
commodious distribution of the people; upon which, living regularly and in
order, they did not only multiply faster, but were more ready to invade, and
more able for defense. But by the negligence and omission of Commonwealths and
Principalites, this method being at present disused, the Provinces are become
weaker, and some of them ruined. For (as I said before) it is this order alone
that secures a Country, and supplies it with people. The security consists in
this, that in a new Conquered Country, a Colony placed by Authority, is a
Fortress and Guard to keep the Natives in obedience; neither without this can a
Province continue inhabited, or preserve a just distribution of the people,
because all places being not equally fertile or healthful, where it is barren,
they desert; where unwholesome, they die; and unless there be some way to invite
or dispose new men to the one, as well as the other, that Province must fail;
the abandoning some places leaving them desolate and weak, and the thronging to
others making them indigent and poor. And forasmuch as these inconveniences are
not to be remedied by Nature, Art and Industry is to be applied; and we see
many Countries which are naturally unhealthful, much bettered by the multitude
of Inhabitants; the Earth being purified by their Tillage, and the Air by their
Fires, which Nature alone would never have effected. Of this, Venice is
instance sufficient; for though seated in a sickly and watrish place, the
concourse of so many people at one time, made it healthful enough. Pisa by
reason of the malignity of the Air, was very ill inhabited, till Genoa, and the
Inhabitants upon its Rivers, being defeated and dispossessed by the Saracens,
it followed, that being supplanted all of them at once, and repairing thither
in such Numbers, that Town in a short time became populous and potent. But the
Custom of sending Colonies being laid aside, new Conquests are not so easily
kept, void places not so easily supplied, nor full and exuberant places so
easily evacuated. Whereupon many places in the world, and particularly in
Italy, are become desolate and deserted in respect of what in former ages they
have been, which is imputable to nothing, but that Princes do not retain their
ancient appetite of true glory, nor Commonwealths the laudable Customs they
were wont.

In old time, by the virtue and courage of these Colonies, new Cities were many
times built, The Original of Florence
and what were new begun enlarged. In which number the City of Florence may be
reckoned, which was begun by the Inhabitans of Fiesole, and augmented by the
Colonies. It is a true Story (if Dante, and John Villani may be believed) that
the City of Fiesole, though placed it self on the top of a Mountain,
nevertheless, that their Markets might be better frequented, and their
Commodities brought to them with greater convenience to the Merchant, they
ordered them a place, not on the top of the hill, but in the plain, betwixt the
bottom of the Mountain, and the Rivor Arn^^s.

These Merchants (in my judgment) were the first occasion of building in that
place, and what was originally but Storehouses for receipt of their
Commodities, became afterward a Town, and place of Habitation.

After the Romans had Conquered the Carthaginians, and rendered Italy safe
against Foreign imbroilments, they multiplied exceedingly; for men will not
incommode themselves, but where they are constrained by necessity; and though
the terrors of War may force them for shelter to fortified places and rocks,
yet when the danger is over, their profit and convenience calls them back again
to their houses, and they perfer Elbow-room, and Ease before any such
restraint. The security which followed in Italy upon the reputation of the
Roman Commonwealth, might possibly be the occasion that this place (from the
aforesaid beginning increasing so vastly) became afterward a Town, and was
called at first Arnina.

After this there arose Civil Wars in Rome, first betwixt Marius and Silla,
then betwixt Caesar and Pompey, and afterward betwixt them that Murdered
Caesar, and those which revenged his death. By Silla first, and after that by
the three Roman Citizens (who revenged the Assassination of Caesar, and divided
the Empire) Colonies were sent to Fiesole; all, or Part of which settled in the
plain not far from the Town which was already begun. So that by this occasion,
the place was so replenished with Houses, Men, and all things necessary for
Civil Government, that it might be reckoned among the Cities of Italy. But from
whence it assumed the name of Florence is variously conjectured. Some would
have it called Florence from Florino one of the chief of that Colonie. Some say
it was not called Florentia, but Fluentia in the beginning, in respect of its
nearness to the River Arno; and they produce Pliny as a witness, who has this
Expression, That the Fluentini are near to the Channel of the River Arnus. But
that (in my opinion) is a mistake, because Pliny in his Book designed to tell
where the Florentines were seated, not what they were called. The Denomination
of Florence.
Nor is it unlikely but that word Fluentini might be corrupted, because
Frontinus and Tacitus (who writ, and were near contemporary with Pliny) called
the Town Florentia, and the people Florentini, forasmuch as they were Governed
in the time of Tiberius, according to the same Laws and Customs with the rest
of the Cities in Italy; and Cornelius Tacitus relates that Ambassadors were
sent from the Florentines to the Emperor, to desire that the Waters of the
River Chiane might not be disimbogued, or diverted upon their Country; neither
is it reasonable to think that City could have two names at one time. My
opinion therefore is clear, that whatever might be the occasion of its Original
or Denomination, it was always called Florentia; that it was founded under the
Empire of the Romans, and began to be mentioned in History in the time of the
first Emperors; that when that Empire was first afflicted by the Barbarians,
Totila, King of the Ostrogoti demolished Florence; that 250 years after, it was
rebuilt by Carolus Magnus, from whose time till the year 1215. it followed the
fortune of the rest of Italy, and was subject to those that Commanded; during
which it was governed first by the Successors of Charles, afterward by the
Berengarii, and last of all by the Emperors of Germany, as has been shown in
our general discourse. In those days it was not in the power of the Florentines
to extend their bounds, or to perform any memorable action, by reason of their
subjection to Foreign Dominion. Nevertheless in the year 1010. on St. Romulus
day (which was a solemn Festival among the Fiesolani) they took, and destroyed
Fiesole, either by the connivance of the Emperors, or by the opportunity of an
Interregnum betwixt the death of one Emperor and the Creation of another, at
which time all the Cities were free. But afterward when the Popes assumed more
Authority, and the Emperors power began to diminish, all the Towns in that
Province began to comport themselves with less regard or reverence to their
Princes; so that in the year 1080. in the days of Arrigo 3. though Italy was
divided betwixt him and the Church, yet till the year 1215. the Florentines by
submitting to the Conquerours, and designing no farther than their own
preservation, kept themselves quiet and entire. But as in the Body of Man, the
later they come, the more dangerous and mortal are the Diseases; so Florence
the longer it was before it fell into the paroxysms of faction, the more
fatally it was afflicted afterward when it did. The occasion of its first
division is considerable, and being mentioned by Dante and several other
Writers as remarkable, I shall take the liberty to discourse of it briefly.

Among other great and powerful Families in Florence, The first Division of
Florence.
there were the Buondelmonti, and Uberti, and not long after them the Amidei,
and Donati. In the Family of the Donati, there was a Lady (a Widow) very rich,
who had a great Beauty to her Daughter. The Lady had resolved with her self to
Marry her Daughter to Messr. Buondelmonte, a Young Gentleman, the head of that
Family. This intention of hers (either by negligence, or presuming it safe
enough at any time) she had not imparted to any body, so that before she was
aware Messr. Buondelmonte was to be Married to a Daughter of the House of
Amidei. The Lady much dissatisfied with her Omission, hoping nevertheless her
Daughters Beauty might be able to dissolve the Contract, seeing him pass one
day alone toward her House, she took her Daughter along, and went down to
accost him, and opening the Gate as he went by, she saluted him, and told him,
she could not but congratulate his Marriage, though indeed she had kept her
Daughter (presenting her to him) in hopes she should have been the Bride. The
young Gentleman beholding the Excellent Beauty of the Damotselle, contemplating
her Extraction, and that her Fortune was not at all Inferior to the persons he
had chosen, fell immediately into such a passion and desire to Marry her, that
not considering the promise he had made, the injustice he should commit, nor
the ill consequences that might follow, he replied, Seeing (Madam) you have
preserved her for me (being not yet too late) it would be ingratitude to refuse
her, and without more ado, he Married her. The notice of his inconstancy was
no sooner divulged, but it was taken in great indignity by the Families of the
Amidei and Uberti, who at that time were nearly allied. Having consulted among
themselves, and several others of their Relations, it was concluded, the
affront was insupportable, and not to be expiated but by the death of Messr.
Buondelmonte; and though some remonstrated the evils which might follow, Moscha
Lamberti replied, That to consider every thing, was to resolve on nothing;
super-adding an old Adage, That a thing once done, is not capable of Remedy:
upon which the Fact being determined, the perpetration was committed to the
said Moscha, Stiatta Uberti, Lambertuccio Amidei, and Oderigo Fifanti. Upon
Easter Day in the morning, they addressed themselves to the work, and being
privately conveyed to a House belonging to the Amidei, between the Old Bridge
and St. Stephans, Messr. Buondelmonte passing the River upon a White Horse, (as
if an injury could as easily have been forgotten, as a Marriage have been
broken) they set upon him at the foot of the Bridge, and slew him under a
Statue of Mars, which was placed thereby. This Murder divided the whole City,
part of it siding with the Buondelmonti, and part with the Uberti; and both the
Families being powerful in Houses, Castles, and Men, the Quarrel continued many
years before either could be ejected; yet though the animosity could not be
extinguished by a firm and stable peace, yet things were palliated and composed
sometimes for the present, by certain Truces and Cessations, by which means
(according to the variety of accidents) they were sometimes at quiet, and
sometimes together by the Ears. In this Condition Florence continued till the
Reign of Frederick 11. who being King of Naples, and desirous to strengthen
himself against the Church; to corroborate his interest in Tuscany, joined
himself to the Uberti and their party, by whose assistance the Buondelmonti
were driven out of Florence, and that City (as all Italy had done before) began
to divide into the Factions of the Guelfs, The Guelfs, and Ghibilin Faction in
Florence.
and the Ghibilins. Nor will it be amiss to commemorate how each Family was
engaged. The Families therefore which sided with the Guelfs were the
Buondelmonti, Nerti, Rossi, Frescobaldi, Mozzi, Baldi, Pulchi, Gherardini,
Foraboschi, Bagnesi, Guidalotti, Sacchetti, Manieri, Lucardesi, Chiaramonti,
Compiobbesi, Cavalcanti, Giandonati, Gianfiliazzi, Scali, Guallerotti,
Importuni, Bostichi, Tornaquinci, Vecchietti, Fosinghi, Arrigucci, Agli, Silii,
Adimari, Visdomini, Donati, Pazzi, della Bella, Ardinghi, Theobaldi, Cerchi.
With the Ghibilines there joined the Uberti, Manelli, Ubriachi, Fifanti,
Amidei, Infanganti, Malespini, Scolari, Guidi, Galli, Capprardi, Lamberti,
Soldanieri, Cipriani, Toschi, Amieri, Palermini, Migliorelli, Pigli, Barucci,
Cattani, Agolanti, Bruneleschi, Caponsachi, Elisei, Abbati, Fedaldini,
Guiocchi, Galigai; to which Families of the Nobility, many of the populacy
joined themselves on each side, as their interest or affections carried them,
so that in a manner the whole City was engaged either on one side or the other.
The Guelfs being driven out, retired into the Vale upon the River Arnus
mentioned before, and the greatest part of their Garrisons being there, they
defended them as well as they could against the Attacks of their Enemies. But
when Frederick dyed, those persons who were Neuters, retaining great interest
and reputation with the people, thought it more serviceable to the City of
Florence to reconcile their differences and unite them, than by fomenting them,
to destroy it. Whereupon endeavoring a Composure, they prevailed at length
that the Guelfs should lay aside their indignation, and return, and the
Ghibilines renounce their suspicion and receive them. Being united in this
manner, it was thought seasonable to provide for their liberty, and to contrive
some Laws for their defense, before the new Emperor should get the power into
his hands. The Union and Government of the City of Florence.
In order thereunto they divided the City into six parts; They chose twelve
Citizens (two for each part) which, under the title of Antiani, they invested
with the Government, but changed them every year. To prevent any animosity that
might arise from the determination of the matters judicial; The Antiani.
they constituted two Foreign Judges, (one of them called the Captain of the
people, and the other the Podesta) to decide all Civil and Criminal Causes
which should occur. The Captain of the People, and Podesta.
And because Laws are but transient, and of little duration, where there is no
power to defend them, they established XX Colors in the City, and 76 in the
Territory, under which all the youth was listed, Their Militia.
and obliged to be ready in their Arms under their respective Colors, as often
and whenever the Captain, or Antiani should require them. Moreover, as their
Ensigns were distinct, so were their Arms; some of them consisted of
Cross-bows, some of them of Halbards. Their Ensigns were changed at every
Pentecost with great solemnity, and disposed to new Men, and new Captains put
over their Companies. Besides, to add Majesty to their Army, and provide a
refuge for such as were wounded, or disabled in Fight, where they might
refresh, and recruit again, to make head against the Enemy, they ordered a
large Chariot covered with Red, and drawn by two white Oxen, upon which their
Standard of White and Red was to be placed. Whenever their Army was to be drawn
out, this Chariot was to be drawn into the Marketplace, and with great
formality consigned to the Captains of the people. For the greater magnificence
and ostentation of their Enterprises, they had moreover, A generous Custom.
a great Bell (called Martinello) which Rung continually a month before they
marched with their Army, that the Enemy might have so much time to provide for
his Defense. So much Gallantry there was then amongst men, and with so much
Magnanimity they behaved themselves, that whereas now adays it is reputed
policy and wisdom to surprise an Enemy, and fall upon him while he is
unprovided, it was then thought treacherous, and ignoble. This Bell, when they
marched, was carried along with the Army, and by it the Guards set, and
relieved, and other Military Orders derived. By this Discipline in Civil and
Martial affairs, the Florentines laid the foundation of their liberty. Nor is
it to be imagined what strength and authority it acquired in a short time, for
it came not only to be the chief City in Tuscany, but to be reckoned among the
Principal of all Italy, and indeed there was no grandeur to which it might not
have arrived, had it not been obstructed by new and frequent dissentions. Ten
years together, the Florenties lived under this Government; in which time they
forced the Pistoiesi, Aretini, and Sanesi to make peace with them, and
returning with their Army from Siena, they took Volterra, demolished several
Castles, and brought the Inhabitants to Florence. In these Expeditions, the
Guelfs had the principal Conduct, as being much more popular than the
Ghibilines, who had carried themselves imperiously during Frederick's Reign,
and made themselves odious; or else it was because the Church party had more
Friends than the Emperors, as being thought more consistent with their
liberty. The Ghibilines in the mean time, being displeased to see their
Authority so sensibly decrease, could not be satisfied, but attended all
occasions to repossess themselves of the Government. When Manfredi the Son of
Frederick King of Naples was invested in that Kingdom, and had overpowered the
power of the Church, conceiving it a fair opportunity, they practiced privately
with him, to reassume their Government; but they could not manage it so
cunningly, but their practice was discovered to the Antiani, who summoning the
Uberti thereupon; the Uberti not only refused to appear, but took Arms, and
fortified themselves in their houses; at which the people being incensed, took
Arms likewise, Manfredi. King of Naples, a great Patron of the Ghibilines.
and joining with the Guelfs, drove them out of Florence, and forced the whole
Ghibiline party to transplant to Siena. From thence they desired the assistance
of Manfredi King of Naples, who sending them supplies, by the Conduct and
Diligence of Frinata (of the House of Uberti) the Guelfs received such a blow
upon the River Arebia, that those which escaped (supposing their City lost)
fled directly to Lucca, and left Florence to shift for it self. Manfredi had
given the Command of the auxiliaries which he sent to the Ghibilines, to the
Conte Giordano, a Captain of no small reputation in those times. Giordano,
after this Victory advanced with his Ghibilines to Florence, reduced the City
to the obedience of Manfredi; deposed the Magistrates, and altered or abrogated
all the Laws, and Customs that might give them the least figure or
commemoration of their liberty: Which injury being done with little discretion,
was received by the people with so much detestation, that whereas before they
were scarce Enemies to the Ghibilines, they became thereby inveterate and
implacable; and that mortal animosity was in time their utter destruction.
Being to return to Naples upon affairs of great importance to that Kindom, the
Conte Giordano left Comte Guido Novello (Lord of Casentino) in Florence, as
Deputy for the King. This Guido Novello called a council of Ghibilines at
Empoli, wherein it was unanimously concluded, that Florence should be razed,
being (by reason the people were so rigid Guelfs) the only City capable to
reinforce the declining party of the Church.

Upon so cruel and barbarous a Sentence against so Noble a City, Ferinata
Uberti.
there was not one Friend or Citizen opposed, besides Ferinata delli Uberti;
who publicly and courageously undertook its defense: Declaring, That he had
not run so many dangers, not exposed himself to so many difficulties, but to
live quietly afterward in his own Country; nor would he now reject what he
contended for so long, nor refuse that which his good fortune had given him; he
was resolved rather to oppose himself (against whoever should design otherwise)
with as much Vigor and zeal as he had done against the Guelfs; and if
jealousy and apprehension should prompt them to endeavor the destruction of
their Country, they might attempt if they pleased; but he hoped, with the same
Virtue which drove out the Guelfs, he should be able to defend the City. This
Ferinata was a man of great Courage, excellent Conduct, Head of the Ghibilines,
and in no small esteem with Manfredi himself. These qualifications, and the
consideration of his Authority, put an end to that resolution, and they began
now to take new measures, and contrive ways of preserving the State. The
Guelfs who had fled to Lucca, being dismissed by the Lucchesi, upon the Counts
commination, they withdrew to Bologna, from whence being invited by the Guelfs
of Parma, to go against the Ghibilines, Carlo d' Anio called into Italy by the
Pope.
they behaved themselves so well, that by their Valor, the Adversary was
overcome, and their possessions given to them: So that increasing in Honor and
Wealth, and understanding that Pope Clement had called Carlo d' Angio into
Italy, to depose Manfredi (if possibly) They sent Ambassadors to his Holiness
to tender their assistance; which the Pope not only accepted, but sent them his
own Standard, which the Guelfs carried ever after in their Wars, and is used in
Florence to this very day. After this, Manfredi was beaten, dispoyl'd of his
Kingdom, and Slain, and the Guelfs of Florence having performed their share in
that Action, their party grew more brisk and courageous; and the Ghibilines
more timorous and weak. Whereupon those who with Count Guido Novello were at
the helm in Florence, began to cast about how they might, by benefits, or
otherwise, gain and cajole the people, whom before they had exasperated by all
circumstances of injury: But those remedies (which if used in time, before
necessity required, might possibly have prevailed) being applied abruptly, and
too late, did not only not contribute to their safty, but hastened their ruin.
To coaks and insinuate with the people and their party, they thought it would
do much if they restored them to a part of that Honor and Authority which they
had lost. To this purpose they chose XXXVI. Citizens from among the People, and
adding to them two Foreign Gentlemen from Bologna, they gave them power to
reform the State of the City as they pleased. As soon as they met, the first
thing they pitched upon, was to divide the City into several Arts (or Trades)
over each Art they placed a Master, A new Model in Florence.
who was to administer Justice to all under his Ward; and to every Art a Banner
was assigned, that under that, each Company might appear in Arms, when ever the
safty of the City required it. At first these Arts, (or Companies) were twelve,
seven greater, and five less; the lesser increasing afterward to fourteen,
their whole number advanced to XXI, as it remains at this day. The Reformation
proceeding quietly in this manner, and contriving many things for the common
benefit of the people, without interruption; Count Guido thinking himself under
an equal Obligation to provide for his Soldiers; caused a Tax to be laid upon
the Citizens, to raise Money for their pay; but he found such difficulty in the
business, he durst never collect it: Whereupon, perceiving all lost, unless
something was suddenly done; he combined with the chief of the Ghibilines, and
determined to take that back again by force from the people which so
unadvisedly they had given.

With which design, having assembled the several Companies in their Arms, (and
the XXXVI. Reformatori with them) causing a sudden Alarm to be brought in, the
Reformatori being frighted, and retiring to their Houses, the Ensigns of the
several faculties were displayed, and several Armed men behind them
immediately; understanding that Count Guido and his party were at St. John's,
they made a stand at St. Trinita, and chose Giovanni Soldanieri for their
Captain. New Commotion.
The Count on the other side, hearing where they had posted, advanced against
them; and the people, not declining, they met in a place which is now called
Loggia dei Tornaquinci, where the Count was worsted, and most of his party
slain. Being off of his mettle, and fearful the Enemy would assault him in the
night, and cut his Throat; his Men being cowed, and unable to defend him,
without considering other remedy, he resolved to preserve himself by flying,
rather than by fighting; and accordingly (contrary to the persuasion of the
Heads of the Ghibilines) he retired to Prato with what men he had left. When he
found himself safe, and his fear over, he became sensible of his Error, and
being desirous to have repaired it next morning, at break of day he drew out
his Men, marched back to Florence, designing to recover that Honorably, which
he had so Scandalously lost; but he found himself mistaken, for though it might
have cost the people hot water to have expelled him, they found it no hard
matter to keep him out when he was gone; insomuch that being repulsed, he drew
off with great sorrow and shame to Casentino, and the Ghibilines returned to
their Houses. The people being Conquerours, out of affection to all such as had
a love for their Country, they resolved to reunite the City once more, and
called home all their Citizens which were abroad, as well Ghibilines as Guelfs.
Hereupon the Guelfs returned, after six years banishment, the Ghibilines late
attempt was pardoned, and they received back again; but yet they continued
odious both to the people, and Guelfs, the last not being able to extinguish
the memory of their banishment; nor the first to forget their Tyranny and
insolence, when the Government was in their hand; so that their animosity was
deposited neither on the one side, nor the other.

Whilst the affairs of Florence were in this posture, a report was spread,
that Corradine, Nephew to Manfredi, was coming with Forces out of Germany, to
Conquer the Kingdom of Naples; upon which the Ghibilines conceived fresh hopes
of recovering their Authority: and the Guelfs being no less solicitous for
their security, begged the assistance of King Charles, in case Corradine should
come. Charles having complied, and his Forces upon their March, the Guelfs
became so insolent, and the Ghibilines so timorous, that two days before the
French Army arrived, the Ghibilines fled out of the City, without staying to be
expelled. The Ghibilines departed, the Florentines new Modeled their City,
choosing Twelve principal Magistrates to continue in Authority only for two
Months, not under the title of Antiani, A second Model by the Guelfs.
but Ruoni-huomini. Next to them they constituted a Council of 80 Citizens,
which they called La Credenza: after which, 180 were chosen out of the people,
which with the Credenza, and the 12 Buoni-huomini were called the
General-Councel: besides which, The 12 Buoni Huomini. La Credenza.
they erected another Council, consisting of 120. both Citiziens and Nobles,
which Council was to consummate and ratify whatever was debated or resolved in
the rest. Having settled their Government in this manner, and by new Laws, and
Election of Magistrates of their own party, fortified themselves against the
Machinations of the Ghibilines, the Guelfs confiscated the Ghibilines Estates,
and having divided them into three parts, one was assigned to public uses,
another given to their Magistrates and Captains, and the third distributed
among the Guelfs, to recompense the damage they had received. The Pope to
preserve Tuscany to the Faction of the Guelfs, made King Charles Imperial Vicar
of that Province. By this method, the Florentines having maintained their
honor and reputation abroad by their Arms, and at home by their Laws, they
remained firm and secure; in the mean time the Pope dyed, Gregory X.
and after a two years vacancy, and a tedious dispute, Gregory X. was elected,
who being at the time of his Election (and a long while before) in Syria, and
(by consequence) ignorant of the humors of the Factions, he carried not
himself with that caution toward them, as his Predecessors had done. But in
his way to France, being arrived at Florence, he thought it the Office of a
good Pastor to endeavor to compose their differences, and prevailed with them
to receive Commissioners from the Ghibilines to negotiate the manner of their
return; but though their Peace was made, and all particulars concluded,
Florence under Excommunication.
the Ghibilines were too jealous to accept them, and refused to come back. The
Pope imputed the fault to the City, and excommunicated it in his passion, under
which censure it continued whilst he lived; but after his death, when Innocent
V. was created, it was taken off. Innocent 5.
Innocent V. was succeeded by Nicholas III. of the house of the Orsini; and
because the Popes were always jealous of any great power in Italy (though
raised by the favor of the Church) and constantly endeavored to depress it;
The Jealousy of the Popes.
great troubles, and frequent variations ensued; Nicolas 3.
for the fear of a Person grown Potent to any degree, was the advancement of
another less powerful than he; who growing powerful by his preferment, as his
Predecessor had done, became formidable like him; and that fear was the
occasion of his debasement. This was the cause that Kingdom was taken from
Manfredi, and given to Charles. This was the reason that Charles became
terrible afterward, and his ruin was conspired: for Nicholas III. (moved by
the considerations aforesaid) prevailed so, that Charles by the Emperors
means, was removed from the Government of Tuscany, and Latino (the Popes Legate)
sent thither in his place, by Commission from the Emperor. Florence at this
time was in no very good condition, for the Guelfish Nobility being grown
insolent, and careless of the Magistrates, several Murders and other violences
were daily committed, the Malefactors passing unpunished by the favor and
protection of the Nobles. To restrain these insolences, it was thought good by
the Heads of the City, to recall those who were banished, The Ghibilines return.
which gave opportunity to the Legate to reunite the City; and to the
Ghibilines, to return: whereupon instead of XII. Governors which they had
before, they were increased to XIV. (VII. of each party) their Government to be
Annual, and their Election by the Pope. Martinus Pope.
Two years Florence remained under this Form, till Martino (a Frenchman) was
created Pope, who restored to King Charles whatever Authority Pope Nicholas had
taken from him: So that Florence being again in Commotion; the Citizens took up
Arms against the Emperors Governor, and to restrain the Gbibilines, and
correct the insolence of their Nobility, put the City under a new form of
Government. It was in the year 1282. The Government reformed by the Citizens.
when the Corporation of the Arts having been invested with the Magistracy and
Militia, had gained great reputation; whereupon by their own Authority they
ordered that instead of the XIV. Three Citizens should be created (with the
Title of Priori) who should Govern the Commonwealth for two Months, The three
Priori to goxern two Months, to be chosen* out of the City indifferently.
and be chosen indifferently out of Commons or Nobility, provided they were
Merchants, or professed any Art. Afterward the chief Magistracy was reduced to
Six persons (one for each Ward) where it continued to the year 1342. in which
the City was reduced into Quarters, and the Priori, to Nine, they having been
advanced to 12. by some accident in the mean time. This Constitution was the
occasion (as shall be showed in its place) of the Nobilities ruin, who upon
sundry provocations were excluded, and afterward without any respect,
oppressed by the people. At first the Nobility consented to its Erection, as an
expedient to unite, and accommodate all differences; but afterward
incroaching, and interfering for the Government, all of them lost it. There was
likewise a Palace assigned for the constant Residence of this Council, (in
which the Magistrates were formerly accustomed to confer with the Commissioners
of the Church) and Sergeants, and other necessary Officers, for their greater
honor, appointed to attend: Which Council, though at first it had only the
Title of Priori; yet afterward for Magnificence sake, it had the addition of
Segnori.

For a while the Florentines continued quiet within themselves, though they had
Wars abroad with the Aretines (whohad driven out the Guelfs) with whom they
engaged successfully in Compaldino, The Segnori.
and overcame them. Upon which, the City increasing both in Wealth, and number
of Inhabitants, it was thought good to enlarge their Walls, which they did to
its present Circumference; whereas before its Diameter was only from the Old
Bridge to S. Lorenzo. The Wars abroad, and Peace at home, had almost
exterminated both the Ghibilines, and Guelfs in that City; there remained only
those sparks of animosity (which are unavoidable in all Cities) betwixt the
Nobles and the People; for the one solicitous of their freedom according to
their Laws, Discord betwixt the Nobility and people.
and the other impatient to Command them, it is not possible they should agree.
Whilst they were apprehensive of the Ghibilines, this humor did not show it
self in the Nobility; but when the Ghibilines were low and depressed, it began
to exert, and the people were injured daily, beyond the Vindication either of
the Magistrates, or Laws; every Nobleman making good his insolence, by the
multitude of his Friends and Relations, both against the Priori, and the
Captain. The Heads therefore of the Arts (by way of remedy against so great
inconvenience) provided that in the beginning of its Office, The Priori The
Gonfaloniere.
every Council of the Priori should create an Ensign, or Gonfaloniere di
justicia, out of the people, assigning him 1000 men in 20 Companies, which were
to be ready with their Arms, and their Gonfaloniere to see Justice administered
whenever the Court, or their Captain required them. The first in this Office,
was Ubaldo Ruffoli, who drawing out his Bands, demolished the Houses of the
Galetti, because one of that Family had slain one of his Fellow-Citizens in
France. The establishment of this Order by the Arts was not difficult, by
reason of the jealousies and emulations amongst the Nobility, who were not in
the least sensible it was intended against them, till they felt the smart of
it, when 'twas put in Execution. This Constitution was terrible to them at
first, but afterward they returned to their old insolence again; for having
insinuated themselves into the Council of the Priori, they found means to
hinder the Gonfaloniere from executing his Office. Besides, Witness being
always required upon any accsation, the Plaintiff could hardly find any body
that would give Testimony against the Nobility. So that in a short time
Florence was involved in its own distraction, and the people exposed to their
former oppression, Justice being grown dilatory and tedious, and Sentence,
though given, seldom or never executed. The Populace not knowing what
resolution to take in this Case, Giano della Bella (a person of Noble
extraction, but a Lover of the Liberty of the City) encouraged the Heads of the
Arts, to reform the City, and by his persusion it was Ordained that the
Gonfaloniere should reside with the Priori, and have 4000 men under his
Command; they likewise excluded the Nobility out of the Council of the Segnori.

They made a Law that all Accessaries, or Abettors, should be liable to the
same punishment with those who were actually Guilty; and decreed that Common
report should be sufficient to convict them. By these Laws (which were called
Ordinamenti della Giustitia) the people gained great reputation: but Giano
della Bella, being looked upon as the contriver of their Destruction, became
odious to the Nobility; and not to them only, but to the wealthiest of the
Populace, who began to suspect his Authority, and not without reason, as
appeared afterward upon the first occasion was given him to abuse it. It
happened one of the Commons was killed in a fray, where several of the Nobility
were present; Corso Donati being one amongst the rest, the Murder was laid to
his Charge, as the most furicus and desperate. He was taken into Custody by the
Captain, but (however causes went) whether he was innocent of the Crime, or the
Captain fearful to condemn him, he was presently discharged. The people
offended at his discharge, betook themselves to their Arms, ran to the House of
Giano della Bella, and begged of him, that he would be the means that the Laws
he had invented might be put in Execution. Giano had privately a desire that
Corso should be punished, and therefore advised not the people to lay down
their Arms, (as many co^ceived he ought) but encouraged them to address to the
Segnori with their Complaints, and desire their Vindication. The people full of
rage, thinking themselves abused by the Captain, and abandoned by Giano, went
not to the Segnori (as directed) but away they ran to the Captain's Palace, and
plundered it; which action displeased the whole City, and was laid upon Giano,
by such as meditated his ruin; whereupon some of his Enemies happening
afterward to be of the Segnori, he was accused to the Captain as an Incendiary
and Debaucher of the people.

Whilst his Cause was in agitation, the people took Arms again, flocked in
great numbers to his House, and offered to defend him against the Segnori his
Enemies. Giano had no mind to experiment the popular favor, or trust his life
in the hands of the Magistrates, as fearing the Malignity of the one, no less
than the unconstancy of the other; but to secure himself against the malice of
his Enemies, and his Country against the commotion of his Friends, he resolved
to give way to their Envy, and Banish himself from that City which he had
preserved from the Tyranny of the Nobility by his own danger and charge. The
Nobility, after his departure, to recover their dignity, which they conceived
lost by the dissentions among them, united, and applied themselves by two of
their Number, to the Senate or Segnoria (which they judged to be their friends)
to entreat them to mitigate in some measure the acerbity of those Laws which
were made against them: which demand was no sooner known, but the people
(fearing the Signoria should comply) began immediately to tumultuate, and,
betwixt the ambition of the one, and suspicion of the other, they fell soon
after to blows. The Nobility stood upon their Guards in three places, at St.
John's, in the Mercato nuovo, and the Piazza de Mozzi, under three Commanders,
Forese Adinari, Vanni de Mozzi, and Geri Spini. The people were not got
together under their Ensigns in great Numbers at the Senator's Palace, which at
that time not far from St. Pruocolo; and because the people were jealous of the
Signori, they deputed six Citizens to share with them in the Government. In the
mean time, while both parties were preparing for the Combat, some both of the
Nobility and Commons, Persuasion to the Nobility to be quiet.
with certain Religious persons of good Reputation, interposed themselves,
remonstrating to the Nobility, that the Honor they had lost, and the Laws made
against them, were occasioned by their arrogance and ill Government; that now
to take Arms, and betake themselves to force, for the recovery of what was lost
by their own dissension and ill-management, would be the ruin of their
Country, and a detriment to themselves. That they should consider in number,
riches, and malice, they were much inferior to the people. That that Nobility
they so vainly affected, by which they thought to advance others, when they
came to sight would prove but a mere Title and Name, unable to defend them
against the advantages which their Enemies had over them. To the people it was
represented imprudence to drive things too far, The (...) to the people.
and make their Adversaries desperate; For he that hopes no good, fears no ill.
That it ought to be considered, their Nobility were they which had gained so
much Honor to their City in its Wars, and were not therefore in justice to be
used at that rate. That they could be content to have the Supreme Magistacy
taken from them, and endure it patiently; but they thought it unreasonable, and
insupportable to be at every bodies mercy (as their new Laws rendered them) and
subject to be driven out of their Country upon every Cappriccio. That it would
be well to mitigate their fury, and lay down their Arms, rather than to run the
hazard of a Battle, by presumption upon their Numbers, which had many times
failed, and been worsted by the less. The people were divided in their
Judgments, some were for engaging, as a thing some time or other would
necessarily be; and better now, than to deser till their Enemies were more
powrful: and if it could be imagined the mitigation of the Laws would content
them, they should be mitigated accordingly; but their insolence and pride could
never be laid by, till by force they were constrained to it. To others more
moderate and prudent, it appeared that the alteration of the Laws would not
signify much, but to come to a Battle might be of very great importance; and
their Opinion prevailing, it was provided that no accusation should be admitted
against a Nobleman without necessary testimony. Though upon these terms both
parties laid down their Arms, yet their jealousies of one another were mutually
retained, and they began again to fortify on both sides. The People thought
sit to re-order the Government, New reformation in Florence 1298.
and reduced their Signori to a less number, as suspecting some of them to be
too great favouers of the Nobility, of whom the Mansini, Magalotti, Altoviti,
Peruzzi, and Cerretani were the chief. Having settled the State in this manner
in the year 1298. for the greater Magnificence and Security of their Signori,
they founded their Palace, and made a Piazza before it, where the houses of the
Uberti stood formerly: About the same time also the Foundation of the Prisons
were laid, which in few years after were finished. Never was this City in
greater splendour, nor more happy in its condition than then, abounding both in
men, riches, and reputation. They had 3000. Citizens in the Town ^it to bear
Arms, and 70000. more in their Territory. All Tuscany was at its devotion,
partly as subjects, and partly as friends. And though there were still piques
and suspicions betwixt the Nobility and the People, yet they did not break out
into any ill effect, but all lived quietly and peaceably together; and had not
this tranquillity been at length interrupted by dissension within, it had been
in no danger from abroad; being in such terms at that time, it neither feared
the Empire, nor its Exiles, and could have brought a force into the Field
equivalent to all the rest of the States in Italy. But that diseas^ from which
ab extra it was secure, was engendered in its own bowels. There were two
Families in Florence, the Cerchi, and the Donati, equally considerable, both in
numbers, riches, and dignity; being Neighbors both in City and Country, there
happened some exceptions and disgust betwixt them, but not so great as to bring
them to blows, and perhaps they would never have produced any considerable
effects, had not their ill humors been agitated and fermented by new occasion.
Among the chief Families in Pistoia, there was the Family of the Cancellieri.
It happened that Lore the Son of Gulielmo, and Geri the Son of Bertaccio, fell
out by accident at play, and passing from words to blows, Geri received a
slight wound. Gulielmo was much troubled at the business, The differen ^ein the
family of the Cancellieri, the occasion and consequence.
and thinking by excess of humility to take off the scandal, he increased it
and made it worse. He commanded his Son to go to Geri's Fathers house, and
demand his pardon; Lore obeyed, and went as his Father directed: but that act
of humanity did not at all sweeten the acerbity of Bertaccio's mind, who
causing Lore to be seized by his servants (to aggravate the indignity) he
caused him to be led by them into the stable, and his hand cut off upon the
Manger, with instruction to return to his Father, and to let him know, That
wounds are not cured so properly by words, as amputation. Gulielmo was so
enraged at the cruely of the fact, as he and his friends immediately took Arms
to revenge it; and Bertaccio and his friends doing as much to defend
themselves, the whole City of Pistoia was engaged in the quarrel, and divided
into two parties. These Cancellieri being both of them descended from one of
the Cancellieri who had two Wives, one of them called Bianca: that party which
descended from her, The Bia^chi and Ner^^
called it self Bianca; and the other in opposition was called Nera. In a short
time many conflicts happened betwixt them, many men killed, and many houses
destroyed. Not being able to accommodate among themselves, though both sides
were weary, they concluded to come to Florence, hoping some expedient would be
found out there, or else to fortify their parties by the acquisition of new
friends. The Neri having had familiarity with the Donati, were espoused by
Corso, the head of that Family. The Bianchi, to support themselves against the
accession of the Donati, fell in with Very the chief of the Cerchi, a man not
inferior to Corso in any quality whatever. The malignity of this humor being
brought hither from Pistoia, began to revive the old quarrel betwixt the Cerchi
and Donati in such manner, that the Priori, and other Principal Citizens began
to apprehend they should fall together by the ears, and the whole City come to
be divided. Hereupon they applied themselves to the Pope, desiring he would
interpose his Authority to assuage those differences which were too great for
their private power to compose. The Pope sent for Very, and pressed him earnestly
to a reconciliation with the Donati. Very seemed to be surprised at his
importunity, pretended he had no prejudice to them at all, and because
reconciliation presupposed a quarrel, there being nothing of the latter, he
thought there was no necessity of the first. So that Very returning from Rome
without any other conclusion, the Malevolence increased, and every little
accident (as it happened afterward) was sufficient to put all in confusion. In
the Month of May, several Holidays being publicly celebrated in Florence,
certain young Gentlemen of the Donati, with their friends on Horseback, having
stopped near St. Trinity, to see certain Women that were Dancing, it fell out
that some of the Cerchi arrived there likewise with some of their friends, and
being desirous to see as well as the rest, not knowing the Donati were before,
they spurred on their horses, and justled in among them. The Donati looking
upon it as an affront, drew their Swords; the Cerchi were as ready to answer
them, and after several cuts and slashes given and received, both sides
retired. This accident was the occasion of great mischief; the whole City (as
well People as Nobility) divided, and took part with the Bianchi and Neri, as
their inclinations directed them. The chief of the Bianchi were the Cerchi, to
whom the Adimari, the Abbati, part of the fosinghi, the Bardi, Rossi,
Frescobaldi, Norli, Mannilli, all the Mozzi, the Scali, Gerrardin^, Cavalcanti,
Matespini, Bestichi, Giandionati, Vecchietti, and Arriguelzi, joined
themselves; with these sided several of the populace and all the Ghibiline
faction in Florence; so that in respect of their Numbers, they seemed to have
the whole Government of the City. The Donati on the other side were heads of
the Neri, and followed by all the rest of the before mentioned Nobility, who
were not engaged with the Bianchi; and beside them all the Parzi, Bisdonini,
Manieri, Bagn^sit, Tornaquinci, Spini, Buondelmonti, Gianfigliazzi, and
Brunelteschi; Nor did this humor extend it self only in the City, but infected
the whole Country. In so much that the Captains of the Arts and such as
favored the Guelfs, and were Lovers of the Commonwealth, very much apprehended
least this new distraction should prove the ruin of the City, and the
restoration of the Ghibilins. Whereupon they sent to the Pope, beseeching him
to think of some remedy, unless he had a mind that City (which had been always
a bulwark to the Church) should be destroyed or become subject to the
Ghibilins. To gratify their request, the Pope dispatched Matteo d' Aquasparta
(a Portugal Cardinal) as his Legate to Florence, who sinding the party of the
Bianchi obstinate and untractable, as presuming upon the advantage of their
Numbers, he left Florence in an anger, and interdicted them; so that the Town
remained in more confusion a^ his departure, than he found it. All parties
being at that time very high, and disposed to mischief, it happened that
several of the Cerchi and Donati meeting at a Burial, some words passed betwixt
them, and from words they proceeded to blows, but no great hurt done, for that
time. Both sides being returned to their houses, the Cerchi began to deliberate
how they might fall upon the Donati, and in Conclusion they went in great
numbers to attack them, but by the Courage of Corso they were repelled, and
several of them Wounded. Hereupon the City fell to their Arms; the Laws and the
Magistrates were too weak to contest with the fury of both parties. The wisest
and best Citizens were in perpetual fear. The Donati and their friends having
less force, were more anxious and solicitous of their safety, to provide for it
as well as was possible: At a meeting of Corso with the heads of the Neri, and
the Captain of the Arts, it was concluded that the Pope should be desired to
send them some person of the Blood Royal to reform their City, supposing that
way the most probable to suppress this Bianchi. The Assembly, and their
resolution was notify'd to the Priori, and aggravated against the Adverse party
as a Conspiracy against their Freedom. Both factions being in Arms, Dante, and
the rest of the Signori taking Courage, with great Wisdom and prudence causing
the people to put themselves in Arms, by Conjunction of several out of the
Country they forced the heads of both parties to lay down their Arms, confined
Corso, Donati and several of the faction of the Neri to their houses; and that
their proceedings might seem impartial, they committed several of the Bianchi,
who afterward upon plausible pretenses were dismissed. Corso and his
accomplices were discharged likewise; and supposing his Holiness to be their
friend, took a journey to Rome to persuade him personally to what by Letters
they had begged of him before. There happened to be at the Popes Court at that
time Charles de Valois the King of France his brother, called into Italy by the
King of Naples to pass over into Sicily. The Pope (upon the importunity of the
Florentine Exiles) though sit to send him to Florence to remain there till the
season of the year served better for his transportation. Charles of Valo^s made
Governor of Florence.
Charles arrived, and though the Bianchi (who had then the Supremacy) were
jealous of him, yet being Patron of the Guelfs, and deputed thither by the
Pope, they durst not oppose his coming; but on the Contrary, to oblige, him
they gave him full Authority to dispose of the City as he pleased. Charles was
no sooner invested with his Authority; but he caused all his friends and
Partisans to Arm, which gave the people so great a jealousy that he would
Usurp upon their Liberties, that they also put themselves in Arms, and stood
ready every man at his door to resist any such attempt. The Cerchi and the
chief of the Bianchi (having had the Government in their hands and managed it
proudly) were become generally odious, which gave encouragement to Corso and
the rest of the Neri who were banished, to return to Florence, being assured
that Charles, and the Captains of the companies were their friends. Whilst
their suspicion of Charles had put the City in Arms, Corso, his Comrades, and
many of their followers entered into Florence without any impediment: And
although Very de Cerchi was persuaded to oppose, he refused it, and told them,
he would leave their Chastisement to the people of Florence, against whose
interest Corso did come. But he was mistaken in his Measures, for in stead of
being punished, he was received very kindly by the people; and Very was forced
to fly for his safety. For Corso having forced his entrance at the Porta Pinti,
drew up and made a stand at S. Pietro Maggiori (a place not far from his
Palace) and having united with such of the people, and his friends as desired
Novelty, and were come thither on purpose; the first thing he did was to
discharge all Prisoners whatever and however committed, whether by private or
public Authority. He forced the Signori to return privately to their houses,
and elected a certain Number (of the faction of the Neri) out of the people, to
supply their places. For five days together they ransacked and plundered the
houses of the chief of the Bianchi. The Cerchi and the heads of that faction,
seeing the people for the most part their Enemies, and Charles none of their
friend, were retired out of the City, to such Castles as they had, and whereas
before they would not entertain the Counsel of the Pope, they were now glad to
implore his assistance, and to let him understand that Charles was not come to
the advantage, but to the prejudice of the City. Whereupon the Pope sent his
Legate Matteo di Aquasparta to Florence the second time, who not only made a
peace betwixt the Cerchi and Donati, but fortified it by several marriages and
alliances. Nevertheless insisting to have the Bianchi participate of the Chief
Offices, and being denied by the Neri who had them in possession, he left the
City as ill satisfied as before, and again Excommunicated it for its
disobedience. Thus both parties continued discontented. The Neri, seeing their
Enemies so near, were apprehensive least by their destruction they should
recover the Honors and Authority which they had lost; and as if these Fears
and Animosities had been not sufficient to do mischief, new affronts and
injuries were offered. Nicholas de Cerchi, being going with some of his friends
to some of his houses, as he passed by the Ponte ad Africo, was assaulted by
Simon son of Corso Donati. The Conflict was sharp, and on either side
deplorable, for Nicholas was killed upon the place, and Simon so wounded that
he died the next Morning. This accident disturbed the whole City afresh, and
though the Neri were indeed most Culpable, yet they were protected by the
Government, and before judgment could be obtained, a Conspiracy was discovered
between the Bianchi and Piero Terranti (one of Charles his Barons) with whom
they practiced privately to be restored to the Government. The Plot was
detected by several letters from the Cerchi to the said Piero, though some
imagined they were counterfeited by the Donati, to divert the infamy they had
incurred by the assassination of Nicholas. The Cerchi and all their Clann were
at this time Prisoners to the Donati (and among the rest Dante the Poet) their
Estates were Consiscated, and their houses demolished. Their party, with
several of the Ghibilines that had joined themselves with them, were dispersed
up and down in sundry places, attending new troubles to better their Condition;
and Charles having finished what he designed when he came thither, returned to
the Pope in pursuance of his Expedition into Sicily, in which he managed
himself with no more prudence than he had done in Florence; but losing many of
his men, he went back into France, with no little dishonor. After Charles was
departed, for some time Florence was quiet, only Corso was dissatisfied, as not
thinking himself in Authority suitable to his deserts: for the Government being
in the hands of the people, New troubles occasioned by Corso Donati.
he believed it managed by such as were much his inferiors. Moved therefore by
these provocations, to varnish over a foul design with a fair pretense, he
calumniated several Citizens who had had charge of the Public money, for
imbeziling of it, and applying it to their private use; giving out that it was
fit they should be inquired after, and punished: several of his mind did the
same, and many others by their ignorance and Credulity were persuaded that what
Corso did was out of pure care and affection to his Country. On the other side
the persons accused, having the favor of the people, stood upon their
justification, and so far these differences proceeded, that after several
expostulations, and civil controversies, they came at length to take Arms. On
one side there were Corso, Lotieri Bishop of Florence, with many of the
Nobility, and some of the Commons. On the other side there were the Signori,
and the greatest part of the people: so that there was sighting in many places
of the City. The Signori, perceiving their affairs in some danger, sent to
Lucca for aid, and immediately all the people in Lucca came in to their
assistance; by whose supervention things were presently composed, the tumults
asswag'd, and the people continued in their former Liberty and Government,
without any other punishment of the Author of the scandal. The Pope had heard
of the tumults at Florence, and sent thither Nicholas da Prato his Legate to
appease them, who, for his quality, learning and behavior, being a man of
great reputation, he quickly obtained such credit with the people, that they
gave him Authority to reform, or Model their Government as he pleased. Being of
the Ghibiline faction, he was inclined to call home those of that party who
were banished; But first he thought it convenient to ingratiate with the
people, by restroing their Ancient Companies, which Act added as much strength
to their interest, as it took away from the Nobless. When he had, as he
thought, sufficiently obliged the multitude, The Legate designed to call home
the Exiles, and tried many ways to effect it, but was so far from succeeding in
any of them, that he rendered himself suspected to the Governors, was forced
out of the City, and leaving all in confusion, in a great passion he
Excommunicated it at his departure. Nor was this City molested with one humor
only, but several; there being at one the factions betwixt the Nobility and the
people, the Guelfs and the Ghibilines, the Bianchi, and the Neri, At that time
all the City was in Arms, and many bickerings happend'd. Many were discontented
at the Legates departure, being willing the banished Citizens should return.
The Medici and Giugni.
The Chief of them who raised the report were the Medici and the Giugni, who
(with the Legate) were discovered to be favorers of the Rebels; in the interim
Skirmishes and Rencounters passed in several places of the Town, and to add to
their Calamity, a fire broke out in the Orto S. Michel among the houses of the
Abbati, from thence i^ went to the houses of the Caponsacchi, and burned them,
from thence to the houses of the Macci, Amieri, Toschi, Cipriani, Lamberti,
Cavalcanti, and all the New Market; from thence it passed to the Porta S.
Maria, burned that, and then wheeling about to the Old Bridge, it consumed the
Palaces of the Gherardini, Pulci, Amidei, Lucardesi, and with them so many
other houses, that the number of all that were consumed by that fire amounted
to more than thirteen hundred. Some were of opinion it began by accident in the
height of the Conflict. Others affirm it was done on purpose by Neri Abbati,
Prior of S. Piero Scharagio (a dissolute and mischievous person) who seeing
every body engaged, thought he might commit a piece of wickedness then, which
no body should be able to remedy; and to the end it might succeed the better,
and give less suspicion of him, he set the houses of his own party on fire,
where he could do it with convenience. These Conflicts, and this Conflagration
happened in July 1304. Florence burned, 1304.
at which time Corso Donati was the only person who did not arm in those
tumults; and not without reason, for thereby he presumed (when weary of their
fighting they should incline to an agreement) he should more easily be chosen
Umpire betwixt them; at length all Arms indeed were laid down, but more that
they were tired, and weary of their miseries, than from any relentment or
condescension on either side. The whole consequence of all was, that the Rebels
were not suffered to return, and the party which favored them was forced to
comply. The Legate being come back to Rome, and understanding the new
distractions in Florence, persuaded the Pope, that if he designed to compose
them, it would be necessary to send for twelve of the Principal Malcontents of
that City, which being the nourishment and fomentors of their miseries, their
miseries would cease as soon as they were removed. The Pope took his Counsel,
sent for twelve of the Chief Citizens (who came to Rome in obedience to his
summons) and among them Corso Donati was one. Upon the departure of these
Citizens the Legate signified to the Exiles, that now was their time (the City
being destitute of their heads) to return. Whereupon the Citizens which were
banished, getting what force together they were able, they marched to Florence,
entered where the walls were unfinished, and passed on as far as the Piazza of
S. John. It was a remarkable passage to consider, that those people who fought
in their behalf whilst humbly and unarmed they begged to be admitted, seeing
them come forcibly into the City with their weapons in their hands, turned
against them immediately, and joining with the people, beat them out of the
City. This Enterprise was lost by leaving part of their forces at Lastra, and
not attending the arrival of Tolosetto Uberti who was coming from Pistoia with
three hundred horse; but supposing Expedition of greater importance to their
success, than Strength, they found (as many had done before) That delay takes
away the opportunity, and celerity the force. The Rebels ^epuls'd, Florence
returned to its old divisions. To lessen the Authority of the Cavalcanti, the
people assaulted and took from them the Castle of Stinche in the Val di Greve,
which had belonged anciently to that family; and because those who were taken
in this Castle were the first which were put in the new built Prisons, that
building took its name from the Castle from whence they came, was called le
Stinche from thence, and is called so to this day. After this, those who had
the Government in their hands reestablished the Companies of the people; gave
them the Ensigns which had been used at first under the discipline of the Arts.
The Captains, the Gonfalonieri of the Companies, and the College of the
Signori were called, and Orders were given that they should assist the Signoria
or Senate at all times, in time of Commotion or injury, with their Swords, and
in time of peace with their Counsels. To the two old Governors they added
another called Essecutore, whose Office it was by conjunction, with the
Gonfalonieri to restrain and correct the insolence of the Grandees. In the mean
time the Pope dying, Corso and his fellow Citizens returned from Rome, and
might have lived quietly, had not the insatiableness of Corso's ambition
created new troubles. To gain reputation it was always his Custom to oppose the
sentiment of the Nobility in whatever was proposed; and which way he observed
the people to incline, thither he constantly directed his Authority, to work
himself into their favor; so that in all Innovations and Controversies he was
the Head; all persons resorting to him who had any thing extraordinary in
design. Hereupon he became so odious to several considerable Citizens, that the
faction of the Neri subdivided, and fell into open division among themselves,
because Corso made use of private Force and Authority, and of such Persons as
were enemies to the State. Corso Donati.
Yet such was the Awe and Majesty of his Person, that every body feared him; to
deprive him of the peoples favor (which, that way, was easily disingaged) it
was given out that he designed upon the Government, and meant to make himself
King: Which from his extravagant way of living was credible enough, and much
confirmed when afterward he married a daughter of Uguccione della Faggivola
chief of the Rianchi, and Ghibilius, and the most powerful Person in the City.
This Alliance was no sooner known among his Enemies, but his adversaries took
Arms, and the people for that reason were so far from appearing in his defense,
that the greater part of them joined with his Enemies. The Chief of his Enemies
(and who were at the head of them) were Rosso della Tosa, Pazzino de Pazzo,
Geri Spini, and Berto Brunelleschi. They, their followers and the greatest part
of the people, ran with their Swords drawn to the foot of the Palace of the
Signori, by whose Order an accusation was preferred to Plero Bianca Captain of
the people, against Corso, as a person who (by the assistance of Uguccione)
conspired to be King. Upon this impeachment he was summoned, and refusing to
appear, was declared a Rebel for his Contumacy; there having been but two hours
time betwixt the accusation and sentence: judgment pronounced, Condemned.
the Signori, with the several Companies of the people (their banners
displayed) went presently to apprehend him. Corso on the other side not at all
dismayed either at the severity of the sentence, the authority of the Signori,
nor the unconstancy of his friends (who had many of them forsaken him) fell to
fortifying his house, hoping to have defended himself there till Uguccione (to
whom he had sent word of his condition) should come to his rescue. His houses,
and Avenues were fortified and barricado'd by him, and strengthened with such
Garrisons of his friends, that though the people were very numerous and pressed
hard to have entered them, they could not prevail. The Conflict was smart, many
killed and wounded on both sides, and the people finding there was no entrance
that way by force, got into the houses of his Neighbors, and through them they
brake unexpectedly into his. Corso finding himself environed by his Enemies,
and no hopes of relief from Ugnccione, dispairing of Victory, he resolved to
try what was possible for his Escape; advancing therefore with Gherardo Bondini
and several other his most faithful and valiant friends, he charged so
furiously upon his Enemies, that he brake them, and made his way through them
(fighting) out of the P^^ta della Croce: Nevertheless being pursued, Gherardo
was slain by Boccaccio Cavicciulli upon the Africa, and Corso was taken
Prisoner at Rouezano by certain Spanish horsemen belonging to the Signoria. But,
disdaining the sight of his Victorious Enemies, and to prevent the torments
which they would probably inflict, as they were bringing him back toward
Florence, he threw himself off his horse, and was cut to pieces by one of the
Company; his body was gathered together by the Monks of S. Salvi, and buried,
but without any solemnity. His death.
This was the sad end of that Magnanimous Person, to whom his Country, and the
Neri, owed much both of their good fortune and ill; and doubtless had his mind
been more Moderate, his memory would have been more honorable; however he
deserves a place among the best Citizens this City did ever produce, though
indeed the turbulency of his Spirit caused his Country and party both to forget
their obligations to him, and at length procured his death, and many mischiefs
to them. Uguccione coming to the relief of his Son in Law as far as Remoli, and
hearing he was taken by the people, presuming he could do him no good, to save
his own stake, he returned back as he came.

Corso being dead in the year 1308. 1308.
all tumults ceased, and every body lived quietly till news was brought that
Arrigo the Emperor was come into Italy with all the Florentin^ Exiles in his
Company, whom he had promised to reinstate on their own Country. To obviate
this, and lessen the number of their Enemies, the Magistrates thought fit of
themselves to reinvite all those who had been rebels, but some few which were
particularly excepted. Those which were excepted, were the greatest part of the
Ghibilines, and some of the faction of the Bianchi, among which were Dante
Aleghieri, the Sons of Very de Cerchi, and Giano della Bella. They sent
likewise to desire the assistance of Robert King of Naples, but not prevailing
in an amicable way without terms, they gave him the Government of their City
for five years, upon condition he would defend them as his subjects. The
Emperor in his passage came to Pisa, and from thence coasting along the shore,
he went to Rome, where he was Crowned in the year 1312; after which, addressing
himself to the subduction of the Florentines, he marched by the way of Perugia
and Arezzo to Florence, and posted himself with his Army at the Monastery of
St. Salvi, where he continued fifty days without any considerable exploit.
Despairing of success against that City, he removed to Pisa, confederated with
the King of Sicily to make an Enterprise upon Naples, and marched forward with
his Army; but whilst he thought himself sure of Victory, and Robert gave
himself for lost, the Emperor died at Buonconvento, and that Expedition
miscarri'd. Not long after it fell out that Uguccione became Lord of Pisa, and
by degrees of Lucca, where he joined himself with the Ghibilines, and by the
assistance of that faction, committed great depredations upon the Neighbors.
The Florentines to free themselves from his Excursions, desired King Robert
that his Brother Piero might have the Command of their Army. In the mean time
Uguccione was not idle. To increase his numbers, and extend his dominion,
partly by force, and partly by stratagem, he had possessed himself of many
strong Castles in the Valleys of Arno, and Nievole, and having advanced so far
as to besiege Monte Catini, the Florentines thought it necessary to Relieve it,
left otherwise that Conflagration should consume their whole Country. Having
drawn together a great Army, they Marched into the Val di Nievole, gave battle
to Uguccione, and after a sharp sight, were defeated. In the battle, they lost
2000. men besides Piero the Kings Brother, whose body could never be found. Nor
was the Victory on Uguccione's side without some qualification, he having lost
one of his Sons, and several Officers of Note. After this disaster, the
Florentines fortified at home as much as they could, and King Robert sent them
a new General called the Conte di Andrea with the title of Conte Novello. By
his deportment (or rather by the Genius of the Florentines, whose property it
is to increase upon every settlement, and to fall afterward into factions upon
every accident) notwithstanding their present War with Uguccione, New divisions.
they divided again, and some were for King Robert, and others against him. The
chief of his Adversaries were Simon della Tosa, the Magalotti, and other
popular familes, who had greatest interest in the Government. These persons
sent first to France, and then into Germany, to raise men, and invite Officers,
that by their assistance they might be able to rid themselves of their new
Governor the Conte. But their fortune was adverse, and neither could be
procured. Nevertheless they gave not their Enterprise over, though they had
been disappointed both in Germany and France; they found out an Officer in
Agobbio; having driven out King Roberts Governor, they sent for Lando from
Agobbio, and made him Essecutore, (or indeed Executioner) giving him absolute
power over their whole City. Laudo de Agobbio.
Laudo being naturally cruel and avaritious, marched with armed men up and down
the City, plundering this place, and killing in that, as those who sent for him
gave him directions; and not content with this insolence, he Coined false money
with the Florentine stamp, and no man had the power to oppose it; to such
grandeur was he arrived by the dissension of the Citizens. Miserable certainly,
and much to be lamented was the Condition of this City, which, neither the
Consequences of their former divisions, their apprehension of Uguccione, nor
the Authority of a King was sufficient to unite. Abroad they were infested by
Uguccione; at home they were pillaged by Laudo; and yet no reconciliation. The
Kings friends, many of the Nobility, several, great men of the Populace, and
all the Guelfs, were Enemies to Laudo and his party. Nevertheless, the
Adversary having the Authority in his hand, they could not without manifest
danger discover themselves; however, that they might not be deficient in what
they were able to do toward the freeing themselves of so dishonorable a
Tyranny, they writ privately to King Robert, to entreat that he would make
Conte Guido da Buttifolle his Lieutenant in Florence. The King granted their
request, sent the Conte to them forthwith, and the adverse party (though the
Signori also were Enemies to the King) had not the Courage to oppose him. But
the Conte for all that, had not much Authority conferred, because the Signori,
and Gonfalonieri of the Companies were favorers of Laudo and his accomplices.
During these troubles in Florence, the daughter of Alberto coming out of
Germany, passed by the City in her way to her husband Charles Son to King
Robert. She was very honorably received by such as were friends to the King,
who complaining to her of the sad Condition of their City, and the Tyranny of
Laudo and his party, she promised her assistance, and by the help of her
interposition, and such as were sent thither from the King, the Citizens were
reconciled, Laudo deposed from his Authority, and sent home to Agobbio full of
treasure and blood. Laudo being gone, they fell to Reform, and the Signoria was
confirmed by the King for three years longer; and because before there were VII
in the Senate of Laudo's party, VI new were chosen of the Kings, and they
continued XIII. for sometime; but they were reduced afterward to VII their old
number. About this time Ugucciene was driven out of Lucca, and Pisa, and
Castruccio Castracani, a Citizen of Lucca, succeeded him in the Government; and
being a brave and Courageous young Gentleman, and Fortunate in all his
Undertakings, Castruccio Castracani.
in a short time he made himself Chief of the Ghibilin faction in Tuscany. For
this cause, laying aside their private discords, the Florentines for several
years made it their business, first to obstruct the growth of Castruccio's
Power, and afterward, (in case he should grow powerful against their will) to
consider which way they were to defend themselves against him: and that the
Signori might deliberate with more Counsel, and Execute with more Authority,
they Created XII. Citizens (which they called Buonhuomini) without whose advice
and concurrence the Signori were not to do any thing of importance. In the mean
time the Authority of King Robert expired; the Government devolved once more
upon the City, which set up the old Rectori and Magistrates as formerly, and
their fear of Castruccio kept them Friends, and united. Castruccio after many
brave things performed against the Lord's of Lunigiana, sat down before Prato:
The Florentines alarmed at the news, resolved to relieve it, and shutting up
their Shops, they got together in a confused and tumultuous manner about 20000
Foot and 1500 Horse; and to lessen the force of Castruccio and add to their
own, Proclamation was made by the Signori, that what ever Rebel of the Guelfs
should come in to the relief of Prato, should be restored afterward to his
Country: upon which Proclamation more than 4000 of the Guelfs came in and
joined with them, by which accession, their Army being become formidable, they
marched with all speed toward Prato, but Castruccio, having no mind to hazard
a Battle against to considerable a force, drew off and retreated to Lucca.
Upon his retreat, great Controversy arose in the Army betwixt the Nobility and
the people. The people would have pursued, and fought in hopes to have overcome
and destroyed him; the Nobility would return, alleging they had done enough
already in exposing Florence for the relief of Prato. That there being a
necessity for that, it was well enough done, but now, no necessity being upon
them, little to be gotten, and much to be lost, fortune was not to be tempted,
nor the Enemy to be followed. Not being able to accord among themselves, the
business was referred to the Signori, which consisting of Nobility and Commons,
they fell into the same difference of opinion, which being known to the City,
they assembled in great multitudes in the Piazza, threatening the Nobility
highly, till at last they condescended. But their resolution coming too late,
and many constrained to join in it against their persuasions, the Enemy had
time, and drew safely off to Lucca. This difference put the people into such a
huff against the Nobility, the Signori refused to perform the Promise they made
to the Rebels which came in upon Proclamation, which the Rebels perceiving,
they resolved to be before hand, if possible, and accordingly presented
themselves at the Gates of the City to be admitted before the Army came up; but
their design being suspected, miscarryed, and they were beaten back by those
who were left in the Town: To try if they could obtain that by treaty, which
they could not compass by force, they sent eight Ambassadors to the Signori, to
commemorate to them the Faith they had given; the dangers they had run
thereupon; and that it could not be unreasonable they should have their
promised reward. The Nobility thought themselves obliged, having promised them
particularly as well as the Signori, and therefore employed all their interest
for the advantage of the Rebels; but the Commons (being enraged that the
Enterprise against Castruccio was not prosecuted as it might have been) would
not consent; which turned afterward to the great shame and dishonor of the
City. The Nobility being many of them disgusted thereat, endeavored that by
force, which was denied them upon applications; and agreed with the Guelfs,
that if they would attempt their entrance without, they would take up Arms in
their assistance within; but their Plot being discovered the Day before it was
to be Executed, when the banished Guelfs came to make their attack, they found
the City in Arms, and all things so well disposed to repel them without and
suppress those within, that none of them durst venture, and so the Enterprise
was given over without any effort. The Rebels being departed, it was thought
fit those Persons should be punished who invited them thither; nevertheless
though every Body could point at the delinquents, yet no Body durst Name them,
much more accuse them. That the truth might impartially be known, it was
ordered that the Names of the Offenders should be written down; and delivered
privately to the Captain; which being done, the Persons accused were Amerigo
Donati, Teghiaio Frescobaldi, and Loteringo Gherardini, whose Judges being now
more favorable than (perhaps) their crime deserved, they were only condemned
to pay a Sum of Money, and came off.

The tumults in Florence upon the alarm by the Rebels, demonstrated clearly
that to the Company of the People one Captain was not sufficient; and therefore
it was ordered for the future, that every Company should have three or four,
and every Gonfalonier two or three joined to them, which should be called
Pennonieri, that, in case of necessity, where the whole Company could not be
drawn out, part of it might appear under one of the said Officers. And as it
happens in all Commonwealths, after any great accident, some or other of the
old Laws are abrogated, and others revived to supply them, so the Signoria
being at first but occasional and temporary, the Senators and Collegi then in
being (having the power in their hands) took Authority upon themselves to make
a Council of the Signori, which should sit forty Months for the future, The
Council of the Signori to ^it forty Months, whereas before it was occasional.
their Names being to be put into a purse, and drawn out every two Months. But
for as much as many of the Citizens were jealous their Names were not in the
purse, there was a new Imborsation before the forty Months began. Hence it was,
the custom of the purse had its Original, and was used in the Creation of their
Magistrates, both at home and abroad, whereas formerly they were chosen by a
Council of the Successors, as the term of the Office began to expire. At first
this way of election was called Imborsationi, and afterward Squittini. And
because every three, or at most five years, this custom was to be used,
Election of Magistrates by Imborsation
it was thought they had prevented great mischiefs to the City, occasioned by
multitude of Competitors, and tumults at every election of Magistrates, which
tumults being to be corrected no way (in their Judgments) so readily, they
pitched upon this, not discerning the evils which they concealed under so small
a convenience. It was now in the year 1325. when Castruccio having seized on
Pistoia, was grown so considerable, that the Florentines (jealous of his
greatness) resolved before he had settled his new conquest, to fall upon him,
and recover it (if possible) out of his hands. Whereupon of Citizens and their
Friends they assembled 20000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, and encamped before Alto
Pascio, by taking it, to render the relief of Pistoia the more difficult. The
Florentines took that pass, and when they had done, they marched toward Lucca,
forraging and wasting the Country. But by the Imprudence and Treachery of
their Commander, little progress was made. This Person (called Ramondo da
Cardona) observing the Florentines to have been very liberal of their liberty,
and to have conferred the Government sometimes upon Kings, sometimes upon
Legates, and sometimes upon more inferior Persons; he thought with himself,
that if he could bring them into any exigence, or distress, it might easily
fall out that they would make him their Prince; to this purpose he frequently
desired and pressed to have the same Authority invested in him in the City, as
he had in the Army, otherwise he could not require nor expect that Obedience
which was necessary for a General. The Florentines not hearing on that Ear,
their Captain proceeded but slowly, Ramondo da Cardona General of the
Florentines.
neglecting his time, as much as Castruccio improved it; for Castruccio having
procured supplies from the Visconti, and other Princes of Lombardy, and made
himself strong, Ramondo (who before lost his opportunity of conquering for want
of fidelity) now lost the possibility of preserving himself, for want of
discretion; for marching up and down lazily with his Army, he was overtaken by
Castruccio near Alto Pascio, assaulted, and after a long fight, broken to
pieces; in which Action many Florentines were taken Prisoners and Killed, and
their General among the rest, who received the reward of his infidelity and ill
Counsel from Fortune her self, which had been more properly bestowed by the
hands of the Florentines. The calamities which Castruccio introduced upon the
Florentines after his Victory; the Depradations, Imprisonments, Ruin's, and
Burnings, are not to be expressed; having no Body to oppose him, for several
Months together, he went where, and did what he had a mind to, and the
Florentines thought themselves happy, (after such a defeat) if they could save
the City. Nevertheless they were not so desperately low, but they made great
provisions of Money, raised what Soldiers was possible, and sent to their
Friends for assistance; but no providence was sufficient against such an Enemy:
they were forced therefore to make choice of Carlo Duke of Calabria (the Son of
King Robert) to be their Sovereign; If it would please him to undertake their
defense; for that Family having been used to the Supremacy of that City, they
promised him rather their Obedience, than Friendship. But Carlo being
personally employed in the Wars of Sicily, he sent Gualtieri (a French Man and)
Duke of Athens, The Duke of Athens Governor of Florence.
to take possession in his behalf. He as his Masters Leiutenant, took
possession of the Government, and created Magistrates as he plea'sd.
Notwithstanding his behavior was so modest, and in a manner so contrary to his
own Nature, every one loved him. Having finished his War in Sicily, Charles
came with a thousand Horse to Florence, and made his entry in July 1326. His
arrival gave some impediment to Castruccio, and kept him from rummaging up and
down the Country with that freedom and security which he had formerly done. But
what the City gained abroad, it lost at home, and when their Enemies were
restrained, they became exposed to the insolence and oppression of their
Friends: for the Signori acting nothing without the consent of the Duke, in a
years time he drained the City of four hundred thousand Florins, though in the
Articles of agreement it was expressly provided he should not exceed 200000. So
great were the Impositions which he, or his Father laid upon the Town; and yet
as if these were too few, their miseries were increased by an accumulation of
new jealousies, and new Enemies. For the Ghibilines of Lombardy were so fearful
of Carlos advance into Tuscany, that Galiazzo Visconti, and the rest of the
princes of Lombardy, with Money and fair Promises persuaded Lewis of Bavaria,
Lod the Emperor called into Italy.
(who had been Elected Emperor against the Popes will) to pass into Italy with
an Army. Being arrived in Lombardy, he passed forward into Tuscany, made
himself Master of Pisa by the assistance of Castruccio, and having received a
considerable supply of Money there, he marched on toward Rome: Whereupon
Charles (being fearful of his Kingdom) and leaving Philippo da Saginitto his
Lieutenant in Florence, went Home with the Force he brought with him. Upon his
departure, Castruccio seized upon Pisa, and the Florentines got Pistoia by
stratagem: Castruccio marched immediately to recover it, sat down before it, and
managed his business with so much Conduct and resolution, that though the
Florentines made many attempts to relieve it, both by Insults upon his Army,
and incursions into his Country, their Attacks, and their diligences were all
ineffectual, they could not possibly remove him; for so firmly was he resolved
to chastise the Pistoians, and weaken the Florentines, that the Pistoians were
constrained to surrender, and receive him once more for their Lord; by which
Action as he contracted much Honor and Renown, The Death of Castruccio and the
Duke of Calabria.
so he thereby contracted so much Sickness and Infirmity, that he died shortly
after upon his return to Lucca. And, because one ill or good accident goes
seldom alone; Charles Duke of Calabria and Lord of Florence died at Naples
much about the same time; so that in a very small space the Florentines were
freed from the oppression of the one, and the apprehension of the other. They
were no sooner free, but they fell to reforming, New reformation.
nulled all the Laws and Ordinances of the ancient Councils, and created two
new, one of them consisting of three hundred of the Commons, the other of two
hundred both Commons and Gentlemen; the first was called the Council of the
People, and the second the Common Council.

The Emperor being arrived at Rome, he created an Antipope; decreed many
things to the prejudice of the Church; and attempted more, which he was not
able to carry; so that at length he removed (with no little disgrace) from Rome
to Pisa, where, either disdaining his Conduct, or for want of their Pay, eight
hundred German Horse mutiny'd, fortified themselves at Monte Ariaro, and as he
was departed from Pisa toward Lombardy, possessed themselves of Lucca, and
drove out Francisco Castracani, whom the Emperor had left Governor of the
Town. Being Masters of that City, and their intentions to make what profit of
it they could, they offered it to the Florentines for twenty thousand Florins,
but by the advice of Simon della Tosa it was refused; this resolution would
have been much to the advantage of our City, had the Florentines persever'd;
but changing it afterward, it proved much to their detriment; for refusing it
at that time when they might have had it so cheap, they bad much more for it
afterward, and were denied it; which was the occasion that Florence changed
its Government often, to its great inconvenience. Lucca, being refused in this
manner by the Florentines, was purchased for 30000 Florins by Gherardino
Spinoli a Genovese, and (because People are more slow and indifferent in
accepting what is offered, than in conceiving what is not) as soon as it was
known to be bought by Gherardini, and at how cheap a rate, the Florentines were
much troubled they had it not themselves, and blamed all those who had any way
discouraged them. To buy it being too late, they sought to gain it by force,
and to that end sent their Army to overrun and spoil the Country about it.
About this time the Emperor was returned out of Italy, and the Pope, by Order
of the Pisani, sent Prisoner into France. The Florentines upon the Death of
Castruccio (which followed in the year 1328) till the year 1340 continued quiet
at Home; The Florentines quiet at Home.
Intent only upon their Wars abroad. In Lombardy upon the coming of John King
of Bohemia, and in Tuscany upon the account of Lucca; they adorned their City
likewise with many new Buildings, and particularly the Tower of St. Reparata
according to the directions of Giolto the most Famous Painter in his time.
Their Buildings.
Moreover, upon an inundation of the River Arnus in the year 1333 (in which the
Water swelling twelve fathoms high in some places of Florence carried away
several Bridges, and many Houses were ruined) they repaired all, with great
care and expense. But in the year 1340 this tranquillity was disturbed, and
they had new occasion of alteration. The Grandees of the City had two ways to
maintain, and increase their Authority. One was by ordering the Imborsations
so, as the Magistracy should fall always either to them or their Friends. The
other was by making themselves chief in the Elections of the Rettori, and
thereby obliging them to be favorable to them afterward in all their
determinations. And of this second way they were so fond and conceited, that
not content with two Rettori (as they had forformerly). A while after they set
up a third; with the Title of the Captain of the Guards, in which Office they
placed Iacomo Gabrieli d' Agobbio, A Captain of the Guards.
with absolute Power over the Citizens. Iacomo in the sight of the Government,
committed daily many Injuries, but more especially to Piero de Baldi, and Bardo
Frescobaldi. Being Nobly descended, and by consequence proud, they could not
endure, to have a stranger do them wrong, in defiance of their other
Magistrates. To revenge themselves of him; and the Government, they entered
into a Conspiracy with several Noble, and Popular Families in the City, who
were disgusted with their Tyranny. The manner concluded upon was, that every
one should get as many Armed Men into his House as he could, and that on
All Saints Day in the Morning, when all the People were at Mass, they should
take Arms, kill the Captain, and the chief of their Governors, and afterward
make new Magistrates, and new Laws for the State. But because dangerous
enterprises, the more considered, are always the less willingly undertaken; it
happens that Plots which allow too much time for their Execution, are generally
discovered: There being among the Conspirators a Gentleman called Andrea di
Bardi, whose fear of Punishment prevailing upon him, beyond his desire of
Revenge, he betrayed all to Iacomo Alberti, his Kinsman, Iacomo imparted it
immediately to the Priori, and the Priori to the Governors. And because the
design was so near Execution, All Saints day being at hand, many of the
Citizens assembled in the Palace, and judging it unsafe to defer, they would
needs persuade the Signori to cause the great Bell to be rung, and the People
commanded to their Arms. Taldo Valori was at that time Gonfaloniere, and
Francisco Salviati one of the Signori. Being Relations of the Bardi they
dissuaded the sounding of the Bell, alleging it was not secure to Arm the
People upon trivial Occasions, because Authority given to them, without some
power reserved to restrain them, was never known to produce any good, and that
it was much easier to raise a Tumult, than to suppress it. They judged it
better therefore to inquire farther into the verity of the thing, and punish it
rather Civilly (if it appeared to be true) than in a furious and tumultuous
manner to corrected it, perhaps with the destruction of the whole City. But
these Arguments served not the turn, but with Vilanous language, and Insolent
behavior the Signori were constrained to cause the Bell to be rung, upon which
the People immediately took Arms, and away to the Piazza. The Bardi, and
Frescobaldi perceiving they were discovered, and resolving to overcome with
Honor or die without Shame, betook themselves to their Arms, hoping they would
be able to defend that part of the City beyond the Bridge where their Houses
were; whereupon they broke down the Bridges, and fortified themselves, till
they should be relieved by the Nobility of the Country, and other Persons their
Friends. But that design was frustrated by the People which lived among them in
the same part of the City, who took up Arms for the Signori; finding themselves
entermixt, and that design not like to succeed, they abandoned the Bridges, and
retreated to the Street where the Bardi dwelt, as stronger than the rest, where
they made a most valient defense. Iacomo d' Agobbio knew well enough that all
this Conspiracy was against him; and having no great inclination to be killed,
in a terrible fright, with his hair standing right up, he ran to the Palace of
the Signori, and secured himself among the thickest of the Armed Men. The other
of the Rettori, Maffeo da Muradi.
though not so conscious, were much more courageous, especially the Podesta
called Maffeo da Maradi, who presenting himself where they were fighting, and
passing the Bridge Rubaconte, threw himself undauntedly among the Swords of the
Bardi, and made a sign for a Parley. Upon which, out of reverence to his Person,
his Courage and good qualities, they let fall their Arms, and stood quietly to
attend him. In a modest and grave harangue he blamed their proceedings;
remonstrated the danger they were in, if they did not yield to the indignation
of the People; he gave them hopes likewise of a fair hearing, and a merciful
sentence, and promised his intercession for them; then returning to their
Signori he persuaded that they would not use extremities, and conquer with the
loss of so many Citizens lives; nor condemn without hearing. In short, so far
he obtained, that by consent of the Signori, Baldi, Frescobaldi and their
Friends left the City, and retired to their Castles without any Impediment.
They being gone, and the People disarmed, the Signori proceeded only against
such of the Families of the Baldi and Frescobaldi as had taken Arms, and to
lessen their Power, they bought the Castles of Mangona, and Vernia of the
Bardi, and made a Law that no Citizen should for the future possess any Castle
within twenty miles of Florence. Not many months after Stialta Frescobaldi, and
several others of that Family were beheaded, having been proclaimed Rebels
before. But it was not sufficient for these Governors to have conquered and
suppressed the Baldi and Frescobaldi; like other People (whose insolence for
the most part increases with their Power) they grew imperious as they grew
strong. Whereas, before the Florentines had only one Captain of the Guards to
afflict them, they chose another now for the Country, investing him with great
Authority, that those Persons whom they suspected, might not be suffered to
live quietly either within the City o^ without* and besides this they abused
and provoked the Nobility in such manner, that they were ready to Sacrifice,
and ^ell both themselves and City to be rev^ng'd, and watching for an occasion,
they met one, and improved it. By the many troubles in Lombardy, and Tuscany,
Lucca was fallen under the Dominion of Mastino della Seala Lord of Verona, who
engaged to deliver it up to the Florentines, but did not perform; for being
Lord of Parma he thought himself able to keep it, and valued not the breach of
his Faith. The Florentines, in revenge, joined with the Venetians, and made
such war upon him, he had well ^igh lost most of his territory; but the
Florentines got little by it, more than the satisfaction to have distressed
Mastino: for the Venetian (according to the practice of all States when entered
into League with People less powerful than themselves ^ having taken Trevigi,
and Vicenza; ^ade a peace without any regard to the Florentines. A while after,
the Visconti Lords of Milan, having taken Parma from Mastino, conceiving
himself unable to keep Lucca any longer, he resolved to sell it. The
Florentines and the P^san^ were competitors in the purchase, and whilst the
bargain was driving, the Pisan^ perceiving the Florent^nes like to carry it, in
respect that they were the more wealthy of the two; Lucca sold to the
Florentines.
they betook themselves to force, and joining with the Visconti, they sat down
before it. The Florentines not at all discouraged, proceeded in their bargain,
and having concluded their terms, they paid down part of the Money to Mastino,
and giving Hostages for the rest, the Town was to be delivered, whereupon Naddo
Ruccellat, Giovanni di Bernardino de Medi^i, and Rosso d^ Ricci^rdo de Ricci,
were sent to take possession, who passing by force into Lucc^, they were
received by Mastino, and the Town delivered up into their hands. However, the
Pisan^ continued their siege, and endeavored by all possible industry to gain
it by force. The Florentines on the other side were as solicitous to relieve
it, but after (...) long War, with great dishonor, and the loss of their Money,
Taken from them by the Pisans.
they were driven out of it, and the Town became subject to the Pisans. The
loss of this City (as in such cases does frequently happen) put the People of
Florence into a Mutiny against their Governors, so that in all places they
upbraided the conduct and administration of their Superiors. At the beginning
of the War the management of the Military affairs was committed to XX.
Citizens, who made Maletesta di Rimini their General, who having executed his
Command with little courage, and less discretion, they applied themselves to
Robert King of Naples for assistance. In compliance with their request, King
Robert sent them supplies under the Command of Gualtieri Duke of Athens, The
Duke of Athens.
who (the Heavens ordaining that all things should concur to their future
misery) arrived at Florence at the very time when the Enterprise of Lucca was
^tterly lost. The XX Governors of the Militia, seeing the People enraged,
thought by choosing a new General, either to inspire them with new hopes, or
take away the occasion of their obloquy; and because their fears were still
upon them, that the Duke of Athens might defend them the better, they first
made him Conservator, and afterward General. The Nobility, upon the reasons
above said, being highly discontented, and many of them retaining a
correspondence with Gualtieri ever since he was Gove^^or of Florence in the
behalf of Charles Duke of Calabria, they began to think now was their tim^ to
wreck their malice, and to ruin the City, believing there was no way left them
to subdue the People who had insulted so long, but by subjecting them to a
Prince, who knowing the Generosity of the Nobless, and the insolence of the
Commons, might recompense both according to their deserts; besides they
presumed it would be something meritorious, if upon their motion, and by their
cooperation he acquired the Government. In pursuane of this design, they had
many private meetings, in which they pressed him to take the Government wholly
into his hands, and they would assist him to the utmost. Nor were the Nobility
alone in this business, some of the Popular families (as the Peruzzi,
Acciaivoli, Antellesi, and Buonaccorsi) joined themselves with them; for being
much in debt, and unable out of their own Estates to clear themselves, they
Plotted against other Peoples, and to free themselves of their Creditors, made
no scruple of enslaving their Country. These persuasions exasperated the
Ambition of the Duke, who, to gain the reputation among the people of being
just and exact, persecuted those who had the management of the Wars against
Lucca, caused Giovan de Medici, Naddo Ruccellai, and Gulielmo Altoviti to be
put to death, banished several others, and others he fined. These executions
startled the middle sort of the Citizens, only the Grandees, and the Common
People were satisfied; the last* out of their natural pleasure in mischief, the
first to see themselves so handsomely reven'gd for the insolences they had
received from the People. Whereupon, when ever the Duke appeared in the
streets, he was pursued with acclamations, and applauses of his integrity,
every one exhorting him to go on in finding out, and punishing the fraud^ of
their Neighbors. The Authority of the XX. was much lessened, the Dukes
reputation increased, and a general fear of him overspread the whole City; so
that to show their affections toward him, all People caused his Arms to be
painted upon their Houses, and nothing but the bare title was wanting to make
him a Prince. Being now in a condition (as he thought) of attempting any thing
securely, he caused it to be signified to the Senate, that for the good of the
Public he judged it necessary they should transfer their Authority upon him,
and that (seeing the whole City approved it) he desired he might have their
resignation. The Signori, having long foreseen the ruin of their Country
approaching, were much troubled at the message: They were sensible of the
danger they were in, yet not to be deficient in any Act of duty to their
Country, they refused him courageously. As a pretense and specimen of his
Religion, and humility, the Duke had taken up his quarters in the Monastery of
St. Croce, and being desirous to give the finishing stroke to his wicked
designs, he by Proclamation required all the People to appear before him the
next morning in the Piazza belonging to that Monastery. This Proclamation
alarmed the Signori more than his message, whereupon joining themselves with
such as were lovers both of their liberty and Country, upon consideration of
the Power of the Duke, and that their force was insufficient, it was resolved
they should address themselves to him in an humble and supplicatory way, to try
if by their P^ayers they might prevail with him to give his Enterprise over, or
else to execute it with more moderation. All things being concluded, part of
the Signori were sent to attend him, and one of them accosted him in this
manner. The Speech of one of the Senators to the Duke of Athens
My Lord, we are come hither, moved first by your Proposal, and next by your
Proclamation for assembling the People, presuming your resolution is to obtain
that by force, to which upon private application we have not consented: it is
not our design to oppose force against force, but rather to remonstrate the
burden and heaviness of that load you would take upon your self, and the
dangers which will probably occur. And this we do, that you may hereafter
remember, and distinguish betwixt ours, and the Counsel of such as advise the
contrary, not so much out of respect and deference to your advantage, as for
the venting their own private fury and revenge. Your endeavor is to bring this
City into servitude, (which has always lived free) because the Government has
been formerly given by us to the Kings of Naples, whereas that was rather an
association, than a subjection. Have you considered how important and dear the
Name of Liberty is to us? A thing, no force can extirpate, no time can
extinguish, nor no merit preponderate. Think, Sir, I beseech you, what Power
will be necessary to keep such a City in subjection. All the strangers you can
entertain will not be sufficient; those which are Inhabitants you cannot
prudently trust; for though at present they are Friends, and have pushed you
forward upon this resolution, yet, as soon as they have glutted themselves upon
their Enemies, their next Plot will be to expel you, and make themselves
Princes. The People, in whom your greatest confidence is placed, will turn,
upon every slight accident, against you, so that in a short time you will run a
hazard of having the whole City your Enemies, which will infallibly be the
ruin both of it and your self; because those Princes only can be secure, whose
Enemies are but few, and they easily removed either by banishment or death; but
against universal hatred there is no security, because the spring and fountain
is not known, and he that fears every Man, can be safe against no Man. If yet
you persist, and take all possible care to perserve your self, you do but
encumber your self with more danger, by exciting their hatred, and making them
more intent and serious in their revenge. That time is not able to eradicate
our desire of Liberty, is most certain. We could mention many good Cities in
which it has been reassumed by those who never tasted the sweetness of it, yet
upon the bare character and tradition of their Fathers, they have not only
valued, but fought and contended to recover it, and maintained it afterward
against all difficulties and dangers. Nay, should their Fathers have neglected,
or forgot to recommend it, the public Palaces, the Courts for the Magistrates,
the Ensigns of their freedom (which are of necessity to be known by all
Citizens) would certainly proclaim it. What action of yours can counterpoize
against the sweetness of Liberty? For what can you do to expunge the desire of
it out of the Hearts of the People? Nothing at all, no, though you should add
all Tuscany to this State, and return every day into this City with new victory
over your Enemies. The Honor would be yours, not ours; and the Citizens have
gained fellow servants rather than subjects. Nor is it the power of your
deportment to establish you. Let your Life be never so exact, your conversation
affable, your judgments just, your liberality never so conspicuous, all will
not do, all will not gain you the affections of the People; if you think
otherwise, you deceive your self, for to People that have lived free, every
link is a load, and every bond a burden. And to find a state violently
acquired, to accord quietly with its Prince (though never so good) is
impossible; of necessity one must comply and frame it self to the other, or
else one must ruin and destroy the other. You have this therefore to consider,
whether you will hold this City by violence (for which all the Guards and
Citadels within, and all the friends could be made abroad, have been many times
too weak ^ or be content with the Authority we give you, to which last we do
rather advise, because no Dominion is so durable as that which is voluntary,
and the other (however your ambition may disguise it) will but conduct you to a
height, where being neither able to advance, nor continue, you must tumble down
of necessity, to your own great detriment as well as ours. But the Dukes heart
was too hard for such impressions as these. The Dukes Answer.
He replied, That it was not his intention to extirpate, but to establish their
Liberty: that Cities divided were the only Cities that were servile, and not
those that were united. That if he by his conduct could clear their City of
their Schisms, Ambitions, and Animosities, he could not be said to take away,
but to restore their liberty. That he did not assume that Office out of any
ambition of his own, but accepted it at the importunity of several of the
Citizens, and that they would do well to consent themselves, as their fellows
had done. That as to the dangers he was like to incur, he did not consider
them; It was the part of an ignoble Person to decline doing good, for fear of
evil that might follow; and of a Coward to lay aside a glorious Enterprise,
upon the mere doubtfulness of the success. That he hoped so to demean himself,
that they should in a short time confess, they had feared him too much, and
trusted him too little. The Senate finding by this answer no good was to be
done, consented the People should meet next morning, as appointed, and the
Government by their Authority to be transferred upon the Duke for a year, with
the same conditions it had been formerly given to the Duke of Calabria. On the
8th. of September 1342. 1342.
The Duke, accompanied by Giovan della Tossa, all his Consorts, and many
Citizens besides, coming into the Piazza, taking the Senate with him, he
mounted upon the Ringhieria, (which are the Stairs at the foot of the Palagie
de Signori) and caused the Articles of agreement betwixt the Senate and Him to
be read. When the Person who read them came to the place where the Government
was mentioned to be given to him for a year, the People cried out, For his
Life, For his Life. Francesco Rustichesi, one of the Signori, rose up to have
spoke, and endeavored to compose the tumult; but he was interrupted, and could
nor be heard. So that he was chosen Lord by consent of the People, not for a
year, but for ever, and afterward taken and carried through the multitude with
general acclamation. The Dukes of Athens chosen Prince by the People.
It is a custom among the Florentines that whoever is entrusted with the Guard
of their Palace, is to be shut up in it in the absence of the Signori. That
trust was at that time in the hands of Rinieri di Giolto, who being corrupted
by some of the Dukes Creatures, received him into the Palace without any
constraint. The Senate being surpised, and much affronted, returned to their
Houses, left the Palace to be plundered by the Dukes servants, the Gonfalone del
Populo to be turned out, and the Dukes Standard to be set up, all which were
immediately done to the inestimable trouble of all good Men, but to the joy and
satisfaction of those who maliciously or ignorantly had consented to his
exaltation. The Duke was no sooner settled in his Dominion, but to suppress
their Authority, who were the greatest propugnators of their liberty, he forbid
the Signori to meet in the Palace, and consigned them a private house. The Duke
of Athens his practice in Florence.
He took away the Ensigns from the Gon^alonieri of the companies of the People.
He discharged all Prisoners, he recalled the Baldi and Frescobaldi from
banishment, prohibited the wearing of arms; and to defend himself within, he
made what friends he could abroad: to that purpose he caressed the Aretini and
all others which depended any way upon the Florentines jurisdiction. He made a
peace with the Pisani (though he was become a Prince) that with the more
advantage he might make War with them afterward. He took away their Bills and
assignments from the Merchants, who had lent the Sat money in their War with
Lucca. He increased the old Gabells, and imposed new. He dissolved the
Authority of the Signori, and in their places he set up three Rettori,
Barglione da Perugia, Guglielmo da Soesi, and Cerretieri Bisdomini, with whom
he constantly advised. The Taxes he laid upon the People were great, his
judgments unjust, and that humanity and preciseness which he counterfeited at
first, was now turned most manifestly into cruelty and pride, by which means
many Citizens of the more Noble and Wealthy sort, were Condemned, Executed, and
some time Tortured. And that his Government might be as unsupportable abroad as
at home, he instituted six new Rettori for the regiment of the Country, who
carried themselves with the same insolence and oppression there, as he did in
the City. He was jealous of the Nobility; though he had been often obliged by
them, and some of them had been recalled from their banishment by him; yet he
could not imagine it compatible with the generosity of a Noble Spirit to submit
and truckle to him. Hence it was, he applied himself to the People, cajoling
them, and scruing into their favor, by which and his power abroad, he doubted
not to be able to justify his proceedings, how unjust and Tyrannical so ever.
The month of May being come, in which the People were wont to make merry; he
caused the inferior sort of the People to be disposed into several Companies,
gave them Ensigns and money, and honored them with splendid titles, so that
half of the City went up and down feasting and junketting among their Brethren,
while the other half was as busy to entertain them. The fame of his new
Dominion being spread abroad, many Persons of French extraction repaired to
him, and he preferred them all, as the most faithful of his friends; so that in
a short time Florence was not only subject to the Frenchmen, but to the French
customs and garb; all People, Men as well as Women, without respect of
indecency or inconvenience, imitating them in all things; But that which was
incomparably the most displeasing, was the violence he and his Creatures used
to the Women, without any regret. Upon these provocations the Citizens were
full of indignation. It troubled them to see the Majesty of their Government
prostitute and ruined; It troubled them to see Ordinances abolished; their Laws
abrogated; honest conversation corrupted, and civil modesty despised; for they
who had never been accustomed to any regal pomp whatsoever, could not without
sorrow behold the Duke environed with his Guards both on foot and on
horseback. But their destruction being in his hands, they were necessitated to
dissemble, and to court and honor him outwardly whom they hated at their
hearts; another inducement was the fear they had conceived upon the frequent
executions, and continual taxes with which he impoverished and exhausted the
City; and the Duke understood very well both their fear, and their anger. It
happened that Mattco di Morrozzo, to ingratiat with the Duke, or to disintangle
himself, had discovered to him a certain Plot which the house of Medici and
some others had contrived against him. (...) Morrozz^
The Duke was so far from inquiring into the matter, that he caused the
informer to be put to death, by which act he discouraged such as would
otherwise have advertised him, upon occasion, and animated those who were
disposed to destroy him. He likewise caused the tongue of B^toni Cini to be
pulled out with such cruelty that he died of it, and for no other cause but
that he had spoke against the taxes, which he imposed upon the City. This last
outrage completed the rest; the People grew perfectly mad, and the Duke
perfectly odious: for that City, which was accustomed heretofore to speak of
every thing freely, and to do what they listed, could not possibly brook to
have their hands tied, and their mouths stopped up by a stranger. Their fury and
passion increasing at this rate, not only the Florentines (who neither know how
to maintain liberty, nor endure slavery) were incensed, but the most servile
Nation in the World would have been inflamed to have attempted the recovery of
its freedom. Whereupon many Citizens of all qualities and degrees resolved to
destroy him; and it fell out, that, at the same time, three Conspiracies were
on foot by three sorts of People, the Grandees, the People, and Artificers.
Besides the General oppression, each party had its peculiar reason. The
Nobility were not restored to the Government; the People had lost it; Three
Conspiracies aganist the Duke at one time.
and the Artificers trade was decayed. The Archbishop of Florence, Agnolo
Acciaivoli, had in his Sermons highly magnified the qualities of the Duke, and
procured him great favor among the People; but after he was Governor, and his
tyranny became notorious, they found how the Archbishop had deluded them. To
make them amends for the fault he had committed, he thought nothing could be
more reasonable, than that the same hand that gave them the wound should
endeavor to cure it, and therefore he, made himself head of the first and most
considerable Conspiracy, in which were engaged with him the Bardi, Rossi,
Frescobaldi, Scali, Altoviti, Magalotti, Strozzi, and Mancini. The Principals
of the second Conspiracy were Manno and Corso Donati, and with them the Pazzi,
Cavicciulli, Cerchi, and Albizzi. Of the third Antonio Adimari was the head,
and with him the Medici, Bordini, Ruccellai, and Aldobrandini. Their design was
to have killed him in the house of the Albizzi, whither it was supposed he
would go on Midsummer day to see the running of the Horses; but he went not
that day, and that design was lost. The next proposition was, to kill him as he
was walking in the streets, but that was found to be difficult, because he went
always well armed, and well attended, and his motions being various and
uncertain, they could not tell where it was most proper to way-lay him. Then it
was debated to slay him in the Council, but that also was not without danger,
because though they should kill him, they must of necessity remain at the mercy
of his Guards. Whilst these things were in debate among the Conspirators,
Antonio Adimari, in hopes of assistance from them, discovered the Plot to some
of his Friends in Siena, told them the Principal of the Conspirators, and
assured them the whole City were disposed to redeem themselves; whereupon one
of the Siennesi communicated the whole business to Francesco Brunelleschi (not
with intention to have betrayed it, but in presumption he had been privy to it
before) and Franc^sco, out of fear, or malice to some that were engaged in it,
discovered all to the Duke. Pagolo de Mazzeccha, and Simon de Monterapoli being
immediately apprehended, they confessed the whole matter, with the number and
quality of the Conspirators; at which the Duke was much surpised, and counsel
being given him, rather to summon the Conspirators to appear, than to secure
them abruptly (because if they fled of themselves, he would be as safe without
scandal) he summoned Adimari, who appeared in confidence of the number of his
Accomplices. Adimari was arrested, and the Duke advised by Francesco
Brunelleschi, and Uguccione Buondelmonti, to betake himself to his arms, and go
up and down to their houses, and kill all of them they met. But, his force in
the Town was Judged too small, for that resolution, and therefore he pitched
upon another, which (had it succeeded) would have secured him against his
Enemies, and provided him with Men. The Duke was wont upon any great
Emergencies, to call the chief Citizens together, and to advise with them.
Having first sent to prepare what force he was able, he caused a list of three
hundred Citizens to be made, and delivered to his Sergeants, to summon them to
Council by their Names, resolving when they were met, to kill, or imprison them
as he pleased. Antonio Adimari being secured, and so many great Citizens
summoned (which could not be done without noise) many of them (and especially
those who were conscious) began to suspect, and some refused absolutely to
obey. The list having been brought to them all, and perused by every one of
them, they began to understand, and encourage one another to take Arms, and dye
manfully like Men, rather than be driven quietly like sheep to the slaughter:
so that in few hours all the Conspiracies were known, and the Conspirators
united: holding Counsel among themselves, it was concluded, that the next day
being the 26 of July 1343. a tumult should be raised in the old Marketplace,
upon which all were to take Arms, and excite the people to liberty. The next
day, the Signal being given by sounding a Bell (as it was agreed before) every
Body took Arms, and crying out Liberty, Liberty, the People betook themselves
to their Arms likewise, and fell to fortify in their several Quarters, under
their respective Ensigns, which was done by the contrivance of the
Conspirators. Commotion in Florence.
The chief of all Families, both Nobility, and People met, and took an Oath to
live and die with one another in the destruction of the Duke (except only the
Buondelmonti, the Cavalcanti, and the four Families of the People, which
consented to make him Prince, who, with the Butchers and Rascality of the City,
ran down armed to the Piazza in defense of the Duke.) The Duke, alarmed at
these proceedings, fortified his Palace, called home his Servants, which were
lodged in several parts of the Town, and sallying forth with them on Horseback
toward the Marketplace, they were many times assaulted by the way, and many
of them slain, being forced back, and recruited with 300 fresh Horse, he was in
doubt with himself, whether he had best fall upon them again, or stand upon his
guard; and in the mean time the Medici, Cavicciulli, Ruccellai, and other
families that were most disobliged by the Duke, were in no less fear, that if
he should make a sally, many who had taken Arms against him in the uproar,
would show themselves his friends; desirous therefore to keep him from
sallying, and by that means, increasing his numbers, drawing what force
together they were able, they advanced toward the Market, place, where some of
their fellow Citizens had posted themselves indefence of the Duke. The Citizens
which were there in the front, and had appeared first for their Prince, seeing
themselves so briskly confronted, changed their sides, left their Duke in the
lurch, and joined with their fellow Citizens, all but Uguccione Buondelmonti,
who retired into the Palace, and Giannozzo Cavalcanti, who retreating with some
of his party into the New Market, and getting upon a bench made an earnest
speech, exhorting the People to stand firm to the Duke, and having got more
force to him, to fright them (if his persuasion failed) he threatened to kill
them all, Man, Woman, and Child, if they joined or persisted in any design
against him. But seeing no body follow him, nor no body near to chastise him
for his insolence, perceiving he had troubled himself hitherto in vain, he
resolved to tempt his fortune no farther, and so retired peaceable to his
house. The conflict, in the mean time, in the Marketplace, betwixt the People
and the Dukes party was great, and though the Dukes Creatures were reinforced
from the Palace, yet they were beaten, part taken Prisoners, and part leaving
their Horses to their Enemies, got on foot into the Palace. Whilst the contest
continued in the Marketplace, Corso, and Amerigo Donati, with part of the
People broke up the Stinche, burned the Records of the Potesta, and public
Chamber, sacked the Houses of the Rettori, and killed all the Dukes Officers
they could meet with. The Duke on the other side, finding he had lost the
Piazza, the whole City was become his Enemy, and no hopes left him of being
relieved, He resolved to try if by any act of kindness or humanity he might
work upon the People. Calling his Prisoners (therefore) to him, with fair and
gentle language he gave them their liberty, and made Antonio Adimari a Knight,
(though not at all to his satisfaction) he caused his Ensign to be taken down,
and the Standard of the People to be set up upon the Palace. Which things being
done unseasonably, and by force, they availed but little. In this manner he
remained blocked up in his Palace, not at all delighted with his condition;
having coveted too much formerly, he was now like to lose all, and in a few
days was in danger of being famished or slain. The Citizens, to give some form
to their Government, assembled themselves in the S. Reparata, and created XIV.
Citizens (half of the Nobility, and half of the People) who with their Bishop
should have full Power to model and reform the State as they pleased. The
Authority of the Potesta they committed to VI Persons of their own election,
which they were to exercise till he that was elected should come. There were at
that time many strangers resorted to Florence, in assistance to that City,
among the rest the Siennesi had sent six Ambassadors (of honorable condition in
their own Country) to negotiat a peace betwixt the Duke and the People. The
People refused any overture, unless Guglielmo da Scesi, his Son, and
Cerrettieri Bisdomini were delivered into their hands, which the Duke
obstinatly denied, till the threats of those who were shut up with him in the
Palace constrained him to consent. Greater, doubtless, is the insolence and
contumacy of the People, and more pernicious the mischiefs which they do,
whilst they are in pursuit of their Liberty, than when they have acquired it.
Guglielmo and his Son were brought forth, and delivered up among thousands of
their Enemies; his Son was a young Gentleman, not yet arrived at eighteen years
of age; yet neither his youth, his comeliness, nor innocence were able to
preserve him; those who could not get near enough to do it whilst he was alive,
wounded him when he was dead; and as if their swords had been partial, and
executed the dictates of their fury with too much moderation, they fell to it
with their teeth, and their hands, biting his flesh, and tearing it to pieces.
And that all their Senses might participate in their revenge, having feasted
their ears upon their groans, their eyes upon their wounds, and their touch
upon their bowels (which they rent out of their bodies with their hands) their
taste must (likewise) be treated and regaled, that their inward parts, as well
as their outward, might have a share of the Ragoust. This Barbarous outrage,
how fatal soever it was to them two, was very lucky to Cerrettieri, for the
People being tired in the formalities of their execution, forgot they had any
more to punish, and left him in the Palace, not so much as demanded, from
whence the next night he was safely conveyed by his Relations, and friends. The
People having satiated themselves upon the Blood of those two, the peace was
concluded; The Duke expelled.
the Duke to depart safely himself, and all that belonged to him, for which he
was to renounce all his Claim and Authority in Florence, and to ratify his
renunciation when he came out of the Florentine Dominions to Casentino. The
Articles being agreed, on the VI. of August, attended by a multitude of
Citizens, the Duke departed from Florence, and arrived at Casentino, where he
ratified the renuntiation, but so unwillingly, that had not Conte Simone
threatened to carry him back to Florence, it had never been done. This Duke (as
his actions demonstrate) was covetous, cruel, difficult of access, and insolent
in his answers. Not being so much effected with the kindness and benevolence of
People, as with their servitude and servility; His Character.
he chose to be feared rather than beloved. Nor was the shape and contexture of
his Body less contemptible, than his manners were odious. He was very little,
exceeding black, his beard long and thin, not apart about him, but concurred to
make him despicable. In this manner the exhorbitancies of his administration in
ten Months time deprived him of his Dominion, which had been placed upon him by
the Counsels of ill Men. These accidents happening thus in the City, all the
Towns under the jurisdiction of Florence, took courage, and began to stand up
for their liberty; so that in a short time Arrezzo, Castiglione, Pistoia,
Volterra, Colle St. Gimignano rebelled, and the whole territory of Florence
(after the example of its Metropolis) recovered its freedom. After the Duke and
his Creatures were removed, the XIV. chief Citizens, and the Bishop, consulting
together, thought it better to pacify the People with peace, than to provoke
them again by War, and therefore pretended to be as well pleased with their
liberty as their own. They sent Ambassadors therefore to Arrezzo, to renounce
the Authority they had over them, and to enter into an alliance of amity with
them, that though they might not hereafter command them as subjects, they might
(upon occasion) make use of them as friends. With the rest of the Cities, they
made as good terms as they could, retaining amity with them all. This
resolution being prudently taken, succeeded very happily; for in a few months
Arrezzo, and all the other Towns returned to their Obedience, and it is
frequently seen, to decline, or renounce things voluntarily, is the way to gain
them more readily, and with less danger and expense, than to pursue them with
all the passion and impetuosity in the World. Affairs abroad being composed in
this manner, they applied themselves to a settlement at home, and after some
debates and alterations betwixt the Nobility and the People, it was concluded
the third part of the Signoria ^r Senate should consist of the Nobility, and
half the other Magistracies to be executed by them. The City (as is said
before) was divided into six parts, out of which sixth, six Signori were
chosen, (one out of every sixth) only by accident now and then their number was
increased to XII. or XIII. New Reformation.
and reduced it again to six afterward; at length they resolved to reform in
that particular, either because the Sesti or sixths were ill distributed, or
else (designing more Authority to the Nobility) they thought it convenient to
increase the number of the Senators. Hereupon they divided the City into
Quarters, and in every Quarter, three Signori were created, to superinspect it.
The Gonfaloniere della Iustitia, and Gonfalonieri of the Popular Companies,
were laid aside, and instead of them they created XII. Buon-Huomini, and VIII.
Consiglieri, four of each sort.

The Common Wealth being settled in this Method, might have continued quiet and
happy, had the Grandees been contented to have framed it themselves to such
modesty of Conversation as is requisite in a Civil Government. But their
practices were quite contrary; when they were but private Persons, no Body was
good enough to be their Companions, and being in Office, scarce any too good to
be their Subjects, every day producing new instances of their Arrogance and
Pride, insomuch that the People were exceedingly troubled, to consider with
what impatience and fury they had removed one Tyrant to make room for a
thousand. In this manner things stood at that time, the insolence of one side,
and the indignation of the other fermenting to that degree, that the Chief of
the People (complaining of the Enormity of their great Ones, and their
haughtiness to the People and to the Bishop) desired that he would be an
instrument to restrain the Grandees to their share in the other Offices, and
effect that the Senate might consist only of the People. The Bishop was
naturally a good Man, but easy and unconstant; from that unconstancy of temper
it was, that his Associats first wrought upon him to favor the Duke of Athens,
and afterward persuaded him against him: in the late Reformation he appeared
highly for the Nobility, now upon the instance and solicitation of the Popular
Citizens, he was as earnest for the People, and supposing to have found the
same irresolution in other People, as was eminent in himself, he fancied
himself able to prevail with the Nobility to consent. Hereupon convoking the
XIV. (who were as yet in possession of their Authority,) with the best language
he could use, he exhorted them to resign the dignity of the Senate to the
People, if they bare any respect to the tranquillity of the City, or their own
safety and preservation. But these Words wrought a contrary effect in the minds
of the Nobility Ridolfo de Bardi reprehending him very smartly, upbraided the
Levity and Treachery of his behavior with the Duke, and concluded at last,
that the Honors and employments they were in, they had acquired with hazard,
and would defend them with the same; and in this squable he and his Brethren
left the Bishop, and went to the rest of the Nobility to communicate with them.
The People were made acquainted with their answer on the otherside, and whilst
the Grandees were providing what strength they could for the defense of their
Senators, the Commons thought it no time to attend for Orders, but ran
immediately to their Arms, and with them to the Palace, calling out to the
Nobility to renounce. The noise and tumult were great; the Signori found
themselv^s forsaken; for the Grandees finding the People universally in Arms,
durst not appear, but kept themselves close at home as obscurely as they could:
whereupon the Popular Senators, endeavoring to pacify the People, alleged
that they were honest and good Men, and prevailed (though with great
difficulty) that they might be sent safe to their houses. The Nobilty deposed.
The Senators of the Nobility being dismissed, the Office was taken away from
the four Grand Cou^sellors, and transferred upon XII. of the People, and the
eight Popular Senators which remained. They restored the Gonfaloniere della
Iustitia, and XVI. Gonfalonieri of the Companies of the People, and re^orm'd
all Counsels in such manner that the Government remained entirely in the
People. When those exorbitances happened, there was a great scarcity in the
City, which occasioned the discontents both of Nobility and People (the People
for want of Victuals, the Nobility for want of Command) and gave encouragement
to Andrea Strozzi to usurp upon their liberty. Andrea selling his Corn at a
cheaper rate than his Neigbours, had greater resort of poor People to his
House, which he observing, mounted on Horseback one morning, with several of
the Rabble at his heels, he cried out to the rest to take Arms, and in a few
hours he got together more than 4000 Men, with whom he marched to the Palace of
the Senate, and demanded to have it opened: but the Senators partly by
threatening, and partly by force, disengaged themselves of them, and afterward,
when they were gone frighted them so with their Proclamations, that by little
and little they dissolved, and went every Man to his Home, and left Andrea
alone to escape as he could. Though this accident was rash, and had the common
end of such desperate attempts, yet it gave no little hopes to the Nobility of
prevailing against the People, seeing the Refuse and Rascallity of the City had
an animosity against them. That they might not slip so fair an occasion, it was
resolved that they should fortify themselves with their assistance (if they
could gain it) and recover by force, The Nobility attempt to recover their
Authority.
what by injustice was taken from them. And so bold they grew in their
confidence of V^ctory, that they began to provide Arms publicly, to fortify
their Houses, and send to their friends in Lombardy for help and supplies. The
People and their Senators were as busy on the other side, The People Arm
against them.
they provided themselves with what Arms they could get, and sent to the
Sanesi, and Perugini for relief. The Auxiliaries on both sides being arrived,
the whole City was immediately in Arms. The Nobility had posted themselves in
three places on this side the River Arnus, at the Palace of the C^vicciulli
near S. John's; at the Palaces of the P^zzi, and Donati near S. Piero Maggiore;
and at the Palace of the Cavalcanti in the New Market: those of the Nobility
who were on the other side of the River, had fortified the Bridges and Streets
which were in the way to their Houses. The Nerli possessed themselves of the
Ponte alla Carraia; the Frescohaldi and Mannelli, of S. Trimita; the Rossi and
Bardi were upon their guard at the old Bridge; and the Rubaconte. The People in
the mean time formed themselves into a posture under the Gonfalone della
Giustitia, and the Ensigns of the People, and being drawn up in array, it was
thought best immediately to fall on; the first that marched were the Medici and
Rondinelli who assaulted the Cavicciulli on that side which is toward the
Piazza de S. Giovanni. The service was very hot (great stones being tumbled
upon them from above, and vollies of Arrows sent liberally among them from
below) and continued three hours complete; but the numbers of the People
increasing, and no relief like to get near them, the Cavicciulli submitted to
their multitudes, and surrendered. The People saved the House and the furniture,
only they took away their Arms, and Commanded them to distribute and disperse
themselves into such Popular Houses as were there acquaintance and friends. The
Cavicciulli being beaten from their Post, the Pazzi and Donati (being less
powerful) were sooner removed. The Cavalcanti were only remaining on that side
of the River, yet more considerable than the other, both in respect of their
numbers and situation. But they, seeing all the Gonfalonieri advancing against
them, where as three of them only had overpowered the rest, surrendered like
their Neighbors without any remarkable defense: and now three parts of the City
were in the Hands of the People, there was but one left in the Power of the
Nobility, but more difficult and inaccessible, by reason it was so secure by
the River Arno, the Bridges and Avenues were of necessity to be cleared before
any good could be done, and they (as is said before) were abundantly provided.
The first of them that was assaulted was the old Bridge, which was as bravely
defended, and the People repulsed. Finding their further Attempts there would
be but in vain, they tried what could be done at the Ponte Rubaconte; but
finding their entertainment no better, they left four Gonfaloni, and some other
Ensigns to block up those Passes, and marched with the rest to the Ponte alla
Carraia. The Nerli had the defense of that Quarter, and behaved themselves
Valiantly, yet their Bridge (as having no Towers) being weaker or else overlaid
with the numbers of their Enemies, (which were much increased by the accession
of the Capponi and other Families about them) they were on every side
oppressed, forced from their Barricadoes, and constrained to retire. When they
were Defeated, they advanced against the Rossi, and from them against the
Frescobaldi, overwhelming them both, the whole Populace beyond the River being
come in to their assistance. The Bardi was the only party remaining, but that
so obstinatly courageous, neither the fortune of their Comerades, the unanimity
of the People against them, nor the impossibility of relief could prevail with
them to surrender, but they would rather die fighting, or see their Houses
pillaged or burned, than submitted themselves quietly into the hands of their
Enemies. And they defended themselves; for though many times they were
assaulted, both at the old Bridge, and the Ponte Rubaconte, the People were
always repulsed, and with considerable loss. There was in old time a Lane to
pass from the Via Romana, betwixt the Palaces of the Pitti to the Wall upon S.
Gorges-hill. To this Lane the People sent six Gonfalonieri with Orders to fall
upon the Bardi behind, who pursued them so effectually, the Bardi were
disheartened, and the People prevailed; those of the Bardi who were appointed
for the keeping of the Barricadoes, no sooner hearing that their houses were
attacked, but they quitted their Posts, and ran in in hopes to defend them. By
this means the Barracades at the old Bridge were won* and the Bardi
discomfitted, who (as many as could) betook themselves to their heals, and were
received by the Quaratesi, Panzanesi, and Mozzi. The People (especially the
baser sort) greedy of Prey, plundered their Houses; demolished their Castles;
and when they had done, burned them all with such inhumanity, as the greatest
Enemy the City had would have been ashamed to have committed. The Nobility
being utterly subdued, the People took upon them the Government of the State,
and because it consisted of three sorts (the more potent, the middle sort and
the base) it was ordained that the more potent should have the Nomination of
two Senators; the middle sort of three, and the meaner of three. The
Gonfalonieri to be chosen (Alternatim) of the one and the other. Besides this,
all the Old Laws against the Nobility were revived and put in force, The
Nobility utterly depressed.
and to weaken them the more, many of them were mingled with the Common People.
The destruction of the Nobility was so great at this time, and their party so
irrecoverably debilitated, that not daring to take Arms again, against the
People, they became pusilanimous and abject, which was the Occasion that
Florence lost not only its Gentry but its Generosity also. From this depression
of the Grandees, the City continued quiet to the year 1353, in which interval
happened the Famous Pestilence (so Eloquently celebrated by Giovanni Boccacio)
in which there died in Florence above 96000 People. The first War the
Florentines made, was against the Visconti, being provoked by the Ambition of
the Archbishop, who at that time was Prince of Milan: which War was no sooner
finished, but new factions began in the City; for though the Nobility was so
cowed, and intimidated, there was no danger of them; yet fortune had her ways
to create them new troubles by new and different dissentions.

THE HISTORY OF FLORENCE.
Book III.
THE great and natural animosities betwixt the People and the Nobility, arising
from an ambition in the one to command, and an aversion in the other to obey,
are the springs and fountains of all the calamities incident to a City: and
indeed there is scarce any thing dangerous or troublesome to a Commonwealth,
but takes its original and nourishment from their diversity of humor. This was
it which kept Rome divided. This was it (if it be lawful to compare great
things with little) which kept Florence divided, though in each City with
different effects. For, in Rome, the enmity betwixt the people and the Nobility
was determined by Expostulation and Reason; in Florence, by the Sword. In Rome,
those things were settled and composed by Law, which, in Florence, were scarce
done by the slaughter and banishment of many of their best Citizens. Rome
increased still in its Military Virtue; but that in Florence was utterly
exhaust. From a primitive equality of its Citizens, Rome was brought to an
immense inequality: whereas Florence* on the contrary, from a vast inequality,
was reduced to a strange equality. Which diversity of effects must have
certainly proceeded from diversity in their designs. The people of Rome desired
no more than to share and communicate with the Nobility in the great O^^ices of
the City. The people of Florence not only desired, but fought and contended to
have the Government to themselves, with perfect exclusion to the Nobility: and
the desires of the Romans being more reasonable, there importunity was the more
supportable by the Nobles, so that they condescended without coming to blows;
and after some small controversy and dispute, it was concluded a Law should be
made, by which the people should be satisfied, and their Dignities preserved to
the Nobility.

On the other side, the demands of the people of Florence were extravagant and
unjust; upon which score the Nobility preparing for the defense, their
differences determined in banishment and blood: and the Laws which ensued were
framed more to the advantage of the Victor, than the benefit of the Public.
Hence it proceeded, that the success of the people in Rome, rendered that City
more potent and considerable; for the people being admitted to the
administration of the Magistracy, Armies, and Empire, equally with the Nobles,
they became inspired with the same Virtue and Magnanimity as they: and as their
Virtue increased, their power increased with it.

But in Florence the people prevailing, divested the Nobility of their
Authority; and if they had a mind to recover it, it was necessary by their
conversation and behavior not only to be, but to profess themselves like the
people. And this was the cause of the changing their Arms, the variation of
their Titles, and Families which was frequent in those times among the
Nobility, to recommend them to the Commons, and make them pass amongst them: so
that the Eminency of their Arms, and the Generosity of their minds, (for both
which the Nobility was formerly famous) was spent and expired, and not to be
revived in the people, where the least spark of it was not to be found; which
rendered Florence every day more abject and base. And whereas Rome, transported
with its own Virtue, grew to that height of Pride, that it could not subsist
longer without a Prince. Florence was reduced to that pass, that a wise
Legislator might have formed the Government according to what scheme and model
he pleased. All which, by perusing of the preceding books, will be obvious to
any body. Having shown therefore the foundation of Florence; the original of
its Liberty; the occasion of its Dissension; and how the factions of the
Nobility and people concluded with the Tyranny of the Duke of Athens and the
destruction of the Nobility: Emulation betwixt the ^iddle and the meaner sort
of people.
it remains now, I should discourse of the Emulations betwixt the people and
the multitude, and several accidents which they produced.

The power of the Nobility being depressed, and the War with the Archbishop of
Millan at an end; there appeared no respect of future contention in Florence:
But the ill fate of our City, the ill conduct of their Affairs, suffered a new
Emulation to spring up (betwixt the Families of the Albizi and Ricci) which
produced as great division in the Town, as was at first betwixt the
Buondelmonti and the Uberti, and afterward betwixt the Cerchi and Donati. The
Popes (who had then their residence in France) and the Emperors who resided in
Germany, to make good their reputation in Italy, had many times, upon several
occasions, supplied us with multitude of Soldiers of all Nations, English,
Dutch, and Britains. The Wars ended, and they out of pay, being Soldiers of
Fortune, they were constrained to make bold sometimes with one Prince, and
sometimes with another; and force them to contribution. In the year, 1353, it
happened one of the Companies came into Tuscany (under the Command of Monsieur
Real of Provence) and put the whole Country into a fear: whereupon the
Florentines not only made public provision of men, but several private
Citizens (and the Albizi and Ricci among the rest) furnished themselves with
Arms for their proper defense. There was a mortal hatred betwixt these two
Families, each of them aspiring at the Government, and conspiring the
destruction of the other. However as yet they were not come to Hostility; only
they clash'd, and interfer'd in their Counsels, and in the executions of the
Magistracy. But upon this occasion, the City being armed, there happened a
quarrel, by accident, in the old Market place; to which the People, that were
near, flocked, as they do on all such occasions. To the Ricci it was reported
the Albizi had fallen upon some of their Family. To the Albizi, that the Ricci
were come out in defiance of them. Hereupon the whole City got together; and no
small difficulty it was to the Magistrate to restrain either of the Families,
or to put an end to a Conflict which was begun by chance, without the fault or
contrivance of either. This accident, though merely contingent, revived their
animosity, and put them both upon designs of increasing their Parties. And
because, by the ruin of the Nobility, the Citizens were reduced to such an
equality, that the Magistrates were become more venerable than formerly; they
resolved both of them to advance their interest rather by ordinary means, than
private violence. We have declared before, how, after the Victory of Charles
the First, the Guelfs were created Magistrates; and great authority given them
over the Ghibilin Faction: which authority and pre-eminence, time, accident,
and their new divisions had so far enervated, that the Ghibilins were grown
into the Government, and exercised the principal Offices as well as the Guelfs.
Uguccione de Ricci being at that time the head of that Family, prevailed to
have the Laws against the Ghibilins renewed: to which Faction, it was supposed
by many, the Albizi were inclined; whose Original being anciently from Arezzo,
they transplanted from thence, and settled in Florence: so that Uguccione
designed by the renovation of those Laws, to render that Family incapable of
any great Office; providing thereby, that it should be criminal for any person
descended from the Ghibilins, to exercise the Magistracy. This practice of
Uguccione was discovered to Piero, Son of Philippo de gli Albizi, who resolved
to connive at it; presuming he should declare himself a Ghibilin, if he opposed
it. These Laws, though renewed by the prevalence, and ambition of the Ricci,
subtracted nothing from the reputation of the Albizi, but were the foundation
of many mischiefs. Nor indeed can a Republic make any Law so pernicious, as a
Law of retro- spection. Piero having rather promoted, than resisted those Laws;
that which his enemies intended as an impediment, proved a means and occasion
of his preferment: for, being made the chief person to super- inspect the
execution of those Laws, he exercised more authority than before; and became
the only favorite of the Faction of the Guelfs. And, because in these Laws
there was no definition of a Ghibilin, nor no Magistrate deputed to discover
them, they were of little importance; only the Captains were appointed to
inquire them out, and to admonish them, that they were not to take the
Magistracy upon them; if they did, they should be liable to a penalty.
Whereupon, those who were afterward incapacitated for the Magistracy, were
called Ammoniti. The Ammoniti
But, at length, the Captains growing bold and audacious in their office,
without any regard whether they were conscious or not; they admonished who they
pleased, as their avarice or animosity directed them.

So that from the year 1357, (in which this Law was renewed) to the year 1366,
there were more than 200 Citizens admonished. By which means, the Captains, and
the Faction of the Guelfs were grown great and considerable; especially Piero
de gli Albizi, Lapo da Castiglionochio, and Carlo Strozzi, for the fear of
being admonished, made all people respect them. And, though the insolence of
their proceedings disgusted many more; yet none looked upon it with so much
indignation as the Family of the Ricci, who had been the occasion of that
disorder, which was not only like to be the ruin of the Commonwealth, but the
promotion and advancement of their Enemies, quite contrary to what they
designed. Uguccione therefore (being one of the Senate, to put an end to those
inconveniences which he by accident had created) obtained a new Law; that to
the six Captains, three more should be added; two of them to be chosen out of
the inferior Mechanics: and prevailed that the Ghibilins should not be
convicted but by 24 of the Guelfs, deputed particularly to that office. For the
time, these Laws in some measure tempered the exorbitance of the Captains so as
their admonitions lost much of their terror; and if any, they were but few that
were admonished. Notwithstanding the emulation betwixt the Albizi and Ricci
continued; their leagues, practices, and consultations going on with more
eagerness, as their fury suggested. In this distraction the City continued from
the year, 1366, to the year 1371; at which time the Guelfs recovered their
power.

In the Family of the Buondelmonti, there was a Gentleman called Benchi; who
for his Gallantry in the Wars against the Pisans, was preferred to be one of the
people; and by that means qualified to be a Senator. But when he expected to be
admitted into the Senate, a Decree was made, that no person of Noble
Extraction, that was become one of the people, should be received into the
Senate. This Decree was highly offensive to Benchi, who, upon consultation with
Piero de gli Albizi, resolved with his admonitions to depress the meaner sort
of the people, and make themselves Governors of the City. And indeed, by his
influence upon the Nobility, and Piero's upon the wealthiest of the Citizens,
the Faction of the Guelfs began to grow more considerable: for with their new
models and regulations they ordered things so, that the Captains and 24
Citizens were wholly at their disposing; their admonitions exercised with as
much audacity as formerly; and the house of the Albizi (being head of that
Faction) increased exceedingly. The Ricci in the mean time were not behind hand
in using all their interest and friends to obstruct their designs; so that
every one lived in great apprehension as foreseeing their destruction was
approaching. Whereupon many Citizens out of affection to their Country
assembled in S. Piero Scheraggio; and having discoursed of their disorders
among themselves, they went afterward to the Senate, to whom, one of the most
eminent among them, made this harrangue.

Most Magnificent Lords; The Citizens Oration to the Senate.
we have many of us doubted, whether to assemble by private order, (though upon
public occasion) might not be offensive, and render us remarkable for our
presumption, and punishable for our ambition. But when we considered, that
daily, without the least caution or regard, many Citizens do meet, and confer;
not for any benefit to the Commonwealth, but in pursuit of their own private
designs: We presumed, that if they were permitted to meet, and Conspire against
the peace of their Country, without displeasure to your Lordships; those whose
design was nothing but its preservation and prosperity, needed not to fear your
reproof. If therefore we have not incurred your Lordships disfavour we are not
much solicitous what others judge of us, because we find they are as
indifferent what we think of them. The love we bear to our Country, most
Magnificent Lords, was that which assembled us at first, and now presents us
before you, to remonstrate our distractions; (which (though too great) increase
daily upon our hands,) and to offer our utmost assistance to remove them. How
difficult soever their Enterprise may appear we cannot despair of success; if
laying aside private respects, you would be pleased with public force to exert
your authority, The corruption of their Cities in Italy, has vitiated ours: for
since Italy freed it self from the yoke of the Empire, all the Towns (wanting
their former restraint) ^lew out into extremes, and ordained Laws and
Governors, not as free men, but as people divided into Factions. From this
Fountain all our miseries, all our disorders do spring. In the first place, no
friendship nor integrity is to be found among the Citizens, unless among those
whose wickedness makes them faithful, having been formerly engaged together in
some villainous action, either against their Neighbor, or Country. Religion,
and the fear of God, is utterly extinguished. Promises and Oaths are binding no
farther than they are profitable; and used not for a tie, but a snare, and as a
means to facilitate their cheats which are always more honorable, by how much
their success is less difficult and dangerous. Hence it is, that vicious and
mischievous men are commended for their industry; and good men, which are
innocent and quiet, are reckoned for sots. And certainly, as there is no sort
of corruption but may be found in Italy, so there are no sort of people more
unhappily adapted to receive it. The young men are idle, the old men
lascivious; all sexes, all ages, all places full of licentious brutality above
the correction of the Laws. Hence springs that avarice among the Citizens; and
that ambition, not of true glory, but of dishonorable preferment; which, being
accompanied with hatred enmity, schism, and dissension, are commonly followed
by executions, banishments, affliction of good men, and exaltation of evil: for
good men depending upon their innocence, and not looking abroad for any thing
extroardinary, either to advance, or defend themselves do too often miscarry
without either, and become the sad objects of the cruelty of Usurpers. This
creates inclination to parties, and increases their power; ill people siding
for covetousness, ambition, revenge, or some other sinister end; and good
people for fear: and that which renders our condition more deplorable, is, to
behold the Contrivers and Ringleaders of all, (as if a word could make them
innocent, and consecrate the iniquity of their actions) guilding, or rather
decking over their ill designs with some Illustrious Title: for, being all
enemies to liberty, let them pretend as they please, either to defend an
Optimacy, or Populacy, the result must be destruction: for the fruit they
expect from their Victory, is not the honor of having delivered their Country,
but the satisfaction of having mastered their enemies, and usurped the dominion
to themselves: and being arrived at that height, what is there so unjust, what
is there so cruel, what is there so ravenous as they? Hence-forward Laws are
made, not for public benefit, but their private advantage, hence-forward, War,
and peace, and Amity is concluded; not for common honor, but particular humor.
And if the other Cities of Italy are repleat with these disorders, ours is much
more: Our Laws, our Statutes, and Civil Ordinances, are made according to the
ambition and capricio of the Conqueror; and not according to the true interest
of people that would be free: whence it follows, that one Faction is no sooner
extinguished, but another succeeds: for that City which would maintain it self
by Faction rather than by Law, can never be quiet: when one party prevails, and
depresses its rival beyond the power of opposition, it sub-divides of
necessity, and falls out with it self; and then all goes to wrack, the people
not being able to defend themselves with those private Laws which were made at
first for their preservation. That these things are true the ancient and modern
dissentions in our own City can sadly demonstrate. When the Ghibilins were
destroyed, it was every man's judgment the Guelfs would have lived honorably
and quietly a long time after: and yet it was not long before they divided into
the Factions of the Neri and Bianchi: when the Bianchi were over-powred, new
parties arose, and new troubles attended them; sometimes fighting in behalf of
the Exiles, and sometimes quarrelling betwixt the Nobility and the People; and
(to give that to others, which either we could not, or would not possess
quietly our selves) committing our liberty sometimes to King Robert, sometimes
to his brother, and at last to the Duke of Athens; never fixing or reposing in
any Government; as not being agreed to live free, nor contented to be servile.
Nay, so much was our State disposed to division, that rather than acquiesce in
the administration of a King, it prostituted it self to the regiment of an
Agobbian, of mean and ignominious Extraction. The late Duke of Athens cannot be
mentioned with any honor to this City; yet his insolence and Tyranny may make
us wiser for the future. Being in Arms at his expulsion, we fell to it among
our selves and fought with more fury one against another, than we had ever done
before; till at length the Nobility was overcome, and at the mercy of the
people: and it was the general opinion (their insupportable pride and ambition
being taken down) there could be no more faction or troubles in Florence: but
we have found to our cost, how false and fallacious man's judgment is. The pride
and ambition of the Nobility was not extinct, but transmigrated into the
people; who, by degrees, grew as impatient for authority as they; and having no
other way to attain it, but by dom^stick dissension, they revived the obsolete
names of Guelfs, and of Ghibilins; which it had been happy for this City never,
to have known. And, that nothing which is humane, may be perpetual and stable;
it is the pleasure of the Heavens that in all States or Governments whatsoever,
some fatal Families should spring up for their ruin and destruction. Of this,
our City can afford as many, and as lamentable instances as any of her
neighbors; as owing its miseries not only to one or two, but several of those
Families: as first, the Buondelmonti and Uberti; next, the Donati and the
Cerchi; and now, the Ricci and Albizi, (a shameful and ridiculous thing.) We
have not enumerated our divisions nor deduced our ill customs so high, to
upbraid or to discourage you by them; but rather as a memorial of their causes,
to show that they are in our memory as well as yours; and to exhort you by
their example, not to be diffident or timorous in correcting them. For in those
days the power of the Nobility was so great, and their alliances so
considerable; the Laws and Civil Magistrates were too weak to restrain them:
but now the Emperor having no power, the Pope no influence; all Italy, and
particularly this City, reduced to such a parity, as to be able to Govern our
selves; where is the difficulty? What impediment remains, why this
Commonwealth (in spite of all examples to the contrary) may not only be
united, but reformed and improved by new Laws and Constitutions, were your
Lordships disposed to create them? To which good work, we do most humbly
importune you, not out of private passion, so much as public compassion for
our Country. Our corruption is great, and it is you only can correct the rage,
and expel the contagion that spreads and luxuriates among us. The disorders of
our Ancestors are not imputable to the nature of the men, but to the iniquity
of those times; which being now altered, gives this City fair hopes, by the
institution of better Laws, to better its fortune; whose malignity is easily to
be overcome by a prudent restraint of ambition; a seasonable inhibition of such
customs as propagate Faction; and a discreet election and adherence to such
things as are compatible with our freedom. And better it is you do it now
legally of your selves, than by deferring it, to divert that office upon the
people and make them do it by force.

The Signori moved then by these arguments, (which they had framed to
themselves before) and by authority and encouragement afterward,
commissionated 56 Citizens to superintend for the safety of the Commonwealth.
True it is, many men are more proper to preserve good Laws, than to make them;
and these Citizens employed themselves more in extirpating the present
Factions, than providing against new; by which means they succeeded in neither:
for not taking away the occasion of the new; and one of the present Factions
being more potent than the other, it could not be done without great danger to
the Commonwealth. New Reformation.
However, they deprived three of the Family of the Albizi; and as many of the
Ricci of all Magistracy (unless of the Guelfish party) for three years; in
which number, Piero de gli Albizi, and Uguccione de Ricci were two. They
prohibited all Citizens for the coming into the Palace, unless the Senate was
sitting. They decreed, that in case of batterry or unjust interruption in the
possession of their Estates, it should be lawful to accuse any man (though of
the Nobility) to the Council, and to make them answer to their Charge. These
Laws had greater reflection upon the Ricci than the Albizi; for though they
were equally intended the Ricci suffered most by them: Piero indeed was shut
out of the Palace of the Signori; but at the Palace of the Guelfs (where his
authority was great) his entrance was free; and though he and his Comrades were
forward enough in their admonitions before they were much forwarder now, and
new accidents occurred to make them yet worse. Gregory XI. holds his Residence
at Avignon.
Gregory XI. was Pope at that time, whose residence being at Avignon, he
governed Italy by Legates, (as his Predecessors had done before him.) These
Legates being proud and rapacious, had brought great calamity upon several of
the Cities. One of these Legates being at that time in Bologna, took the
advantage of a scarcity which was in Florence, and resolved to make himself
Lord of Tuscany: to which end, he not only omitted to supply the Florentines
with provisions but to deprive them utterly of all other relief, as soon as the
spring appeared, and gave opportunity for his motion, he invaded them with a
great Army, hoping they would be easily conquered, because they were both
famished, and disarmed: and possibly his design might have taken, had not his
Army been mercenary, and corrupt; for the Florentines having no other weapons
to defend themselves, betook themselves to their bags, and paid his Army 130000
Florins to draw off. To begin a War, is in any man's power; but, alas, no body
can end one. This War was commenced by the ambition of the Legate, but
prosecuted by the indignation of the Florentines; who entered into an immediate
League with Monsieur Barnabo, and all the Cities which were at enmity with the
Church. To manage it, they created eight Citizens, whom they invested with
absolute authority of proceeding without appeal, New Commission for the
management of the War.
and disbursing without account. This War against the Pope, though Uguccione
was dead, revived those who had followed the fortunes of the Ricci, who in
opposition to the Albizi, had favored Barnabo, and appeared against the
Church; and the rather, because the eight were all enemies to the Guelfs:
whereupon Piero de gli Albizi, Lapo da Castiglionochio, Carlo Strozzi, and
others, united to defend themselves against their adversaries. And while the
eight great Citizens were employed in the management of the War, and they in
their admonitions, the War continued three years, till the death of that Pope.
However, it was carried on with so universal satisfaction, that the Eight were
continued yearly in their Office, and got the Title of Santi; notwithstanding
they had sequestered the riches of the Churches, forced the Clergy to the
execution of their Functions, and despised the censures of the Pope, So much
did the Citizens at that time prefer the advantage of their Country, before the
quiet of their Consciences: and so earnest were they to make it appear to the
Church, that, as when they were friends, they had power to defend it; so now
being enemies, they were as able to distress it; having put all Romagna, la
Marca, and Perugia, into Rebellion. But, though they were able to maintain War,
at this rate, against the Pope, they could not so well defend themselves
against their Captains and Factions. The indignation and hatred the Guelfs had
conceived against the Eight, augmented their insolence; and they affronted them
as well as the rest of the chief of the Citizens. Nor was the arrogance of the
Captains inferior to the insolence of the Guelfs; they had made themselves more
formidable than the Signori; and men went with more awe and reverence to their
Houses, than to the Senators Palace: insomuch, that not an Ambassador was sent
to Florence, but he received Audience from, and had particular commission to
the Captains. Pope Gregory being dead, this City had no more Wars abroad; yet,
at home, it was in great confusion: the imperiousness of the Guelfs was grown
insupportable, and no way visible to suppress them: it was judged therefore
necessary to take Arms, and commit the superiority to the decision of Fortune.
On the Guelfs side there were all the ancient Nobility, and the greatest part
of the more powerful Citizens; of whom, as (we have said) Lapo, Piero, and
Carlo were the chief. On the other side, were all the inferior sort of the
people headed by the Eight, and assisted by Georgio Scali, Tomaso Strozzi, the
Ricci, the Alberti, and the Medici. The rest of the multitude (as it happens
always in such cases) joined with the discontents. The power of their
adversaries seemed very considerable to the Guelfs; and their danger great, if
any Senate should prove their enemies, and go about to destroy them: desirous
to prevent it, they assembled together; where, examining the State and
condition of the City, they found the persons which had been admonished, were
so numerous, that they had thereby disobliged most of their Citizens and made
them their enemies. They could propose no other remedy; but as they had
degraded them of their honors, so to banish them the City, seize upon the
Senators Palace by force, and constrain the whole Town to come over to their
side, according to the example of the Guelfs their Predecessors; whose quiet
and security was to be attributed wholly to their banishing their adversaries.
As to the design, all of them agreed; but they differed about the time. It was
in the year 1377, in the month of May, 1377.
when Lapo conceiving it unsafe to defer; acquainted them that delays were
dangerous especially to them; considering, that in the next Senate Salvestro de
Medici might be chosen Gonfaloniere, A Conspiracy of the Guelfs.
who was a known enemy to their sect. Piero de gli Albizi was of another
sentiment, and thought it best to protract; in respect that more force would be
necessary, which were not to be got together privately; and to raise them
publicly, was to run themselves into palpable danger. His judgment therefore
was, that they should have patience till S. John's day, which was at hand; at
which time, in regard it was one of the greatest Festivals, and great resort
would come to the City of Course, they might convey in what numbers they
pleased, without danger of discovery. And to obviate their apprehension of
Salvestro, he proposed to have him admonished; and if that would not do, to put
the change upon him, by some fraud or artifice in the imborsation; and foist in
some other of the College of his quarter, to defeat him securely of that
Office. This last opinion being approved, it was resolved to put off! though
Lapo consented unwillingly, urging, that delay was uncertain; that no time can,
in all circumstances, be convenient; and that he who expects a perfect
opportunity, seldom attempts any thing; and when he does, it turns commonly to
his own disadvantage. However, they proceeded to admonish him, but could not
hinder Salvestro. And, for the change, the Eight had got an inkling of that,
and took care to prevent it; The Conspiracy defeated.
so that Salvestro was drawn for Gonfaloniere by Alamanno de Medici. Being of a
Noble Popular Family, he could not endure that the People should be oppressed
by the power of a few great persons; resolving therefore with himself, to put a
period to their insolence: seeing he was favored by the people, and backed by
several of the principal Citizens; he communicated his designs with Benedetto
Alberto, Tomaso Strozzi, and Georgio Scali; all of them concurring in the Plot,
and engaging their assistance. Upon this they formed a Law privately, whereby
the Ordini d^lla Giustitia against the Grandees were revived, the authority of
the Capitani di part, retrenched; and the Ammoniti readmitted to the
Magistracy. And, because it was best to propose and enact it at one time, if it
were possible (for it was first to be presented to the Colleges, and
afterward debated in the Councils,) Salvestro being in his Office, (which, for
the time, is, as it were, Prince of the City) he caused a College and Council
to be called both together in one morning; and coming in person to the
College, (which were none of his friends) he proposed the Law to them which he
had prepared; but it was rejected as an innovation, and he could not prevail to
have it passed. Salvestro, seeing himself defeated in his first practice to
obtain it, pretended some necessity to go forth; and, without being perceived
slipped away to the Council; where, having placed himself so as he might be
heard and seen by the whole Assembly, he told them as follows:

That, The Speech of Salvestro de Medici.
being made Gonfaloniere, he did not think he had been designed for the
Cognizans and determination of private Causes, (which have their peculiar
Judges) but to superintend the State, to correct the insolence of the Grandees,
and to moderate and rectify such Laws as were found prejudicial, nay,
destructive to the Commonwealth. That in both cases he had been diligent to
the utmost; and employed himself with all possible industry: but the
perverseness and malevolence of some men was so untractable, and contrary to his
good designs; they did not only hinder him from perpetrating any thing for the
benefit of the public; but they denied him their Counsel, and refused for to
bear him. Wherefore, finding it was not in his power to be any way beneficial
to his Country; he knew not for what reason, or with what confidence he should
continue in an Offic^ which either he did not really deserve, or of which he
was thought unworthy by others. For this cause his intention was to retire and
leave the people to the election of another, who might be more virtuous, or
more fortunate than he.

And having said, he departed from the Council toward his own house. Those of
the Council, who were privy to the design, and others, desirous of novelty,
raised a tumult thereupon; to which, the Senators and Colleges immediately
resorted; and meeting their Gonfaloniere, they prevailed with him, partly with
their authority, and partly with their entreaty, to return to the Council,
which, by that time, was in great confusion: many of the Noble Citizens had
been threatened, and injuriously treated; and, among the ^est, Carlo Strozzi
had been taken by the buttons, by an Artificer, and doubtlesly slain, had not
the standers-by interposed; and, with some difficulty, saved him. But he which
made the greatest hubub, and put the City in Arms, was Benedetto de gli
Alberti, who, from a window of the Palace, cried out aloud to the people, to
Arm; Upon which the Piazza was filled with armed men immediately; and the
Colleges did that out of fear, which they had denied upon request. The
Captains of the parties had, in the mean time, got together what Citizens they
could, to advise what was to be done against this Decree of the Senate. But
when they heard of the tumult, and understood what had passed in Council, they
all of them slunk back to their houses. Let no man that contrives any
alteration in a City, delude himself, or believe that he can either stop it
when he will, or manage it as he pleases. Salvestro's intention was to have
procured that Law, and settled the City. But it fell out quite otherwise; for
their humors being stirred, every man was distracted: the shops shut up; the
Citizens assaulted in their houses: several removed their goods into the
Monestaries and Churches, to secure them; all people expecting some mischief at
hand. The whole Corporation of the Arts, met, and each of them made a Syndic.
Hereupon the Priori called their Colleges, and were in Counsel a whole day
together with the Syndics, to find out a way to compose their disorders to the
satisfaction of all parties; but, being of different judgments, nothing was
agreed. The next day the Arts came forth with Ensigns displaid; which the
Senate understanding, and doubting what would follow, they called a Counsel to
prevent the worst, which was no sooner met but the tumult increased, and the
Ensigns of the Arts marched up into the Piazza with Colors flying, and store
of armed men at their heels. Thereupon to satisfy the Arts, and the multitude,
and (if possible) to dispel that cloud of mischief which was impending; the
Council gave General power (which, The Balia.
in Florence is called Balia) to the Senators, Colleges, the Eight, the
Captains of the Parties, and the Syndics of the Arts, to reform the State as
they should think most advantageous for the public. Whilst these things were
in agitation; some of the Ensigns of the Arts, joining themselves with some of
the rabble, (being stimulated by certain persons, who were desirous to revenge
themselves of some late injuries which they had received from the Guelfs) stole
away from the rest; went to the Palace of Lapo da Castiglionchio, broke into
it, plunderd it, and burned it. Lapo, upon intelligence of what the Senate had
done, in contradiction to the orders of the Guelfs, and seeing the people in
Arms, having no variety of choice; but either to hide, or to fly; he absconded
first in S. Croce, but afterward fled away to Casentino, in the disguise of a
Friar; where he was often heard to complain of himself, for having consented to
Piero de gli Albizi: and of Piero for having protracted their attempt upon the
Government till S. John's day. Piero and Carlo Strozzi, upon the first noise of
the tumult, hid themselves only, presuming (when it was over) they had
relations and friends enough to secure their residence in Florence. The Palace
of Lapo being burned, (mischiefs being more easily propagated, than begun,)
several other houses ran the same fate, either out of public malice, or
private revenge: and that the greediness and rapacity of their Companions
might, if possible outdo theirs; they broke up the Goals, and set the
prisoners at liberty: and, after this, they sacked the Monastery of Agnoli and
the Convent di S. Spirito to which, many Citizens had conveyed much of their
goods. Nor had the public Chamber escaped their violence, had not the awe and
reverence of one of the Signori defended it; who being on horseback, with some
persons in Arms attending him, opposed himself, in the best manner he could,
against the fury of the people; which being appeased in some measure, either by
the authority of the Signori, or the approach of the night, the next day the
Balia indemnified the Ammoniti, with proviso, that for three years, Reformation
again.
they should not exercise any Magistracy in that City. They rescinded those
Laws which were made in prejudice to the Guelfs. They proclaimed Lapo da
Castiglionochio, and his accomplices, Rebels: after which, new Senators were
chosen, and of them, Luig^ Guicciardini was made Gonfaloniere. Being all looked
upon as peaceable men, and lovers of their Country great hopes were conceived
the tumult would have ceased: notwithstanding, the shops were not opened; the
people stood to their Arms, and great Guards kept all over the City: so that
the Signori entered not upon the Magistracy abroad, with the usual pomp, but
privately within doors, and without any ceremony at all. These Senators
concluded, nothing was so necessary nor profitable for the public, at the
beginning of their Office, as to pacify the tumult: whereupon, by Proclamation,
they required all Arms to be laid down; all shops to be opened; and all
persons, who had been called out of the Country, to the assistance of any
Citizen, to depart. They disposed Guards in several places of the Town; and
ordered things so, that if the Ammoniti could have been contented, the whole
City would have been quiet. But they not being satisfied to attend three years
before they should be capable of Office, the Arts, in favor to them, got
together again; and demanded of the Senate, that, for the future, no Citizen
might be admonished as a Ghibilin, by either the Senate, the College, the
Captains of the Parties, the Consuls, or Sindic's of any Art whatsoever:
requiring likewise, that new imborsation might be made of the Guelfs, and the
old one be burned. Their demands were presently accepted, both by the Senate
and Counsels; supposing thereupon, their new tumult would have ceased. But
those that are covetous, and impatient for revenge, are not to be satisfied
with bare restitution. Such as desired disorder, to enrich and wreck themselves
upon their enemies, persuaded the Artificers they could never be safe, unless
many of their adversaries were banished, ot destroyed. Which practices being
remonstrated to the Senate; they caused the Magistrates of the Arts, and the
Sindic's, to appear before them, to whom Luigi Guicciardini the Gonfaloniere
spoke in this manner:

If these Lords, Luigi Guicciardini's Oration.
and my self, had not long since understood the fortune of this City; and
observed, that its Wars abroad were no sooner determined, but it was infested
with new troubles at home; we should have more admired, and more resented the
tumults Which have happened: but things that are familiar, carrying less terror
along with them, we have born the late passages; with more patience;
especially, considering we were not at all conscious to their beginning; and
had reason to hope they would have the same end as former tumults have had upon
our condescension to their great, and their numerous demands. But finding (to
our Sorrow) you are so far from composing your thoughts, or acquiescing in what
has been granted, that you are rather exasperated, and conspire new injury
against your fellow Citizens, and endeavor to banish them; we must needs say,
the ignobleness of your proceedings provokes us to displeasure. And certainly,
had we imagined, that in the time of our Magistracy, our City should have been
ruined, either in siding with, or against you, we should have declined that
honor, and freed our selves from it, either by banishment, or flight. But,
supposing we had to do with people not utterly destitute of humanity, and void
of all affection to their Country; we willingly accepted of the preferment, as
hoping, by the gentleness of our deportment, to be too hard for your ambition
and violence. But we see now, by unhappy experience, the mildness of our
behavior, and the readiness of our condescensions do but inhanse and elate
you, and spur you on to more dishonorable demands. We say not this to disgust,
but to inform you; let others represent to you what will please; it shall be
our way to remonstrate what is profitable. Tell me (upon your words) what is
there more that you can justly desire of us? You proposed to have the Captains
of the Parties divested of their authority; it is done. You moved, the old
imborsations might be burned, and new ones decreed to supply them; we
consented. You had a mind the Ammoniti should be readmitted to places of
honor and trust; we granted it: Upon your intercession, we pardoned those who
had burned houses, and robbed Churches; and, to satisfy you, have sent several
of our principal Citizens into Exile. To gratify you, the Grandees are
circumscribed with new Laws, and all things done that might satisfy you: what
end therefore will there be of your demands? Or, how long will you abuse the
liberty you enjoy? Do you not perceive, that we can be overcome with more
patience, then you can subdue us? What will be the conclusion; or, whither will
your dissentions hurry this poor City? Can you have forgot how Castruccio, (an
inconsiderable Citizen of Luca) taking advantage of the divisions, possessed
himself of it? Do not you still remember, that the Duke of Athens, from a
private person, became your Lord and your Sovereign; and all from our own
differences at home? Whereas, when we were united, the Archbishop of Millan,
nor the Pope himself, were able to hurt us; but were glad (after several years
War) to lay down with dishonor. Why then will you suffer your own discords (in
time of Peace too) to bring a City into slavery, which so many potent enemies,
in time of War, were not able to captivate? What can you expect from your
divisions, but servitude? What from the goods you have, or shall hereafter take
violently from your neighbors, but poverty? The persons you plunder, are they,
who, by our care and appointment, supply the City with all things; and if it be
defeated of them, what can we do to sustain i^? Whatever you gain, (being
unjustly acquired) you can hardly preserve: from whence, famine and poverty
must necessarily follow. These Lords therefore, and my self do command, and (if
it be consistent with our, Dignity) entreat, and beseech you, that you would
compose your selves for this once, and be content with our passed
condescensions; or, if they be too little, and there remains still something to
be granted; that you would desire it civilly, and not with the force and
clamor of a tumult; and if your request be just, you will not only be
gratified; but occasion taken away from wicked men, to ruin your Country,
under your shelter and pretense.

These words being true, had great influence upon the people, insomuch that
they returned their thanks to the Gonfaloniere, acknowledged that he had
behaved himself like a good Lord to them, and a good Citizen to the City, and
promised their obedience to whatever he commanded. To break the ice, the
Signori deputed two Citizens for each of the chiefest Offices, to consult with
the Syndic's of the Arts, what, in order to the public good, was most fit to
be reformed; and to report it to the Senate. But, whilst these things were
transacting, a new tumult broke out, which put the City into more trouble than
the former. The greatest part of the robbery, and late mischief, was committed
by the rabble, and rascallity of the people; and of them; those who had been
most eminently mischievous, apprehended, when the greater differences were
reconciled, they might be questioned, punished for the crimes they had
committed, and (as it always happens) be deserted by those very persons who
instigated them at first: New troubles
to which was added, a certain hatred the inferior sort of the people had taken
against the richer Citizens, and the Principals of the Arts, upon pretense that
they were not rewarded for the service they had done, with proportion to their
deserts. For when, as in the time of Charles the First, the City was divided
into Arts, every Art had its proper Head and Governor, to whose jurisdiction,
(in Civil cases) every person in the several Arts, were to be subject. These
Arts (as we said before) were originally but XII, afterward they increased to
XXI, and grew to that power and authority, that, in a few years, they engrossed
the whole Government of the City: and because, among them, some were more
considerable, and some less; they came, by degrees, to be distinguished, and
VII of them were called Maggiori, and XIV, Minori. From this division, and the
other reasons aforesaid, proceeded the arrogance of the Captains of the
Parties; for those Citizens who had anciently been Guelfs, (under whose
Government those Offices were always preserved) did ever indulge the chief and
better sort of the Arts; and discountenance the more inferior, and all that
took their parts: hence it was, all the beforementioned troubles and tumults
were derived. But because, in the ordinary Companies and Corporations of the
Arts, there were many trades (in which the meaner sort of people were employed)
of no distinct and peculiar Company, but were incorporated with other Trades,
as the quality of their employments made them fit; it fell out, that when they
were not satisfied with their work, or any other ways injured by their Masters;
they had no person to repair to for redress, but to the Magistrate of that
Company of which they were sworn; from whom, they conceived, they had not
received that justice, which ought to have been done them. Of all Companies of
the City, the Company of Clothiers was the greatest, and had most of these sort
of people depending upon it; insomuch, that being the first in wealth and
authority' by the industry of its Members, it maintained (and does still) the
greatest part of the multitude. The baser sort of people therefore (both of
this Company, and the rest) were highly incensed upon the foresaid occasions;
and being excited, by fear of correction, for the pillaging and firing of the
Palaces, they met many times in the night, to discourse of what was passed; and
to admonish one another of the danger they were in; and to animate and unite
them, one of the most daring, and most experienced among them, made this Speech:

Were it now to be considered, The Speech of a Plebeian.
whether we were immediately to take Arms; to burn, and plunder the houses of
our fellow Citizens, and rob the Churches; I should be one of those who should
think it worthy of further debate, and perhaps, prefer harmless poverty before
hazardous gain. But, since Arms are taken, many mischiefs have been done; and
much prize has been got; it is (in my judgment) most natural, to advise which
way our gains are to be preserved; and how we may best secure our selves
against the ills we have committed. I am certainly of opinion, if no man should
do you that service, your own necessity would advise you. You see the whole
City full of complaints, and indignation against us; the Citizens, frequent in
their meetings; and the Senators perpetually with the Magistrate. Be confident,
it is to design against us; to contrive new ways, and to contract new Forces to
destroy us. It remains therefore upon us, to do two things; one is, to provide,
that we be not punished for our passed offenses: the other, that we may live
with more liberty and satisfaction for the future. To justify therefore our
former misdeeds, in my thoughts, it is convenient to increase them with new;
and by the artifice of redoubling our mischiefs, our conflagrations, and
robberies, to allure and engage more companions to our Party. For, where many
are guilty, none are punished; though small faults are revenged, great ones are
generally rewarded; and where the disease is epidemical, few people complain;
an universal ca^amity being always more supportable than a private. So then, to
multiply our misdeeds, is the readiest way of obtaining our pardon, and
prevailing for those things which we believe conducive to our liberty: nor is
there any difficulty to discourage us; it seems to me, the enterprise is not
only easy, but certain; because those who should oppose us, are divided, and
rich: their divisions will give us the Victory; and their riches (when we have
got them) shall maintain it. Let not the antiquity of their blood dismay you,
(though objected so insolently.) All men having the same original, are equally
ancient; and nature has made no difference in their contexture, strip them
naked, you are as well as they: dress them in your rags, and your selves in
their robes,, and you will doubtless be the Nobles; for it is nothing but
poverty and riches that discriminates betwixt you. It troubles me, to think,
that there are many of you unquiet in your consciences, for what you have done;
and resolved to be guilty of no more: if it be so, I was mistaken in my
judgment, and you are not the persons I thought you. Neither conscience, nor
disgrace, ought at all to deterr you; they that overcome, (let the means be
what they will) are never troubled with the dishonor: and, for conscience, you
ought not to be concerned. Where the fear of famine, and death, and prisons,
are so pregnant, there is no room for apprehensions of Hell. Observe the ways
and progress of the World; you will find the rich, the great, and the potent,
arrive at all that wealth, and grandeur, and authority, by violence or fraud;
and when once they are possessed, you will see with what confidence and
security they gild over the brutality of their usurpations, with the unjust
(but glorius) title of acquests. Observe, on the other side, those whose
pus^llanimity or sottishness affrights them from those courses, what becomes of
them? they are choked up and consumed in servitude and poverty: honest
servants, are perpetual servants; good men are always badly provided for; the
bold and unscrupulous, do soonest free themselves from bondage; and the most
fraudulent and rapacious, from indigence and distress. God and Nature have laid
every man's fortune before him; and we see men more naturally disposed to
rapine, than industry; to bad actions, than good. Hence it is, we devour one
another; and he that can do least, goes always by the worst. Force, therefore,
is to be used, when occasion is given; and, what fairer opportunity can be
offered by Fortune? The Citizens are divided; the Senate irresolute; the
Magistrate frighted; so that before they can unite, and come to any resolution,
our work will be done, and we be either absolute Princes of the City, or
Masters of such Cantons, as will not only pardon us for what is passed, but
enable us to awe our enemies for the future. I confess, this resolution is
dangerous, and bold; but where necessity urges, boldness is prudence; and
danger in great things, was never considered by men of the least courage and
gallantry. Those enterprises which begin with danger, do end with reward; and
men never free themselves from one peril, but by adventuring a greater. Again,
having prisons, and tortures, and death before our eyes, (as we have) it cannot
but be more hazardous to stand still, than to look out for security: in the
first, our destruction is certain; in the other, contingent. How often have I
heard you complain of the avarice of your superiors; and the injustice of your
Magistrates? Now, in your time, not only to free, but to advance your selves
into a capacity of retaliating, and giving them as much occasion of fearing
you, as you have had of them. Time has wings, opport^^ity flies away; and when
once passed, is never to be reclaimed. You see our enemies are preparing, let
us prevent their preparation: who-ever begins first, is sure to prevail, to the
ruin of their enemies, and exaltation of themselves. Go on therefore with
courage, it is an enterprise will yield honor to many of us, but security to us
all.

Though their own propensity was too much, this speech pushed the people
forward, with more impetuosity, to mischief; so that after they had drawn
together what company they were able, they concluded to take Arms, and obliged
themselves, by oath, to relieve one another, when any of them should fall under
the correction of the Magistrate. Whilst they were in this manner conspiring
against the Government, the Senators had notice of it from one, and having
caused one Simone to be apprehended, he confessed the whole plot, and that the
next day was intended for a tumult. whereupon, foreseeing the danger they were
in, they assembled the Colleges, and such Citizens as sided with the Sindic's
of the Arts, and labored the preservation of the City, Before they could be
got together, it was night; and the Signori were advised to consult with the
Consoli dell' Arti, who agreed unanimously, that the whole City should Arm; and
the Gonfaloniere del Populo, draw all the Companies, the next morning, into the
Piazza. At the time when the Citizens met, and Simone was upon the Rack, one
Nicolada Friano being in the Palace, to do something about the clock, returned
with all speed to his house, put the whole neighborhood into an uproar, and
brought above a thousand armed men together into the Piazza di Santo Spirito in
a moment. The alar'm increasing, came to the rest of the Conspirators, who
immediately took Arms; The people rise again.
and* in a short space, San Piero M^ggiore, and S^n Lorenza, (as they had
appointed before) were full of Armed men. The day being arrived, which was the
21st. of July, in favor of the Senate, there were not above 80 men appeared in
their Arms, and none of the Gonfaloniere; for they having intelligence the
whole City was in Arms, were afraid to stir out of their houses. The first
party of the people which advanced to the Piazza, was that which had met at San
Piero Maggior; but the Forces which were drawn there before, did not remove.
Not long after them, appeared the rest of the multitude, who, finding no
resistance, with hideous noise, demanded their prisoners of the* Signori, and
not succeeding by threats, to gain them by force, they set fire to the Palace
of Luigi Guicciardini, and burned it to the ground; whereupon, for fear o^
worse mischief, their prisoners were ordered to be delivered. When they had
recovered their prisoners, they took the Standard della Giustitia from the
Essecutore, burned many houses under it, and persecuted all people that they
were angry with, whether upon public, or private account; many Citizens, upon
particular quarrels, conducting the tumult to the houses of their adversaries;
it being sufficient, to cry out in the multitude, To such an house, to such a
man; or for him that carried the Standard, to direct it to such a place. They
burned the accounts and books of the Company of the Clothing Trade; and after
they had done mischief good store, that they might accompany their exorbitance
with some laudable action, they made Salvestro de Medici, a Knight, and as many
more of their Partners, as the whole number amounted to 64, among which, there
were Benedetto, and Antonio de gli Alberti; Tomazo Strozzi, and several others;
some of which, received their honor much against their wills. In which
accident, one thing is more then ordinarily remarkable; that those persons,
some of them, whose houses were burned; were, the same day, knighted by the
same persons which had burned them; so unconstant are the people, and so small
the distance betwixt their kindness, and revenge; an experiment of which, was
seen in their behavior to Luigi Guicciardini, the Gonfaloniere della
Giustitia. The Senators finding themselves abandoned by their Guards, by the
chief of the Arts, and their Gonfaloniere themselves, were very much perplexed,
nobody coming into their assistance, as they were commanded; and, of the 16
Gonfaloni, there was only the Company of the Golden Lion, and two more, which
appeared, and they staid not long in the Piazza; for, not finding themselves
followed by their Brethren, they also returned to their houses: the Citizens,
on the other side, seeing the fury of the multitude uncontrollable, and the
Palace of the Signori deserted, some of them kept close in their houses; others
thrust themselves into the crowd, thereby to secure there own houses, and their
friends; by which means, the numbers of the people were much increased, and the
power of the Senate extremely diminished. The tumult continued in this violence
all day long; and, at night, there were above 6000 men together at the Palace
of Stephano, behind the Church of S. Barnaby. Before day, they constrained the
several Arts to send for their Ensigns; and having got them in the morning,
they marched with their Colors before them, to the Palace of the Podesta, who
refusing to surrender; they fell upon it, and forced it. The Senate desirous to
compose things another way, perceiving nothing was to be done by force, called
three Members of their Colleges, and sent them to the Palace of the Podesta,
who found, that the heads of the people had been already in consultation with
the Sindic's of the Arts, and some other considerable Citizens, to resolve what
was fit to be demanded of the Senate: so that they returned in a short time to
the Senate, with four Deputies from the people, and these following proposals.
The demands of the people.
That the Clothing Trade might not, for the future, be subject to the
Government of a forreigner; That three new Companies, or Corporations, should
be erected; one, to consist of Carders, and Diers; another, of Barbers,
Taylers, Shoomakers, and such other Mechanics; and the third; of the more
inferior Trades, out of Which Companies, two should be chosen to sit in the
Senate; and three to sit among the 14, which had the Government of the
Artiminori, or inferior Trades. That the Senate should provide Halls for these
new Companies, where they might meet, and consult about their affairs. That no
person, of any of these Companies, should be constrained to pay any debt under
fifty Ducats, for the space of two years. That no interest should be paid out
of the Banks, and only the principal to be restored. That all prisoners, and
condemned persons, should be discharged. That all the Ammoniti should be
readmitted to all honors. Many other things were demanded in behalf of their
friends; and, on the contrary, as to their enemies, they insisted, that several
of them might be imprisoned, and several admonished. To give perfection to all,
it was necessary they should be ratified in the Counsel of the Commons; which
was deferred till the next, because two Counsels were not to be held in one
day. In the mean time, the Arts seemed all of them to be content, and the
people to be satisfied; having promised, as soon as their Laws and demands were
confirmed, they would retire to their houses. The next morning being come, and
the Counsel of the Commons deliberating upon their demands; the voluble and
impatient multitude were got together, and marching, with Ensigns displaid,
into the Piazza, with so obstreperous and dreadful a noise, as affrighted both
the Counsel, and Senate: whereupon, Guerriante Marignouli, one of the Signori,
(induced more by fear, than any private exception) went down, under pretense to
secure the Gate below, and marched off to his house. He could not, however,
convey himself so privately away, but the Rabble discovered him, yet without any
violence to him, only crying out, as he passed, that all the Senators should
leave the Palace; if not, they would burn their houses, and knock their
children on the head. By this time, the Law they urged, was concluded; the
Senators returned to their Chambers; and the Counsel gone down, (not daring to
go forth) were walking up and down the Court and the Cloisters, dispairing of
the safety of the City, by reason of the bruitishness, and barbarity of the
multitude, and the crossness or pusillanimity of those who might have either
bridled or suppressed them. The Signori were likewise in no less doubt and
confusion, seeing themselves not only forsaken by one of their own Members, but
relieved by nobody, neither with intelligence, norsupplies. Whilst they were
in this hesitation, uncertain what they ought, or what they were able to do,
Tomazzo Strozzi, and Benedetto Alberti, (prompted by private ambition, of being
themselves the last of the Senators which should remain in the Palace, or else,
because it was really their judgment) persuaded them to give way, to yield to
the fury of the people, and retire privately, every man to his own house. This
counsel being given by persons who had been heads of the people, (though others
seem to approve it) displeased Alamanno Acciaivoli, and Nicolo de Been,
exceedingly, who (recollecting their courage) made answer; That, if others of
the Senate had a mind to depart, they would not hinder them; but, for their
parts, till the expiration of their authority permitted them, they were
resolved not to leave the Palace, but with the loss of their lives. This
difference redoubled the horror of the Senate, and the rage of the people:
insomuch, that the Gonfaloniere, choosing to resign his Office with shame,
rather than retain it with danger, recommended himself to Tomazzo Strozzi's
protection, who took him out of the Palace, and conducted him to his house: in
like manner, the rest of the Signori departed one after another; and Alamanno,
and Nicolo, (who were so magnanimous before, lest they should be thought more
valiant than wise, got out also, and returned like the rest; so that the
Palace, remained in the hands of the people, and the eight Officers for the
administrations of War, who had not as yet laid down their Commands. When the
people made their entrance into the Palace, Michaele di Lando.
the Ensigns of the Gonfaloniere di Giustitia, was carried by one Michaele di
Lando, a Carder of Wool. This Michaele (without shoes on his feet, and scarce
clothes on his back) being followed by a great rout, ran up to the top of the
stairs, and being got within hearing of the place where the Senators sat, he
turned himself about to the multitude, and said; You see, Gentlemen, this
Palace, and this City, is yours; how shall they be disposed of, or, what is
your pleasure shall be done? To which, they universally replied, it was their
pleasure he should be Gonfaloniere, and govern the City as he thought best.
Michaele accepted the Office, being a prudent and sagacious man, more obliged
to Nature than Fortune; and the first thing he resolved, was, to compose the
tumults, and settle the City. To hold the people employed, and gain time for
the digestion of his designs, he commanded them abroad, in search of one Ser
Nuto, (who had been intended for Provost Marshal, by Lapo da Castiglionochio,
and most of those who were about him, went away in his pursuit. To begin (then)
his dominion with justice, as he had acquired it by Grace, he caused
Proclamation to be made, that no man should dare to burn, or steal any thing
for the future; and to terrify the more, he caused a Gallows to be set up in
the Piazza: proceeding next to the reformation of the City, he turned out the
Sindic's of the Arts, and put new in their places; He deprived the Signori, and
the Colleges of their Authority, and burned the bags of their Office. By this
time the people had found Ser Nuto, brought him to the Palace, tied him up to
the Gallows by one of his legs, and every one that was about him, having torn
off a piece, in a moments time, there was nothing of him to be seen, but one of
his feet. On the other side, the Otto della Guerra, (supposing the Government
in them, upon the departure of the Signori) had designed new Senators to
succeed them. But Michaele understanding it, sent to them to be gone out of the
Palace, and to let them know, it should appear to all people, that he could
govern Florence, without their counsel or assistance. After this, he assembled
the Sindic's of the Arts; and created four new Senators out of the inferior
sort of people; two for the better, and two for the worser Trades. Moreover, he
divided the State into three parts,; one of them to relate to the new Arts;
another to the less; and the third to the greater. He gave to Salvestro de
Medici, the revenue of the shops upon the old Bridge; to himself, the
Podestaria of Empoli; besides many other Acts of beneficence to several
Citizens, and friends of the people, not so much for their own sakes, but that
they might be always willing, and able to defend him. The people however, began
to suspect, that Michaele was partial to the better sort; and to discern that
they had not so much interest in the Government, as would be necessary for
their safety. Whereupon, pushed forward by their accustomed insolence, they
took Arms again, and came marching, with their Colors flying, to the Piazza,
in a bravado, requiring the Senators to come down to the Ringheria, and
deliberate upon certain new things they had to propose for their security, and
good. Michaele was sensible of their insolence, but (not to provoke them any
farther, before he knew what they would have) he only blamed their manner of
address; desired them to lay down their Arms, and, that then, by fair means,
they should obtain that, which did not stand with the Dignity of the Government
to grant by constraint: with which answer, the people being highly incensed,
they drew up at new S. Mary's, against the Palace, and created eight
Commissioners, with their Ministers and dependants, to gain themselves
reverence and reputation: so, as at that time, the City had two Tribunals; and
were governed by two distinct Administrations. Among the Commissioners it was
resolved, that eight persons, to be chosen by the body of the Arts, should be
always resident in the Palace, with the Senators, to give Sanction to whatever
the Signori resolved upon. They took from Salvestro de Medici, and Michaele de
Lando, whatever in their former Counsels they had conferred upon them;
assigning several Offices, and pensions, to many of their friends, to support
the Dignity of their employments. Having concluded, in this manner, among
themselves, to make all the more valid, they sent two of their Members to the
Senate, to demand their confirmation; otherwise, to let them know, that what
they could not obtain by civil application, they were able to do by force.
These two Commissioners delivered their message to the Senate, with great
confidence and presumption; upbraiding the Gonfaloniere by his Office, and
other honors which he had received from them; and that, in return, he had most
ungratefully behaved himself toward them and coming, at the end of their
objurgation, to threaten him; Michaele, unable to endure so great insolence,
(more sutably to the Majesty of his Place, than the meaness of his Birth)
resolved* by some extraordinary way, to correct such extraordinary impudence,
and drawing his sword, he cut them very much, and caused them afterward, to be
manacled and imprisoned.

This action of the Gonfaloniere was no sooner known, but it put all the
multitude in a flame: and believing they should be able to gain that by
violence, which they could not compass without, they immediately to their Arms,
and marched round about the Palace, to find where, with most advantage, they
might fall on. Michaele, on the otherside, suspecting the worst, resolved to be
beforehand, as judging it more honorable to fall upon them abroad, than to
expect them within the walls, till they fell upon him, and forced him out of
the Palace (as they had done his Predecessors) with great shame and dishonor.
Gathering therefore together a great number of Citizens, (who having found
their error) were resorted to him; he marched out as strong as he could, on
horseback, and advanced to fight them as far as new S. Mary's.

The people (as I said before) were as forward as he; and marching about
toward the Palace, to take their advantage, it happened, Michaele made his
sally at the same time, and they missed one another. Michaele overcomes the
multitude.
Michaele returning, found the people had possessed themselves of the Piazza,
and were storming the Palace; whereupon, he charged them so smartly on the
rear, that he brake them immediately; some of them he chaced out of the City;
and forced the rest to throw down their Arms, and hide themselves. This victory
being obtained, the tumult dissolved, and the City became quiet, and all by the
single valor of the Gonfaloniere; who for Courage, Generosity, and Prudence,
was superior to any Citizen of his time, and deserves to be numbered among the
few Benefactors to their Country: for, had he been ambitious, or ill-disposed,
the City had lost its liberty, and relapsed into greater tyranny than that in
the time of the Duke of Athens. But, his goodness would not admit a thought
against the good of the public; and his prudence managed things so, that many
submitted to him, and the rest he was able to subdue.

These passages amazed the common people, and put the better sort of Artificers
into an admiration of their own stupidity, who could not endure the grandeur of
the Nobility, were now forced to truckle to the very skum of the people. When
Michaele had this good fortune against the people, at the same time, new
Senators were drawn, two of which were of so vile and abject condition, every
body desired to quit themselves of so infamous a Magistracy. Whereupon, the
first day of September, when the Signori made the first entrance upon their
Office, the people being so thick, that the Palaci was full of armed men; there
was a cry sent forth from among them, that no Senator should be made out of the
meaner sort of the people; and, in satisfaction to them, the Senate degraded
the other two, (one of which was called Tira, and the other Boraccio) and, in
their places, Georgio Scali, and Francesco di Michaele, were elected.

Afterward, they dissolved the Corporations of the meaner Trades, and of all
their dependants; only Michaele di Lando, Ludovico di Puccio, and some few
other were excepted. They divided the Magistracy into two parts; one for the
greater, the other for the lesser sort of Arts. Only it was concluded, the
Senate should contain five of the lesser Arts, and four of the greater; the
Gonfaloniere to be chosen sometimes out of one, and sometimes out of the other.
This Constitution and Establishment, settled the City for a while: and, although
the Government was taken out of the hands of the people; yet, the Artificers of
the meanest quality, had more power than the popular Nobility, who were forced
to comply, to satisfy the Arts, and divide them from the baser sort of people.
This was much approved by those who desired the faction of the Guelfs (which
had handled several of the Citizens with so great violence) might be depressed;
among the rest which were advanced by this new model, Giorgio Scali, Benedetto
Alberti, Salvestro de Medici, and Tomaso Strozzi were made, The popular Faction
distinguished from the plebean.
as it were, Princes of the City. These proceedings exasperated the jealousies
betwixt the popular Nobility, and the meaner sort of people, by the instigation
of the Ricci, and Albizi, of which two parties, because we shall have frequent
occasion to discourse (many sad and great actions happening afterward betwixt
them) we shall, for better distinction, call one of them the Popular, and the
other the Plebeian Party, for the future.

This Government continued three years, with frequent examples both of
banishment and death: for those who were at the helm, knowing there were many
malcontents both within the City, and without, lived in perpetual fear. They
who were discontented within, attempted, or conspired every day something or
other against the State. Those without, (having no restraint upon them) by
means sometimes of this Prince, sometimes of this Commonwealth, raised several
scandals both of the one side and the other. At that time, Giannozzo da
Salerno, General for Carlo Durazzo, who was descended from the King of Naples,
happened to be at Bologna, attending a design, which; they said, Durazzo had
undertaken against Queen Giovanna, at the instigation of the Pope, who was her
mortal enemy. There were in Bologna, at the same time, several Exiles from
Florence, who held strict intelligence both with Pope Urban and Carle: which
was the cause, that those who governed in Florence, living in great jealousy,
gave credit easily to the calumniations of all those Citizens that were
suspected. During this general apprehension, news was brought to the
Magistrate, that Gionnozza da Salerno, with the assistance of all those who
were banished, was to march down with his Army against Florence; and that
several in the City had engaged to take Arms in his behalf, and to deliver up
the Town. Upon this information, many were accused; in the first place, Piero
de gli Albizi, and Carlo Strozzi were named; and after them, Capriano Mangioni,
Iacopo Sacchetti, Donato Barbadori, Philippo Strozzi, and Giovanni Anselmi; all
which were secured, except Carlo Srozzi, who escaped; and (that nobody might
dare to take Arms for their rescue) the Senate deputed Tomaso Srozzi, and
Benedetto Alberti, with a competent number of Soldiers, to secure the City.
The Prisoners being examined, and their charge, and answer compared, they were
found, not Guilty, and the Captain refused to condemn them; hereupon those who
were their enemies, incensed the people so highly against them, that, in a
great fury, they forced the Captain to condemn them. Neither could Piero de gli
Albizi be excused, either for the greatness of his Family, or the antiquity of
his Reputation; he having a long time been the most feared, and the most
reverenced Citizen in Florence. Whereupon, either some of his true friends, (to
teach him moderation in the time of his greatness,) or some of his enemies, (to
check, and alar'm him with the unconstancy of fortune) at a great Treat which
he had made for several of the Citizens, sent him a salver of Comfits; among
which a nail was privately conveyed; which being discovered in the dish, and
viewed by the whole Table, it was interpreted as an admonishment to him, to fix
the wheel of his fortune; for being now at the height, if its rotation
continued, he must of necessity fall to the ground; which interpretation was
verified first by his fall, and then by his death. After this execution the
City remained full of confusion, both Conquerors and Conquered being afraid:
but the saddest effects proceeded from the jealousy of the Governors, every
little accident provoking them to new injuries against the Citizens, by
condemning, admonishing, or banishing them the Town; to which may be added, the
many new Laws and Ordinances which they made to fortify their authority; which
were executed with great prejudice to all such as were suspected by their
party: for, by them, 66 were commissioned, with the assistance of the Senate,
to purge the Commonwealth of such people as they thought dangerous to the
State. These Commissioners admonished 39 Citizens; several of the Populace; and
debased many of the Nobles; and to oppose themselves more effectually against
foreign invasions, they entertained into their pay an English man, called John
Aguto, and excellent Officer, and one who had commanded in Italy for the Pope,
and other Princes, a long time. Their alarms from abroad were caused by
intelligence, that Carlo Durazzo was raising several Companies for the invasion
of the Kingdom of Naples; and the Florentine Exiles joined with him in the
Expedition; but to obviate that danger, they provided not only what force, but
what money was possible; and when Carlo came with his Army to Arrezzo, the
Florentines being ready with forty thousand Florines to receive him, he
promised he would not molest them. After he had received their money, he
proceeded in his enterprise against Naples; and having taken the Queen, he sent
her Prisoner into Hungary. His Victory there, suggested new jealousy into the
Governors of Florence: they could not imagine their money could have greater
influence upon the King, than the friendship his Family had long maintained
with the Faction of the Guelfs, who were undone by him. Apprehensions
increasing at this rate, enormities increased with them, which were so far from
extinguishing their fears, that they were exceedingly multiplied; and the
greater part of the City were in great discontent. To make things worse, the
insolence of Giargio Scali, and Tomaso Strozzi were added, who being grown more
powerful than the Magistrate, every one feared, lest, by their conjunction with
the Plebeians, they should be ruined.

Nor did this Government seem violent and tyrannical to good men only, but to
the seditious, and debauched: for this arrogance of Giorgio's being some time
or other of necessity to have an end; it happened, that Giovanni di Cambio was
accused by one of his acquaintance, for practicing against the State; but upon
examination, Cambio was found innocent by the Captain; and the Judge gave
sentence, that the Informer should suffer the same punishment, which should
have been inflicted on the other, had his charge been made good. Giorgio
interposed, with his entreaties and authority to preserve him; but, not
prevailing, he, and Tomaso Strozzi, with a number of armed men, rescued him by
force, plundered the Captains Palace, and forced him to hide himself. This
action made the whole City detest him; put his enemies upon contriving his
destruction, and Plotting which way they might redeem the City out of his
hands, and the Plebeians, (who, for three years together, had had the command
of it.)

To this design, the Captain gave the opportunity; for the tumult being
appeased, he went to the Senate, and told them;

That he had cheerfully accepted the Office, to which they had elected him,
presuming he had served Persons of Honor and Equity, who would have taken Arms
to have promoted and vindicated Justice, rather than to have obstructed it: but
his observation and experience had acquainted him with the Governors of the
City and their manner of conversation; that dignity which so willingly he had
taken up for the benefit of his Country, to avert the danger and detriment
impending, he was as ready to lay down.

The Captain was sweetened by the Senate, and much confirmed by a promise made
to him of reparation for what he had suffered already, and security for the
future. Hereupon, several of them consulting with such of the Citizens as they
thought greatest lovers of their Country, and least suspicious to the state; it
was concluded that they had now a fair opportunity to redeem the City of the
clutches of Giorgio and his Plebeians; (most people having alienated their
affections from him, upon his last insolence) and the best way would be to
improve it before they had time to reconcile; for they knew the favor of the
people was to be lost and gained by the least accident in the World.

For the better conduct of their affairs, it was thought necessary that
Benedetto Alberti should be drawn into the Plot; without whose concurrence, the
enterprise would be dangerous. This Benedetto was a very rich man, courteous,
sober, a true lover of his Country, and one infinitely dissatisfied with the
irregularity of their ways; so that it was no hard matter to persuade him to
any thing that might contribute to the ruin of Giorgio; for that which had
made him before an enemy to the Popular Nobility, and the faction of the
Guelfs, was the insolence of the one, and the tyranny of the other,; and
afterward finding the heads of the multitude no better than they, he forsook
them likewise, and all the misdemeanors and impieties which were committed
after that, were done without his approbation or consent; so that the same
reasons which inclined him to the people at first, the same reasons impelled
him now to desert them.

Having brought Benedetto and the heads of the Arts to their Lure in this
manner, and furnished themselves with Arms, they seized upon Giorgio, but
Tomaso escaped. The next day after he was apprehended, Giorgio was beheaded,
with so great terror and consternation to his party, that they were so far from
endeavoring his rescue, that all of them crowded in to behold his execution.
Being brought to die before those people who had so lately adored him, he
complained of the iniquity of his fortune, and the malignity of those Citizens,
who, by their injury and justice had constrained him to side with a multitude
which was not capable either of gratitude or fidelity; and discovering
Benedetto in the midst of the Guards, he said; And can you, Benedetto, consent
that this wrong should be done to me? Were you in my place, I assure you, I
would not suffer it: but let me tell you, this day is the last of my
misfortunes, and the first of yours. After which, lamenting his unhappiness in
having committed his fortunes and life to the constancy of the people, which is
shaken by every rumor, or accident, or conceit, he laid down his head, and it
was cut off in the midst of his armed and insulting enemies: after him several
of his confederates were executed, and their bodies dragged about the streets
by the people. His death put the whole City into commotion; for at his
execution, many Citizens had put themselves into Arms in favor of the
Senators, and the Captain of the people, and some upon the dictates of their
own private ambition and revenge. The City being full of various humors, every
one had his private design, which all desired to compass before they laid down
their arms. The ancient Nobility called Grandi, could not brook that they were
deprived of public employments, and therefore set all their wits upon the
tenters, to recover what they had lost; and armed, upon pretense of
re-investing the Captains of the Arts with their original authority. The
popular Nobility and the greater Arts were disgusted, that the Government
should be communicated to the inferior Arts, and the lowest sort of the people.
On the other side, the inferior Arts were disposed to augment, not detract from
their authority; and the meaner sort of people were as tender and jealous of
loosing their Colleges: which distractions caused the City to tumultuate
several times in one year; sometimes the Nobility; sometimes the better Trades;
sometimes the lesser; sometimes the common people; and sometimes altogether
betaking to their Arms in several parts of the Town; upon which, many
skirmishes and rencounters happened betwixt them and the Guards of the Palace;
the Senators contending sometimes, and sometimes complying, as they judged most
likely to remedy those inconveniences: so that after two Treaties, and several
Balia's created for the reformation of the City; after many mischiefs, and
troubles, and dangers, they came to an agreement, That all who had been
imprisoned after Salvestro de Medici was made Gonfaloniere, should be
discharged. That all dignities and pensions conferred by the Balia LXXVIII
should be taken away. That their honors should be restored to the Guelfs. That
the two new Arts should be deprived of their Incorporation and Governors,
Reformation
and all their members and dependents disposed into the old Companies as
formerly. That the Gonfaloniere di Giustitia should not be elected by the
lesser Arts; and whereas before they had the disposition of half, they should
hereafter be capable but of a third part of the Offices of the City, and the
best of them too to be put out of their power: so that the popular Nobility and
the Guelfs reassumed the whole G^vernment and the Commons were absolutely
dispossessed, after they had held it from the year 1378, to 1381. The Commons
expelled from the Government. 1381. Michaele Lando imprisoned.
Nor was this Magistracy less injurious toward the Citizens, nor less grievous
in its principles, than the Government of the people; many of the popular
Nobility, who had been eminent defenders of the people interest, being clapped
in prison, with great numbers of the chief of the Plebeians: Among which
Michaele Lando was one; nor could the many good Offices which he had done in
the time of his authority, protect him from the rage of that parry, when the
licentious and unrestrained multitude ruined the City: so little was his
Country thankful for all his great actions. Into which error, because many
Princes and Commonwealths do frequently fall, it happens, that men terrified
by such examples, before they can be made sensible of their Princes
ingratitude, do fall into their displeasure. These slaughters and these
exilements had always, and did then displease Benedetto Alberti; and he both
publicly and privately condemned them. Whereupon, the Government were fearful
of him, as believing him one of the Plebeians principal friends, and one who
had consented to the death of Giorgio Scali, not out of any disapprobation of
his conduct, but that he might remain alone in authority after him. By degrees,
his words and demeanor came to be suspicious, and the party that was uppermost
watched him very narrowly, to find out some occasion to send him after Giorgio.
Things being in this posture at home, no great action happened abroad; that
little which did happen, was occasioned more by fear of what they might, than
from any prejudice that was actually sustained; Lodovico d' Angio coming into
Italy about that time, to drive Carlo Durazzo out of the Kingdom of Naples, and
repossess the Queen Giovanna. The passage of this Prince put the Florentines
into no little distraction; Carlo, upon the old score of amity, desired their
assistance; Lodovico (like those who seek new friendships) demanded their
neutrality. The Florentines, (that they might please both parties, if possible)
to comply with Lodovico, and supply Carlo, discharged Aguto from their service,
and recommended him to Pope Urban, who was a professed enemy to Carlo; which
artifice was easily discovered by Lodovico, and he thought himself much injured
thereby. While the War continued in Puglia betwixt Lodovic and Charles,
supplies were sent out of France to reinforce Lodovico: which Forces (being
arrived in Tuscany) were conducted to Arezzo by those who were banished out of
that Town, where they removed all those who were of Charles his party; and just
as they designed the same measures against Florence, Lodovic's death.
as they had taken against Arezzo, Lodovic died, and the affairs of Puglia and
Tuscany followed his fate, for Charles secured himself of his Kingdom, which he
thought he had lost; and the Florentines, who were not sure to defend their
own, bought Arezzo of those who had kept it for Lodovic. Charles having secured
himself of Puglia, departed for Hungaria, (which Kingdom was, by inheritance,
descended to him) leaving his Wife behind him in Puglia, with Ladislao and
Giovanna, (two of his children,) as shall be shown more fully.

Carlo possessed himself of Hungary, Carlo d' Angio' s death.
but died shortly after; hour his Conquest of that Country was so grateful an
exploit to the Florentines, that never greater expressions of joy were made for
any victory of their own, as appeared as well by public as private
magnificence; many Families keeping open houses, and feasting exceedingly, but
none with that pomp and extravagance as the Family of the Alberti; Magnificenc^
envied.
the provision and ostentation of whose entertainments, were fitter for the
condition of a Prince, than for a private person. Which extravagance gained him
much envy, and that, being seconded by a jealousy in the Government, that
Benedetto had designs against it, was the occasion of its destruction: for they
could not be safe, whilst they thought it might fall out every day, that he
(reconciling himself with the people) might turn them out of the City as he
pleased. Things being at this uncertainty, it happened that he being
Gonfaloniere delle Compagnie, his Son in Law Philippo Magalotti was made
Gonfaloniere di Giustitia, which accident redoubled the apprehension of the
Governors, as thinking Benedetto grew upon them so fast, their authority must
of necessity decline: but desirous to remedy it what they could, and if
possible, without a tumult, they encouraged Bese Magalotte (his enemy and
competitor) to acquaint the Senate, that Philippo not being of age for the
execution of that Office, he could not, nor ought not enjoy it; and the cause
being heard in the Senate, Philippo was adjudged incapable of that Dignity, and
Bardo Mancini succeeded in his place; a person fiercely against the faction of
the people, and a perfect enemy to Benedetto. Having entered upon his Office, he
called a Balia for reformation of the State; which Balia inprisoned Benedetto
Alberti, and banished all the rest of his Family, only Antonio was excepted.
Before he was carried away, Benedetto called all his friends together, to take
his leave of them; and finding them sad, and the tears in their eyes, he spoke
to them as follows:

You see (Gentlemen) in what manner fortune has ruined me, Benedetto's Speech
and threatened you: I do not wonder at it, nor indeed ought it to be strange to
you: seeing it so happens always to them, who, among ill men, are studious of
being good, or sollicitous of sustaining that which all people are desirous to
pull down. The love to my Country associated me first with Salvestro de Medici;
and the same love divided me afterward from Giorgio Scali: it is nothing but
that, and the injustice of their proceedings, which have made me hate those who
are now at the Stern; who, as they have had nobody that could punish them, so
they are desirous to leave nobody to reprehend them. I am content with my
banishment, to free them of the fear they have conceived not only of me, but of
all that are sensible of their Tyranny and injustice. For my self I am not so
much concerned; the honors conferred upon me when my Country was free, I can
quietly relinquish whilst it is in servitude and bondage; and the memory of my
past condition will give me more pleasure, than the infelicity of my present
can give me regret. My greatest affliction will be, to consider, my Country is
become a prey to particular men, and exposed to their insolence and rapine: it
troubles me likewise for you, lest those evils which this day are consummated
in me, and but commencing in you, should prove greater detriment to you than
they have done to me; however, comfort your selves, bear up against any
misfortune, and carry your selves so; that if things happen adversly, (as
doubtless they will) it may appear to all people that you were innocent, and
that they succeeded without the least fault or contribution of yours.

Afterward, Benedetto dies at Rhodes.
to give as great testimony of his virtue abroad, as he had done at home, he
went to the Sepulcher of our Savior, and, in his return back, died at Rhodes.
His bones were brought back to Florence, and buried with great solemnity by
those very people who pursued him, whilst he was living, with all the calumny
and injustice imaginable: nor were the Alberti the only sufferers in these
distractions, many Families beside that, were admonished, and imprisoned. Among
the rest there were Piero Benini, Matteo Alderotti, Giovanni e Francesco del
Been, Giovanni Benchi, Andrea Adimari, and with them several of the lesser
Artificers. Among them which were admonished, were the Covoni, the Benini, the
Rinucoi, the Formiconi, the Corbizi, the Manelli, and the Alderotti. The Balia
was by custom created for a precise time; and being now in the execution of
these Citizens, who were fairly elected; having done what they could for the
satisfaction of the State, they desired to lay down, though their time was not
critically expired; which the people understanding, many of them ran with their
Arms to the Palace, crying out there were several more to be admonished, and
several more to be imprisoned before they renounced. The Senate was much
displeased, but entertained them with fair promises, till they had fortified
themselves so, as they were able to make them lay by those Arms, for fear,
which in their rage they had taken up: nevertheless, to comply in some
proportion with the fierceness of the humor, and lessen the Authority of the
Plebeian Artificers; it was ordered, that whereas the third part of the Offices
of the City were in their hands before, they should now be reduced to a fourth
part only: and (that there might always be two of the most trusty and faithful
persons to the State, in the Senate) authority was given to the Gonfaloniere di
Giustitia, and four other Citizens, to put a certain number of select men's
names into a purse, out of which, at every meeting of the Senate, two were to
be drawn.

Affairs thus settled in the year 1381, the City continued quiet within till
1393; in which year Giovan Galeazzo Visconti (called the Comte di Virtue) took
his Uncle Barnabo prisoner, 1381.
and made himself, by that, Master of all Lombardy. This Comte di Virtue had an
opinion he could make himself King of Italy by force, as easily as he had made
himself Duke of Milan by fraud; so that in the year 1390 he began a War upon
the Florentines, which, though prosecuted with variety of fortune on both
sides, yet the Duke was many times in danger to have ruined Florence; and
doubtless had ruined it, had not it been prevented by his death. However, their
defense was courageous, as might be expected from a Republic; and the end of
the War less unhappy, than the course of it had been dreadful; for when the
Duke had taken Bologna, Pisa, Perugia and Siena, and prepared a Crown, to be
crowned King of Italy in Florence, he died in the nick, and his death permitted
him not to taste the pleasures of his past Victories, nor the Florentines to
feel the calamities which would have followed their losses. Whilst this War
with the Duke was on foot, Maso de gli Albizi was made Gonfaloniere di
Giustitia, who, upon Piero's death, was become a great enemy to the Alberti:
and (because in all Factions, the humor and animosity does still ferment and
increase) Maso (though Benedetto was dead in his banishment) had an itching
desire, before he laid down his Office, to be revenged of that Family, and he
took his opportunity upon the examination of a certain person who impeached
Alberto, and Andrea de gli Alberti of intelligence with the Rebels. Upon this
accusation they were immediately taken into custody, and the whole frame of the
City altered. The Senate took Arms, assembled the people, created a Balia, by
authority of which many Citizens were confined, and new imborsation of Officers
made: most of the Alberti were confined; many Artificers admonished, and put to
death. Upon which provocation, the Arts and inferior sort of people took Arms,
in as much heat as if their lives or reputation had been taken from them. Part
of them ran to the Piazza, and part to the house of Very de Medici, who, after
the death of Salvestro, was become the head of that Family. To cajole those who
were in the Market place, the Senate sent Rinaldo Gianfigliazzi, and Donato
Acciaivoli (as persons more acceptable to the people than any else) to command
them, and sent with them the Ensign of the Guelfs, and the people. Those who
went to the house of Very, begged of him to take the Government upon him, and
free them from the Tyranny of those Citizens who were enemies to every thing
that was good. All those who have left any memorials of the passages of those
times, do agree in this; That, had not Very been more virtuous than ambitious,
he might have made himself Prince of the City, without any impediment: for the
great damages justly and unjustly sustained by the Arts and their friends had
so incensed them, that there wanted nothing but an head, to satiate their
revenge. Nor was Very without those that minded him of his advantage; for
Antonio de Medici (who had long time born him a grudge) persuaded him very
earnestly to take the Government upon him; to whom Very returned this Answer.

As your threats, when you were mine enemy, did never affright me; so your
Counsels now you are my friend, shall never delude me.

And, turning about to the multitude, he bid them be courageous, for he would
secure them, if they would follow his direction. Then, marching in the midst of
them into the Piazza, he went up to the Senate, and told them;

That he could not be sorry his conversation had been such, Very de Medici's
Speech to the Senate.
as had procured him the love of the people; but yet he was much troubled they
had made a wrong judgment of him, not at all ^utable to what his conversation
had deserved; for, never having given the least example of ambition, or
faction, he could not but wonder from whence they should deduce their opinion;
that, as a turbulent person, he would be the maintainer of their factions, and,
as an ambitious man, the Governor of their State. He begged of their Lordships,
that the error of the multitude might not be imputed to him; for what ever was
in his power, he submitted to them, with the first opportunity; he recommended
it to them to use their fortune temperately, and content themselves quietly
with an imperfect victory, rather than to make it entire by the destruction of
the whole City.

Very was much applauded by the Senate; they desired that he would be a means
that all Arms might be laid down, and that afterward they would not fail to do
what he and the other Citizens should advise. After his harangue in the Senate,
Very returned into the Piazza, and having joined his Brigade with those under
the Command of Rinaldo and Donato, he gave this account to them all; That he
found the Signori very well disposed toward them: that many things had been
proposed, but the shortness of the time, and the absence of the Magistrates had
prevented any conclusion; wherefore he made it his request to them, that they
would lay aside their Arms, and give obedience to the Senate, assuring them,
that with the Senate, gentleness would prevail farther then insolence, and
entreaty than threatening; and that they should want neither security nor
preferment, if they would be directed by him: upon which assurance they all
returned to their houses. Arms being in this manner laid down, the Senate
secured the Palace with their Guards; then they listed 2000 Citizens which were
best affected to the State, and divided them equally by Companies, with orders
to be ready to relieve them whenever they were called: the rest which were not
listed, were not suffered to bear Arms. These preparations being made, they
imprisoned many of the Artificers, and put several of them to death who had
been most pragmatical in the late commotions; and, to add more Majesty and
reputation to the Gonfaloniere della Guistitia, it was provided that no person
should be capable of that Office under 45 years of age: to secure their
Government, they made several other Laws and Ordinances which were in
supportable, not only to the persons against whom they were made, but even to
those who were honest, and of their own party; for they could not believe a
State well grounded, or safe, that was to be defended with so much violence and
severity. Nor were the Alberti which remained in the City, the only persons
dissatisfied with these proceedings; nor the Medici (who looked upon the people
as merely over-reached) many others were with this extravagant severity
exceedingly disgusted. The first man that opposed them, was Donato the son of
Acciaivoli. This Donato though he was one of the Grandees of the City, and
rather superior, than equal to Maso de gli Albizi, (who, for service done in
his Gonfaloniership, was become, as it were, Master of the City) yet, among so
many malcontents, it was impossible he should be pleased, nor prefer (as many
people do) private advantage before public convenience: and therefore his
first project was, to try if he could call those who were banished, or at least
restore the Ammoniti to their old Offices and Commands. To this purpose he
insinuated with several Citizens, whispering it into the ears first of one, and
then of another; that there could be no other way to quiet the people, or stop
the dissension of the parties; concluding, that he attended only till he was of
the Senate, and then he would make it his business to bring it to pass. And
because, in all humane actions, delay breeds weariness, and haste danger; to
avoid the one, he ran himself upon the other. Among the Senators, there was
Michaele Acciaivoli his confederate, and Nicolo Ricovers his friend. Donato
judged this too fair an opportunity to be slipped; and therefore desired them,
that they would move to the Council for a Law for restoration of the Citizens.
Being over-persuaded by him, they proposed it to their brethren, who were all
of opinion, that innovations are not to be attempted where the success is
doubtful, and the danger inevitable. Whereupon Donato, having tried all ways in
vain, in his passion caused it to be told them, that seeing they would not
permit the City to be reformed by fair means, it should be done by foul: which
words being highly resented, the Senate communicating the whole business with
the principal Governors, Donato Acciaivoli confined.
cited Donato, who, upon his appearance, being confronted, and convicted by the
person to whom he dilivered his message, he was committed to custody, and
confined to Barlette. With him were imprisoned Alamanno, and Antonio de Medici,
with all which were descended of Alamanno's Family and several others of the
more inferior Arts, that were in reputation with the people. All these things
happened within two years after Maso had reassumed the Government. The City
remaining in this posture, many discontents at home, and many exiles abroad;
there chanced to be at Bologna among the banished men, Piccho Cavicciulli,
Tomaso de Ricci, Antonio de Medici, Benedetto de gli Spini, Antonio Girolami
Christofano di Carlone, with two more of inferior condition, all of them young,
brisk, and disposed to encounter any difficulty that hindered their return to
their Country. To these it was privately signified by Piggiello, and Baroccio
Cavicciulli, (who, at the same time, were admonished in Florence) that if they
would come into the Town, they would convey them into an house, from whence
they might kill Maso de gli Albizi, and call the people to Arms; who being
discontented, would be easily provoked; and the rather, because they would be
headed by the Ricci, Adimari, Medici, Menelli, and several other considerable
Families. Allured by these hopes, 1397.
on the fourth of August. 1397, they arrived privately in Florence; and (being
disposed of according to agreement) they sent out to observe the motions of
Maso, by whose death they presumed they should raise a tumult among the people.
Maso was gone out, and (by accident) in an Apothecary's shop not far from San
Piero Maggiore; the messenger that was to set him, seeing of him there,
repaired immediately to his Comrades to give them information; A new Conspiracy
defeated.
who taking their swords, ran directly to the place, but he was gone. Not at
all discouraged with their first miscarriage, they turned toward the old
Market, where they killed one of their adversaries. Upon which, a great noise
being raised, and a clamor of the people crying out, Arm, Liberty, Arm; let the
Tyrants die; they marched toward the new Market, where near the Calimara they
slew another; and so going forward with the same shout and outcry, nobody
taking Arms, they stopped in the Loggia della Nighitosa: and mounting there
upon the highest place they could find, the multitude being round about them,
(but come rather to stare than assist) they exhorted them to take Arms, and
free themselves from a bondage which so highly they abhorred; they assured
them, the complaints and lamentations of such as were oppressed in the City,
had moved them to endeavor their liberty, and not any private injury to
themselves: that they were sensible they had the prayers of many good people,
that God would give opportunity to their designs. Had they had an Head to have
commanded them, it was believed they would have succeeded at any time; but now
occasion was offered, and they had Captains enough to conduct them; they stood
gaping upon one another, expecting like sots, till those persons who
endeavored their freedom, were knocked on the head, and their slavery
redoubled. They could not likewise but marvel, that they, who, upon the least
injury, were heretofore ready to take Arms, should not stir now upon so great
and numerous provocations, but suffer so many of their Citizens to be banished,
and admonished when it was in their power to restore the one to their Country,
and the other to their Offices. These words (how true soever) moved not the
multitude in the least, either because they were afraid, or else because the
death of the two persons which were killed, had made the murderers odious: so
that the founders of the tumult perceiving that neither words nor actions would
work any thing, understanding too late, how dangerous it is to enterprise the
liberty of a people that are resolved to be slaves; and despairing of success,
they retreated into the Church of S. Reparata, not to secure their lives, but
to protract their deaths. Upon the first noise of this tumult, the Senate had
armed, and caused the Palace to be shut up; but when they heard what the
business was, who were the Authors, and what was become of them; they took
courage, and commanded the Captain, with what Fortes he could get, to go and
apprehend them; which was no hard matter to perform; for the Church-doors being
broken open, and part of them slain, the rest were taken prisoners; who, upon
examination, confessed nothing, but that Baroccio and Piggiello Cavicciulli
were the only incendiaries, and they were both of them killed.

After this accident, there happened another of greater importance. About this
time (as we said before) the City had Wars with the Duke of Milan, The Duke of
Milan practices against the City.
who finding open force was not like to prevail, applied himself to artifice;
and by the help of the Florentine exiles, (of which Lombardy was full) he
procured a treaty with several in the Town, in which it was concluded, that at
a certain day, from the nearest places to Florence they could contrive, the
greatest part of the Exiles which were able to bear Arms, should pass by the
river Arnus into the City; and then joining suddenly with their friends within,
should run to the Palace of the Senate, and other houses of the chief Officers,
and having slain them, model, and reform afterward as they pleased. Among the
Conspirators in the Town, there was one of the Ricci called Samminiato, who (as
it falls out in most plots, where few are not sufficient, and many not secure)
seeking for a companion, found an informer; for imparting the business to
Salvestro Cavicciulli, (whose own injuries, as well as his relations, might
have made him more faithful) he post-poning his future hopes to his present
fear, discovered all to the Senate. Whereupon Samminiato being seized, they
extorted the whole process of the Conspiracy, but of his accomplices nobody
was taken, but one Tomaso Davisi; who coming from Bologna, not knowing what was
happened in Florence, was apprehended by the way, before he got thither; all
the rest, upon the imprisonment of Samminiato, fled away in great fear, and
dispersed. Samminiato and Tomaso being punished according to the quality of
their offense, a new Balia was made of several Citizens; and authority given
them to inquire farther after delinquents, and to secure the State. This Balia
proclaimed Rebels, Several Families banished.
6 of the Family of the Ricci, 6 of the Alberti, 2 of the Medici, 3 of the
Scali, 2 of the Strozzi, Bindo Altoviti, Bernardo Adimari, and several others
of meaner condition. They admonished, besides, the whole Family of the Alberti,
Ricci, and Medici for ten years, except only some few. Among those of the
Alberti which were not admonished, Antonio was one, being esteemed a quiet and
a peaceable man* their jealousy of this plot being not yet out o^t their
heads, a Monk happened to be apprehended, who had been observed, whilst the
conspiracy was on foot, to have passed many times betwixt Bologna and Florence
and he confessed he had frequently brought Letters to Antonio; Antonio being
taken into custody, denied it obstinately at first; but being confronted by the
Monk, and the charge justified against him; he was fined in a sum of money, and
banished three hundred miles distance from the City; and that they might not
always be in danger of the Alberti, they decreed, that none of that Family
above 15 years of age, should be suffered to continue in the Town. 1400.
These things happened in the year 1400, two years after Giovan Galezo Duke of
Milan, died: whose death, (as we have said before) put an end to a War that had
been prosecuted for twelve years. After which, the Government having extended
its authority, and all things at quiet both abroad and at home, they undertook
the enterprise of Pisa, which succeeded so well: they took the Town very
honorably, and enjoyed that and the rest very peaceably, till the year 1433.
Only in the year 1412, the Alberti having transgressed against the terms of
their banishment, a new Balia was erected, new provisions made for the security
of the State, and new impositions inflicted upon that Family.

About this time, The King of Naples dies.
the Florentines had War likewise against Ladislaus King of Naples, which ended
in the year 1416, upon the death of that King. During the time of the War,
finding himself too weak, he had given the City of Cortona to the Florentines,
of which he was Lord; but afterward recovering more strength, he renewed his
War with them, and managed it so, that it was much more dangerous than the
former; and had not his death determined it, (as the other was by the death of
the Duke of Milan) doubtless he had brought Florence into as great exigence as
the Duke of Milan would have done; and endangered, if not ruined its liberty.
Nor did their War with this King conclude with less good fortune than the
other; for when he had taken Rome, Sienna, la Marka, and Romagna; and nothing
remained but Florence, to hinder his passage with his whole force into
Lombardy, he died; so that, death was always a true friend to the Florentines,
and did more to preserve them, than all their own conduct or courage could do.
From the death of this King, this City remained at peace (both abroad and at
home) eight years: at the end of that term, their Wars with Philip Duke of
Milan, revived their factions, which could never be suppressed, but with the
subversion of the State, which had governed from the year 1371, to 1434, with
much honor, and maintained many Wars with much advantage, having added to
their Dominion, Arezzo, Pisa, Cortona, Livorno, and Monte Pulciano, and
doubtless would have extended it farther, had the City been unanimous, and the
old humors not been rubbed up, and revived, as in the next book shall be more
particularly related.

THE HISTORY OF FLORENCE.
Book IV.
ALL Cities (especially such as are not well constituted under the Titles of
Common Wealths) do sometime or other alter their Government, yet not (as many
think) by means of Liberty and Subjection; but by occasion of servitude, and
licentiousness: for only the name of Liberty is pretended by popular Persons,
such as are the instrument of licentiousness; and servitude is sought for by
those that are Noble, neither of them both desiring to be restrained either by
Laws or any thing else. Nevertheless when it does happen, (as it happens but
seldom) that a City has the good fortune to produce, and advance some Wise,
Honest, and Potent Citizen, by whom the Laws may be so ordered, that the humors
and emulations betwixt the Nobility and the People* if not perfectly composed,
may be yet so well circumscribed and corrected, that they may be checked from
breaking forth to its prejudice; Then it is That, City may be called free, and
that State pronounce it self durable; for being founded upon good Laws and
Orders at first, it has not that necessity of good Men to maintain it. Of such
Laws and Principles many Common Wealths were anciently constituted; and
continued a long time. Others have wanted, and do still want them; which has
frequently occasioned the variation of the Government, from Tyranny; to
licentiousness; and from licentiousness to Tyranny: for by reason of the
powerful animosities in all of them, it is not, nor can be possible, they
should be of any du^ation, one disgusting the Good, and the other, the Wise.
One doing mischief with ease, and the other good with difficulty; in this the
insolent have too much Authority; in another the sots; and therefore it is
convenient that both one and the other, be supported and maintained by the
fortune and Valor of some Eminent Man, though he may be taken from them by
Death, or made unserviceable by misfortune. I say therefore, that Government
which flourished in Florence from the death of Giorgio Scali, which fell out in
the year 1381 was supported first by the conduct of Muso di gli Albizi, and
afterward by Nicolo Uzano.

This City from the year 1414 till the end of the 22, remained quiet, King
Ladis^ans being dead, and Lombardy divided into several Cantons; so that
neither abroad nor at home, had they the least cause of apprehension. The next
Citizens in Authority to Nicolo Uzano, were Bartolmeo Valori, Nerone de Nigi,
Rinaldo de gli Albizi, Neri di Gino, and Lapo Nicolini. The factions which
sprung from the animosity betwixt the Albizi, and the Ricci (which were with so
much mischief revived afterward by Salvestro de Medici) could never be
extinguished, and although that which was most generally succored, prevailed
but three years, and was afterward depressed, yet the greatest part of the
City had imbibed so much of their humor, as could never be wrought out. True it
is, the frequent exprobrations, and constant persecutions of the heads of that
party from the year 1381 to 1400 had almost brought them to nothing. The first
Families which were persecuted, as the chief of that faction, were the Alberti,
Ricci, and Medici, who were robbed of their Men, as well as their Money, and if
any of them continued in the City, their employments and dignities were most
certainly taken from them; which usage had indeed debased that party, and
almost consumed it. However the memory of the injuries received, and a secret
desire of being revenged lay close in the Hearts of many of them; and having no
opportunity to show it, they kept it private to themselves. Those of the
Popular Nobility who governed the City so quietly, committed two errors which
were the ruin of their Government. One was in their insolence, upon the long
time of their Government; The other, that by reason of emulations among
themselves, contracted by long possession of the State, they had not preserved
that inspection which they ought to have done, over those who were able to
disturb them. Whereby (daily running themselves deeper in the displeasure of
the People, and either not regarding new Plots, because they did not apprehend
them, or else encouraging them, to supplant one another) the house of Medici
recovered its Authority. The first of them which began to rise, was Giovanni
the Son of Bicci, who, being grown very wealthy, of a benign and courteous
nature, by concession of those who Governed, was made Supreme Magistrate; and
his advancement celebrated with so universal satisfaction and joy (the People
believing they had now got a Protector) that the graver sort began to suspect
it, Uzano advices against the Medici.
and observing all the old humors reviving again. And Nicolo Uzano failed not
to advertise the other Citizens, and to remonstrate how dangerous it was to
promote one of so general a reputation; that disorders were easily suppressed
in the beginning; but when grown to any height, they were hardly to be
remedied: and that he knew Giovanni to be a man in parts much superior to
Salvestro. But Nicolo was not reguarded by his Brethren, who envied his
reputation, and desired more company to take him down. Florence being in this
manner infested with these humors, which began privately to ferment, Philippo
Visconti, Philippo Visconti Lord of Lombardi.
second Son to John Galeazo, becoming Lord of Lombardy by the death of his
Brother, supposing himself in a condition for some great enterprise, was very
ambitious to recover the Sovereignty of Genoua, which was then free, under the
administration and conduct of Tomaso da Campo Tregoso; but he durst not be too
confident of success either in that, or any other design, till he had entered
into an alliance with the Florentines, the reputation of which, he concluded
would carry him through all. To that purpose he sent two Ambassadors to
Florence* to propose it. Many Citizens advised to the contrary, though they
were contented the amity which had been betwixt them for many years should be
continued, yet they had no mind to a League, as knowing what reputation, and
advantage would accrue to him thereby, and how unprofitable it would be to
their City. Others were for the League, by virtue of which they might put such
terms upon him, as (if he transgressed) should discover his ill intentions to
the World, and justify any War they should make upon him for the breach of his
agreement: after great debate, a Peace was concluded, Peace betwixt Elorence,
and Milan.
and Philip obliged himself not to meddle with any thing on this side the
Rivers Magra and Panaro. Having settled his alliance, Philip fell upon Brescia,
and took it; and after that upon Genoua; and took that contrary to the opinion
of Florence, who had promoted the peace, they having been confident that
Brescia, by the help of the Venetian, and Genoua by its own proper strength,
would have been able to have held out. And because, in his Treaty with the Doge
of Genoua, Philip had reserved Serezana and other Towns on this side the Magra,
with condition when ever he would part with them, that the Genoeses should have
the refusal (having broke his promise) the whole League was violated; Besides,
he had made an agreement with the Legate of Bologna. All which things considered
together, altered the affections of the Florentines toward him, and being
jealous of new troubles, made them look out for new remedies. Philip having
intelligence of their apprehensions; to justify himself, and feel the
inclinations of the Citizens, or else to lull and delude them; he sent
Ambassadors to Florence, to let them know he was much surpised at the
suspicion he understood they had conceived against him, and was ready to
renounce any thing that might give them the least occasion of displeasure. The
effect this Embassy produced in the City, was only to divide it; part (and that
the most considerable in the Government) was of opinion they should Arm, and
put themselves into a Posture against the designs of their Enemies. If
preparations were made, and Philip was quiet, no War would ensue, and they
might contribute to a Peace. Others out of envy to the Government, or
apprehension of the War, concluded it no Wisdom to be suspicious of a friend
without great provocation; and that what he had done was not Worthy (in their
judgments) of such rigid proceeding. They knew well enough to create the Ten,
and to raise Men was the same thing as declaring of War, which if done with so
Potent a Prince, would be certain ruin to the City, without any prospect of
advantage; for if they prosper'd, and got the Victory, they could not make
themselves Masters of any thing considerable, Romagna being betwixt, nor could
they attempt any thing aginst Romagna by reason of its vicinity to the Church.
However their opinion prevailed who were for preparations; they created the
Ten, they raised Soldiers and laid new Taxes upon the people; which lying more
heavily upon the Common, than the better sort of Citizens, filled the City with
complaints, all people crying out of the oppression of the great people, who to
satiate their Ambition, and enlarge their Authority, had engaged them in an
expensive and unnecessary War: they were not yet come to an absolute rupture
with the Duke, but all things were full of suspicion; For Philip, at the
request of the Legate of Bologna (who was fearful of Antonio Bentivogli, a
banished man, and at that time in the Castle Bolognese) had sent new forces
into that City to secure it, which Forces being near the Dominions of Florence,
created no little jealousy in that State. But that which gave the strongest
alarm to all people, and made the greatest discovery of the War was the Dukes
practices at Furli. The Lord of Furli at that time, was Giorgio Ordelassi, who
dying left his Son Tibaldo to the Tutelage of Philip. The Mother suspecting the
integrity of his Tutor, would have sent him to her Father Lodovico Alidossi
Lord of Imola, but the people of Furli constrained her to deliver him up to
Philip, in pursuance of the Testament of Ordelaffi. Philip to disguise his
designs, and give less occasion of jealousy, ordered the Marquess of Ferrara,
to send Guido Torelli with certain Soldiers to take possession of Furli in his
Name, and as his Lieutenant, and so that Town fell into the hands of Philip.
Which intillegence coming to Florence at the same time with the news of the
arrival of forces at Bologna, facilitated the resolution for War, though before
there had been strong opposition, and Giovanni de Medici did publicly dissuade
it; alleging that though they were certain enough of the Dukes inclinations
yet it was better to expect him, and receive his attack, than to prevent it by
advancing against him; for it was the beginning of the War, must Justify the
prosecution; the agressor would be in the fault, and the other excusable to all
the Princes of Italy; Neither could they demand the assistance of their
Neighbors with so much confidence, to invade other People, as to defend
themselves; nor would any body ^ight so cheerfully to gain from others, as to
secure their own. To this it was answered, that the Enemy was not to be
expected at home; that fortune is oftener a friend to the Invader, than to the
invaded; and that (though it may be possibly more expense) yet there is less
damage and detriment in making War in an Enemies Country than in ones own.
These arguments carried it; and Orders were given to the Ten to try all ways,
and turn every stone for the recovery of Furli, out of the hands of the Duke.
The Duke observing how serious and busy the Florentines were in retriving a
place he had undertaken to secure, sent Agnolo della Pergola with a
considerable force, to Imola, That the Prince having his hands full at home,
might not be at leisure to think of the defense of his Grandson. Agnola
advanced with his Army, near Imola and (though the Florentines lay at
Modigliana) took the Town one night by the benefit of a great Frost which had
frozen the Ditches, and sent Lodovico Prisoner to Milan. Imola taken by the
Duke Philip.
The Florentines seeing Imola lost; and the War publicly owned; commanded
their Army to march and beseige Furli, which being accordingly performed, that
Town was immediately beleagured, and to hinder the Conjunction of the Dukes
Forces to relieve it, they hired the Comte Alberigo with his Squadron from
Zagonara, to keep them in perpetual alarm, and to make daily in-roads to the
very walls of Imola: Agnolo perce^v'd by the strong entrenchment of our Army,
that Furli could not without great difficulty be relieved, so he resolved to
set down before Zagonara presuming the Florentines would not lose that place;
and that if they came to relieve it, they must not only raise their Seige
before Furli; but fight his Army upon great disadvantage. Hereupon the Duke
Alberigo's Forces were constrained to a Parley, in which it was agreed the Town
should be surrendered, if in fifteen days time it was not relieved by the
Florentines. Their condition being known in the Florentine Camp, begot great
disorders there, as well as in the City, The Florentines overthrown.
and every body desiring to wrest so great a prize out of the hands of the
Enemy, their Host hastened the loss of it; form marching from Furli to the
relief of Lagonaria they came to an engagement and were utterly defeated, not
so much by the Valor of their Enemies, as the badness of the weather; for our
Men having marched several hours through deep ways in perpetual rain, finding
the Enemy fresh and drawn up with advantage, it was no hard matter to overcome
them. Nevertheless in a Victory so famous all over Italy, it was strange, and
yet true, that there died no body of any Eminence but Lodovico Albizi, and two
of his Sons, who falling from their Horses, were stifled in the dirt. The news
of this defeat put the whole City of Florence into a dumps, especially the
Grandees who had persuaded the War; they saw the Enemy strong and courageous;
themselves without force of friends; the people incensed, railing up and down
the Streets; upbraiding them with the great Taxes, and the impertinence of the
War; girding, and scoffing at them with most contumelious expostulations, are
these they which created the Ten to terrify the Enemy? Are these they who have
relieved Furli, and rescued it out of the hands of the Duke? See how strangely
their Counsels are discovered, and the ends to which they inclined, not to
defend our Liberty (which is an Enemy to them) but to increase their Power,
which God in his Wisdom has most justly diminished. Nor is this the only
enterprise they have pulled upon the City, but several others, and particularly
that against Ladis^ao which was parallel exactly, To whom will they now address
for supplies? To Pope Martin? Braccio can be witness how they used him before:
To Queen Giovanna? She was forced formerly to desert them, and throw her self
into the Protection of the King of Aragon? Such language as this, and whatever
could be invented by an enraged people, was the Common dialect in the Streets.
To prevent inconveniences, the Senate thought good to assemble several
Citizens, who with gentle words should endeavor to quiet those humors, which
were stirred in the people. Rinaldo de gli Albizi, was one of them, who (being
eldest Son to Maso, Albizi's exhortation to be quiet.
and by means of his own Virtue and the reputation of his Father, arrived at
considerable esteem in the City) spoke to them at large. He told them that it
was neither justice nor prudence to judge things by success, seeing many times
good Counsels miscarry, and ill ones do prosper. That to commend ill Counsels
upon their good success was to encourage Error, rather than Virtue, which
would turn to the great prejudice of the public, because they are not always
unfortunate. On the other side, to condemn wise Counsels for the unhappiness of
their event, is as blameable as that; seeing thereby honest Citizens are
discouraged and detered from speaking their judgments, though the exigence be
never so great. Then he demonstrated the necessity of the War, and how (if it
had not been carried into Romagna) it would have broke out in Tuscany. He told
them, it had pleased God their Army should be beaten; yet their loss was not so
great as it would be, if the design should be abandoned, but if still they
would bear up against their misfortune, and put themselves forward to the
utmost of their Power, they should not need to be much sensible of their loss
nor the Duke of his Victory. That they ought prenot to be discouraged at their
Expenses and Taxes, it being necessary to increase at them sent, as a way to
lessen them hereafter. He told them that greater supplies are more necessary in
an offensive; than a defensive War, and in conclusion he exhorted them to the
imitation of their forefathers, who by the Manliness of their behavior in all
their distresses, did always defend themselves against any Adversary whatever.

Encouraged by his Authority, the Citizens entertained the Comte de Oddo Son to
Braccio, into their pay; committing him to the instruction of Nicolo Piccinino
who had been brought up under Braccio, and was reputed the best of his
Officers; to whom they joined other Commanders of their own, and certain Horse
Officers, which were remaining of the late defeat. For the raising of more
Monys, they created XX. Commissioners out of the Citizens; who finding the
chief Citizens low, and depressed upon the late overthrow, overlaid them with
Taxes, and opress'd them exceedingly. These impositions disgusted them much;
yet at first in the point of honor they thought it beneath them to complain of
their own private usage; only they blamed the Taxes in general, and press,d to
have them abated; being publicly known, it was publicly opposed; and so far
neglected in the Councils, that to make them sensible how difficult a matter
they had undertaken, and to render them odious to the people, order was given
that the Taxes should be collected with all strictness and severity; and in
case of opposition, it should be lawful for any man to kill him who resist an
Officer. Whereupon many sad accidents ensued among the Citizens; many being
wounded, and not a few slain: so that it was believed the Parties would have
proceeded to Blood; and every sober man apprehended some mischief at hand. The
Grandees having been accustomed to be favored, could not endure that
strictness, and the others thought it but just to have all taxed
proportionably. In these confusions, several of the Prime Citizens met, and
concluded to take the Government upon themselves, because their backwardness
and remisness had given the multitude confidence to reprehend actions of the
State, and reincourag'd such as were wont to be the heads of the people. After
many Cabals, and frequent discourses among themselves, it was proposed to meet
altogether at a time, which they did above LXX. of them in the Church of St.
Stephano, by the connivance of Lorenzo Ridolfi de Fidi, and Francesco
Gianfigliazzi, two of the Senate. Giovanni de medici was not at the meeting,
either not being called (as a Person in whom they could put no confidence) or
refusing to come being contrary to his judgment. Rinaldo de gli Albizi made a
Speech to them all. He remonstrated to them the condition of the City; Rinaldo
de gli Albizi.
how by their negligence the Authority was relapsed to the people, which in the
year 1381, their Fathers had taken out of their hands. he represented the
iniquity of the Government from 1377. to the year 1380. and remembered them how
in that Interim, many there present had had their Fathers and Relations killed.
That now the dangers were the same, and the disorders no better. That the
multitude had already imposed a Tax as they pleased; and would doubtless by
degrees (unless greater force, or better order was taken to prevent them)
create Magistrates at their pleasure. which if they should do, they would usurp
their places, and ruin a State which for 42 years together had flourished with
much honor and reputation to the City; and Florence fall under the Government
of the multitude, (one half in perpetual luxury, and the other in fear) or else
under the Tyranny of some single Person that should usurp. Wherefore he assured
himself that whoever was a lover of Honor or his Country, would think himself
obliged to resent it and be put in mind of the Virtue of Bardo Mancini, who
with the destruction of the Alberti rescued the City from the same dangers; and
as the occasion of that boldness and incroachment of the multitude proceeded
from negligence and remissness in the Magistrate, the Palace of the Senate
being full of new and inferior men, he concluded, the best way to remedy it,
would be to do as they did then; to restore the the Government to the Grandees
to clip the wings of the inferior Trades by reducing them from XIV. to VII. By
which means their authority in the Councils would be retrenched, both by the
diminution of their number, and the restoration of the Nobility, who upon the
old score of animosity would be sure to keep them under; adding that it was
great Wisdom to make use of all people, opportunity, and according to the
convenience of their time: for if their forefathers had done prudently to make
use of the multitude to correct the insolence of the Grandees; it would be no
less discretion, now the people were grown insolent, and the Nobility under
hatches, to make use of the Nobility to reduce them to their balance; which
might be two ways effected either by artifice, or force: for some of them being
in the Commission of Ten, it was in their power to bring what numbers they
thought good into the City, and to dispose them as they pleas^d without any
observation.

Rinaldo was much applauded, Nicolo Urano.
his Counsel by every Body approved; and Urano among the rest, returned this
answer. That indeed all that had been said by Rinaldo was true, his remedies
good and secure, when applyable without manifest division of the City; and that
might be done exactly, if Giovanni de Medici could be drawn to their party; if
he were separated from them, the people might rise, but could do nothing for
want of a head; but whilst he was firm to them, nothing was to be done without
force and if they should betake themselves to that, he could not but foresee a
double danger either of not gaining the Victory; or not enjoying it when it was
got. He modestly remembered them of his former advices, and how they had
neglected to prevent these difficulties in time, which might easily have been
done; But that now he thought it unpracticable, unless some way could be found
to gain Giovanni to their party.

Hereupon Rinaldo was deputed to attend Giovanni, and try what might be done He
waited upon him, and pressed him with all the arguments he could use to join
with them, and that he would not, by favoring and indulging the people make
them insolent and saucy to the ruin both of the City and Government. To which
Giovanni replied,

That it was the Office of a wise and good Citizen (at least in his judgment)
to preserve the ancient laws and customs of a City; Giovanni de Medici 's reply
to Rinaldo.
nothing being more injurious than those alterations; that many being offended,
it must necessarily follow many must be discontented and where many are so,
some ill accident or other is daily to be expected. That in his opinion this
resolution of their's would be subject to two most pernicious effects.

The first by conferring honors upon them, who having born none of them before,
would understand less how to value them, and by consequence complain less for
the want of them. The other in taking them away from those who have been
accustomed to them, and would assuredly never be quiet till they be restored to
them again. So that the injury to one party will be greater than the benefit to
the other; the author of the change gains fewer Friends than Enemies; and the
latter be much more industrious to do him a mischief, than the former to defend
him. Men being naturally more prone to revenge, than gratitude; loss (for the
most part) being in the one, but profit or pleasure always in the other. Then,
turning about to Rinaldo, he said. And you, Sir, if you would recollect what
has passed, and with what cunning and subtilty things have been formerly
transacted in this City, you would be cooler and less hasty in this resolution;
for who ever advised it, as soon as with your power he has divested the people
of their Authority, be will usurp upon you, and become your Enemy by the same
means you intend to oblige him. Nor will it fall out better to you than it did
to Benedetto Alberto, who by the persuations of those who did not love him,
consented to the ruin of Giorgio scali and Tomaso Strozzi, and not long after
was himself banished by the same Persons which inveigled him: he advised him
therefore to consider more seriously of the busness, and rather than to
proceed, to follow the example of his Father, who to ingratiate with the
people, abated the Excise upon Salt; procured, that whosoevers Taxes was half a
Floren or under, should pay it if they pleased, otherwise it should never be
levied. Prevailed that the day the Councils assembled, should be priviledg'd;
and all Persons for that time protected from their Creditors; and at last
concluded that for his own part he was resolved to acquiesce in the Government
as it stood then, and to leave the City as he found it.

These transactions being talked of abroad, procured much reputation to
Giovanni, but more hatred to the other Citizens whose conversation he declined
what he could, to give the less encouragement to those who designed new
troubles, under his familiarity and favor: declaring to every Body he
discoursed withal about it, that in his judgment, factions were rather to be
extinguished, than fomented at that time; and that as to himself, he desired
nothing more cordially, than love and unanimity in the City, though several of
his own party were dissatisfied with him, and had advised him to be more
stirring and active in the busness. Among the rest Alainanno de Medici was one,
who being naturally furious, egged him on to take this opportunity of revenging
himself upon his Enemies, and obliging his friends; reproaching him by the
coldness of his proceedings, which (as he told him) gave his Enemies occasion
to practice against him, without fear or respect; which practices (it was to be
doubted) would succeed one time or other, and be the destruction both of his
family and friends. Cosimo, his Son, importuned him to the same, but Giovanni,
neither for what had been revealed, nor prognosticated could be moved from his
resolution; however, the faction appeared plain enough, and the whole City was
most manifestly divided. There were at that time attending the Senate in the
Palace, two Chancellors, Martino, The sactions of Uzano, and the Medici
and Pagolo. The latter was a favourer of Uzano, the former of the Medici.
Rinaldo, finding Giovanni inexorable and not to be wrought over to them,
contrived to turn Martino out of his office, presuming after that the Senate
would be more inclinable to them. Which design being smelt by the Adversary,
Martino was not only continued in his Place but Pagolo turned out to the great
detriment and dissatisfaction of his party, and doubtless the effects would
have been dreadful, had not the War lien so heavy upon them, and the late
defeat at Zagonara, put the City into such confusion. For whilst these things
were agitated in Florence, Agnolo della Pergola with the Dukes Troops had taken
all the Towns which the Florentines held in Romagna, (except Castracaro and
Modigliana) some for want of due fortification, and some for want of courage or
fidelity in the Garrisons. In the acquisition of these Towns, two things
happened, which demonstrate how grateful valor is even to an Enemy, and how
much cowardice and pusillanimity is despised. Biagio del Milano was Captain of
the Castle called Montepetroso, which being not only besieged, but set on fire
by the Enemy, looking over the walls, and finding no way to escape, or preserve
the Castle, he caused straw and bedding, and what other clothes he had, to be
thrown over the walls, where he saw the fire was not yet come, and then letting
down two of his Children upon them, The great courage of Biagio del Milano.
he cried out to the Enemy, Here take such movables as God and my fortune have
given me; it is in your power to force them, and not in mine to preserve them;
but for the treasure of my mind, in which my glory, and honor consists you
cannot ravish that from me, and I will never surrender it. The Enemy (amazed at
his Gallantry) ran presently to save the Children, and presented him Ropes and
Ladders to have preserved himself; but he refused them, and chose rather to die
in the flames, than to be saved by the Enemies of his Country. An example
worthy of the commendation of Antiquity, and the more remarkable by how much
few of them are to be found. The Children were restored to what ever could be
preserved and sent home by the Enemy (with singular generosity) to their
Relations, who received them not with more joy, than they were entertained by
the State, which for their Fathers and their own sakes, kept them at the
public charge during their lives.

The other happened in Galeata, The Cowardice of Zenobi del Pino.
where Zenobi del Pino was Podesta, who without any defense at all, delivered
up his Castle to the Enemy, and afterward persuaded Agnolo to quit the Alps in
Romagna, and betake himself to the hills in Tuscany where he might spin out the
War with more advantage, and less danger to himself. Agnolo not able to brook
such meanness and baseness of his Spirit, delivered him over to his Servants to
dispose of him as they pleased, who after millions of affronts, and derisions
allowed him nothing but painted cards for his diet,, declaring they intended of
a Guelf to make him a Ghibilin that way, but what ever they intended, in a
short time he was starved to Death.

In the mean time Conte Oddo, with Nicolo Piccinino were entered into the Valdi
Lamona, to see if they could reduce the State of Faenza to an amity with the
Florentines; or at the least hinder Agnola della Pergola from making his
incursions so freely into the territory of Romagna. But the vale being very
strong: and the inhabitants martial, Conte Oddo was slain, and Piccinino
carried Prisoner to Faenza. However as it fell out, the Florentines obtained by
this loss, what they would have hardly gained by the victory; for Nicolo
Piccinino transacted so well with the Governor of Faenza, and his Mother, that
by his persuasion, they became friends to the Florentines, and entered into a
League with them, by which he was released. But Piccinino followed not that
Counsel which he had given to others: for either being debauched by the Towns
he passed through; or looking upon the condition of the Florentines to be but
low, Picinino revolts.
and his own to be bettered in another place; he departed abruptly from
Arrezzo, where his post was and stealing away into Lombardy, he took up Arms
under that Duke. The Florentines weakened by these accidents; and disheartened
by the expense of the War; concluded they were unable to carry it on, upon
their own private account; hereupon they sent Ambassadors to the Venetians, to
desire their assistance (which they might easily and effectually grant) against
the growing greatness of a Person, who if let alone, would be as dangerous and
destructive to them, as to the Florentines. Francesco Carmignuola persuaded
them likewise to the same enterprise, who was an excellent Soldier as any in
those times; had served formerly under the Duke. But then he was revolted from
him, and come over to the Venetian. The Venetian was uncertain what to
determine, not daring to be too confident of Carmignuola, because not sure
whether his animosity to the Duke, was real or pretended. Whilst they remained
in this suspense, the Duke found a way, by corrupting one of his Servants, to
cause him to be poisoned, but the poison being too weak did not kill him
outright but brought him to great extremity. The Venetians having notice of
this, laid their suspicion aside; and the Florentines continuing their
solicitations, they entered into League with them, by which it was agreed the
War should be prosecuted by both parties, at the common expense; that what ever
should be taken in Lombardy, should be delivered to the Venetians; and what
ever in Romagna and Tuscany, Carmignuola General of the League.
should be put into the hands of the Florentines: and Carmignuola was made
General of the League. By means of this alliance the War was transferred into
Lombardy, where it was managed by Carmignuola with that discretion and courage,
that in a few months time he took several Towns from the Duke, and Brescia
among the rest; which last in those times, and according to the method of those
Wars, was accounted a miracle. This War continued five years, and the Citizens
of Florence were much impoverished by the Taxes which had been continued as
long. Hereupon a regulation was agreed upon, and (that all people might be
charged according to their Estates) it was proposed the Personal Estate should
be chargeable as well as the real; and that who ever had to the value of a
hundred Florens in goods, should pay half a proportion. But there being Law and
Authority to levy this Tax, but not men enough to compel them, the Grandees
were disgusted, and opposed it, before it was perfectly concluded: only
Giovanni de Medici promoted it so vigorously, that he carried it against them
all. And because in the Books of assesment, every man's goods were rated (which
the Florentines call Accatastare) this imposition was called Catasto. Catasto.
Moreover this Law restrained the Tyranny of the Nobles, not permitting them to
strike, or terrify such as were inferior to them, in the Counsels, as formerly
they had presumed. This Tax therefore though accepted cheerfully enough by the
Commons, went much against the minds of the Nobility. But it being in the
Nature of man, never to be satisfied, and as soon as possessed of what with
great vehemence he desired, to wish as fiercely for another. The people not
content with the proportions set them by the Law, demanded a retrospection, and
that it might be considered how much the Nobility had paid less in times past,
than was now allotted them by the Catasto, and that they might be forced to pay
it for the reinbursement of such as had sold their Estates to enable them to
pay their Taxes before. This proportion affrighted the Grandees much more than
the Catasto: so that to defend themselves against both, they decry'd the
Catasto as unjust and unequal, in laying a Duty upon goods and household stuff
(which are here to day, and lost to morrow) and exempting money, which many
people kept privately in their hands, so as the Catasto could not discover it.
To which they added, that it was not but reasonable those Persons who
relinquished, or neglected their own private affairs for the better management
of the public, should be favored in the Taxes; for devoting their whole
labor to the benefit of the State, there was no justice nor equity in the
World, that the City should have the profits of their Industry, and Estate, and
from others receive only the contribution of their Estates. Those who were for
the Catasto, replied that as their goods varied, the Taxes might be varied too;
and to any inconvenience from that, a remedy might be found. As to the money
concealed, that was not to be considered for making no profit of it, there was
no reason it should be paid for; and when ever they employed it, it would be
sure to be discovered. For the pains they took, and their solicitude for their
Country, if it were troublesome to them, they might have liberty to retire, for
there was no doubt but some well affected Citizens would be found, who would
not repine to serve the City both with their Counsel and Estates: and that
there were so many honors, and other perquisits attending those great Offices,
as might suffice any reasonable Persons, without abatement of their Taxes. But
their great discontent was from another cause; the Nobility were offended that
they could not make War at other peoples, charge, as they were used to do
formerly but were obliged to bear their share as well as their Neighbors. Had
this way been found out before, there would have been no War with King
Ladis^ao, then; nor with Duke Philip now; both which Wars were undertaken to
fill the coffers of some particular Citizens, more than for any general
necessity; but this commotion of humors, was appeased by Giovanni de Medici,
who convinced the people, it was not convenient to look backward. That their
business now was to provide carefully for the future, and if the former
impositions had been unequal and injust, they were to thank God a way was found
to relieve them, and not make that a means to divide which was intended to
unite the City; as it would certainly do, if the old assesments, and the new
were adjusted, for it was better to be contented with half a victory than to
venture all for an absolute; many instances making it out, that where more has
been strived for, all has been lost. With these and such like discourses, he
pacified the people, and the design of retrospection was qui^e laid aside.

However the War with the Duke being carried on for a while, a peace at length
was concluded at Ferrara by the mediation of a Legate from the Pope. But the
Duke not observing the conditions at first, the League took Arms again, and
coming to an engagement with his Army at Maclovio they defeated him quite, and
forced the Duke to new propositions, Peace betwixt the league and the Duke.
which were accepted by the League: by the Florentines, because they were grown
jealous of the Venetian, and sensible, that the vast charge which their City
was at, was to make others more powerful than themselves. by the Venetians,
because they observed Carmignuola, after the Duke was overthrown, to advance
but slowly, and make little or no advantage of his victory, so as they could
not place any further confidence in him. In this manner the peace was concluded
in the year 1428, 1428.
by which the Florentines were restored to what they had lost in Romagna; the
Venetians had Brescia, and the Duke gave them Bergamo, and the Territory
belonging to it, over and above. This War cost the Florentines 3 millions and
five thousand Ducats; the success of which, was Grandeur and Authority to the
Venetian, but poverty and dissension to themselves. Peace being concluded
abroad, the War was transplanted, and broke out at home. The Grandees of the
City could not digest the Catasto; and not seeing any way of suppressing it,
they contrived ways of incensing the people against it that they might have
more Companions to oppose it. They remonstrated therefore to the Officers for
collection, that they were to search, and Catastat the goods of the
Neighboring Towns, lest any of the Florentine goods should be conveyed
thither. Whereupon all that were Subjects to that City, were required to bring
In Inventories of their goods within a certain time. But the Volterrani
complaining to the Senate, incensed the Officers so highly, they put eighteen
of them in Prison. This action provoked the Volterrani exceedingly, but the
regard they had for their Prisoners, kept them at present from any commotion.

About this time Giovanni de Medici fell Sick, and finding his Sickness to be
mortal, he called his Sons Cosimo and Lorenzo to him, and said;

I suppose the time that God, and Nature allotted me at my Birth, is now
expired I die contented, Giovanni de Medici's Speech to his Sons at his Death.
leaving you rich, and healthful, and honorable, (if you follow my footsteps
and instruction) and indeed nothing makes my Death so easy and quiet to me, as
the thought that I have been so far from injuring or disobliging any Person,
that I have done them all the good offices I was able; and the same course I
recommend to you. For matter of Office and Government (if you would live happy
and secure) my advice is, you accept what the Laws and the people confer upon
you; that will create you neither envy nor danger, for it is not what is given
that makes men Odious, but what is usurped; and you shall always find greater
number of those who encroaching upon other peoples interest, ruin their own at
last, and in the mean time live in perpetual disquiet. With these arts, among
so many factions and enemies, I have not only preserved but augemented my
reputation in this City, if you follow my example, you may maintain and
increase yours. But if neither my example nor persuasion can keep you from
other ways, your ends will be no happier than several others who in my memory
have destroyed both themselves and their Families.

Not long after he died, and was infinitely lamented by the greatest part of the
City, as indeed his good qualities deserved: for he was charitable to the
height; not only relieving such as he asked but preventing the modesty of such
as he thought poor, and supplying them without it. He loved all People: the
good the Commended; the bad he Commiserated. He sought no Office, and went
through them all. He never went to the Palace, but invited. He was a lover of
Peace, and an Enemy to War. He relieved those who were in adversity, and those
who were in prosperity he assisted. He was no friend to public extortion, and
yet a great argumenter of Common Stock. Courteous in all his employments; not
very eloquent, but solid, and judicious. His complexion appeared melancholy,
but in company he was pleasant and facetious. He died rich, especially in Love
and Reputation; and the inheritance of all descended upon his Son Cosimo.

The Volterrani were weary of their Imprisonment, and to recover their
liberties, promised to condescend to what was required. Cosino heir his Father.
Giusto.
Being discharged, and returned to Volterra, the time for the new Priori's
entrance into the Magistracy arrived, and one Giusto (a Plebeian but a Man of
good interest among them) was chosen in the place. Having been one of those who
were imprisoned at Florence he had conceived a mortal hatred against the
Florentines, and it was much increased by the instigation of one Giovanni (a
Person of Noble extraction) who being in Authority with him at the same time
persuaded him that by the authority of the Priori, and his own interest, he
would stir up the People to rescue themselves from their dependence upon
Florence, and afterward make himself Prince: upon this encouragement Giusto
took Arms; possessed himself of the Town; imprisoned the Florentine Governor,
and, by consent of the people, made himself Lord. The news of these revolutions
in Volterra, Volterra revolts.
was not at all pleasing to the Florentines; But their peace being made with
the Duke, and their Articles signed they thought they had leisure enough to
recover that Town; and to lose no time, they made Rinaldo de gli Albizi, and
Palla Strozzi Commissioners, and sent them thither out of hand. Guisto
suspecting the Florentines would assault him, sent to Sienna, and Lucca for
relief. The Siennesi refused him, alleging they were in League with the
Florentine: and Pagolo Guinigi (who was then Lord of Lucca) to reingratiate
with the people of Florence (whose favor he had lost in their Wars with the
Duke) not only denied his assistance to Giusto, but sent his Ambassador
Prisoner to Florence. The Commissioners to surprise the Volterrani, before they
were aware, assembled what strength they had of their own, raised what foot
they could in the lower Val d' Arno, and the territory of Pisa: and marched
toward Volterra. Giusto discouraged neither by the desertion of his
Neighbors, nor the approach of the Enemy, relied upon the situation, and
strength of the Town; and prepared for his defense. There was at that time in
Volterra, one Arcolano (a Brother of that Giovanni who had persuaded Giusto to
take the Government upon him) a Person of good credit among the Nobility. This
Arcolano having got several of his Confidents together, he remonstrated to
them, how God Almighty by this accident had relieved the necessities of their
City; for if they would take Arms with him; remove Giusto from the Government,
and deliver all up to the Florentines, they should not only have their old
privileges confirmed, but be themselves made the chief Officers of the Town.
Having consented to the design; they repaired immediately to the Palace where
Giusto resided; and leaving the rest below Arcolano with three more went up
into the dining room, where they found him with other Citizens; they pretended
to speak with him, about business of importance, and having (in the variety of
their discourse) drilled him to another Chamber, Arcolano and his accomplices
fell upon him with their Swords: but they were not so nimble but Giusto had the
opportunity to draw his, and wound two of them, before he fell himself, yet his
destiny being unavoidable, he was killed, Giusto slain.
and thrown out into the Palace yard. Whereupon those who were Confederate with
Arcolano taking Arms, they delivered up the Town to the Florentine
Commissioners who were not far off with their Army. The Commissioners marched
directly into the Town, without any Capitulation, so that then the condition of
the Volterrani was worse than before; for among other things, a great part of
their Country, was dismembered; and the Town it self reduced to a Vicariata.
Volterra being in this manner lost, and recovered at the same time, there had
been no danger of new War, had not the ambition of some Men pulled it down upon
their heads. There was a person who for a long time had served the Florentines
in their Wars against the Duke: his name was Nicolo Fortebraccio, Son of a
Sister of Braccio da perugia. This Nicolo was disbanded upon the Peace; and at
the time of these accidents at Volterra had his quarters at Fucecchio, so that
the Commissioners made use of him, and his Soldiers in that enterprise. It was
believed, that whilst Rinaldo was engaged with him in that War, he had
persuaded Nicolo upon some pretended quarrel, to fall upon the Lucchesi;
assuring him that if he did, he would order things so in Florence, that an Army
should be sent against Lucca, and he have the command of it. Volterra being
reduced, and Nicolo returned to his old Post at Fucecchio; either upon
Rinaldo's instigation, or his own private inclination, in Novem. 1429. with 300
Horse and 300 Foot, he surpriz,d Ruoti, and Compito two Castles belonging to
the Lucchesi; and afterward falling down into the plain he made great
depredation. The news being brought to Florence, the whole Town was in uproar,
and the greatest part was for an expedition against Lucca. Of the chief
Citizens which favored the Enterprise, there were all the Medici, and Rinaldo,
who was prompted thereto either out of an opinion it would be for the advantage
of that Commonwealth, or out of an ambition to be made head of it himself.
Those who opposed it were Nicolo da Uzano, and his party. And it seems an
incredible thing, that in one City, upon one occasion, there should be such
contrariety of Judgments. For the same people who after ten years Peace,
opposed the War against Duke Philip, (which was undertaken in defense of their
liberties) the same Persons now, after such vast expense, and so many
Calamities as their City had undergone, pressed and importuned for a War with
the Lucchesi, to disturb the Liberties of other People. And on the other side,
those who were for the War then, resisted it now. So strangely does time alter
the Judgments of Men; so much more prone are people to invade their Neighbors,
than to secure themselves, and so much more ready are they to conceive hopes of
gaining upon others than to apprehend any danger of losing their own. For
dangers are not believed till they be over their heads; but hopes are
entertained though at never so great distance. The People of Florence were full
of hopes upon intelligence of what Nicolo Fertebraccio had done and did still
do, and upon certain letters which they received from their Rettori upon the
confines of Lucca. For their deputies in Pescia, and Vico, writ them word that
if they might have lib^rty to receive such Castles and Towns as would be
delivered up to them, they should be Masters of the greatest part of the
Territory of Lucca: and it contributed not a little to their encouragement,
that at the same time, they received an Embassy from the Senate of Lucca, to
complain of Nicolo's invasion, and to beg of the Senate that they would not
make War upon a Neighbor City, which had preserved a constant amity with them.
The Embassador's name was Iacopo Vicciani; who had been Prisoner not long
before to Pagolo Guinigi Lord of Lucca, for a Conspiracy against him; and
(though found guilty) had been pardoned for his Life. Supposing he would have
as easily have forgiven his imprisonment, as Pagolo had done his offense he
employed him in this Embassy, and sent him to Florence. But Iacopo being more
mindful of the danger he had escaped, than the benefit he had received;
encouraged the Florentines to the enterprise; which encouragement added to the
hopes they had conceived before, and caused them to call a General Council (in
which 498. Citizens appeared) before whom the whole project was more
particularly debated.

Among the Principal promoters of the expedition (as I said before) Rinaldo was
one, Rinaldo pers^ades the War.
who represented to them, the great advantage that would accrue to them by the
taking of that Town, He insisted upon the convenience of the time, as being
abondon'd by the Venetian, and the Duke; and not capable of relief from the
Pope, who had his hands full another way. To which he added the easiness of the
enterprise, the Government having been usurped by one of its own Citizens, and
by that means lost much of its natural vigor, and ancient disposition to defend
its liberties; so that it was more than probable, either the people would
deliver it up, in opposition to the Tyrant, or the Tyrant surrender for fear of
the people. He exaggerated the injuries that Governor had done to their State,
the ill inclination he still retained toward them; and the dangers which would
ensue if the Pope or Duke should make War upon it; concluding that no
enterprise was ever undertaken by the State of Florence more easy, more
profitable, or more just.

In opposition to this it was urged by Uzano that the City of Florence never
undertook any War with more injustice, Uzano opposes it
or hazard, nor any that was more like to produce sad and pernicious effects.
That first, they were to invade a City of the Guelfish faction, which had been
always a friend to the City of Florence; and to its own danger and prejudice
many times received the Guelfs into its bosom, when they were banished, or
unsafe in their own Country. That in all the Chronicles of our affairs, it was
not to be found, that City had ever offended Florence, whilst it was free; and
if at any time since its subjection, it had transgressed, (as indeed it had
during the Government of Castruccio, and under this present Lord) it was but
reasonable to lay the sadle upon the right Horse; and to impute the fault
rather to their Tyrants, than Town. If War could be made against the Tyrant,
without detriment to the City, well and good; the injustice would be the less.
But that being impossible, he could never consent that a City of so ancient
amity and alliance, should be ruined for nothing. However because Men lived
then at such a rate, that no account was made of what was just and unjust, he
would wave so trifling an argument, and proceed to the profit and emolument of
that War, which was the thing now adays most seriously considered: did believe
those things were most properly called profitable, which carried least damage
along with them; but how that expedition could with any equity be called
profitable, he could not understand; seeing the damage was certain, and the
benefit but contingent. The certainty of the damage consisted, in the vastness
of the expense which must of necessity be great enough to discourage a City
that was quiet and at peace, much more one that had been already harrass'd out
with a tedious and a chargeable War as their City had been. The advantages
proposed were the taking of Lucca, which he confessed would be considerable.
Yet the accidents and impediments with which they might meet were so far from
being to be slighted, that to him they seemed numerous and insuperable, and the
whole enterprise impossible. Nor ought they to presume that either the Venetian
or the Duke would be content that they should conquer it, for though the
Venetian seemed to comply, it was but in gratitude to the Florentines at whose
charges they had so largely extended their Empire, and the other was only
cautious of engaging in a new War, and new expense, and attended till they were
tired and exhausted, that he might fall upon them with advantage. He minded
them likewise, that in the middle of their enterprise, and in the highest hopes
of their Victory, the Duke would not want means to relieve the Lucchesi, either
by supplying them with money under hand, or if that would not do, by disbanding
his Men, and sending them as Soldiers of Fortune, to take pay under them. Upon
these reasons he persuaded them to give over that design, and to live so with
that Usurper, as to create him what Enemies they could, for he knew no way so
ready to subdue the Town, as to leave it to his Tyranny, and let him alone to
afflict and weaken it as he pleased. So that if the business was managed as it
should be, that City might quickly be brought to such terms that the Usurper,
not knowing how to hold it, and the City as unable to Govern it self, would be
constrained to throw it self voluntarily under their protection. Nevertheless
seeing their eagerness was such that his reasons could not be heard, he would
undertake to prognosticate; that the War which they were about should cost them
much money; expose them to many dangers at home, and in stead of taking Lucca,
and keeping it to themselves, they should deliver it from an Usurper, and of a
poor, ^ervile, but friendly City, make it free, and malicious, and such as in
time would grow to be a great obstacle to the greatness of Florence.

This enterprise being thus canvassed on both sides, it came (privately and
according to custom) to the votes of the whole Convention, and of the whole
number, only 98 were against it. Resolution being taken, and the ten men
created for the carrying on of the War, they raised men with all speed both
infantry and Horse. For Commissaries, they deputed Astorre Gianni, and Rinaldo
de gli Albizzi, and made an agreement with Nicolo Fortebaccio that he should
deliver what Towns he had taken, into their hands, and take pay under them. The
Commissaries being arrived with their Army in the Country of Lucca, they
divided, Astorre extending himself upon the plain toward Camaggiore, and
Pietra Santa; and Rinaldo with his Squadron marching toward the Mountains,
presuming that if they cut off its intercourse with the Country, it would be no
hard matter to become Masters of the Town. But both their designs were unhappy;
not but that they took several Castles and Towns, but because of sundry
imprudences committed in the management of the War, both by the one and the
other. Astorre Gianni gave particular evidence of his indiscretion in the
passage which follows. Not far from Pietra Santa there is a vale called
Seraveza, rich, full of Inhabitants; who understanding the approach of that
Commissary went out to meet him, and to desire that he would receive and
protect them as faithful servants to the people of Florence. Astorre pretended
to accept their offer, but afterward he caused his Soldiers to seize upon all
the strong places, The Cruelty of Astro.
and passes in the vale; and assembling all the Inhabitants in their Principal
Church; he kept them Prisoners and commanded his men to plunder and destroy the
whole Country; after a most cruel and barbarous way, profaning the Churches
and Religious Houses, and abusing the Women, as well Virgins as others. These
passages being known in Florence, offended not only the Magistrates, but the
whole City. Some of the Seravezi, who had escaped the hands of the Commissary,
fled directly to Florence, telling the sadness of their condition to all
Persons they met with, and being encouraged by several who were desirous to
have Astorre punished, either as an evil Man, or as an adversary to their
faction; The Seravezzesi complain.
they addressed themselves to the Ten, and desired to be heard; and being
introduced, one of them stepped forth and spoke to this purpose.

We are assured (most magnificent Lords) our words would not only find belief,
but compassion among you, did you but know in what manner your Comissary first
seized upon our Country, and afterward upon us. Our Vale (as it is likely your
Chronicles may remember you) was always of the Guelfish party; and many times a
faithful receptacle for such of your Citizens as by the persecution of the
Ghibilins, were not suffered at home. Our Ancestors and we have always adored
the very name of this Illustrious Republic; and esteemed it as the head and
principal member of that party. Whilst Lucca was Guelfish, we submitted very
quietly to their Commands; but since it fell under the dominion of an Usurper,
who has relinquished its old friends, and joined himself with the Ghibilins, we
have obeyed him, it is true, but rather by force, than by cons^nt: and God knows
how often we have begged for an opportunity to express our affection to our old
friends. But how blind and deceitful are the desires of Man; That which we
prayed for, as our only felicity, is become our destruction. As soon as we
heard your Ensigns were marching toward us, supposing them not our Enemies,
but our ancient Lords, and friends, we went immediately to wait upon your
Commissary, and committed our valley, our fortunes, and our selves into his
hands, relying wholly upon his Generosity, and presuming he had the Soul (if
not of a Florentine) at least of a Man. Pardon (I beseech you) my freedom, we
have suffered so much already, nothing can be worse, and that gives me this
confidence.

Your General has nothing of a Man but his Person, nor of a Florentine but his
Name. He is a mortal Disease, a savage Beast, and as horrid a Monster as ever
any Author ever described. For having wheedled us together into our Cathedral
under pretense of discoursing some things with us, he mad^e us his Prisoners:
ruined and burned our valley; robbed, and spoiled, and sacked, and beat, and
murdered the inhabitants; the Women he ravished, the Virgins he forced, tearing
them out of the arms of their Parents, and throwing them as a prey to his
Soldiers. Had we provoked him by any injury ^ither to his Country or himself:
we should have been so far from complaining, we should have condemned our
selves; and esteemed it no more than what our own insolence and unworthiness
had pulled upon our heads. But having put our selves freely into his power;
without Arms or any other capacity of resistance; to be then robbed, and abused,
with so much injury and insolence, is beyond humanie patience, and we cannot
but resent it. And though we might make all Lombardy ring with the sadness of
our complaints; and with imputation, and scandal to this City, diffuse the
story of our sufferings all over Italy, we have waved and declined it, thinking
it unjust to asperse so Noble, so Charitable a Commonwealth, with the cruelty
and dishonor of a Barbarous Citizen, whose insatiable avarice had we known, or
could have but suspected, before we had tried it; we would have strained and
and forced our selves to have gorged it (though indeed it has neither bounds
nor bottom) and by that means (if possible) preserved part of our Estates, by
sacrificing the rest. But that being too late, we have addressed our selves
most humbly to your Lordships, begging that ye should relieve the infelicity of
your Subjects; that other People may not (by our president) be terrified or
discouraged from committing themselves under your Empire and Dominion. If the
infinite and unsupportable injuries we have suffered, be too weak or few to
procure your compassion; yet let the fear of God's displeasure prevail, whose
Temples have been plundr'd and burned, and his People betrayed in the very
bowls of his Churches.

And having said thus, they threw themselves before them upon the ground,
yelling, and imploring that they might be reposess'd of their Estates and their
Country; and that their Lordships would take care (seeing their reputation was
irrecoverable) that at least the Wives might be restored to their Husbands, and
the Children to their Parents. The cruelty and inhumanity of his behavior
having been understood before; and now particularly related by the sufferers
themselves; wrought so highly upon the Magistrates, that immediately they
Commanded Astorre back from the Army, casheir'd him, and made him afterward
incapable of any Command. They caused inquisition likewise to be made after the
goods of the Saravezesi: such as were found, were restored, what could be
found, was repriz'd afterward by the City, as opportunity was offered.

Rinaldo de gli Albizi Rinaldo ac^us'd.
was accused on the other side for managing the War, not so much for the
public profit of his Country, as for his own, it was objected against him,
that from the very hour of his Commission, he laid aside all thoughts of
reducing Lucca, and designed no farther than to plunder the Country, to fill
his own pastures with other Peoples Cattle, and furnish his own houses with
other Peoples goods. That his own Bokty and his Officers being too little to
satisfy him, he bartered and bought the plunder of his common Soldiers, and,
of a General, made himself a Merchant. These calumniations being come to his
ears, netled his honest, but haughty mind, more perhaps than a wise Man would
have suffered them to do. However they disturbed him so, that in a rage both
against Magistrate and City, without expecting, or so much as desiring leave he
returned upon the spur to Florence, presented himself before the Ten, and told
them;

That he now found how difficult and dangerous it was to serve an unconstant
People, His Speech to the Ten.
and a divided City; the one entertained all reports and believed them. The
other punished what was amiss, condemned what was uncertain, but rewarded
nothing that was done well. So that if you overcome, no body thanks you; if you
mistake every body blames you; if you miscarry every body reproaches you;
either your friends persecute you for emulation, or your Enemies for Malice.
However for his part he had never, for fear of Scandal or imputation, omitted
any thing which he judged might be of certain advantage to his Country. But
that now indeed the baseness of the calumnies under which at present he lay,
had mastered his patience, and changed his whole Nature. Wherefore he begged the
Magistrates would for the future be more ready to justify their officers, that
they might act with more alacrity for the good of their Country. And that
seeing in Florence no Triumph was to be expected, that they at least would
concern themselves so far, as to secure them from obloquy. He admonished them
likewise to reflect, that they themselves were officers of the same City, and
by consequence every hour liable to such slanders as may give them to
understand how great trouble and disquiet honest Men conceive at such false
accusations.

The Ten endeavored to pacify him as much as the time would allow, but
transferred his command upon Neri di Gino, and Alamanno Salviati, who instead of
rambling, and harrasing the Country, advanced with their Army, and blocked up
the Town. The season being cold, the Army was lodged at Capanole, the new
Generals, thinking the time long, had a mind to be nearer and encamp before the
Town, but the Soldier objected the ill weather, and would not consent, though
the Ten sent them positive orders to that purpose, and would not hear of excuse.

There was at that time resident in Florence, a most excellent Architect called
Philip, the the Son of Brunelesco, of whose Workmanship this City is so full,
that after his Death he deserved to have his statute set up in Marble in the
principal Church of the Town, with an inscription under it, to testify his
great excellence to the Reader. This Philip upon consideration of the banks of
the River Scrchio, and the situation of the Town, had found out a way to drown
it. This invention he imparted to the Ten, and so convinced them, that by their
order, experiment was to be made, which was done, but it turned more to the
prejudice of our camp, than to the detriment of the Town. For the Lucchesi
perceiving the design, heightened and strengthened their banks one that part
where the river was to overflow, and afterward taking their opportunity one
night, they brake down the sluice which was made to turn the water upon them;
so that their banks being firm and high, and the banks toward the plain open,
it overflowed their Camp, and forced them to remove. This design miscarrying,
the Ten called home their Commissioners, and sent Giovanni Guiccardini to
command the Army in their stead; who clapped down before the Town, and
straightened it immediately. Finding himself distressed, the Governor of the
Town, upon the encouragement of Antonio dell Rosso, a Sienese (who was with him
as resident from the Town of Sienna) sent Salvestro Trenta and Lodovico Bonvisi
to the Duke of Milan, to desire he would relieve him. Finding him cold in the
business, they entreated him privately that he would at least send them
supplies, and promised him (from the People) that as soon as they were arrived,
they would deliver both Lord and Town into their hands; assuring him that if
this resolution were not suddenly taken, their Lord would surrender it to the
Florentines, who had tempted him with several fair proffers. The fear of that,
made the Duke lay aside all other respects, wherefore he caused the Conte
Francesco Sforza his General, publicly to desire leave to march with his
forces into the Kingdom of Naples; and having obtained it, he went with his
Troops to Lucca, notwithstanding the Florentines, upon notice of his
transaction, sent to the Conte Boccaccinor Alamanni their friend to prevent it.
Francesco having forced his passage into the Town, the Florentines drew off to
Librafatta, and the Conte marched out, and sat down before Pescia, where Pagolo
da Diaccetto was Governor, and in great fear ran away to Pistoia. Had not the
Town been better defended by Giovanni Malavolti, than by him, it had been most
dishonourably lost. The Conte, not able to carry it at the first assault, drew
off to Buggiano, took that and Stilano a Castle not far off and burned both of
them to the ground. The Florentines displeased with this devastation, applied
themselves to a remedy which had often preserved them, and knowing that
Soldiers of Fortune are easier corrupted than beaten they caused a
considerable sum to be proffered to the Conte, not only to depart, but to
deliver them the Town. The Conte perceiving no Man was to be squeezed out of
that City, accepted the proposition in part; but not thinking it convenient in
point of honor to put them in possession of the Town, he articled to draw away
his Army upon the payment of 50000 Ducats. This agreement being made, that the
people of Lucca might excuse him to the Duke, he seized upon their Governor,
which they had promised to depose. Antonio dell Rosso (the Siena Ambassador)
was at that time in Lucca, as we said before. This Antonio by the Authority of
the Conte, meditated the destruction of Pagolo. The heads of the Conspiracy
were Pietro Cennami, and Giovanni da Chivizano.

The Conte was quartered out of the Town, upon the Banks of the Serchio, and
with him the Governor's Son. The Conspirators, about 40 in number, went in the
night to find out Pagolo, who hearing of their intention, came forth in great
fear to meet them, and inquire the occasion. To whom Cennami made answer; That
they had been too long Governed by him: that the Enemy was now about their
walls, and they brought into a necessity of dying either by Famine or the
Sword; That for the future they were resolved to take the Government into their
own hands, Pagolo Lord of Lucca deposed.
and therefore they demanded that the Treasure, and the Keys of the City might
be delivered to them. Pagolo replied, that the Treasure was consumed; but both
the Keys and himself were at their service, only he had no request to make to
them, that as his Government had begun, and continued without blood, so there
might be none spilt at its conclusion. Hereupon Pagolo and his Son were
delivered up to the Conte Francesco, who presented them to the Duke, and both
of them dyed afterward in prison.

This departure of the Conte, having freed the Lucchesi from the Tyranny of
their Governor, and the Florentine from the fear of his Army; both sides fell
again to their preparations; the one to beleaguer, and the other to defend. The
Florentines made the Conte Orbino their General, who begirt the Town so close,
the Lucchesi were constrained once more to desire the assistance of the Duke,
who under the same pretense as he had formerly sent the Conte, sent Nicolo
Piccinino to relieve them. Piccinino advancing with his Troops to enter the
Town, the Florentines opposing his passage over the River, the Florentines were
defeated after a sharp engagement, and the General with very few of his Forces,
preserved themselves at Pisa. This disaster put the whole City in great
consternation; and because the enterprise had been undertaken upon the peoples
account, The Florentines defeated.
not knowing where else to direct their complaints, they laid the fault upon
the Officers and managers, seeing they could not fix it upon the contrivers of
the war; and revived their old articles against Rinaldo. But the greatest part
of their indignation fell upon Giovanni Guiccardini; charging him that it was
in his power to have put an end to the war, after Conte Francesco was departed;
but that he had been corrupted by their money; part of which had been remitted
to his own house by bills of exchange; and part he had received himself, and
carried it with him. These reports and rumors went so high, that the Captain of
the people, moved by them, and the importunity of the contrary party, summoned
him before him, Giovanni appeared, but full of indignation, whereupon his
relations interposed, and to their great honor, prevailed so far with the
Captain, that the process was laid aside. The Lucchesi upon this Victory, not
only recovered their own Towns, but overran, and possessed themselves of the
whole Territory of Pisa, except Biantina, Calcinaia, Liccorno, and Librafatta;
and (had not a conspiracy been accidently discovered in Pisa) that City had
been lost among the rest. The Florentines however recruited their Army, and
sent it out under the command of Micheletto, who had been bred up a Soldier
under Sforza.

The Duke having obtained the Victory, to overlay the Florentines, with
multitude of Enemies, procured a League betwixt the Genouesi, Sanisi, and the
Lord of Piombino, for the defense of Lucca; and that Piccinino should be their
General, which thing alone was the discovery of the plot. Hereupon the
Venetians and Florentines renew there League. Open Hostilities are committed
both in Lombardy and Tuscany; and many Skirmishes and Rencounters happen with
various fortune on both sides; till at length every Body being tired, 1433.
a General Peace was concluded betwixt all parties in the month of May 1433. by
which it was agreed that the Florentines, Siennesi, Lucchesi and who ever else
during that war had taken any Towns or Castles from their Enemies, Peace
betwixt the Florentines and Lucchesi.
should restore them, and all things return to the possession of the owners.
During the time of this war abroad, the malignant and factious humors began to
work again and ferment at home; and Cosimo de Medici after the Death of his
Father, began to manage the public business with greater intention and
magnanimity; and converse with his Friends with greater freedom than his Father
had done. Insomuch that those who before were glad at the death of Giovanni.
were much surpised and confounded, to see him so far outdone by his Son.
Cosimo was a wise and sagacious Gentleman, grave, but grateful in his presence;
liberal, and courteous to the highest; never attempted any thing against any
party, nor the State, but watched all opportunities of doing good to every
Body, and obliging all people with his continual beneficence. So that indeed
the excellency of his conversation, was no little distraction and disadvantage
to those who were at the helm. However, by that way he presumed he should be
liable to live as freely, and with as much Authority, in Florence, as other
people: or else being driven to any strait by the malice of his Adversaries, it
would be in his power to deal with them, by the assistance of his friends. The
great instruments for the propagation of his interest were Averardo de Medici,
and Puccio Pucci, Averardo with his prudence procuring him much favor and
reputation. This Puccio was a Person so eminent for his judgment, and so well
known to the people, that he denominated the faction, which was not called
Cosimo's, but Puccio's Party, The City was divided in this manner at that time,
when the enterprise was taken against Lucca; during which the ill humors, were
rather provoked, and incensed than extinguished. And although Puccio's Party
were the great promoters of it at first, yet afterward in the prosecution of
it many of the contrary party were employed, as Men of more reputation in the
State. Which being above the power of Averardo de Medici, and his comrades to
prevent, he set himself with all possible Art to calumniat those Officers; and
upon any misfortune (and no great thing can be managed without it) all was
imputed rather to their imprudence and ill conduct, than to the Virtue of their
Enemies. He it was that aggravated his Enormities so strongly against Astorre
Gianni. He it was disgusted Rinaldo de gli Albizi, and caused him to desert his
Command without leave. He it was which caused the Captain of the people to cite
Guiccardini before him. From him it was, all the other aspersions which were
laid upon the Magistrates and the Generals, did proceed. He aggravated what was
true; he invented what was false; and what was true, and what was false where
readily believed by those who hated them before.

These unjust and irregular ways of proceeding were well known to Nicolo Uzano,
and other heads of that Party. They had many times consulted how they might
remedy them but could never pitch upon a way. To suffer them to increase, they
were sensible would be dangerous; and to endeavor to suppress them, they knew
would be difficult. Nicolo da Uzano was the first Man that exposed his disgust;
but observing the war to be continued without, and the distractions increasing
at home; Nicolo Barbadori, desirous of Uzano's concurrence to the destruction
of Cosimo, went to seek him at his house, and finding him alone very pensive in
his study, he persuaded him with the best arguments he could use, to join with
Rinaldo in the expulsion of Cosimo, to whom Nicolo da Uzano Nicolo da Uzano's
answer to Barbadori.
replied in these Words.

It were better for your self, for your Family and the whole Commonwealth, if
both you and your whole party, had their beards (as they say you have) rather
of Silver than Gold. Their Counsels then, proceeding from Heads that were gray,
and repleat with experience, would be fuller of Wisdom, and advantage to the
Public. Those who design to drive Cosimo out of Florence, ought first to
consider his interest with their own. Our Party you have christened the party
of the Nobility, and the contrary faction, is called the faction of the people.
Did the truth of the matter correspond with the Name, yet in all adventures the
victory would be doubtful, and we ought in discretion rather to fear than
presume, when we remember the Condition of the Ancient Nobility of this City,
which have not only been depressed, but extinguished by the people. But we are
under greater discouragments than that, our Party is divided, theirs is entire.
In the first place Neri de Gino, and Nerone de Nigi (two of the Principal of
our City) have not declared themselves as yet; so that it remains uncertain
which side they will take. There are several houses and families divided among
themselves. Many out of a pick to their Brothers, or some other of their
Relations, have abandoned, us, and betaken to them. I shall instance in some of
the chief, and leave the rest to your private consideration. Of the Sons of
Maso de gli Albizi; Lucca, out of animosity to Rinaldo, has engaged himself on
the other side: in the Family of the Guiccardini, among the Sons of Luigi,
Piero is an Enemy to his Brother Giovanni, and sides with our adversaries.
Tomaso and Nicolo Soderini, in opposition to Francesco, their Uncle, are
manifestly defected. So that if it be seriously deliberated, who are on their
side, and who are on ours, I know no reason why ours should be called the
faction of the Nobility more than theirs. And if it be alleged, that the
people are all on their side; so much is ours the worse; for when ever we come
to blows, we shall not be able to oppose them. If we insist upon our dignity,
it was given us at first, and has been continued to us for fifty years by this
State; and if now we should discover our weakness, we should certainly lose it.
If you pretend the justice of our cause, and that that will give us reputation,
and detract from our Enemies;

I answer, it is fit that justice should be known and believed by other people,
as well as our selves; which is quite contrary, the whole cause of our present
Commotion being founded upon a bare suspicion, that Cosimo would usurp, and
make himself Sovereign, of our City. Though this suspicion passes among us, it
does not with other people who accuse us, even for our accusation of him.
Examine the crimes upon which we ground our suspicion; what are they, but that
he distributes his money freely, according to every Man's necessity; and that not
only upon a private, but public account, not only to the Florentines, but to
the foreign Commanders: that he favor this or that Citizen which desires to be
a Magistrate; that by the general reputation he has among all People, he
advances this, or that, of his friends to employments as he sees occasion: so
that the whole weight and strength of his impeachment, lies in this; that he is
charitable, liberal; ready to his friend; and beloved by all People. Tell me I
beseech you what Law is it that prohibits, that blames, and condemns
beneficence, or love? It Is true, these are ways by which Men aspire and do many
times arrive at the Supremacy; but they are not thought so by other People; nor
are we sufficient to obtrude them; because our own ways have defamed us; and
the City (having lived always in faction) is become corrupt and partial, and
will never regard our accusations. But admit you succeed and should prevail so
far as to banish him (which truly if the Senate concur might be done without
difficulty (how can you think among so many of his friends as will be left
behind, and labor incessantly for his return, to obviate or prevent it?
Certainly it will be impossible, his interest is so great, and himself so
universally beloved, you can never secure him. If you go about to banish the
chief of those who discover themselves to be his friends, you do but multiply
your adversaries, and create more Enemies to your self: return he will, in a
very short time, and then you have gained only this point, to have banished a
good Man, and readmitted a bad: for you must expect he will be exasperated, his
Nature debauched by those who call him back; and being obliged to them so
highly it will be no prudence in him to reject them. If your design be to put
him to Death formally, by the cooperation of the Magistrate; that is not to be
done; his wealth, and your corruption will preserve him. But admit he should
die, or being banished never return, I do not see what advantage will accure to
our state. If it be delivered from Cosimo, it will be in the same danger of
Rinaldo; and I am of their number who would have no Citizen exceed another in
Authority. If either of them prevail (as one of them must) I know not what
obligation I have to favor Rinaldo more than Cosimo. I will say no more, than
God deliver this City from private usurpation, and (when our sins do deserve
it) particularly from his. Do not therefore persuade to a thing that is every
way so dangerous; do not fancy that by the assistance of a few, you can oppose
against a multitude: all the Citizens you converse with, partly by ignorance,
and partly by malice, are disposed to sell their Country; and fortune is so
favorable as to have presented them a Chapman. Manage your self therefore by
my Counsel for once; live quietly, and observe, and (as to your liberty) you
will have as much reason to be jealous of your own party, as the adverse. When
troubles do happen, let me advise you to be a Neuter; by it you will stand fair
with both sides, and preserve your self, without prejudice to your Country

These words rebated the edge of Barbadoro's fury; and all things remained
peaceable during the war with Lucca. But peace being concluded, and Uzano
deceased, the City was left without wars abroad, or Government at home; every
Man driving on his own pernicious designs; and Rinaldo (looking upon himself
was now as Chief of the Party) pressed and importuned all such Citizens as he
thought capable of being Gonfalonieri, to take Arms and wrest their Country out
of the jaws of a person, who by the malice of a few, and the ignorance of the
multitude, would otherwise inevitably enslave it. These Plots and
counter-plots, on Rinaldo's side, and his Adversaries kept the City in a
perpetual jealouse; Insomuch that at the creation of every Magistrate it was
publicly declared how every Man stood affected both to the one faction and the
other; and at the election of Senators, the whole City was in an uproar: every
thing that was brought before the Magistrate (how inconsiderable and trifling
so ever) created a mutiny: all secrets were discovered: nothing was so good, or
so evil, but it had its favorers and opposers; the good as well as the bad
were equally traduced, and no one Magistrate, did execute his Office.

Florence remaining in this confusion; and Rinaldo impatient to depress the
Authority of Cosimo: considering with himself that Bernardo Guadagni (were it
not for his arreers to the Public) was a fit Person to be chosen Gonfaloniere;
to qualify him for that Office, he discharged them himself. And coming
afterward to a Scrutiny, it fell out that Fortune (which has been always a
friend to our disorders) made Bernardo Gonfaloniere for the Months of September
and October. Rinaldo visited him forthwith, and told him that the Nobility, and
all People that desired to live happily, were much rejoiced at his preferment;
and that it was now his business to carry himself so as they might never repent
it: he laid before him the danger of dividing among themselves; and how nothing
could contribute so much to their Union, as the depression of Cosimo; for he
was the Man, and no other, who kept them down, by the immensity of his
treasure, and raised up himself so high, that without timely prevention he
would make himself Sovereign. That (as he was a good Citizen) it was his Office
to provide against it, by assembling the People in the Piazza; taking the State
into his protection; and restoring its liberty to its Country: he put him in
mind that Salvestro de Medici could (though unjustly) curb and correct the
Authority of the Guelfs, to whom (if for no other reason but for the Blood
which their Ancestors lost in that quarrel) the Government belonged; and what
he did unjustly against so many, Bernardo might do justly, and therefore safely
against one. He encouraged him not to fear: for his friends would be ready to
assist him, with their Arms in their hands. The People that were his creatures,
were not to be regarded, for no more assistance was to be expected by Cosimo
from them, than they had formerly yielded to Giorgio Scali. His riches was not
to be dreaded; for, when seized by the Senate, his wealth would be theirs, and
for conclusion he told him, that in doing thus, he would unite and secure the
Commonwealth, and make himself glorious. Bernardo replied in short, that he
believed what he said to be not only true but necessary: and that time being
now fitter for action than discourse, he should go and provide what force he
could, that it might appear he had companions in his Enterprise. As soon as he
was in possession of his Office; had disposed his Companies, and settled all
things with Rinaldo, he cited Cosimo, who (though dissuaded by most of his
friends) appeared presuming more upon his own innocence, than the Mercy of his
Judges. Cosimo was no sooner entered into the Palace, and secured; but Rinaldo
with all his servants in Arms, and his whole party at his heels, came into the
Piazza, where the Senators causing the people to be called, 200 Citizens were
selected to constitute a Balia reformation of the State. This Balia was no
sooner in force, but the first thing they fell upon in order to their
reformation, was the process against Cosimo; many would have him banished; many
executed; and many were silent, either out of compassion for him, or
apprehension of other people; by means of which non-concurrence, nothing was
concluded. In one of the Towers of the Palace (called Alberghettino) Cosimo was
a Prisoner in the Custody of Federigo Malavolti. From this place Cosimo could
hear and understand what was said; and hearing the clutter of Arms, and
frequent calling out to the Balia, he began to be fearful of his Life, but
more, lest he should be assassinated by his particular Enemies. In this terror
he absteen'd from his meat, and eat nothing in four days but a morsel of Bread.
Which being told to Federigo, he accosted him thus.

You are afraid to be poisoned, Federig^'s speech to Cosimo his Prisoner.
and you kill your self with hunger. You have but small esteem for me, to
believe I would have a hand in any such wickedness: I do not think your Life is
in danger, your friends are too unmerous both within the Palace, and without:
if there be any such designs, assure your self they must take new measures; I
will never be their instrument, nor imbrue my hands in the Blood of any Man,
much less of yours, who has never offended me: courage then; feed as you did
formerly, and keep your self alive for the good of your Country and friends,
and that you may feed with more confidence, I my self will be your Taster.

These words revived Cosimo exceedingly: who with tears in his Eyes kissing and
embraceing Federigo, in most pathetical and passionate terms he thanked him for
his humanity; and promised him reward, if ever his fortune gave him
opportunity: Cosimo being by this means in some kind of repose; and his
business and condition in dispute among the Citizens; to entertain Cosimo
Federigo brought home with him one night to Supper, a Servant of the
Gonfaloniere's called Fargannaccio, a pleasant Man, and very good company.
Supper being almost done, Cosimo (hoping to make advantage by his being there,
having known him before very well) made a sign to Federigo to go out; who
apprehending his meaning, pretended to give order for something that was
wanting, and went forth. After some few preliminary words when they were alone,
Cosimo gave Fargannaccio a token to the Master of the Hospital of S. Maria
Nuova for 1100 Ducates, a thousand of them to be delivered to the Gonfaloniere,
and the odd hundred for himself. Forgannaccio undertook to deliver them; the
Money was paid; and the Gonfaloniere was desired to take some opportunity of
visiting Cosimo himself. Upon the receipt of this sum, Bernardo became more
moderate, and Co^imo was only confined to Padua, though Rinaldo designed
against his Life. Besides Cosimo Averardo, and several others of the Medici
were imprisoned and among the rest Puccio, and Giovanni Pucci. For greater
terror to such as were dissatisfied with the Banishment of Cosimo, the Balia
was reduced to the eight of the Guards, Cosimo banished.
and the Captain of the people. Upon which resolution, Cosimo being conveen'd
before the Senate the 3 of October 1433, received the sentence of Banishment;
with exhortation to submit, unless he intended they should proceed more
severely both against his Person and Estate. Cosimo received his sentence very
cheerfully. He assured them, that honorable convention could not order him to
any place, to which he would not willingly repair. 1433.
He desired of them, that since they had not thought fit to take away his Life,
they would vouchsafe to secure it, for he understood there were many in the
Piazza who attended to kill him; and at length he protested that in what ever
place or condition he should be, himself and his Estate should be always at the
service of that City, Senate, and people. The Gonfaloniere, bad him be
satisfied; kept him in the palace till night; conveyed him than to his own
house; and having supped with him delivered him to a guard to be conducted
safely to the Frontiers. Wherever he passed, Cosimo was honorably received;
visited publicly by the Venetians; and treated by them more like a Sovereign
than a Prisoner, Florence being in this manner deprived of a Citizen so
universally beloved, every Body was dismayed, as well they who prevailed, as
they who were overpowered. Whereupon Rinaldo, foreseeing his Fate, that he
might not be deficient to himself, or his party, called his Friends together,
and told them.

That he now saw very evidently their destruction was at hand; Rinaldo's speech
to his Friends.
that they had suffered themselves to be overcome by the entreaties, and tears,
and bribes of their Enemies, not considering that ere long it would be their
turns to weep, and implore, when their Prayers would not be heard, nor their
tears find any compassion; and for the money they had received, not only the
principal would be required, but interest extorted with all possible cruelty.
That they had much better have died themselves, than Cosimo should have escaped
with his Life, and his friends be continued in Florence. Great Men should never
be provoked: when they are, there is no going back. That now there appeared no
remedy to him, but to fortify in the City; which our Enemies opposing (as
doubtless they will) we may take our advantage and banish them by force, since
we cannot by Law. That the result of all this would be no more (than what he
had inculcated before) the restoration of the Nobility; the restitution of
their honors and Officers in the City; and the corroboration of their party
with them, as the adversary had strengthened his with the People. And that by
this means, their party would be made more strong by assuming more courage and
Vigor, and by acquiring more credit and reputation. At last supperadding, that
if these remedies were not applied in time, he could not see which way, amidst
so many Enemies, the State was to be preserved, and he could not but foresee
the City and their whole party would be destroyed.

To this, Mariotto Boldovinetti opposed himself, alleging the haughtiness of
the Nobility, and their insupportable Pride; and that it was not prudence in
them to run themselves under a certain Tyranny, to avoid the uncertain dangers
of the People. Rinaldo perceiving his Counsel not likely to take, complained of
his misfortune, and the misfortune of his party; imputing all to the malignity
of their stars, rather then to the blindness and inexperience of the Men.
Whilst things were in this suspense, and no necessary provision made, a letter
was discovered from Agnalo Accinivoli to Cosimo, importing the affections of
the City toward him, and advising him to stir up some War or other, and make
Neri de Gino his friend, for he did presage the City would want Money, and no
Body being found to supply them, it might put the Citizens in mind of him, and
perhaps prevail with them to solicit his return: and if Neri should be taken
off from Rinaldo, his party would be left too weak to defend him. This letter
coming into the hands of the Senate, was the occasion that Agnolo was secured,
examined, and sent into banishment; and yet his example could not at all deter
such as were Cosimo's friends. The year was almost come about since Cosimo was
banished; and about the latter end of August 1434, Nicolo di Croco was drawn
Gonfaloniere for the next two months, and with him eight new Senators chosen of
Cosmo's Party.

So that that election frighted Rinaldo and his friends. And because by Custom
it was three days after their election before the Senators were admitted to the
execution of their office, Rinaldo addressed himself again to the heads of his
Party, and remonstrated to them the danger that was hanging over their heads:
that the only remedy left them was immediately to take Arms, to cause Donati
Velluti (who was Gonf^loniere at that time) to erect a new Balia: to degrade
the new Senators; to create others (for their turns) in their places: to burn
the old, and fill up the next imborsation with the names of their friends: this
resolution was by some people held necessary and good, but by others it was
thought too viole^^, and that which would draw very ill consequences after it.
Among the number of dissenters Palla Strozzi was one; who being a quiet,
gentle, and courteous Person, apter for study, than the restraining of
factions, or opposing civil dissentions replied that all enterprises that are
contri^'d with the least shadow of wisdom, or Courage, seem good at first, but
prove difficult in the execution, and destructive in the end. That he had
thought (the Dukes Army being upon their frontiers in Romagna) the apprehension
of new War abroad, would have employed the thoughts of the Senate, better than
the differences at home. That if it should appear they designed an alteration
of the Government (which could hardly be concealed) the people would always
have time enough to get to their Arms, and perform what was necessary for their
Common defense; which being done of necessity, would not carry with it either
so much wonder, or reproach.

Upon these considerations it was resolved, that the new Senators should be
permitted to enter; but such an eye to be had to their proceedings, that upon
the least injury, or reflection upon their party, they should unanimously take
Arms and rendezvous at the Piazza of St. Pulinare, from whence (being not far
from the Palace) they might dispose of themselves as their advantage directed.
This being the result of that meeting, the new Senators entered upon the Office;
and the Gonfaloniere, to give himself a reputation, and to render himself
formidable to his Enemies, caused his predecessor Donato Velluti to be clapped
in Prison, as a Person who had embezled the public treasure: after this, he
felt, and sounded his Brethren about Cosimo's return; and ^inding them
disposed, he communicated with such as he thought the heads of the Medici's
party, who encouraging him likewise, he cited Rinaldo Ridolfo Peruzzi, and
Nicolo Barbadori, as the Principals of the contrary faction. Upon this
citation, Rinaldo concluding it no time longer to protract, issued forth from
his house with a considerable number of Armed Men, and joined himself with
Ridolfo Peruzzi and Nicolo Barbadori, immediately: there were among them
several other Citizens, besides a good number of Soldiers (which being out of
pay were at that time in Florence) and all drew up (as was before agreed) at
the Piazza di St. Pulinare. Palla Srozzi though he had got good store of people
together, stirred not out of his House, and Giovanni Guiccardini did the same;
whereupon Rinaldo sent to remember them of the^^ engagement, and to reprehend
their delay: Giovanni reply,d, that he should do disservice enough to the
Enemy, if by keeping his house, he prevented his Brother Piero's going forth to
the relief of the Senate. Palla, after much solicitation, and several messages,
came on Horseback to St. Pulinare, but unarmed and with only two footmen at his
heels. Rinaldo perceiving him, advanced to meet him; upbraided him with his
negligence, and told him that his not joining with the rest, proceeded from the
want of ^idelity or courage; either of which was unworthy a person of his
quality or rank. That if he thought by not doing his duty against the other
faction, he should save his own stake, and escape with his liberty and Life; he
should find himself mistaken. That for his own part, if things happened
adversly he should have this consolation, that he was not backward with his
advice before the danger; nor in it with his Power: Whereas he and his Comerads
could not without horror remember that this was the third time they had betrayed
their Country. First, when they preserved Cosimo; the next, when they rejected
his Counsels; and the third then, in not assisting with their supplies; to
which Palla made no answer that the standers by could understand but muttering
to himself, he faced about with his Horse, and returned from whence he came.

The (...) perceiving Rinaldo and his party in Arms, and themselves utterly
deserted, they caused the Gates of the Palace to be barracado'd up, as not
knowing what else was to be done. But Rinaldo neglecting his opportunity of
marching into the Piazza, by attending supplies which never came to him,
deprived himself of his advantage; gave them courage to provide for their
defense and to several other Citizens to repair to them, both with their
Persons, and advice. In the mean time, some friends of the Senators which were
least suspected went to Rinaldo and acquainted him, that the Senate could not
imagine the reason of this commotion: that if it was about the business of
Cosimo they had no thoughts of recalling him. That they never had any
inclination to offend him; i^ these were the grounds of their jealousy, they,
might assure themselves if they pleased; come into the Palace, be civilly
received, and readily gratified in their demands. But fair words would not down
with Rinaldo, who told them that the way he had prepos'd to assure himself, was
by reducing the Senators to their private Condition; and reforming the City to
the benefit of all People. But it seldom happens that any thing is well done
where there is equality in Power, and difference in judgment.

Ridolfo Peruzzi (moved with what the Citizens had said) told them that for his
part he asked no more but that Cosimo might be kept out: that if that were
granted, he had his designs: that he would not fill the City with Blood, nor
impose upon the Senate; that he was ready to obey them if they pleased, and
according he marched with all his followers into the Palace, and was joyfully
received. Rinaldo's staying at St. Pullnare; pusillanimity of Palla, and
Ridolfo's revolt defeated Rinaldo of his victory and rebated much of the first
edge and vigor of his Party: with all which, the Popes Authority concurred.
Eugenius the Pope labors a peace,
Pope Eugenius, being driven out of Rome by the people, was at that time
resident in Florence; who understanding the tumult; and judging it incumbent
upon his office (if possible) to appease it, he sent Giovanni Vitelleschi (a
Patriarch and great friend of Rinaldo's) to desire he might speak with him, for
he had authority and interest enough with the Senate to secure and content him,
without Blood shed, or other detriment of the Citizens: upon the persuasion of
his friend, Rinaldo with all his Squadron marched to St. Maria Novella where
the Pope lay. Eugenius let him know the promise the Senate had made him to
commit all differences to his determination; and that (when their Arms were
laid down) all things should be ordered, as he pleased to award. Rinaldo
observing the coldness of Palla; and the inconstancy of Peruzzi, and having no
more cards to play, cast himself into his Holiness his Arms, not doubting but
his interest was sufficient to protect him. Cosimo recalled


Hereupon by the Popes direction notice was given to Nicolo Barbadori and the
rest which attended Rinaldo without, that they should go home and lay down
their Arms, for Rinaldo was in treaty with him about a Peace with the Senate;
upon which news they all disbanded, and laid down their Arms. The Senate
continued their Treaty by the mediation of the Pope; but in the mean time sent
privately into the Mountains of Pistoria to raise foot, and causing them to
join with their own forces and march into Florence in the night, they possessed
themselves of all the Posts in the City; called the people together into the
Palace; e^^^ted a new Balia; which the first time they met, recalled Cosimo,
and all that were b^nish'd with him. And on the contrary faction, they banishd
Rinaldo de gli Albizi, Ridolfo Peruzzi, Nicolo Barbadori, Palla Strozzi, and so
great a number of other Citizens, that there was scarce a Town in Italy but had
some of their exiles, besides several which were banished into foreign
Countries. So by this and such accidents as these, Florence was impoverished in
its wealth and industry, as well as inhabitants. The Pope beholding the
destruction of those Men who by his intercession had laid down their Arms, was
much troubled, complained heavily to Rinaldo of their violence, exhorted him to
patience, and to expect submissively till his fortune should turn. To whom
Rinaldo made this answer.

The small confidence they had in me, who ought to have believed me, and the too
great con^idence I had in you, Rinaldo's answer to the Pop^.
has been the ruin of me and my party. But I hold my self more culpable than
any body, for believing that you who had been driven out of your own Country,
could keep me in mine. Of the vicissitudes, and uncertainty of fortune, I have
had experience enough. I have never presumed in its prosperity, and adversity
shall never deject me; knowing that when she pleases she can take about and
indulge me: if she continues her severity, and never smiles upon me more, I
shall not much value it, esteeming no great happiness to live in a City where
the Laws are of less authority, than the passions of particular men. For might
I have my choice, that should be my Country where I may securely enjoy my
fortune and friends; not that where the first is easily sequestered, and the
latter to preserve his own Estate, will forsake me in my greatest necessity. To
wise and good men it is always less ungrateful to hear at a distance, than to be
a spectator of the miseries of his Country; and more honorable they think to be
an honest Rebel, than a servile Citizen.

Having said thus, he took his leave of the Pope, and complaining often to
himself of his own Counsels, and the cowardice of his friends, ^in great
indignation he left the City, and went into banishment. On the otherside,
Cosimo having notice of his restoration; returned to Florence, where he was
received with no less ostentation and triumph, than if he had obtained some
extraordinary Victory; so great was the concourse of people, and so high the
demonstration of their joy, that by an unanimous and universal concurrence he
was saluted, The Benefactor of the people, and the Father of their Country.

THE HISTORY OF FLORENCE.
Book V.
GOvernments in the variations which most commonly happen to them, do proceed
from order to confusion, and that confusion afterward turns to order again.
For Nature having fixed no sublunary things, as soon as they arrive at their
achme and perfection, being capable of no further ascent, of necessity they
decline. So, on the other side, when they are reduced to the lowest pitch of
disorder having no farther to descend, they recoil again to their former
perfection: good Laws degenerating into bad customs, and bad customs ingendring
good Laws. For, virtue begets peace; peace begets idleness; idleness, mutiny;
and mutiny, destruction: and then vice versa; that ruin begets Laws; those
Laws, virtue; and virtue begets honor and good success. Hence it is, as wise
men have observed, that Learning is not so ancient as Arms; and that in all
Provinces as well as Cities, there were Captains before Philosophers, and
Soldiers before Scholars. For good and well conducted Arms having gotten the
victory at first, and that victory, quiet. The courage and magnanimity of the
Soldier could not be depraved with a more honorable sort of idleness, than
the desire of learning; nor could idleness be introduced into any well-governed
City by a more bewitching and insinuating way. This was manifest to Cato (when
Diogenes and Carneades the Philosophers were sent Ambassadors, from Athens, to
the Senate) who observing the Roman youth to be much taken with their doctrine,
and following them up and down with great admiration; foreseeing the ill
consequences that honest laziness would bring upon his Country: he obtained a
Law, that no Philosopher should be admitted into Rome. All Governments
therefore do, by these means, some time or other come to decay; and when once
at the lowest, and men's sufferings have made them wiser, they rebound again,
and return to their first order unless they be suppressed, and kept under by some
extraordinary force.

These vicissitudes and revolutions (first by means of the Tuscans, and then of
the Romans) kept Italy unsettled, and rendered it sometimes happy, and
sometimes miserable: and although nothing was afterward erected out of the
Roman ruins, comparable to what was before; (which nevertheless might have
been done with great glory under a virtuous Prince) yet in some of the new
Cities and Governments, such sprouts of Roman virtue sprung up; that though
they did not usurp upon one another, yet they lived so amicably and orderly
together, that they not only defended themselves, but repelled the Barbarians.

Among these Governments was the Florentine, though perhaps inferior in
circumference of territory, yet in power and authority equal to any of them:
for being seated in the heart of Italy, rich, and ready upon all occasions,
they defended themselves bravely when ever they were invaded, or brought the
victory to their allies, wherever they sided.

If therefore by reason of the courage of those new Principalities, the times
were not altogether quiet; yet the severity of the War did not make them
insupportable. For that cannot be called Peace, where the Governments clash,
and invade one another; nor that War, in which no men are slain, no Towns
pillaged, nor no Government destroyed. The Wars of those times were begun
without fear; carried on without danger; and concluded without detriment.
Insomuch, that that virtue which used to be extinguished in other Provinces, by
means of a long peace, was spent and exhausted in Italy by the faintness of the
war, as will be more conspicuous by our description of the occurrences betwixt
1434 and 1494. In which it will appear how, at length, a new way was opened to
the excursions of the Barbarians; and Italy relapsed into its old servitude and
bondage. And if the actions of our Governors, both at home and abroad, be not
to be read (as the actions of our Ancestors) with so much wonder and admiration
of their courage and grandeur. Yet, in other respects they may seem as
considerable, seeing how many Noble and great people have been restrained, and
kept under by their Arms, how weak and ill managed however. And though, in our
description we make no mention of the fortitude of the Soldier, the conduct of
the Captains, nor the love of the Citizen toward his Country; yet we shall
discover what cheats, what cunning, and what arts were used by both Princes,
Soldiers, and Citizens, to preserve a reputation which they never deserved.
And this perhaps may be as worthy our knowledge, as the wisdom and conduct of
old; for if the examples of Antiquity do teach us what to follow; our more
modern transactions will tell us what to avoid.

Italy, by those who commanded it, was reduced into such a condition, that when
by agreements of the Princes, a Peace was made up, it was presently interrupted
by those who had Arms in their hands: so that they neither gained honor by
their Wars, nor quiet by their Peace. A Peace being concluded betwixt the Duke
of Milan and the League in the year 1433, the Soldiers unwilling to disband,
turned the War upon the Church. These Soldiers were at that time of two
Factions, 1433. The Soldiers in Italy distinguished into two parties.
the Braccescan, and the Sforzescan Faction. Of this latter, Conte Francesco,
the son of Sforza, was Captain; the first was commanded by Nicolo Piccinino
and, Nicolo Forte Braccio. To these two parties all the rest of the Soldiers
in Italy joined themselves. Of the two, Sforza's party was most considerable,
as well for the courage of their Conte, The Duke of Milan promises his Daughter
to Conte Fran. Sforza.
as for a promise the Duke of Milan had made him, to give him in Marriage a
natural daughter of his called Madona Bianca; the probability of which alliance
gained him great reputation. After the Peace of Lombardy was concluded; both
these parties, upon several pretended occasions, turned their Arms against
Eugenius the Pope. Nicolo Forte Braccio, was moved by an old animosity Braccio
had always retained to the Church. The Conte was spurred on by his ambition.
Nicolo assaulted Rome, and the Conte possessed himself of la Marca; whereupon,
the Romans (to evade the War) turned Eugenius out of Rome, The Pope invaded,
makes peace with Fran. Sforza.
who fled to Florence, though with no little danger and difficulty. Being
arrived there, upon consideration of the danger he was in, and that he was
deserted by all the Princes, who re^used, upon his score, to take up those Arms
again, which so lately, and so willingly they laid down; made his Peace with
the Conte, and gave him the Signorie of la Marca, though the Conte had added
insolence to his usurpation, and, in his Letters to his Agents, dated them in
Latin (as they do frequently in Italy Ex Girifalco nostro Firmiano, invito
Petro and Paulo. But not contented with the Grant of that Country, he would
needs be created Gonfaloniere of the Church, and the Pope condescended; so much
^id his Holiness perfer an ignominious Peace before dangerous War. The Conte,
upon these terms, became a friend to the Pope, and converted his Arms against
Nicolo Forte Braccio; betwixt whom, for many Months together, several accidents
happened in the territory of the Church; so that which side soever prevailed,
the Pope and his Subjects suffered more than those that managed the War. At
length, by the mediation of the Duke of Milan, an agreement (in the nature of a
Truce) was concluded betwixt them, by which both of them remained Masters of
several Towns in the Patrimony of the Church. The War was in this manner
extinguished in Rome, but it brake out again presently in Romagna, Wars in
Romagna.
by the means of Battista da Canneto, who had caused certain of the Family of
the Grifoni in Bologna to be assassinated; and drove out the Pope's Governor,
and many others which he suspected to be his enemies; to keep by force, what he
had got by surprise, he addressed himself to Philippo for aid: and the Pope to
countermine him, and revenge the injuries he had received, applied to the
Venetian and Florentine. Both parties being supplied, there were two great
Armies in Romagna of a sudden. Philp's Auxiliaries were commanded by Nicolo
Piccinino. The Venetian and Florentine, by Gattamelata, and Nicolo da
Tolentino. Not far from Imola they came to a Battle, in which the Venetians and
Florentines were defeated; and Nicolo da Tolentino sent Prisoner to the Duke,
where he died in a few days, either by Poison or grief. The Duke being either
impoverished by the War, or apprehending this Victory would quiet the League,
followed not his advantage, but gave the Pope and his Confederates opportunity
to recruit; who choosing the Conte Francesco for their General, Fran Sforza
General of the Pope's Leag^e
they sent him to drive Forte Braccio out of the Lands of the Church; and to
try if they could put an end to that War which they had begun in favor of the
Pope. The Romans seeing his Holiness in the field again, and his Army
considerable; they desired to be reconciled; and, having concluded the terms,
they received a Governor from him. Among other Towns, Nicolo Forte Braccio had
possessed himself of Fiboli, Montefiasconi, the City of Castello, and Ascesi:
not being able to keep the field, Nicolo was retreated into this latter Town,
and besieged by the Conte. The siege proving long, by the braveness of Nicolo's
defense, the Duke began to cast about, and consider, he must either hinder the
League from carrying the Town, or look to himself as soon as it was taken. To
give the Conte therefore diversion, he commanded Nicolo Piccinino, by the way
to Romagna, to pass into Tuscany: whereupon, the League judging the defense of
Tuscany of more importance than the reducing of Ascesi, they sent to the Conte
to stop Piccinino's passage, who was at that time with his Army at Furli. Upon
these orders the Conte raised his siege, and marched with his Forces to Cesena
having, left the War of la Marca, and the care of his own affairs to the
management of his Brother Lione. Whilst Piccinino was laboring to pass, and
Francesco to obstruct him, Nicolo Forte Braccio fell upon Lione, and with great
honor to himself, took him Prisoner, plundered his people, and following his
blow, took several Towns in la Marca at the same excursion. This news was very
unwelcome to the Conte, who gave all his own Country for lost; nevertheless,
leaving part of his Army to confront Piccinino he marched himself against Forte
Braccio with the rest, forced him to an engagement, and beat him. In which
defeat Forte Braccio was hurt, taken prisoner, and died of his wounds.

This Victory recovered all that Nicolo Forte Braccio had taken from him; and
forced the Duke of Milan to desire a peace, Peace betwixt the League and the
Duke
which he obtained by the mediation of Nicolo da Esti, Marqeuss of Ferrara, by
which it was agreed, that the Towns which the Duke had got in Romagna should be
restored; and his Forces withdrawn into Lombardy; and Battista da Caneto (as it
happens to those who owe their dominion to the courage or power of other
people) as soon as the Duke's Forces were drawn off, despairing to remain in
Bologna upon his own legs; quitted the Town, and left it to re-admit its old
Governor Antonio Bentivogli, who was chief of the contrary party.

All these things succeeded, during the banishment of Cosimo; upon whose
return, those persons who were active in his restoration, and those who had
suffered more than ordinarily before, concluded (without regard to any body
else) to secure themselves of all the Offices in the State. The Senate which
succeeded for the months of November and December, not satisfied with what
their predecessors had done in favor of their party; they lengthned the time,
changed the places of several which were banished, and sent many new ones into
banishment after them. The Citizens were questioned and molested, not only for
their inclinations to the parties, but for their wealth, their relations, and
private correspondencies. And, had this proscription proceeded to blood, it had
been as bad as Octaviano's, or Silla's: nor was it altogether without; for
Antonio di Bernardo was beheaded, and four other Cizens, (of which Zanobi Bell
Fratelli, and Cosimo Barbadori were two) who having escaped out of their
Dominions, and being gotten to Venice; the Venetians (valuing Cosimo's friend
ship before their own honor and reputation) caused them to be secured, sent
them prisoners home; where they were most unworthily put to death. However,
that example gave great advantage to Cosimo's party, and great terror to the
adverse; when it was considered that so potent a Republic should sell its
liberty to the Florentines, which was supposed to be done not so much in
kindness to Cosimo, as to revive and incense the factions in Florence; and by
engaging them in blood, to render the animosities in that City irreconcilable,
the Venetians being jealous of no other obstruction to their greatness, but the
Union of those parties. Having pillaged and banished all such as were enemies,
or suspected to be so to the State, they applied themselves to charess and
oblige new persons to corroborate their party; restored the Family of the
Alberti, New Ordinances in Florence
and who-ever else had been proclaimed Rebel to his Country. All the Grandees
(except some few) were reduced into the popular rank; the Estates of the Rebels
they sold to one another for a song. After which, they fortified themselves
with new Laws, new Magistrates, and new Elections, pulling out such as they
thought their enemies, and filling the purses with the names of their friends.
But, admonished by the ruin of their friends; and thinking not enough for the
security of their Government, to make the imborsation as they pleased; they
contrived, that all Officers of life and death should be created out of the
chief of their party; and that the Persons who were to oversee the
imborsations, and the new Squittini, should (with the Senators) have power to
create them. To the Eight of the Guards, they gave authority of life and death.
They decreed, that the banished Persons should not return (though the time of
their banishment was expired) till leave given them by four and thirty of the
Senate and the Colleges, when their whole number amounted but to thirty and
seven. They made it criminal to write, or receive Letters from them: every
word, every sign, every motion that was unpleasing to the Governors, was
punished severely; and if any one remained suspected who had escaped these
injuries, they loaded him with new duties and impositions, till, in a short
time, they had cleared the City of their Enemies, and secured the Government to
themselves. However that they might want no assistance from abroad, and
intercept it from such as should design against them; they entered into League
with the Pope, the Venetians, and the Duke of Milan.

Things being in this posture in Florence, Giovanna Queen of Naples died, and,
by will made Rinieri d^ Angio her heir. Alphonso, King of Aragon, was at that
time in Sicily, and having good interest with many of the Nobility of that
Kingdom, he prepared to possess it. The Neapolitans and several others of the
Lords were favorers of Rinieri. The Pope had no mind that either the one or
the other should have it but would willingly have governed by a Deputy of his
own. In the mean time Alphonso arrived out of Sicily, and was received by the
Duke of Sessa; where he entertained certain Princes into his pay, with design
(having Capua in his possession, which was governed at that time, in his name,
by the Prince of Taranto) to force the Neapolitans to his will. Wherefore he
sent his Army against Caietta, which was defended by a Garrison of Neapolitans.
Upon this Invasion, the Neapolitans demanded assistance of Philip; who
recommended the Enterprise to the people of Genoa; the Genoeses not only to
gratify the Duke, who was their Prince, but to preserve the goods and effects
which they had at that time both in Naples, and Caietta, rigged out a strong
fleet immediately. Alphonso having news of their preparations, reinforced
himself, went in Person against the Genoeses, and coming to an engagement with
them of the Island of Pontus, he was beaten, taken Prisoner, (with several
other Princes) and presented by the Genoeses into the hands of Duke Philip.
Alphonso brought prisoner to Duke Philip.
This Victory astonished all the Princes of Italy, who had any apprehension of
the power of Philip, beleiving it would give him opportunity to make himself
Master of all: but he (so different are the judgments of men) took his measures
quite contrary. Alphonso was a wise and prudent Prince, and as soon as he had
convenience of discoursing with Philip, remonstrated to him how much he was
mistaken in siding with Rinieri; for that assuredly, having made himself King
of Naples, he would endeavor, with all his Power, to bring Milan in subjection
to the French, that his assistance might be near him, and that upon any
distress, he might not be put to it to force a way for his supplies; nor was
there any way to do it so effectual, as by ruining him, and introducing the
French. That the contrary would happen by making Alphonso Prince; for then,
having nobody, to fear but the French, he should be obliged to love and
charess the Duke above any body in whose power it would be to give his enemies
a passage; by which means Alponso should have the title, but the power and
authority would remain in Duke Philip: insomuch, that it imported the Duke much
more than himself, to consider the dangers of one side, with the advantages of
the other, unless he desired more to satisfy his passion than to secure his
State. For, as by that way he would continue free and independent; by the
other, (lying betwixt two powerful Princes) he would lose his State quite, or
living in perpetual apprehension, be a slave to them both. These words wrought
so much upon the Duke, that, changing his designs, he set Alphonso at liberty,
sent him back to Genoa, and from thence into the Kingdom of Naples, where he
landed at Caietta which upon the news of his enlargement, had been seized by
some Lords of his party. The Genoeses (understanding how, without any regard to
them, the Duke had discharged the King; and, considering with themselves, that
of all their danger and expense, he had engrossed the honor, impropriated the
thanks of the Kings enlargement, and left them nothing but his regrate and
indignation for having defeated and taken him prisoner) were highly
dissatisfied with the Duke.

In the City of Genoa, The Dogs and his authority in Cenoa.
when it has the free exercise of its liberty by the free suffrages of the
people, a chief is chosen, which they call their Doge; not with the absolute
power of a Prince, to determine arbitrarily of any thing; but to purpose and
recommend what is to be debated and resolved upon by the Magistrates in the
Council. In the same City there are many Noble Families so mighty and potent,
they are not without difficulty to be brought to any obedience to the
Magistrate. Of all those Families, the Tregosi and Adorni are most powerful and
wealthy; and from them spring all the divisions of the City, and all the
contempt of the Laws; for differing perpetually among themselves, and
pretending both to the Dogeship; they are not contented to have it fairly
decided, but came many times to blows; by which, as one is set up, the other is
always depressed; and sometimes it falls out, that that party which is
overpowered, and unable to carry that Office otherwise, calls in foreign
assistance, and prostitutes that Government, which they cannot enjoy
themselves, to the dominion of a stranger.

By this means it comes often to pass, that they who have the Government in
Lombardy, have the command of Genoa likewise; as it happened at the time when
Alphonso was taken prisoner. Among the principal Citizens of Genoa, who caused
that City to be delivered into the hands of the Duke, Francisco Spinola.
Francisco Spinola was one; who not long after he had been very active to
enslave his Country, became suspected to the Duke (as it often happens in those
cases) Francisco being highly dissatisfied, left the Town; and by a kind of
voluntary exile, had his residence at Caietta; being there at that time when
the engagement was with Alphonso, and having behaved himself very well in it;
he presumed he had again merited so much favor from the Duke, as to be
permitted to live quietly in Genoa: but finding the Duke's jealousy to
continue, (as not believing he, that had betrayed his Country could ever be
true to him) he resolved to try a new experiment, to restore his Country to its
liberty, and himself to his honor and security at once; believing no remedy
could be administered so properly to his fellow Citzens, as by the same hand
which gave them their wound. Observing therefore the general indignation
against the Duke for having delivered the King; he concluded it a convenient
time to put his designs in execution; and accordingly he communicated his
resolutions with certain Persons, which he had some confidence were of the same
opinion, and encouraged them to follow him. It happened to be S. John Baptist's
day (which is a great Festival in that City) when Arismino, a new Governor,
sent them from the Duke, made his entry into Genoa. Being entered into the Town
in the Company of Opicino (his predecessor in the Government) and other
considerable Citizens, Francisco Spinola thought it no time to protract, but
running forth Armed into the streets, with such as were before privy to his
design, he drew them up in the Piazza before his house, and cried out Liberty,
Liberty. It Is not to be imagined with what alacrity the people and Citizens ran
to him at that very name; insomuch, that if any out of interest or other
consideration, retained an affection for the Duke, they were so far from having
time to arm, and make defense, they had scarce leisure to escape. Arismino,
with some of the Genoeses of his party, fled into the Castle which was kept for
the Duke. Opicino presuming he might get thither, fled toward the Palace,
where he had 2000 men at his command, with which he supposed he might not only
be able to secure himself, but to animate the people to a defense; but he
reckoned without his Host; for, before he could reach it, he was knocked on the
head, torn in pieces by the multitude, and his members dragged about the Streets.

After, Genoa recovers its liberty.
this the Genoeses having put themselves under new Magistrates and Officers of
their own, the Castle and all other posts which were kept for the Duke, were
reduced, and the City perfectly freed from its dependence on the Duke. these
things thus managed, though at first they gave the Princes of Italy occasion to
apprehend the growing greatness of the Duke, yet, now observing their
conclusion, they did not despair of being able to curb him; and therefore,
notwithstanding their late League with him, the Florentines Venetians and
Genoeses made a new one among themselves. Whereupon Rinaldo de gli Albizi, and
the other chief Florentine Exiles seeing the face of affairs altered, and all
things tending to confusion, they conceived hopes of persuading the Duke to a
War against Florence, and going upon that design to Milan, Rinaldo's Oration to
the Duke of Milan.
Rinaldo accosted the Duke as follows:

If we, who have been formerly your Enemies, do now with confidence supplicate
your assistance for our return into our own Country; neither your Highness, nor
any body else, (who considers the Progress of humane affairs, and the
volubility of fortune) ought at all to be surprised, seeing both of our passed
and present actions, of what we have done formerly to your self, and of what we
intend now to our Country, we can give a clear and a reasonable account. No
good man will reproach another for defending his Country, which way soever he
defends it. Nor was it ever our thoughts to injure you, but to preserve our
Country; which will be evident, if you consider how in the greatest stream of
our victories and success, we no sooner found your Highness disposed to a
peace, but we readily embraced it, and pursued it with more eagerness than your
self: so that as yet we are not conscious to our selves of any thing that may
make us doubt of your favor. Neither can our Country, in justice, complain,
that we are now pressing and importuning your Highness to employ those Arms
against it, when we have obstinately opposed them before, in its defense: for
that Country ought equally to be beloved by all which is equally indulgent to
all; and not that, which despising the rest, advances and admires only a few.
Nobody maintains it unlawful in all cases to bear Arms against ones Country.
Cities are mixed bodies, yet have they their resemblance with natural bodies;
and, as in these, many diseases grow which are not to be cured without
violence: so in the other, many times such inconveniences arise, that a
charitable and good Citizen would be more criminal to leave it infirm, than to
cure it, though with amputation, and the loss of some of its members. What
greater distemper can befall a politic body than servitude? And what more
proper remedy can be applied than that which will certainly remove it; Wars are
just, when they are necessary; and Arms are charitable when there is no other
hopes left to obtain justice. I know not what necessity can be greater than
ours; nor what act of charity more commendable, than to wrest our Country out
of the jaws of slavery. Our cause then being both just and charitable, ought
not to be slighted, either by us, or your Highness, though it were only in
compassion. But your Highness has your particular provocation besides; the
Florentines having had the confidence, after a peace solemnly concluded with
you, to enter into a new League with the Genoeses your Rebels; so that if our
prayers and condition should be unable, your own just indignation and
resentment should move you, especially seeing the enterprise so easy. Let not
their passed carriage discourage you, you have seen their power and resolution
to defend themselves formerly; and both of them were reasonably to be
apprehended, were they the same now as they have been, But you will find them
quite contrary, for, what strength, what wealth, can be expected in a City
which has lately exploded the greatest part of its rich and industrious men?
What obstinacy or resolution can be apprehended in a people which are divided,
and at enmity among themselves? Which enmity is the cause that, that very
treasure which is left, cannot now be employed so well as it formerly was; for
men do cheerfully disburse, when they see it is for the honor and security of
their Country; hoping, that peace may reprize, what the War has devoured. But
when in War and Peace they find themselves equally oppressed; and under a
necessity in the one, of enduring the outrages of their enemies; and in the
other, of truckling to the insolences of their friends; Nobody will supply
our advance one farthing toward its relief: and the people suffer more many
times by the avarice of their friends, than by the rapacity of their enemies;
for in this last case they have hopes some time or other to see an end of it;
but in the other they are desperate. In your last War you took up Arms against
an entire and united City; in this, you have to do only with a remnant. Then,
you attempted upon the liberty of the City; now* you will endeavor to restore
it: and it is not to be feared, that in such disparity of causes, the effects
should be the same. Nay rather your Victory is certain, and what advantage and
corroboration, that will be to your own State, is easily judged; having Tuscany
obliged to you thereby, and readier to serve you in any of your designs, than
Milan it self. So that, though formerly this acquest would have been looked
upon as usurpation and violence; it will be now esteemed an high piece of
justice and charity. Suffer not therefore this opportunity to pass, and be
sure, if your other enterprises against this City have produced nothing but
expense, difficulty, and dishonor; this will make you amends, and with great
ease, turn to your great honor and advantage.

The Duke needed not many words to excite him against the Florentines; he had
an hereditary quarrel to them, which (besides the blindness of his ambition) did
always provoke him, and now more than ordinarily, upon occasion of their new
League with the Genoeses. However the expenses and dangers he had formerly
passed, the memory of his late defeat, and the vanity and ill-grounded hopes of
the exiles, discouraged him quite. The Duke, upon the first news of the
Rebellion in Genoa, sent Nicolo Piccinino, with what Forces he had and could
get together, toward that City, to recover it, if possible, before the
Citizens should have composed themselves, or put the Government into order;
presuming much upon the Castle which stood out for him. And though Nicolo drove
the Genoeses up into the Mountains, and took from them the vale of Pozivori,
where they had fortified themselves; yet he found so much difficulty
afterward, (though he had beat them into the Town) that he was forced to draw
off. Whereupon at the instigation of the exiles, he received orders from the
Duke, that he should attack them on the East Side of the River, and make what
devastations he could in their Country toward Pisa; supposing* that by the
success of this expedition, he should be able to judge from time to time what
course he was to steer. Upon the receipt of these orders, Nicolo assaulted
Serezana, and took it and then having done much mischief in those parts to
alarm the Florentines, he marched toward Lucca, giving out he would pass that
way into the Kingdom of Naples, to assist the King of Aragon. Pope Eugenius,
upon these new accidents, departed from Florence to Bologna, where he proposed
and negotiated an accommodation betwixt the Duke and the League; representing
to the Duke, that if he would not comply, he would be forced to part with the
Conte Francesco to the League; for Francesco being his confederate, was at that
time under his pay. But, though his Holiness took much pains in the business,
that treaty came to nothing; for the Duke would not consent, unless Genoa were
restored; and the League were as obstinate to have it remain free; so that all
parties growing diffident of the peace, each of them began to make provision
for War. Nicolo Pinccinino being arrived at Lucca the Florentines began to
apprehend new troubles, caused Neri di Gino to march with all speed into the
Country of Pisa, and obtained of the Pope that Conte Francesco might join with
him, and their united Forces take their Post before St. Gonda: Piccinino being
at Lucca, desired a passport to go into the Kingdom of Naples, and being
denied, he threatened to force it. The Armies and Officers were of equal number
and eminence; so that neither side being over-forward to run the hazard of a
Battle, by reason of the extraordinary coldness of the weather, (it being in
December) they lay by one another several days without any action at all. The
first that moved was Nicolo Piccinino; who was informed, that if in the night
he assaulted Vico Pisano he should easily carry it. Nicolo attempted it; but
failing of his design, he plundered the Country about it, and burned the Town
of S. Giovanni alla Ven^.

This enterprise (though for the most part ineffectual) encouraged Nicolo to
proceed nevertheless; especially, observing that the Conte and Neri stirred not
to molest him: thereupon he assaulted St. Maria in Castello and Filetto, and
took them both: nor did the Florentine Army move for all that: not that the
Conte was afraid to come forth, but because the Magistrates in Florence (out
of respect to the Pope, who was mediating a peace) had not as yet resolved upon
the War: and that which was but prudence in the Florentines, being interpreted
fear by the enemy, they took courage, and with all the Forces they could make,
sat down before Barga. The news of that siege caused the Florentines to lay
aside all compliments and respect; and to resolve not only to relieve Barga,
but to invade the Country of the Lucchesi. Whereupon the Conte marching
directly against Nicolo, and giving Battle to force him from the Siege he
worsted his Army, and made him draw off: the Venetians in the mean time
perceiving the Duke had broke the League, sent Giovan Francesco da Gonzague
their General, with an Army as far as Chiaradadda, who spoiling the Duke's
Country, constrained him to call back Nicolo Piccinino out of Tuscany. Which
revocation, with the Victory they had lately obtained against Nicolo,
encouraged the Florentines to an expedition against Lucca, and gave them great
hopes of success: in which they carried themselves without either fear or
respect, seeing the Duke (who was the only person they apprehended) employed by
the Venetians; and the Lucchesi, by having, as it were, received their enemies
into their houses, and given them cause to invade them, had left themselves no
grounds to complain.

In April therefore, 1437.
in the year 1437 the Conte marched with his Army; and before he would fall
upon any thing of the enemies, he addressed himself to the recovery of what had
been lost, and accordingly he reduced S. Maria de Castello and whatever else
had been taken by Piccinino. Then advancing against the Lucchesi, he sat down
before Camajore; whose Garrison and inhabitants (though well enough affected to
their Lord) being more influenced by the terror of an enemy at hand, than their
fidelity to their friends a far off, surrendered immediately; after which, he
took Massa and Serazan with the same dexterity and reputation; and then turning
his Army toward Lucca in the month of May; he destroyed their Corn, burned
their Villages, stubb'd up their Vines, and their Fruit Trees, drove away their
Cattle, and omitted nothing of outrage and hospitality that is, or can be
committed by Soldiers. The Lucchesi seeing themselves abandoned by the Duke,
and unable to defend their Country, retired into the Town, where they
entrenched and fortified so well, that they did not doubt (by reason of their
numbers within) but to be able to Make it good for some time, as they had
formerly done. Their only fear was of the unconstancy of the people, who being
weary of the siege, would probably consider their own private danger before the
liberty of their Country, and force them to some ignominious accord. Whereupon,
to encourage them to a vigorous defense, they were called together into the
Marketplace, and one of the wisest and gravest of the Citizens spoke to them
as follows.

You have often heard, The Speech of a Citizen of Lucca to the people.
and must needs understand, that things done of necessity, ar^ neither to be
praised, nor condemned. If therefore you accuse us of having drawn this War
upon you, by entertaining the Duke's Forces, and suffering them to assault you;
you are highly mistaken. You cannot be ignorant of the ancient and inveterate
hatred the Florentines bear you; so that it is not any injury in you, nor any
resentment in them, but your weakness and their ambition which has provoked
them; the first giving them hopes, the other impatience to oppress you. Do not
think that any kindness of yours can divert them from that desire; nor any
injury of yours provoke them to be worse? It Is their business therefore to rob
you of your liberty; it is yours to defend it; and what either of you do in
pursuance of those ends may be lamented, but cannot be wondered at by any body:
we may be sorry our Country is invaded, our City besieged, our Houses burned;
but who of us all is so weak as to admire it? Seeing, if our power were as
great we would do the same to them, and, if possible, worse. If they pretend
this War was occasioned by our admitting of Nicolo; had he not been received,
they would have pretended another; and, perhaps, had this invasion been
deferred, it might have proved more fatal and pernicious; so that it is not his
coming is to be blamed, but our ill fortune, and the ambition of their nature;
for we could not refuse the Duke's Forces; and when they were come, it was not
in our power to keep them from doing acts of Hostility: you know very well,
that without the assistance of some considerable Prince, we had not been able
to defend our selves; nor was any man more proper to relieve us, both in
respect of his fidelity and power, than the Duke. He restored us to our
liberty, and 'twas but reasonable he should secure it. He was always an enemy
to those who would never be our friends; if therefore we have provoked the
Duke, rather than we would disoblige the Florentines, we have lost a true
friend and made our enemy more able and more ready to offend us: so that it is
much better for us to have this War, with the friendship of the Duke; than to
have peace, with his displeasure: and we have reason to hope he will rescue us
from these dangers to which he has exposed us, if we be not wanting to our
selves. You cannot forget with what fury the Florentines have many times
assaulted us; and with what honor and reputation we have repelled them, even
when we have had no hopes but in God and in time, and how both of them have
preserved us. If we defended our selves then; what reason now is there to
despair? Then we were deserted by all Italy and left as a prey to the Enemy;
now we have the Duke on our side, and it is not improbable the Venetians will be
but slow in their motions against us; seeing it can be no pleasure to them to
see the power of the Florentines increase. Then the Florentines were more free
and unengaged, had more hopes of assistance, and were stronger of themselves
and we every way weaker; for then we defended a Tyrant, now we fight for our
selves; then the honor went to other people, now it returns upon us; then they
were united and entire, now they are divided, and all Italy full of their
Rebels. But if we had none of these reasons, nor none of these hopes to excite
us, extreme necessity would be sufficient to animate us to our defense. Every
enemy ought in reason to be apprehended by us, because all of them seek their
own glory, and our destruction; but, above all, the Florentines ought to be
most dreadful, who are not to be satisfied with our obedience, tribute, nor the
government of our City; but they must have our persons and Wealths, to satiate
their cruelty with our blood, and their avarice with our estates; so that there
is no person nor condition among us so mean, but ought justly to fear them. Let
Nobody therefore be dismayed to see our Country wasted, our Villages burned,
and our Lands possessed by the enemy: if we preserve our City, they of course
will revert: if we lose our City, to what purpose will they be kept?
maintaining our liberty; the enemy can hardly enjoy them: but losing our
liberty what comfort would it be to retain them? Take arms therefore with
courage, and when you are engaged with your enemy, remember the reward of your
Victory is not only the safety of your Country, but the preservation and
security of your children and estates.

These last words were received by the people with such warmth and vigor of
mind, that unanimously they promised to die rather than to desert their City,
or entertain any treaty that might entrench upon their liberty; so that
immediately order was taken for all things necessary for the defense of the
City. In the mean time the Florentine Army was not idle, after many mischiefs
and depredations in the Country, they took Monte-Carlo upon conditions; after
which they encamped at Uzano, that the Lucchesi being straightened on all sides,
and made desperate of relief, might be constrained to surrender. The Castle was
strong, and furnished with a good Garrison; so that was not so easily to be
carried as the rest. The Lucchesi (as was but reason) seeing themselves
distressed, had recourse to the Duke, and recommended their case to him with
all manner of expression; sometimes they commemorated the services they had
done him: sometimes they remonstrated the cruelty of the Florentines: what
courage it would give the rest of his friends to see him interpose in their
defense; and what terror it would infuse to see them exposed: for if they lost
their liberty and their lives, he would lose his honor, and his friends, and
the fidelity of all those who had ever exposed themselves to any danger for his
sake: which words were delivered with tears, that if his obligations should
fail, his compassion might move him to assist them. Insomuch that the Duke,
adding to his old animosity to the Florentines, his late engagements to the
Lucchesi, but above all being jealous of the greatness of the Florentine, which
of necessity would follow so important acquest; he resolved to send a great
Army into Tuscany, or else to fall so furiously upon the Venetians, that the
Florentines should be constrained to quit that enterprise to relieve them: he
had no sooner taken this resolution but they had news at Florence that the Duke
was sending forces into Tuscany; which made them suspicious of their designs,
and therefore, to find the Duke employment at home, they solicited the Venetian
very earnestly that they would attack him in Lombardy with all the power they
could make: but they were not only weakened, but disheartened by the departure
of the Marquess of Mantoua, who had left their service, and taken arms under
the Duke. Whereupon they returned this answer, that they were so far from being
able to ingross the War, they could not assist in it, unless they sent Conte
Francesco to command their Army; and obliged him by Articles to pass the Po.
with them in person (seeing by the old agreement he was not to go so far) for
without a General they would undertake no War; nor could they have confidence
in any but the Count; nor in him neither, unless he obliged himself to pursue
the War in all places alike.

The Florentines were of opinion the War was to be carried on briskly in
Lombardy; yet on the otherside to remove the Conte was to destroy their designs
against Lucca, and they were very sensible, that demand was made, not so much
out of any necessity they had of the Conte, as to defeat that enterprise. The
Conte, for his part, was by contract obliged to to go into Lombardy whenever he
should be required by the League; but now he was unwilling to forfeit his hopes
of that alliance which the Duke had promised him, by marrying him to one of his
relations. So that betwixt the desire of conquering Lucca, and the fear of
having Wars with the Duke, the Florentines were in no little distraction. But
their fear (as it always happens) was the stronger passion of the two, insomuch
as they were content (as soon as Uzano was taken) the Conte should pass into
Lombardy. But there was still a difficulty behind, which not being in their
power to dissolve, gave the Florentines more trouble and jealousy, than any
thing else; and that was, that the Conte would not be obliged to pass the Po,
and without it, the Venetians would not entertain him, there being no way to
accommodate this difference, but of necessity one of them must submit; the
Florentines persuaded the Conte that in a letter to the Senate of Florence he
should oblige himself to pass that river, alleging that a private promise not
being sufficient to dissolve a public stipulation, he might do afterward as
he pleased; and which way soever he acted, this convenience would certainly
follow, that the Venetians having begun the War, would be compelled to pursue
it; and that humor be inevitably diverted, which was so much to be feared.

To the Venetians they intimated on he other side, That that letter, though
private, was sufficient to bind him, and that they ought to be satisfied
therewith: that whilst it might be done securely it would be best to conceal
it, and indulge his respects to his Father-in-Law for it would be neither for
his, nor their advantage to have it discovered, without manifest necessity: and
in this manner the Florentines concluded upon the Conte's passage into
Lombardy; and the Conte having taken in Uzano, cast up certain new works about
Lucca to keep from fallying, and recommended the War to the Commissioners which
succeeded; Jealousy betwixt the Venetian and the Coun.
he passed the Alps, and went to Reggio, where the Venetians (being jealous of
his proceedings) to discover his inclinations, put him at first dash upon
passing the Po, and joining the rest of their Army; which the Conte
peremptorily refused, and many ill words passed betwixt him and Andrea
Mauroceno who was sent about it from the Venetians: upbraiding one another by
their pride and infidelity; and after several protestations on both sides; on
the one, that he was not obliged to it; on the other that he should not be paid
without it, the Conte returned into Tuscany, and his adversary to Venice. The
Conte was quartered by the Florentines in the Country of Pisa; and they were
not without hopes of prevailing with him to reassume his command against the
Lucchesi; but they found him not disposed; for the duke not understanding he
had refused to pass the Po, in compliment to him (fancying by his means he
might preserve Lucca) he desired him that he would be an instrument to make
peace betwixt the Lucchesi and the Florentines, and if he could to comprehend
him also, insinuating by the by, that in convenient time he should marry his
Daughter. This march had great influence upon the Conte, who persuaded himself
the Duke having no heirs Males might thereby in time come to the Government of
Milan. Upon which grounds he discouraged the Florentines from prosecuting the
war affirming that for his own part he would not stir, unless the Venetians
paid him his arreers, and performed the rest of their Covenants; for his pay
alone would not do his business, wherefore it concerned him to secure his own
State, and therefore he was to look out for other allies, and not depend only
upon the friendship of the Florentines: that seeing he was abandoned by the
Venetians he was obliged to a stricter regard to his own affairs; and
threatened very slily to make an agreement with the Duke. These tricks and
expostulations were not at all to the Florentines satisfaction. They found
their design upon Lucca lost, and their own State in danger, whenever the Duke
and the Conte united. To prevail with the Venetians to make good their terms,
Cosimo de Medici was dispatched to them, (supposing his reputation might have
some influence upon them) and a long speech to their Senate, he represented the
posture of affairs in Italy; the power and conduct of the Duke; and concluded,
that if the Count and he joined, the Venetians would be confined to the Sea,
and the Florentines in no small danger of their liberty: to which it was
answered by the Venetian that they had well considered the condition of Italy,
and their own; and did believe they were every way able to defend themselves;
The Venetians untractable
however it was not their custom to pay any Body for doing other People
service. It belonged therefore to the Florentines to see the Conte satisfied,
seeing it was they had had the benefit of his service, or rather (if they had a
mind to preserve themselves in security for the future) to correct and rebate
his insolence than to pay him; for Men put no bounds to their ambition; and if
he should then be paid without doing any service, his next demand, in all
liklyhood, would be more insolent and dangerous: in their judgment therefore it
was high time to put a stop to his carreer, and not let him run on, till he
became incorrigible; but if out of fear, or any other consideration they had a
mind to continue him their friend; their best way would be to pay him: with
which answer Cosimo returned, and nothing was concluded.

The Florentines nevertheless interceded very earnestly with the Conte that he
would not forsake the League; who had no great inclination to it himself; but
his desire to consummate the marriage with the Dukes Daughter, kept him in such
suspense, that upon every little accident he was ready to leave them. The Conte
had left his Towns in la Marca, to be secured by Furlano, one of his principal
Officers: this Furlano was earnestly solicited by the Duke, that he left the
Conte's service, and joined himself to him. Whereupon laying aside all other
respects to save his own stake, the Conte came to an agreement likewise with
the Duke, and among the rest of the Articles, this was one, that for the future
the Conte should not intermedle in the affairs either of Romagna or Tuscany.
After he had made this peace with the Duke, the Conte was very importunate with
the Florentines to come to an agreement with the Lucchesi; and he persuaded
them so far, that finding no other remedy, they came to a composition with them
in the month of April 1438, by which capitulation the Lucchesi were to have
their liberties preserved; and the Florentines to keep possession of Monti
Carlo, and some other Castles which they had taken before: after which they
writ many sad letters up and down Italy, lamenting that seeing God and Man were
unwilling that the Lucchesi should fall under their Dominion, they had been
constrained to a peace with them: and so much were they concerned for their
disappointment in that enterprise, that seldom has any Body been known to lose
their own Estates with more impatience and regret, than the Florentines
expressed, for not gaining other peoples. However though the Florentines at
that time had so many irons in the fire; they forgot not their alliances with
their Neighbors, nor the decoration of their City. Nicolo Fortebraccio (who
had married a Daughter of the Conte de Poppi) being dead, Poppi had the command
of the Borgo san Sepulcro, Conte di Poppi.
the Castle, and other appendixes, which he kept in behalf of his Son-in-Law,
whilst his Son-in-Law lived,; refusing afterward to surrender them to the Pope
who demanded them as usurped from the Church: upon which refusal the Pope sent
the Patriarch with an Army to recover them by force. The Conte di Poppi finding
himself unable to defend them, offered them to the Florentines, who would not
accept them: however upon the Pope's return to Florence, they interposed, and
labored an agreement betwixt his Holiness and the Conte.

But finding the Treaty difficult and dilatory; the Patriarch fell upon
Casentino, took Prato Vecchio and Romena, and proffered them likewise to the
Florentines; but they could not be accepted, unless the Pope would consent they
should restore them to the Conte, which after much argumentation he did, upon
condition the Florentines should use their interest with Conte Poppi to restore
Burgo to him. The mind of his Holiness being at quiet by this means the
Florentines (the Cathedral Church of their City, called Santa Reparata, having
been out of repair, long since begun to be mended, and now brought to that
perfection, Divine service might be celebrated in it) entreated his Holiness
that he would oblige them so far, as to consecrate it himself: to which he
willingly condescended; and for the greater magnificence of the Church and
City, and the ostentation and honor of the Pope, a Gallery was built from Santa
Maria Novella (where the Pope held his Court to the Church which was to be
consecrated) four fathoms wide, and two high, covered over with very rich
Cloths, under which, only his Holiness, his Court, and such Magistrates of the
City as were appointed to attend him, were to pass all the rest of the Citizens
and people, having disposed themselves in the street, the Church, and a top of
their Houses; to behold so glorious a spectacle. The Ceremony being passed with
the usual solemnity; his Holiness, as a token of more then ordinary respect,
conferred the honor of Knighthood upon Guiliano de Avanzati at that time
Gonfaloniere de Giustitia but always a very eminent Citizen; to whom the Senate
(that they might not seem behind hand with the Pope in any point of
Beneficence) gave the Government of the Pisa for a year.

About this time certain differences arising betwixt the Greek and the Roman
Churches, Controversies betwixt the Greek and Roman Churches.
they could not agree in all particulars about the Divine Worship: and for as
much as in the last Council of Basil, much had been said upon that subject by
the Prelates of the Church, it was resolved that all diligence should be used to
bring the Emperor, and the Prelates of the Greek Church together to the Council
of Basil, to try if there was any way to accomodate them with the Romans.
Though it was derogatory to the Majesty of the Emperor, and contrary to the
pride of his Prelates, to yield in any thing to the Romans, yet the Turk lying
heavy upon them, and fearing that of themselves they should not be able to
resist him, that they might with the more confidence and security desire relief
from other people, they resolved to comply, and accordingly, as was directed by
the Council of Basil, the Emperor, the Patriarch, Determined at Florence, by
the submission of the Greek.
and several other Prelates and Barons of Greece, arrived at Venice; but being
frighted from thence by the Plague, it was resolved they should remove to
Florence and all their differences be discussed and determined in that City:
being assembled, and for many days together both Roman and Greek Prelates, all
of them in the Cathedral; after many and long disputations, the Grecians
condescended, and complied with the Church and Bishop of Rome.

The peace betwixt the Lucchesi, and the Florentines, and betwixt the Duke and
the Conte, being concluded; it was thought no hard matter to put an end to the
Wars of Italy, especially in Lombardy, in Tuscany; for the War in the Kingdom
of Naples betwixt Rinato di Angio and Alphonso d' Aragona, was hardly to be
composed but by the ruin of one of them: and though the Pope was discontented
for the loss of so many Towns; and the ambition of the Duke and Venetian was
sufficiently known; yet it was supposed necessity would force the one of lay
down, and weariness the other: but they were out in their conjectures; for
neither Duke nor Venetian could be persuaded to be quiet; but on the contrary
they took Arms afresh, and Lombardy and Tuscany was filled again with their
Hostilities. The ambitious and haughty mind of the Duke could not brook that
the Venetians should keep Bergamo and Brescia; and the rather because he
observed them always in Arms, perpetually making incursions all over his
Country; in which, he thought he should not only restrain them, but recover all
he had lost, when ever the Pope, the Florentines, and the Conte should desert
them: he designed therefore to take Romagna from the Pope supposing when he had
gained that, it would not be in his Holiness Power to offend him; and the
Florentines seeing the fire at their own doors, would not stir for fear of
themselves; or if they did, they could not assault him conveniently. The Duke
understood likewise how angry the Florentines were with the Venetians, about
the business of Lucca and upon that score concluded them the less likely to
take up arms for the Venetians: and as to Conte Francesco, he did not doubt his
new amity, and the hopes of his marriage, would keep him quiet and safe.

To prevent Scandal, and give less occasion to any Body to stir (having obliged
himself by his Articles with the Conte not to meddle with Romagna) he caused
Nicolo Piccinino to take the enterprise upon himself, and fall upon it as of
his own ambition and avarice. Nicolo, at the time of the treaty betwixt the
Duke and the Conte, was in Romagna and (by the Dukes direction) showed himself
much dissatisfied at his agreement with his implacable adversary, the Conte.
Whereupon he retired with his Army (in great discontent as was pretended) to
Camurata (a Town betwixt Furli and Ravenna) and fortified himself, as if he
designed to make good that Quarter, till he could find some better
entertainment and the report of his disgust being spread all over Italy, Nicolo
took order to have his services and the Dukes ingratitude, remonstrated to the
Pope; and that though by the enterest of two of the principal Generals, he had
got all the forces of Italy under his command, yet if his Holiness would say
the word, he could contrive things so, that one of them should become his
enemy, and the other unserviceable; for if he would provide him with moneys and
supply him with Men, he would fall upon the Towns which the Conte had usurped
from the Church, and by giving the Conte employment for the preservation of his
own Countries, render him incapable of being subservient to the ambition of the
Duke. The Pope believing what he said to be rational and true, sent him 5000
Ducats, besides large promises of provision for himself and his Children; and
though many times he was admonished to have a care of being deceived yet he
would never suspect, nor admit one word to the contrary.

The City of Ravenna was at that time commanded for the Church by Ostasio da
Polenta, The Pope deluded, and his Country invaded by Piccinin^.
Nicolo conceiving it no time to protract (his Son Francesco having plundered
and sacked Spoleto to the great satisfaction of the Pope) resolved to attack
Ravenna, either thinking the enterprise easy in it self, or else holding
private intelligence with Ostasio the Governor; which soever it was, he had
not invested it many days, before it was surrendered upon articles; and that
being taken Bologna, Imola, and Furli followed in a short time; and that which
was most strange, was, that of twenty strong holds which in those parts were
garrisoned by the Pope, there was not any one but submitted to Nicolo; and not
contented with these affronts to his Holiness, he added contumely to his
injustice; and writ the Pope word, that he had used him according to his
deserts: for having impudently endeavored to interrupt the old friendship
betwixt him and the Duke; and filled all Italy with letters that he abandoned
the Duke; and sided with the Venetian. Having possessed himself of Romagna, he
left it to the Government of his Son Francesco; and passing himself with the
greatest part of his Army into Lombardy, he joined the rest of the Dukes
forces; assaulted the Country of Brescia; and in a short time brought it under
subjection, and when he had done so, laid siege to the City: the Duke desirous
that the Venetians might be exposed, excused himself to the Pope the
Florentines, and the Conte, pretending, that what was done by Nicolo in
Romagna, if it were contrary to their capitulations, was no less contrary to
his inclinations; suggesting privately, that when time and opportunity
contributed, he would make him sensible of his disobedience: the Florentines,
and the Conte gave no great credit to what he said; believing (as was true)
that it was nothing but artifice to keep them in suspense, till he conquered
the Venetians, who supposing themselves able alone to contend with the Duke,
were too proud to desire assistance of any body, but with their Captain
Gatamelato, would wage War with him by themselves. The Conte Francesco desired,
by permission of the Florentines, that he might have gone to the relief of King
Rinato (had not the accidents in Romagna and Lombardy diverted him) and the
Florentines for the old friendship betwixt them and France, would have
willingly consented, and the Duke would have assisted Alphonso, for the
kindness he had expressed to him in his former distress: but both the one and
the other had too much employment at home, to concern themselves in any
differences abroad: the Florentines seeing Romagna overrun, and the Venetians
baffled by the Duke (apprehending their own, by the calamity of their
Neighbors) desired the Conte to come into Tuscany, that they might consider of
some way to obstruct the Dukes forces, which were then much stronger than ever
they had been; adding withal, that if their insolence was not suddenly
restrained, there was no state in Italy but would feel the incovenience.

The Conte knew well enough the apprehension of the Florentines was but
reasonable; yet his desire that his marriage with the Dukes daughter might
proceed, kept him in suspense: and the Duke perceiving his mind, kept him up
with reiterated hopes, (if he stirred not against him) for the young Lady was
now of age to have it consummated, and many times the Treaty was so far
advanced, that all convenient preparations were made for the Wedding, when of a
sudden some new scruple or cavil was found to protract it: however to make the
Conte more secure, he added some deeds to his promises; and sent him thirty
thousand Florens, to which the Duke had engaged himself by the articles of
marriage. But this transaction hindered not the proceeding of the War in
Lombardy. Every day the Venetian lost some Town or other; the Boats they sent
to secure the Rivers, were sunk and dispersed by the Dukes forces; the Country
of Bresca and Verona harassed and possessed; and those Cities both of them so
straightly blocked up, the common opinion was, they could not hold out: the
Marquess of Mantua, who for many years had been their General, left them; and
went over to the Duke; so what their pride would not suffer them to do in the
beginning; in the process of War, they were driven to by their fear; for
finding now they had no remedy but in the friendship of the Conte, and the
Florentines, they demanded it of themselves; but not without much diffidence
and suspicion, least the Florentines should make them the same answer, which in
the enterprise of Lucca, they had received from them about the affairs of the
Conte: but they found them more tractable than they expected, and indeed more
than their carriage toward them had deserved. So much more prevalent in the
Florentines was their old quarrel to their Enemies than their new pick and
exceptions to their friends. And having long before prefaged the distress into
which the Venetians of necessity would fall; they had represented to the Conte
how inseparable his ruin would be from theirs; and that he would find himself
deceived, if he expected the Duke would esteem him more in his good, than his
adverse fortune; for it was fear of him (whilst his affairs were uncertain) and
nothing else, had moved him to that treaty about his Daughter; and forasmuch as
the same thing which necessity constrains people to promise, it constrains them
to perform; it was necessary to continue the Duke in the same distress; which
could not be done, but by preserving the Grandeur of the Venetians. He ought
therefore to consider, that if the Venetians should be forced to quit their
territory upon the land; he would not only be deprived of the conveniences he
might have from them, but of all that he might reasonably expect from other
People who were afraid of them; and if he reflected upon other states of Italy,
he would find some of them poor; and some of them Enemies; and alone (as they
had often inculcated) the Florentines were not able to maintain him; so that in
all respects it was his interest to sustain the Dominion of the Venetians upon
the Terra firma. The Conte earnestly persuaded not to desert the Venetians.
1438.
These persuasions, added to the hatred the Conte had conceived against the
Duke, for his juggling about his Daughter, disposed him to the agreement; yet
not so as to oblige himself to pass the Po.

The Articles were agreed in February 1438, in which the Venetians engaged to
defray two thirds of the Charge of the War, and the Florentines one; each of
them obliging themselves at their own expenses to defend the Conte's lands in
la Marca in the mean time. Nor was the League contented with these forces and
allies; for they joined to them the Lord of Faenza, the Sons of Pandolfo
Malatesta da Rimino and Piero Giampagolo Ursino; they tried the Marquess of
Mantoua likewise; but they could not remove him from the Duke; to whom the Lord
of Faenza revolted (upon better conditions) though he had entered the League;
which put them into great fear they should not be able to execute their designs
in Romagna so readily as they proposed: at this time Lombardy was in such
distress, that Brescia was besieged by the Dukes forces, and reduced into such
a condition, it was daily expected when by famine it should be constrained to
surrender. Verona was in the same condition, and if either of them was taken,
it was concluded all farther opposition would be in vain, and all their
expenses hitherto lost: against this there was no visible remedy, but to send
the Conte into Lombardy and in that there were three difficulties. One was to
persuade the Conte to pass the Po, and carry on the War in all places: the
second was, that the Florentines seemed to be exposed thereby, and left to the
discretion of the Duke, who retiring into his own fastnesses, might divide his
forces, and facing the Conte with one party, join with their rebels with the
other, and march into Tuscany; which was a course they were not a little afraid
of. The third was, to resolve which way the Conte might pass most securely into
the Contry of Padua to the Venetian Army. Of these three difficulties, the
second relating to the Florentines, took up the greatest debate; but knowing
the necessity, and tired with the Venetians (who pressed for the Conte with all
imaginable opportunity, and protested that without him they would give over
all) they preferred the necessity of their associate before any danger of their
own.

However, the difficulty of the way was referred to be secured by the Venetians;
and because for the managing of this Treaty, and inclining the Conte to pass
into Lombardy, it was thought fit that Neri the Son of Gino Capponi should be
dispatched to him; the Senate concluded to send for him to Venice, to make the
employment the more grateful, and instruct him the more commodiously about the
way the Conte was to march. Upon this invitation, Neri departed from Cesena,
and came by water to Venice, where never any Prince was received with more
honor and acclamation than he was by the Senate; for upon his coming and the
resolutions which thereupon they were to take, they believed the whole
happiness and safety of their Government did depend: Neri being introduced into
the Senate, spoke to them in this manner.

Most Serene Prince,

MY Masters were always of Opinion, Neri 's speech to the Venetian Senate.
that the greatness of the Duke would be the destruction of your Commonwealth
and their own; and that if any thing prevented it, it must be the Grandeur and
prosperity of both. Had this been credited in time by your Lordships our
condition had been better than it is; and your state secure from many dangers
wherewith it is now infested; but you not having given us either assistance, or
credit, when our necessities required, we could not make such haste to your
relief; nor you desire it so readily as you might have done; had you known us
better either in prosperity or adversity; or understood that where we love
once, our love is inextinguishable, and where we hate once, our hatred is
immortal: the love and respect we have always retained to this illustrious
Senate, you your selves do know; having many times seen Lombardy full of our
forces which was sent in to your relief: our animosity to Philip is known to
all the World, and we shall continue it to his family; for it is impossible old
love, or inveterate hatred can ever be expunged, let the new injuries, or
endearments be as many as they will: we are, and have been assured, that in
this War we might have stood neuter, with great favor from the Duke, and no
danger to our selves: for though by your expulsion he had made himself Master
of Lombardy; yet there would be enough left in Italy to secure us; seeing envy
is always concomitant with power; one increases with the other; and where envy
is, War and distraction must follow. We were not insensible likewise (by
declining this War) how great charges, and danger we should have avoided, and
how easily, by our stirrings we may transplant into Tuscany: but all these
discouragments have been overrul'd by our affection of the state, and we
resolved to assist you with the same vigor, as we would defend our selves: to
this end (most Noble Lords) my Masters judging it necessary above all things to
relieve Verona and Brescia; and imagining that impossible, but by the conduct
of the Count; they sent me first to him to persuade his passing into Lombardy,
(to which your Lordship knows he would never be obliged) and to try the same
arguments with him, as wrought upon us: as he is invincible in Arms, so he is
not to be out done in courtesy; and that frankness and Generosity which he saw
us practice toward you, he has endeavored to exceed: he understood very well
how much he should leave Tuscany exposed by his departure, but observing how we
postponed our own safety to yours, he very generously has promised to do the
same, and prefers your interest before his own. My business here is to proffer
you the Count at the head of 7000 Horse, and 2000 Foot, ready to receive your
Orders, and seek out the Enemy as you please to direct. My request therefore is
(and it is the request of my Masters, and his own) that as he has exceeded the
number which he was obliged to bring in to your service, so you would enlarge
your reward; that neither he may repent of his enterprise, nor we be sorry we
persuaded him.

These words of Neri's were heard with as much attention by the Senate, as if
they had been delivered from an Oracle, and so much was the auditory revived
thereby, they had not patience to let their Duke reply according to custom; but
rising all of them upon their feet, with their hands lifted up, and tears in
their eyes, they gave the Florentines thanks for the good office they had done
them; and him, for the diligence and dexterity of his dispatch; promising that
no time should ever obliterate it, not only in their own hearts, but in the
hearts of their posterity; and that their Country and themselves would always
be at the service of the Florentines. But the transport being over they fell
into serious debate about the way the Count was to take, that bridges and all
other conveniences might be provided: four ways there were before them. One
from Ravenna, along the shore; but that lying most upon the Sea, and the Fens;
was not approved: the next was the direct way, but obstructed by a Castle
called the Ucellino which was garrisoned by the Duke, and to be taken, before
they could pass; and that could not be done in a short time without great
difficulty, and to be long about it would frustrate their relief in another
place, which required all possible expedition. The third way was by the forest
of Lugo, but the Po being over-flown, that was unpassable. The fourth was
through the Country of Bologna, over the bridges at Puledrano, Cento, and Picue,
and so by Finale and Bondeno to Ferrara, from whence partly by water, and
partly by land, they might pass into the Country of Padua, and join with the
Venetian Army: this way also had its difficulties, and they were liable to be
impeded by the Enemies Army; yet being chosen as the best; notice was given to
the Count, who departing with all imaginable speed, arrived in the Country of
Padua on the 20th. of June; the arrival of so great a Captain in Lombardy,
revived the whole Government of Venice; and whereas before they were almost
desperate of their safety; they began now to take courage, and expect new
conquests upon the Enemy. The first thing the Count attempted, was the relief
of Verona, to prevent which, Nicolo marched with his Army to Soave (a Castle
betwixt the Country, of Vicensa, and Verona) there he entrenched; throwing up a
ditch from Soave to the marches of Adice

The Count finding himself obstructed through the plain; resolved to march over
the mountains to Verona; presuming that Nicolo would either believe he could
not pass that way, by reason of its steepness and cragginess; or let him pass
so, before he believed it, that it would be too late to interrupt him.
Wherefore, taking eight days provision along with him, he marched his Army over
the Mountains, and at Soave came down into the plains. And though Nicolo had
thrown up some works to incommode him, yet they were too weak to give him a
stop. Nicolo finding the Enemy passed beyond his imagination; and fearing to be
forced to an engagement upon some disadvantage; he drew off to the other side
of the Aldice, and the Count, without farther obstacle, marched into Verona.
Having overcome the first difficulty, and relieved Verona, the next thing the
Count was to attempt, was to succor Brescia. That City is seated so near the
Lake di Garda, that though it was blocked up by land, yet the Lake was open,
and they could supply themselves with provisions. Upon that consideration, the
Duke had put what force he could upon the Lake, and in the beginning of his
designs, had secured all the Towns which were capable of supplying them by the
benefit of the Lake.

The Venetians had Galleys likewise upon the Lake; but they were not strong
enough to encounter the Dukes. The Count thought it necessary with his Army to
Land, to give the Venetian Galleys some advantage upon the Water; and therefore
he concluded to attempt some of those Towns which lay conveniently for the
famishing of Brescia, he clapped down therefore with his Army before Bandolino
(a Castle standing upon the Lake) hoping if he took that, the rest would
surrender. But in that enterprise, his fortune deceived him; for most of his
Men falling sick, he was forced to raise the siege and remove his Army to Zemo,
a Castle belonging to the Veronesi, where the air was more healthful, and the
Country more plentiful. The Count retired, Nicolo, not to slip the opportunity
of making himself Master of the Lake, left his Camp at Vegasio, and with a
select party went to the Lake where joining with the rest, he fell so furiously
upon the Venetian Squadron, that he broke it quite, and took most of them
Prisoners. Upon this Victory, most of the Castles upon the Lake, surrendered to
the Duke. The Venetians, startled at this defeat, and fearing left the
Brescians should yield thereupon, they solicited the Count very earnestly, both
by letters, and Messages, that he would attempt to relieve them. The Count,
perceiving his hopes of doing it by the Lake, absolutely defeated, and his way
by the fields impossible by reason of the Trenches, and Bulwarks, which were so
numerous and strong, and an Army to make them good, so that to venture among
them would be inevitable destruction, the way by the Mountains having been
succesful to him at Verona, he resolved to try it once more for the relief of
Brescia. Having pitched upon his way, the Count departed from Zeno, and by the
Val d' Acri, marching to the Lake of St. Andrea, he passed to Forboli, and
Penda upon the Lake di Garda, from whence he advanced to Tenna, and sat down
before it; it being necessary that Castle should be taken before he could get
into Brescia. Nicolo having intelligence of his design, Nicolo Piccino defeated
by the Count.
marched his Army to Pischiera, and from thence (joining with the Marquess of
Mantoua. and a commanded party of his best-men) he proceeded to engage the
Count, who giving him battle, Nicolo was beaten; his Army dispersed; many of
them taken Prisoners; and those which escaped, many of them fled to their Camp,
and many of them to the Fleet. Nicolo got off himself into Tenna, and night
being come, concluding if he stayed till morning he could never get farther, to
avoid a certain danger, Escapes to Tenna and from thence very strangely to his
Army.
he exposed himself to a doubtful. Of all his retinue, Nicolo had only one
servant with him, a lusty stong German, and one that had always been very
faithful to him. Nicolo persuaded his German, that if he would put him into a
sack, he might carry him off to some secure place upon his shoulders, as some
luggage of his Masters. The Enemy lay round before the Castle, but (transported
and secure upon their Victory the day before) without any Order, or guards: by
which means the German found no great difficulty in the business, for putting
himself into the habit of a freebooter, and Mounting his Master upon his
shoulders, he passed through their whole Camp, and brought him safe to his
party. This Victory, had it been improved as happily as it was gained, might
have given more relief to Brescia, and more felicity to the Venetians: but
being ill managed, they had little reason to exult, and Brescia remaining in
the same necessity as before; for Nicolo was no sooner returned to the forces
which he had left behind, but he set all his wits to work which way he might
exploit some new thing to atone for his loss; and obstruct the relief of the
Town: he knew himself the situation of the Citadel of Verona, and had learned
from the Prisoners taken in that War: not only that it was ill guarded, but the
way how it might easily be surprised: he believed therefore that fortune had
presented him with an opportunity of recovering his honor, and converting his
Enemies joy, into sadness and sorrow. Verona is in Lombardy, seated at the foot
of those Mountains which divide Italy from Germany; so that it stands partly
upon the Hill, and partly upon the plain; the River Adice rises in the valley di
Trento and running into Italy, does not extend himself immediately through the
plains; but banding to the left hand among the Mountains, it comes at length to
the City; and passes through the midst of it: yet not so as to divide it into
equal parts, for toward the plain it is much greater, then toward the
Mountains: upon the rising part of the City, there are two Castles, one of them
called San Piero, and the other San Felice, which appear stronger in their
situation, than their walls; and do by it command the whole Town. In the plain
on this side the Adice, behind the wall of the City, there are two Fortresses
about a thousand paces distant one from the other; of which the one is called
the old Citadel, and the other the new. On the inside of one of them, there
passes a wall to the other and is (in respect of the other walls which fetch a
compass) as the string to a bow. All the space betwixt these two walls, is full
of Inhabitants and called the Borg of San Zeno. These two Castles and the Burg,
Nicolo designed to surprise, believing it would be no difficult matter, both
because of the former negligence of the Guards (which he presumed after the
late Victory would be much greater) and of an opinion he had, that no
enterprise was so feasible as that which the Enemy believed was impossible to
be done. Having drawn out a party of choice Men in order to his design, he
joined with the Marquess of Mantoua, and marching in the night to Verona, he
scaled the new Citadel, and took it without being perceived, and then forcing
upon the Port di S. Antoine, the signal was given to his Horse, Verona
surprised by Nicolo
and they marched all of them into the Town. Those of the old Citadel who were
upon the Guard, hearing the noise when the Sentinels in the other Citadel were
knocked on the head, and when the Gate of S. Antoine was broken up, believing
it was the Enemy, cried out to the People to Arm; and fell a ringing their
Bells. The Citizens taking the alarm, came together in great Confusion! those of
them who had most courage, got to their Arms, and retreated with them to the
Palace of the Rettori: in the mean time Nicolo's Soldiers had plundered the
Borgo di S. Zeno, and advancing toward the Town, the Citizens, perceiving the
Dukes forces was entered, and no way left to defend themselves: advised the
Venetian Rettori to retire into the fortresses, and preserve themselves and
their goods, for (as they said) it would be much better to do so, and attend
better fortune; than by endeavoring to avoid the present danger, to be knocked
on the Head, and the whole City pillaged: hereupon the Rettori, and all the
Venetians betook themselves to the Castle of S. Felice; and several of the
principal Citizens went to meat Nicolo and the Marquess of Mantoua to beg of
them that they would rather possess that City rich, and with honor, than poor
to their disgrace; especially seeing they had not by an obstinate defense
deserved preferment from their old Masters, or hatred from their new. The
Marquess and Nicolo having encouraged them what they could, they protected them
from plunder as much as was possible; and because they were confident the Count
would immediately address himself to the recovery of the Town, they contrived
with all imaginable industry to get the Fort into their hands; but what they
could not take, they blocked up with ditches and trenches cut about to obstruct
the Enemy from relieving them.

The Count Francesco was with his Army at Tenna, where upon the first report of
this surprise, he believed it but vain; afterward understanding the truth, he
resolved by a more than ordinary speed to recompense his former negligence, and
expiate its disgrace. And though all the chief Officers of his Army advised him
to give over his enterprise of Brescia, and Verona, and retire to Vicenza,
least otherwise the Enemy should encompass him where he was, yet he would not
consent; but resolved to try his fortune for the recovery of Verona, and
turning about to the Venetian Proveditori, and Barnardetto de Medici (who
assisted as Commissioner for the Florentines) he encouraged them in their
doubts and assured them he would retake it if any of the castles held out for
him. Having put all things in order, and drawn out his Men, he marched toward
Verona with all expedition: at first sight, Nicolo imagined he was marching to
Vicenza, as he had been counseled by his officers; But observing him to march
on, and direct his forces toward the Castle of S. Felice, he thought it time
to provide for his defense: but all was too late, the trenches, and
embarrasments were not finished; the Soldiers separated, and plundering, and
could not be got together time enough to hinder the Count from getting into the
Citadel, and from thence into the City, to the great disparagement of Nicolo,
and detriment of his party, who with the Marquess of Mantoua, retreated first
into the Citadel which they had taken, and from thence escaped to the City of
Mantoua, Recovered by the Count.
where rallying the remainder of their forces, they joined themselves with the
Army before Brescia: so that in four days time Verona was won and lost by the
Duke forces. Being Winter time, and the weather very cold the Count having
after his Victory, put in some supplies of victual into Brescia, though with
very great difficulty, he removed his quarters to Verona, having given order
for the building certain Galleys to Forboli that Winter, to be ready against
the Spring, that then he might be so strong both by land and by Water, as to
give Brescia an effectual and total relief.

The Duke seeing the War at a stand for a time, and his hopes of being Master
of Verona and Brescia, at an end; all which he attributed to the Counsel and
supplies of the Florentines, whose affection could not be alienated, by all the
provocations the Venetians had given them; nor gained over to his side, by all
the promises which he had made them; that they might be sensible of their own
oversight, and feel the inconveniences they had pulled upon themselves, he
resolved to invade Tuscany, to which he was much encouraged by Nicolo, and the
Florentine exiles. Nicolo's design was upon the possessions of Braccio, and to
drive the Count out of La Marca: The Duke encouraged in his expedition into
Tuscany by Nicolo and the Florentine exiles.
the other had an itching after their own Country, and a mind to be at home, so
that both parties animated the Duke with such arguments as were most suitable to
their particular designs: Nicolo told him he might send him with an Army into
Tuscany, and leave Brescia besieged; for he was Master of the Lake; was well
entrenched about the Town; had several strong Castles in the Country; and good
Officers and Soldiers enough to resist the Count, if he should make any
attempt in another place; which was not to be imagined till he had relieved
Brescia, and that was impossible: so that if he pleased, he might make War in
Tuscany, and not quite his enterprise in Lombardy; he remonstrated besides that
the Florentines would be constrained, as soon as they saw him in Tuscany, to
call back the Count or be ruined; and whichsoever of the two happen, his
Victory would be certain,

The exiles, inculcated, that if Nicolo came near Florence with his Army, it
was impossible, but the People, tired out with their Taxes and the insolence of
the Grandees, would take arms and revolt; as to his passage to Florence, they
promised it should be easy, and Casentino open to them, by the interest and
correspondence which Rinaldo held with that Governor: so that the Duke,
inclinable of himself, was much fortified and encouraged by their persuasions:
the Venetians on the other side (though the Winter was very sharp) pressed the
Count to the relief of Brescia with his whole Army; but he refused, alleging
it was not to be done at that time; that better weather was to be expected, and
that in the interim their Fleet should be got ready and then it might be
attempted both by Land and by Water: which answer giving no satisfaction, the
Venetians became slow, and remiss in sending them provisions, so that in their
Army many People died. The Florentines having advertisement of all these
passages, were greatly dismayed; seeing the War brought home to them of Tuscany,
and that in Lombardy, not turned to account: nor were they less fearful of the
forces of the Church; not that the Pope was their Enemy, but that they found
that Army at the devotion of the Patriarch who was their implacable adversary:
The Patriarch of Alexandria General for the Pope.
Giovanni Vitelleschi Cornetano was first Apostolical Notarie, then Bishop of
Ricanati, after the Patriarch of Alexandria, and being at last created
Cardinal, was called the Cardinal of Florence; This Cardinal was a cunning and
Courageous Person, so capable of business that the Pope, had a strong affection
for him, gave him command of the forces of the Church, and in all the Popes
enterprises in Tuscany, Romagna, Naples, and Rome, he was constantly his
General; so that by degrees he gained so great authority both over the Army,
and the Pope, that the Pope began to be afraid to command him, and the Army, to
refuse their obedience to any body but he. The Cardinal being at that time in
Rome, when the news arrived that Nicolo was marching into Tuscany.

The fear of the Florentines was highly increased, because from the time of
Rinaldo's expulsion, The Patriarch a friend to Rinaldo.
that Cardinal had been an Enemy to their state, for the Articles of agreement
which were, by his mediation procured in Florence, were not made good, but
rather managed to the prejudice of Rinaldo, he having been the occasion of his
laying down his Arms, and that, the occasion of his banishment; so that the
Government of Florence began to fear the time was come for the restoration of
Rinaldo, if he joined with Nicolo in his expedition into Tuscany and their
apprehensions were augmented by the sudden departure of Nicolo, who seemed to
them to leaven enterprise which he had almost completed, to embark himself in
another there that was more dangerous and doubtful: which they presumed he would
never have done, without some private intelligence, or unknown invitation:
these their apprehensions they had infused into the Pope, who was grown
sensible of his error in having transferred so much Authority upon other
People. But whilst the Florentines were in this suspense, fortune presented
them a way, to secure themselves of the Patriarch: that State had scouts abroad
to intercept, and peruse all letters, to see if they could meet with any
correspondence to the prejudice of the State; at Monte Pulciano it happened a
packet was taken which the Patriarch had written to Nicolo Piccinino without
the knowledge or consent of the Pope. The Pope discovers intelligence betwixt
the Patriarch and Nicolo, and resolves to secure him.
Though the Character was strange, and the sense so implicit and abstruse,
that nothing could be made out of it, yet that obscurity, considered with its
directions to an Enemy, alarmed his Holiness so, as he resolved to secure him.
The care of his apprehension he committed to Antonio Rido da Padoua, whom he
had made Governor of the Castle of Rome. Antonio as soon as he had his orders,
was ready to execute them, and expected an opportunity. The Patriarch had
resolved to pass into Tuscany and having fixed upon the next day for his
departure from Rome, he sent to the Governor that he would be upon the bridge
next morning at a precise hour, for he had something to discourse with him:
Antonio thought now his opportunity was come, ordered his People as he thought
convenient, and at the time appointed was ready expecting the Patriarch upon
the Bridge, which was to be drawn up, or let down, as occasion required. The
Patriarch was punctual, and came exactly at his time, the Patriarch secured and
dies.
and Antonio entertaining him a while upon the bridge, gave a sign, and on a
sudden the bridge was pulled up, and the Patriarch in the Castle; so that of
the General of an Army he became a Prisoner in a moment. The People which were
with him, began to swagger at first, but understanding afterward it was his
Holinesses direction, they were pacified and quiet: and the Governor of the
Castle comforting him with fair words, and giving him hopes of a better
condition, the Patriarch replied, that great Persons were not secured, to be
discharged again; that those who deserved to be seized, did not deserve to be
dismissed, and it was his own case, for he died in Prison not long after, and
Lodovico Patriarch of Aquileia was made General of the Pope's Army in his
place; who though before he could not be engaged in the Wars betwixt the Duke
and the League, yet then he was persuaded; and promised to be ready for the
defense of Tuscany, with 4000 Horse and 2000 Foot.

Being delivered from this danger, there was another of no less importance, and
that was their fear of Nicolo upon the confusion of affairs in Lombardy, and
the differences betwixt the Venetians and the Count: for better information,
the Florentines sent Neri the Son of Gino Capponi, and Guiliano d' Anazenti to
Venice, as also to settle the prosecution of the War for the next year,
commanding Neri, upon the resolution of the Venetians, to repair to the Count,
to found his, and exhort him to such courses as should be necessary for the
security of the League: these Ambassadors were scarce got onward on their way,
as far as Ferrara, before they had the news that Piccinino had passed the Po
with 6000 Horse. Thereupon they made what haste was possible, and being come to
Venice, they found that Senate very positive to have Brescia relieved at that
very time, not being (as they said) able to attend any better, nor their state
to put out any Fleet, so that without present supply, they would be forced to
surrender, which would complete the Dukes successes, and be the loss of all
their Territories by Land: finding them so perverse, Neri went to Verona, to
hear what arguments the Count could produce to the Contrary, who with good
reasons made it out to him, that to endeavor the relief of Brescia in that
juncture, would be not only ineffectual at present, but much to their prejudice
afterward, for considering the season of the year, and situation of the Town,
nothing could be done, he should only harrass and disorder his Men so, as when
a proper time for action should come, he should be forced to draw of to Verona
to supply himself with what the Winter had consumed, and what was necessary for
their future support; so that all the time that was fit for action, would be
spent in marching backward and forward. Commissioners to the Count from the
Venetians.
To adjust these things, Orsalto Iustiniani, and Giovan Pisani were sent to
Verona to the Count, by whom it was concluded (after much dispute) that the
Venetians for the ensuing year should give the Count 80000. Ducats, and 40. a
piece to the rest of his Army. That he should march forth with his whole Army,
and fall upon the Duke, endeavoring by some smart impression upon his Country
to make him recall Nicolo out of Lombardy. After which conclusion, they returned
to Venice, but the Venetians (the sum being thought very great) went on but
slowly with their preparations. Nicolo Piccinino proceeded however, was got
already into the Country of Romagna, and tampered so successfully with the Sons
of Pandolfo Malatesta, that they deserted the Venetians and took up Arms under
the Duke: this news was unpleasing at Venice, but at Florence much more;
because that way they thought to have given Nicolo a stop. But the Malatesti
being in Rebellion, the Florentines were not a little dismayed, especially
fearing, that their General Piero Giampagolo Orsino (who was then in the
territories of the Malatesti) might be defeated, and they by consequence
disarmed: The Count desirous to follow Nicolo.
these tidings, were also no small trouble to the Count, who began to apprehend
if Nicolo passed into Tuscany, he might be in danger of losing La Marca, and
(disposed to secure his own Country if he could) he came to Venice, and being
introduced to the Duke, he declared to him. that his passage into Tuscany would
be convenient for the League, for the War was to be carried on, where the
General, and Army of the Enemy was, and not among their private, and particular
Towns, and Garrisons: because their Army once beat, there is an end of the War;
but though their Garrisons be taken, and their Towns reduced, if their Army be
entire, they should be never the nearer, but the War (as it does many times
happen) would break out more severely. Assuring them that La Marca and all
Tuscany would be lost if Nicolo was not briskly opposed; which being lost, no
remedy could be expected in Lombardy; but if it might, he did not understand
how he could with any excuse abondon his own Subjects and friends; for coming
into Lombardy a Prince, he should be loath to leave it as a private Captain. To
this the Duke of Venice replied, that it was manifest, and nothing more
certain, that if he left Lombardy, and passed the Po with his Army, Dissuaded
by the Duke of Venice.
all their territories upon Land would be lost; and that it would be to no
purpose to consume more money in defending it. For he can be no wise Man who
endeavors to defend that which he is sure to lose, and he no fool who chooses
to lose his Country alone, rather than his Country and Money too, and if the
loss of their affairs should follow, it would then be clear enough how much it
imported the reputation of the Venetians, to protect Romagna and Tuscany. But
the whole Senate was against his opinion, believing if he succeeded in
Lombardy, he should be sure every where else, and that could be no hard task;
that State, upon Nicolo's departure, being left weak and infirm, so that that
might be ruined, before Nicolo could be called back, or any other sufficient
remedy provided. That if things were curiously examined, it would be found that
Nicolo was sent into Tuscany upon no other errand, but to divert the Count from
his enterprise in Lomberdy, and remove the War from his own Country by carrying
it into another: so that if the Count should pursue him without irresistible
necessity, he would rather accomplish his des^gns, and do as he would have him:
but if they continued their Army in Lombardy, (...) shifted in Tuscany as well
as they could; they would be sensible of their ill resolution when it was too
late, and find that they had lost all in Lombardy irrecoverably, without any
equivalence or reprisal in Tuscany.

(...) manner every Man having spoken, and replied, as his judgment directed
him; it was concluded to be quiet for some days, to see what the agreement
betwixt Nicolo and the Malatesti would produce: They (...) to a resolution.
whether the Florentines might rely upon Piero Giam Pagolo; and whether the
Pope proceeded fairly with the League as he had promised he would. This
^^^^lution b^ing taken, not long after, they had intelligence; that Piero Giam
Pagolo was (...) toward Tuscany with his Army; and that the Pope was better
inclined to the (...) at that time, than before; with which advertisements the
Count being confirmed, he was content to remain in Lombardy himself; that Neri
should be dispatched thither with a 1000 of his Horse, and five hundred others,
and if things should proceed so, as that his presence should be necessary in
Tuscany; upon the left summons from Neri the Count engaged to repair to him
without any delay. Accordingly Neri marched away, arrived with his forces at
Florence in April, and the same day Giam Pagolo arrived there also; in the mean
time Nicolo Piccinino having settled the affairs of Romagna, was designing for
Tuscany; and being inclined to have marched by the way of the Alps of S.
Benedetto, and the vale of Montone, he found that passage so well defended by
the conduct of Nicolo da Pisa, that he believed his whole Army would not be
able to force it: and because of the suddenness of this irruption the
Florentines were but indifferently provided either with Soldiers, or Officers,
they committed the passes of the other Alps to the guard of certain of their
Citizens, with some new raised Companies of Foot, among which Citizens
Bartholomeo Orlandini had the command, and more particularly the keeping of the
Castle of Marradi, and the pass that was by it. Nicolo Piccinino supposing the
pass of S. Benedetto insuperable by reason of the courage and vigilance of the
Commander; chose rather to attempt the other way where the cowardice and
inexperience of the chief Officer was not like to give him so great opposition.
Marradi is a Castle built at the foot of those Alps which divide Tuscany and
Romagna; but on the side of Romagna, at the entrance into the Vale di Lamona
though it has no Walls, yet the River, the Mountains and the inhabitants make
it strong. For the Men are martial and faithful, and the River has worn away
the bancks, and made such Grotes and hollows therein, that it is impossible
from the valley to approach it, if a little Bridge which lies over the River be
defended: and on the mountain side the Rocks and the Cliffs are so steep, it is
almost impregnable: but the pusillanimity of Bartolomeo debased the courage of
his Men, and rendered the situation of his Castle of no importance: for no
sooner did he hear the report of the Enemies approach, but leaving all in
confusion, away he ran with his Party, and never stoped til he came at Borgo a
San. Lorenzo. Nicolo (having possessed himself of that pass: strangely surprised
to consider how poorly it had been defended; and as much pleased that now it
was his own) marched down into Mugello, and having taken several Castles, he
staid at Puliciano to refresh; from whence he made his excursions as far as
Monte Fiesole, and was so bold to pass the River Arno, scouring, forraging, and
pl^undering the Country within three miles of Florence. The Florentines however
were not at all dismayed, but the first thing they did was to secure the
Government, of which they were not much afraid both for the intrest which
Cosimo had with the people; and the method they had taken to reduce the chief
Officers of the City into the hands of a few of the most potent Citizens, who
with their vigilance and severity kept under all such as were discontented, or
studious of new things, besides they had news of the resolutions in Lombardy:
of Neri's approach; with the number of his forces, and that the Pope had
promised to supply them with more: which hopes were sufficient to support them
till Neri's arrival. But Neri finding the City in some disorders, resolved to
take the field, and restrain Nicolo from foraging so freely: and therefore
drawing together, what Infantry he could, out of the People, he joined them
with his Horse, marched into the field, and took Remole, which the Enemy had
possessed. After the taking of that Town, he encamped his Army there;
obstructed the excursions of Nicolo; and gave the City great hopes of sending
him farther off. Nicolo observing, though the Florentines had lost many of
their Men, it procured no commotion; and understanding they were all quiet and
secure in the Town, he concluded it vain to lose time any longer, The Count
Poppi revolts from the Flo^rentine.
wherefore he changed his designs, and resolved to do something which might
cause the Florentines to provoke him to a Battle, in which he doubted not to
overcome, and then all things would follow as he expected, of course. there was
at that time in Nicolo's Army, Francesco Conte di Poppi who (when the Enemy was
in Mugello) revolted from the Florentines, with whom he was in League, the
Florentines had a jealousy of him before and ende^voured to continue him their
friend, by enlarging his pay, and making him there Deputy over all the Towns
which were near him, but nothing could do, so strongly did his affection
incline him to the other party, that no fear, nor act of kindness what ever was
sufficient to divide him from Rinaldo, and the rest of the Brethren, who had
had the Government formerly: so that he no sooner heard of Nicolo's approach,
but he went in to him immediately, and solicited him with all imaginable
importunity to advance toward the City and march into Casentino; discovering
to him the whole strength of the Country, and with what ease and security he
might straiten the Enemy. Nicolo took his Counsel, and marching into Casentino,
he possessed himself of Romena, and Bibiena, and afterward encamped before
Castle San Nicolo. That Castle is placed at the foot of those Alps which divide
Casentino from the vale of Arno; and by reason it stood high, and had a strong
Garrison in it, it was no easy matter to take it, though Nicolo plied it
continually with his Cannon.

This siege continued twenty days, during which time the Florentines had got
together what force they could, and had already under several Officers 3000
foot at Fegghine, commanded by Piero Giam Pagolo as General; Neri Capponi, and
Bernardo de Medici as Commissioners. The Castle of San Nicolo had sent out four
Persons to give them notice of their Condition, and press them for relief:
whereupon the Commissioners examining the situation of the place, found it was
not to be relieved but by the Alps which came down from the Vale of Arno, the
tops of which might easily be possessed by the Enemy, before they could come at
them, in respect they had a shorter cut to them, and the Florentines could not
stir, but they must of necessity be seen: so that to attempt a thing which was
not like to succeed, was to expose and cast away their Men without doing any
good: upon these considerations the Commissioners having commended their
courage passed, advised them to continue it whilst they were able, and when
they found they could hold it no longer, to surrender upon as good terms as
they could: hereupon after 32 days siege Nicolo became Master of the Castle,
but the losing so much time upon so inconsiderable a place, was (in great part)
the miscarriage of that enterprise: for had he invested Florence, or but keep
it blocked up at a distance, the Governor of that City would have been
constrained to raise Money, and Men, and must have supplied it with provisions,
with much more difficulty, having the Enemy so near them, besides many would
have been pressing for peace seeing the War so likely to continue: but the
desire the Count di Poppi had to be revenged of that Garrison (which had been
his Enemy a long time) caused him to give that Counsel, Nicolo ill^advised by
Count Poppi.
and Nicolo to oblige him, consented to it, which was the destruction of both:
and indeed it seldom happens, but private animosity, proves a prejudice to the
interest of the public. Nicolo, pursuing his Victory, took Passina and Chiusi,
and the Count di Poppi persuaded him to continue in those parts, alleging that
he might extend his Quarters betwixt Chiusi, and Pieve as he pleased, and
making himself Master of the Alps, he might as he saw occasion, return to the
old post in Casentino and the Vale Arno, or falling down into Vale di Chiana
and the Vale de Fevere, be ready upon the least motion of the Enemy. But Nicolo
reflecting upon the rockiness of those places, only he replied his Horses could
swallow no stones, and removed to Borgo a S. Sepulcro where he was received
with all demonstration of kindness, from whence he endeavored to debauch the
Citizens of Castello, but they were too firm to the Florentines to entertain
any such motion. Being desirous to have Perugia (where he was born) at his
devotion, he went either with 40 Horse to make them a visit, and was honorably
treated, but in a few days he rendered himself suspected, having been wheedling
with the Legate and several of the Citizens, and made many proposals to them,
but none of them succeeded; so that receiving 8000 Ducats of them, he returned
to his Army.

After this he got intelligence in Cortona, and was very busy in seducing it
from the Florentines, but being discovered before it was ripe, that also came
to nothing. Among the principal of that City there was on Bartolomeo di senso,
Nicolo practices to surprise Crotona.
who going the Rounds one night by the Captains order, was told by a Country
Man his friend, that if he had no mind to be killed, he should have a care, and
go back. Bartolomeo pressing to know his reason; he found the whole series of
the Plot, and went immediately to the Governor, and acquainted him: how,
seizing upon the Conspirators, and doubling his Gurards thereupon, expected the
coming of Nicolo according to agreement, who came indeed punctually at his
time, but finding himself descovered, returned to his quarters. Whilst things
ware carried on in Tuscany at this rate, with little advantage to the forces of
the Duke, his affairs in Lombardy were as unquiet, but with more detriment and
loss, for Count Francesco as soon as the season gave leave, took the field with
his Army, and the Venetians having repaired their fleet in the Lake, he thought
it best in the first place to make himself Master of that, and to drive the
Duke out; supposing when he had done that, the rest would be easy. Whereupon
he caused the Venetian. Fleet to set upon the Dukes; which they did, and
defeated them; after which he took all the Castles which they had in their
possession, Brescia reli^ved.
so that the Enemy which besieged Brescia by land, understanding the destiny of
their Comerades, drew of from the siege; and left the Town free, after it had
been straightened three years. Having finished his business there, and obtained so
important a Victory, the Count thought ^it to seek out the Enemy, who was
retired to Socino, a Castle upon the River of Oglio, and dislodging them there,
they retreated to Cremona: where the Duke made a head, and resolved to defend
that part of his Country. But the Count advancing daily against him; being
fearful he should lose all, or a great part of his Territory, he began to
lament the resolution of sending Nicolo into Tuscany; and to redress his error,
he writ word to Nicolo of the condition he was in, pressing him with all speed
to come back to his relief. The Florentines in the mean time had joined their
forces with the Popes, and made a halt at Anghiari a Castle at the foot of the
mountains which part Val di Tevere, from Valdichiana, four miles distant from
San Sepulcro; betwixt which places the way was plain, the Country champain, sit
for Horse, and proper for a Battle. Having heard of the Counts Victory, and
that Nicolo was recalled, they thought the Victory might be obtained without
more hazard or labor, and therefore orders was dispatched in all haste to the
Comissaries to avoid an engagement by all means; for Nicolo could not stay in
Tuscany many days. These orders coming to Nicolo's ear, finding that of
necessity he must part; that he might have left nothing untryed, he resolved to
provoke them to a Battle, believing he should take them unprovided, seeing
(according to their intelligence) they could have no reason to expect any such
thing; and to this he was much encouraged by Rinaldo, the Conte di Poppi, and
all the Florentine exiles, who knew well enough they were undone if Nicolo
departed; but if they could bring them to a fight, there was a possibility of
prevailing, and if they did lose the Victory, they should lose it with honor.

This resolution being taken, the Army moved; and being advanced as far as
Borgo before the Florentines perceived it, he commanded 2000 Men out of that
City, who, (relying much upon the conduct of their General, and the promises he
made them, being also desirous of plunder) followed him cheerfully. Marching on
from thence directly toward Anghiari in Battalia, Nicolo arrived with his
whole Army within two miles, when Micheletto Attendulo perceiving a great dust,
and suspecting it to be the Enemy, cried out to have all People stand to their
Arms. The tumult in the Florentine Camp was not small; The Battle of Anghiari.
for that Army encamped ordinarily without any Discipline, and being negligent
besides, in presumption the Enemy were further off, they were fitter to fly
than to fight; all of them being disarm^d, and straggled from their quarters
into such places as the shade, or their recreations had carried them.
Nevertheless so much diligence was used by the Commissaries, and the General,
that before the Enemy could get up, they were on Horseback, and in order to
receive them; and as Micheletto was the first that discovered them, so he was
the first that engaged them; running with his Troop to secure the Bridge which
crossed the way not far from Anghiari. Micheletto having posted himself at the
Bridge, Simomino an Officer of the Popes, and his Legate, placed themselves on
the right hand, and the Florentine Commis^aries, and General on the left;
having planted the foor as thick as possible upon the banks; there was only one
way for the Enemy to attack them and that was by the bridge; nor had the
Florentines any where to defend themselves but there; only they ordered their
foot, that if the Enemies foot, should leave the high way, and fall upon the
flanks of the Horse; they should let fly at them with their; Crossbows, and
give their Cavalry a secure passage over the Bridge.

The first that appeared, were gallantly received by Micheletto, and repulsed;
but Astor re, and Francesco Piccinino coming in with a commanded party, to
their relief, they charged him so briskly, that Micheletto was not only beat
back over the Bridge, but pursued to the very end of the Town, and they which
pursued them being charged again in the Flank, were repulsed over the Bridge,
and all things as at first. This skirmish continued two hours complete:
sometimes Nicolo, and sometimes the Florentines being Masters of the Bridge;
and though the fight upon the Bridge was equal to both, yet on this side and
the other, Nicolo had much the disadvantage. For Nicolo's men passing the
Bridge were received by a gross of the Enemy, which being drawn up with
advantage by reason of the ground, could charge, or wheel, or relieve those
that were distressed as they saw occasion. But when the Florentines passed
over, Nicolo had no place to relieve his Men for the ditches and banks in the
way, as it appeared in the conflict; for though Nicolo's forces gained the
Bridge several times, yet by the fresh supplies of the Enemy they were still
forced to give back: but when the Florentines prevailed, and passed over the
Bridge, Nicolo had not time, by reason of the briskness of their charge, and
the incommodity of the ground to reinforce his Men, Piccinino defeated.
but those which were behind were forced to mix with those that were before,
one disordered the other, and the whole Army was constrained to fly, and every
Man got to Bargo as well as he could. The Florentines let them go, as having
more inclination to the plunder, which in Horses, Arms, and other things
afforded them a plentiful prey; for with Nicolo there escaped not above 1000
Horse, most of the rest being taken Prisoners: the Citizens of Borgo who had
followed Nicolo for prize became prize themselves, and were most of them taken;
with all their carriages and colors: this victory was not so much prejudicial
to the Duke, as it was advantageous to Tuscany, for had the Florentines lost
the Day, that Province had been his; but he losing it, lost nothing but his
Arms and his Horses, which a little money would recruit. Never was there any
War made in an Enemies Country with less execution than in this, for in so
great a rout, and so sharp an engagement, which lasted four hours, there was
but one Man slain, and he not by any wound or honorable exploit, but falling
from his Horse he was trodden to Death: with such security did they fight then;
for all of them being cuirashers on Horseback, and completely armed, they could
not presently be killed, and if they found there was no likelihood of getting
off themselves, or being rescued by their friends, they surrendered before they
could come at them to slay them: this Battle both in it self and consequences,
was a great instance of the unhappiness of that War; for the Enemy being
beaten, and Nicolo fled to Borgo, the Commissioners would have pursued, and
besieged him in that place, to have made there Victory entire: But some of the
Officers and Soldiers would not obey; pretending they would dispose of their
plunder, and cure themselves of their wounds, and which is more remarkable the
next day about noon without any regard to, or leave from their superior
Officers, they went to Arezzo; deposited their prey; and returned to Anghiari
when they had done.

A thing so contrary to all order and military discipline, that the relics
and remainder of any well governed Army would easily have robbed them of their
Victory, which so undeservedly they had obtained. And besides this, the
Commissioners giving order that all prisoners should be kept (to prevent their
rallying, or getting together again) in spite of their Orders, they dismissed
them all. A thing most justly to be admired, that an Army so constituted,
should be able to get the Victory, and that the Enemy should be so poor
spirited as to be beaten by them. Whilst the Florentines therefore were
marching to Arezzo and returning again, Nicolo had opportunity to quit Borgo,
and draw off all his Men toward Romagna; and with him the Florentine exiles,
who seeing their hopes desperate of returning to Florence they dispersed
themselves into all parts of Italy, and some of them into other Countries, as
their conveniences prompted them, of these Rinaldo chose Ancona for his
residence, and afterward (to obtain a mansion in Heaven, for that which he had
lost upon Earth) he went to visit the Sepulcher of our Savior; from whence
being returned, as he was sitting at Table very merry at the Wedding of one of
his Daughters, he fell down on a sudden, and died. His fortune being favorable
so far, as to take him away in one of the most pleasant days of his Life; a man
truly honorable in all conditions, but would have been much more, had his Stars
brought him forth in a City that had been united; for Florence being factious,
the same things disgusted there, which would have been rewarded in another
place. The Commissaries when their Men were come back from Arezzo, and Nicolo
departed, presented themselves before Borgo; whereupon the Townsmen would have
surrendered to the Florentines, but could not be accepted: in this Treaty and
negotiation, the Commissaries became jealous of the Popes Legate, lest he had a
design for seizing it for the Church; so that they came to ill language, and
doubtless some ill accident would have happened, had those proposals proceeded:
the Popes Legate being gratified in his desires: that controversy fell to the
ground. Whilst they were so solicitous for the enterprise of Borgo, news came
that Nicolo Piocinino was marched toward Rome* but others said toward La
Marca, wherefore the Legate, and many of the rest, gave their opinions to march
toward Perugia, to be ready to defend either Rome or La Marca, whither Nicolo
was fled with Bernat do de Medici; and Neri, with the Florentine^, were to
march for Casentino: this being determined, Neri departed with his forces to
Rassina; took it, and Bibi^na, Prato Vecchio, and Romeni; from thence he
marched to Poppi, and besieged it on two sides; Poppi besieged.
one toward the plain of Certomondo; and the other upon the mountain that goes
along to Fronzoli. Count Poppi seeing himself forsaken both by God and Man, had
shut himself up in Poppi, not with any hopes of relief, but to make his
conditions so much the better; and Neri coming before it, and forming his
siege; he desired a parley, and had as good terms offered, as in his state could
be expected, which were to go away himself, and his Children, with what ever
they could carry with them, for which the Town, and its Territory was to be
delivered to the Florentines; whilst the Treaty was managing, he came down to
the Bridge over the Arno which is at the end of the Town, and calling to Neri,
in great sorrow and affliction he said to him,

Had I considered my own ill fortune, Poppi's speech to the Florentine
Comissaries.
and your power as I should have done, I had been now as ^ friend
congratulating your victory, and not suppl^cating your Mercy as an Enemy.
Fortune at present is favorable and propitious to you: to me it is rigid and
severe; I had Horses and Arms, and Subjects, and Estate, and who can wonder if
I part with them unwillingly? but if you please (as you may) to command all
Tuscany, we must of necessity obey: I have this only to comfort me, that had
not I committed this error, such would not have been that exercise nor
demonstration of your Generosity, for if now you should think fit to preserve
me, you will leave to the World an indelible instance, and example of Clemency:
let therefore your compassion exceed my offense, and permit at least that this
single residence may continue to those from whom your predecessors have
received formerly many obligations.

Neri replied, Neri's answer.
That he had unhappily placed his hopes upon People which could do him no good.
That he had transgressed so highly against the Republic of Florence, that as
things then stood, there was a necessity of yielding up all, and that he must
abandon those places, as he was an Enemy to Florence, which as a friend he had
refused to preserve; for he had given so ill a Testimony and example of
himself, That he could not be continued; and in every chance of fortune had
been so unconstant and various, that they could not have any confidence but
that still be would be working to the prejudice of their state, and yet it was
not so much him, as his interest they were afraid of. But if he would withdraw
into Germany, the Government of Florence would intercede, that he might reside
there as a Prince and be a friend to him, for the obligations he said they had
received from his Ancestors. To which the Count answered in great passion, that
he would be farther off the Florentines than so, and laying aside all further
Capitulation (seeing no remedy) the Count Delivered up the Town, and all his
other concerns to the Florentines; only his goods, his Wife and Children
departed with him, very disconsolate, for having lost a Dominion which his
predecessors had enjoyed above 400 years. These successes being known in
Florence, were received with great joy and acclamation, both by the Magistrates
and People. And because Barnardetto de Medici, found that Nicolo 's marching
toward Rome or La Marca would be of little importance, he returned with his
forces to Neri, and both of them coming back to Florence, it was resolved that
they would be entertained with the highest honors which could be conferred by
that City, upon their victorious members, and accordingly they were received in
a Triumphant manner, by the Senate the Captains of the Parties, and the whole
City beside.

THE HISTORY OF FLORENCE.
Book VI.
IT always was (and it is reasonable it be) the design and end of all those who
make war, to enrich themselves, and impoverish the Enemy; nor is conquest and
victory desired upon any other score, but to magnify the one, and to depress
the other: hence it is, that when ever victory impoverishes or debilitates you,
you have either transgressed, or fallen short, of what you aimed at in the War.
That Prince, or Commonwealth is enriched by Victory, when he exirpateth his
Enemy, and impropriats the spoil. On the other side, his Victory impoverishes
him, when (though he overcomes his Enemy) he cannot utterly extinguish him, and
the spoil and prey is left to the Soldiers. This Prince, this Commonwealth is
unhappy in its losses, but more in its victories; for being defeated, it is
liable to the injuries of its Enemies; and being victorious, to the contumely
of its friends, which as they are less reasonable, are less supportable, seeing
it is again necessitated to oppress and disgust its subjects by new impositions
and taxes: and if there be the least humanity in Government, it cannot rejoice
or exult in a victory, which makes all its subjects sad. The well Governed
Commonwealths of old, were wont to fill their Bags with Gold and Silver;
destribute donatives, remit subsidies and tribute to the people and solemnize
their victories with merriment and feasting; but those of whom we write,
drained their Exchequer, impoverished the people, and never secured themselves
of their Enemies; which proceeded from the disorders in the management of the
War; for having beaten, and pillaged the Enemy, they neither kept them
Prisoners, nor killed them; so that (being incensed) they forbate revenging
themselves upon the Conqueror no longer than he which cammanded them could
recruit them with Horses and Arms: and the plunder and ransoms falling to the
Soldiers, the Conquerours made no advantage of the spoils of the Enemy, but
were forced to tear their supplies out of the bowels of their Subjects; nothing
of benefit accurring to the people, they were rendered more imperious and cruel
in their taxes: and those Soldiers had brought things to that pass, that both
the Conqueror and conquered (if they intented to preserve their authority over
their Men) were in necessity of more money; for the one side was to be
recruited, the other to be rewarded; and as the one could not fight, unless he
was newly equipped; so the other would not engage him without recompense for
what was passed; from whence it happened, that one side had no great joy of its
victory; and the other no great sense of its loss; for the conquered had time
to recruit, and the Conqueror had none to pursue. This disorder and perverseness
in the Soldier was the reason that Nicolo was recruited, and on Horse back
again, before his defeat was known through Italy; and sharper war he made upon
his Enemies afterward, than he had ^ver done before. This it was, that after
his rout before Brescia, enabled him to surprise Verona: this it was, that
after he was worsted at Verona, gave him opportunity to invade Tuscany; this it
was, that after his loss at Anghiari, recruited him again, and made him
stronger in the field (ere he got to Romagna) than he was before, which gave
the Duke new hopes of defending Lombardy, though by means of his absence he had
looked upon it as lost: for whilst Nicolo was giving the Enemy an alarm at
Tuscany the Duke of Milan was reduced to a condition of hazarding all, and
therefore apprehending he might be undone, before Nicolo (who was sent for)
would come to his rescue, to stop the Career of the Count, and temper his
fortune by industry, which he could not do by force; he had recourse to those
remedies which in the like case he had many times used and sent Nicolo da Esti
Prince of Ferrara to Peschiera to the Count, to persuade him in his name to a
Peace; The Duke proposes a peace.
and to remonstrate to him that the prosecution of the War could not turn to
his advantage; for if the Duke should be distressed, and unable to maintain his
^eputation, the Count would be the first which would suffer by it; by reason
the Venetians and Florentines would have no farther occasion, and by
consequence no farther esteem for him: and as a testimony of the sincerity of
his proposal, the Duke offered to co^^mmate, his Marriage, and send his
Daughter to Ferrara to be delivered to him as soon as the peace was concluded;
to which the Count replied, that if the Duke did truly desire peace, he might
easily have it; for the Venetians and Florentines were as much inclined to it
as he, but the difficulty would be to persuade them he was in earnest, as
knowing he would never have proposed any such thing, had not some necessity
constrained him; and as soon as that should be removed, he would make War upon
them again.

As to the business of his Marriage, he could not repose any confidence in his
promise, having been so often baffled by him before: nevertheless, if every
thing else were agreed, he should proceed in it as his friends should advise.
The Venetians, who are jealous of their Soldiers, where they have no reason to
be so, had reason enough to be suspicious here, which the Count being desirous
to remove, prosecuted the War with all diligence imaginable; but his mind was
so inflamed with ambition, and the Venetians so slack, and intepidated with
jealousy, little more was done that Summer: so that when Nicolo Piccinino
returned into Lombardy, Winter came on, and the Armies were sent to their
Winter quarters. The Count to Verona; the Duke to Cremona: the Florentines into
Tuscany, and the Popes Army to Romagna, which after the Battle of Anghiari,
assaulted Furli and Bologna in hopes to have taken them from Francesco
Piccinino, who kept them from his Father, and defended them so well, they could
not get them out of his hands; nevertheless their coming into those parts so
terrified the people of Ravenna that to avoid the domination of the Church by
consent of Os^asio di Potenta their Lord, they submitted to the Venetian, who
(in recompense of his kindness, that he might never recover by force, what he
had given them with so little discretion) sent Ostasio with his only Son to
spend their days in Candia, where they died: in which expedition his Holiness
wanting Money, (notwithstanding the Victory at Anghiari) he was glad to sell the
Castle of Borg^ a San Sepulcro to the Florentines for 25000 Ducats. The
ingratitude of the Venetians.


Things being in this posture, and all sides thinking themselves safe as long
as it was Winter; all thoughts of peace were laid aside, especially by the
Duke, who thought himself doubly safe, both in the season of the year, and the
arrival of Nicolo; had therefore broke of his Treaty with the Count a little
abruptly; and in great haste rigged out Nicolo again with all provisions and
accoutrements that were necessary for the War: the Count having notice of his
preparations, went to Venice to consult the Senate how affairs were to be
ordered the next Summer. When Nicolo was ready (perceiving the Enemy out of
order) he never staid for the spring, but in the coldest of the Winter he
passed the Adda, and Acri, surprised 2000 Horse, and took most of them
prisoners: but that which touched the Count nearest and startled the Venetians,
was the defection of Ciarpellone one of his principal officers, who went over
to the Duke: the Count had no sooner the news, but he left Venice; and coming
with all possible speed to Brescia, he found Nicolo retired, and gone back to
his former station: the Count had no mind, finding the Enemy gone, to follow
him at that time; but chose rather to defer, till some advantage should tempt
him, and give him opportunity to revenge himself: he prevailed therefore with
the Venetians to recall the forces they had in the Florentine service in
Tuscany; and to confer the command of them upon Micheletto Attendulo,
Gattamelata being dead. The spring being come, Nicolo Piccinino was first in
the field, Micheletto General for the League.
and beseiged Cignano, a Castle some twelve miles distant from Brescia: to the
relief of which, the Count addressed himself; and betwixt these two Generals
the War was managed as formerly. The Count being fearful of Bergamo, went with
his Army and encamped before Martinengo, a Castle which (if taken) lay very
convenient for the succouring of Bergaino (which City was by Nicolo greatly
distressed) who finding he could not easily be disturbed, but by the way of
Martinengo, had supplied it plentifully with all things, so as the Count was
forced to besiege it with all his Army: whereupon Nicolo marched with his
forces where he might most conveniently incommode him, and entrenched himself
so strangely, the Count could not (without manifest danger) assail him so that
thereby he brought things to that pass that the besieger was in more distress,
than the besieged; and the Count than the Castle. For the Count could neither
keep the siege for want of provisions, nor rise, for fear of Nicolo's Army; and
every body expected victory for the Duke, and destruction for his Enemy: but
fortune, (which never wants ways of favoring her friends, and disobliging her
Enemies) brought it about that Nicolo in confidence of his Victory was grown so
insolent haughty, that without respect to the Duke, or himself, he sent him
word that he had served him a long time, and as yet not gained so much ground
as would bury him when he died; he desired therefore to know what recompense he
was to expect for all his dangers, and fatigues; for it being now in his power
to make him absolute Master of Lombardy and to put all his Enemies into his
hands, he thought it but reasonable, as he was certain of his Victory, Nicolo's
insolence to the Duke.
to be secured of his reward; and therefore he did propose he might have the
City of Piacenza made over to him, that when he had tired and worn himself out
in his Wars, he might have that Town for his recess; and at the last he took
the boldness to threaten the Duke with the quitting his enterprise, if he was
not gratified in his demands. This contumelious and insolent way of
capitulation, was so offensive, and detestable to the Duke, that he resolved to
lose all, rather than comply; so that this arrogance in Nicolo wrought an
effect upon him, to which the Arms nor the minaces of the Enemy could never
reduce him; and that was to make peace with the Count, to whom he sent Guido
Buone da Fortona with proposals of peace; and the proffer of his Daughter;
which was embraced with both Arms by the Count and his Colleagues.

All being privately agreed among themselves; Peace betwixt the Duke and the
Count.
the Duke sent a message to Nicolo to require him to make a Truce with the
Count, for a twelve month; pretending his treasure was low, and had been so
exhausted with the War, that he could not but prefer a certain Peace, before a
Victory that was doubtful. Nicolo admired his resolution, as not able to
imagine what should make him reject so glorious a Victory; not in the least
suspecting, that he bogled at the remuneration of his friends, and chose rather
to let his Enemies escape; so that not obeying him readily, the Duke was
constrained to threaten, that without immediate compliance, he would deliver
him up as a prey for his own Soldiers, and his Enemy. Whereupon Nicolo
submitted, but with the same alacrity as on that is forced to forsake both his
Country and friends; complaining, and lamenting his unhappiness, whose Victory
over his Enemies was always interrupted either by his fortune, or the Duke. The
truce being made, the Marriage betwixt Madona Bianca and the Count was
consummated, and the City of Cremona given to her in Dower: 1441
after which, the peace was concluded in November 1441 at which for the
Venetians, Francesco Barbadico, and Pagolo Frono; for the Florentines Agnolo
Acciailo were present; the Venetians got by this peace Peschiera, Asola, and
Leonata a Castle belonging to the Marquess of Manto^a.

The Wars in Lombardy being ended, the only part of Italy where there was any
Hostility, was in the Kingdom of Naples, which not being able to be composed,
was the occasion of new troubles in Lombardy. During the Wars in those parts,
Alfonso of Aragon had overrun the whole Kingdom of Naples, and left the King of
Rinato nothing at all but the Country about the Metropolis. Whereupon Alfonso
conceiving the Victory already in his hands, resolved whilst he besieged
Naples, to seize upon Benevento, and the rest of the Towns which were yet
remaining to the Count in those Countries, supposing it might be done without
much danger, the Count himself being employed in Lombardy; and his design
succeeded as easily as he imagined; for he took all his Towns with little or no
opposition. But the news arriving of the peace in Lombardy, Alfonso, began to
apprehend lest the Count (to recover what he had lost) should join with Rinato,
and Rinato being of the same opinion, sent to invite, and solicit the Count,
that he would come, and revenge himself of his Enemy, by relieving his friend.
On the otherside Alfonso was as earnest with the Duke, that in respect of the
friendship which was betwixt them, he would give the Count some diversion, and
by employing him in greater affairs, enforce him from undertaking of this.
Philippo entertained the motion very readily; not considering it entrenched
upon that peace, which not long before he had concluded with so much prejudice
to himself: he caused therefore to be signified to the Pope E^genius, that then
was the time to recover the Towns which the Count had taken from the Churches,
and for his easier success, he proffered him Nicolo Piccinino (who was in his
pay) during the War, but discharged upon the peace, and was at that time in
Romagna with his forces: the Pope received the proposition very joyfully upon a
double account, both as he hated Francesco, and desired his own, and though he
had been cheated by Nicolo once before, yet now the Duke interposing, he could
not suspect him in the least; joining his forces therefore with Nicolo's, he
marched into la Marca: the Count being much alarmed at the news, got what
strength together he could, and went to encounter them.

In the mean time Alfonso took Naples; Naples taken by Alfonso.
and all that Kingdom fell into his hands except Castelnuovo: Rinato having
left a strong Garrison in Castelnuovo, went away himself for Florence, where he
was most honorably received, but finding he was not able to continue the war,
he stayed there but some certain days, and away he passed to Marsilia; during
which time Alfonso had taken Castelnuovo, and the Count was got into La Marca,
but not so strong as the Pope and Nicolo: wherefore he addressed himself to the
Venetian, and Florentine, for assistance both of men and money; representing to
them that unless they now looked upon them, and did something to restrain the
Pope and Alfonso, whilst he was in being, afterward they would have enough to
do to secure themselves; for they might join with Duke Philip, and divide all
Italy betwixt them: for some time both Venetian and Florentine suspended their
answer, either because they were unwilling to make his Holiness, and Alfonso
their Enemies; or else, because their hands were already full in Bologna.
Hannibal Bentivoglio had driven Francesco Piccinino out of that City, and to
enable himself to defend it against the Duke (who was a favourer of Francesco)
he had desired the assistance of the Venetians and Florentines; and they not
denied it. Whilst the affairs in Bologna were in this manner uncertain, they
could not resolve to give the Count their assistance; but Hannibal defeating
Francesco afterward, so that all things there seemed to be composed, they then
concluded to supply him. Yet first to secure themselves against the Duke, they
renewed the League with him, to which the Duke was not averse, for though he
had consented to the War against the Count, whilst Rinato was in the field; yet
now Rinato was routed, and his whole Kingdom taken from him, he had no mind the
Count should be destroyed likewise: and to that end he nto only consented to
the aid which they desired, but he writ to Alfonso to draw his forces back
again into Naples, and not to prosecute the War there any longer; to which,
although Alfonso was very unwilling, yet in respect of his obligations to the
Duke, he quietly consented, and drew off his Army to the other side of Trento.

Whilst things were in this posture in Romagna, the Florentines were not
unanimous at home: among the Citizens of chiefest reputation and authority in
that Government, Neri the Son of Gino Capponi was one, of whose interest Cosimo
de Medici was most particularly jealous, in respect of the great vogue he had
both in the City, and Army: for having a long time had the Command of the
Florentine forces, he had gained them exceedingly by his courage and
deportment: besides the many great services performed by him and his father
(the Father having taken Pisa, and the Son defeated Nicolo at the Battle of
Anghiari) were fresh upon the memory, and caused him to be beloved by most
people, but dreaded by such as were fearful of more Companions in their
Government. Amongst other of their principal Officers, there was one Baldaccio
d' Anghiari an excellent Soldier; not to be surpassed, Baldaccio General of
the Flor^ntine foot.
either for courage or conduct in all Italy at that time: having always
commanded their foot, he had gained so great influence upon them, that it was
generally believed, with him they would undertake any enterprise what ever,
when ever he desired them. This Baldaccio was a great lover of Neri, of whose
bravery and prudence he had all along been a witness, which to the rest of the
Grandees, gave great occasion of suspicion; and thinking with themselves that
to let him alone would be dangerous, but to imprison him much more; they
resolved to make him away, and fortune eflected it. Bartolomeo Orlandini was at
that time Gonfaloniere di Giustitia: who having been sent to keep the pass at
Marradi (as was said before) when Nicolo Piccinino made his inroad into
Tuscany, had most basely deserted it, and exposed a Country which was almost
inaccessible of it self. Baldaccio was so much provoked, or rather ashamed at
his cowardice, that he spoke slightly of him, and writ several letters
expressing his contempt; which Bartolomeo resenting highly, and being conscious
it was true; he resolved to be revenged, and expiate his own fault with the
death of his accuser: his resolution being known to other of his Enemies, they
encouraged him to proceed, and at one blow to revenge himself for the injury he
had received; and deliver the state from a person they could neither retain
without danger, nor dismiss without ruin. Having fixed upon his way Bartolomeo
shut up several armed Men one day in the Chamber; and Baldaccio being come to
the Piazza (as he constantly did) to discourse with the Magistrates, and ^^quire
orders for his conduct, the Gonfaloniere sent to speak speak with him, and he
presently obeyed: seeing him coming, the Gonfaloniere went to meet him, and
entertained him about his affairs three or four turns in the Senators Chamber;
but at length having drilled him near the Chamber where his ambush was laid, he
gave the Signal, and all of them rushing upon him (who was alone, and without
arms) they killed him, and threw him out of the Palace window which looks
toward the Dogana; and then cutting off his Head, and carrying his trunk into
the Piazzo, they left it there all day as a spectacle for the people: he had
only one Son by his Wife Annalena; which living not long after him, Annalena
deprived both of Husband and Child, and resolving to have no farther
conversation with Man, she made a Monastery of her house, and shutting her self
up with several other Noble Persons, which came to her to that purpose; she
spent the remainder of her days there in great piety and devotion; calling the
Monastery by her own Name, and immortalizing her memory, both by the one and
the other. This action was no small diminution to Neri; and took away a
considerable part of his reputation and friends yet it did not satisfy the
contrivers, for having been more than ten years at the helm, the authority of
the Balia expired, and every body began to talk and act with more freedom than
they thought convenient, they judged it necessary to revive that Court, for the
encouragement of their friends, 1444.
and the depression of their Enemies; Hereupon, in the Year 1444, the Counsels
created a new Balia, which re-established the Offices; contracted the number of
the Officers which were to choose the Senators; Florence reformed.
renewed the Chancery of reformation; removing Philippo Peruzzi out of the
Chancellorship, and putting one into his place who they believed would be
Governed by them. They prolonged the banishment of those that were refractory;
imprisoned Giovanni, the Son of Simone Vespucci; degraded the Accoppiatori as
Enemies to the State, and with them the Sons of Piero Baroncelli; all the
Seragli, Bartolomeo, Francesco Castellani, and several others; by which means
they procured great reputation, and authority to themselves, and no little
prejudice and disparagement to their Enemies; and having settled themselves at
home in the Government, they began to look about, and inquire how things were
managed abroad.

Nicolo Piccinino (as we said before) being abandoned by Alfonso; and the
Count, by assistance of the Florentines, became formidably powerful, he
assaulted Nicolo not far from Fermo, and gave him so great a defeat, that
Nicolo was glad to fly (almost alone) to Montecchio, where he fortified himself
so well, and defended himself so bravely, that in a short time his whole Army
repaired to him again, and put him into a condition of supporting easily
against the Count, and the rather, because Winter being come, both of them were
constrained to send their Armies into quarters. All Winter long Nicolo was
employed in increasing his Army, which was much furthered by the assistance of
the Pope, and Alfonso; insomuch that when the spring appeared, and both Armies
took the field, the Count was much too weak for Nicolo, and indeed brought to
that extremity of want, that he must of necessity have been ruined, had not the
Duke frustrated the advantage which Nicolo had got over him. Philip sent to
Nicolo to desire he would come presently to him, for he must needs speak
personally with him about business of very great importance; and Nicolo, being
greedy to know it, left his command to his Son Francesco, and went to Milan to
the Duke; relinquishing a certain victory, for an uncertain reward, which being
perceived by the Count he thought that occasion of engaging the Son in his
Fathers absence, was not to be slipped, and coming to a fight with him near the
Castle di Monteloro, he overthrew Francesco, and took him Prisoner.

Nicolo arriving at Milan, finding himself deluded by the Duke, and
understanding the defeat, Nicolo dies. 1445
and imprisonment of his Son, he took it to heart, and died with sorrow 1445 in
the 64 year of his age, a more brave, than a fortunate General. He left only
two Sons, Francesco, and Giacoppo, whose conduct was less, and fortune worse
than their Fathers; so that the Disciples of Bracio were almost extinct, whilst
the Sforzeschan being more succesful, became more glorious. The Pope
understanding Nicolo was dead, and his Army overthrown (not daring to rely much
upon the King of Aragons supplies) desired a peace of the Count, and obtained
it by the meditation of the Florentines, by which the Pope was to have in la
Marca, Osimo, Fabriano, and Ricanato restored, and all the rest were to remain
to the Count. After this accommodation in la Marca, all Italy had been quiet,
had not the Bolognesi disturbed it. there were two super-eminent families in
Bologna, the Canneschi, and the Bentivogli; Hannibal was the head of the
latter, and Battista of the first. To beget the greater confidence betwixt
them, many matches had been made; but among Men that aspire to the same degree
of greatness, an Alliance is sooner made, than a friendship. Bologna was in
League with the Venetians, and Florentines, which League was made by Hannibal
Bentivogli's means after Francesco Piccinino was expelled. Troubles in Bologna.
Battista understanding how earnestly the Duke desired the friendship of that
City, contrived how he might kill Hannibal, and deliver that City to the Duke;
and having concluded the circumstances, on the 24th of June 1445, Battista and
his accomplices set upon Hannibal, and slew him, and when they had done,
declared themselves for the Duke. The Venetians and Florentine commissaries
were at the same time in the Town; and at the first report of the tumult,
returned privately to their houses, but finding the people thronging in great
numbers in the Market place, complaining, and exclaiming against the Murderers
of Hannibal; they took courage; joined themselves with them, and putting them
into a posture, they fell upon the Canneschi, and in half an hours time, routed
them, killed part of them, and and drove the rest out of the City. Battista not
having opportunity to get away, nor his Enemies to kill him, betook himself to
his house, where hiding himself in a chest, or Bing to keep Corn in, they
searched for him a whole day, and could not discover him: being assured he was
not gone out of Town, they came back again and threatened his Servants so, that
one of his Lacqueys betrayed him, and carried them to him; then drawing him out
of his hole in armor as he was, they killed him, and dragged him about the
Sreets, and burned him; so that the Victory of the Duke was sufficient to
encourage that enterprise, but his expedition in relieving it, was not great
enough to make it good. By the death of Battista, and the expulsion of the
Canneschi their tumults were composed; but the Bolognesi remained in no little
confusion, there being none of the family of the Bentivoglio's left to govern
them; for Hannibal had only one Son, of about six years old called Giovanni;
and it was feared lest some difference and division might arise betwixt the
friends of Bentivoglio (in whose power it was to restore the Canneschi) to the
destruction of their party, and Country.

Whilst they were in this suspense, the Conte di Poppi being by accident in
Bologna, sent word to the principal of the City, that if they would be governed
by one of Hannibals blood he could direct them where they might have one; for
about twenty years since, Hercules, a Cousin-German of Hannibals being at
Poppi, had the enjoyment of a young Maid in that Town, who was brought to bed
afterward of a Son called Santi; which, Hercules affirmed to him many times,
Santi Bentivoglio.
was his, nor was it to be denied, for who ever knew them both, must needs
ownea more than ordinary resemblance. The Citizens giving credit to what he
said, dispatched some of their Citizens to Florence immediately, to see the
Youth and to desire Neri, and Cosimo, that he might be delivered to them: the
reputed father of Santi was dead, and the Son lived with an Uncle called
Antonioda Cascese, a rich Man, without Children of his own, and a great friend
of Neri's: Neri out of respect to his Uncle, thinking the business not to be
despised, nor on the other side, rashly accepted, proposed that Santi might be
sent for; and that in the presence af Cosimo and the Bolognian Ambassadors,
they might hear what he could say for himself; he was sent for accordingly, and
behaved himself so well, the Bolognesi were ready to worship him; so strangely
prevalent sometimes is the love of a faction; yet there was nothing concluded
at this meeting, only Cosimo took Santi aside and told him.

No Body can counsel you better in this case, Cosimo 's speech to Santi
than your self: because you may follow your own inclination. If you be the Son
of Hercules Bentivogli, you will apply your self to such things as are worthy
and suitable to the honor of that house But if you be the Son of Agnolo da
Cascese; you will continue in Florence, and spend the rest of your days basely
in the ordering of Wool.

This Speech netled the young Man, and whereas before he seemed to be
irresolute, he now declared he would refer himself wholly to Cosimo, and Neri,
and do as they directed him; and (it being agreed with the Ambassadors) Clothes
and Horses were bought, and equipage provided, and a while after being
honorably conducted to Bolonia, he was made Governor both of Hannibals Son,
and the City, which office he executed so well, that whereas all his
predecessors were killed by their Enemies; he lived quietly all his time and
died lamented at last.

After the death of Nicolo, and the peace concluded in La Marca; Philip wanting
a new General to command his Army made private overtures to Ciarpellone one of
the most experienced officers in the Counts Army; and at last coming to an
agreement, Ciarpellone desired leave of the Count to go to Milan, and take
possession of certain Castles which Philip had given him in the late Wars. The
Count suspecting the business (to disappoint the Duke, and prevent his serving
against him) he caused him first to be stopped, and afterward to be killed,
pretending to have found him engaged in Conspiracy against him; at which manner
of proceeding the Duke was highly incensed, but the Venetians and the
Florentines were pleased well enough, as apprehending the least amity betwixt
the Count and the Duke; however this indignity set all La Marca in an uproar,
and was the occasion of new War there. Gismondo Malatesti was Lord of Rimino;
and being Son-in-Law to the Count, he expected to have had the Government of
Pesaro; but the Count having reduced it, gave the Command of it to his Brother,
which Gismondo took very ill; and to make it the worse, his mortal Enemy
Federico di Monte Feltro, by the Counts means, had usurped the Dominion of
Urbino: upon these provocations Gismondo joined himself with the Duke, and
solicited the Pope and the King of Naples to make War upon the Count; who to
give his Son-in-Law a relish of the War to which he had such a mind, he
resolved to begin, and to fall first upon him; whereupon the Countries of
Romagna and La Marca were in a tumult immediately; for Philip, the King of
Naples, and the Pope sent all of them assistance to Gismondo, and the Venetians
and Florentines (though they sent him no Men) supplied the Count with what
moneys he wanted. Philip, not content to make War against him in Romagna only,
designed to deprive him of Cremona and Pontremoli, but Pontr^moli was defended
for him by the Florentines, and Cremona by the Venetians; so that the War was
received again in Lombardy; New war in Lombardy.
and many troubles ensued in the Country of Cremona, among which the Dukes
General Francesco Piccinino was overthrown at Casale by Micheletto and the
Venetian Army; and the Venetians conceiving hopes thereupon of deposing the
Duke, sent their Commissary to Cremona, assaulted Ghiaradadda, and took all
that Country, except* Cremona it self; and then passing the Adda, they made
their excursions to the very walls of Milan: the Duke not satisfied with his
condition, applied himself to Alfonso King of Aragon for succor; representing
the ill consequences which would follow upon his Dominions in Naples, if
Lombardy should fall into the hands of the Venetians: Alfonso promised to send
him supplies, but their passage would be difficult without the permission of
the Count, upon which consideration, Duke Philip addressed himself to the
Count, and begged of him that he would not abandon the Father-in-Law who was
both aged and blind. The Count was much offended with the Duke, for having
pulled those Wars upon him; and on the other side the greatness of the
Venetians did not please him at all; besides his money was gone, and the League
supplied him but coldly; for the Florentines were now freed from their
apprehensions of the Duke, The Count courted by all Parties.
which was the great cause of their caressing the Count, and the Venetians
desired his ruin, as the only person capable of carrying the whole state of
Lombardy from them.

Nevertheless, whilst Philip was seducing him to his side, and promised him the
Command of all his forces, upon a condition he would leave the Venetians, and
restore La Marca to the Pope; they sent Ambassadors to him, promising him
Milan, when it was taken, and the Generalship of their Army in perpetuum, so he
would prosecute the War in La Marca, and obstruct the supplies which were
sending by Alfonso into Lombardy. The Venetian proffers were great, and his
obligations to them considerable, they having made that War on purpose to
secure Cremona to the Count; again the Dukes injuries were fresh, and his
promises not to be trusted. Yet the Count remained doubtful which he should
accept; his obligation to the League; his Faith given, the late good offices
which they had done him, and their many promises for the future, were great
arguments on one side, yet he was loath on the other side to deny the
importunities of his Father-in-Law; but that which swayed with him most of all,
was the poison which he suspected was hid under the promises of the Venetians,
to whose discretion he must leave himself (if he succeeded in their Wars) both
for their performance, and his own preservation; which no wise Prince would
ever do, till necessity compelled him. But this suspense and difficulty of
resolution in the Count, was taken away by the Venetians; who having a design
by some practices and intelligences in the Town, to get it for themselves, upon
some other pretense they caused their forces to march into those parts, but
their plot was discovered by him that governed there for the Count, and in
stead of gaining Cremona, they lost the Count, who laid aside all respects, and
joined with the Duke.

Pope Eugenius was dead, Duke Philip died. 1447.
Niolo V. created his successor, and the Count advanced with his whole Army to
Cotegnola in order to his passage in Lombardy, when news was brought to him
that Duke Philip was dead, which happened in the year 1447. on the last of
August. These tidings much troubled the Count, whose Army could not be in good
order because they had not had their full pay. The Venetians he feared, as
being in arms, and his professed Enemies, now upon his revolt to the Duke.
Alfonso had been always his Enemy, and he was fearful of him; he could have no
confidence in either the Pope or the Florentines, for the Florentines were in
League with the Venetians, and he was in possession of several Towns which he
had taken from the Pope: however he resolved to bear up bravely; look his
fortune in the face; and comport himself according to the accidents which
should occur: for many times secrets are discovered in action, which dejection
and despondency would have concealed for ever. It was no little support to him
to believe, that if the Milanesi were oppressed; or that jealous of the
ambition of the Venetian, no Man was so proper for them to apply to, for
protection, as himself. So that taking courage thereupon, he marched into the
Country of Bologna, and from thence passing by Modena and Reggio, he encamped
upon the Lenza, and sent to the Milanesi to offer them his service: the
Milanesi, after the Dukes death, were divided into factions; part of them had a
mind to be free, and part of them to live under a Prince; and of those which
were for a Prince, part were for the Count, and part for Alfonso: but they
which were for a Commonwealth, being more unanimous prevailed, and erected a
republic according to their own model, to which many of the Cities in that
Dukedom refused to conform, supposing they might make themselves free as well
as Milan if they pleased; and those who were not inclined to that Government,
would not submit to it in them. Lodi and Piacenza therefore surrendered to the
Venetian; Pavia and Parma made themselves free: upon which confusions the Count
removed to Cremona, where certain deputies of his to that purpose, met with
certain Commissioners from Milan, The Count made General for the Milanesi.
and came to an agreement, by which it was agreed that he should be General of
their forces, and all conditions performed to him which were concluded in his
last treaty with the Duke; to which was superadded that Brescia should be put
into the Counts hands, till he should be possessed of Verona. and that then
keeping the last, the first should be restored.

Before the death of the Duke, Pope Nicolo upon his assumption to that Chair
endeavored to make a general peace, betwixt all the Princes of Italy; and to
that purpose he negotiated with the Florentine Ambassadors which were sent to
his creation, for a Diet to beheld at Ferrara, to treat either of a long
cessation, or a firm peace; and accordingly the Popes Legate was met there by
Commissioners from the Venetians, the Duke, and the Florentines. Alfonso sent
none, for he was at Tiboli with a great Army in favor of the Duke, and
believed (as soon as the Count could be debauched from them) he should have a
fair opportunity to fall upon both the Venetian, and Florentine. In the mean
time the Count lay still in Lombardy, attending the consummation of the Peace,
to which Alfonso would not send, but promised to ratify what should be agreed
by the Duke. This peace was a long time in debate, but at length it was
concluded, it should either be a cessation for five years, or a perpetual
Peace, as the Duke of Milan should choose; the Dukes Commissioners, returning to
know his resolution, they found him dead, however the Milanesi were willing to
stand to their agreement, but the Venetians would not condescend, fancying
great hopes to themselves of overrunning that State, The Venetians ambition of
the Duchy of Milan.
because Lodi and Piacenza had submitted to them soon after the death of the
Duke; and believing either by treaty or force they should be able to reduce the
rest, before any Body could come in to their relief; and this they fancied the
rather, because the Florentines were engaged in a War with Alfonso. Alfonso was
at this time at Tiboli, and being impatient to pursue his designs upon Tuscany
(according to agreement betwixt him and the Duke) conceiving the Waralready
commenced in Lombardy, would give him convenience, he had a great mind to have
foam footing in the state of Florence, Alfonso* Invades the Florentines.
before the War should apparently break out; to that purpose he entered into
correspondence with some persons in the Castle of Cennina, in the upper Vald'
Arno, and took it: the Florentines were much surprised at so unexpected an
accident, and seeing that King in motion against them, they listed Men, created
a new Council of Ten, and provided themselves for War, with as much industry as
any of their predecessors. The King was marched already with his Army into the
Country of Siena, and had used his utmost endeavors to get that city into his
clutches; but it continued firm to the Florentines; refused to admit him, and
all the rest of the Towns, under its jurisdiction, did the same. Yet they
furnished him with provisions, their weakness and the Kings great strength
excusing it.

The Kings resolution was changed of invading the Florentines by the way of the
Val d' Arno, either because Cennina was taken from him again, or that the
Florentines were too well furnished with Soldiers in those parts; wherefore he
turned toward Volterra, and surprised many Castles in the County belonging
thereto. From thence he passed into the County of Pisa, where, by the
assistance of Arrigo, and Fatio (Counts of Gherardesca) he took some posts, and
then assaulted Campiglia, which being defended by the Florentines; he was not
able to carry; so that the King leaving Garrisons in the places he had taken;
and certain Troops to make excursions upon the Enemy; with the rest of his Army
retired and took his quarters in the Country of Siena. The Florentines in the
mean time being secured by the season of the year, provided themselves with
Soldiers with all possible care, and gave the command of them to Federigo Lord
of Urbino, and Gismondo Malatesta da Rimino, betwixt whom there was some
precedent difference, yet it was so prudently composed by Neri de Gino, and
Barnardetto de Medici their Commissaries, that they took the field together
before the Winter was over; recovered the places lost in the Country of Pisa;
and the Pomerancie in the Volterran; curbing and restraining his excursions of
those who were left by Alfonso upon the Coasts, so, as they were scarceable to
secure their Garrisons. As soon as the Spring was come, the Commissaries had a
Rendevous of all their Army (which consisted of about 5000 Horse, and 2000
Foot, at Spedalletto; and the King had another, of about 15000, some three
miles from Campiglia: and when it was supposed he would have fallen upon that
Town, he turned about to Piombino, believing it would be no hard matter to gain
it, in respect that it was but indifferently provided; and if he did, it would
be no little prejudice to the Florentines, seeing from thence he could harrass
them with a tedious War, and by sending forces there by Sea, infest the whole
Country of Pisa. This Policy of Alfonso^ startled the Florentines, and
consulting what was to be done, it was concluded, that if they could lie with
their Army upon the coasts of Campiglia, he would run a hazard of being beaten,
or be forced to draw off with no little disgrace. To this purpose they rigged
out four Galliasses which they had at Ligorn, and sent three thousand foot in
them to reinforce Piombino, and then posted themselves at Caldane a place of no
easy access; for to lie upon the coasts in the plain, they judged it more
dangerous, and more subject to attacks: the Florentines were to be supplied
from the neighboring Towns, which being thin, and but ill inhabited, they were
but indifferently furnished, so that the Army was much incommoded, especially
for Wine, for none growing there, and coming with great difficulty from other
parts, it was not possible to provide for them all. But the King (though
straightened by the Florentines) had plenty of all things by the way of the Sea.
The Florentines perceiving it, had a mind to try experiment, whether their
forces could not be supplied by Sea likewise, whereupon they caused their
Galliasses to be brought, loaded them with victuals, and having dispatched them
accordingly, they were set upon by seven of Alfonso's Galleys, and two of them
taken, and the other two fled. This disaster cut off all hopes of relieving
that way: so that 200 of the looser sort of Soldiers ran away to the Kings
Camp for want of Wine, and the rest mutiny'd, grumling that they should be
confined to so hot places where there was no Wine, and the Water very bad:
hereupon the Commissaries took it into debate, and it was concluded that they
should leave that Post, and address themselves to the recovery of certain
Castles which remained in the hands of the King.

On the other side the King, though he wanted no provision, and was more
numerous in Men; found himself no less distressed, for his Army was full of the
diseases which those maritime Countries do produce, they were grown so general
and fierce, that many Men died, and most of them were sick. Upon this
consideration, a Peace was proposed, and the King insisted upon 50000 Florens,
and that Piombino might be left to his discretion. Which demands being
deliberated at Florence, many who desired peace, were earnest to have them
accepted; affirming they could not expect success in a War, which required so
vast an expense to maintain it: but Neri Capponi going to Florence, gave them
such pregnant reasons to the contrary, that the whole City agreed to refuse
them, and the Governor of Piombino was well entertained, and promised to be
relieved both in time of War and Peace, if he would defend it courageously as
he had hitherto done. The King having notice of their resolution, and
perceiving his Army too sickly and infirm to take the place, he brake abruptly
from his siege; left above 2000 of his Men dead behind him; retreated with the
rest of his Army through the County of Siena, Alsonso retreats of Tuscany.
and from thence into the Kingdom of Naples, highly dissatisfied with the
Florentines, and threatening them with a new War when occasion offered.

Whilst these things passed in Tuscany, the Count Francesco being made General
for the Milanesi, thought fit before any thing else, to reconcile himself with
Francesco Piccinino, (who had a command likewise under him) that he might
assist him in his enterprises, or at lest oppose them with more circumstances
of respect: after which, he took the field with his Army, and the Citizens of
Pania, suspecting their own ability to defend themselves against so formidable
a force, and yet unwilling to bring themselves under the yoke of the Milanesi,
they offered to surrender to him, upon condition they might not fall under
their domination. The Count had a great mind to that City, and looked upon it
as a fine initiation, and pretense, to the rest of his designs. Nor was it
fear, or the imputation of breaking his Faith, that restrained him from taking
it, for great Men think it dishonorable for to lose, but none to gain, though
with fraud and injustice. His great doubt was, lest in taking it, he should
disoblige the Milanesi so, as they should give themselves to the Venetian; and
in not taking it, he was jealous they should surrender to the Duke of Savoy, to
which he saw too many of the Citizens inclined, in either of which cases, his
authority in Lombardy would be lost. At length judging it less danger to take
that City himself, than to let another Man get it; he resolved to accept it,
persuading himself it would satisfy the Milanesi, to let them know, how fatal
it might have been for him to have refused it, seeing those Citizens would
certainly have delivered it to the Venetian, or the Duke of Savoy; either of
which ways their State had been undone; and that it was better in his
possession who was their friend, than in either of theirs, both of them being
too potent, and both of them their Enemies. The Milanesi, for all his
compliments, were much unsatisfied with the business, as plainly discovering
the ambition and ends of the Man; but they thought best at present to conceal
it, not knowing whither they were to betake themselves (upon a rupture with the
Count) but to the Venetians, whose pride, and arrogant terms, they dreaded and
abhorred: so that they concluded not to break with the Count, but to obviate
their present miseries, with his assistance, hoping when they were freed from
the former, some propitious opportunity might happen to quit them of him; for
they were not only infested by the Venetians; but by the Genoeses, and the Duke
of Savoy in the name of Charles of Orleans, descended from a Sister of Philips;
but the Count defended all against them without any trouble. Their greatest
adversary was the Venetian, who was come near with a powerful Army to seize
upon their state, and had Lodi and Piacenza already in their possession, which
last, the Count beleagured, and after a long siege, took it, and sacked it:
after he had recovered that City, Winter coming on, he drew his Army into
quarters, and went himself to Cremona, where all that Winter he entertained
himself with his Wife: but as soon as the Spring appeared, the Venetian, and
Milanesi were both in the field: the Milanesi had a great desire to retake
Lodi, and afterward to come to an agreement with the Venetian: for the expense
of the War was increased; and the fidelity of the Count suspected. In order to
this, it was resolved their Army would march to Caravaggio and besiege it;
supposing that upon the taking of that Castle, Lodi would surrender. The Count
obeyed their Orders, though his own inclination was to have passed the Adda,
and invaded the Country of Brescia. Being set down before Caravaggio, he
entrenched and fortified his Army so well with Ditches and Ramparts, that the
Venetians could not attempt to relieve it without great disadvantage.

However the Venetians advanced with their Army, under the Command of their
General Micheletto, within two flights shot of the Counts camp; continued there
several days, and had many skirmishes with them. Notwithstanding the Count
persisted in his siege, and pressed them so hard, they must of necessity
surrender. The Venetians, believing the loss of that Castle would be the loss
of their whole enterprise, were much dissatisfied with the news, and calling a
Counsel, after many disputes it was concluded, there was no way but to attack
the Count in his trenches, which was not to be done without great disadvantage;
but the Senate of Venice, though naturally timorous, and not apt to any sudden
or dangerous resolutions, was in this case so much transported, as rather to
venture all than lose that, though the loss of that would be the ruin of all.
It was concluded therefore to fall upon the Count, and standing to their Arms
one morning very early, they assaulted that part of the camp which was the
weakest guarded, and (as it usually happens in such surprises as that) at the
very first onslaught, they put the whole Sforescan Army into disorder. But the
Count so rallied them again, that after many attempts, and irruptions upon
their Works, they were not only repulsed, The Venetians totally defeated.
but so shattered and dispersed, that of their whole Army (in which there were
more tha^ 12000 Horse, there were not above 1000 escaped, and their whole
baggage and train of Artillery taken; so that never till that day had the
Venetians received so considerable a defeat.

Among the rest of the prey and Prisoners there was found a Venetian
Proveditore who before the Battle had spoken opprobrious words of the Count,
calling him Bastard and Coward: this Proveditore finding himself in the hands
of his Enemies, being conscious of his offense; and expecting no otherwise, but
that his reward would be suitable: according to the Nature of base Spirits, (who
are always insolent in prosperity, and poor and abject in adversity) throwing
himself with tears at the feet of the Count, he acknowledged his fault, and
beseech'd his pardon. The Count took him up by the arm, and bad him be of good
courage: but afterward he told him, he could not but wonder a Person of
prudence, and that gravity as he desired to be thought, should commit so great
an error, and indecorum, as to speak reproachfully of those who did not deserve
it. As to Bastardy he accused him of, he knew not the passages betwixt Sforza
his Father, and Madona Lucia his Mother, for not being then present, he was not
able to order them better, and therefore he did hope nothing which they did
could be imputable to him. But this he knew, that since he had been capable of
any thing himself, he had carried himself so, as no body could reprehend him,
to which, both he and his Senate could give fresh and irrefragable testimony;
at last he admonished him to be more modest for the future, to have more
caution in all his enterprises, and then he dismissed him. After this Victory,
the Count marched his Army into the Country of Brescia, possessed himself of
all wherever he came; and then encamped within two miles of the City. The
Venetians upon their overthrow, suspecting (as it happened) that Brescia would
be the first thing the Count would attempt, reinforced it as much as in so
short a time they were able; got what forces they could together with all
imaginable diligence; and sent to the Florentines to desire their assistance by
virtue of their League: who being freed from their War with Alfonso, supplied
them with a 1000 foot and 2000 Horse; with which forces having got an Army
together, the Venetians began to think they were in a condition to treat; and
for a long time, it had been the custom and fate of the Venetians to recover
twice as much by peace, as they lost by the War. They understood very well, the
Milanesi were jealous of the Count; whose design was not so much to be their
General, as their Prince; they knew it was in their own power to make peace
with which of them they pleased; for both of them desired it; one out of
ambition, the other for fear. They concluded at last to compose with the Count,
and to proffer him their assistance for the subduction of Milan; presuming that
the Milanesi finding themselves betrayed by the Count, in their fury would
submit to any dominion but his; and then they being most capable of defending
them, were the most likely to be the Persons they would choose for their
protection.

Upon this resolution, they sent to try the Count, and found him very
inclinable to a peace, as desiring the victory at Caravaggio might be
appropriated to him, and not to the Milaneses. A peace therefore was struck up,
and the Venetians obliged themselves to pay to the Count, (till Milan should be
taken) 13000 Florens a month and maintain in his service 4000 Horse, Peace
betwixt the Venetians and the Count excluding the Milanesi.
and 2000 Foot during the War. The Count on the other side engaged to restore
to them, all the Towns, Prisoners, and what ever else had been taken in that
War by him; reserving to himself only such Towns as were in Duke Philips
possession when he died. The news of this agreement, disquieted the Milanesi
much more than their Victory had rejoiced them. The Magistrates stormed; the
People complained; the Women and Children lamented; all of them in one chorus
pronouncing the Count a Traitor and an infidel. And though they did not expect
to reclaim him from his ingratitude, by any prayers or promises they could make
him, nevertheless they thought fit to send Ambassadors to him, to see with what
confidence, and expressions he could receive them after such barbarous
disloyalty, and being brought into his presence, one of them spoke to him to
this Effect.

Those who desire to obtain any thing of other People, The Oration of one of
the Milan Ambassadors to the Count.
are wont to accost them with prayers, or promises, or threats; that either
their compassion, or profit, or poverty might move them to condescend: but in
Men that are cruel, and covetous, and prepossest with their own greatness and
authority; there being no room for either of the three, it is in vain for any
Man to think to mitigate them with prayers, to oblige them with promises, or to
fright them with threats. We therefore, understanding (though too late) you
cruelty, your ambition, and your insolence; are come hither, not to beg any
thing of you (for if we did, we are sensible it would not be granted) but to
commemorate and charge you with the benefits you have received from the People
of Milan; and to remonstrate with what ingratitude you have requited them; that
among the many miseries which you have brought upon us, we may have at least
the pleasure to reprehend you for them. You ought to remember your condition
after the death of the Duke; you were at hostility with the Pope, and King
Alfonso; you were discarded by the Venetians, and the Florentines, who, upon
some just and late provocation; or else finding you useless, were become (as it
were) your Enemies: you were tried and weary of the War you had maintained
against the Church, you were left without Men, without money, without friends,
desperate of preserving your own, much more of gaining from others; under which
exigencies, of necessity you must have sunk, had not our innocence, and
plainheartedness supported you. We, we were they who received you into our
Arms, moved by the reverence we retained for the memory of our Duke; with whom
you had entered into so near and so late an alliance; presuming (and as we
thought) with reason, that the love you professed to him, would have been
extended to his People; and that our rewards being added to his, the amity
betwixt us, would not only have been firm, but indissolvable, and for that
cause to your old articles with the Duke, we threw in Verona and Brescia. What
could we give, or promise you more? and you, what could you have (or indeed
ask) more of us, or any Body else at that time? You received from us a kindness
you could not look for; and we, in recompense, have received a mischief we
never deserved: nor was this the first instance of your falsehood; for no sooner
were you in possession of the command of our Army, but against all justice and
obligation, you received Pavia into your hands; which, indeed, gave us the
first hint of what was to be expected from your friendship; however he
swallowed that injury, in hopes such an acquest as that might have satiated
your ambition. But alas! those who must have all, will not be satisfied with a
part. You promised that all your conquests afterward should be ours, because
you knew, what you should give us at several times, you could take from us at
once; this is verified since your victory at Caravaggio, which though won with
the expense of our treasure and blood, is by your baseness perverted to our
ruin. Oh! unhappy are those Cities who are constrained to defend their liberty
against such as invade them, but much more unhappy are they who in their
defense are enforced to employ such mercenary and such treacherous instruments
as you. May we be example to posterity, though Thebes and the King of Macedon
could be no warning to us, who having beaten their Enemies, was made their
General by them, and their Prince afterward by himself. We are not, therefore,
to be condemned for any thing, but our confidence in you; whose passed life,
and insatiable appetite of dominion, ought to have taught us better than to
have trusted a person which betrayed the Prince of Lucca; squeezed the
Florentines and the Venetians, disrespected the Duke, despised a King; and
committed several injuries (above all) both against God and the Church. And
indeed we had no reason to believe that so many Princes and Potentates should
be of less authority with Francesco Sforza, that the Milanesi, or that he would
be just in his engagements to us, when he had broke them with every body else.
But our indescretion cannot excuse your treachery, nor clear you of that
infamy, which our just and deplorable complaints will fix upon you all the
World over. Nor can any thing secure you against the stings and compunctions of
your own Conscience; for inverting those Arms which we had provided for our
defense, against our own liberty and freedom; you cannot think any thing so
proper for you, as the reward of a Parricide. And if yet your incontroulable
ambition should blind you; the evidence the whole World will give of your
impiety, will open your eyes, and God himself will open them, if either
perjury, or falsehood, or treason, do offend him; or if in his divine
providence, for some occult good, he sees it fit to forbear it, and to show
himself to us a favourer of ill Men. Do not therefore delude your self with the
assurance of victory; the just anger of God will oppose you; and we are
resolved to lose lives and liberties together: and if it so fall out that we
should be constrained to submit, there is no Prince in Italy but we will choose
before you; and if our sins be so great, as to pull down the greatest misery in
the World upon our heads, and force us into your hands, be assured, that
dominion which you begin with infamy and fraud, will end in the destruction of
you or your Children.

The Count was netled by every part of the speech, yet without any
extraordinary commotion in either gesture or words, he made them this answer;

That being injured so highly as they thought themselves, The Counts answer.
he would bear with the indiscretion of their language; though to persons
capable of judging betwixt them, there was nothing that they had charged him
with, which he could not easily refel. He could make it appear, that he had not
injured the Milanesi, but secured himself only against their intelligence and
designs. That if they reflected upon their carriage after the Battle of
Caravaggio, they would find, that in stead of rewarding him with Verona and
Brescia, as they had contracted, they were underhand negotiating a peace with
the Venetians; that the burden and scandal of the War might be left upon his
shoulders, whilst they ran away with the profits of it, and the honor of the
peace: so that if they looked impartially into the matter, they would find, he
had done nothing but what they had endeavored before; and that if he had
deferred to do it so long, the more they were obliged to him; and with the more
justice he might retort ingratitude upon them. That as to the truth, or falsity
of what was on either side alleged, the end of the War would make it appear,
in which, that God which they had so solemnly invocated to revenge them, would
demonstrate which of the two was most tender of displeasing him, and which with
most equity he opposed.

The Ambassadors being departed, the Count prepared to invade them; and the
Milanest for their defense; to which purpose they joined themselves with
Francesco and Giacopo Piccinino, who upon the score of the old animosity
betwixt the Bracceschi and the Sforzeschi, had been faithful to the Milaneses:
hoping by their means to preserve their liberties, till they should have
opportunity to divide betwixt the Venetians and the Count, which amity they did
not think would be of any long continuance. The Count was of the same opinion,
and thought it his best way to bind them by rewards, seeing they were ticklish
in their promises. In the distribution therefore of the War, he was contented
the Venetians should attack Cremona; whilst he with the remainder of the Army,
assaulted the rest of that State: this article being proposed to the Venetians
was so grateful, that upon that very reason they continued their friendship to
the Count, till he had overrun most of the Country of Milan; and so straightened
that City, that no provisions could come at it. So that despairing of other
relief, they sent Ambassadors to Venice, to entreat, that they would
commiserate their case, and (according to the practice of all Commonwealths)
rather support those who stood for their liberty, than a Tyrant; who if he
should gain their City, would be tooo strong afterward for them. Nor ought
they to believe he would be content with the terms of their capitulation, who
had violated his League with that state. The Venetians were not ye^ Masters of
Crema; and being loath to discover themselves till that were in their
possession; they answered them in public, that their alliance with the Count
would not suffer them to assist them; but privately they entertained them so, as
they might give their Masters assured hopes of their friendship. The Count was
got already so near Milan, that he had taken some part of the suburbs; and the
Venetians having reduced Crema, they thought it time to publish their amity
with Milan, with whom they were secretly agreed; and the first article they
agreed to, was the conservation of their liberty. This League being rati^ied,
the Venetians commanded such forces as they had with the Count, to march back
to their Army, they signified likewise to the Count, the peace which they had
concluded; and gave him twenty days time to accept it himself. The Count was
not at all surprised at the inconstancy of the Venetians; he had foreseen it
long before, and expected it should happen every day. Yet he could not but
regret it as much, as the Milanesi had been molested at his: he desired two
days to give in his answer to the Ambassadors, which time he resolved to detain
the Venetians who were in his service, and go on with his enterprise. He gave
out publicly he would accept of the peace; and sent Ambassadors to Venice,
with full power to ratify it; but they had private instructions to the
contrary, to spin out and protract the conclusion by all the cavils and
subtleties they could invent: and that the Venetian might give the more credit
to his pretenses, he made a truce with the Milanesi for a month; drew of^ his
Army, and dispersed it into such places as he had taken in that Country: this
stratagem of his was the occasion of his victory afterward, and the ruin of
the Milanesi; for the Venetians presuming upon the peace, were slower and more
remiss in their preparations for War.

And the Milanesi, seeing the cessation confirmed; the Enemy removed, and the
Venetian their friend; believed for certain the Count would trouble them no
more: which opinion was pernicious to them two several ways, in making them
more negligent for their defense; and in sowing their land, which devoured much
of their corn, and was the reason they were sooner distressed. On the other
side, nothing was hurtful to them, but was beneficial to the Count, and gave
him time to respite, and look abroad for allies. During this War in Lombardy,
the Florentines had not declared of either side: nor shown any favor to the
Count when he took part with the Milanesi, nor afterward; for the Count having
no great need of them, had not sought their assistance; only after the defeat
at Caravaggio, (as they were obliged by the League) they sent aid to the
Venetians. But now the Count was alone, and had no body else to resort to, he
was enforced to press their assistance, publicly to the state, Cosimo de
Medici a friend to Francesco.
and privately to his friends, but especially to Cosimo de Medici, who in all
his undertakings had counseled him faithfully, and freely supplied him: nor did
he desert him now in his distress; but furnished him with what could privately
be conveyed, encouraged him to go on in his design; he proposed likewise that
the City would publicly own him; but he found difficulty, in that Neri the Son
of Capponi was the most potent Man in Florence, and to him it appeared more for
the interest of that City, that the Count should accept of the peace, Neri
Cappon^ against him.
than prosecute the War. His first apprehension was least out of indignation to
the Count, the Milanesi should give themselves up to the dominion of the
Venetian, which would be the ruin of them all: then, if the Count should
succeed, and Milan come into his hands, so great an Army, with so great a
territory added to it, must needs (in his judgment at least) become dangerous,
and formidable; for if he were troublesome whilst but a Count, when a Duke he
would be insupportable. For these reasons he affirmed it would be better for
the republic of Florence, and for all Italy besides that the Count should
remain as he was, with his reputation in the Army; and Lombardy be divided into
two Commonwealths, which were never like to join to the ruin of their
Neighbors; and singly, and by themselves, they were not able to do hurt; to
compass which; he saw no way so probable, as by preserving their old amity with
the Venetians, and disclaiming the Count.

These arguments were not approved by Cosimo's friends; believing they were not
so much Neri's judgment, as jealousy; lest the Count being made a Duke, Cosimo
should grow too powerful by being his friend. Cosimo on the other hand
persuaded that their alliance with the Count would be for the advantage both of
Florence, and all Italy; for it was madness to imagine Milan could continue a
Commonwealth, seeing the humor of the Citizens; their manner of Life, and the
old factions and differences among them, were not capable of any form or system
of civil Government; so that of necessity the Count must be Duke of it, or the
Venetians Lords: and in that case no body could be so weak, but to prefer a
single Neighbor, competently powerful; before an Enemy that was remote, but
more great and incontroulable. Neither could he believe the Milanesi would give
themselves up to the Venetians, for the Count had the bigger party in the Town,
and when ever they found themselves unable to defend their liberties any
longer; they would more probably surrender to the Count than the Venetian.
These varieties of opinions kept the City a long time in suspense; but at
length it was agreed that Ambassadors should be dispatched to the Count, to
treat about their alliance; if they found him so strong, that there was
likelihood he should prevail, then they should conclude; but if otherwise, they
were to cavil, and protract. By the time these Ambassadors had got to Reggio,
they had news the Count was become Master of Milan. For the Count as soon as
his truce was expired, and had clapped down again before it with his Army,
hoping to carry it in a short time, in despite of the Venetians, for they
could not come to relieve it, but by the river Adda, which was easy to be
hindered; being Winter, he could not fear they would remove him with their
whole Army, and before the Spring he doubted not to carry it, especially seeing
Francesco Piccinino was dead, and Giacopo his Brother remained sole Captain of
their forces. The Venetian had sent an Ambassador to Milan to encourage them to
defend themselves, and to assure them of speedy and effectual relief; and so
far they were as good as their words, that during the Winter many skirmishes
and conflicts passed betwixt the Venetians and the Count; till when the weather
began to be open, they came down with their Army (under the command of Pandolfo
Malatesta) and encamped upon the river of Adda; where it being debated in
Counsel whether they should fall upon the Count, The Venetious assist the
Milanesi.
and run the hazard of a Battle, it was opposed by Pandolfo, (upon his
experience both of the Count and his army) who advised, the Town might be
relieved without any such danger, the Count being distressed already both for
forage and Corn. Wherefore his opinion was, that they should block him up
where he was, and intercept his provisions, which would keep up the Spirits of
the Milanesi and divert them from surrendering to him.

This resolution was most plausible to the Venetians, because they thought it
safe in it self, and did hope by keeping the Town in constant necessity, it
would be forced at last to deliver up to them; for considering how the Count
had provoked them, they could not imagine they would surrender to him. In the
mean time the Milanesi were reduced to extreme misery, for being a populous
City, the poor People fell down dead in the Streets for want of Bread; and this
scarcity begetting murmurs and complaints in several places, the Magistrates
were afraid of some tumult or other, and used all possible diligence to prevent
their assembling. The multitude is not suddenly to be engaged in any mischief;
but when once they are disposed, the lest accident imaginable sets them on
work. It happened that two persons of indifferent condition being in discourse
near the Porta Nuova about the calamities of the City, and what ways were left
to preserve it; People got about them by degrees, so as in a short time they
were in a considerable number; upon which a rumor was spread in the Town, that
they were in Arms against the Magistrates at Porta Nuova: hereupon, the whole
multitude (who expected some occasion) put themselves in Arms, made Gasparre da
Vico Mercato, their leader, and marching up to the place where the Magistrates
were in Council, they fell upon them with such fury, that all which could not
escape, were slain; among the rest Lionardo Veneto the Venetian Ambassador, who
had laughed at their miseries, and was judged the principal occasion of their
wants: having made themselves Masters of the City, they deliberated which way
to relieve themselves of their distresses, and it was unanimously resolved
(seeing their liberty was not to be preserved) that they should throw
themselves under the protection of some Prince which should be able to defend
them, but they were divided about the Person; some were for King Alfonso, some
for the Duke of Savoy, some the King of France, not one word all the while of
the Count; so great and implacable was the indignation of the People against
him; yet at last, not agreeing in the rest, Gasparre da Vico Mercato mentioned
the Count, Gasparre da Vico Mercato his advice.
and displayed gravely before them, that if their design was to rid themselves
of the War, the Count was the only person to be chosen; for the People of Milan
were in necessity of a certain and present peace, not of a tedious and only
possible supply.

Then he fell with great words to mitigate the proceedings of the Count; he
accused the Venetians: he accused all the Princes of Italy, (who some for
ambition, and some for avarice) would not permit them to live free. And now
since their liberty was lost; and they must yield to some Body or other, his
opinion was, they should do it to one that knew them; and was able to defend
them; that they might be sure of peace for their servitude, and not be engaged
in greater, and more pernicious War. The People heard him with great intention,
and when he had done, they cried out with one voice that the Count should be
the Man; Francesco entered Milan, and made Duke of it.
and Gasparre their Ambassador to invite him; who carrying him the joyful news,
was kindly entertained, and the Count entered into Milan 26th of February 1450,
and was received with great acclamation, even by those Persons which not long
before had so highly traduced him. 1450
The news of this conquest arriving at Florence, they despatched orders
immediately to their Ambassadors who were upon the way, that instead of treating
an agreement with him as Count (which was their instruction before) their
business should now be to congratulate him as Duke. These Ambassadors were
honorably entertained, and bountifully presented by the Duke; The Duke of Milan
and the Florentines Confederate.
who knew, against the Power of the Venetians, he could not have in all Italy
more faithful nor more potent allies, than the Citizens of Florence, who though
freed from their apprehensions of the House of the Visconti, were nevertheless
obnoxious to the forces of the King of Aragon, and the Venetians; for they knew
the Kings of Aragon would be their Enemies, for the amity and correspondence
they had always maintained with the French; and the Venetians knew their old
fears of the Visconti were occasioned by them, and remembering with what
eagerness the Visconti were persecuted, and that if they came into their power,
they were like to fare no better, they were bent wholly upon their ruin. For
these reasons the new Duke embraced an agreement with the Florentines, very
willingly, The King of Aragon and the Venetian^.
and the Venetians, and the King of Aragon confederated against them; the King
of Aragon undertaking the Florentines, and the Venetians, the Duke; who being
new, and scarce settled in his Government, they supposed would not be able to
confront them with all his own forces, nor all the friends he could make. But
because the League betwixt the Florentines and the Venetians, was not yet fully
expired; and the King of Aragon, upon conclusion of the War at Piombino, had
made an accord with them, it did not seem convenient to break the peace
abruptly, but rather to attend some accident that might give them pretense to
invade them. Whereupon they sent Ambassadors to Florence (each of them, apart)
to let the Florentines know, that the Leagues which had passed betwixt them
were not made to offend any body, Ambassadors from them to ^lorence.
but to defend one another. Then the Venetians complained that the Florentines
had suffered Alexander the Dukes Brother to pass with his forces into Lombardy
by the way of Lunigiana: and besides had been the authors and Counselors of
the agreement betwixt the Duke, and the Marquess of Manto^a; all which they
affirmed was done to the prejudice of their State, and contrary to the amity
betwixt them; insinuating as friends, that who ever injures another Person
wrongfully, gives him a right to revenge himself: The Florentines answer.
and who ever breaks peace, must prepare for War. The answer to these Embassies
was committed to Cosimo, who in a wise and eloquent oration, recapitulated the
benefits the republic of Venice had received from that State; declaring what
empire and dominion they had gained with that treasure, and forces, and advice
of the Florentines; demonstrating that as the amity betwixt them was proposed
by the Florentines; they would not be the first which would break it. For
having been always lovers of peace, they were well satisfied with their
friendship; and would always endeavor to preserve it. The truth was, all
people wondered at their complaints and that so grave and judicious a Senate,
should concern themselves for things so trivial and vain; but seeing they
thought them worthy of their consideration, they could not but declare, that
their Country was free and open to any body; and that the Duke was a Person of
such qualifications, that he needed not the advice, or favor or any in the
choice of his Allies; and therefore he was afraid there was something more at
the bottom, than they had hitherto discovered; which if hereafter it should
appear, the Florentines doubted not, but to manifest it easily to the World,
that as their friendship had been profitable, their enmity could be dangerous.
However things were smoothed over pretty handsomely for that time; and the
Ambassadors seemed to go away well enough content: yet the alliance the King of
Aragon and the Venetians had made, and the manner of their deportment, gave the
Duke, and Florentines both, more reason to prepare for a War, than to rely upon
their peace: upon which the Florentines confederating with the Duke the
Venetians discovered themselves, made a League with Sienna, and banished all
the Florentines, and their subjects, out of Venice and its dominions: and not
long after, Alfonso did the same, without any respect to the League he had made
with them the year before; and without any just, or so much as pretended
occasion. The Venetians were desirous to get Bologna into their hands, and to
that end furnishing certain of their exiles with a proportionable force, they
marched thither in the night and by the common shore got into the Town so
privately, their entrance was not perceived, till they gave the alarm
themselves; upon which Santi Bentivogli, leaping out of his bed, was informed
the whole City was in the possession of the Enemy. Santi was advised by many
which were about him, to fly, and preserve himself that way, seeing there was
not any left to secure the State. However he resolved to try his fortune, and
taking arms, and encouraging his servants to follow him, he went forth, and
having joined them to some of his friends, he charged a party of the Enemy,
beat them, killed several, and forced all of them out of the Town; by which
action he was thought to have given ample testimony of his extraction from the
house of the Bentivogli. These passages made it clear to the Florentines that a
War was intended; and therefore they betook themselves to their ancient methods
of defense. They created a Council of Ten. They entertained new officers. They
sent Ambassadors to Rome, Naples, Venice, Sienna, and Milan, to desire aid of
their friends; to discover such as were suspicious: to gain such as were
irresolute; and to pry into the Counsels of their Enemies. From the Pope, they
could obtain nothing but general words, civility, and exhortations to peace.
From the King of Aragon nothing but idle excus^s for having dismissed the
Florentines; Preparations for War in Florence.
offering his passport to any which demanded it: and although he end avoured
by all means to conceal his preparation for War, yet the Ambassadors found him
a juggler, and peceived several of his practices against their State. With the
Duke therefore they renewed their League; procured an amity with the Genoeses;
composed the differences about the reprisal, and many other things which had
formerly obstructed it: they tried all ways to frustrate or break the Treaty;
and they went so far as to supplicate the great Turk, to banish all Florentines
out of his Country; but that Emperor would not hearken. The Florentine
Ambassadors were prohibited entrance into the Dominions of the Venetian,
because (forsooth) they were in League with the King of Aragon, and could not
send any Embss^^aes without his participation. The Siennesi received their
Ambassadors, treated them well* lest they should be overrun, before the League
could relieve them; and therefore they thought it best to collogue, and lull
those Arms a sleep, which they were not able to resist. It was conjectured
then, that the Venetian and King both, sent Ambassadors to justify the War;
but the Venetian Ambassador being refused likewise to be admitted into the
territories of Florence, the King's denied to do that office alone, and the
whole Embassy came to nothing: by which the Venetians found themselves used
with the same rudeness and contempt, which not many months before they had
exercised upon the Florentines.

In the midst of these apprehensions, the Emperor Federigo 3. passed into
Italy to be crowned, Federigo the Emperor enters into Florence.
and on the 30th of January 1451, entered into Florence with an equipage of
1400 Horse. He was honorably entertained there by the Senate; and continued
with them to the 6th of February, upon which day he departed for Rome, in order
to his coronation; where having performed that ceremony, and celebrated his
nuptials with the Empress, (which was come thither by Sea) he departed again
for Germany; returned by Florence, (where all the old honors were retreated)
and having been obliged in his passage by the Marquess of Ferrara, he gave him
a grant of Modena and Reggio as a reward. But the Florentines were not by all
those solemnities diverted from their preparations; for their own reputation,
and the terror of their Enemies, the Duke and they had entered into a League
with France, which with great joy, and ostentation they published all over
Italy.

In the month of May 1452 the Venetians, not thinking it fit to dissemble any
longer, invaded the territories of the Duke of Milan, by the way of Lodi with
16000 Horse, and 6000 Foot; whilst at the same time the Marquess of Monferrat
(upon some designs of his own, or the stimulation of the Venetians) assaulted
him on the other side by the way of Alexandria. The Duke had got an Army
together of 18000 Horse, and 3000 Foot, with which (after he had furnished
Alexandria, and Lodi, with strong Garrisons, and fortified all places where the
Enemy might offend him) he fell into the Country of Brescia, where he did great
mischief to the Venetians, both parties plundring the Countries, and burning
such Towns as were not able to defend themselves: but the Marquess of
Monferrat, being defeated not long after by the Garrison at Alexandria, the Duke
was at more leisure to infest, and make his inroads into the Countries of the
Venetian. Whilst the War was carried on in Lombardy in this manner, with
various, but inconsiderable accidents, the Wars in Tuscany was commenced
betwixt the King of Aragon and the Florentines, Tuscany invaded by the King of
Aragons for^es.
and managed with as little ardour, and success as the other. Ferrando (a
natural Son of Alfonso's) marched into Tuscany with 12000 Men under the command
of Federigo Lord of Urbin. His first enterprise was to assault Faiano in
Valdisciana (for the Siennesi being their friends, they entered that way into
the Florentine dominions) the Castle was weak; the walls but indifferent; the
Garrison but small; yet those they had within it were valiant and faithful; the
whole number which were sent for the security of that place, not exceeding 200.
Before this Castle Ferrando encamped, and either their courage was so little
without, or theirs so great within) that it took him up 36 days before he could
master it. Which time gave the Florentines great convenience of providing other
places of higher importance, and drawing their force together and disposing
them into better order, than otherwise they could have done.

This Castle being taken, the Enemy marched into Chianti where they attempted
two little Towns which were held by a few private Citizens, and were repulsed.
Leaving them, they removed to Castellina (a little Castle upon the confines of
Chianti) and sat down before it. This Castle was about ten miles from Sienna;
weak in its works, but weaker in its situation; yet in neither so weak, as the
courage of the assailants; for after 44 days seige, and all the art, and force
they could use, they were glad to draw off, and leave the Castle as they found
it. So little formidable were the Armies in those days, and so inconsiderable
the Wars, that those places which are now deserted as impossible to be kept,
were then defended as if they had been impossible to have been taken. Whilst
Ferrando was with his Army in Chianti, he made many incursion into the Country
of Florence, running up with his parties within six miles of the Town, to the
great terror and detriment of their subjects, who, having got together about
8000 Soldiers, under the Command of Astorre de Faenza, and Gismondo Malatesta,
held off from the Enemy toward the Castle of Colle, being unwilling to come to
a Battle, because they knew if they lost not their Army, there was no danger of
the War; for the little Castles which should be taken would be restored upon
the peace; and the great Towns were secure. the King had likewise a Fleet of
about twenty Vessels (Galleys and Foists) in the Sea of Pisa, which Fleet
(whilst La Castellina was assaulted by Land) was employed by the King to batter
the Castle of Vada that stood upon the Sea; and they did it so effectually,
that in a short time by the inadvertency of the Governor, they got it into
their hands: from whence afterward they ran over the whole Country
thereabouts, but those excursions were presently restrained by certain
Florentine Soldiers which were sent to Campiglia. The Pope in the mean time
concerned himself no farther, than to mediate an accord. But though he was so
tender in engaging abroad in any action of War, he found himself at home in no
little danger. There was at that time in Rome a person called Stephano Porcari,
Stephana Porcari.
a Citizen born, of good extraction, and learning, but most eminent for the
Generosity of his mind. This Stephano was ambitious (as most are which are
desirous of Glory) to perform, or at least attempt some thing that might make
him memorable to posterity. And nothing occurred so honorably to his thoughts,
as to deliver his Country, from the insolence of the Prelates, and reduce it to
its primitive liberty; hoping if he effected it, he should be called either the
Father or the Restorer of his Country. His great hopes and encouragement in
this enterp^ize was deduced from the iniquity and ill lives of the Prelates;
which were highly displeasing both to the Barons and People of Rome. But his
greatest confidence was grounded upon certain verses of Petrarch's in that
Canto which begins, Spirito Gentile etc. The verses are these.

Sopra ill monte Tarpeio Canzon vedrai.
Un Cavalier ch' Italia tutta honora,
Pensoso piu d' altrui che di se stesso.
Stephano was of opinion that Poets were many times inspired, and had perfect
and divine inflations from above. So that he concluded what Petrarch had
prophesied in that Canto would certainly come to pass, and he did not know any
man fitter than himself to accomplish it, in respect of his eloquence and
learning and favor, and friends. Having taken up this fancy, he could not
contain himself, but his words, gesture, and manner of living discovered him,
and rendered him suspicious to the Pope; who to secure himself against his
plots, confined him to Bologna, and sent instructions to the Governor to have
an eye over him every day. But Stephano was not to be discouraged by one
disaster; it rather animated him in his design; in so much that with the
greatest caution he could, he continued his practices with his friends, and now
and then would steal to Rome and back again with such expedition, as he would
be sure to present himself before the Governor at that time he was to appear.
But afterward, having drawn in as many as he thought necessary for his work he
resolved to proceed to action, without farther delay; and sent to his
correspondents in Rome, that at a prefixed time, a splendid supper should be
prepared; all the conspirators to be invited to it; and each of them have
private orders to bring his Confident along with him, and he promised to be
there himself precisely at the time. All things were ordered exactly to his
directions; and he himself was punctually with them; for as soon as supper was
ready, and served up to the Table, he presented himself amongst them, in a Robe
of cloth of Gold, his collar and other ornaments about him; to give him Majesty
and reputation (and having embraced all the Conspirators) in a long oration he
exhorted them to be courageous, and dispose themselves cheerfully in so
glorious an enterprise. Then he appointed the way, ordering one of them to
seize the Popes Palace the next morning, and the other to run about the
streets, and excite the People to Arm. But his Conspiracy coming to the ear of
the Pope (some say by the treachery of his confederats, others by his being
seen in the Town) which way soever it was, Stephano and his confederats put to
Death.
the Pope caused him and the greatest part of his Comerads to be apprehended
the very same night after supper, and put to death, as they deserved. This was
the end of that enterprise, and though among some People perhaps, his intention
might be commended, yet his judgment must necessarily be blamed; for such
attempts may have some shadow of glory in the contrivance, but their execution
is certain destruction.

The War in Tuscany had continued about a year, and in the spring 1453 1453.
both Armies had taken the field, when in relief of the Florentines Alexandro
Sforza the Dukes Brother arrived with a supply of 2000 Horse, by which the
Florentine Army being much increased, and the Kings Army become inferior in
number, the Florentines thought fit to recover what they had lost, and with
little labor took some of their Towns again: after which they encamped at
Foiano, which by the carlesness of the Commissaries was sacked; so that the
inhabitants being dispersed, they were hardly got to inhabit there again: and
when they did come, it was not without great exemptions and reward. The Castle
of Vada also was retaken; for the Enemy perceiving they could not hold it, they
set it on fire, and departed. Whilst the Florentine Army was employed in this
manner, the King of Aragons Army, not having the courage to come near them,
were retreated toward, Sienna, from whence they made frequent excursions into
the Country about Florence, where they made great hububs; committed many
outrages, and brought great terror upon the People, Nor was the King defective
in contriving other ways of assaulting his Enemies, dividing their forces or
detracting from their reputation. Gherardo Gambatorti was at that time Lord of
Valdibagno. This Gherardo and his Ancestors, had always been in the Florentine
service, either as hired, or recommended. Alfonso was tampering with this
Gherardo to deliver up his territory to him, and he promised to give him an
equivalence in the Kingdom of Naples. This transaction was not so private, but
they had news of it in Florence, and an Ambassador was dispatched to remember
him of his own and his predecessors obligations to that State; and to admonish
him to presevere in his amity with them, as they had constantly done. Gherardo
pretended to be surpised at what the Ambassador told him; swore a thousand
oaths that never any such wickedness entered into his thoughts; proffered to
have gone in person to Florence, and resided there, to secure them of his
fidelity; but being unhappily indisposed himself, his Son should go a long with
him, and remain there as a perpetual Hostage. His proffers, and his
imprecations together made the Florentines believe that Gherardo was honest,
and his accuser the Knave, in which opinion they acquiesced. But Gherardo went
on with the King, and rather with more eagerness than before; and when all was
agreed, Alfonso sent Friar Puccio (a Knight of Jerusalem) to take possession of
the Castles and Towns which belonged to Gherardo.

But Bagno retaining its affection to Florence, The vale of Begno revolts.
promised obedience to the Kings Commissary, with no little regret: Puccio was
in possession of almost all that State, only the Castle of Corzano was behind,
which was likewise to be delivered. When Gherardo made this surrender, among
the rest of his own creatures about him there was one Antonio Gualandi, a
Pisan, a young Gentleman and brave, and one that highly detested this treachery
in Gherardo. Pondering with himself the situation of the place, the number of
the Garrison; the dissatisfaction he observed both in their gestures and looks,
and finding Gherardo at the Gate ready to introduce the Enemy; he conveyed
himself betwixt the Castle and Gherardo and taking his opportunity with both
his hands thrust him away; and then causing the wicket to be shut, he exhorted
the guards to stand faithfully to the Florentines against so false and so
flagitious a Man: the report of this action arriving at Bagno, and the Towns
which were about it, they unanimously took Arms against their new Masters; and
setting up the Florentine colors upon the walls they drove them all out of
that Country: this news coming to Florence, they immediately clapped their young
Hostage into Prison, and dispatched supplies to Bagno and those parts to secure
them, and made that Country dependant upon themselves. Gherardo (a Traitor in
the mean time, both to his friends and his Son) had much ado to escape; leaving
his Wife, Family, and fortune in the hands of his Enemies. This accident was
looked upon as a great deliverance in Florence: for had the King made himself
Master of those parts, he might with little expenso have overrun all as far as
Valdi Tevere, and Casentino, and brought such distraction upon their affairs,
that the Florentines must have divided their Army, and been disabled thereby
from attending the Aragonian forces about Sienna, with their Army entire.
Besides the provisions which the Florentines had made in Italy to oppose the
confederacy of their Enemies; they sent Agriolo Acciaivoli their Ambassador
into France, to negotiate with that King for the sending King Rinato d' Angio
into Italy, in the behalf of the Duke and themselves, and to represent to him,
that coming thither for the defense of his friends, when he was once entered,
and had settled them, he might set up his own claim to the Kingdom of Naples
and they would be engaged to assist him, and so whilst in Lombardy and Tuscany
the War was carried on (as we have related) in France, the Treaty was
concluded, and Rinato obliged in June to come into Italy with 2400 Horse; and
the League on the other side obliged at his arrival at Alexandria, to pay him
30000 Florens, and 10000 per men. afterward whilst the War should continue:
but being ready (upon this stipulation) to pass into Italy, he was obstructed
by the Duke of Savoy and the Marquess of Monferrat, who were friends to the
Venetians, and would not suffer him to pass. Hereupon Rinato was desired by the
Florentine Ambassador to march with his Forces into Provence, and for the
encouragement and reputation of his friends, to pass himself and part of them
into Italy by Sea, leaving the rest in Provence, till the King of France should
prevail with the duke of Savoy that they might march through his Country: and
as the Ambassador advised, it was done; for Rinato went by Sea, and the rest at
the King of France's mediation, were permitted to pass into Italy through the
Dominions of the Duke of Savoy. King Rinato was received by the Duke of Milan
with all the demonstrations of Kindness imaginable; and having joined their
Forces, they assaulted the Venetians with such terror, that in a little time,
all the Towns they had taken about Cremona were recovered; and not contented
with them, they took almost all the Country of Brescia; for the Venetian Army,
not thinking it self secure in the field, was retreated under the very walls of
that City. Winter coming on, and the Duke at Verona, he thought fit, for the
refreshment of his men, to put them into quarters, and consigned Piazenza for
the quarters of Rinato; where having remained all that Winter in the year 1453,
1453.
without any action considerable; when the spring was come, and the Duke
resolved to draw into the field, and drive the Venetians out of all they had
upon the terra firma, Rinato signified to the Duke, that of necessity he must
return into France. This resolution of Rinato's was unexpected to the Duke, and
gave him no little anxiety. He went to him immediately, himself, and
endeavored with all possible importunity to dissuade him; but neither prayers
nor promises could prevail with him any farther, than to leave part of his
forces with them, and to engage himself to send his Son Giovanni, who in his
room should continue in the service of the League. How unwelcome so ever it was
to the Duke, Rinato's departure was not at all displeasing to the Florentines
for having recovered what they had lost themselves, and being grown fearless of
Alfonso, they had no maw, that the Duke should get more than his own Towns in
Lombardy. Rinato continuing his resolution, departed for France, and (as he had
promised) sent his Son Giovanni into Italy; who staid not in Lombardy, but
removed presently to Florence, where he was honorably entertained. This
departure of Rinato disposed Duke Francesco to peace; the Venetians, the
Florentines, and Alfonso, were all weary of the War, and ready to embrace it;
and the Pope desired it above all, by reason that that very year Mahomet the
great Turk had taken Constantinople and made himself Master of all Greece:
which alarmed all Christendom, but especially the Venetians and the Pope, who
imagined already they felt his Talons in Italy. The Pope therefore desired all
the Potentates of Italy that they would send their several Plenipotentiaries to
him, to negotiate a general peace. His motion being accepted and the
Ambassadors met; when they came to the matter, so much difficulty arose, as
there was but small hopes of accommodation.

Alfonso required that the Florentines should reinburse him for all the charges
he had been at in the War: and the Florentines expected the same. The Venetians
demanded Cremona of the Duke; and the Duke Bergamo, Brescia, and Crema of them.
So that these difficulties seemed impossible to be removed. Nevertheless, what
was so desperate at Rome, among so many, was easily concluded betwixt two of
them, at Milan, and Venice; for whilst the peace was negotiating at Rome, and
proceeded thus slowly; on the ninth of April 1454 it was determined betwixt the
Duke and the Venetians, that each of them should be restored to what they were
possessed of before the War. Peace betwix^ the Duke and Venetians.
That the Duke should have liberty to recover what the Marquess of Monferrat,
and the Duke of Savoy had taken from him; and that three months time should be
allowed to the rest of the Princes of Italy to come in. The Pope, the
Florentines, the Siennesi, and other little Potentates came in within the time
prefixed, and ratified it; and the Venetians, Florentines and Duke, made a
peace betwixt them three for 25 years. Alfonso was the only Prince of Italy who
seemed to be refractory; conceiving he could not concur without diminution, in
respect he was to be admitted rather as an auxiliary, than a principal: upon
which score he continued irresolute a good while, and would not declare; at
length upon several Embassies from the Pope and other Princes, he suffered
himself to be prevailed upon, and he and his Son entered into the League for 30
years. Alfonso enters into the League.
After which the King and the Duke made several alliances and cross-matches
together; marrying their Sons and Daughters reciprocally into one another
families. Yet, that Italy might not be left without feed or foundation for a
new War, Alfonso would not enter into the League, till he had leave by consent
of the colleagues to make War upon the Genoeses; and Gismondo Malatesta; and
Astorre Prince of Faenza: Peace being concluded upon those terms, Ferrando
Alfonso's Son, who had been at Sienna, returned into Naples, having done
nothing considerable in Tuscany, but lost many of his Men.

This Peace being made, and most of the Princes comprehended, the only fear
that remained, was, lest the differences betwixt Alfonso and the Genoeses might
disturb it. But it proved otherwise, for Alfonso did nothing openly to molest
it; it was the ambition and avarice of the Mercenary Soldier which interrupted
it; the Venetians (as their custom is upon the conclusion of peace) disbanding
their Army, New troubles by Giacopo Piccinino encouraged privately by Alfonso.
Giacopo Piccinino one of their Generals, with several other considerable
officers (without leave) departed into Romagna, and from thence to Sienna,
where he began new Hostilities, and took several Towns. In the beginning of
these troubles, and of the year 1455 Pope Nicolo died, and Calisto 3. was
chosen to succeed. This Pope, to repress these new and approaching Wars, raised
what forces he could, under the command of his General Giovanni Ventimiglia,
and joining them with the forces of the Florentines and the Duke (who were
likewise got together to suppress those commotions) they marched together in a
Body against Giacopo, and coming to an engagement with him near Bolsena,
notwithstanding Ventimiglia was taken prisoner Giacopo was worsted, and got off
in disorder to Castiglione della Pescaia; where, had he not been supplied with
money by Alfonso he had been utterly ruined. Which relief made all People
believe that that enterprise was undertaken, and prosecuted by Alfonso's order,
and direction: and Alfonso perceiving he was discovered, to reconcile himself
to the Colleagues, (whom he had disobliged with that pitiful War) he brought it
about that Giacopo should restore all he had taken in the territory of Sienna,
upon the payment of 20000 Florens; after which conclusion, he received Giacopo
and his forces into the Kingdom of Naples. In these times, though the Pope was
very intent upon the curbing of Piccinino, yet not so but he had eye still upon
the interest of Christendom, which was then much overlaid by the Turk.

To this end he sent Ambassadors, and preachers into all the Provinces of
Europe, to persuade them to arm against the common Enemy of their Religion;
Calisto 3. solicits War against the Turks.
and with their persons and purses to give what assistance they were able: so
that in Florence great store of alms were collected; and several People wore
the red corss, to intimate that they were ready in their Persons to engage in
that War. Besides which, several solemn processions were made; nor was there
any thing in public or private wanting, to show them among the forwardest of
the Christians in that enterprise, either for Counsel, or Money, or Men. but
the edge of this Croisad was taken off, by a late intelligence they received,
that the Turk having besieged Belgrade a Town in Hungary, not far from the
Danube; was beaten off by the Hungarians, and himself wounded: so that the
terror which all Christendom conceived upon the taking of Constantinople,
being abated, they went on but cooly in their preparations for War; and in
Hungary likewise upon the Death of the way-wod their General, their Victory was
prosecuted but faintly. But to return to the affairs in Italy. The troubles
commenced by Giacopo Piccinino, being composed in the year 1456, and all humane
contention in appearance at an end; it pleased God to begin a new War of his
own, and to send such a storm and tempest of Wind in Tuscany, as produced most
strange and memorable effects, above the records of time past, A prodigious
tempest.
or the credit of time to come. Upon the 24 of August, about an hour before day
near the upper Sea toward Anconia, a thick dark cloud, of about two miles
wide, was seen crossing over Italy, and pointing toward Pisa; which cloud
being driven by an extraordinary impulse (whether natural or supernatural I
cannot say) was divided into several parts; sometimes hurried up to the sky;
sometimes as furiously toward the Earth; sometimes twisting round like a
Cylinder, knocking and dashing one against the other with unconceivable
violence, with great lightnings and flashes of fire before them; which
concussions made a noise more dreadful and loud than ever any thunder or
Earthquake was known to have done. The terror of this tempest was so great,
every one believed the World was at an end; and that the Heavens, the Earth,
the Waters, and the rest of the Elements, were resolving into their first chaos
and confusion: nor were the effects less formidable where it passed, especially
about the Castle of S. Casiana. This Castle is about eight miles from Florence,
situate upon the mountain which parts the vales of Pisa and Grieve; betwixt
this Castle, and the Town of S. Andrea (upon the same mountain) this whirlwind
passing, reached not to the Town; and of the Castle it carried away only the
battlements and chimnies; but betwixt the said places it laid several houses
flat with the ground; tore up the Churches from their foundations, and carried
the Roofs of the Churches of San. Martino a Bagnuolo, and of Santa Maria della
pace, whole and entire, above the distance of a mile. A Messenger and his mules
were hurried out of the way, into the neighboring valley, and found dead the
next day. The sturdiest Oaks and the strongest trees, were not only blown down,
but carried an incredible distance from the place where they grew. Insomuch
that when day appeared, and the tempest was over, the people remained stupid,
and in strange consternation. The Country was desolate, and wasted; The ruins
of the houses and Churches terrible; The lamentation of those whose houses were
subverted and their cattle, servants, or friends found dead in their ruins,
was not to be seen nor heard without great horror and compassion. But God sure
intended rather to affright, than chastise the Tuscans; for had this tempest
happened in any of their Cities where the houses were thick, and the
inhabitants numerous, as it fell upon the hills where the oaks and trees and
houses were thin; doubtless the mischief and desolation had been greater than
the mind of man can comprehend. But God Almighty was pleased to content himself
with this essay, to make mankind more sensible of his power, if they persisted
to offend him.

But to return where I left. Alfonso, as I said before, was not at all
satisfied with the peace; and seeing the War which he had caused Giacopo
Piccinino to make, upon the Siennesi (without any reasonable occasion) had
produced no considerable effect; he had a mind to try what that would come to,
which by the League he was permitted to undertake: So that in the year 1456.
(desiring to fix that Government in the family of the Adorni, and to supplant
the Tregosi who were then in possession) resolved to invade the Genoes^ both by
Sea and by Land. The Genoesi assaulted by Alfonso
To this end, he caused Giacopo Piccinino to pass Tronto with his Forces and
fall upon Gismondo Malatesta, (by way of diversion) who having secured his
Towns was not much terrified at his reproach, so that his enterprise on that
side turned to little account* but his invasion of Genoa created him and his
Kingdom more troubles, than he ever desired: Piero Fregosa was at that time
Duke of Genoa. This Piero, finding himself unable to bear up against so
powerful a King: upon consideration of his own weakness, resolved at lest to
surrender that State to one that should be able to defend it, and perhaps
sometime or other give him a reasonable reward; he sent Ambassadors therefore
to Charles 7 of France to desire his protection, and tender him the Government.
Charles accepted the offer, and to take possession of the City, Genoa delivered
to the French.
he sent Giovanni d' Angio (King Rinato's Son) who not long before was returned
from Florence into France; for Charles was persuaded that Giovanni being
acquainted with the humors, and customs of the Italians, was properer for that
Government, than any Man he could send: besides from thence he believed he
might prosecute his designs against Naples with more ease and covenience; his
Father Rinato, having been expelled that Kingdom by Alfonso of Aragon. Hereupon
Giovanni departed for Genoa, was received honorably by the Town, and invested
with the whole power both of the City, and State.

This accident was not at all pleasing to Alfonso; he found now he had pulled
an old house over his head; however he carried it bravely, went on with his
enterprise and was advanced with his Fleet under Villa Marina at Porto Fino,
when surpised with a sudden distemper, he died. Alfenso dies.
The death of Alfonso, put an end to the Wars against Giovanni, and the
Genoeses: and Ferrando succeeded his Father Alfonso in the Kingdom, was in no
little trouble, having an Enemy upon his hands of such reputation in Italy; and
a jealousy of several of his Barons, who being inclined to new changes, he was
afraid might side with the French: besides he was acquainted with the ambition
of the Pope, and being scarce settled in his Kingdom, was fearful lest he should
attempt something to supplant him: his only hopes were in the Duke of Milan,
who was no less solicitous for the affairs of that Kingdom, than himself;
apprehending that if ever the French came to be Masters of Naples, their next
enterprise of course would be against him; for he knew they might pretend to
Milan as an appendix to that Crown. For these reasons, as soon as Alfonso was
dead, Francesco sent letters and Men to Ferrando; the first to keep up his
heart, the other his reputation. Upon the death of Alfonso the Pope designed to
give his Nephew Piero Lodovico Borgia, the Government of that Kingdom; and to
gloss over the business, and make it more plausible to the Princes of Italy, he
gave out that that Kingdom belonging formerly to the Church, his intention was
only to reduce it to that condition, and therefore he desired the Duke of Milan
would not give any assistance to Ferrando; and offered him such Towns as he had
possessed formerly in that Kingdom. But in the midst of his contrivances
Calisto died, and Pius 2. Calisto 3. dies and Pius 2. chosen in his chair.
succeeded him, who was a Si^nnesi of the Family of the Piccol Huomini, and his
Name Aeneas.

This Pope employing his thoughts wholly for the benefit of Christendom, and
the Honor of the Church, and laying aside all private passion, and advantage
at the entreaty of the Duke of Milan, crowned Ferrando King of Naples: judging
it a readier and safer way to compose the differences of Italy by confirming
him that was already in possession, than by assisting the pretenses of the
French; or setting up (as Calisto did) for himself. However Ferrando took it
for a favor, and to requite it he made Antonio the Popes Nephew Prince of
Malfi; married him to his natural Daughter; and besides this, restored
Benevento and Ferracina to the Church. And now all the Arms in Italy were
visibly laid down, and Pius (as Calisto had begun before) was moving all
Christendom against the Turk; when a new quarrel sprung up betwixt the Fregosi,
and Giovanni the Lord of Genoa, which produced a greater, and more important
War than the last: The Genoesi revolts from the French.
Petrino Fregosi was retired to a Castle of his in Riveria; much discontented,
that Giovanni d' Angio having been preferred to his dignity in Genoa by him and
his Family, had not gratified them as they deserved: so that by degrees it was
come to a feud. Ferrando was very well pleased with the difference; as being
the only way to secure him in his Kingdom, and therefore he sent Pietrino
supplies both of men and money, hoping thereby Giovanni might be expuls'd out of
the State of Genoa. Giovanni having notice of their intelligence sent for
relief into France, which having received, he marched out against Pietrino; but
Pietrino by the access of more supplies from sundry places, being grown too
strong, Giovanni retreated, and applied himself to securing the City; which he
did not do so carefully, but Pietrino in one night surprised several Posts in
it, but was beaten the next morning, himself, and most of his Men slain. this
victory elevated Giovanni so far, that he resolved to attempt upon Ferrando;
departing from Genoa in October 1459 with a great Fleet, 1459.
he sailed to Baia, and from thence to Sessa, where he was honorably received
by that Duke.

There had joined themselves with Giovanni, The Kingdom of Naples invaded by
Giovanni d' Angio.
the Prince of Taranto, and the Citizens of Aquila; besides several other
Princes and Cities; so that already that Kingdom was more than half lost. Upon
which Ferrando desired aid of the Pope, and the Duke of Milan, and to lessen
the number of his Enemies, made peace with Gismondo Malatesti, which peace
disgusted Giacopo Piccinino so highly ( Gismondo being his natural Enemy) that
he deserted Ferrando, and took up Arms under Giovanni. Ferrando sent money
likewise to Federigo Lord of Urbin, and as soon as could be expected, got
together a considerable Army (according to those times) with which he marched
against the Enemy, and finding them upon the River Sarni, he engaged them, but
was defeated and his most considerable officers taken; after this victory, most
of the Towns and Castles surrendered to Giovanni only Naples and some few
neighboring Towns and Princes, adhered still to Ferrando. Giacopo Piccinino
advised to march directly for Naples, Ferrando discomfited.
and make himself Master of the chief City, but Giovanni replied he would first
ruin the Country, and then the City would come with more ease; but his
rejecting the Counsel of Piccinino, was the loss of that design; for he did not
know that the members follow the head more naturally, than the head the
members: Ferrando was fled into Naples, and there resorted to him diverse of
his Subjects who were driven from their homes, whom he received, and having
with all possible gentleness, gained some moneys of the Citizens, he got a
small body of an Army together; he sent new Embassies to the Pope and Duke for
supplies and was relieved with more plenty and speed than before; for they were
both of them afraid, that the loss of that Kingdom would turn to their
prejudice. Much strengthened by their supplies, Ferrando marched out of Naples;
and having recovered his reputation, in part, he recovered some of his Towns:
But whilst the War was carried on in that Kingdom with such variety, an
accident happened which robbed Giovanni of his opportunity of completing that
enterprise. The Genoesi were extremely dissatified with the insolent Government
of the French; had taken Arms against the Governor, and forced him into the
Castle; in this action the Fregosi and Adorni concurred; and the Duke of Milan,
supplied them both with money and men: King Rinato passed that way with a fleet
toward the relief of his Son, imagining by the help of the Castle he might
recover the Town; and landing his men in order thereunto, he was beaten in such
sort, that he was forced back into Provence. This news dismayed Giovanni not a
little: however he gave not his enterprise over, but continued the War by the
help of such Barons whose revolt from Ferrando had rendered them desperate of
pardon: at length after many occurencies, both Armies came to a Battle near
Troia, in which Giovanni was routed, but his defeat troubled him not so much,
as the loss of Piccinino, who left his side, and went back again to Ferrando.
His Army being broke, he got off into Histria and from thence into France. This
War continued 4 years, Giovannis defeated.
and miscarried by the negligence of the General, when the Soldiers had many
times overcome. In this War however the Florentines were not publicly
concerned. The truth is upon the death of Alfonso, his Son John of Aragon being
come to that Crown, sent his Ambassadors to desire their assistance for his
Nephew Ferrando, according to their obligation by their late League with
Alfonso; but the Florentines returned, that they did not think themselves
obliged to assist the Son in a quarrel commenced by the Father; and as it was
begun without their consent or knowledge, so without any assistance from them it
might be continued or ended. Whereupon, in behalf of their King, the
Ambassadors protested them guilty of the breach of the League, and responsible
for all the losses which should follow; and having done that, in a great huff
they departed. During the revolutions in this War, the Florentines were at
quiet abroad, but at home it was otherwise, as shall be shown more
particularly, in the following Book.

THE HISTORY OF FLORENCE.
BOOK VII.
IN the reading of the last Book, it may appear (possibly) impertinent, and a
digression, for a Writer of the Florentine History to have broke out, and
expatiated upon the affairs of Lombardy and Naples. Yet I have done it, and
shall do it for the future; for though I never professed to write the
transactions of Italy, yet I never bound my self up from giving a relation of
such important and memorable passages, as would make our History more grateful
and intelligible; especially seeing from the actions of other Princes and
States, wars and troubles did many times arise in which the Florentines were of
necessity involved: for example, the War betwixt Giovanni d' Angio, and King
Ferrando, proclaimed in them so great a hatred and animosity one toward the
other, that it was continued afterward betwixt Ferrando and the Florentines,
and more particularly the House of Medici. For King Ferrando complaining, not
only that they had refused him their assistance, but given it to his Enemies;
that resentment of his, was the occasion of much mischief, as will be shown in
our narration.

And because in my description of our Foreign affairs, I am advanced to the
year 1463. (being returned to our domestic) it will be necessary to look back
for several years. But first by way of introduction (as my custom) I shall say,
that they who imagine a Commonwealth may be continued united, are egregiously
mistaken. True it is, dissension does many times hurt; but sometimes it
advantages a State. It hurts when it is accompanied with parties, and factions;
it helps, when it has none. Seeing therefore, it is impossible for any
Legislator or founder of a republic, to provide there should be no piques, nor
unkindnesses betwixt Men; it is his business what he can, to secure them
against growing into parties and Clans. It is then to be considered, that there
are two ways for Citizens to advance themselves to reputation among their
Neighbors, and they are, either publicly or privately. The Public way is, by
gaining some battle, surprising and distressing some Town; performing some
Embassy carefully and prudently; or counselling their State wisely and with
success; the private way is, by being kind to their fellow Citizens; by
defending them from the Magistrates; supplying them with money, promoting them to
honors; and with plays and public exhibitions to ingratiate with the People.
This last way produces parties and factions, and as the reputation acquired
that way is dangerous and fatal, so the other way it is beneficial (if it sides
with no party) as extending to the public. And although among Citizens of such
qualification, there must needs be emulations and jealousies, yet wanting
partisans, and People which for their advantage will follow them, they are
rather a convenience than otherwise, to a Government; for to make themselves
more eminent and conspicuous than their Competitors, they employ all their
faculties for its advancement, prying and observing one another actions so
strictly, that neither dares venture to transgress.

The emulations in Florence were always with faction; and for that reason
always were dangerous; nor was any party unanimous any longer than it had an
adverse party in being; for that being overcome, and the predominant party
having no fear, nor order to restrain it, subdivided on course: Cosimo de
Medici's party prevailed in the year 1434; but (the depressed party being
great, and many powerful Men amongst them) for a while they continued unanimous
and supportable, committing no exorbitance among themselves, nor injustice to
the People, which might beget them their hatred. Insomuch, as when ever they
had use of the People for their readvancement to any place of authority, they
found them always ready to confer it upon the chief of that party, whether it
was the Balia or any other power which they desired: and so from the year 1434
to 55 (which was 21 years) they were six times created of the Balia by the
Counsels of the People.

There were in Florence (as we have many times hinted) two principal Citizens,
Cosimo de Medici, and Neri Capponi. Cosimo de Medici and Neri Capponi the two
great Citizens in Florence.
Neri had gained his reputation in the public way, and had many friends, but
few partisans: Cosimo on the other side had advanced himself both ways, and had
friends and partisans both, and these two continuing friends, whilst they lived
together, they could ask nothing of the People; but it was readily granted,
because unanimity went along with the Power. But Neri dying in the year 1455,
and the adverse party being extinct, the Government found great difficulty to
recover its authority, and Cosimo's great friends were the cause of it, who
were willing to detract from his authority, now his adversaries were
suppressed. This was the beginning of the divisions in 1466, in which year, in
a solemn counsel, where the public administration was debated, those to whom
the Government at that time belonged, advised that there should be no Balia for
the future: that the way of imborsation should be laid aside; and the
Magistrates be chosen by lots, as in the former Squittini's or elections. To
obviate this humor, Cosimo had two ways, either to possess himself forcibly of
the Government by the power of his party, and depose his Enemies: or to let
things go which way they would, and attend till time should make his friends
discern, that they did not take the Government, and authority so much from him,
as from themselves. Of the two he made choice of the last; knowing that
according to that constitution, the purses being full of his friends, he could
without any danger reassume his Authority when he pleased. The City being thus
reduced to its old way of creation of Magistrates by lots, they thought they had
perfectly recovered their liberty, and that for the future elections were to be
made not according to the influence of the Nobility, but the inclination of the
People. So that sometimes the friend of one Grandee was rejected, and sometimes
of another, and those whose houses were formerly full of Clients and their
presents, had now scarce housholdstuff left, or servant to attend them: those
who were formerly their inferiors, were now become their equals, and their
equals advanced to be their Superiors: they were not regarded nor respected,
but rather derided and abused; all People taking the freedom to talk of them
and their Government as they pleased, even in the streets and high ways,
without any contradiction; so that it was not long after, they discovered, that
as he had told them, it was not so much Cosimo, as themselves which were
degraded.

However Cosimo took no notice, but in all propositions that would please the
People, he was the first who concurred. But that which was most terrible to the
Nobility, and made Cosimo look about him, was the receiving of the Catastro of
the year 1427 by which the impositions were to be laid by order of Law, and not
by the capriccio's of particular Men. This Law being revived, and Magistrates
already chosen to put in execution, the Nobility assembled, and went to Cosimo
to beg of him that he would be a means to rescue them out of the jaws of the
people; and restore the State to a condition that might make him powerful, and
them honorable. To which Cosimo replied he would do it with all his heart,
provided it might be done legally by the consent of the people and without any
force, of which he would not endure to hear. Then they endeavored in the
Counsels to prevail for a new Balia, but they could not obtain it; whereupon
they returned to Cosimo, and pressed him with all expressions of humility that
he would consent to a Parliament; but Cosimo (resolved to make them fully
sensible of their error) absolutely refused it, and because Donati Cochi (being
Gonfaloniere di Giustitia at that time) presumed to call a Parliament without
his consent; Cosimo made him so ridiculous and contemptible in the Senate, he
was not able to continue there but as a distracted Man, was sent home again to
his house: Nevertheless, lest things should run too far to be recovered, Luca
Pitti (a bold and tenacious Man) being made Gonfaloniere di Giustitia, ^e
thought it a convenient time to have the Government to him, that if any thing
miscarried in that enterprise it might be imputed to Luca. And accordingly Luca
in the very beginning of his office, urged the People many times to the
restoration of the Balia, threatening those of the Counsels with opprobrious
and insolent language; and not long after he executed what he had threatened;
for in August 1453 in the vigil of San. Lownzo, Luca Pitti.
having filled the Palace with armed Men, he called the people together in the
Piazza, and constrained them by force to consent, to what they had voluntarily
refused. Having repossess'd themselves of the state, created a new Balia, and
changed the Magistrates according to the pleasure of a few; that the biginning
of their Government might be as terrible, as it was forcible, they confined
Girolamo Machiavelli and some others, Girolamo Machiavelli.
and deprived many of their honors. Girolamo not being exact in observing his
bounds, was proscribed, and wandering up and down Italy to excite the several
Princes against his own Country, by the Treachery of one of the Senators in
Lunigiana, he was apprehended, brought back to Florence, and executed in
Prison. This Government (which lasted eight years) was very violent, and
insupportable: for Cosimo being grown old, weary of business, and infirm in his
body; could not be so sedulous as formerly, so that the City was become a prey
to a few particular Citizens; who in requital of his good service to the State,
made Luca Pitti a Knight, and he (in return of their kindness) appointed, that
whereas before they were called Priori dell Arti, now (that they might at least
retain the Title, though they lost the possession) they should be be called
Priori della liberta. He ordered likewise that whereas formerly the
Gonfalonieri sat on the right hand of the Retori, they should sit in the midst
of them hereafter: and (that God might have his share in the revolution) he
caused solemn services, and processions to be performed, by way of thanks for
the honors to which they were restored.

Luca was richly presented both by Cosimo and the Senate; after whom the whole
City came in flocks, so that it was believed he had given him that day to the
value of 20000 Ducats by which means he grew into such reputation, that not
Cosimo, but he was looked upon as the Governor of City; and he arrived at that
point of vanity, to begin two stately and magnificent houses one in Florence,
and the other at Rucina, not above a miles distance from the City: but that in
Florence was greater, and more splendid, than the House of any other private
Citizen whatsoever; for the finishing of which he balked no extraordinary way;
for not only the Citizens and better sort, presented him, and furnished him
with what was necessary about it; but the Common people gave him all of them
their assistance: besides all that were banished, or guilty of Murder, Felony,
or any other thing which exposed them to public punishment, had Sanctuary at
that house provided they would give him their labor. The rest of his Brethren,
though they built not such houses, they were no less rapacious than he, so that
though Florence had no Wars abroad to destroy it, it had Citizens at home, in
its own bowels, which would not suffer it to prosper. In the mean time, as we
have said before, the Wars happened in the Kingdom of Naples, and the Pope had
difference with the Malatesti in Romagna concerning Rimino and Cesana, which
they had taken from him, and desired to recover: so that betwixt the thoughts
of that, and the enterprise against the Turks, the time of Pius his whole
Papacy was consumed. But Florence fell again into its old factions and
dissentions. The divisions in Cosimo's party began in 55 upon the occasions
aforesaid, and by his wisdom (as is said before) they were restrained. But in
64 Cosimo fell sick, Cosimo dies.
and dyed, generally lamented, both by his friends and his Enemies, for they,
who loved him not whilst at the Helm, seeing their fellow Citizens so rapacious
whilst he was living, (the reverence they bore to his Person making them less
insupportable than otherwise they would be) could not but fear, now he was
dead, and his influence lost; they should be utterly ruined, and in his Son
Piero they could repose little confidence; for though he was of himself a good
Man, yet being infirm, and but young in the State, they supposed he would be
constrained to comply with them, and they become more headstrong and
incontrolable in their wickedness: so that Cosimo died universally lamented,
and certainly he deserved it for he was the most famous and memorable Citizen
(of a Person that was no Soldier) that ever Florence or any other City
produced: he exceeded all his contemporaries, not only in Authority and Estate,
but in liberality and prudence; which qualities made him a Prince in his
Country, and beloved by all People: his munificence was more eminent after his
death, than before, for when his Son Piero came to look over his writing, and
to enquire into the particulars of his Estate, he found there was scarce a Man
of any quality in the City, to whom Cosimo had not lent a considerable sum; and
many times when he heard of the exigencies of any Person of quality, he
supplied them unasked. His magnificence appeared in the multitude of his
buildings; for in Florence he built the Convents of S. Marco, and S. Lorenzo,
and the Monastery of S. Verdiano: in the Monti di Fiesoli, S. Giralomo, and the
Abbey in Mugello, he not only repaired a Church of the Minor's, but he took it
down, and rebuilt it from the ground: besides this in S. Croce, in Servi in
Agnoli, in S. Mineato, he erected altars, and most sumptuous Chapels, all
which besides the building, he adorned with all the utensels and decorations
required in so sacred a place. Besides his religious houses, he built several
private houses for himself, one in the City suitable to his quality; four
without, at Careggio, Fiesole, Cafaggivolo, and Trebi, all of them fitter for
Princes, than private Men: and as if his buildings in Italy were too few to
make him famous, he built an Hospital in Jerusalem, for the reception and
relief of poor and infirm pilgrims brought thither by their devotion; in which
fabric, he laid out a vast sum of Money: and albeit in his actions and
buildings he behaved himself like a King, and was the only Prince in Florence,
yet he was so moderate, and untransported in all things, that in his
conversation, his Parades, his allyances, and his whole manner of life, he
retained the modesty of a Citizen; for he was sensible that ostentation and
Pomp in that which is every day to be seen, contracts more envy, than
moderation, and gravity. Being to seek for matches for his Sons, he did not
endeavor for the alliance of Princes, but married his Son Giovanni to Cornelia
Alessandri, and Piero, to Lucretia Tornabuoni, and contracted his
Grandchildren by Piero, Bianca to Gulielmo di Pazzi, and Nannina to Bernardo
Rucellai. Among all the States, Princes, and civil Governments of his time; no
person came near him for sagacity and intelligence. Hence it was that in all
the variety of his fortunes, when the City was so uncertain, and the people so
voluble; He kept his Authority 31 years, for being a wise man and of great
prospect, he foresaw any mischief at a distance, and was ready to prevent it,
before it proceeded too far; or to frustrate the effects of it, if it did
Whereby he did not only subdue all domestic and private ambition at home, but
restrained. it so happily in several Princes, that whoever confederated with
him and his Country, came off upon equal terms, if not worsted their enemies;
and whoever opposed him, either lost their money, their time, or their State:
and of this the Venetians can give ample testimony, who whilst in League with
him against Duke Philip, were always victorious; but that League was no sooner
broken, but they were beaten both by Philip, and Francesco: and when they
joined with Alfonso against the Republic of Florence, Cosimo with his own
credit drained Naples and Venice so dry, that they were glad to except what
terms of peace he would allow. Of all the difficulties therefore which Cosimo
encountered both within the City and without, the conclusion was still honorable
for him, and destructive for his enemies; so that the civil discords gained him
authority at home, and his foreign Wars, power and reputation abroad; insomuch
that to the territory and Dominion of his Country, he added the City of Borgo a
Sepulcro, Montedoglio, Casentino, and Valdi Bagno, and by his virtue and
fortune, snppress'd his Enemies, and exalted his friends. He was born 1389. on
S. Cosimo, and Damiano's day. The first part of his life was full of troubles,
witness his banishment, his imprisonment, and his dangers in being killed. From
the Counsel of Constance, after Pope John was ruined (whom he had attended
thither) he was forced to fly in disguise, or otherwise he had been slain: but
after the fortieth year of his age it was more pleasant and happy; not only
such as were employed with him in public affairs, but the managers also of his
private treasure in foreign parts, participating of his felicity. From him many
Families in Florence may derive their great estates: particularly the
Fornabuoni, the Benci, the Portinari, the Sapetti, and in short all that had
dependence either upon his counsel or fortune.

Though his disbursements were vast in building his Houses and Temples, and in
his distributions to the poor, yet he would complain sometimes among his
friends, that he had not laid out so much to the honor of God, as he was
obliged; and that if he had done much more, he must confess himself his debtor.
His stature was ordinary, his complexion worthy, his presence venerable: his
learning was not great, but his eloquence admirable; he was naturally prudent,
courteous to his friends, merciful to the poor, profitable in his converse,
cautious in his counsels; speedy in his executions, and in his sayings and
replies, both solid and facetious. When he went first into Banishment, Rinaldo
de gli Albizi) drolling upon his exilement) sent him word, The hen was
hatching, to which Cosimo returned, that she would have but ill hatching so far
from her nest. To some of his Rebels who in a threatening way sent him word.
They were not asleep, he replied, he believed it, for he had spoiled their
sleeping. When Pope Pius was encouraging and pressing all Christian Princes
against the Turk, Cosimo said the Pope was an old Man, but he had begun an
enterprise as if he had been a Boy. To the Venetian Ambassadors, who came to
Florence with the Ambassadors of Alfonso, to complain of that Commonwealth,
putting his hat off to them, he demanded the color of his hair, they told him
it was gray; he replied, in time your Senators will be of the same color. Not
many hours before his death, his Wife seeing him shut his eyes, enquired why he
did so, and he told her to use them. Some Citizens after his return complaining
to him that the City would be depopulated, and God Almighty offended, if he
banished so many wealthy and Religious Men; he told them, the City had better
be depopulated than destroyed. That two yards of Cloth were enough to keep a
Man from the cold; and that States were not to be preserved by the beads a Man
carried in his hand. These last expressions gave his Enemies occasion to
calumniate him, as a person that was a greater lover of himself than his
Country; and one that took more care of this World than the next. Many other of
his wise sayings might be inserted, but being unnecessary, they are omitted.
Cosimo was likewise a great lover and advancer of learned Men; upon which score
he entertained in Florence Argiropolo a Grecian, as learned as any in his time,
that by him the youth of Florence might be instructed in the Greek tongue, and
in several of his Tenets. He entertained likewise in his House Marcileo Ficino,
a great Patron of the Platonic Philosophy, whom he loved so entirely; and that
he might follow his studies with more convenience, he gave him a house near his
own Palace at Caraggi. So that his prudence, his beneficence, his success, and
his way of living made him be beloved, and feared among the Citizens, and much
esteemed by all Princes of Europe. Whereby he left such a foundation to his
posterity, that by their virtue they might equal him, by their fortune
transcend him, and obtain as much honor as he had in Florence, in all the
Cities and Countries of Christendom. Nevertheless toward the latter end of his
days, he had several afflictions, he had but two Sons, Piero and Giovanni, of
which Giovanni (the most hopeful) dyed, and Piero who survived, was infirm, and
by the weakness of his body unfit either for public or private business; so
that after the death of his Son, causing himself to be carried about his house,
he sighed and said, this house is too big for so small a Family.

It troubled him also that he had not (in his judgment) enlarged the dominion
of the Florentine state, nor added to it empire, any considerable acquest: and
its troubled him the more, for that he found himself cheated by Francesco, who
when he was but Count, had promised him, as soon as he had made himself Master
of Milan, to employ his Arms against Lucca in the behalf of the Florentines;
but his mind changed with his fortune, and having got to be the Duke of Milan,
had a desire to enjoy in peace, what he had obtained by War, so that after his
elevation, he never meddled in foreign concerns, nor made any more Wars, than
were necessary for his own defense: which was a great disturbance to Cosimo,
who now discerned he had been at great pains and expense to advance a Man who
was both false and ungrateful. He perceived likewise that in respect of his
age, and the infirmities of his body, he was not able to apply himself to
public or private business as he was wont; and he saw both the one and the
other decline, the City going to wrack by the dissentions of the Citizens; and
his fortune by his Ministers and Sons. These considerations gave him no little
disquiet toward his end; yet he died full of Glory and renown; all the Cities
and Princes of Christendom sent their compliments of condolency to his Son
Piero, the whole City attended his Corpse with great solemnity to the Grave, and
by public decree it was inscribed upon his Tomb Padre della Patria.

If in my description and character of Cosimo, I have rather followed the
example of those who have written the lives of Princes, than of an Historian,
it is not to be admired. He was a person extraordinary in our City, and I
thought my self obliged to give him a more than ordinary commendation: during
the time that Italy and Florence were in the condition aforesaid; Lewis King of
France was infested with a furious War, which his Barons (at the instigation of
Francis Duke of Britan, and Charles Duke of Burgundy) had raised. This War lay
so heavy upon him, he could not assist Giovanni in his designs upon Genoa and
Naples, but believing he had need enough of all the supplies he could get, he
called back his forces; and Savona being at that time in the hands of the
French, he ordered it to be delivered to the Count, and left him if he pleased
to pursue the enterprise against Genoa: the Count was easily persuaded to a
thing so much to his advantage; so that by the reputation of his amity with the
French King, and the assistance given him by the Adorni, he possessed himself
of Genoa, and in gratitude to the French King, sent him a supply of 1500 Horse
into France, under the Command of his eldest Son Galeazzo: by this means
Ferrando of Aragon, and Francesco Sforza remained at quiet; the one Duke of
Lombardy, and Lord of Genoa; the other King of the whole Kingdom of Naples, and
having contracted alliances together, and married their Children the one to the
other; they began to consider how they might secure their states to themselves
whilst they lived, and to their heirs when they were dead.

In order to this, it was thought necessary, the King should make sure of such
of his Barons as had sided against him in his Wars with Giovanni d' Angio, and
the Duke should endeavor to extirpate all that had been favorers of the
Bracci, who were mortal Enemies to the said Duke, and at that time in great
reputation, under the conduct of Giacopo Piccinino. For Giacopo being the
greatest Captain in Italy, and having no Sovereignty of his own; it concerned
all who had any, to have an eye over him, and more especially the Duke, who
thought he could not enjoy his Dominion safely himself, nor leave it to his
Sons, whilst Giacopo was living. Hereupon the King with all industry
endeavored an accord with his Barons, used all possible art to reconcile
himself to them; and he succeeded with much difficulty; for they found that
whilst they were in Wars with the King, they must certainly be ruined; but by
accommodation of their differences, and trusting themselves to him, there was
only a hazard; and because Men do always avoid those evils with more readiness,
which are most certain, Princes do easily deceive, such as are not able to
contend. The Barons seeing nothing before them but destruction, if they
continued the War, accepted his conditions, and threw themselves into his Arms;
but not long after, sundry pretenses were taken against them, and they were all
of them extinguished. Which news, was so terrible to Giacopo Piccinino (who was
then with his forces at Solmona) that by the mediation of his friends he
immediately practiced his reconciliation with the Duke: and the Duke having
offered him honorable terms, Giacopo resolved to accept them, and come in; and
accordingly he went to Milan to present himself to him, attended by 100 Horse.
Giacopo had served under his Father, and with his Brother a long time; first
for Duke Philip and then for the People of Milan; so that by long conversation
in those parts he had got a good interest, and was generally beloved, and the
present condition of affairs, had much increased it; for the prosperity, and
Grandeur of the Sforzeschi had created them envy; and Giacopo's adversity and
long absence had gained him compassion among the People, and a great desire to
see him advanced: all which kindness discovered it self at his arrival; there
being scarce any of the Nobility but went out to meet him; the streets were
full of People to behold him; and no talk in the whole City but of him, and his
family. But their extravagant acclamations were his ruin; for as they
increased the Dukes jealousy, so they confirmed his resolution to remove him,
and that it might be done the more plausibly, and with less danger of
detection, he ordered that his marriage with Drusiano his natural daughter (to
whom he had been contracted long before) should be consummate. After which he
practiced with Ferrando to entertain him as General of his Army, and to give
him 100000 Florens by way of advance; upon conclusion of these Articles,
Giacopo and his wife accompanied an Ambassador from the Duke to Naples: where
they were all very well received, and for several days entertained with all
imaginable affluence and diversion; but desiring leave to pass to his Army at
Solmona, he was invited by the King into the Castle, and after supper both he
and his Son Francesco were apprehended, and clapped up into Prison, where not
long after they were murdered.

Thus were the Princes of Italy jealous of that virtue, Giacopo Piccinino
murdered.
which they had not in themselves; and not enduring it in other People, they
exposed that Country to calamities which not long after afflicted and destroyed
it.

Pope Pius, having in the mean time accommodated the differences in Romagna,
and finding an universal peace all over Europe; thought it a convenient time to
solicit the Christians against the Turks, and reassumed the whole methods
which his predecessors had taken, by which all the Princes of Christendom were
prevailed withal to assist either with money, or Men: Matheo King of Hungary,
and Charles Duke of Burgundy engaged to go in Person; and were made Generals of
that enterprise by the Pope, who was so well pleased with what he had done,
that he went from Rome to Ancona to be at the Rendezvous of the Army, which was
to meet there, and (by Ships which the Venetians had promised to furnish) be
transported into Sclavonia. After the arrival of his Holiness, there was so
great a throng and confluence of People, that in a few days all their provision
was devoured; and the neighboring Towns not being able to supply, every Body
was ready to starve for hunger: besides which they neither had money to pay the
Soldier, nor weapons to Arm them; there was neither Duke of Burgundy, nor King
of Hungary there; the Venetians indeed had sent a few Galleys under one of
their Captains, but it was rather to show their Pomp, than to perform their
promise; so far were they unfit for the transportation of an Army. So that in
the midst of these disasters by reason of his great age and infirmities, the
Pope died; the whole A^^^ disbanded and returned to their own homes. Pope Pius
dying in the year 1465, (...) (by birth a Venetian) was elected in his place.
And as most of the Principalities in Italy had changed their Governors about
that time, Francesco Sforza died.
so Francesco Sforza Duke of Milan died after he had enjoyed that Dukedom
sixteen years, and Galeazzo his Son was declared his successor. The Death of
this Prince was the occasion that the divisions in Florence increased, and
broke out much sooner than otherwise they would have done. Cosimo being dead,
Piero his Son succeeded both to his authority and Estate; and having called to
him Diotisalvi Neroni as honorable and great a Man as most in the City, (by
whom, Cosimo upon his death bed had commanded his Son Piero to be governed in
all his affairs) he let him know the great confidence his Father had reposed in
him, and that being desirous to obey him after his Death, as he had done whilst
he was living, he did entreat his advice not only in his private and domestic
affairs, but in his public administration of the Government: and that he might
begin first with his own particular business, he would show him the accounts
and Books of his Estate, that he might understand how things stood; and direct
him afterward as he pleased. Diotisalvi promised to be ready, and faithful;
but the accounts being produced and examined, were found very disorderly and
imperfect: Diotisalvi (as a Person which respected his own interest, more than
his professions to Piero, or his obligations to his Father, supposing it easy
to rob him of his reputation, and divest him of the Authority which Cosimo had
left him as hereditary) came to him therefore with Counsel very fair and
reasonable in appearance, but inwardly destructive and pernicious. He
represented to him the disorder of his accounts; and what sums of money would be
necessary to have by him, if he meant to keep up his credit, or preserve his
preferment in the State: he told him that those disorders were not any way so
readily to be redressed; nor his Coffers so naturally supplied, as by calling
in such sums as were owing to his Father both abroad and at home. For Cosimo
(to gain himself an interest) had been very ready to accommodate any body that
wanted; and the moneys he had lent amounted to an incredible sum. Piero was
well satisfied with his advice, and thinking it but just, he called in his
money. But no sooner had he done it, but the Citizens cried out upon him;
declaimed against him as ungrateful and covetous, and used him as
opprobriously, as if he had robbed them, and not demanded his own. Diotisalvi
finding his design succeed, and that Piero was fallen into disgrace with the
People, he consulted with Luca Pitti, Agnolo Acciaivoli, and Nicolo Soderini,
how they might depose him: they were all of them ready to embrace the design;
but upon several grounds and provocations; Luca desired to succeed Piero in his
command, for he was grown so great, he disdained to obey him: Diotisalvi, knew
Luca was not fit to be chief in the Government, and therefore he thought, if
Piero was removed; in a short time that authority would devolve upon him:
Nicolo Sodoreni had a mind the City should be more free, and governed by
direction of the chief Magistrates: Agnolo, had a private quarrel to the Medici
for several reasons, and particularly these. Raffaello his Son had long before
married Alessandra de Bardi, and had a great fortune with her: this Lady,
either for his own defects, or other Peoples, was ill treated by both
Father-in-Law, and Husband. Lorenzo d' Ilarione a young Gentleman her relation,
pitying her condition, went with certain of his Comerads one night well Armed,
and took her by force out of the house of Agnolo. The Acciaivoili complained
heavily of the outrage, and the cause being referred to Cosimo, he awarded that
the Acciaivoili should refound her portion, and that then it should be left to
the Ladies election whether she would return to her Husband or no. Agnolo did
not think Cosimo in this determination, had dealt with him as a friend, and not
being able to revenge it upon him, he resolved to do it upon his Son. Yet
though their reasons and ends were diverse, the Conspirators agreed all in
their pretense, that the City should not be governed by a peculiar Council, but
by the Magistrates. The hatred of the People, and their occasions to revile him,
were much exaggerated by the failing of several Merchants about that time,
which was objected to Piero as a great prejudice to the City, as if the calling
in of his money had broke them. To this aspersion it was added that he was
negotiating a match for his eldest Son Lorenzo, with Clarice a Daughter of the
Orsini, which they took in great dudgeon, and upbraided him by it, declaring
that it was now apparent what he drove at; and that thinking his Son too good
for any alliance in Florence, it was manifest he did not now look upon himself
as a Citizen, but was casting about how he might make himself Sovereign: for he
was too proud to have the Citizens to his kindred, had a desire to make them
his subjects; and therefore he did not deserve to have them his friends. These
Conspirators believed they had all sure in their hands, for the greater part of
the Citizens being deluded with the name of liberty, (with which the
Conspirators had gilded and embellished their designs) had professed
themselves on their side. There being a general ebullition of these sort of
humors at that time in the City; it was thought convenient by some that were
not at all taken with them, seeing they could not be absolutely depressed, to
find out a way to discuss and divert them; for whilst the People are idle, they
are proper instruments for any commotion: to employ them therefore, and remove
their thoughts from contriving against the Government (it being a complete year
since Cosimo died) for the entertainment and recreation of the City, they took
occasion to make two public and solemn Feasts, or shows (which are usual
there) one of them represented the three Wise men, who were conducted by the
Star to the place where our Savior was born, and this was performed with so
much Pomp and magnificence that for several months together the whole City was
employed about the Pageants and preparation. The other was called a Tornament
(which is a kind of skirmishing on Horseback) in which the young Gentlemen of
the City had challenged the most eminent Knights of Italy; and among these
young Gentlemen, Lorenzo the eldest Son of Piero carried the applause, not by
favor or partiality, but by his own valor and dexterity. But these sports and
divertisements were no sooner over, but the Citizens returned to their old
jealousies, and every one pursued his own fancy with more eagerness than
before; which occasioned great feuds, and they were augmented much by two
unfortunate accidents. The one was, that the authority of the Balia was
expired; the other that Francesco Duke of Milan was dead; upon whose death, the
new Duke Galeazzo, sent Ambassadors to Florence to confirm the capitulations
which his Father Francesco had made with that City; one of the articles
obliging them to pay Francesco an annual sum of money: the chief of the adverse
party thinking this a fair opportunity, opposed the Medici in the ratification;
alleging that the agreement was made with Francesco, not with his Son; and
that Francesco being dead, the obligation was void; for Galeazzo was not so
great and considerable as his Father, and therefore his amity unlikely to be so
profitable; so that though indeed there was not much gained by Francesco, there
was less to be expected from his Son; and if any Citizen, to maintain his own
private interest would pay him his annuity, it would be against the freedom and
the safety of the City.

To this Piero replied, that so important an alliance, was not so carelessly to
be lost, that nothing was more advantageous and necessary (as well for all
Italy as Florence) than their alliance with the Duke; for thereby the Venetians
would be discouraged from attempting upon that Duchy, either by counterfeit
friendship, or manifest War. But should this alliance be dissolved, no sooner
would it be known to the Venetians, but they would fall immediately upon the
Duke; and finding him young, without friends, and scarce warm in the State;
they would easily carry it from him, either by fallacy or force; and in either
of those cases, the Commonwealth of Florence must be destroyed. But his reasons
could not be accepted; the sedition began to break out openly: the adverse
party assembled in several Companies in the night, the greatest part of them in
La Pista, and the friends of the Medici in the Crocetta: the Conspirators being
impatient to have Piero destroyed, had gotten the subscription of several
Citizens as favorers of their designs: but being got together, one night above
the rest, after solemn debate in Counsel which way they were to proceed; it was
unanimously agreed that the power of the Medici should be rebated; but they
were divided in the way; the most moderate part proposed that seeing the Balia
was extinct, they should only take care it should not be revived; for if the
Government fell into the hands of the Counsels and Magistrates (as it would do
of course) in small time Piero's authority would evaporate; and with that, his
interest among the Merchants; for his affairs were now in such a posture, that
unless he could relieve himself by the public Treasure, he would be certainly
ruined: and when that should happen, there would be no farther danger of him,
their liberty would be recovered without banishment or blood, which all good
Citizens ought to desire; but if force was applied, infinite hazards might
occur. If one be falling of himself, no body thrusts him; if any one thrusts
him, every body sustains him. Besides, if nothing extraordinary being acted
against him, he will have no occasion to Arm, or strengthen his party; and if
he should, it must be with great charge, and disadvantage; for every one would
suspect him, which would facilitate and hasten his ruin. Others were not
satisfied with this delay; affirming that time would be more for his benefit,
than theirs; and if they would proceed by cold delatory gradations, Piero would
run no hazard, but they should run many. For the Magistrates (though they were
his Enemies) suffering him to enjoy the privileges of the City; his friends
would make him Prince (as had happened in 58) to their utter destruction: and
that though that Counsel was honest and peaceable, yet this was wiser and more
secure, and therefore to be executed, whilst the minds of the People were
incensed: the way they proposed was to arm at home, and to entertain the
Marquess of Ferrara into their pay abroad; and when a Senate of their friends
happened to meet, then to rise, and secure themselves as well as they could.
The result of all was, that they should attend such a Senate, and then make the
best of their time. Nicolo Fedmi (who was employed as Chancellor) was one of
this Council; who being tempted by greater, and more practicable hopes,
discovered the whole Plot to Piero, and gave him a list of the Conspirators,
and a Catalogue of the subscriptions. Piero was astonished at the number and
quality of his adversaries; and upon consultation with his friends, it was
concluded, that he also should take subscriptions, and having committed the
care of them to some of his confidents, he found the Citizens so sickle and
unstable, that many of them who had subscribed to the Enemy came over, and
obliged themselves to him. Whilst things were in this distraction, the time
came about in which the supreme Magistracy was to be renewed; to which Nicolo
Soderini was advanced by the Gonfaloniere de Giustitia. It was a wonder to see
the concourse not only of the better sort of Citizens, but of the common People
which attended him to the Palace, and put on an Olive Garland upon his head by
the way, (to signify that he was the Person upon whom the safety, and the
liberty of their City did depend.) By this, and many examples of the same
nature it is evident, how inconvenient it is to enter upon the Magistracy, or
Government, with more then ordinary acclamation; for not being able to perform
as is expected (and for the most part more is required) the People abate of
their esteem, and come by degrees to despise you. Thomaso and Nicolo Soderini
were Brothers, Nicolo was a person of greater Spirit, but Thomaso the more
prudent. Thomaso being a friend to Piero and knowing the humor of his Brother;
that he desired the liberty of the City, and that the Government might be
preserved without offense to any body, he encouraged him to a new Squittini, by
which means the Borsi might be filled with the names of such Citizens as were
lovers of liberty, and the Government continued without violence, as he
desired. Nicolo was easily persuaded by his Brother, and suffered the time of
his Magistracy to expire in the vanity of that opinion, and his friends which
were of the Conspiracy were well enough contented, as being already emulous of
him, and not desiring the reformation should fall out during his authority;
presuming they could effect it when they pleased, though another was
Gonfaloniere. Whereupon his office expired with less honor than he entered upon
it; by reason he had begun many good things, but perfected nothing.

This accident fortified the party of Piero exceedingly; confirmed his friends,
and brought over such as were neuter: so that though all things were ready on
all sides, they were delaid for several months, and not the least tumult
appeared. Nevertheless Piero's party increasing, his Enemies began to resent
it, and met together, to perform that by force, which they might more easily
have done before by means of the Magistrates; in order to which they concluded
to kill Piero (who was at that same time sick at, C^rreggi) and cause the
Marquess of Ferrara to advance toward the City; for when Piero was dead, they
resolved to come armed to the Palace and force the Senate to settle the
Government as they should direct: for though all of them were not their
friends, yet they doubted not but to fright them into a concurrence.
Diotisalvi, to disguise his design visited Piero very often; discoursed with
him about unit^^ing the factions, and advised him very frankly. But Piero was
informed of the whole conspiracy, and besides Domenico Martegli had given him
notice that Francesco Neroni the Brother of Diotisalvi had been tempting him to
their party, assuring him of success: Hereupon Piero resolved to be first in
arms, and took occasion from their practices with the Marquess of Ferrara. He
pretended he had received a Letter from Gicvanni Bentivogli Prince of Bologna,
importing that the Marquess of Ferrara was with certain forces upon the River
Albo, and that it was given out, his design was for Florence; upon which
intelligence, Piero pretended to arm, and (attended by a great number of armed
men) he came to the City. At his arrival his whole party took arms, and the
adversary did the same, yet not in so good order as Piero, for his men were
prepared, and the other surprised. Diotisalvi's Palacebeing not far from
Piero's, Diotisalvi judged himself insecure at home, and therefore went up and
down, sometimes exhorting the Senate to cause Piero to lay down his Arms;
sometimes seeking out Luca, and encouraging him to be constant; but the
briskest and most courageous of them all was Nicolo Soderini, who taking Arms
immediately, Nicolo Soderini persuades Luca to take Arms against Piero.
and being followed by most of the Populace of his quarter, went to Luca's
house, entreated him to mount, and march with him to the Palace for the
security of the Senate, who (he assured him) were of his side; by doing of
which, the Victory would be certain; but if he remained in his house, he would
run the hazard of being slain by those who were armed, or abused by those who
were not; and then he would repent him when too late, whereas now it was in his
power by force of Arms to ruin Piero if he pleased: or if he desired peace, it
was more honorable to give conditions, than to receive them. But all his
Rhetoric could not work upon Luca; he had altered his mind, and received new
promises of Alliances and rewards from Piero; and already married on of his
Nieces to Giovanni Tornabuoni; so that instead of being persuaded by him, he
admonished Nicolo to lay down, and return quietly to his house; for he ought to
be satisfied, that the City should be governed by its Magistrates: for whether
he was satisfied or not, it would be so; all People would lay down their Arms;
and the Senate having the stronger party, would be Judges of their quarrel.
There being no remedy, and Nicolo having no where else to dispose himself, went
back to his house; but before he departed he told him thus.

I cannot alone do this City any service. but I can prognosticate its miseries.
The resolution you have taken, will deprive your Country of its liberty; your
self of your authority; me of my Estate; and others of their Country.

At the first news of this tumult, the Senate had caused their Palace to be
shut up, where they kept themselves close with the Magistrates, without
appearing for either side: the Citizens (especially those who had followed Luca
seeing the party of Piero armed, and the other disarmed) began to contrive how
they might show themselves his friends, not how they might express themselves
his Enemies. Whereupon the principal Citizens, and the heads of the factions
met in the Palace before the Senators, where many things were debated relating
to the Government of the City in that juncture, and the ways of reconciliation:
but because Piero could not be there in respect of his indisposition, all
agreed to go to him to his house, except Nicolo Soderini, who (having
recommended his Children and family to the protection of Tomaso) was retired to
his Country house, to attend there, the conclusion of these troubles, which he
expected would be unhappy to him, and fatal to his Country. The rest being
arrived at Piero's Palace, one of them being deputed, complained to him of the
condition of the City by reason of the tumults; The Senate and chief Citizens
attend Piero at his house.
declared that they who took Arms first, were most conscious of them; that
understanding Piero was the Man, and his design unknown, they were come to him
to be informed from himself, and if it appeared to be for the advantage of the
City, they promised to comply. To which Piero replied, that he who takes Arms
first is not in the fault, but he who gives the occasion: that if they
considered more seriously of their behavior toward him, they would not wonder
at what he had done for his own preservation: for they would find it was their
conventions in the night; their subscriptions, and practices to defeat him both
of his Authority and life, which had forced him to his Arms, yet having
extended them no farther than his own house, he conceived it was good evidence
his intentions were innocent, and rather to defend himself, than injure any
body else, that he desired nothing, but his own security, and had never given
them occasion to suspect him of other, that when the Authority of the Balia
expired, he never attempted to revive it in any extraordinary way; but was
willing (if they were so themselves) that the Magistrates should have the
Government of the City; that Cosimo and his Sons knew how to live honorable in
Florence, either with or without the Balia; and that in 58 it was for their
interest, not his, that it was restored. But this was not sufficient, he found
them of opinion, that whilst he was in Florence, there would be no safety, no
tranquillity for them: a thing truly so far from his belief, he could never
have imagined or thought upon it, that his own friends and his Father should
not endure to live with him in the same City, seeing no action of his had ever
expressed him otherwise, than a quiet and peaceable Man.

Then turning about to Diotisalvi, and his Brothers who were all present, he
reproached them severely by the favors they had received from Cosimo; by the
confidence he had placed in them; and the great ingratitude which they had
returned (which reprimende was delivered with so much zeal and efficacy, that,
had not Piero himself restrained them, some there present were so much enraged
at their deportment toward him, they would certainly have killed him) and at
last he concluded, that what ever they and the Senate determined, he would
consent to, for he desired nothing of them but to live quiet and in peace.
Hereupon many things were proposed but nothing concluded; only in general it
was thought necessary the City should be reformed, and new Laws created: The
then Gonfaloniere de Giustitia was Bernardo Lotti, a person in whom Piero had
no confidence, and so resolved not to do any thing whilst he was in office,
which he conceived would be no great prejudice to his affairs, because his time
was almost expired. But at the election of Senators in September and October
following, 1466. Roberto Lioni was chosen Gonfaloniere, who was no sooner
settled in his office, but (all others thing being prepared to his hand) he
called the People together into the Piazza, and created a new Balia, all of
Piero's creatures, who fell presently upon the creation of new Magistrates, and
chose them as Piero directed. Which manner of proceeding so terrisied the heads
of the adverse party, that they fled out of the City most of them; Agnolo
Acciaivoli to Naples, Diotisalvi Neroni, and Nicolo Soderini to Venice. But
Luca Pitti remained behind, presuming upon his late alliance, and the promises;
which he had received from Piero: The Enemies of the Medici depressed
Giovanni the Son of Neroni, at that time Archbishop of Florence (to prevent
the worst) banished himself voluntarily to Rome. All the fugitives were
proclaimed rebels; and the family of the Neroni dispersed. Many other Citizens
were banished likewise, and consined to particular places; nor was this all; a
solemn procession was ordered, to give God thanks for the preservation of the
State, and the unity of the City: in the time of which solemnity, certain
Citizens were apprehended, tortured, and then part of them put to death, and
part of them banished. But in all the inconstancy and variations of fortune,
Luca Pitti deserted.
nothing was so remarkable as the fall of Luca Pitti. He quickly learned the
difference betwixt Victory and misfortune; betwixt honor, and disgrace, His
house (which was formerly thronged with the visits and attendancies of the
better sort of Citizens) was now grown solitary and unfrequented. When he
appeared abroad in the streets, his friends and relations were not only afraid
to accompany him, but to own or salute him; some of them having lost their
honors for doing it, some of them their Estates; and all of them threatened, The
noble structures which he had begun, were given over by the workmen; the good
deeds which he had done were requited with contumely, and the honors he had
conferred, with infamy and disgrace. So that many persons who in his authority
had presented him largely, in his distress required it again. pretending it was
lent, and no more, and these very People who before commended him to the skies,
cried him down again as fast, for his ingratitude and violence: so that now
when it was too late, he began to repent himself that he had not taken Nicolo's
advice, and died honorably seeing he could not live so. Nevertheless Agnolo
Acciaivoli being than at Naples, before he attempted any thing of innovation,
he resolved to try Piero, and see if there was no hopes of reconciliation; to
which purpose he writ to him this following letter.

I cannot but smile to observe the wantonness of fortune, and what sport she
makes her self in turning friends into Enemies, Agnolo 's letter to Piero de
Medici.
and Enemies into friends, according to her own humor and capriccio; you may
remember how at the banishment of your Father (resenting the injury done to him
above any danger of my own) I lost my Country, and escaped narrowly with my
life. In Cosimo's days I refused no opportunity of honoring your family; and
since he died, I have entertained none to offend it. True it is the weakness of
your complexion, and the minority of your Sons, gave some kind of disquiet, and
I was willing our Country might be put in such a posture, as to subsist after
your Death; what ever I have done, was only to that end; not against you so
much, as for the benefit of my Country: if that was an error, I am sorry for
it, and do hope the innocence of my intention, and the service of my former
actions may atone it: nor can I fear but I shall find mercy in a Family which
has had so long experience of my fidelity; or that one single fault will be
able to extinguish so many obligations. Piero having received this Letter, by
the same hand returned him this answer.

Your smiling at that distance, is the reason I weep not where I am: were you
so merry in Florence, Piero 's answer.
I should be more melancholy at Naples. I grant you have been a well wisher to
my Father, and you confess he gratified you for it; so that if there be
obligation on any side, it is on yours, because deeds are more valuable than
words; and if you have been already rewarded for your good actions, it is but
reasonable you should be punished for your evil: your pretense of love to your
Country cannot excuse you, for no body but will believe the Medici as great
lovers and propagators of their Country as the Acciaivoli. Live therefore where
you are, in dishonor, since you had not the discretion to live honorably here.

Agnolo upon the receipt of this letter, desparing of Pardon, removed his
quarters to Rome; where associating with the Archbishop, and the rest of the
exiles; they consulted what was the best way of lessening the reputation of the
Medici; which at that time was tottering in Rome, and gave Piero no small
trouble to sustain it; but by the assistance of his friends, they failed of
their design. Diotisalvi, and Nicolo Soderini on the other side, used all
possible diligence to provoke the Venetian Senate against their Country*
supposing its Government being new, and ungrateful to many People, the first
invasion would shake it, and that it would not be able to stand. There was at
that time in Ferrara Giovan Francesco the Son Palla Strozzi, who in the
revolutions in 34 was banished with his Father out of Florence: this Giovanni
was a Man of great credit, and reputed as rich a Merchant as any in the City.
These new Rebels insinuating with him, persuaded him how easy it would be to
recover their Country when ever the Venetians would undertake it; and they
doubted not but they would undertake it, if part of the charge could be
defrayed; otherwise it was not to be expected: Giovanni was willing to revenge
the injuries he had received; believed what they said, and promised to assist
with all the Money he could make; upon which Diotisalvi, and Soderini addressed
themselves to the Doge.

Complained to him of their Banishment, which they pretended was for no other
cause, but that they were desirous their Country might be governed by the Laws;
and the Magistrates (not a few of their Grandees) have the power to put them in
execution. Upon this account it was, that Piero de Medici and his followers,
having been used to a tyrannical way, had taken arms by an artifice, disarmed
them by a cheat, and banished them by a fallacy, and as if this were not
enough, God Almighty must be brought in, and made an accessory to their
cruelty, whilst in a solemn Procession, and the sacred exercise of their
devotion, many Citizens who (upon faith given that they should be safe) had
remained behind, were seized, secured, tortured, and executed: a thing of most
execrable and nefarious example. To revenge the inhumanity of those actions,
and avert the judgments which they would otherwise pull down upon their
Country, they knew not where to apply themselves with more hopes then to that
illustrious Senate which having done so much for the preservation of their own
liberty, must need have some compassion for such as lost have theirs. They
beseeched them therefore as, freemen, to assist them against their Tyrants; as
merciful, against the merciless; and remember them how the Family of the Medici
had defeated them of Lombardy, when Cosimo (contrary to the inclinations of all
the rest of the City) assisted Francesco against them: so that if the equity of
their cause did not move them, the justice of their own indignation might
provoke them,

These last words prevailed so far upon the Senate, that thy resolved,
Bartolomeo Coligni (their General) should fall upon the Dominion of the
Florentines, and to that purpose their Army being drawn together with all
possible speed, and Hercules da Esti being sent by Borso Duke of Ferrara,
joined himself with them. Their first enterprise was upon the Town of Doadola
which (the Florentines being in no order) they burned, and did some mischief in
the Country about it. But the Florentines (as soon as Piero had banished the
adverse party) had entered into a new League with Galezzo Duke of Milan, and
Ferrando King of Naples; The Florentines invaded by the venetiant.
and entertained Federigo Count of Urbin for their General: so that being
fortified by such friends, they did not much value their Enemies: for Ferrando
sent his Son Alfonso; and Galeazzo came in person (both of them with
considerable forces) to their relief; and all of them together made a head at
Castracaro, a Castle belonging to the Florentines at the bottom of the Alps
which descend out of Tuscany into Romagna. In the mean time, the Enemy was
retired toward Imola; so that betwixt the one and the other, according to the
custom of those times, there happened several light skirmishes, but no
besieging nor storming of Towns, nor no provocation to a battle on either side,
both parties keeping their tents, and staring one upon another, with
extraordinary cowardice. This manner of proceeding was not at all pleasing to
the Florentines, who found themselves engaged in a War, which was like to be
expensive, and no profit to be expected: insomuch that the Magistrates
complained of it to those Citizens which they had deputed as commissaries for
that expedition; who replied, That Galeazzo was wholly in the fault; and that
having more Authority than experience, he knew not how to make any advantageous
resolution; nor would he believe them which were able to instruct him, and that
therefore it was impossible (whilst he was in the Army) that any great action
should be achieved. Hereupon the Florentines addressed themselves to the Duke,
and let him know.

That he had done a great honor (and it had been much for their advantage) in
coming personally to their assistance; for his very name and reputation had
made their Enemies retire: Nevertheless they could not but prefer his safety
and the good of his State, before their own; because whilst he was safe, they
could not be capable of fear; and if lost, they should be incapable of comfort.
They could not therefore discharge themselves, nor express the respect they had
for him better, then by remembering him, that (besides the danger where he was)
it could not be secure for him to be any longer at that distance from Milan;
for being but young in the Government, and his Enemies powerful and
industrious; who knew what mischief they might meditate? and how easily execute
it when they had done? so that they made it their request to him for the safety
of his own person, and the preservation of his State, that he would leave only
part of his forces with them, and return himself with the rest.

Galeazzo was as well pleased with their Counsel, as they were to give it; and
without more ado returned from whence he came. The Florentine Generals (being
rid of this incombrance, and that it might appear to the World who was the
impediment before) advanced against the Enemy, so that they came presently to a
battle, which continued half a day without any disadvantage; for there was not
one Man killed, a few Horse hurt, and but a few Men taken prisoners. When
Winter was come, and the time that their Armies were accustomed to go into
quarters, Bartolomeo rereated toward Ravenna; the Florentines into Tuscany;
and the forces of the King and the Duke into their several Countries: but
finding no tumult nor commotion in Florence, as they were promised by the
Rebels; and the Soldiers which were hired not being punctually paid; the
Venetians thought fit to treat, and in a short time a peace was concluded: this
peace having deprived the rebels of all hopes, Peace between the Florentines
and the Venetians
they divided, and went to several parts. Diotisalvi went to Ferrara, where he
was entertained and relieved by the Marquess Borso: Nicolo Soderini removed to
Ravenna, where he lived long with a small pension from the Venetians, and at
last died: this Nicolo was accounted a just and courageous Man, but slow, and
irresolute: which was the cause that he slipped an opportunity when he was
Gonfaloniere, that he could never afterward retrieve. Grown insolent upon
their success, those of the Florentines who were in power (as if they fansied
they had not prevailed, unless their cruelty did testify it,) plagued and
tormented not only their Enemies, but how ever else they thought good to
suspect; and obtained of Bardo Altovili to divest several Citizens of their
honors, and that others should be banished; which was so great a strengthening
to that party, and depression to the other; that they exercised the power which
they had usurped, as if God and fortune had given them that City for a prey.

These practices Piero understood not; and if he had, his ilness would not have
permitted him to redress them: for he was so stiff, and contracted with the
Gout, he had the use of nothing but his tongue, with which he could only
admonish and advise them to live civilly, and enjoy their Country in peace, and
not be accessory to its destruction. To please and entertain the People, he
resolved to celebrate the Marriage of his Son Lorenzo, to whom he had
contracted Claricia a Daughter of the house of Ursina; which wedding was
performed with a Pomp and magnificence answerable to the persons by whom, and
for whom it was made; several days were spent in Balls, in Banquets, and Shows,
and to demonstrate the Grandeur of the House of the Medici, two martial
spectacles were exhibited; one representing Horse and Men charging as in a
field fight; the other the siege and expugnation of a Town; both of them
contrived and discharged with the greatest glory and gallantry imaginable.
Whilst affairs were in this posture in Florence, all Italy was at peace; but
under great apprehensions of the Turk, who advancing in his designs, had taken
Negropont, to the great scandal and detriment of all Christendom: Borgo
Marquess of Ferrara died about this time, and was succeeded by his Brother
Hercules. Gismondo da Rimini died (a perpetual Enemy to the Church) and left
the Dominion to his Son Roberto, who was reckoned afterward among the best
Commanders of that age. Pope Paul died likewise, in whose place was created
likewise Sextus called first Francesco da Savona, a Person of mean or rather
base extraction, but for his courage made General of the order of S. Francis;
and after that, Cardinal: This Pope was the first which showed to the World
what the Papacy could do: and that many things called errors before, might not
only be excused, but hid and obtected by the Papal Authority. He had in his
Family two persons ( Piero and Girolamo) who (as was Generally believed) were
his natural Sons, though they passed under more specious and honorable
appellations. Piero being a Friar, was by degrees promoted to the Cardinalship,
with the Title of SanSesio. To Girolamo he gave the Government of Furli, which
he had taken by violence from Antonio Ordelaffi whose predecessors had a long
time been Princes of that City: this secular and ambitious way of proceeding,
procured his Holiness great estimation among the Princes of Italy; insomuch as
all of them desiring his friendship, the Duke of Milan gave to Girolamo, his
natural Daughter Catharine in Marriage, and in Dower with her, he gave him the
City of Imola, which by the like violence he had taken from Taddeo Alidossi.
Betwixt this Duke and Ferrando the King, a new alliance was contracted; for
Elizabeth the Daughter of Alfonfo, (the Kings eldest Son) was Married to Giovan
Geleazzo eldest Son to the Duke. In the mean time Italy was full of
tranquillity; no care incumbant upon those Princes, but to pay their respects
one to the other, and by mutual matches, new obligations, and leagues, to
fortify and secure one another. Yet in the midst of this Peace, Florence was
not without its convulsions; the ambition and dissension of the Citizens
distracting their affairs; and Piero being interrupted by his own distempers,
could not apply any remedy to theirs. However to discharge his Conscience,
endeavor what he was able, and try whether he could shame them into a
reformation, he called them all to his House, and saluted them in this manner.

I never imagined the time could come in which the carriage of my friends
should Piero's speech to the florentines.
have made me inclinable to my Enemies; or the consequences of my Victory, have
made me wish I had been beaten. I thought my party had consisted of Men whose
appetites might have been bounded and circumscribed, and such as would have
been satisfied to have lived quietly and honorably in their own Country,
especially after their Enemies were expelled. But I find now, I was mistaken;
ignorant of the natural ambition of the World; and more particularly yours. It
is not enough (it seems) for you to be chief and Principal in so illustrious a
City, and (though but a few) to have the honors, and offices, and emoluments,
with which heretofore a much greater number was satisfied. It is not enough, to
have the forfitures and confiscations of your Enemies divided among you; it is
not enough that (exempting your selves) you load, and oppress the rest with
taxes; and appropriate them to your own private uses when they come in, but you
must abuse and afflict your neighbors with all the circumstances of injury:
you rob them of their Estates; you sell them justice; you abhor the Laws; you
oppress the peaceable, and exalt the insolent: I did not think there had been
such examples of rapine and violence in all Italy, as I find in this City. Has
this City given us the Authority, to Subvert it? Has it given us pre-eminence
to destroy it? Has it honored us, to afflict it? I do profess by the Faith of
an honest Man, and declare here publicly to you all, that if you persist in
these courses, and force me to repent of my Victory, I will order things so,
that you shall have but little comfort in abusing it.

The Citizens replied modestly at that time, but not a jot reformation;
whereupon Piero sent privately to Agnolo Acciaivoli to meet him at Cafaggiolo,
where they had long discourse about the condition of the City; and it is not
doubted but if he had lived, he would have recalled his Enemies to have
restrained the exorbitances of his friends; but death would not suffer it,
Piero de Medici dies.
for after great conflicts both in his body and mind, in the 53 year of his
age, he died: his virtue, and his bounty could not be perfectly conspicuous to
his Country, being eclipsed by his Father, who died not long before him; and
these few years he survived, were wholly taken up either by his own sickness,
or the dissension of his friends. He was enterred in the Temple of San. Lorenzo
near his Father, and his exequies performed with a Pomp proportionable to his
quality, and deserts. He left behind him two Sons Lorenzo and Guiliano;
pregnant, and hopeful enough of themselves, but the tenderness of their age
was that which made every body apprehensive, Among (or rather above) the
principal of that Government was Thomaso Soderini, whose prudence and authority
was not only eminent in Florence, but in the Courts of all the princes of Italy
after the death of Piero, Tomaso had the respect of the whole City, most of the
Citizens flocking to his House, as their Chief; and many Princes directed their
correspondencies to him: Tomaso soderini in great favor with the Florentines,
declines it discreetly.
but he being wise, and sensible of his own fortune and the fortunes of his
Family, refused their correspondence; received none of their letters, and let
the Citizens know, it was not upon him, but the Medici they were obliged to
attend: and that his actions might quadrate with his exhortations, having
called all the chief families together in the Convent of S. Antonio, he brought
in Lorenzo and Guiliano de Medici amongst them, where after a long and solid
discourse about the condition of that City, Italy, and the several
principalities within it; he concluded that if ever they would live happily and
in peace; secure against foreign invasion, and dissension at home; it was
necessary to continue their observance to the family of the Medici, and to give
those young Gentlemen the Authority of their predecessors; for Men are not
troubled at the promotion of ancient familes; but upstarts, as they are
suddenly advanced, are suddenly forsaken, and it has been always found more
easy to preserve a family in power (where time has worn out his Enemies) than
to raise a new one which will unavoidably be subject to new emulations: after
Tomaso had spoke, Lorenzo began, and (though but young) delivered himself with
so much gravity and composedness; that he gave them great hopes of his future
abilities; and before they parted both of them were perfectly adopted. Not long
after, they were installed in the dignities of their Father; entertained as
Princes of the Government; and Tomaso appointed their chief Mininister; by
which means they lived quiety for a while both abroad and at home, Lorenzo and
Guiliano de Medici made Princes of the City.
without the least prospect or apprehension of troubles; but on a sudden, a new
tumult unexpectedly arose to desturb them, and given them a hint of their
following miseries.

Among the Families which suffered with Luca Pitti, and his party, was the
Family of the Nardi; Salvestro and his brothers (the chief of that house) were
first banished, and then (upon the War with Bartolomeo Coglione) proclaimed
rebels. Among the Brothers, there was one of them called Bernardo, a brisk and
courageous youth, who (not being able to subsist abroad by reason of his
poverty, and having no hopes of returning by reason of the peace) resolved to
attempt something that might be an occasion of reviving the War: ai slight and
inconsiderable beginning, producing great effects many times, because People
are generally more prone to assist and improve a commotion, than to contrive
and begin it Bernardo had good acquaintance in Prato, and in the Country about
Pistoia, but more especially with the Palandre, which (though a Country family)
was numerous, and brought up, like the rest of the Pistolesi, in arms and in
blood. He knew they were highly discontented, as having been ill used in the
time of the Wars by the Magistrates in Florence: he knew likewise the disgusts
of the Pratisi; the pride and rapacity of their Government, and some body had
told him how ready they were for any practice against the State: so that from
all these circumstances he conceived hopes (by debauching of Prato) of kindling
such a fire in Tuscany, as by supplying it by fuel, they should not be able to
extinguish: he communicated his design with Diotisalvi, and inquired of him, in
case Prato should be surprised, what assistance he could procure him from the
Princes of Italy. Diotisalvi looked upon the business as desperate and almost
impossible; however seeing the part he was to bear in it, was secure enough;
and that the experiment was to be made at another Man's cost; he encouraged him
to go on, and promised him assistance from Bologna and Ferrara, if he could but
secure the Town for a fortnight. Bernardo (tickled with his promises, and
persuading himself his success would be good) conveyed himself privately to
Prato, and imparting his designs to some persons, he found them readily
disposed: the same compliance and alacrity he found in the Palandre, and having
agreed with them both of the time, and the place, he sent the news immediately
to Diotisalvi. The Potesta or Governor of Prato at that time was Cesare
Pretucci; who being put in by them, preserved it for the Florentines. The
Governors of such Towns had a custom to keep the keys of the castle themselves;
yet (especially where there was no jealousy) if any of the Town desired to go
in or out in the night, they were so civil, as to suffer them: Bernardo
understanding the custom, came himself, and the Palandre with about a hundred
armed Men, and lay close near the gate which goes toward Pistoia, A Conspiracy
of the Nard^.
whilst those in the Town who were privy to the conspiracy, armed likewise, and
sent one of their number to the Governor to beg the favor of the keys,
pretending there was a Citizen which desired to enter. To Governor suspecting
nothing, sent one of the servants with the Keys, who being gone a convenient
distance from the Palace, was knocked down, his charge taken from him; and the
Gate being opened, Bernardo and his party were let in. Having entered, and
discoursed a little while with their friends in the Town, they divided into two
bodies; one of them under the conduct of Salvestro a Pratese, surprised the
Castle; the other commanded by Bernardo, possessed themselves of the Palace,
took the Governor and his whole Family Prisoners, and committed them to the
custody of some of his Men: which done, they set up a great cry for liberty in
the Streets, and upon it many of the People resorted to the Market place: It
being now day, and the Magistrates informed that the Castle and Palace were
surprised, and the Governor and all his Family in Prison, they could not
imagine from whence this accident should proceed. The eight (who in that City
were supreme) met together in the Palace to consult what was to be done. But
Bernardo and his accomplices, having run some time about the streats, and found
few or no body come in; upon information that the eight were assembled, they
went directly to them, and Bernardo took occasion to let them know, that their
design was only to deliver their Town from servitude; and that if they would
take Arms, and join with them in it, they would create immoratal honor to
themselves, perpetual peace to the People; then he remembered them of their
ancient Liberty, and compared it with their present condition; and promised
them such assistance in a few days, as the Florentines should not be able to
contend withal: besides he assured them he had intelligence in Florence, and
they would show themselves as soon as they understood their success in this
Town: but the eight were not to be moved with bare words, and answered that
they knew not whether Florence was in liberty or bondage, nor did it belong to
them to inquire; this they knew that for their parts they desired no further
liberty, then to continue under the same Magistrates which had then the
Government of Florence, from whose hands they had never received any injury
that might provoke them to take Arms against them: they admonished him
therefore to release the Governor, leave the Town as he found it; and withdraw
in time from an enterprise which he had rashly begun. But Bernardo was not to
be discouraged so easily; for seeing entreaties and fair means had no better
success, he resolved to try how far terror would work; and as a taste of what
was to be expected, concluded to put the Governor to Death; having caused him
to be haled out of Prison: he gave orders he should be hanged out of one of the
Windows in the Palace: Petrucci was brought almost to the Window with a rop
about his neck, when he spied Bernardo attending to see him executed; and
turning to him, he said.

Bernardo you think by cutting me off, to make the Pratesi follow you; but the
effect will be quite contrary. The Veneration they bear to the Governors which
are sent hither from Florence, is so great, it will incense them to see me
destroyed, and your cruelty to me, will turn to your ruin; so that it is that
it is my life, not my death, must do your business; if I command then what you
think fit to direct, they will obey me before you, and I following your
direction, your design will be fulfilled.

Bernardo (who was no conjurer) thought his counsel was good, and therefore
ordered him (out of a back window which looked into the Marketplace) to
require the obedience of the People, which as soon as he had done, he was
carried back from whence he came. The weakness of the Cospirators was by this
time discovered; and several of the inhabitants were got together, and Giorgio
Ginori (a Knight of Rhodes) among the rest. The Giorgio being the first who
took Arms, advanced against Bernardo who was riding up and down the Streets,
sometimes persuading, and sometimes threatening the City. Having found him and
charged him with a considerable number that followed, Bernardo defeated and
taken.
Bernardo was wounded, and taken prisoner, after which it was not hard to
release the Governor, and overpower the rest; for being but few, and divided
into several parties, they were most of them either taken or killed.

In the mean time the news of this accident arrived at Florence, and was
represented much greater than the truth. The first report was that Prato was
surprised; the Governor and his whole Family slain; the Town full of the
Enemies forces; Pistoia in Arms, and several Citizens of that City engaged in
the Plot: so that of a sudden the Palace was full of Citizens, expecting orders
from the Senate for what was to be done. There was in Florence at that time an
eminent Captain called Roberto San Severino; it was resolved to send what
forces they could get together of a sudden under his command toward Prato;
that he should advance as near it as he could, give them particular notice of
all passages, and act, as he in his discretion should see occasion. Roberto was
presently dispatched, and marched with his party as far as the Castello di
Campi, when he was met by a messenger from Petrucci with the news that Bernardo
was taken, his party defeated, and all things in quite; so that he marched back
again to Florence, and not long after Bernardo was brought thither to be
examined by the Magistrates. Being questioned upon several things, and
particularly what induced him to that enterprise, he replied, that choosing
rather to die in Florence, then to live any longer in exile, he determined to
do semething which might make him memorable when he was dead. This tumult being
composed almost as soon as begun, the Citizens began to return to their old way
of security, thinking (without any regard or consideration) to enjoy the
profits of a Government which they had so lately re-established and confirmed;
from whence all those incovenences ensued, which are too often the followers of
peace; the youth being more vain and extravagant than formerly, squandred away
vast sums, in Clothes, and Treats, and all manner of Luxury; and having nothing
to do, spent their whole time and Estates among dancing Masters, and Women:
their whole study and ambition was to be thought glorious in their habit; and
smart and poinant in their discourse, for he that could retort or bite the most
readily, was thought the gretest wit, and had the greatest applause: and yet
these effeminacies were much increased, by the arrival of the Duke of Milan,
who with his Lady and whole Court was come to Florence (to fulfill a pretended
vow) where he was entertained with magnificene suitable to his quality, The Duke
of Milan in Florence.
and the alliance betwixt them. Then was the first time it ever was seen in
that City that in Lent when all flesh was forbidden by the Church, it was eaten
publicly, without dispensation, or respect to the Laws of God or of Men. Among
the rest of the Shows which were made to entertain him, the Holy Ghost's
descending upon the Apostles, being represented and exposed in the Church di S.
Spirito; so many candles were used in the solemnity that some of them took
fire, and burnt the Church to the Ground, which was looked upon as a judgment,
and a manifest expression of Gods anger toward us; if then the Duke found the
City of Florence full of niceness, and delicacy, and exorbitance in their
manners, he left them much worse when he went away; so that the soberer sort of
the Citizens thought it necessary for sumptuary Laws, and edicts of restraint
for the regulation of expenses in Clothes, Funerals, and Feastings, to confine
them within the compass of frugality and discretion.

In the midst of the peace, there happened a new and unexpected tumult in
Tuscany, about this Town of Volterra, Tumults in Volterra.
it was the fortune of some of those Citizens to find a mine of Alum, who
knowing the usefulness of it, and the advantage which might accrue, that they
might be the better supplied with moneys, and justified by better authority,
they applied themselves to some of the considerable Citizens of Florence, and
made them sharers in the profits. The business at first (as all things of that
nature are) was little reguarded by the Volterrans, but after, when they grew
sensible of their gains, they strove too late, to do what at first might have
been easily prevented. They began to examine and argue it in the Councils,
alleging there was no reason a commodity found in the public lands, should be
converted to particular use: hereupon Ambassadors were sent to Florence, and
the cause referred to a Committee of Citizens, who, being either bribed, or
convinced, reported that the desires of the People of Volterra, were (in their
judgment) unjust. That they could not find any reason why the defendants should
be deprived of what by their own labor and industry they had acquired; and
that therefore the mine was in all equity to be continued to them: though if
they pleased they might command them to pay an annual sum of money, as a fee and
acknowledgement of their Superiority. This being reported it rather increased
than lessened the mutiny of the Volterrans; nothing was discoursed of in the
whole City, but this affair: the People pressed hard for what they thought,
themselves robbed of: The Partisans were as zealous to keep what they had got,
and upon reference to the Florentines it was confirmed to them; so that in a
dispute, there was one eminent Citizen called Picorino slain, and after him
several more of his party, and their houses plundered and burned; in the heat
of their rage, they had much ado to forbear the same violence to the Florentine
Magistrates, the sierceness, of their fury being over, they sent Ambassadors to
Florence to represent to that Senate that if they would preserve to them their
old privileges, they would continue their subjection, and maintain the City in
its ancient dependence. But there was great argument about the answer: Tomaso
Soderini was of opinion the Volterrans were to be received upon any terms, as
thinking it dangerous as that time to kindle a fire so near their own Houses:
for he was fearful of the disaffection of the Pope and the power of the King;
nor durst he depend upon the amity either of the Duke or the Venetian, as not
being certain of the courage of the one, or the fidelity of the other; harping
still upon an old adage, that a lean peace was better than a fat Victory.
Lorenzo, on the other side, thinking this a fair opportunity to demonstrate his
Wisdom, and his magnanimity together; and the rather because encouraged by such
as envied Tomaso, he declared against the tumult; resolved to punish them by
force, and affirmed that if these were not corrected in terrorem, upon the
least trivial and impertinent occasion, the rest of the Territories would do
the same, without any fear or reverence in the World. The result of all being
that they should be corrected; answer was returned to the Ambassadors, that the
Volterrans were not to expect the continuation of their privileges, having
broken them themselves, and that therefore they were either to submit to the
Senate without any Capitulation, or to expect the consequence of War. The
Volterran Ambassador being returned with this answer; they prepared for their
defense; fortified their Town; and sent for supplies to all the Princes of
Italy; but none of them gave them any encouragement, but the Siennesi, and the
Governor of Piombino.

The Florentine, on the other side, placing much of their success in their
speed, dispatched away 10000 foot and 2000 Horse under the command of Federigo
Lord of Urbin, who falling upon the Country of Volterra, did easily subdue it;
after which he sat down before the City; but that standing high, and the hill
being steep, it was not to be assaulted but on that side where the Church of S.
Alessandro stood. The Volterrans for their better defense had hired about 1000
Soldiers, who observing the Florentines resolution to carry it, and that they
were very strong in their Leaguer, believing it untenable, they began to be
remiss and careless in their duties; but in anything of mischief to their
Masters, they were vigorous enough: so that the poor Citizens being assaulted
without, and abused within, began to incline to a peace; but not being admitted
to conditions, they were glad to throw themselves into the arms of their
Enemies; who having caused them to open the Gates, the greatest part of the
army marched in, and advancing to the Palace where their Priori were assembled,
they commanded them to return to their houses; but by the way one of them was
unluckily Pillaged and reviled by a Soldier, Volt^rra surrendered and sacked.
and from that Action (the disposition of Mankind prompting him more naturally
to mischief than good) proceeded the destruction of that City, which for a
whole day together was robbed, and rummaged by the Soldiers, neither Women,
nor Children, nor Churches, nor any place being exempt from the rapacity as
well of their Mercenaries, as Enemies. The news of this Victory was entertained
in Florence with extraordinary joy, and being Lorenzo's own enterprise, it
turned highly to his reputation: and one of his most intimate friends upbraided
Tomaso Soderini by his Counsel to the contrary; what think you now, Sir (said
he to him) Volterra is won? To whom Tomaso replied, I think it rather lost; for
had you received it upon terms, it might have been serviceable, and contributed
to the security of this City but being so be kept by force it will be a trouble
and weakness to you in time of War, and an expense and inconvenience in time of
Peace.

In those days, the Pope being desirous to keep the Lands of the Church in
their natural obedience, had caused Spoliro to be sacked, which Town by
instigation of the Factions within it, had been in rebellion; and the City of
Castello having been in the, same contumacy, was afterward besieged. In that
Town Nicolo Vitelli was Prince, who retaining a great correspondence and
friendship with Lorenzo di Medici, had supplies sent him from Florence. though
not enough to defend Nicolo, yet sufficient to sow the seeds of such enmity
betwixt the Pope and the Medici, as produced most pernicious effects. Nor had
it been long before they had discovered themselves, had not the death of Piero
Cardinal di S. Sisto intervened. For that Cardinal (having traveled through all
Italy, and spent some time both at Venice and Milan, in honor (as he pretended)
to the Marquess of Ferrara's wedding) had sifted the Princes to see how they
stood inclined to a difference with the Florentines: but being returned to
Rome, he died, not without suspicion of being poisoned by the Venetians, out of
an apprehension of his power, when ever he should have opportunity to exert it;
for though his humor and extraction were mean, and his education retired, in a
Covent, yet upon his promotion to the Cardinalship, he discovered more pride
and ambition, than was becoming not only a Cardinal, but a Pope. For he had the
vanity to make a feast at Rome which cost him above 20000 Florens and would
have been thought an extravagance in the greatest King of his time. Pope sixtus
having lost his Minister, proceeded more coolly in his designs nevertheless the
Florentines, the Duke, and the Venetians entered into a League; Italy in two
Factions.
Sixtus and the King of Naples entered into another, and left room for several
other Princes to come in if they pleased. By this means all Italy was divided
into two factions, every day producing something or other which augmented the
feuds; and particularly a dispute about the Isle of Cyprus, to which Ferrando
pretended, but the Venetian had got the possession; upon which the Pope and
Ferrando confederated more strictly: the great Captain of those times, and the
most eminent for conduct was Federigo Prince of Urbin, who had served under the
Florentine a long time: that their League might not have the advantage of such
a General, the Pope and Ferrando resolved, if possible to debauch him from
them, and to that end both of them invited him to Naples. Federigo obeyed, with
great astonishment, and displeasure to the Florentines, concluding he would run
the same fate which Giacopo Piccinino had done before him; but they were
utterly mistaken; for Federigo returned with great honor from Naples and Rome,
and was made General, of their League. In the mean time the Pope and the King
were not idle but still feeling and tempting the Senats, of Romagna, and
Sienna, to make them their friends, and enable themselves thereby to be
revenged on the Florentines; of which the Florentines having advertisement,
they provided such remedy against their ambition, as would consist with their
time; and having lost Federigo, they entertained Roberto do Pimino into their
pay: they renewed their Leagues with the Citizens of Perugia, and the Senate of
Faenza.

The Pope and the King pretended that the grounds of their dissatisfaction was,
for that they had seduced the Venetians from their League, and associated with
them themselves, and the Pope did not think that he could preserve the honor
and reputation of the Church, nor Count Girolamo his Sovereignty in Romagna,
whilst the Venetian and Florentine were united. The Florentines on the other
side feared that they did not desire to separate them from the Venetians so
much, to make them their friends, as to enable themselves more easily to injure
them; so that for two years together Italy remained under these jealousies, and
diversities of humors, before any tumult broke out. The first which happened
(and that was no great one) was in Tuscany. Braccio of Perugia (a Person as we
have said before, of great reputation in the Wars) left two Sons Oddo, Troubles
in Tuscany.
and Carlo, whilst the last was very young, his Brother was slain unhappily in
a tumult in the Val di Lamona. And Carlo (when capable for his age) was
preferred by the Venetians to a command in their Army, out of respect to the
memory of the Father and the hopefulness of the Son. The time of his Commission
expired about that time, and Carlo would not suffer it to be renewed by the
Senate; being resolved to see whether his own reputation, or his Fathers, could
bring him back again to Perugia. To which the Venetians readily consented, as
People which added something to their Empire, by every commotion: Carlo
therefore, marched into Tuscany, but finding the Perugians in League with the
Florentines, and his enterprise by consequence more uneasy then he expected,
that nevertheless he might do something worthy thy to be talked of, he
assaulted the Siennesi (pretending an old debenture to his Father for service
he had done them) and fell upon them with such fury, that their whole Country
was overrun. The Siennesi seeing themselves so fiercely invaded (and being
naturally jealous of the Florentines) persuaded themselves, it was done by
their consent, and made their complaints to the Pope and the King: they sent
Ambassadors likewise to Florence; who complained of the injuries they had
received; and remonstrated, that without their privacy and connivance Carlo
could never have assaulted them so securely. The Florentines excused
themselves, assuring them they would employ their greatest interest that Carlo
should not injure them any farther; and that in what way soever their
Ambassadors should propose, they would require him to desist: of which
proceeding Carlo complained as much on the other side, declaring that for not
having supplied him, the Florentines had robbed themselves of a considerable
acquist and him of great honor, and reputation; for he promised them the
possession of that City in a short time; so much cowardice he had observed in
the People, and so much disorder in their defense: whereupon Carlo drew off,
and retired to his old Masters the Venetians: and the Siennesi (though
delivered by the Florentines means) remained full of disgust, as not thinking
it an obligation to rescue them from a calamity they had brought upon their
heads. Whilst the affairs in Tuscany were carried on in this manners, by the
Pope and the King, there fell out an accident in Lombardy of greater
importance, and threatened greater destruction. There was a person called Cola
(of Mantoua) who taught the Latin tongue to several young Gentlemen in Milan;
this Cola, being a learned, but ambitious man, out of pique to the Dukes
conversation, or some private exceptions of his own, took occasion in all his
discourse, wherever he came, to declaim against subjection to an ill Prince;
and to magnify their felicity whose fortune it was to be born, and brought up
in a Commonwealth, affirming that all famous Men, had their education; not
under Princes but Republics; the latter prferring them as virtuous, the other
destroying them as dangerous. The Gentlemen with whom he had entered into more
particular familiarity were Giovanandrea Lampognano, Carlo Visconti, and
Girolamo Olgiatto, and to these he had may times inculcated the excellence of
the one Government, and the periciousness of the other, and by degrees he
became so confident both of their courage and inclination, that he persuaded
them to a solemn oath, that as soon as their age would give them leave, they
should employ all their faculties to redeem their Country from the Tyranny of
their Prince.

The young Gentlemen, full of his documents, and a desire of observing their
oaths: detesting the courses of the Duke, and resenting some particular
injuries of their own, were impatient to put his directions in execution.
Galeazzo was in his carriage both cruel and lascivious (each of which good
qualities were sufficient to make him odious) it was not enough for him to
debauch and vitiate the noblest Ladies of the City, but he took delight to
publish it; no man (in his judgment) was handsomely punished who was not
executed with some unusual circumstance of cruelty. He was suspected likewise
to have murdered his Mother, for not fancying himself Prince enough, whilst she
was in the way, he behaved himself so toward her, that she desired to retire
to Cremona (which was the place of her dower) in which journey she was
surprised with a sudden sit of sickness, and died, and her death, by many
People, imputed to her Son. By tampering with or reflecting upon some Ladies of
their relations, Galeazzo had highly disobliged both Carlo and Girolamo; and to
Giovanandrea he had refused to give the possession of the Abbey of Miramando,
which was granted to his predecessors by the Pope: these private injuries,
egged on the young Gentlemen to revenge themselves, and deliver their Country;
presuming if they could kill him, not only the Nobility, but the whole body of
the People would follow them: resolved therefore upon the fact, they met many
times to consult of the way, and their old familiarity rendered them
unsuspected. Whilst they were contriving their business, to make themselves
more dexterous and courageous when they came to it, their way was to strike and
stab one another with the sheaths of those daggers which they had prepared to
do the work, Conspiracy against the Duke of Milan.
sometimes upon the arms, and sometimes upon the breasts of one another. At
length they came to consider of the time and the place: in the Castle it was
thought unsafe; a hunting, dangerous and uncertain; a walking, difficult, and
unpracticable; in the conventions impossible; at length it was concluded he
should be assassinated at some show or public festivity, to which he would
certainly come, at which time upon sundry pretenses they might have opportunity
to assemble their friends. They concluded likewise, that if any of them, upon
any occasion whatever should be absent, or apprehended the rest should proceed,
and kill him upon the place.

In the year 1476 Christmas coming on, and the Duke accustomed on S. Stephens
day with great solemnity to visit the Church of that Martyr, they pitched upon
that for the time and the place. The morning arriving, they caused some of
their principal friends and servants to arm, pretending they were to assist
Giovanandrea who (contrary to the inclinations of some of his Enemies) was to
bring certain pipes of Water into his grounds for his greater convenience:
being armed according to directions, they conducted them to the Church,
alleging that they would get leave of the Prince to justify what might
happen: they caused several others likewise of their friends and allies to meet
there, upon several pretenses, presuming when the stroke was struck, and the
business done to their hand, they would hall in then without any difficulty or
scruple. Their resolution was, ^as soon as the Duke was killed, to get all
those armed Men at their heels, and to march into that part of the Town where
they thought they could raise the People with most ease, and persuade them to
arm against the Duchess, and the Ministers of the State not doubting but the
People would readily follow them, being much distressed for want of provisions
and promised (as they intended) the houses of Cecco Simonetta, Giovanni Botti,
Francesco Lucani, and all the rest of the Governors, to plunder. Having laid
their design thus, and encouraged one another toxecute it bravely, Giovanandrea
with his accomplices, went to Church betimes, and heard Mass together, after
which Giavanadrea turning toward the image of San. Ambrogio, he said, Most,
venerable Patron of our City, thou know our intention, and for what end we
expose our selves to so many dangers; be I beseech you kind and propitious to
our enterprise, and by favoring of justice, let the World see how much
injustice displeases you. To the Duke on the other side, before side, before he
came to Church, many things happened which seemed to presage his Death. When he
dressed himself that morning, he put on a Coat of mail which he usually wore,
but on a sudden thinking it unhandsome or troublesome, he caused it to be pulled
off and laid by. He had a mind to hear Mass in his own Chapel, but his
Chaplain was gone to Saint Stephens Church, and carried all the implements
along with him; having news of that, he ordered the Bishop of Como, should
officiate for him, but he excused himself upon very reasonable impediments: so
that he was necessitated (as it were) to go to Church: before he went, he
caused Giovan Galeazzo and Hermes, his Sons to be brought to him, and when they
came, he kissed and embraced them, as if he was never to see them again; at
length (and very loath) being parted from them, he resolved to go to Church,
and marching out of the Castle betwixt the Ambassadors of Ferrara and Mantoua,
he went toward S. Stephens. The conspirators in the mean time, to give the
less suspicion, and avoid the cold, which at that time was very great, were go
up into a Chamber belonging to the Archpriest, who was of their acquaintance;
but hearing the Duke was coming they went down and placed themselves in the
Porch, Giovanandrea and Girolamo on the right hand, and Charles on the left.
Those who marched before the Duke were already entered, then came the Duke
himself encompassed with a great multitude of People. As is usual in such
pompous solemnities. The first which addressed themselves to their work was
Giovanandrea, The Duke of Milan slain.
and Girolamo, who pretending to make room, pressed up to the Duke, and with
short daggers which they had ready drawn in their sleeves, they stabbed him.
Giovanandrea gave him two wounds, one in the belly, the other in the throat:
Girolamo struck him in the throat likewise, and in the belly, Carlo Visconti
being placed nearer the door, the Duke was past him before he was assaulted,
and therefore he could not strike him before he was dead, however he must do
his share, and with a schine gave him two deep wounds upon his shoulders; his
blows were so sudden and thick, he was cut down and dead, before almost any
body perceived it. Nor had he time to do or say more than to call upon the name
of our Lady, (and that but once) as he fell. The Duke being slain, great hubub
was raised, many Swords drawn, and (as it happens frequently in such cases)
many people ran in great confusion about the streets, without any certain
knowledge of what had passed. However those who were about the Duke, had seen
him killed, and knew who they were that did it, pressed hard upon them to
revenge it.

Giovanandrea being willing to have disengagedhimself, got out of the church,
thrust himself among the women who were there in great numbers upon their
knees, but being entangled, and stopped by their coats, a Moor (who was one of
the Dukes footmen) got up to him, and killed him: Carlo was slain also by
those who were by; but Girolamo Oligato got out of the Church among the crowd;
for seeing his companions dead, and not knowing whither to betake himself, he
went to his own house, but was refused by his Father and his Brothers: his
Mother having more commiseration recommended him to a Priest who had been an
ancient friend of that family which Priest changed habits with him, and
conveyed him to his house; where he remained two days in hopes some tumult or
other would fall out, and he might have opportunity to save himself. But
finding he was mistaken in that, and fearing to be found out where he was, he
disguised himself, and endeavored to get off, but was discovered, secured, and
delivered up to the Magistrate, to whom he confessed the whole process of the
Conspiracy. This Girolamo was about twenty three years old, no less courageous
and resolute at his death, than at the perpetration of the fact. Being stripped
and the Executioner with his knife in hand ready to give the stroke, he spoke
these words in Latin Mors acerba, fama perpetua, stabit vetus memoria fac^s.
This Plot was carried on with strange secrecy, and executed with prodigious
courage by these unhappy young gentlemen: but being neither followed nor
defended by those whom they expected, they miscarried, and were slain. Let
Princes by this example live so as to make themselves honored and beloved, that
no body may hope to kill then and escape; and let other People have care of
relying upon the multitude too far, how discontented soever; for in their
distress they will be sure to forsake them. This accident put all Italy into an
amaze, but much more what happened in Florence not long after; for that brake
the Peace of all Italy which had continued for 12 years, as shall be shown in
the next Book, whose end will be no less sad and deplorable, than the beginning
is bloody and terrible.

THE HISTORY OF FLORENCE.
Book VIII.
THe beginning of this eight Book falling betwixt two Conspiracies, the one
Executed at Milan, and already described; the other at Florence, and remaining
to be related; it would have been convenient (according to my custom) to have
said something of the quality and importance of Conspiracies, and I should
willingly have undertaken it, had it not been done in another place, and the
subject too copious to be passed over with brevity. Waving therefore a matter
which would require so much consideration, and is else where amply discoursed;
I shall tell, how the Family of the Medici (having subbued the adversaries
which openly opposed them) to make themselves absolute in the City, and reduce
the rest to a civil submission, were necessiated to disable those who were
privately their Enemies. For whilst the Medici were but equal in authority, and
as it were but in competition with other great Families; the Citizens which
emulated their greatness, might oppose them publicly without danger, because
the Magistrates being free and independent, neither party was afraid, till one
of them was suppressed. But after the Victory in 66 the Government devolving
wholly upon the Medici, they exercised it with so much rigor that those who
were discontented were forced to comport themselves patiently under it, or by
private and clandestine machinations to endeavor to remove it; which seldom
and with great difficulty succeeding, they most commonly ruined the
Conspirators, and augmented their Grandeur, against whom they were contrived.
So that a Prince, according to that method to be deposed, if he be not killed
dead, (as the Duke of Milan) which happens but rarely, he breaks forth into
greater authority; and how good so ever before, becomes bad any tyrannical. For
the practices of those Men, give him occasion to fear; fear, to secure himself;
security, to be insolent; and from thence springs such aversions and hatred as
is commonly his ruin; so that in conclusion treason does usually destroy the
contrivers, and ruin them in time against whom they conspired.

Italy (as we said before) was divided into two factions the Pope and the King
of Naples made one; the Venetians, the Duke of Milan, and the Florentines made
the other; and though betwixt them War was not solemnly declared, yet daily
provocations were given on both sides, and the Pope very busy in his designs
against Florence. Philippo di Medici the Archbishop of Pisa being dead, in
crossnes to that Family, his holiness invested Francesco Salviati in that
Bishopric as knowing him to be their Enemy; and the Senate of Florence
refusing him possession, new quarrels arose which created much trouble.
Hereupon the family of the Pazzi was encouraged at Rome, and the Family of the
Medici, affronted in every thing. The Family of the Pazzi, for quality and
estate, was the most illustrious in Florence. The chief of them was Messer
Giacopo, who for his wealth and Nobility was mad a knight by the People: this
Giacopo had only one natural Daughter living, but several Nephews by Piero, and
Ant^nio his Brothers: the chief of them, were Guilielmo, Francesco, Rinato,
Giovanni, and (after them) Andrea, Galeotto, and Nicolo. Cosimo di Medici
observing the Grandeur of that Family, had married Bianca his Niece, to the
eldest, Guilielmo, in hopes by that alliance to remove the jealousy and
animosity which was then betwixt the families. But (so uncertain and fallacious
are all humane designs) it proved quite contrary. For those who were of
Lorenzo's cabal, persuaded him it was dangerous, and a diminution to his
authority, to advance such Citizens as were wealthy and potent; whereupon
Giacopo and his Nephews were not preferred to those dignities which (in the
opinion of other People) they deserved. This gave occasion of disgust to the
Pazzi, and apprehension to the Medici; Animosity betwixt the Pazzi and the
Medici.
and the increase of the one, gave matter for the augmentation of the other. So
that in all things where other Citizens were entertained, the Pazzi were
rejected by the Magistrates. The Counsel of eight (upon a trivial occasion,
without respect and difference usually shown to Persons of his quality)
recalled Francesco de Pazzi from Rome, and required his residence in Florence.
Hereupon the Pazzi complained highly of the Government, and spoke bitterly of
them wherever they came, which produced more suspicion in the Government, and
more injury to themselves. Giovanni de Pazzi was married to the Daughter of
Giovanni Boromei a very rich man, who being dead without other Children, his
Estate descended to his Daughter. Notwithstanding, Carlo his Nephew got
possession of part, and refused to surrender. The controversy coming to a
hearing, it was decreed that Carlo should keep his possession, and the Daughter
was defeated: which injustice, the Pazzi imputed wholly to the malevolence of
the Medici; of which Giuliano complained many times to his Brother Lorenzo,
admonishing him to have a care lest Grasping at too much, he robbed himself of
all. But Lorenzo being young, and elated with his power, would have a hand in
every thing, and all must be acknowledged from him. The Pazzi being too noble
and opulent, to swallow so many affronts, began to cast about how they might
revenge themselves. The first who brake the ice, was Francesco, who being more
sensible, and courageous than the rest, determined to recover what was his
right, or to lose what he had.

Retaining an implacable hatred to the Government at Florence, he lived most
commonly at Rome, where he employed great sums of Money, as other Florentine
Merchants did usually do. Having an intimate acquaintance with Count Girolamo,
they complained to one another oftentimes of the inhumanity of the Medici, at
length they came to a solemn debate, and it was concluded that for the one's
recovery of his Estate and the others living freely in that City, it was
necessary the present Government in Florence should be subverted, which could
not be done, but by killing Giuliano, and Lorenzo. They were confident (having
first convinced them of the easiness of the fact) the Pope and the King of
Naples, Conspiracy against Lorenzo and Guilian di Medici.
would give their consents. Having entertained these thoughts betwixt
themselves, they thought fit to communicate with the new Archbishop of Pisa;
who being naturally ambitious, and lately disobliged, most readily embraced it:
consulting themselves what measures were to be taken, it was resolved that
Giacopo de Pazzi should be drawn in, without whose concurrence, the design was
like to be more difficult. To this purpose it was concluded that Francesco de
Pazzi should repair immediately to Florence; and the Count and Archbishop
continue at Rome to be near the Pope when things should be fit to be imparted
Francesco finding Giacopo more formal and untractable then he desired and
signifying it to Rome, it was resolved to apply greater authority to dispose
him, whereupon the Archbishop and the Count communicated the whole affair with
Giovan Baptist a one of his Holiness his Generals.

This Giovanni was a man of great reputation in war; and particularly obliged
both by the Count, and the Pope. Nevertheless he objected the great danger and
difficulties of the enterprise, which the Archbishop endeavored to refel by
urging the assistance they were to expect both from the Pope, and the King of
Naples. The hatred the Citizens of Florence bare to the Medici: the number of
relations and friends which would follow the Salviati, and the Pazzi; the
easiness to kill them, by reason of their frequent walking alone about the City
without either guards or suspicion: and (after they were dead) the small or no
opposition to be expected in the change of the Government: which allegations
Giovanni Battista could not absolutely believe, because he had been assured the
contrary by several considerable Citizens. Whilst these things were in this
suspense, it happened that Carlo Lord of Faenza fell sick, and was given over
for dead. Hereupon the Count and Archbishop conceived they had a fair
opportunity to dispatch Battista to Florence, and thence into Romagna, under
pretense of recovering certain Towns which Carlo of Farenza had taken from
them. The Count therefore commissioned Battista to wait upon Lorenzo, and in
his Name to desire his advice how he was to behave himself in Romagna: after
which he was to visit Francesco di Pazzi, and Giacopo di Pazzi, and seeing if
he could engage them in the design: and that he might carry the Popes authority
along with him, they appointed him before he departed to receive his Holiness
his Commands, who promised what could be imagined for the promotion of the
enterprise: Battista departing speedily from Rome, arrived at Florence;
consulted Lorenzo according to his instructions, was very civilly received, and
so wisely and amicably answered in all his demands, that Battista was
surprised, and began to look upon him as courteous, discreet, a friend to the
Count, and one that had been maliciously misrepresented. However, he was to
pursue his orders, and visit Francesco; he being at Lucca; he went directly to
Giacopo, and upon the first motion found him very averse. But before he went
away the Popes recommendation sweetened him so that he told Battista he might
proceed in his journey to Romagna, and by that time he came back, Francesco
would be in Florence, and they would talk father of the business: Battista went
to Romagna and returned; pursued his pretended transactions with Lorenzo; when
he had done with him, went to the Pazzi, and ordered things so that Giacopo was
drawn in upon ferious consultation of the way. Giacopo was of opinion their
design was impossible whilst both the Brothers were together in Florence; That
they had better attend till Lorenzo went to Rome, which by report would be
certain, and in a very short time. Francesco was willing enough to have had
Lorenzo at Rome, but if the worst came to the worst, and he did not go thither,
they might be sure to kill them both together at some wedding, some show, or
some act of devotion: as to their foreign assistance, it was thought convenient
that the Pope should send his forces against Castello de Montone, having just
occasion of invading the Count Carlo, for the troubles and tumults he had
raised in the Country of Perugia and Sienna; Notwithstanding they came to no
positive resolution at that time; only they agreed that Francesco di Pazzi, and
Giovan Battista should return to Rome, and there determine of all things with
his Holiness, and the Count. The whole matter being redebated solemnly at Rome,
they came to this conclusion, (the enterprise against Montone being confirmed)
that Giovan Francesco da Tolentino (an officer of the Popes) should go into
Romagna and Lorenzo da Castello into his Country; each of them get together
what forces they were able, and keep them ready to be disposed of, as the
Archbishop Salviati, and Francesco dei Pazzi should order; who being come to
Florence with Giovan Battista, they prepared all that was necessary; and King
Ferrando's Ambassador assured them of his Masters utmost assistance. The
Archbishop, and Francesco being arrived at Florence, they persuaded into their
party Giacopo the Son of Poggio, a learned youth, but ambitious, and studious
of new things. That drew in likewise two Giacopo Salviati's, one of them a
Brother, the other a Kinsman of the Archbishop's. They hired Bernardo Bandini,
and Napoleone, two valiant young French Gentlemen, who had been much obliged to
the Family of the Pazzi. Of Foreigners, besides them two, they entertained
Antonio da Volterra, and one Stephano a Priest, who taught the Latin tongue to
Giacopo's Daughter, Rinato dei Pazzi dissuades from the enterprise, but in vain.
and lived in his house.

Rinato dei Pazzi (a wise and student Man, and one who very well understood the
consequences of such Plots) consented not to it, but rather detested it, and by
all plausible ways endeavored to dissuade it. The Pope had maintained at Pisa
to study the Canon Law, Rafaelo di Riario nephew to the Count Girolamo, from
which place he was recalled by his Holiness, and promoted to a Cardinalship. It
was judged commodious by the Conspiracy, that this Cardinal should come to
Florence for the better concealment of their design, seeing that in his
equipage all such of their confederats as were necessary, might be conveyed
into the Town, which would much facilitate the work. Accordingly the Cardinal
arrived, and was lodged by Giacopo dei Pazzi at a Country house of his at
Mentughi, not far from Florence. They desired by his means that Lorenzo, and
Guiliano might be brought together, and it was resolved that the first
opportunity they should be killed. It was contrived then to make an
entertainment for the Cardinal at Ftesole, but by accident, or on purpose, it
fell out that Guiliano was not there; so that that design being defeated, their
next was to invite the Cardinal to Florence, and thither they made no question
but both the Brothers would come: the 26 of April 1478 was appointed to be the
day. The night before, they met all together, and prepared and disposed all
things for execution the next morning; but the day being come, news was brought
to Francesco, that Guiliano was not there: upon that, the chief of them met
together again, and concluded the business was no longer to be delayed, for
being communicated to so many, it was not possible to conceal it: so that they
determined without more ado, to assassinate him in the Church of Santa
Riparata, when (the Cardinal being present) both the Brothers they presumed
would be of course. They appointed Giovanni Battista to attack Lorenzo, and
Francesco dei Pazzi and Bernardo Bandini, to do as much to Guiliano. But Giovan
Battista excused himself; the former familiarity he had had with Lorenzo, or
some other accident having mollified his heart: he pretended his courage would
not serve him to commit such an act in the Church, as would add sacrilege to
his treason, and his denial was the first step to the destruction of them all;
for being straightened in time, they were forced to depute Antonio da Volterra,
and Stephano the Priest, to that office, two persons very unapt for such an
action both in respect of their nature, and education; and certainly if in any
thing a resolute, and great mind (accustomed by long experience, to cruelty and
Blood) be necessary, it is in this case where Princes are to be killed. Having
concluded of their time, and other circumstances, there was nothing behind but
the signal when they were to begin; which was when the Priest which celebrated
the principal Mass, should receive the Sacrament himself: at which time the
Archbishop of Salviati with his own followers, Giacopo di Poggio with his
should possess themselves of the Palace of the Senate, that, either by
persuasion or force the Senate might be brought over to their side, as soon as
the Brothers were slain. Upon this resolution they went to the Church where the
Cardinal and Lorenzo were already in their seats. The Church was thronged with
people, and Divine Service begun, when it was observed that Guiliano was not
there, whereupon Francesco dei Pazzi and Bernardo who were designed to murder
him; went to him to his house, and with entreaties and other Artifice, got him
along with them to the Church. It is very remarkable, and not often to be
matched, that with so horrid, and detestable a design at their hearts, they
could carry themselves with that tranquillity and composedness, for all the way
as they pased they entertained him with youthful and pleasant discourse; and
such was the security of Francesco that under pretense of caressing and
embracing, he felt about his Body to see whether he was armed. Guiliano and
Lorenzo both, knew well enough that the Pazzi bore them no good will, and that
with all their hearts they would depose them if they could; but they believed
whenever they attempted against them it would be legally, and without any
violence upon their persons, and therefore suspecting nothing of danger in that
kind, they dissembled as much kindness to the Pazzi, as the Pazzi did to them.
The assassines being ready, (those who were to kill Lorenzo, by the help of the
crowd being got up to him without any suspicion, on that side, and Guiliano's
on the other) the sign was given, and Bernardo Bandini, with a short dagger
provided on purpose, stabbed Guiliano into the breast, who passing a step or
two forward, fell down upon the ground, Francesco dei Pazzi threw himself upon
him stabbed him all over, and struck with such fury, that he hit his own leg,
and made a desperate wound: Antonio and Stephano in the mean time attempted
upon Lorenzo, and making several strokes at him, they wounded him slightly in
the throat and no where else; for either by their own faint heartedness, or his
courage in defending himself, or the interposition of those who were by, all of
them were put off, and their whole enterprise miscarried: whereupon they fled
in great terror, and hid themselves as well as they could; but being found they
were shamefully put to death, and their bodies dragged about the City. Lorenzo
on the other side, joining with those friends he had about him, betook himself
to the vestry, and stood upon his guard. Bernardo Bandini seeing Guiliano dead,
having an old quarrel to Francesco Nori, a great friend to the Medici, he
killed him into the bargain; and not satisfied with two murders, he crowded up
to Lorenzo with his courage and alacrity to supply what the slackness and
cowardice of his accomplices had left unfinished: But finding him barricado'd
in the vestry, he could not come at him. In the midst of this great tumult,
(which was so dreadful it was thought the Church would have been pulled down
upon their heads) the Cardinal got up close to the Altar, where by the labor
of the Priests he was preserved, till the tumult was appeased, and the Senate
sent to conduct him to his own Palace, where he remained in great fear till the
time he was dismissed. There were at that time in Florence, certain Perugians
who had been banished from their Houses in the time of their factions; these
Perugians the Pazzi had drawn to their party, by promises of restitution. So
that the Archbishop of Salviati, marching with Gi^copo di Poggio and their
followers to secure themselves of the palace, took them along with him; and
being come to the Palace, he left some of his company below, with orders upon
the first noise above stairs that they should seize upon the Gate, whilst he
and the rest of the Perugians went up into the Castle. Finding the Senate was
risen (by reason it was late) after a short time he was met by Cesare Petrucci
the Gonfaloniere di Giustitia, so that entering further with him, and some few
of his crew, he left the rest without, who walking into the Chancery, by
accident shut themselves in, for the lock was so contrived, that without the
key, it was not easily to be opened either within or without. The Archbishop
being entered with the Gonfaloniere, pretending to impart some great matter to
him from the Pope, he accosted him in so confused and distracted a way, the
Gonfaloniere from the disorder both of his looks and expressions, began to
suspect, sprung from him out of the Chamber with a great cry, and finding
Giacopo di Poggio, he caught him by the hair of the head, and delivered him to
one of the Sergeants. the noise running immediately to the Senators with such
arms as they had about them, they set upon the Conspirators, and all them who
went up with the Archbishop (part being shut up, and part unable to defend
themselves) were either killed, or thrown alive out of the windows. Of this
number, the Archbishop, the two other Salviati, and Giacopo di Poggio were
hanged. Those who were left below, had forced the Guards, and Possessed
themselves of the Gate; insomuch that the Citizens which upon the first alarm
had run into the Castle, were not able to assist the Senate either with their
counsel or Arms. Francesco de Pazzi in the mean time, and Bernardo Bandini
seeing Lorenzo escaped, and one of themselves (upon whom the hopes of that
enterprise did principally depend) most grievously wounded, they were much
dismayed; Bernardo, concluding all lost, thinking to provide for his safety with
the same courage, as he had injured the Medici, he made his escape. Francesco
being returned to his house, tried if he could get on Horseback (for orders
were, as soon as the fact was committed to gallop about the Town, and excite
the People to liberty, and arms) but finding he could not ride by reason of the
deapness of his wound, and the great quantity of blood which he had lost, he
desired Giacopo to do that office for him, and then stripping he threw himself
upon the bed. Giacopo, though an ancient Man, and not versed in such kind of
tumults, to try the last experiment of his fortune, he got on Horseback, and
with about an hundred Horse well armed, and formerly prepared, he marched
toward the Palace, caying out Liberty, liberty, to the People as he went
along; but some of them being deafned by their obligations to the Medici. and
the rest not desirous of any change in the Government, none of them came in.
The Senators who were on the top of the Palace and had secured themselves as
well as they could, threw down stones upon their heads, and frighted them with
threats as much as possible. Giacopo was in great confusion, and knew not what
to do. when his cousin Giovanni Saristori coming to him, and reproaching him by
what was done already, The Conspiracy miscarries.
advised him to go home to his house, and be quiet; assuring him there were
other Citizens who would be as careful of the People, and their liberties as
he. Being therefore utterly destitute of all hopes, Lorenzo alive, Francesco
wounded, and no body appearing for him, he resolved to save himself if he
could, and marched out of Florence with his Party at his heels, and went
toward Romagna. In the mean time the whole City was in Arms, and Lorenzo,
surrounded by a strong Party of armed men, was reconveyed to his Palace. The
Senats Palace was recovered, and all those who had possessed it were either
taken or killed. The name of the Medici was with great acclamation cried about
the City, and the members of those who were slain were either dragged or
carried upon the point of their swords about the streets; every body with great
anger and cruelty persecuting the Pazzi. Their houses were all broken up by the
People; Francesco, naked as they found him in his bed, was hurried out of his
house to the Palace, and hanged up by the Bishop and his Brethren, Yet with
all their contumely by the way, and all their affronts when he came there, they
could not provoke him to give them one word; only he looked grim, and fixed his
eyes upon every one that abused him, and without any other complaint, he
silently expired, Guglielmo de Pazzi Brother-in-Law to Lorenzo, was preserved
in his house, both out of respect to his innocence, and the intercession of
Bianca his Wife. There was not a Citizen in all the City, but went either armed
or disarmed to Lorenzo in this exigence, and proffered him both themselves and
their fortunes; so great was the kindness and interest which that family by
their prudence and liberality had gained in the People. Whilst this business
happend, Rinato di Pazzi was retired to his Country house, intending to
disguise himself, and and escape if he could, but he was discovered,
apprehended by the way, and brought back again to Florence Giacopo was taken
likewise passing the Alps, for the Alpigines hearing what happened in Florence,
seeing him pass that way, they persued, took him, and returned him to Florence;
nor could he prevail with them (though several time he mades it his earnest
request) to kill him by the way. Four days after this accident, Giacopo and
Rinato were condemned, and put to Death, b^t among all who were executed (and
they were so many that the streets, and high ways were full of their limbs)
none was so much lamented as Rinato; for he was always esteemed an honest good
Man, not guilty of that pride and arrogance which was observed in the rest of
his family. And that this story might not pass without an extraordinary
instance of the fury of the People, Giacopo who was buried at first in the
Sepulcher of his Fathers, afterward was torn from thence as an excommunicated
Person, dragged out of the walls of the City, and thrown into a hole; and being
taken up again, his body was drawn (in the same halter with which he was
hanged) naked about the streets, and having no place allowed it to be quiet at
land, was at last thrown into the Arnus. A great example of the inconstancy of
fortune, to see a person of his wealth and authority, pulled so ignominiously
in pieces, and ruined with so many circumstances of contempt. They spoke indeed
of his vices, and of a strange propensity in him to swearing and play, above
the degree of the most profligate person; but those infirmities were abundantly
recompensed in his charity and benificence; for he was a great reliever of the
poor, and endowed several places of devotion. The Sunday before this plot was
to be executed, that no Man might be a sufferer by any ill fortune of his, he
paid all his debts; and all the effects in his Ware houses or custody which
belongs to other Persons, he consigned to their several owners with an
unimaginable care, after a long examination, Giovan Battista Montesecco was at
last condemned, and his head struck off. Guglielmo de Pazzi, was banished, and
his kinsmen which were left alive, imprisoned in a dungeon in the Castle of
Volterra. When the tumult was over, and the Conspirators executed. Guiliano's
funeral was celebrated with the universal condolement of the City, he having
been a person of as much goodness and humanity as could be desired in one of
his quality and extraction. He had only one Son, born some months after his
death, who was christened Giulio, who proved so remarkable for his virtue and
fortune, that the whole World rings of his reputation at this day; and if God
gives me life, I shall speak largely of, when I come to the description of his
times.

The forces which were got together under Lorenzo de Castello in the vail of di
Tevero, under Giovan Francesco Tolentino in Romagna, in behalf of the Pazzi,
were in their march toward Florence: but hearing of the miscarriage of their
affairs, they returned from whence they came, Nevertheless the Pope and the
King of Naples (though their Conspiracy had failed, The Pope and King of Naples
make War upon the Florentines.
and not produced those mutations which they hoped for in Florence) resolved to
attempt that by open War, which could not otherwise be effected, and both the
one and the other caused their forces to advance toward that City, with all
possible diligence, declaring as they went, that all the design of their march,
and all their desire of the Citizens, was not removing but the removal of
Lorenzo, who was the only Enemy he had in the Town. The King's Army had already
passed the Tronto, and the Popes was in the Country of Perugia; and lest his
temporal power should be too little, he let loose his spiritual maledictions,
and excommunications against him. Whereupon the Florentines seeing themselves
invaded with such formidable numbers, addressed themselves to their defense,
with all possible care. Lorenzo de Medici (because the War was pretended only
against him) pressed very earnestly that all the chief Citizens might be invited
to the Palace before the Senate; and above 300 of them appearing, he spoke to
them in this manner.

Most noble Lords, and you must magnificent Citizens.
I do not well know whether I am to congratulate, or condole with you this day
for the things which are passed; Lorenzo 's speech to the Florentines.
and truly when I consider with what malice and collusion, I was assaulted, and
my Brother slain, I cannot but condole, and my whole heart and Soul is
overwhelmed with the affliction; when after that I revolve with what
promptitude, with what zeal, with what love, with what unanimity, and universal
consent of the whole City, his death was revenged, and mine prevented; I cannot
but rejoice, nay even triumph and exsult, For as experience has now taught me
that I had more Enemies in this City, than I suspected; it has convinced me on
the other side, I had more true friends than I could have hoped for: so that I
am to congratulate your goodness, and to condole the injury and iniquity of
other People, which is the more deplorable, because rare, and underserved.
Think, I beseech you, most noble Citizens, to what point of infelicity fortune
has brought our family, when even among our friends, our relations, and in the
very Church we are in danger. Those who are in distress, or apprehension of
death, are wont to fly to their friends, and relations for shelter; we found
ours not only disposed, but armed, and prepared, and impatient to destroy us.
Those who are under any public or private persecution, have usually their
refuge and Sanctuary in the Church: where others are protected, we are
assaulted: where Parricides and Murderers are secured, the Medici are murdered
themselves. But God (who has not hitherto deserted our family) has preserved
us, and undertaken our defense. What injury have we done any body, that could
deserve such vehement revenge? Sure we our selves never offended those persons
who have been so furious against us; if we had, we should not have left them in
that capacity to revenge themselves; if it be public censure, or injury which
provoked them (and of that too I know nothing) it is you, not we are offended;
This Palace, this Senate, and the Majesty of this Government, is aspersed with
undeserved decrees against the Citizens, in partiality to us, which to my own
knowledge is far from being true. We would not have injured them if we had been
able, and you would not have suffered us, had we been willing: who ever traces
the truth to the bottom, will find our Family was not exalted by this
Government for nothing, if I may speak it modestly, it was their humanity,
their bounty, their munificence which constrained you to it: if then we have
been beneficial to strangers, how came our relations to be disgusted? If their
appetite of dominion prompted them to what they have done, (and the seeing of
this Palace. and filling the Piazza with armed Men, is an evident demonstration
it was nothing else) the design is sufficient conviction, and shows their
brutality and ambition. If it were hatred and detestation of our authority, it
was you that gave it us, and it is you were injured. But certainly, if any
power or authority deserves to be regreted, it is that which is usurped, not
that which is acquired by a continued stream of kindness and liberality. I
appeal to you, most Illustrious Senators, whether any of my predecessors
arrived at their Grandeur any way but by the unanimous consent, and promotion
of this Court, My Grandfather Cosimo returned not from his banishment by
violence, and force of Arms, but by your invitation. My ancient and infirm
Father, was too weak to have supported his authority against so many Enemies;
it was your bounty, it was your authority which defended it. When my Father was
dead, and I (though but a Child) was left to succeed him, Alas! how could I
have maintained the honor and dignity of the Family without your favor and
instruction. Our house never was, nor ever will be able to govern this State,
without your cooperation, and assistance. I cannot imagine therefore what
quarrel they should have had against us, or what just reason for their envy;
they should rather have turned their indignation upon their own ancestors, who
with their insolence and avarice defeated them of that honor, which ours have
gained by their generosity and goodness, But, let us gratify them so far as to
grant we had injured them, and that their combinations against us, were but
reasonable and just; Why must they conspire against this Palace? Why must they
confederate with the Pope, and King of Naples, against the innocence and
liberty of this Commonwealth? Why must all Italy be involved in a War? For this
they can have no excuse: if any Man have offended them, they might have
offended him again, and not blended and confounded private injury with public
revenge. This is it which revives our calamities, though the Authors are
extinct. That is it which has brought the Pope and King of Naples upon us with
their Armies, though their declaration be only against me and my family. I wish
to God it were true, and that their design was no farther: the remedy would be
easy, and your deliverance at hand; I should not be so ill a Citizen as to
postpone the public, to my private security; no I would willingly quench your
flames, though with my own blood and destruction: but because the injuries of
great persons are always clothed with some plausible pretense, they have chosen
this, to exasperate you against me: if you think I deserve it, I am now in your
hands, to be continued or rejected as you please: you are my Fathers, you are
my Patrons, what ever you command, I will endeavor to do; and not refuse with
my own blood to finish this War, which is begun with my Brothers.

The Citizens could not contain from tears, whilst Lorenzo was speaking, and
with the same pity as they had heard him, he was answered by one deputed by the
rest. That the whole City did acknowledge the merits both of his ancestors and
himself. That he should be of good cheer, for with the same readiness and
devotion as they had revenged his Brothers death, and prevented his, they would
preserve his person and reputation, and expose their whole Country rather than
desert him; That their actions might be commensurate, they appointed him a
guard, to secure him against domestic designs, and paid them out of the
public treasure: after which they addressed themselves to the War, and raised
what Men and money they were able. They sent for aid to the Duke of Milan, and
the Venetians according to the league; and the Pope more like a Wolf than a
Shepherd, being ready to devour them, they tried all ways to justify
themselves that they could think of, possessed all Italy with his treachery
against their state, remonstrated his impieties to all the World; and that he
exercised his Papacy with as much injustice, as he gained it: for he had sent
those (whom he had advanced to the highest degree of Prelacy) in the company of
Traitors and Murderers to commit treason in the Church, in the time of divine
service, and the Celebration of the Sacrament; and after that (having been
unable to kill all the Citizens, alter the Government, and sack the City) he
interdicted it with his Pontifical maledictions, and threatened to destroy it.
But if God were just, and the violences of Men offensive to him; he must needs
be displeased at the proceeding of his Vicar, and permit that Men (having no
other refuge) might resort unto him. For which reason the Florentines not only
refuse his interdiction, but forced their Priests to celebrate divine service
as before. They called a Council in Florence, of all the Tuscan Prelates within
their jurisdiction, and appealed to them concerning their differences with the
Pope; against which in justification of his cause, it was alleged, that it
belonged properly to the Pope to supplant Tyrants, to suppress ill Men, and to
advance good; all which he was to remedy, as opportunity was offered. But that
secular Princes had not right to imprison Cardinals; to execute Bishops; to
kill, or dismember, or drag about the streets the bodies of the Priests; and to
use the innocent and the nocent without any difference or distinction.
Nevertheless the Florentines not at all refusing his quarrels and complaints,
dismissed the Cardinal which was in their power, and sent him back to the Pope;
yet the Pope without any regard to that civility, The Pope and King invade the
t^rritories of the Florentines.
caused them to be invaded with all his forces, and the Kings; both their
Armies (under the Command of Alfonso Duke of Calabria Ferrando's eldest Son,
and Federigo Conted' Urbino) entered Chianti, and by means of the Siennesi, who
were of the Enemies party, ^took Radda; several other Castles; and plundered
the whole Country. Next they encamped before Castellina: the Florentines seeing
themselves thus fiercely attacked, were in great fear, as having but few men of
their own, and the assistance of their friends coming in very slowly; for
though the Duke indeed, had sent them supplies, yet the Venetians refused it,
as not thinking themselves obliged to relieve them in their particular
quarrels; for as, they pretended, private animosities were not in reason to be
defended, at a public expense. So that the Florentines, to dispose the
Venetian to better things, sent Tomaso Soderini Ambassador to that State,
whilst in the mean time, they raised what Men they could, and made Hercules
Marquess of Ferrara their General. Whilst in this manner they were employed in
their preparations, the Enemy had brought Castellina to such distress that,
despairing of relief, the Garrison surrendered, after forty days siege. From
hence, the Enemy advanced toward Arezzo, and sat down before Monte S. Senino.
The Florentine Army was by this time drawn out, and being marched toward the
Enemy, had posted it self within three miles of them, and incommoded them so
that Federigo sent* to Urbino to desire a truce for some few days; which was
granted, but with so much disadvantage to the Florentines, that those who
requested it were amazed when they had obtained it; for without it they must
have drawn off with disgrace. But having those days allowed to recollect
themselves, when the time was expired they went on with their siege, and took
the Town under the very nose of our Army. By this time Winter being come, to
provide themselves good quarters, the Enemy drew his Army into the Country of
Sienna, the Florentines where they thought most convenient; and the Marquess of
Farrara (having done little good to himself or other People) returned from
whence he came. About this time Genoa was in rebellion against the State of
Milan, and upon this occasion, Galeazzo being dead, Genoa rebels against the
State of Milan.
and his Son Giovan Galeazzo a minor, and unfit for the Government, difference
arose betwixt Sforza, Lodovico, Ottaniano, Ascanio, his Unckles, and Medona
Bona his Mother; each of them pretending to the tuition of the Child. In which
competition Madona Bona the Duchess Dowager prevailed, by the Counsels of
Tomaso Soderini (the Florentine Ambassador in that Court, at that time) and
Cecco Simonetto who had been secretary to the late Galeazzo; whereupon Sforzi
flying from Milan, Ottaniano was drawn, as he was passing the Adda, and the
rest dispersed into several places, Roberto de san Severino ran the same
fortune, and fled, having forsaken the Duchess in those disputes, and joined
himself with the Unckles. The troubles falling out, not long after in Tuscany,
those princes hoping from new accidents, or new success, every one of them
attempted what he thought likely to restore him to his Country. King Ferrando
observing the only refuge the Florentines had in their necessities, was to the
State of Milan. determined to give the Duchess so much employment of her own,
that she should not be at leisure to send them any relief; and by means of
Prospero Adorno, the Signore Roberto, and the Sforzi which were banished, he
wrought so that Genoa rebelled; nevertheless the little Castle remained firm to
the young Duke, and the Duchess sent forces to them to recover the Town, but
they were overthrown; whereupon considering with her self the danger which
might accrue both to her Son, and her self, if the War should be continued, all
Tuscany being imbroiled. and the Florentines in distress, she resolved, seeing
she could not retain Genoa as a Subject, that she would have it as a Friend;
and agreed with Battistino Fregosi (a great Enemy to Prospero Adorno) to
deliver him the Castle, and make him Prince of Genoa, upon condition he would
drive out Prospero, and give the Sforzi no assistance nor protection. After all
was concluded betwixt them, the Castle was surrendered, and by the help of
that, and his party, Battistino reducing Genoa, and according to their custom,
made himself Dogue; the Sforzi and Signore Roberto being forced out of the
Town, they passed with their followers into Lunigiana. The Pope and the King
seeing the troubles in Lombardy composed, took occasion to infest Tuscany on
that side toward Pisa, with those Persons which were driven out of Genoa;
supposing by dividing, and diverting their forces, to weaken the Florentines;
whereupon the Summer approaching, they prevailed with the Signore Roberto to
march with his Squadron from Lunigiana, into the Country of Pisa; Roberto put
the whole Country into confusion; took several Castles from the Pisans, and
plundered them, and made his excursions to the very walls of Pisa it self.
About this time Ambassadors arrived at Florence, from the Emperor, the King of
France, and the King of Hungary, who from their several Princes being sent to
the Pope, persuaded the Florentines to send Ambassadors also, and promised
their utmost endeavor with him, to conclude all their differences with an
honorable peace. The Florentines consented, as well to excuse themselves to the
World, as that they were really desirous of it. Having sent therefore their
Ambassadors, they returned as they went, without any accommodation: and the
Florentines finding themselves abused or abandoned by the Italians, resolved to
try if they could gain themselves any reputation by an alliance with France,
The gratitude of the Fl^rentines.
to which purpose they sent as their Ambassador Donato Acciaivoli, a person
well skilled both in the Greek and Latin tongues, whose Ancestors had always
born great office in that State; but being arrived at Milan in his journey he
died; and Florence, in honor to his memory, and remuneration to his Children,
buried him magnificently at the public charge; gave his Sons considerable
exemptions; and his Daughters such portions as would marry them like
themselves; and sent Giud' Antonio Vespucci (a Man well versed in the imperial
and Pontifical Laws) to the King of France in his place. The inroad Signore
Roberto had made into the Country of Pisa, (as all sudden and unexpected things
do) gave the Florentines no little distraction. For the War lying heavy upon
them in the Country of Siena, they could not see how they should be able to
defend themselves on the other side; however they sent officers and all other
provisions to reinforce the City of Pisa; and that they might keep the Lucchesi
from assisting the Enemy, with money or any thing else, they sent Gino Capponi
as their Ambassador to them; but he was received so ill, out of an ancient
Enmity to the People of Florence, (upon former injuries received, and a
constant apprehension to them, that he was many times in danger of being killed
by the multitude: So that his journey produced new quarrels, rather than new
quiet; and thereupon the Florentines called back the Marquess of Ferrara,
entertained the Marquess of Mantoua into their pay; and with great importunity,
desired of the Venetians Count Carlo the Son of Braccio, and Deifebo the Son of
Count Giacopo, who (after several scruples and demurs) were sent to them; for
having made peace with the Turk, and no pretense left to excuse themselves,
they were ashamed to braek faith with the League. Carlo therefore, and Deifebo
being come, with a considerable number of Horse, and joined to what forces they
could conveniently draw out of the Marquess of Ferrara's Army. (which attended
the Duke of Calabria) they marched toward Pisa, in quest of Signore Roberto,
who was posted with his ARmy near the river Serchio; and thought at first he
made a show of expecting our Army, yet upon second thoughts he removed. and
retired into the Country of Lunigiana, to the same quarters where he lay before
his expedition to Pisa. Upon his departure, Count Carlo repossess'd himself of
all the Enemy had taken in that Country; and the Florentines being clear on
that side; drew all their forces into one body betwixt Colle and Santo
Giminiano; but upon Carlo's conjunction there being several of the Sforzeschi,
and the Bracceschi in the Army, the old feud began to revive, and it was
believed, had they stayed longer together, they had fallen together by the
ears: to prevent these inconveniences, it was resolved to divide the Army, that
Count Carlo should march with his forces into the Country of Perugia, and the
rest fortify and entrench themselves at Poggibonzi. to obstruct the Enemy from
entering into the Country of Florence. By this division they supposed likewise
the Enemy would be forced to divide, for they thought that either Count Carlo
would take Perugia (where he had a great party as they believed) or that the
Pope would be constrained to send a good body of Men to defend it; and to drive
his Holiness into greater necessity, they ordered Nicolo Vitelli (who had left
Castello, where Lorenzo his Enemy was predominant) with what force he could
make to approach the Town, to drive out his adversary if he could, and keep it
against the Pope.

At first, fortune seemed to incline to the Florentines, Count Carlo advanced
strangely in the Country of Perugia; Nicolo Vitelli, though he could not get
into the Town of Castello, yet he was Master of the field, and plundered round
about it without any contradiction; and those forces which were encamped at
Poggibonzi made their excursions to the very walls of Sienna. But at last all
their hopes came to nothing, for first Count Carlo died in the very height of
their expectations, whose death had nevertheless much bettered the condition of
the Florentines, had they known how to have improved the victory which it
produced; for no sooner was the death of Count Carlo known, but the Popes Army
(being all together in Perugia) conceiving great hopes of overpowering the
Florentines, took the field, and encamped upon the Lake within three miles of
the Enemy: on the other side Giacopo Guicciardini, (at that time Commissary of
the Army) by the advice of Roberto da Rimino, (who since the death of Count
Carlo, was the chief, and best reputed officer among them) knowing what it was
that set the Enemy agog, they resolved to attend him; and coming to a Battle
not far from the Lake (in the very place where Hannibal gave the Romans that
memorable defeat) the Popes Army was routed. The Popes Army defeated.
The news of this victory was extremely welcome in Florence, both to the
Magistrates, and People; and it would have been great honor and advantage to
that enterprise, had not disorders in the Army at Poggibonzi spoiled all, and
the victory over the one Camp, been interrupted by a mutiny in the other; for
that Army having got much plunder in the Country of Sienna, when they came to
divide, there fell out great difference betwixt the Marquess of Ferrara, and
the Marquess of Manto^a, so that they came to blows, and did one another what
mischief they were able.

The Florentines finding no good was to be expected from them together,
consented that the Marquess of Ferrara with his forces might march home; by
which means the Army being weakened, without a head, and very disorderly, the
Duke of Calabria being with his Army not far from Sienna, took a resolution of
falling upon them; but the Florentines hearing of his advance, not trusting to
their Arms, their numbers (which was much greater than the Enemy) nor the
situation of their Camp (which were very strong) without expecting their
coming, or seeing so much as the face of their Enemy, as soon as they preceived
the dust, they fled, and left their Ammunition, and Carriages, and Artillery
behind them; and so cowardly and poor spirited that Army was become that the
turning of a horses head or tail, gave either victory or defeat. This Rout
filled the King's Soldiers with prize, and the Florentines with fear; for that
City was not only afflicted with War, but with so violent a pestilence, that
most of the inhabitants were forced to leave the Town, and betake themselves to
the Country. This overthrow was rendered more terrible by sickness, for those
Citizens who had Estates in the Val di Pisa, and the Val Delsa, being driven
thither, and secure; were forced (upon this rout) to hurry back again to
Florence as well as they could, and that not only with their goods and their
Children, but with all their families and dependants, for every hour they were
afraid the Enemy would have presented himself before the Town. They who had the
administration of the War, being sensible of these disorders, commanded their
Army (which was victorious in Perugia) that leaving their designs there, they
should march into the Val Delsa, and oppose themselves against the Enemy, who,
since their last victory, overrun that whole Country. And though that Army had
so straightened Perugia, it was every hour expected to surrender, yet the
Florentines chose rather to defend themselves, than to gain upon any body else;
and raising their siege they were conducted to S. Cassiano, a Castle about
eight miles from Florence, as the only place where they might lie secure, till
the other Army was rallied, and brought to them. The Enemy on the other side,
being at liberty in Perugia, upon the withdrawing of the Florentines, took
heart, and made their inroads daily into the countries of Arezzo and Cortona;
and the other Army, which under the command of the Duke of Calabria, had routed
them at Poggibonzi, took Poggibonzi, and Vico, pillaged Certaldo, made great
spoil, and got great prize in that Country, after they sat down before Colle
which (in those times) was looked upon as extraordinary strong, and being well
manned, and provided with all things, it was hoped it might entertain the Enemy,
till their Armies could be united.

The Florentines having joined all their forces at S* Cassiano, and the Enemy
proceeding very fiercely in their leaguer; they resolved to march toward them,
and post themselves as near them as they could, supposing they should thereby,
not only encourage the Garrison to defend themselves, but make the Enemy more
cautious in all his attacks: Hereupon they removed from S. Cassiano, and
encamped at S. Giminiano about five miles from Colle, from whence with their
Horse, and the lightest of their foot, they daily molested the Dukes Camp: but
this was not enough for the Garrison in Colle, for wanting all things that were
necessary, they surrendered the 13 of November, to the great displeasure of the
Florentines, but the great joy of the Enemy, especially the Siennesi, who
besides their common hatred to Florence, had a particular quarrel against this
Town.

Winter was now at the height; the season unfit for War; and the Pope and King
(to give them hopes of peace, or to enjoy their victory quietly themselves)
offered a truce for three Months to the Florentines, and allowed them ten days
for an answer; which proffer was accepted; but as a wound is more painful when
cold, than when it is first given, this small repose, gave the Florentines
greater sense of the miseries which they had endured; insomuch as they began to
talk freely, and upbraid one another by the miscarriages in the War, charging
one another with the greatness of the expense, and the inequality of their
taxes, and these exprobrations were not only in the streets, and among the
ordinary sort of People, but even in their conventions, and public counsels,
in which one of them, took the confidence to tell Lorenzo to his face, that the
City was weary, and would have no more War, and that therefore he should
bethink himself of peace; upon which Lorenzo, discerning the necessity, advised
with such of his friends as he judged most faithful and able, and it was
concluded by all (that seeing the Venetians were cold and uncertain; the Duke
young, and imbroiled in new troubles at home) their best way would be to seek
out for new alliance. and try what that would contribute to their success.
Their great scruple was, into whose arms they should cast themselves, whether
into the Popes, or the King's of Naples; and upon serious debate it was
resolved into the King's, as a person of more stability, and likely to yield
them better protection, in regard of the shortness of the Popes lives, and the
changes upon their successions. For the small fear the Church has of any
Prince, and the small regard it has of any body else in all its resolutions,
causes that no secular Prince can repose any entire confidence, or communicate
freely in his affairs, with any of the Popes; for the that associats with him
in war, and in dangers, may perhaps have a companion and a sharer in his
Victories; but in his distress he shall be sure to be alone, his holiness being
still brought off by his speritual influence and authority. It being therefore
determined more profitable to reconcile with the King, there could be no way
thought of so likely, as by Lorenzo himself, for by how much the more that King
had tasted of his liberality, by so much the more they thought it probable he
might succeed. Lorenzo embracing the motion, and having prepared for his
journey, committed the City and Government to Tomaso Soderini (at that time
Gonfaloniere di Gustitia) and left Florence in the beginning of December. Being
arrived at Pisa in his way, he writ to the Senate, and gave them an account of
his design, and the Senate in honor to him, and that he might treat with more
reputation, made him Ambassador for the People of Florence, and gave him
authority to conclude with him, according to his own judgment, and discretion.
About this time Signore Roberto da Santo Severino, joining with Lodovico and
Ascanio (for their brother Sforza was dead) they invaded the State of Milan, in
hopes to have re-invested themselves; having possessed themselves of Tortona,
and Milan, and the whole State being in Arms, the Duchess was advised (to
compose her civil dissentions) to restore the Sforzi, and receive them into the
Government again. Her great Councellor in this, was Antonio Tassino a
Ferrarese, who, though meanly extracted, being come to Milan, was preferred to
be Chamberlain both to the Duke and the Duchess; this Antonio, for the
comeliness of his person, or some other secret excellence, after the Dukes
death, grew into great favor with the Duchess, and in a manner governed the
whole State; which was very unpleasing to Cecco, Antonio Tassino a favorite of
the Duchess.
a Man of great prudence, and long experience in public affairs, insomuch that
he used all his interest both with the Duchess, and the rest of the Governors
to clip the wings of his authority, and remove him. Antonio having notice of
his design, to countermine him, and have some body near which might be able to
defend him, he advised the Duchess to restore the Sforzi, and the Duchess
following his persuasion, invited them back again without communicating with
Cecco: upon which he is reported to have told her that she had done a thing
which would cost him his life, and deprive her of the Government. And so
afterward it fell out, Lodovico Sforza Governor of Milan.
for Cecco was put to death by Lorenzo, and Tassino turned out of Milan, which
the Duchess took in such dudgeon, that she forsook the Town, and left the
Government of her Son to his uncle Lodovico, which act of here is in leaving
that whole Duchy to the Government of Lodovico, was the ruin of Italy, as
shall be shown in its place. Lorenzo de Medici was in his journey toward
Naples, and the truce betwixt the parties, in a very fair way, when on a
sudden, beyond all expectation Lodovico Fregoso, having intelligence in
Serezana, surprised the Town, and made all prisoners whom he found any ways
affected to the Florentines. This accident was highly resented by the Governors
of Florence, for they imagined it done by the order of Ferrando, and therefore
complained heavily to the Duke of Calabria (who was with his Army at Sienna)
that whilst they were in Treaty, they should be assaulted so treacherously; but
the Duke assured them by Letters, and an Embassy on purpose, that what had
passed was done without either his consent, or his Fathers. However, the
affairs of the Florentines were judged in a very ill condition; their treasure
being exhausted; their Prince, in the hands of the King; an old War on Foot
with the Pope and the King, a new War commenced with the Genoeesi, and no
friends to support them, for they had no hopes of the Venetian, and of the
State of Milan they had more reason to be afraid, it was so various and
unstable: the only hope remaining to the Florentines, was in Lorenzo's address
to the King.

Lorenzo arrived at Naples by Sea, was honorably received both by the King, and
the whole City; Lorenzo de Medeci arrives at Niples.
and though the War was begun for no other end but to ruin him, yet the
greatness of his Enemies, did but add to his Grandeur; for being brought to his
audience, he delivered himself so handsomely, and discoursed so well of the
condition of Italy, of the humors of all the Princes, and People therein, and
gave so good account of what was to be dreaded by War, and what was to be hoped
for by peace, that the King admired the greatness of his mind, the dexterity of
his wit, the solidity of his judgment, more now, than he had wondered before,
how he could alone sustain so great an invasion, insomuch that he doubled his
respects toward him, and began to think it his interest much more to make him
his friend, than to continue him his Enemy. Nevertheless upon sundry pretenses
and fetches, he kept him in dispense from December to March, not only to
satisfy himself in a farther experience of Lorenzo, but to inform himself of
the infidelity of Florence, for that City was not without those who would have
been glad the King would have kept him, and handled him as Giacopo Piccinino
was handled. These People began to complain, and spoke ill of him, all over the
Town, to oppose themselves publicly in the Councils against any thing that was
moved in favor to Lorenzo; and gave out generally where ever they came, that
if the King kept him much longer at Naples, they would alter the Government; so
that the King forbore to dispatch him for some time, in expectation of a
tumult. But finding all quiet, and no likelihood of any such thing, on the 6 of
March 1479, he dismissed him, having first presented him so nobly, and treated
him so honorably, that they had made a perpetual League, and obliged themselves
mutually for the preservation of one another Dominions.

If therefore Lorenzo was great when he went from Florence, he was much greater
when he returned; and was received with a joy, and acclamation in the City,
suitable to his quality, and the recency of his deserts, who had ventred his own
life so frankly, to procure peace to his Country, Two days after his arrival,
the Articles of Peace were published, by which both the State of Florence and
King had particularly obliged themselves to a common defense; that such Towns
as were taken from the Florentines during the War (if in the King's power)
should be restored: that the Pazzi which were prisoners at Volterra, should be
discharged, and a certain sum of money paid to the Duke of Calabria, for a
prefixed time. This Peace was no sooner published, but the Pope, and the
Venetians were infinitely offended, the Pope thinking himself neglected by the
King, and the Venetians by the Florentines, for both one and the other having
been partners in the War, they took it unkindly to be left out of the Peace.
Their displeasure being reported and believed at Florence, it was presently
apprehended that the effect of this peace, would be a greater War.

Hereupon the Governors of the State, New constitutions.
began to think of contracting the government, and reducing it into a lesser
number of Ministers, appointing a Council of 70 Citizens to transact such
affairs as were of principal importance. This new Constitution settled the
minds of those who were desirous of innovation, and to give it a reputation,
the first thing they did, was to ratify the peace which Lorenzo had made with
the King, and they appointed Antonio Ridolfi, and Piero Nasi, Ambassadors to
the Pope. Notwithstanding this Peace, the Duke of Calabria departed from the
Country of Siena with his Army, pretending he was retained by the dissentions
of that City, which were so great, that being quartered not far off, he was
invited into the Town, and their defferences referred to his arbitration. The
Duke accepted the overture, fined several of the Citizens; imprisoned several;
banished some, and some he put to death; so that he became suspicious, not only
to the Sienesi, but to the Florentines also; that his design was to make
himself Prince of that City; nor could they devise any remedy, seeing they had
entered into a League with the King, and thereby made both Pope, and Venetians
their Enemies. And this suspicion was not only got into the brains of the
multitude in Florence (a subtle interpreter of affairs,) but into the minds
also of the Governors, so that it was generally concluded, the liberty of that
City was never in more danger: but God who has always had a particular care of
it in all its extremities, averted that evil, and by an unexpected accident,
gave the King, the Pope, and the Venetians a diversion which imported them
more, than their advantages in Tuscany.

Mahomet the great Turk, The Isle of Rhodes assaulted by the Turks.
was with a great Army, encamped before Rhodes, and had lien before it several
months: though his forces were numerous, and his diligence great, yet the
valor of the besieged was not to be mastered, for they defended themselves so
bravely, he was forced to draw off, and quit the siege, with a great deal of
dishonor. Having left Rhodes, he sent part of his Fleet, under the command of
Giacometto Bascia toward Velona, and (either upon consideration of the
easiness of the enterprise; or express command from the Grand Signore to that
purpose) coasting about Italy, on a sudden he landed 6000 Men, assaulted the
City of Otranto, took it, plundered it, killed all the Inhabitants, and when he
had done, fortified both the Town and the harbor as much as possibly he could,
and with a good party of Horse, scowred the whole Country about it. The King
being much alarmed at this invasion, as knowing how great a Monarch he had to
deal with, sent his Ambassadors about to every Body, to let them know his
condition, and to beg their assistance, against the common Enemy; besides which
he pressed the Duke of Calabria with all imaginable importunity, to leave his
designs at Siena, and come back with all his forces: this invasion though it
was very dreadful to the Duke, and all the rest of Italy, yet it was welcome to
Florence and Siena, the one thinking its liberty most miraculously preserved,
and the other themselves as strangely delivered from those dangers which would
of necessity have destroyed them. Which opinion was much increased by the
unwillingness wherewith the Duke departed from Siena; complaining and cursing
his fortune, which by so unreasonable and an unexpected accident, had defeated
him of the Dominion of Tuscany. The same thing, changed the Counsels of the
Pope, and whereas before he would never admit any Ambassador from Florence, he
was grown now so meek, he would hear any body speak of a general Peace; and
word was sent to the Florentines that when ever they found themselves inclined,
ask pardon of the Pope, they would be sure to have it. The Florentines thought
not fit to slip so fair an occasion; and therefore sent 12 Ambassadors to the
Pope, who entertained them with diverse practices after they were arrived at
Rome, before he admitted them to audience: yet at length it was adjusted how
all Parties should comport for the future, and what every one should
contribute, in time of Peace, as well as in War; after which the Ambassadors
were admitted to the feet of the Pope, who was placed in great Pomp, with his
Cardinals about him.

The Ambassadors, The Ambassadors to the Pope.
to extenuate what had passed, laid the fault sometimes upon their own
necessities; sometimes upon the malignity of other People: sometimes upon the
popular fury; sometimes upon their own just indignation; as being so unhappy to
be forced either to fight; or to die; and because death is the most terrible of
all things, and all things will be tried, before that will be embraced, they
had endured the War, the excommunications and all the ill consequences which
followed; rather than suffer their liberty (which is the life of a
Commonwealth) to be taken from them, and extinguished: nevertheless, if their
necessity had run them upon the rocks, and forced them to do any thing which
was displeasing to him, they were ready to make him satisfaction, and did hope,
according to the example of their gracious Redeemer, he would be as ready to
receive them into his most merciful Arms. The Pope replies.
To which excuses his Holiness replied with great heat and indignation,
reproaching them by all the mischiefs which they had done to the Church;
nevertheless, to preserve the Commandments of God, he was contented to grant
them their pardon as they desired; but intimated withal, that they were to be
more obedient for the future, and if again they transgressed, that liberty
which now they were only like to have lost should be then taken wholly, and
that justly, away, because they who deserved to be free, were such as practiced
good things, and not bad; and liberty abused, was destructive both to
themselves, and other People; for to neglect their duty either to God or his
Church, was not the office of good Men, but of such as were dissolute and lewd;
the correction of which belongs not only to Princes, but to all that are
Christians; so that for what was to be passed, they were to lay the fault upon
themselves; who by their ill deeds had given occasion of the War, and continued
it by their worse; but now that was at an end, yet it was attributed more to
the goodness of other People, than any merit in them; after which he gave them
his benediction and the form of the agreement, to which he had added (besides
what had been debated, and concluded on in Counsel,) that if the Florentines
expected any fruit from his blessing, they should furnish out fifteen Galleys
and keep them in their pay till the Turk was beaten out of Italy. The
Ambassadors complained grievously to have an article of that weight superadded
to what was concluded in the Treaty; but by all the friends they could make,
and all the arts they could use, they could not prevail to have it expunged;
whereupon returning to Florence, that Senate, to perfect the Peace, sent Guide
Antonio Vespucci (who not long before was returned from France) their
Ambassador to his Holiness, and by his prudence, he brought the terms to be
tolerable, and as a greater sign of his reconciliation, received several other
marks of his Holiness favor. The Florentines having put an end to all their
differences with the Pope. Siena being free, they delivered from their
apprehensions of the King, by the Duke of Calabria drawing away with his Army
out of Tuscany, and the War continuing with the Turks, they pressed the King so
hard to the restitution of such places as the Duke of Calabria at his departure
had committed to the keeping of the Sanesi; that he began to fear the
Florentines might desert him, and by making War upon the Sanesi; hinder the
assistance which he expected from the Pope, and the rest of the Princes of
Italy; whereupon he caused them all to be delivered, and by several new
favors, reobliged the Florentines to him; from whence we may observe, that it
is interest and necessity, not their hands or their words, which make Princes
keep their promises. These Castles being restored, and the new League
confirmed, Lorenzo de Medici gained greater reputation than the War first, and
after, the peace (when they were jealous of the King) had taken from him. For
at that time there wanted not those who calumniated him openly, as one, who to
preserve himself, had sold his Country, and as by the War they had lost their
Towns, by the peace they should lose their liberty. But when the Towns were
restored; and honorable peace concluded with the King; and the City returned to
its ancient reputation, the People (who are generally greedy to talk, and judge
of things more by the success, than the Counsel) changed their note presently,
and cried up Lorenzo to the skies, as one who had gained more by his management
in that peace, than their ill fortune had got them by the War; and that his
prudence and judgment had done what all the Armies and power of their Enemies
could not.

This descent of the Turks deferred the War, which the Pope and the Venetians
upon provocation of that peace, had designed against them, but as the beginning
of the Turkish invasion was unexpected, and produced much good; so the end of
it was unlooked for, and the occasion of much mischief; for Mahomet the Grand
Signore died suddenly, and difference arising betwixt his Sons, those who were
landed in Puglia, being abandoned by their Lord, came to an agreement with the
King of Naples, and delivered up Otranto into his hands. This fear therefore
being removed, which kept the Pope, and the Venetians quiet; every one began to
be apprehensive of new troubles. On the one side the Pope and the Venetian were
in League, and with them Genoesi, Sanesi, and other lesser Potentates. On the
other side, were the Florentines, the King of Naples, the Duke of Milan, and
with them the Bolognesi, and several other little States. The Venetian had a
design upon Ferrara; they thought they had reason enough to attempt it, and
hopes enough to carry it. The reason was, because the Marquess had declared
himself obliged no longer to receive either their Visdomine, or their falt; for
by compact after 70 years, that City was to be exempt both from the one and the
other: to which the Venetians replied that so long as he retained the Polesine;
so long he was, to receive the Visdomine and the Salt; but the Marquess
refusing; they thought they had just occasion to take Arms, and their
opportunity was convenient, seeing the Pope, in such indignation, both against
the Florentines, and King: to oblige him the more, Count Girolamo being by
accident at Venice, was honorably treated, made a Gentleman of that City, and
had all the privileges and immunities of a Citizen conferred upon him; which
is a particular favor, and shows always the great esteem they bear to the
Person which receives it. In preparation for this War, they laid new taxes upon
their subjects; and for their General, they had chosen Roberto da San Severino,
who upon some difference betwixt him, and Lodovick Duke of Milan, fled to
Tortona, and having made some tumults there, he got off to Genoa, from whence
he was invited by the Venetians, and made General of their Army. The news of
these preparations coming to the ears of the League, they prepared themselves
accordingly. The Duke of Milan chose Federigo Lord of Urbin, for his General.
The Florentines Costanzo di Pesaro; and to sound the Pope, and discover whether
these proceedings of the Venetians were by his consent, King Ferrando sent the
Duke of Calabria with his Army to quarter upon the Tronto, and desired leave of
his Holiness that they might pass through his territories, from thence into
Lombardy to the relief of the Marquess; which being absolutely denied, the
Florentines and King thinking that a sufficient declaration of his mind,
resolved to attempt it by force, and try if that they could make him their
friend, or at least give him such impediments as should hinder his supplying of
the Venetians, who had already taken the field; invaded the Marquess; overrun
most of the Country, and clapped down with their Army before Figarolo, a Castle
of great importance to the affairs of that Prince. The King and the Florentines
having in the mean time concluded to fall upon the Pope, Alfonso Duke of
Calabria marched his Army toward Rome, and by the help of the Collennesi (who
were joined with him, in opposition to the Orsini who sided with the Pope) he
committed great spoils all over that Country. On the other side, the
Florentines under the command of Nicolo Vitelli assaulted the City of Castello;
took it, turned out Lorenzo who had kept it for the Pope, and gave it to Nicolo
as Prince: the Pope was at this time in very great anxiety. Rome was full of
factions within, and the Enemy in the Country without. Nevertheless, (like a
courageous Prince, resolved to overcome, not to yield to his Enemies) he
entertained for his General Roberto da Rimino, and inviting him to Rome, where
he had assembled all the forces he could make, he represented how great an
honor it would be to him, if he could rescue the Church from the calamities
which were upon it; and that not only himself and his successors, but God
Almighty would reward him. Roberto having taken a view of his Army, and all the
Magazines, he persuaded the Pope to raise him what foot he could more, which
was done with great diligence and expedition. The Duke of Calabria was all this
while forraging about that Country, and making his inroads to the very walls of
the City; which netled and provoked the Citizens so, as many of them came
freely, and offered their service to remove them, which Roberto with many
thanks, and great expressions of kindness accepted.

The Duke, understanding their preparations, thought fit to draw farther off
from the City, supposing that Roberto would not venture to follow him at any
distance from the Town; besides he had some expectation of his Brother Federigo
who was to come to him with fresh supplies from his Father. Roberto finding
himself equal in Horse, and superior in foot, drew his Army out of the Town,
and directing toward the Enemy, he encamped within two miles of him. The Duke
finding the Enemy upon his back, quite contrary to his expectation; perceived
there was no remedy but he must fight, or run away; so that forced, and
constrained, lest otherwise he should do a thing unworthy of a King's Son, he
resolved to fight, turned upon the Enemy, and each of them having put their
Army into order, according to the discipline of those times, they fell to it,
and the battle continued from morning to noon, and was fought with more courage
than any in Italy for fifty years before; there dying on the one side and the
other above a thousand Men: the end of which fight was very honorable for the
Church; for their infantry being numerous, so galled the Dukes Horse, The Duk^
of Calabria defeated.
that they were forced to turn tail; and the Duke had been taken, had he not
been rescued by some Turks, which upon the delivery of Otronto took pay under
him. Roberto having gained so absolute a Victory, returned triumphantly to
Rome; but he enjoyed the pleasure of it but little, for in the heat of the
battle having drunk a great quantity of cold water, he put himself into a flux,
and died not many days after; his body being interred by his Holiness with all
imaginable ceremony. The Pope having gained this Victory, he sent the Count
toward Castello to try if he could recover it for Lorenzo, and what he could
do upon Rimina; for after the death of Robert, there being only one Child left
in the tuition of his Lady, he thought it might be no hard matter to get into
that Town; and doubtless he had succeeded, had not that Lady been assisted by
the Florentines, who opposed him so happily, that he could do nothing against
Rimino, nor Castello. Whilst these things were in agitation in Romagna, and
Rome, the Venetians had taken Figarolo, and passed the Po with their Army; the
Duke of Milan's, and the Marquess his Army (being in no small disorder, upon
the death of the Count d' Urbino) who falling ill was removed to Bologna; and
died there; so that the Marquesses affairs began to decline, and the Venetians
had great hopes of becoming Masters of Ferrara. On the other side the
Florentines and King of Naples, used all possible art to bring the Pope over to
their party, but not being able to do it by force; they threatened him with a
Counsel, which the Emperor had pronounced already should be held at Basil.
Whereupon, by persuasion of his Ambassadors at Rome and the chief of the
Cardinals (who were very desirous of peace) the Pope was constrained, A new
League.
and began to hearken to the peace, and tranquillity of Italy; and for fear the
Grandeur of the Venetians should be the ruin of that Country, he became
inclinable to the League, and sent his Nuncii to Naples, where a peace was
concluded for five years betwixt the Pope, King of Naples, and Florentines,
reserving a certain time for the Venetians, if they pleased to come in. Which
being done, the Pope sent to the Venetians to desist in their War against
Ferrara, but the Venetians were so far from complying, they reinforced their
Army, and pursued it with more cagerness than before; for having defeated the
Dukes forces, and the Marquesses at Argenta, they had advanced in such manner
against the City, that their Army was encamped in the Marquesses Park. So that
the League, thinking it no dallying any longer, resolved to assault them with
all the forces they could make, and accordingly the Duke of Calabria had orders
to march thither with their Army. The Florentines likewise sent what Men they
could spare; and for the better administration of the War, a Diet was appointed
to be held at Cremona, where there met the Popes Legate, Count Girolamo, the
Duke of Calabria, the Signore Lodovico, and Lorenzo de Medici, with many other
Princes of Italy, in which Council the Method of the future War was debated,
and having concluded that Ferrara could not any way be relieved more
effectually, than by a brisk diversion, they desired Lodovico's permission to
attack the Venetians through the Country of Milan; but Lodovico would not be
persuaded, as fearing to pull a War upon his back, which he could not be rid
off when he pleased: whereupon it was determined that they should march with
their whole strength for Ferrara, and having mustered 4000 Horse and 8000 Foot,
they advanced against the Venetians, who were 2200 Horse, and 6000 Foot. But
the first thing the League thought fit to attempt, was a Fleet which the
Venetians had upon the Po: and they assaulted it so smartly that they broke it
at Rondino, destroyed 200 of their Vessels, and took Antonio Iustiniano (the
Proveditor of their Navy) Prisoner.

The Venetians seeing all Italy combined against them; to give themselves
greater reputation, they entertained the Duke of Reno into their pay with 200
good Horse and upon news of the defeat of their Fleet, they sent him with part
of the Army to face the enemy, whilst Roberto da San Severino passed the Adda
with the rest, and approaching to Milan, proclaimed the Duke and Madam Bona his
Mother; hoping that Lodovico and his Government had been so odious in that
City, that the very name of the other would have begot some commotion. This
inroad at first produced some kind of terror: but the conclusion was quite
contrary to what the Venetians had designed, for this compelled Lodovico to do,
what he could not be brought to before; and therefore leaving the Marquess of
Ferrara to the defense of his own Country, with 4000 Horse, and 2000 Foot, the
Duke of Calabria with 12000 Horse, and 5000 Foot, marched into the Countries of
Bergona, Brescia, and Verona, plundering and spoiling all about them, before
the Venetians could send them any relief, for Roberto and his Army had much ado
to secure that City: on the other side, the Marquess of Ferrara, had recovered
a great part of his losses; for the Duke of Reno (who was sent to confront him)
having but 2000 Horse and 1000 Foot was not able to oppose him: so that all
that year 1483, things went on prosperously for the League. The next Spring
(the Winter having passed without any considerable action) both Armies took the
field. The League, for greater expedition in their designs against the
Venetians, had drawn their whole Army together; and (had the War been managed
as wisely as the year before) had easily carried what ever the Venetians were
possessed of in Lombardy; for they were reduced to 6000 Horse, and 5000 Foot
(whilst the Enemy consisted of 13000 Horse, and 6000 Foot) for the Duke of
Reno, being entertained only for a year, when his time was out, was retired.
But (as it many times happens where many are in equal authority) diffention
among the Grandees, gives the Victory to the Enemy; for Federigo Gonzagua
Marquess of Mantona being dead (who whilst he was living, kept the Duke of
Calabria, and Signore Lodovico in good correspondence) there grew exceptions
betwixt them, and jealousies by degrees: for Giovan Galeazzo being of age,
become capable of the Government, and married to the Daughter of the Duke of
Calabria, he had a mind his Son-in-Law, and not Lodovico, should exercise the
Government. Lodovico, smelling his design, resolved if possible, to prevent
him. This inclination of Lodovico's, being known to the Venetians, they thought
it a fair opportunity to gain (as they had done before) by peace; what by Wur
they had lost; and making private overtures to him, in August 1484 they came to
an agreement, which was no sooner divulged but the other Confederuts were
highly displeased, especially seeing all they had taken from the Venetians
would be restored; the Venetians lefvin the possession of Rovigo and Polisine
(which they had taken from the Marquess of Ferrara) and invested with all the
Prerogatives and preheminences which they had exercised over that City before
for every Man judged they had made a chargeable War; gained some honor indeed
in the prosecution of it; but in the conclusion, they had come off with
disgrace; for the Towns which they had taken were restored, but the Towns they
had lost were kept by the Enemy: yet the confederats were glad to accept the
Peace, being weary of the war, Castello besieged by the Army of the Pope.
and unwilling to attempt their fortune any further with the defects and
ambition of other People.

Whilst in Lombardy things were managed at this rate, the Pope, by the
mediation of Lorenzo, pressed hard upon the City of Castello to turn out Nicolo
Vitelli, who (to bring over the Pope to their party) was deserted by the
League. Whilst they were entrenched before the Town, those of the Garrison who
were friends to Vitelli, sallyed out upon the Enemy, and beat them from the
siege; hereupon the Pope recalled Girolamo from Lombardy; caused him to come to
Rome to recruit his Army, and then sent him to pursue his designs against
Castello: but judging it better upon second thoughts to reduce Nicolo by fair
means than foul, he made peace with him, and reconciled him, as much as in him
lay, to his adversary Lorenzo: and to this he was constrained more out of
apprehension of new troubles, than any desire to peace; for he saw ill humors
remaining betwixt the Colonnesi, and the Ursini.

In the War betwixt the Pope and the King of Naples, the King of Naples had
taken from the Ursini the Country of Pagliacozzo, and given it to the Colonnesi
who followed his party. When Peace was afterward made betwixt the Pope and the
King, the Ursini demanded restitution by virtue of that treaty. The Colonni
provoked the Pope, and are ruined in Rome.
The Pope many times required the Colonnesi to deliver it, but neither the
prayers of the one, nor the threats of the other being able to prevail, they
fell upon the Ursini with their old way of depredation and plunder. The Pope
not enduring that insolence, drew all his forces together, and joining them
with the Ursini, they sacked the Houses of all the Colonni in Rome; killed
those who resisted, and destroyed most of the Castles which they had in those
parts: so that those tumults were ended, not by peace, but by the destruction
of one of the parties.

In the mean time, the affairs in Genoa and Tuscany were in no better
condition; for the Florentines kept Antonio da Marciano, with his forces upon
the frontiers of Serezana, and with excursions and skirmishes, kept the
Serezani in perpetual alarm. In Genoa Battistino Fregoso Doge of that City,
reposing too much confidence in Paulo Fregoso the Archbishop, was himself, his
Wife and Children, seized by him, and the Archbishop made himself Prince. The
Venetian fleet had at that time assaulted the King of Naples; possessed
themselves of Galipoli; and alarmed all the Towns about it; but upon the peace
in Lombardy, all the differences were composed, except those in Tuscany, and
Rome: for the Pope died five days after the Peace was proclaimed, either his
time being then come, or else his indignation at the Peace (against which he
was most obstinately averse) having killed him. However he left all Italy quiet
when he died, though whilst he lived, he kept it constantly imbroiled. Upon his
death, Rome was immediately in Arms: Count Girolamo with his forces retired to
the Castle: the Ursini were fearful the Colonni would revenge the injuries they
had so lately received: the Colonni demanded their Houses and Castles to be
made good; so that in a few days, Murders, Roberies, and burning of Houses, was
to be seen in several parts of the City; but the Cardinals having persuaded
Girolamo to deliver up the Castle into the hands of their College; to retire
to his own Government, and free the City from his forces; hoping thereby to
make the next Pope his friend, he readily obeyed, delivered up the Castle to
the College, and drew off his forces to Imola. So that the Cardinals being rid
of that fear, and the Barons of the assistance they expected from Girolamo,
they proceeded to the Election of a new Pope, and after some little disputes,
they made choice of Giovan Battista Cibo Cardinal di Malfetta, a Genoese, with
the name of Innocent the 8, who by the easiness of his Nature (being a Man of
peace) prevailed with them to lay down their Arms, and once more made all quiet
at Rome.

Notwithstanding this Peace, the Florentines could not be prevailed with to be
quiet; it appearing to them dishonorable, and insufferable, that a private
Gentleman should have taken, and keep from them the Castle of Serazana; and
because it was an article in the Peace, that not only all that had been lost
might be demanded again, but that War might be waged against any that
obstructed it, they prepared Men and money to go on with that enterprise:
whereupon Agostino Fregoso, who had surprised Serazana, finding himself unable
with his private force, to sustain such a War, he resigned it to S. George. And
seeing we shall many times have occasion to mention S. George, and the Genoesi,
The Company of S. Giorgio.
it will not be inconvenient to describe the orders and methods of that City,
which is one of the principal in Italy.

When the Genoesi had made peace with the Venetians, after the greatest War in
which they had ever been engaged, not being able to satisfy certain Citizens
who had advanced great sums of money for the service of the public, they made
over to them the profits of the Dogana, appointing that every Man should share
of them, according to the proportion of his principal sum, till his whole debt
should be wrought out; and for their convenience of meeting, and better
disposing of their affairs, they consigned the Palace to them which was over
the Custom-house. These Creditors erected a kind of Government among
themselves, created a Counsel of 100 to deliberate and order all public
matters, and another of eight Citizens, to put them in execution: their debts
were divided into several parts, which they called Luoghi, and their whole body
was called San. Giorgia. Having established their Government in this manner,
new exigences arising every day to the Commonwealth, they had recourse to San.
Giorgio for supplies; which being rich, and well managed was able always to
relieve them: but the Magistrates and community of the City (having granted
them their customs before) were forced now when they borrowed any money, to make
over their lands to them, and they had done it so frequently, that the
necessities of the one, and the supplies of the other had brought things to
that pass, that the greatest part of the Towns and Cities under the
jurisdiction of Genoa, were fallen into their hands, and they Governed and
disposed of them as they pleased, choosing annually their Rettori or Governors
by public suffrage, without the least interposition or concernment of the
Commonwealth. From hence it happened that the affection of the People was
removed from the Government of the Commonwealth (which they looked upon as
tyrannical) to the Government of San Giorgio, (which was well, and impartially
administered) and from hence the casic and often changes, of the State did
proceed; which submitted it self sometimes to this Citizen, sometimes to that
stranger, as occasion invited; and the reason was, because it was not San.
Giorgio, but the Magistrates which altered the Government. Therefore when the
contention was betwixt the Fregosi, and Adorni for Sovereignty of the City;
because the controversy was only among the Governors of the Commonwealth; the
greatest part of the Citizens withdrew, and left the State to him that could
catch it; the office of San. Giorgio concerning it self no farther, than to
swear the person advanced, to the conservation of their Laws, which have not
been altered to this very day; for having Arms, and money, and conduct, they
cannot be subverted without danger of a destructive Rebellion. A rare and
incomparable example, not to be fellowed in all the visible, or immaginary
Commonwealths of the Philosophers; to behold in the same Circle, among the same
Citizens, liberty, and tyranny, civility, and corruption, justice, and rapine
to be exercised at the same time; for that order alone preserved that City in
its ancient and vencrable customs. And had it fallen out (as in time doubtless
it will) that the Government of the Commonwealth had fallen to the management
of San. Giorgio, no question but before this it would have been greater, and
more formidable than the republic of Venice. To this San. Giorgio, therefore
Agostino Fregosa (not being able to keep it himself) delivered Serezana: San.
Giorgio accepted it readily, undertook to defend it; put out a Fleet immediately
to Sea; and sent forces to Pietra Santa to intercept any that should go to the
Florentines, who were already encamped before Serezana. The Florentines on the
other side had a months mind to Pietra Santa, as a Town which, by reason of its
situation betwixt Pisa and that, would make Serezana inconsiderable, though
they should take it; and in the mean time interrupt them in their Leaguer, as
often as that Garrison should think it fit to come forth. To bring this about,
the Florentines sent a considerable quantity of provisions and ammunition, with
a small party to convey them from Pisa to their Camp. Supposing that the
Garrison of Pietra Santa would be tempted to take them, both from the weakness
of the convoy, and the greatness of the prize: and their artifice succeeded,
for the Garrison could not see such a booty, and suffer it to pass. This was as
the Florentines desired, and gave them just pretense of hostility; whereupon,
rising from Serezana, they marched to Pietra Santa, and encamped before it,
which being well manned, defended it self stoutly. The Florentines having
disposed their artillery in the plain, they raised a new battery upon the
mountain, intending likewise to batter it from thence. Giacopo Guicardini was
their Commissary at that time, and whilst they were employed at Pietra Santa in
this manner, the Genoa fleet took and burned the Rocca di Vada, and landing
some Men, overran all the Country there abouts. Against these forces Bongiami
Gianfigliazza was dispatched with a party of Horse and foot, who restrained
their extravagance, so as they did not make their excursions as formerly.
However the Fleet continued to moleft the Florentines, and accordingly removed
to Ligorn, where with bridges, and other military engines, having got close to
the New Tower, they battered it smartly for several days together, but finding
it to no purpose, they went off again with shame. In the mean time the siege at
Pietra Santa went on very slowly; insomuch that the Enemy was encouraged, to
attempt upon their battery, and sallying out when they saw their advantage,
they carried it, much to their own reputation, and to the discouragement of
their Enemy, who immediately drew off to about four miles distance, and the
officers considering it was October, and the Winter f^r on, were of opinion to
put their Army into their quarters, and reserve the prosecution of their siege,
till a better season.

These disorders being known at Florence, filled all the chief officers with
great indignation; upon which to recruit their Camp, and recover their
reputation, they elected Antonio Pucci, and Bernardo del Nero for their new
Comissaries; who being sent with a consisiderable supply of money to the Camp,
remonstrated to the chief officers, the displeasure of the Senate, the State
and the whole City; their commands to return their Leaguer with the Army; the
scandal and infamy it would be, if so many great officers, with so great an
Army, having nothing to oppose them but a pitiful Garrison, should not be able
to carry so weak, and so contemptible a Town. They represented likewise, the
present and future advantage which they might expect if it were taken; so that
they were all encouraged to return, and the first thing to be attacked, they
resolved should be the Bastion, out of which they had been forced: in which
action, it was manifest, what courtesy, affability, kind usage, and good words
could produce in the Soldiers, for Antonio Pucci, persuading this, promising
that, assisting a third with his hand, and embracing the fourth, incited them
to the assault with such fury, that they regained the Bastion in a moment; but
they did not take it without loss, for the Count Antonio da Marciano was slain
from one of their great Guns. This success brought such a terror upon the
Garrison, that they began to think of surrendering. Pietra Santa taken by Lorenzo.
That things might be transacted with greater reputation, Lorenzo de Medici
thought good to repair in person to the Camp, where he was no sooner arrived,
but in a few days the Castle surrendered. Winter being come, it did not appear
to those Officers convenient to prosecute the War, but to attend better
weather, for the season of the year, by the malignity of the air had infected
the Army extremely, for many of their chief Officers were sick; and among the
rest, Antonio Pucci, and Bongianni Gianfigliazzi, were not only sick, but died,
to the great regret of all People, so much honor and estimation had Antonio,
acquired by his conduct at Pietra Santa. The Florentine had no sooner taken,
and settled themselves in Pietra Santa, but Ambassadors came to them from the
Lucchesi to demand it, as an appendix to their Commonwealth; alleging that
among the rest, there was an express article that what ever should be taken
either of the one side or the other, should be restored to the first owners.
The Florentines did not deny the agreement, but answered that they could not
tell whether in the Peace they were then negotiating with the Genoeses, they
might not be obliged to restore it, and therefore they could give them no
positive resolution, till that was determined; and if it should happen that
they should not be obliged, it would be necessary for the Sienesi to think of
some way to satisfy for the expense they had been at, and the damage they had
received by the loss of so many considerable Citizens, and when they did so,
they might be consident they should have it. This whole Winter was consumed, in
negotiations of Peace, betwixt the Florentines and the Genoesi, which were
transacted at Rome by the mediation of the Pope: but nothing being concluded,
the Florentines would have fallen upon Serezana in the spring, had they not
been prevented by Lorenzo's indisposition, and a new War betwixt Ferrando and
the Pope. For Lorenzo was not only troubled with the Gout (which was his
hereditary disease) but he had so great pains and affliction at his stomach,
that he was forced to go to the baths to be cured. But the chiefest occasion
was the War, which was originally from hence. The City of Aquila was subject to
the Kingdom of Naples, but so, as in a manner it was free. In that City, the
Count de Mortorio was a Man of more than ordinary reputation. The Duke of
Calabria lying with his Horse not far from Tronto, pretending a desire to
compose certain tumults which had happened betwixt the Peasants in those parts
(but being really ambitious to reduce that City to a more entire subjection to
his Father) sent to the Count to let him know he desired to speak with him, and
take his advice in the regulation of those affairs. The Count, not having the
least jealousy, repaired to him immediately, but he was seized, as soon as he
arrived, and sent Prisoner to Naples.

This accident being known in Aquila, altered the affections of the whole City,
Aquila rebels against the King of Naples.
insomuch that the People taking Arms, Antonio Concinello (the King's
Commissary) was slain, and with him, such of the Citizens as were known to be
affected to the Neapolitan interest: and that they might have friends to defend
them in their Rebellion, they set up the Banner of the Church, and sent
Ambassadors to the Pope, to tender him the possession of their City, and
implore his protection against the Tyranny of the King. The Pope was easily
persuaded to their defense, as a Person that hated the King, both upon public,
The Pope undertakes its protection.
and private accounts; whereupon being informed that Roberto da San Severino (a
great Enemy to the State of Milan) was out of employment, he sent for him to
Rome with all speed, made him his General, and solicited all the friends and
relations of the Count de Mortorio to rise in his behalf; so that the Princes
of Altemura, Salerno, and Besignana took up Arms against the King. The King
seeing himself engaged so unexpectedly in a War, sent to the Florentines, and
Duke of Milan for their aid; the Florentines were very irresolute what was to
be done; they thought it unreasonable, to leave their own designs, for the
promotion of other Peoples, besides that, the taking up Arms again so suddenly
against the Church, must needs be very dangerous; nevertheless being in League,
and under an obligation, they preferred their faith before either interest, or
danger; took the Orsini into their pay, and sent their whole force (under the
Count de Pitigliano) toward Rome, in assistance of the King. By this means the
King had two Camps, that under the Duke of Calabria, he sent toward Rome, in
conjunction with the Florentines, to attend the motion of the Army of the
Church; the other he kept at home, to secure his own Country against any
commotion by the Barons, and in both places things occurred with variety of
success: but at length the King remaining in all places superior, by the
mediation of Ambassadors from Spain, in August 1486 a Peace was concluded, to
which the Pope (being depressed, and discouraged with his ill fortune)
consented, and all the Princes of Italy with him, only the Genoesi were
excepted, Peace concluded.
as Rebels to the State of Milan, and usurpers upon the territories of
Florence. The Peace being concluded, Roberto da San. Severino, having been
neither faithful to the Pope, nor terrible to the Enemy, was turned out of Rome
in disgrace, and being pursued by the forces of the Florentines and the Duke;
when he was past Cesenna, finding they gained upon him, and would be presently
upon his back, he betook himself to his heels, and with about 100 Horse fled
away to Ravenna, leaving the rest of his party either to be entertained by the
Duke, or destroyed by the Country. The King having signed the Peace, and
reconciled himself with his Barons, he caused Giovanni Coppola, and Antonello
d' Anversa and their Sons, to be put to Death, as Persons who had betrayed his
secrets to the Pope in the time of the War. By the experiment of this War, the
Pope having observed with what diligence and alacrity the Florentines preserve
their alliance, though he hated them before for their affection to the Genoesi,
and their asistance to the King, he began now to caress them, and show greater
favor to their Ambassadors, than formerly he had done: which inclination being
intimated to Lorenzo, he improved it with all possible industry, as knowing it
would gain him great reputation, if to his friendship with the King, he could
add the amity of the Pope. This Pope had a Son called Francesco, and being
desirous to advance him both in fortune and friends (which when he was dead
might support him) he could not find a Person in all Italy, with whom he might
more safely ally him, than with Lorenzo de Medici; and therefore he ordered
things so that he married him to a daughter of Lorenzo's. This alliance being
finished, his Holiness had a desire that the Genoesi by agreement should
deliver up Serezana to the Florentines, and declared to them that they could
not in justice retain what Agostino had sold them; nor could Agostino convey
that to San. Giorgio which was none of his own; but with all his arguments he
could never prevail; so that whilst these things were in agitation in Rome, the
Genesi went on with their preparations, and rigging out many of their Ships,
before they could have any news of it at Florence, they landed 3000 Men, and
assaulted the Castle of Serezanello, which stands upon the Serezana and was
Garisoned by the Florentines, and having sacked, and burned the Town (which
lies on one side of it) they advanced against the Castle, and having planted
their Guns, they battered it exceedingly. This attack was new, and unexpected
to the Florentines, insomuch that they drew what force they were able together,
under the command of Urginio Ursino, at Pisa, and made their complaints to the
Pope, that whilst he was in treaty with them for peace, the Genoeses had
invaded them; after which they sent Piero Corsini to Lucca, to preserve that
City in its allegiance: they sent likewise Pagocantonio Soderini their
Ambassador to Venice, to try the minds of that Commonwealth. They desired aid
likewise of the King of Naples, and Signor Lodovico, but neither of them
supplied them, the King pretending apprehension of the Turkish fleet; and
Lodovico with other shifts delaied to relieve them; so that the Florentines (as
they usually are) were left alone in their necessity, finding no body so well
disposed to assist them, as they were to assist other People. Nevertheless
(being not strange to them) they were not at all discouraged, but raising a
great Army under the Command of Giacopo Guicciardini, and Pietro Vettori, they
sent them against the Enemy, who had lodged himself upon the River Magra. In
the mean time Serazanello was closely besiged, and what with mines, and
batteries, brought to great danger of being taken. Whereupon a Counsel being
called, it was resolved to leave it, and the Enemy not at all declining, they
came to an engagement, The Genoeses overthrown.
in which the Genoesi were defeated, Lodovico dal Fiesco, and several of their
principal officers taken Prisoners: yet this Victory could not incline the
Serezanesi to surrender, they rather prepared more obstinately for their
defense; and the Florentine Commissaries being as diligent on their side, it
was courageously both assaulted and defended. This Leaguer proving longer than
was expected, Lorenzs de Medici thought it expedient to go himself to the Camp,
where his arrival animated his own Soldiers, and discouraged the adversary;
for upon observation of the vigor of the Florentines, and the coldness of
their supplies from Genoa, freely, without any capitulation, they threw
themselves into the arms of Lorenzo, and (except some few who were more
eminently active in the Rebellion) they were all courteously treated by the
Florentines. During this siege, Signor Lodovico, had sent his Horse to
Pontremoli, in appearance, in our favor; but holding a correspondence in
Genoa, a party mutinied against the Government* and by the help of those
forces, secured the Town for the Duke of Milan. About this time, the Germans
made War upon the Venetians and Boccelino d' Osimo Nella Marca, had caused
Osimo to revolt from the Pope, and made himself Lord of it. This Boccelino,
after many accidents was contented (upon the persuasion of Lorenzo di Medici)
to deliver up that Town again to the Pope, which he did, and coming to
Florance, he lived there (under Lorenzo's protection) very honorable, a
considerable time; but afterward removing to Milan, and not finding the same
faith as he had done at Florance, he ws put to death by Lodovico's command. The
Venetians, being set upon by the Germans near the City of Trento were utterly
defeated, The Venetians defeated.
and Signor Roberto da San Severino their General was slain. After the loss of
this Victory according to their usual fortune, the Venetians made a peace with
the Germans, but upon terms as exceedingly honorable, as if they had been the
Conquerors.

About the same time great troubles arose likewise in Romagna: Francesco d'
Orso of Furli; was a Man of great authority in that City, and falling under the
suspicion of the Count Girolamo, he was many times threatened by him: so that
Francesco living in perpetual fear he was advised by his friends and relations,
to be before hand with the Count, and seeing his intention was manifestly to
take away his life, he should strike the first blow and make sure of the Count,
and so by the death of another Person, secure himself. This Counsel begin
given, and as resolutely undertaken, they appointed the time to be at the Fair
at Furli; for several of their friends in the Country coming to the Town on
course that day, they thought they should have enough of them present, without
the danger of inviting them. It was in the month of May, in which the greatest
part of the Italians have a custom of supping by day light. The Conspirators
thought their best time to kill him would be after he had supped, when the
servants were gone down to their own, and left him as it were alone in his
Chamber. Having agreed upon the time, Francesco went to the Counts Palace, and
having left his accomplices below, and told one of his Servants that he desired
to speak with the Count, he was admitted, and finding him alone, after some
previous and pretended discourse, Count Girolamo murdered.
he took his opportunity and killed him; then calling up his Companions, the
Servant was slain likewise; and then the Captain of the Castle coming in by
accident with some few in his company to speak with the Count, they fell upon
him, and murdered him with the rest. Having finished their work, and raised a
great hubub in the House, the Count's body was thrown out of the window, a
great cry made of liberty and the Church, and the people exhorted to Arm, who
abominating the cruelty and the avarice of the Count, fell upon his Houses,
plundered them, and made the Countess Catherina (his Lady) and her Family
Prisoners: and this was done with so little opposition, that there was nothing
but the Castle which hindered the accomplishment of their designs: but that
Captain being obstinate, and not to be wrought upon by them to surrender, they
desired the Countess to try if she could persuade him, which she promised to
endeavor, if they would let her go to him into the Castle; and as Hostage for
her fidelity, she would leave them her Children. The Conspirators believed her,
and gave her leave to go to him; but she was no sooner in the Castle, but she
began to swagger, and threaten them with death in revenge of her husband's; and
when they told her they would kill all her Children, she bid them do their
worst, for she knew how to have more. The Conspirators were not a little
dismayed at this accident; they saw the Pope sent them no succors, and hearing
that Lodovico the Countesses Uncle was sending forces to her relief, they
packed up what they could, and away they went to Castello so that the Countess
being restored, she revenged the death of her husband with all possible
cruelty. The Countess revenged the Death of her Husband.
The Florentines had news of what happened to the Count, and immediately took
occasion to attempt the Castle of Piancaldoli which had been formerly taken
from them by the said Count; and accordingly sending their forces thither, they
retook it, but with the death of Ciecco, a most excellent Architect. About the
same time that this tumult happened in the City, another of no less importance,
fell out in the Country of Romagna Galeotto Lord of Faenza, was married to the
Daughter of Giovanni Bentivogli Prince of Bologna: this Lady being jealous, or
upon some other ill usage from her husband; or else ill natured of her self,
had her Husband in such contempt, that she contrived to take away both his
Authority and Life; and one day counterfeiting her self sick, she laid her self
upon the bed, and having hid some of her Comerads in her Chamber; she ordered
when Galeotto came to visit her, they should rush upon him, and kill him. This
Lady had communicated her design to her Father, who was well enough contented,
hoping when his Son-in-Law was dead he might set up for himself. The time
agreed upon for the Execution being come, Galeotto as he was accustomed) came
to see his Wife, Galeotto Lord of Faenza murdered by his Wife.
and having discoursed with her a while, the Conspirators rushed forth, and
killed him before he could make any defense. Upon his death a great tumult was
raised, and the Lady with one of her little Children called Astorre was forced
to betake herself to the Castle, The people took arms; Giovan Bentivogli (with
a Bergamese who had been an officer under the Duke of Milan) having got some
forces together marched into Faenza where Antonio Boscoli the Commissary of
Florence was resident at that time, and having assembled all the chief of that
party, they were in great argument about the Government of the Town; when the
inhabitants of the Val di Lamona, had taken the alarm, and being got together
in a throng, they fell upon Giovami, and the Bergamese, they cut one of them to
pieces, and took the other prisoner, and calling out upon Astorre, and the
Florentines, they delivered the City to the conduct of the Commissary. This
accident being known in Florence, was highly displeasing to every Body;
nevertheless they caused Giovanni and his Daughter to be set at liberty, and
took upon themselves the care of Astorre and the City, by univeral consent of
the whole People. After the Wars betwixt the greater Princes were composed;
besides these, there happened many tumults in Romagna la Marca, and Siena,
which being of no great moment, I think it supperfluous to recount them. True
it is, troubles in Siena (after the end of the War, and the Duke of Calabria's
leaving those parts in the year 1488) were more frequent than else where, and
after several variations (sometimes the people, sometimes the Nobility having
the predominance) at length the Nobility prevailed, and of them, the persons of
greatest authority were Pandolfo, and Giacopo Petrucci, who, one of them for
his conduct and the other for his courage, were made as it were Princes of that
City; But the Florentines from the end of the War against Serazana to the year
1492 (in which Lorenzo died) lived in great felicity. For Lorenzo having by his
great interest and prudence, procured peace all over Italy, Lorenzo de Medici.
he applied himself to enlarging the Grandeur of the City, and of his own
Family; and first he married his eldest Son Piero, to Alfonsina the Daughter of
Cavaliere Orsimo: his second Son Giovanni he advanced to be a Cardinal, which
having no president, was the more remarkable; for he was but 13 years old, at
the time of his promotion: for his third Son Giuliano (who was very young) he
could make no extraordinary provision, because he lived not long after: but his
Daughters were disposed of very well: one of them was married to Giacopo
Salvati, another to Francesco Cibo; a third to Piero Ridolfi, the fourth (which
he had married to Giovanni de Medici to keep his Family united) died. In his
private affairs, especially in merchandising, he was very unfortunate, for by
reason of the exorbitance of his officers (who all of them lived like Princes)
much of his fortune was wasted and squandered, insomuch that he was constrained
to be beholding to the State for great sums of money. That he might be no longer
liable to the malignity of fortune, he left his trading, and fell a purchasing
land, as a surer, and more durable way. In the Countries of Prato, Pisa, and
the vale, he bought such possessions, as for the revenue, and magnificence of
the Houses, were fitter for a King than a private person. After this he
beautified and enlarged the City, and because there were many places
uninhabited, he appointed new streets, and caused new houses to be erected to
fill them; which was not only an augmentation, but a great Ornament to the
City. That he might live quietly at home, and in time of War, keep his Enemies
at a distance, he fortified the Castle of Firezuolo, which stands toward
Bologna in the middle of the Alps. Toward Siena, he began to repair Poggio
Imperial, and make it very strong: toward Genoa, he secured that passage, by
the reducation of Pietra Santa, and Serezana; with good stipends and Pensions
he confirmed his friends, the Baglioni in Perugia, the Vitelli in the City of
Castello: in Faenza he had a particular Government, all which were as so many
Bulwarks to keep the Enemy from Florence. In times of peace he caressed the
City with feasting, and plays, and tournaments, and representations of ancient
triumphs, to delight and entertain the People: his only design being to see
them pleased, the City suppplied, and the Nobles respected: he was a great
lover of Artists, and favourer of learned Men, of which Agnola da
montepulciano, Christofano Laudini, and Demetrius the Greek can give ample
testimony: the Count Giovanni della Mirandola (a person almost defied for his
literature) left all the other parts of Europe which he had traveled, and
(moved by Lorenzo's magnificence) fixed his residence at Florence. In
Architecture, Music, and Poesy, he delighted exceedingly. Many poetical
compositions with several of his comments upon them are still to be seen. And
that the Florentine youth might be encouraged to study, he erected an
University in Pisa, and hired the best Scholars in Italy to read to them: he
built a Monastery not far from Florence on purpose for Friar Mariano da
Chinazano an Augustine Monk, and one which he esteemed an excellent Preacher.
He was greatly beloved both of God, and fortune, for all his designs came to a
good end, and all his Enemies miscarried; for besides the Pazzi, he was set
upon to have been killed by Battista Frescobaldi, in the Carmine; and by
Baldinotto da Pistoia, at his Country House; but both of them failed, and were
justly punished, with all their confederats. The excellence of his
conversation, the eminence of his wisdom, and the happiness of his fortune,
made him honorable not only in Italy, but in all the Courts of the world.
Mathias King of Hungary gave many testimonies of his affection: the Sultan by
his Ambassadors and presents, visited and presented him. The great Turk
delivered Bernar do Bandini into his hands, who had murdered his Brother
Giulian; all which rendered him highly venerable in Italy, and he added to his
reputation every day by his prudence. In his discourse he was eloquent, and
facetious; in his resolutions wise, in his executions, quick, and courageous;
nor can any think be objected sufficient to eclipse these virtues, though he
was indeed addicted to Women, took too much pleasure in the company of witty
and satirical Men; and would play at boys play sometimes beneath the dignity of
his office; for he would play many times with his Children at all the most idle
and Childish recreations they would put him to. So that if the gravity of his
life, be considered with its levity, he will seem to be composed of two several
persons, united by an almost impossible conjunction. The last part of his days
was full of sorrow and disquiet, occasioned by the distempers of his body; for
he was sorely afflicted with intolerable pains at his Stomach, Lorenzo died
which brought him so low, that in April 1492 he died, in the 43 year of his
age. Never was there any man, not only in Florence but Italy, who departed with
more reputation for his wisdom* nor more lamentation to his Country; and
because upon his death, many desolations were like to ensue, the Heavens
themselves did seem to presage it. The spire of the Church of S. Riparata was
struck with thunder with such fury that a great part of the steeple was
destroyed by it to the great consternation of the City. All the Inhabitants of
Florence, and the Princes of Italy, bewailed him, which was particulary
manifested by their several compliments of condolency, and whether they had
reason or not, for what they did, the effects which succeeded a while after, did
clearly demonstrate; for being deprived of his Counsels, Italy could not find
one remaining, able to satiate, or restrain the ambition of Lodovico Duke of
Milan, for want of which, after his death such seeds of dissension brake forth,
as have perplexed and embroiled all Italy ever since.

THE PRINCE, Together with the ORIGINAL OF THE GVELF and GHIBILIN, Life of
CASTRVCCIO CASTRACANI, Murder of VITELLI, etc. by Duke VALENTINO, State of
FRANCE, State of GERMANY.


By NICOLAS MACHIAVEL.

Faithfully Englished.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, Charles Harper, and John Amery, in
Fleetstreet. 1680.

NICOLO MACHIAVELLI TO THE Most Illustrious LORENZO Son of PIERO de MEDICI.
THose who desire the favor of a Prince, do commonly introduce themselves by
presenting him with such things as he either values much, or does more than
ordinarily delight in; for which reason he is frequently presented with Horses,
Arms, Cloth of Gold, Jewels, and such Ornaments as are suitable to his Quality
and Grandeur. Being ambitious to present my self to your Highness with some
testimony of my devotions toward you, in all my Wardrobe I could not find any
thing more precious (at least to my self) than the knowledge of the Conduct and
Achievements of Great Men, which I learned by long conversation in modern
affairs, and a continual investigation of old: after long and diligent
examination, having reduced all into a small Volume, I do presume to present to
your Highness; and though I cannot think it a work fit to appear in your
presence, yet my confidence in your bounty is such, I hope it may be accepted,
considering I was not capable of more, than presenting you with a faculty of
understanding in a short time, what for several years, with in^inite labor and
hazard I had been gathering together. Nor have I beautified or adorned it with
Rhetorical Ornations, or such outward imbellishments as are usual in such
descriptions. I had rather it should pass without any approbation, than owe it
to any thing but the truth and gravity of the matter. I would not have it
imputed to me as presumption, if an inferior person as I am, pretend not only
to treat of, but to prescribe, and regulate the proceedings of Princes: for as
they who take the Landscape of a Country, to consider the Mountains, and the
nature of the higher places, do descend ordinarily into the Plains, and dispose
themselves upon the Hills, to take the prospect of the Valleys; in like manner,
to understand the nature of the people, it is necessary to be a Prince, and to
know the nature of Princes, it is as requisite to be of the people. May your
Highness then accept this Book with as much kindness as it is presented; and if
you please diligently and deliberately to reslect upon it, you will find in it
my extreme desire that your Highness may arrive at that Grandeur which Fortune
and your Accomplishments do seem to presage; from which pinnacle of Honor, if
your Highness vouchsafes at any time to look down upon things below, you will
see how unjustly, and how continually I have been exposed to the malignity of
fortune.

Machiavel's Prince.
CHAP. I.
The several sorts of Governments, and after what manner they are obtained.
THere never was, nor is at this day any Government in the World, by which one
Man has rule and dominion over another, but it is either a Commonwealth, or a
Monarchy. Monarchies are either hereditary, where the ancestors of the
Sovereign have been a long time in possession, or where they are but new. The
new are either so wholly, and entirely (as Milan was to Francis Sforza) or
annexed to the hereditary Dominions of the Conqueror (as the Kingdom of
Naples, to the Kingdom of Spain.) These territories thus acquired are
accustomed either to be subject to some Prince, or to live at liberty and free,
and are subdued, either by his auxiliaries, or own forces, by his good fortune,
or conduct.

CHAP. II.
Of Hereditary Principalities.
I Shall omit speaking of Commonwealths, as having discoursed of them largely
elsewhere, and write in this place only of Principalities, and how according to
the foregoing division, the said Principalities may be governed, and
maintained. I do affirm then that hereditary States, and such as have been
accustomed to the Family of their Prince, are preserved with less difficulty
than the new, and because it is sufficient not to transgress the examples of
their predecessors, and next to comply and frame themselves to the accidents
that occur. So that if the Prince be a person of competent industry, he will be
sure to* keep himself in the throne, unless he be supplanted by some great, and
more than ordinary force: and even then, when so supplanted, fortune can never
turn tail, or be adverse to the usurper, but he will stand fair to be restored.
Of this, Italy affords us an example in the Duke of Ferrara, who supported
bravely against the invasion of the Venetians in 1484, and afterward against
Pope Julius 10, upon no other foundation but his antiquity in that Government;
for a natural Prince has not so much occasion or necessity to oppress his
Subjects, whereby it follows he must be better beloved, and retain more of the
affections of his People unless some extraordinary vices concur to make him
odious, so that the succession and coherence of his Government, takes away the
causes and memory of innovations; for one new change leaves always (as in
buildings) a toothing, and aptitude of another.

CHAP. III.
Of mixed Principalities.
BUt the difficulties consist in Governments lately acquired, especially if not
absolutely new, but as members annexed to the territories of the Usurper, in
which case such a Government is called mixed. The tumults and revolutions in
such Monarchies proceed from a natural crosness and difficulty in all new
conquests, for Men do easily part with their Prince, upon hopes of bettering
their condition, and that hope provokes them to rebel, b^t most commonly they
are mistaken, and experience tells them their condition is much worse.

This proceeds from another natural and ordinary cause necessitating the new
Prince to overlay or disgust his new subjects by quartring his Army upon them,
Taxes, or a thousand other inconveniences, which are the perpetual consequents
of conquest. So that you make them your Enemies who suffer, and are injured by
your usurpation, but cannot preserve their friendship who introduced you,
because you are neither able to satisfy their expectation, or employ strong
remedies against them, by reason of your obligations, wherefore though an
usurper be never so strong, and his Army never so numerous, he must have
intelligence with the natives, if he means to conquer a Province. For these
reasons Lewis XII. of France, quickly subdued Milan, and lost it as quickly,
for the same People which opened him their gates, finding themselves deceived
in their hopes, and disappointed in the future benefits which they expected,
could not brook, nor comport with the haughtiness of their new Sovereign: it is
very true, Countries that have rebelled, and are conquered the second time, are
recovered with more difficulty, for the defection of the People having taken
off all obligation or respect from the Usurper, he takes more liberty to secure
himself by punishing offenders, exposing the suspected, and fortifying where
ever he finds himself weak; so that Count Lodovick having been able to rescue
Milan out of the hands of the French the first time, only by harrasing and
infesting its borders, the second time he recovered it, it was necessary for
him, to arm and confederate the whole World against the said King, and that his
Army should be beaten, and driven out of Italy: and this happened from the
foresaid occasions. Nevertheless the French were twice dispossessed. The
general reasons of the first, we have already discoursed; it remains now that
we take a prospect of the second, and declare what remedies the said King Lewis
had, or what another may have in his condition, to preserve himself better in
his new conquests, than the King of France did before him. I say then that
Provinces newly acquired, and joined to the ancient territory of him who
conquered them, are either of the same Country, or Language, or otherwise. In
the first case, they are easily kept, especially if the People have not been
too much accustomed to liberty: and to secure the possession, there needs no
more than to extirpate the Family of the Prince which governed before; for in
other things maintaining to them their old condition, there being no
discrepancy in their customs, Men do acquiesce and live quietly, as has been
seen in the cases of Burgundy, Bretagne, Gascogne and Normandy, which have
continued so long under the Government of France: for though there be some
difference in their language, nevertheless their Laws and customs being alike,
they do easily consist. He therefore who acquires any thing, and desires to
preserve it, is obliged to have a care of two things more particulary; one is,
that the Family of the former Prince be extinguished; the other, that no new
Laws or Taxes be imposed; whereby it will come to pass, that in a short time it
may be annexed and consolidated with his old Principality. But where Conquest
is made in a Country differing in Language, Customs, and Laws, there is the
great difficulty, their good fortune and great industry is requisite to keep it;
and one of the best and most efficacious expedients to do it, would be for the
Usurper to live there himself, which would render his possession more secure,
and durable, as the great Turk has done in Greece, who, in despite of all his
practices and policies to keep it in subjection, had he not fixed his Imperial
residence there, would never have been able to have effected it. For being
present in Person, disorders are discovered in the bud, and prevented; but
being at a distance, in some remote part, they come only by hearsay, and that,
when they are got to a head, and commonly incurable. Besides, the Province is
not subject to be pillaged by officers, by reason of the nearness and
accessibleness of their Prince, which disposes those to love him who are good,
and those to dread him who are otherwise; and if any foreigner attacks it, he
must do it with more care and circumspection, in respect that the Princes
residence being there, it will be harder for him to lose it.

There is another Remedy, rather better than worse, and that is, to plant
Colonies in one or two places, which may be as it were the Keys of that State,
and either that must be done of necessity, or an Army of Horse and Foot be
maintained in those parts, which is much worse; for Colonies are of no great
expense; The Prince sends and maintains them at very little charge, and
intrenches only upon such as he is constrained to dispossess of their Houses
and Land, for the subsistence and accommodation of the new Inhabitants, who are
but few, and a small part of the State; they also who are injured and offended,
living dispersed and in poverty, cannot do any mischief, and the rest being
quiet and undisturbed, will not stir, lest they should mistake, and run
themselves into the same condition with their Neighbors.

I conclude likewise, That those Colonies which are least chargeable, are most
faithful and inoffensive, and those few who are offended are too poor, and
dispersed, to do any hurt, as I said before; And it is to be observed, Men are
either to be flattered and indulged, or utterly destroyed; because for small
offenses they do usually revenge themselves, but for great ones they cannot; so
that injury is to be done in such a manner, as not to fear any revenge. But if
in stead of Colonies, an Army be kept on foot, it will be much more expensive,
and the whole revenue of that Province being consumed in the keeping it, the
acquisition will be a loss, and rather a prejudice than otherwise, by removing
the Camp up and down the Country, and changing their quarters, which is an
inconvenience every man will resent, and be ready to revenge, and they are the
most dangerous and implacable Enemies who are provoked by insolences committed
against them in their own houses. In all respects therefore, this kind of guard
is unprofitable, whereas on the other side Colonies are useful. Moreover, he
who is in a Province of a different constitution (as is said before) ought to
make himself head, and Protector of his inferior Neighbors, and endeavor with
all diligence to weaken and debilitate such as are more powerful, and to have a
particular care that no stranger enters into the said Province, with as much
power as he; for it will always happen that some body or other will be invited
by the Malcontents, either out of ambition, or fear. This is visible in the
Etolians, who brought the Romans into Greece, who were never admitted into any
Province, but by the temptation of the Natives. The Common method in such Cases
is this; As soon as a foreign Potentate enters into a Province, those who are
weaker, or disobliged, join themselves with him, out of emulation and animosity
to those who are above them, insomuch that in respect of these inferior Lords,
no pains is to be omitted that may gain them; and when gained, they will
readily and unanimously fall into one mass with the State that is conquered.
Only the Conqueror is to take special care they grow not too strong, nor be
entrusted with too much Authority, and then he can easily with his own forces,
and their assistance keep down the greatness of his Neighbors, and make
himself absolute Arbiter in that Province. And he who acts not this part
prudently, shall quickly lose what he has got, and even whilst he enjoys it,
be obnoxious to many troubles and inconveniences. The Romans in their new
Conquests observed this Course, they planted their Colonies, entertained the
inferior Lords into their protection without increasing their power, they kept
under such as were more potent, and would not suffer any foreign Prince to have
interest among them. I will set down only Greece for an Example. The Etolians,
and Achaians were protected; the Kingdom of the Macedonians was depressed, and
Antiochus driven out; yet the merits and fidelity of the Achaians and Etolians
could never procure them any increase of Authority, nor the persuasions and
applications of Philip induce the Romans to be his friends, till he was
overcome, nor the power of Antiochus prevail with them to consent that he
should retain any Sovereignty in that Province: For the Romans acted in that
case as all wise Princes ought to do, who are to have an eye, not only upon
present, but future incommodities, and to redress them with all possible
industry, for dangers that are seen afar off, are easily prevented, but
protracting till they are at hand, the remedies grow unseasonable, and the
malady incurable. And it falls out in this case, as the Physicians say of an
Hectic Fever; that at first it is easily cured, and hard to be known, but in
process of time, no being observed, or resisted in the beginning, it becomes
easy to be known, but very difficult to be cured: So is it in matters of
State, things which are discovered at a distance (which is done only by prudent
men) produce little mischief, but what is easily averted: But when through
ignorance or inadvertency, they come to that height that every one discerns
them, there is no room for any remedy, and the disease is incurable: The Romans
therefore foreseeing their troubles afar off, opposed themselves in time, and
never swallowed any injury, to put off a War, for they knew that War was not
avoided, but deferred thereby, and commonly with advantage to the Enemy;
wherefore they chose rather to make War upon Philip, and Antiochus in Greece,
than suffer them to invade Italy; and yet at that time there was no necessity
of either, they might have avoided them both, but they thought it not fit; for
they could never relish the saying that is so frequent in the Mouths of our new
Politicians, To enjoy the present benefits of time, but preferred the exercise
of their courage and wisdom, for time carries all things along with it, and may
bring good as well as evil, and ill as well as good. But let us return to
France, and examine if what was there done, was conformable to what is
prescribed here: and to this purpose I shall not speak of Charles VIII. but of
Lewis XII. as of a Prince whose Conduct, and affairs (by reason his possession
was longer in Italy) were more conspicuous, and you shall see how contrary he
acted in every thing that was necessary for the keeping of so different a
State. This Lewis was invited into Italy by the Venetians, who had an ambition
to have got half Lombardy by his coming: I will not condemn the Expedition, nor
blame the Counsels of that King, for being desirous of footing in Italy, and
having no Allies left in that Country but all doors shut against him (upon the
ill treatment which his predecessor Charles had used toward them) he was
constrained to take his friends where he could find them, and that resolution
would have been lucky enough, had he not miscarried in his other
administration; for he had no sooner subdued Lombardy, but he recovered all the
reputation and dignity that was lost by King Charles: Genoa submitted; Florence
courted his friendship, the Marquess of Mantoua, the Duke of Ferrara,
Bentivoglio, Madam de Furli, the Lords of Faenza, Pesoro, Rimini, Camerino,
Piombino; the Lucchesi, Pisani, Sanesi, all of them address themselves to him
for his alliance and amity; Then the Venetians began to consider, and reflect
upon their indiscretion; who to gain two Towns in Lombardy, had made the King
of France Master of two thirds of all Italy. Let any one now think with how
little difficulty the said King might have kept up his reputation in that
Country, if he had observed the rules abovesaid, and protected his friends, who
being numerous, and yet weak, and fearful, (some of the Pope, and some of the
Venetians) were always under a necessity of standing by him, and with their
assistance he might easily have secured himself against any Competitor
whatever. But he was no sooner in Milan, but he began to prevaricate* and send
supplies to Pope Alexander, to put him in possession of Romagna, not
considering that thereby he weakened himself, and disobliged his friends who had
thrown themselves into his arms, and agrandized the Church, by adding to its
spiritual authority (which was so formidable before) so great a proportion of
temporal, and having committed one error, he was forced to proceed so far, as
to put a stop to the ambition of Pope Alexander, and hinder his making himself
Master of Tuscany, the said Lewis was forced into Italy again. Nor was it
enough for him to have advanced the interest of the Church, and deserted his
friends, but out of an ardent desire to the Kingdom of Naples, he shared it
with the King of Spain; so that whereas before he was sole Umpire in Italy, he
now entertained a Partner, to whom the ambitious of that Province, and his own
Malcontents might repair upon occasion; and whereas the King of that Kingdom
might have been made his Pensioner, he turned out him, to put in another that
might be able to turn out himself.

It is very obvious, and no more than Natural, for Princes to desire to extend
their Dominion, and when they attempt nothing but what they are able to
atcheive, they are applauded, at least not upbraided thereby; but when they are
unable to compass it, and yet will be doing, then they are condemned, and
indeed not unworthily.

If France then with its own forces alone had been able to have enterpriz'd
upon Naples, it ought to have been done; but if her own private strength was
too weak, it ought not to have been divided: and if the division of Lombardy to
which she consented with the Venetian, was excusable; it was, because done to
get footing in Italy; But this partition of Naples with the King of Spain, is
extremely to be condemned, because not pressed or quickened by such necessity
as the former. Lewis therefore committed five faults in this Expedition: He
ruined the inferior Lords; He augmented the Dominion of a Neighbor Prince; He
called in a Forreigner as puissant as himself; He neglected to continue there
in person; and planted no Colonies: All which errors might have been no
inconvenience whilst he had lived, had he not been guilty of a sixth, and that
was depressing the power of the Venetian: If indeed he had not sided with the
Church, nor brought the Spaniards into Italy, it had been but reasonable for
him to have taken down the pride of the Venetian, but persuing his first
resolutions, he ought not to have suffered them to be ruined, because whilst
the Venetian strength was entire, they would have kept off other people from
attempting upon Lombardy, to which the Venetians would never have consented,
unless upon condition it might have been delivered to them, and the others
would not in probability have forced it from France, to have given it to them:
and to have contended with them both, no body would have had the courage. If it
be urged that King Lewis gave up Romagna to the Pope, and the Kingdom of
Naples, to the King of Spain, to evade a War, I answer, as before, That a
present mischief is not to be suffered to prevent a War, for the War is not
averted, but protracted, and will follow with greater disadvantage.

If the Kings faith and engagements to the Pope to undertake this enterprise
for him, be objected, and that he did it to recompense the dissolution of his
Marriage, and the Cap which at his intercession his Holiness had conferred upon
the Legate of Amboise, I refer them for an answer, to what I shall say
hereafter about the faith of a Prince, how far it obliges. So then King Lewis
lost Lombardy, because he did not observe one of those rules, which others have
followed with success in the Conquest of Provinces, and in their desire to keep
them: Nor is it an extraordinary thing, but what happens every day, and not
without reason. To this purpose I remember I was once in discourse with the
Cardinal d' Amboise at Nantes, at the time when Valentino (for so Caesar Borgia
Pope Alezander's Son was commonly called) possessed himself of Romagna: In the
heat of our Conference the Cardinal telling me that the Italians were ignorant
of the art of War; I replied, that the French had as little skill in matters of
State, for if they had had the least policy in the world, they would never have
suffered the Church to have come to that height and Elevation. And it has been
found since by experience, that the Grandeur of the Church and the Spaniard in
Italy, is derived from France, and that they in requital, have been the ruin
and expulsion of the French.

From hence a general rule may be deduced, and such a one as seldom or never is
subject to Exception. Viz. That whoever is the occasion of another
advancement, is the cause of his own diminution: because that advancement is
founded either upon the conduct or power of the Donor, either of which become
suspicious at length to the person preferred.

CHAP. IV.
Why the Kingdom of Darius usurped by Alexander, did not rebel against his
Successors, after Alexander was dead.
THE difficulties encountered in the keeping of a new Conquest being considered,
it may well be admired how it came to pass that Alexander the Great, having in
a few years made himself Master of Asia, and died as soon as he had done, That
state could be kept from Rebellion: Yet his Successors enjoyed it a long time
peaceably, without any troubles or concussions but what sprung from their own
avarice and ambition. I answer, That all Monarchies of which we have any
record, were governed after two several manners; Either by a Prince and his
Servants whom he vouchsafes out of his mere grace to constitute his Ministers,
and admits of their Assistance in the Government of his Kingdom; or else by a
Prince and his Barons who were persons advanced to that quality, not by favor
or concession of the Prince, but by the ancientness, and Nobility of their
Extraction. These Barons have their proper jurisdictions and subjects, who own
their Authority, and pay them a natural respect. Those States which are
governed by the Prince and his Servants, have their Prince more Arbitrary and
absolute, because his Supremacy is acknowledged by every body, and if another
be obeyed, it is only as his Minister and Substitute, without any affection to
the Man. Examples of these different Governments, we may find in our time in
the persons of the Grand Signore, and the King of France. The whole Turkish
Monarchy is governed by a single person, the rest are but his Servants, and
Slaves; for distinguishing his whole Monarchy into Provinces and Governments,
(which they call Sangiacchi) he sends when and what Officers he thinks fit, and
changes them as he pleases. But the King of France is established in the middle
(as it were) of several great Lords, whose Sovereignty having been owned, and
families beloved a long time by their Subjects, they keep their pre-eminence,
nor is it in the King's power to deprive them, without inevitable danger to
himself. He therefore who considers the one with the other, will find the
Turkish Empire harder to be subdued, but when once conquered, more easy to be
kept: The reason of the difficulty is, because the Usurper cannot be called in
by the Grandees of the Empire; nor hope any assistance from the great Officers,
to facilitate his Enterprise, which proceeds from the reasons abovesaid, for
being all slaves, and under obligation, they are not easily corrupted; and if
they could, little good was to be expected from them, being unable for the
aforesaid reasons, to bring them any party: So that whoever invades the Turk,
must expect to ^ind him entire and united, and is to depend more upon his own
proper force, than any disorders among them; but having once conquered them,
and beaten their Army beyond the possibility of a recruit, the danger is at an
end; for there is no body remaining to be afraid of, but the Family of the
Emperor, which being once extinguished, no body else has any interest with the
people, and they are as little to be apprehended after the Victory, as they
were to be relied upon before. But in Kingdoms that are governed according to
the Model of France, it happens quite contrary, because having gained some of
the Barons, to your side (and some of them will always be discontent, and
desirous of change) you may readily enter: They can (as I said before) give you
easy admission, and contribute to your Victory. But to defend, and make good
what you have got, brings a long train of troubles and calamities with it, as
well upon your friends, as your foes. Nor will it suffice to exterminate the
race of the King; forasmuch as other Princes will remain, who upon occasion,
will make themselves heads of any Commotion, and they being neither to be
satisfied nor extinguished, you must of necessity be expelled upon the first
Insurrection.

Now if it be considered what was the Nature of Darius his Government, it will
be found to have been very like the Turks, and therefore Alexander was obliged
to fight them, and having conquered them, and Darius dying after the Victory,
the Empire of the Persians remained quietly to Alexander for the reasons
abovesaid; and his Successors, had they continued united, might have enjoyed it
in peace, for in that whole Empire no Tumults succeeded, but what were raised
by themselves. But in Kingdoms that are constituted like France, it is
otherwise, and impossible to possess them in quiet: From hence sprung the many
defections of Spain, France, and Greece from the Romans, by reason of the many
little Principalities in those several Kingdoms, of which, whilst there
remained any memory, the Romans enjoyed their possession, in a great deal of
incertainty, but when their memory was extinct, by power and diuturnity of
Empire, they grew secure in their possessions, and quarrelling afterward among
themselves, every Officer of the Romans was able to bring a party into the
field, according to the latitude and extent of his Command in the said
Provinces, and the reason was, because the race of their old Princes being
extirpate, there was no body left for them to acknowledge, but the Romans.
These things therefore being considered, it is not to be wondered that Alexander
had the good fortune to keep the Empire of Asia, whilst the rest, as Pyrrhus
and others, found such difficulty to retain what they had got, for it came not
to pass from the small, or great Virtue of the Victor, but from the difference
and variety of the Subject.

CHAP. V.
How such Cities and Principalities are to be Governed, who lived under their
own Laws, before they were subdued.
WHen States that are newly conquered, have been accustomed to their liberty,
and lived under their own Laws, to keep them, three ways are to be observed:
The first is utterly to ruin them; the second to live personally among them;
the third is (contenting your self with a Pension from them) to permit them to
enjoy their old privileges and Laws, erecting a kind of Council of State, to
consist of a few, which may have a care of your interest, and keep the people
in amity and obedience. And that Council being set up by you, and knowing that
it subsists only by your favor and authority, will not omit any thing that may
propagate and enlarge them. A Town that has been anciently free, cannot more
easily be kept in subjection, than by employing its own Citizens, as may be
seen by the Example of the Spartans, and Romans. The Spartans had got
possession of Athens, and Thebes, and settled an Oligarchie according to their
fancy; and yet they lost them again. The Romans to keep Capua, Carthage, and
Numantia, ordered them to be destroyed, and they kept them by that means.
Thinking afterward to preserve Greece, as the Spartans had done, by allowing
them their liberty, and indulging their old Laws, they found themselves
mistaken; so that they were forced to subvert many Cities in that Province,
before they could keep it; and certainly that is the safest way which I know;
for whoever conquers a free Town, and does not demolish it, commits a great
error, and may expect to be ruined himself, because whenever the Citizens are
disposed to a revolt, they betake themselves of course to that blessed name of
Liberty, and the Laws of their Ancestors, which no length of time, nor kind
usage whatever will be able to eradicate, and let all possible care and
provision be made to the contrary, unless they be divided some way or other, or
the Inhabitants dispersed, the thought of their old privileges will never out
of their heads, but upon all occasions they will endeavor to recover them, as
Pisa did, after it had continued so many years in subjection to the
Florentines; But it falls out quite contrary, where the Cities or Provinces
have been used to a Prince whose race is extirpated and gone; for being on the
one side accustomed to obey, and on the other, at a loss for their old Family,
they can never agree to set up another, and will never know how to live freely
without; so that they are not easily to be tempted to rebel, and the Prince may
oblige them with less difficulty, and be secure of them when he has done. But
in a Commonwealth their hatred is more inverterate, their revenge more
insatiable, nor does the memory of their ancient liberty ever suffer, or ever
can suffer them to be quiet: So that the most secure way is either to ruin
them quite, or make your residence among them.

CHAP. VI.
Of Principalities acquired by ones own proper Conduct and Arms.
LEt no man think it strange, if in speaking of new Governments, either by
Princes or States, I introduce great and eminent Examples; forasmuch as men in
their actions follow commonly the ways that are beaten, and when they would do
any generous thing, they propose to themselves some pattern of that Nature;
nevertheless, being impossible to come up exactly to that, or to acquire that
virtue in perfection which you desire to imitate; a wise man, ought always to
set before him for his Example the actions of great Men, who have excelled in
the achievement of some great Exploit, to the end that though his virtue and
power arrives not at that perfection, it may at least come as near as is
possible, and receive some tincture thereby: Like Experienced Archers, who
observing the Mark to be at great distance, and knowing the strength of their
Bow, and how far it will carry, they fix their aim somewhat higher than the
Mark, not with design to shoot at that height, but, that by mounting their
Arrow to a certain proportion, they may come the nearer to the Mark they
intend. I say then, that Principalities newly acquitted by an upstart Prince,
are more or less difficult to maintain, as he is more or less provident that
gains them. And because the happiness of rising from a private person to be a
Prince, presupposes great Virtue, or Fortune, where both of them concur, they
do much facilitate the conservation of the Conquest: yet he who has committed
least to Fortune, has continued the longest. It prevents much trouble likewise
when the Prince (having no better residence elsewhere) is constrained to live
personally among them. But to speak of such who by their Virtue, rather than
Fortune, have advanced themselves to that Dignity, I say, that the most
renowned and excellent, are Moses, Cyrus, Romulus, Theseus, and the like: And
though Moses might be reasonably excepted, as being only the Executioner of
God's immediate Commands, yet he deserves to be mentioned, if it were only for
that Grace, which rendered him capable of Communication with God. But if we
consider Cyrus, and the rest of the Conquerors and Founders of Monarchies, we
shall find them extraordinary; and examining their Lives and Exploits, they
will appear, not much different from Moses, who had so incomparable a Master;
for by their Conversations and Successes, they do not seem to have received any
thing from fortune, but occasion, and opportunity, in introducing what forms of
Government they pleased; and as without that occasion, the greatness of their
Courage had never been known, so had not they been magnanimous, and taken hold
of it, that occasion had happened in vain. It was necessary therefore for Moses,
that the people of Israel should be in captivity in Egypt, that to free
themselves from bondage, they might be disposed to follow him: It was
convenient that Romulus should be turned out of Albo, and exposed to the wild
beasts when he was young, that he might afterward be made King of Rome, and
Founder of that great Empire. It was not unnecessary likewise that Cyrus should
^ind the Persians mutining at the Tyranny of the Medes, and that the Medes
should be grown soft, and effeminate with their long peace. Theseus could never
have given proof of his Virtue and Generosity, had not the Athenians been in
great troubles and confusion. These great advantages, made those great persons
Eminent, and their great Wisdom knew how to improve them to the reputation, and
enlargement of their Country. They then who become great by the ways of Virtue
(as the Princes abovesaid) do meet with many difficulties, before they arrive
at their ends, but having compassed them once, they easily keep them: The
difficulties in the acquisition, arise in part from new Laws and Customs which
they are forced to introduce for the Establishment and security of their own
dominion; and this is to be considered that there is nothing more difficult to
undertake, more uncertain to succeed, and more dangerous to manage, than to
make ones self Prince, and prescribe new Laws: Because he who innovates in that
manner has for his Enemies all those who made any advantage by the Old Laws;
and those who expect benefit by the new, will be but cool and luke-warn in his
defense; which luke-warmness proceeds from a certain awe for their adversaries
who have their old Laws on their side, and partly from a natural incredulity in
mankind, which gives credit but slowly to any new thing, unless recommended
first by the experiment of success. Hence it proceeds that the first time the
adversary has opportunity to make an attempt, he does it with great briskness,
and vigor, but the defense is so t^pid and faint, that for the most part the
new Prince, and his adherents perish together. Wherefore for better discussion
of this case, it is necessary to inquire whether these innovators do stand upon
their own feet, or depend upon other People; that is to say whether in the
conduct of their af^airs, they do make more use of their rhetoric, than their
Arms. In the first case, they commonly miscarry, and their designs seldom
succeed; but when their expectations are only from themselves, and they have
power in their own hands to make themselves obeyed, they run little or no
hazard, and do frequently prevail. For further eviction, the Scripture shows us
that those of the Prophets whose Arms were in their hands, and had power to
compel, succeeded better in the reformations which they designed; whereas those
who came only with exhortation and good language, suffered Martyrdom and
Banishment, because (besides the reasons above said) the People are unconstant,
and susceptible of any new Doctrine at first, but not easily brought to retain
it: so that things are to be ordered in such manner that when their Faith
begins to stagger, they may be forced to persist. Moses, Cyrus, Theseus, and
Romulus could never have made their Laws to have been long observed, had they
not had power to have compelled it; as in our days it happened to Friar Jerome
Savanorola, who ruined himself by his new institutions, as soon as the People
of Florence began to desert him; for he had no means to confirm them who had
been of his opinion, nor to constrain such as dissented. Wherefore such persons
meet with great difficulty in their affairs; all their dangers are still by the
way, which they can hardly overcome, but by some extraordinary virtue, and
excellence: nevertheless when once they have surmounted them, and arrived at
any degree of veneration, having supplanted those who envyed their advancement,
they remain puissant, and firm, and honorable, and happy. I will add to these
great examples, another, perhaps not so conspicuous; but one that will bear a
proportion and resemblance with the rest, and shall satisfy me for all others
of that nature. It is of Hiero of Syracuse, who of a private person was made
Prince of that City, for which he was beholding to fortune no further than for
the occasion, because the Syracusans being under oppression, chose him for
their Captain, in which command he behaved himself so well, he deserved to be
made their Prince, for he was a person of so great virtue and excellence, that
those who have writ of him, have given him this Character, that even in his
private condition, he wanted nothing, but a Kingdom to make him an admirable
King. This Hiero subdued the old Militia, established a new; renounced the old
Allies; confederated with others; and having friends and forces of his own, he
was able upon such a foundation to erect what fabric he pleased; so that
though the acquisition cost him much trouble, he maintained it with little.

CHAP. VII.
Of new Principalities acquired by accident, and the supplies of other People.
THey who from private condition ascend to be Princes, and merely by the
indulgence of fortune, arrive without much trouble at their dignity, though it
costs them dear to maintain it, meet but little difficulty in their passage,
being hurried as it were with wings, yet when they come to settle and
establish, then begins their misery. These kind of Persons are such as attain
their dignity by Bribes, or concession of some other great Prince, as it happened
to several in Greece in the Cities of Ionia, and upon the Hellespont; where
they were invested with that power by Darius for his greater security and
Glory, and to those Emperors who arrived at the Empire by the corruption of
the Soldiers. These persons I say, subsist wholly upon the pleasure and
fortune of those who advanced them, which being two things very valuable and
uncertain; they have neither knowledge nor power to continue long in that
degree; know not, because unless he be a Man of extraordinary qualities and
virtue, it is not reasonable to think he can know how to command other people,
who before lived always in a private condition himself; cannot, because they
have no forces upon whose friendship, and fidelity they can rely. Moreover
States which are suddenly conquered (as all things else in nature whose rise
and increase is so speedy) can have no root or foundation, but what will be
shaken and supplanted by the first gust of adversity, unless they who have been
so suddenly exalted, be so wise as to prepare prudently in time for the
conservation of what fortune threw so luckily into their lap, and establish
afterward such fundamentals for their duration, as others (which I mentioned
before) have done in the like cases. About the arrival at this Authority either
by virtue, or good fortune I shall instance in two examples that are fresh in
our memory, one is Francis Sforza, the other Caesar Borgio; Sforza by just
means, and extraordinary virtue made himself Duke of Milan, and enjoyed it in
great peace, though gained with much trouble. Borgia on the other side (called
commonly Duke of Valentine) got several fair territories by the fortune of his
Father Pope Alexander, and lost them all after his death, though he used all
his industry, and employed all the Arts which a wise and brave Prince ought to
do to fix himself in the sphere, where the Arms, and fortune of other people
had placed him: For he (as I said before) who laid not his foundation in time,
may yet raise his superstructure, but with great trouble to the Architect, and
great danger to the building. If therefore the whole progress of the said Duke
be considered, it will be found what solid foundations he had laid for his
future dominion, of which progress I think it not superfluous to discourse,
because I know not what better precepts to display before a new Prince, than
the example of his actions, and though his own orders and methods did him no
good, it was not so much his fault, as the malignity of his fortune.

Pope Alexander the sixth had a desire to make his Son Duke Valentine great,
but he saw many blocks and impediments in the way both for the present, and
future. First he could not see any way to advance him to any territory that
depended not upon the Church, and to those in his gift, he was sure the Duke of
Milan, and the Venetians would never consent, for Faenza and Riminum had
already put themselves under the Venetian protection. He was likewise sensible
that the forces of Italy, especially those who were capable of assisting him,
were in the hands of those who ought to apprehend the greatness of the Pope, as
the Ursini, Colonnesi, and their followers, and therefore could not repose any
great confidence in them: besides, the Laws and alliances of all the States in
Italy must of necessity be disturbed, before he could make himself Master of
any part, which was no hard matter to do, finding the Venetians upon some
private interest of their own, inviting the French to another expedition into
Italy, which his Holiness was so far from opposing, that he promoted it by
dissolution of King Lewis his former marriage. Lewis therefore passed the Alps
by the assistance of the Venetians, and Alexanders consent, and was no sooner
in Milan, but he sent forces to assist the Pope in his enterprise against
Romagna, which was immediately surrendered upon the Kings reputation. Romagna
being in this manner reduced by the Duke, and the Colonnesi defeated, being
ambitious not only to keep what he had got, but to advance in his Conquests,
two things obstructed; one was the infidelity of his own Army; the other, the
aversion of the French: for he was jealous of the forces of the Ursini who were
in his service; suspected by would fail him in his need, and either hinder his
conquest, or take it from him when he had done; and the same fears he had of
the French; and his jealousy of the Ursini was much increased, when after the
expugnation of Faenza, assaulting Bologna, he found them very cold and backward
in the attack: and the King's inclination he discovered, when having possessed
himself of the Duchy of Urbin, he invaded Tuscany, and was by him required to
desist. Whereupon the Duke resolved to depend no longer upon fortune, and
foraign assistance, and the first course he took, was to weaken the party of
the Ursini, and Colonni in Rome, which he effected very neatly by debauching
such of their adherants as were Gentlemen, taking them into his own service,
and giving them honorable pensions, and Governments, and Commands, according to
their respective qualities, so that in a few months, their passion for that
faction evaporated, and they turned all for the Duke. After this he attended an
opportunity of supplanting the Ursini, as he had done the Family of the Colonni
before; which happened very luckily, and was as luckily improved: for the
Ursini considering too late, that the greatness of the Duke and the Church
tended to their ruin, held a Council at a place called Magione in Perugia,
which occasioned the rebellion of Urbin, the tumults in Romagna, and a thousand
dangers to the Duke besides; but though he overcame them all by the assistance
of the French, and recovered his reputation, yet he grew weary of his foreign
allies, as having nothing further to oblige them, and betook himself to his
artifice, which he managed so dexterously, that the Ursini reconciled
themselves to him, by the mediation of Seignor Paulo, with whom for his
security he comported so handsomely by presenting with money, rich stuffs, and
Horses, that being convinced of his integrity, he conducted them to Sinigaglia,
and delivered them into the Dukes hands. Having by this means exterminated the
chief of his adversaries, and reduced their friends, the Duke had laid a fair
foundation for his greatness, having gained Romagna and the Duchy of Urbin,
and insinuated with the People by giving them a gust of their future felicity.
And because this part is not unworthy to be known for imitation sake, I will
not pass it in silence. When the Duke had possessed himself of Romagna, finding
it had been governed by poor and inferior Lord's, who had rather robbed than
corrected their Subjects, and given them more occasion of discord than unity,
insomuch as that Province was full of robberies, riots, and all manner of
insolences; to reduce them to unanimity, and subjection to Monarchy, he
thought it necessary to provide them a good Governor, and thereupon he conferred
that charge upon R^miro d' Orco, with absolute power, though he was a cruel,
and a passionate Man. Orce was not long before he had settled it in peace, with
no small reputation to himself. Afterward the Duke apprehending so large a
power might grow odious to the people, he erected a Court of judicature in the
middle of the Province, in which every City had its advocate, and an excellent
person was appointed to preside. And because he discovered that his passed
^verity had created him many Enemies; to remove that ill opinion, and recover
the affections of the people he had a mind to show that if any cruelty had been
exercised, it proceeded not from him, but from the arrogance of his Minister;
and for their further confirmation; he caused the said Governor to be
apprehended, and his Head chopped off one morning in the Market place at Cesena,
with a wooden dagger on one side of him, and a bloody knife on the other; the
ferocity of which spectacle not only appeased, but amazed the people for a
while. But reassuming our discourse, I say, the Duke finding himself powerful
enough, and secure against present danger, being himself as strong as he
desired, and his neighbors in a manner reduced to an incapacity of hurting
him, being willing to go on with his conquests, there remaining nothing but a
jealousy of France, and not without cause, for he knew that King had found his
error at last, and would be sure to obstruct him. Hereupon he began to look
abroad for new allies, and to haesitate and stagger toward France, as appeared
when the French Army advanced into the Kingdom of Naples against the Spaniards
who had besieged Cajeta; his great design was to secure himself against the
French, and he had doubtless done it, if Alexander had lived. These were his
provisions against the dangers that were imminent, but those that were remote,
were more doubtful and uncertain. The first thing he feared was, lest the next
Pope should be his enemy, and reassume all that Alexander had given him, to
prevent which he proposed four several ways. The first was by destroying the
whole line of those Lord's whom he had dispossessed, that his Holiness might
have no occasion to restore them; The second was to cajole the Nobility in
Rome, and draw them over to his party, that thereby he might put an aw, and
restraint upon the Pope. The third was, if possible to make the College his
friends. The fourth was to make himself so strong before the Death of his
Father, as to be able to stand upon his own legs, and repel the first violence
that should be practiced against him. Three of these four expedients he had
try'd^before Alexander died, and was in a fair way for the fourth, all the
disseiz'd Lord's which came into his Clutches, he put to death, and left few of
them remaining: he had insinuated with the Nobility of Rome and got a great
party in the College of Cardinals, and as to his own corroboration, he had
designed to make himself Master of Tuscany, had got possession of Perugia, and
Piombino already, and taken Pisa into his protection: and having now farther
regard of the French (who where beaten out of the Kingdom of Naples by the
Spaniard, and both of them reduced to necessity of seeking his amity) he leapt
bluntly into Pisa, after which Lucca, and Sienna submitted without much
trouble, partly in hatred to the Florentines, and partly for fear, and the
Florentines were grown desperate and without any hopes of relief; so that had
these things happened before, as they did the same year in which Alexander
died, doubtless he had gained so much strength and reputation, that he would
have stood firm by himself, upon the basis of his own power and conduct*
without depending upon fortune, or any foreign^supplies. But his Father died
five years after his Son had taken up Arms, and left him nothing solid, and in
certainty but Romagna only, and the rest were in nubious, infested with two
formidable Armies, and himself mortally sick. This Duke was a Man of that
magnanimity and prudence, understood so well which way Men were to be wheedled,
or destroyed, and such were the foundations that he had laid in a short time,
that had he not had those two great Armies upon his back, and a fierce
distemper upon his body, he had overcome all difficulties, and brought his
designs to perfection. That the foundations which he had laid were plausible,
appeared by the patience of his Subjects in Romagna who held out for him a
complete month, though they knew he was at deaths door, and unlikely ever to
come out of Rome: to which place though the Baglioni, the Vitelli, and Ursini
returned, seeing there was no likelihood of his recovery, yet they could not
gain any of his party, nor debauch them to their side: it is possible he was not
able to put who he pleased into the Pontifical chair, yet he had power enough
to keep any man out who he thought was his Enemy: But had it been his fortune
to have been well when his Father Alexander died, all things had succeeded to
his mind. He told me himself about the time that Julius XI. was created, that
he had considered well the accidents that might befall him upon the death of his
Father, and provided against them all, only he did no imagine that at his
death, he should be so near it himself. Upon serious Examination therefore of
the whole Conduct of Duke Valentine, I see nothing to be reprehended, it seems
rather proper to me to propose him (as I have done) as an Example for the
imitation of all such as by the favor of fortune, or the supplies of other
Princes, have got into the saddle; for his mind being so large, and his
intentions so high, he could not do otherwise, and nothing could have opposed
the greatness and wisdom of his designs, but his own infirmity, and the death
of his Father. He therefore who thinks it necessary in the minority of his
Dominion to secure himself against his Enemies; to gain himself Friends, to
overcome whether by force, or by fraud; to make himself beloved, or feared by
his people; to be followed and reverenced by his Soldiers; to destory and
exterminate such as would do him injury; to repeal and suppress old Laws, and
introduce new; to be severe, grateful, magnanimous, liberal, cashier and
disband such of his Army as were unfaithful, and put new in their places;
manage himself so in his alliances with Kings and Princes, that all of them
should be either obliged to requite him, or affear'd to offend him; He, I say
cannot find a fresher or better Model than the actions of this Prince. If in
any thing he be to be condemned, it is in suffering the Election of Julius XI.
which was much to his prejudice; for though (as is said before) he might be
unable to make the Pope as he pleased; yet it was in his power to have put any
one by, and he ought never to have consented to the Election of any of the
Cardinals whom he had formerly offended, or who after their promotion were like
to be jealous of him; for men are as mischievous for fear, as for hatred. Those
Cardinals which he had disobliged, were among others, the Cardinals of St.
Peter ad Vincula, Collonno St. George, and Ascanius. The rest, if any of them
were advanced, to the Papacy, might well be afraid of him, except the Spanish
Cardinals, and the Cardinal of Roan; The Spaniards by reason of their
obligations and alliance; and the other, by reason of his interest in the
Kingdom of France. Wherefore above all things, the Duke should have made a
Spanish Cardinal Pope; and if that could not have been done, he should rather
have consented to the Election of Roan, than St. Peter ad Vincula; for it is
weakness to believe, that among great persons, new obligations can obliterate
old injuries and disgusts. So that in the Election of this Julius XI. Duke
Valentine committed and Error that was the cause of his utter destruction.

CHAP. VIII.
Of such as have arrived at their Dominion, by wicked and injustifiable means
NOw because there are two ways from a private person to become a Prince, which
ways are not altogether to be attributed either to fortune or management, I
think it not convenient to pretermit them, though of one of them I may speak
more largely where occasion is offered to treat more particularly of
Republics. One of the ways is when one is advanced to the Sovereignty by any
illegal nefarious means: The other when a Citizen by the favor and partiality
of his Fellow-Citizens is made Prince of his Country. I shall speak of the
first in this Chapter, and justify what I say by two Examples, one Ancient,
the other Modern, without entering farther into the merits of the cause, as
judging them sufficient for any man who is necessitated to follow them.
Agathocles the Sicilian, not only from a private, but from a vile and abject
Condition, was made King of Syracuse, and being but the Son of a Potter, he
continued the dissoluteness of his life, through all the degrees of his fortune:
Nevertheless his vices were accompanied with such courage and activity, that he
applied himself to the Wars, by which, and his great industry, he came at
length to the Praetor of Syracuse: Being settled in that Dignity, and having
concluded to make himself Prince, and hold that by violence, without obligation
to any body, which was conferred upon him by consent, he settled an
intelligence with Amilcar the Carthaginian, who was then at the head of an Army
in Sicily, and calling the People and Senate of Syracuse together one morning,
as if he had been to consult them in some matter of importance to the State,
upon a signal appointed, he caused his Soldiers to kill all the Senators and
the most wealthy of the People; after whose death, he usurped and possessed the
Dominion of that City without any obstruction: and though afterward he lost
two great Battles to the Carthaginians, and at length was besieged, yet he was
not only able to defend that City, but leaving part of his forces for the
security of that, with the rest he transported into Africa, and ordered things
so, that in a short time he relieved Syracuse, and reduced the Carthaginians
into such extreme necessity, that they were glad to make peace with him, and
contenting themselves with Africa, leave Sicily to Agathocles. He then who
examines the Exploits and Conduct of Agathocles* will find little or nothing
that may be attributed to fortune, seeing he rose not (as is said before) by
the favor of any man, but by the steps and gradations of War; with a thousand
difficulties and dangers having gotten that Government, which he maintained
afterward with as many noble Achievements. Nevertheless it cannot be called
Virtue in him to kill his fellow-Citizens, betray his Friends, to be without
faith, without pity, or Religion; these are ways may get a Man Empire, but no
glory nor reputation: Yet if the Wisdom of Agathocles be considered, his
dexterity in encountering, and overcoming of dangers, his Courage in supporting
and surmounting his misfortunes; I do not see why he should be held inferior
to the best Captains of his time. But his unbounded cruelty, and barbarous
inhumanity, added to a million of other Vices, will not permit that he be
numbered amongst the most Fxcellent Men. So then that which he performed cannot
justly be attributed to either Fortune or Virtue, for he did all himself
without either the one or the other. In our days under the Papacy of Alexander
VI. Oliverotto da Fermo being left young many years since by his Parents, was
brought up by his Uncle by the Mothers side, called John Togliani, and in his
youth listed a Soldier under Paulo Vitelli, that having improved himself by his
Discipline, he might be capable of some Eminent Command. Paulo being dead, he
served under Vitellezzo his Brother and in short time by the acuteness of his
parts, and the briskness of his Courage, became one of the best Officers in his
Army. But thinking it beneath him to continue in any Man's Service, he
conspired with some of his fellow-Citizens of Fermo (to whom the servitude of
their Country, was more agreeable than its liberty) by the help of Vitellesco
to seize upon Fermo: In order to which, he writ a Letter to his Uncle John
Fogliano, importing, That having been absent many years, he had thoughts of
visiting him and Fermo, and taking some little diversion in the place where he
was born, and because the design of his Service had been only the gaining of
Honor, That his fellow-Citizens might see his time had not been ill spent, he
desired admission for a hundred Horse of his Friends, and his Equipage, and
begged of him that he would take care they might be honorably received, which
would redound not only to his Honor, but his Unckles, who had had the bringing
him up. John was not wanting in any Office to his Nephew, and having caused him
to be nobly received, he lodged him in his own House, where he continued some
days, preparing in the mean time what was necessary to the Execution of his
wicked design: he made a great Entertainment, to which he invited John
Fogliani, and all the chief Citizens in the Town. About the end of the
treatment, when they were entertaining one another, as is usual at such times,
Oliverotto very subtly promoted certain grave discourses about the greatness
of Pope Alexander, and Caesar his Son, and of their Designs; John and the rest
replying freely to what was said, Oliverotto smiled, and told them those were
points to be argued more privately, and thereupon removing into a chamber, his
Uncle, and the rest of his fellow-Citizens followed; They were scarce sat
down, before Soldiers (which were concealed about the room) came forth, and
killed all of them, and the Uncle among the rest; After the Murder was
committed Oliverotto mounted on Horseback, rode about, and rummaged the whole
Town, having besieged the chief Magistrate, in his Palace; so that for fear,
all people submitted, and he established a Government of which he made himself
Head. Having put such to death as were discontented, and in any capacity of
doing him hurt, he fortified himself with new Laws, both Military and Civil,
insomuch as in a years time he had not only fixed himself in Fermo, but was
become terrible to all that were about him; and he would have been as hard as
Agathocles to be supplanted, had he not suffered himself to have been
circumvented by Caesar Borgia, when at Singalia (as aforesaid) he took the
Ursini, and Vitelli; where also he himself was taken a year after his Parracide
was committed, and strangled with his Master Vitellozzo from whom he had
learned all his good qualities, and evil

It may seem wonderful to some people how it should come to pass that
Agathocles, and such as he, after so many Treacheries, and acts of inhumanity,
should live quietly in their own Country so long, defend themselves so well
against foreign Enemies, and none of their Subjects conspire against them at
home; seeing several others, by reason of their cruelty, have not been able,
even in times of Peace, as well as War, to defend their Government. I conceive
it fell out according as their cruelty was well or ill applied: I say well
applied (if that word may be added to an ill action) and it may be called so,
when committed but once, and that of necessity for ones own preservation, but
never repeated afterward, and even then converted as much as possible to the
benefit of the Subjects. Ill applied, are such cruelties as are but few in the
beginning, but in time do rather multiply than decrease. Those who are guilty
of the first, do receive assistance sometimes both from God and Man, and
Agathocles is an instance. But the others cannot possibly subsist long: From
whence it is to be observed, that he who usurps the Government of any State, is
to execute and put in practice all the cruelties which he thinks material at
once, that he may have no occasion to renew them often, but that by his
discontinuance, he may mollify the People, and by his benefits bring them over
to his side: He who does otherwise, whether for fear, or ill Counsel, is
obliged to be always ready with his Knife in his hand, for he can never repose
any confidence in his Subjects, whilst they, by reason of his fresh and
continued inhumanities cannot be secure against him: So then Injuries are to be
committed all at once, that the last being the less, the distaste may be
likewise the less; but benefits should be distilled by drops, that the relish
may be the greater. Above all a Prince is so to behave himself toward his
Subjects, that neither good fortune or bad should be able to alter him; for
being once assaulted with adversity, you have no time to do mischief, and the
good which you do, does you no good, being looked upon as forced, and so no
thanks to be due for it.

CHAP. IX.
Of Civil Principality.
I Shall speak now of the other way, when a Principal Citizen, not by wicked
contrivance, or intolerable violence is made Sovereign of his Country, which
may be called a Civil Principality, and is not to be attained by either Virtue,
or Fortune alone, but by a lucky sort of craft; This Man I say arrives at the
Government by the favor of the People or Nobility; for in all Cities the
meaner, and the better sort of Citizens are of different humors, and it
proceeds from hence that the common people are not willing to be commanded and
oppressed by the great ones, and the great ones are not to be satisfied without
it: From this diversity of appetite, one of these three Effects do arise,
Principality, Liberty, or Licentiousness. Principality is caused either by the
people, or the great ones, as, either the one, or the other has occasion: The
great ones finding themselves unable to resist the popular torrent, do many
times unanimously confer their whole Authoriry upon one Person, and create him
Prince, that under his protection they may be quiet and secure. The people on
the other side, when overpowered by their Adversaries, do the same thing,
transmitting their power to a single Person, who is made King for their better
defense. He who arrives at the Sovereignty by the assistance of the great ones,
preserves it with more difficulty, than he who is advanced by the people,
because he has about him many of his old Associates, who thinking themselves
his Equals, are not to be directed and managed as he would have them. But he
that is preferred by the people, stands alone without Equals, and has no body,
or very few about him, but what are ready to obey: Moreover the Grandees are
hardly to be satisfied without injury to others, which is otherwise with the
people, because their designs are more reasonable, than the designs of the
great ones, which are fixed upon commanding, and oppressing altogether, whilst
the people endeavor only to defend and secure themselves. Moreover where the
people is adverse, the Prince can never be safe, by reason of their numbers,
whereas the great ones are but few, and by consequence not so dangerous. The
worst that a Prince can expect from an injured and incensed people, is to be
deserted; but if the great ones by provoked, he is not only to fear abandoning,
but conspiracy, and banding against him; for the greater sort being more
provident and cunning, they look out in time to their own safety, and make
their interest with the Person, who they hope will overcome. Besides the Prince
is obliged to live always with one and the same people, but with the Grandees
he is under no such obligation, for he may create, and degrade advance and
remove them as he pleases. But for the better Explication of this part, I say,
That these great men are to be considered two ways especially; That is, whether
in the manner of their administration they do wholly follow the fortune and
interest of the Prince, or whether they do otherwise. Those who devote
themselves entirely to his business, and are not rapacious, are to be valued
and preferred. Those who are more remiss, and will not stick to their Prince,
do it commonly upon two Motives, either out of laziness or fear (and in those
cases they may be employed, especially if they be wise and of good Counsel,
because if affairs prosper, thou gainest honor thereby; if they miscarry, thou
need not to fear them) or upon ambition, and design, and that is a token
that their thoughts are more intent upon their own advantage than thine. Of
these a Prince ought always to have a more than ordinary care, and order them
as if they were Enemies professed, for in his distress they will be sure to set
him forwards, and do what they can to destroy him. He therefore who comes to be
Prince by the favor and suffrage of the People, is obliged to keep them his
friends, which (their desire being nothing but freedom from oppression) may be
easily done. But he that is preferred by the interest of the Nobles against the
minds of the Commons, is above all things to endeavor to ingratiate with the
People, which will be as the other if he undertakes their protection: And Men
receiving good Offices, where they expected ill, are indear'd by the surprise,
and become better affected to their Benefactor, than perhaps they would have
been, had he been made Prince by their immediate favor. There are many ways of
insinuating with the People, of which no certain rule can be given, because
they vary according to the diversity of the subject, and therefore I shall pass
them at this time concluding with this assertion, that it is necessary above
all things, that a Prince preserves the affections of his people, otherwise in
any Exigence, he has no refuge nor remedy. Nabides Prince of the Spartans,
sustained all Greece, and a Victorious Army of the Romans, and defended the
Government and Country against them all; and to do that great action, it was
sufficient for him to secure himself against the Machinations of a few, whereas
if the People had been his Enemy, that would not have done it. Let no man
impugn my opinion with that old saying, he that builds upon the People, builds
upon the sand. That is true indeed when a Citizen of private Condition relies
upon the people, and persuades himself that when the Magistrate, or his
Adversary, goes about to oppress him, they will bring him off, in which case
many presidents may be produced, and particularly the Gracchi in Rome, and
Georgio Scali in Florence. But if the Prince that builds upon them, knows how
to command, and be a man of Courage not dejected in adversity, nor deficient in
his other preparations, but keeps up the spirits of his people by his own
Valor and Conduct, he shall never be deserted by them, nor find his
foundations laid in a wrong place.

These kind of Governments are most tottering and uncertain, when the Prince
strains of a sudden, and passes (as at one leap) from a Civil, to an absolute
power, and the reason is, because they either command, and act by themselves,
or by the Ministry and Mediation of the Magistrate: In this last case their
authority is weaker, and more ticklish, because it depends much upon the
pleasure and concurrence of the Chief Officers, who (in time of adversity
especially) can remove them easily, either by neglecting, or resisting their
Commands: nor is there any way for such a Prince in the perplexity of his
affairs to establish a Tyranny because those Citizens and Subjects who used to
exercise the Magistracy, retain still such power and influence upon the people,
that they will not infringe the Laws, to obey his; and in time of danger he
shall always want such as he can trust, So that a Prince is not to take his
measures according to what he sees in times of peace when of the Subjects
(having nothing to do but to be governed) every one runs, every one promises,
and every one dies for him, when death is at a distance: but when times are
tempestuous, and the ship of the State has need of the help and assistance of
the Subject, there are but few will expose themselves: And this experiment is
the more dangerous, because it can be practiced but once: So then, a Prince who
is provident and wise ought to carry himself so, that in all place, times, and
occasions the People may have need of his administration and Regiment, an ever
after they shall be faithful and true.

CHAP. X.
How the strength of all principalities is to be computed.
TO any man that examines the nature of principalities, it is worthy his
consideration, whether a Prince has power and territory enough to subsist by
himself, or whether he needs the assistance, and protection of other People. To
clear the point a little better, I think those Princes capable of ruling, who
are able either by the numbers of their men, or the greatness of their wealth
to raise a complete Army, and bid Battle to any that shall invade them; and
those I think depend upon others, who of themselves dare not meet their Enemy
in the field, but are forced to keep within their bounds, and defend them as
well as they can. Of the first we have spoken already, and shall say more as
occasion is presented. Of the second no more can be said, but to advise such
Princes to strengthen and fortify the Capital Town in their Dominions, and not
to trouble himself with the whole Country; and whoever shall do that, and in
other things, manage himself with the Subjects as I have described, and perhaps
shall do hereafter, shall with great caution be invaded, for men are generally
wary and tender of enterprizing any thing that is difficult* and no great
easiness is to be found in attacking a Town well fortified and provided, where
the Prince is not hated by the People.

The Towns in Germany are many of them free; though their Country and district
be but small, yet they obey the Emperor but when they please, and are in no awe
either of him, or any other Prince of the Empire, because they are all so well
fortified, every one looks upon the taking of any one of them as a work of
great difficulty and time, their Walls being so strong, their Ditches so deep,
their works so regular, and well provided with Cannon, and their stores and
Magazines always furnished for a Twelvemonth. Besides which, for the aliment
and sustenance of the People, and that they may be no burden to the public,
they have workhouses where for a year together the poor may be employed in
such things as are the Nerves and life of that City, and sustain themselves by
their labor. Military Discipline and Exercises are likewise much request
there, and many Laws and good Customs they have to maintain them.

A Prince then who has a City well fortified, and the affections of his people,
is not easily to be molested, and he that does molest him, is like to repent
it, for the affairs of this world are so various, it is almost impossible for
any Army to lie quietly a whole year before a Town, without interruption. If
any objects that the people having houses and possessions out of the Town, will
not have patience to see them plundered and burned; and that Charity to
themselves will make them forget their Prince; I answer, that a wise and
dexterous Prince will easily evade those difficulties, by encouraging his
Subjects and persuading them, sometimes their troubles will not be long;
sometimes, inculcating, and possessing them with the cruelty of the Enemy; and
sometimes by correcting and securing himself nimbly of such as appear too
turbulent and audacious. Moreover the usual practice is for the Enemy to
plunder and set the Country on fire at their first coming, whilst every man's
spirits is high, and fixed upon defense; so that the Prince needs not concern
himself, nor be fearful of that for those mischiefs are passed, and
inconveniences received, and when the People in three or four days time begin
to be cool, and consider things soberly, they will find there is no remedy and
join more cordially with the Prince, looking upon him as under an obligation to
them, for having sacrificed their Houses and Estates in his defense. And the
nature of Man is such, to take as much pleasure in having obliged another, as
in being obliged himself. Wherefore all things fairly considered, it is no such
hard matter for a Prince not only to gain, but to retain the affection of his
Subjects, and make them patient of a long Siege, if he be wise, and provident,
and takes care, they want nothing, either for their livelihood or defense.

CHAP. XI
Of Ecclesiastical Principalities
THere remains nothing of this Nature to be discoursed, but of Ecclesiastical
Principalities about which the greatest difficulty is to get into possession,
because they are gained either by Fortune or Virtue, but kept without either,
being supported by ancient Statutes universally received in the Christian
Church, which are of such power and authority, they do keep their Prince in his
dignity, let his conversation or conduct be what it will. These are the only
persons who have lands and do not defend them, Subjects, and do not govern
them, and yet their lands are not taken from them though they never defend
them, nor their Subjects dissatisfied, though they never regard them; so that
these Principalities are the happiest and most secure in the world; but being
managed by a supernatural power above the wisdom and contrivance of man; I
shall speak no more of them, for being set up, and continued by God himself, it
would be great presumption in any man who should undertake to dispute them.
Nevertheless, if it should be questioned how it came to pass that in Temporal
things the Church is arrived at that height, seeing that before, Alexander's
time, the Italian Ptinces, not only such as were Sovereigns, but every Baron
and Lord, how inconsiderable soever in Temporal affairs, esteemed of them but
little; yet since, it has been able not only to startle and confront the King
of France, but to drive him out of Italy, and to ruin the Venetians, the
reason of which, though already well known, I think it not superfluous, to
revive in some measure.

Before Charles King of France passed himself into Italy, that Province was
under the Empire of the Pope, the Venetians, the King of Naples, Duke of Milan,
and the Florentines. It was the interest of these Potentates, to have a care,
some of them that no foreign Prince should come with an Army into Italy, and
some that none among themselves should usurp upon the other. Those of whom the
rest were concerned to be most jealous, were the Pope, and the Venetian: to
restrain the Venetians, all the rest were used to confederate, as in the
defense of Ferrara. To keep under the Pope, the Roman Barons contributed much,
who being divided into two factions (the Ursini, and Colonnessi in perpetual
contention, with their Arms constantly in their hands under the very nose of
the Pope) they kept the Pontifical power very low, and infirm: and although now
and then there happened a courageous Pope (as Sextus) yet neither his courage,
wisdom, nor fortune was able to disintangle him from those incommodities; and
the shortness of their reign was the reason thereof; for ten years time (which
was as much as any of them reigned) was scarce sufficient for the suppression
of either of the parties, and when the Colonnesi as a man may say were almost
extinct, a new Enemy sprang up against the Ursini, which revived the Colonnesi,
and reestablished them again. This emulation and animosity at home, was the
cause the Pope was no more formidable in Italy; after this Alexander VI. was
advanced to the Papacy, who more than all that had ever been before him,
demonstrated what a Pope with money and power was able to do; having taken
advantage of the French invasion, by the Ministry and conduct of Duke
Valentine, he performed all that I have mentioned else where among the Actions
of the said Duke. And though his design was not so much to advantage the
Church, as to aggrandize the Duke, yet what he did for the one, turned
afterward to the benefit of the other, for the Pope being dead, and Valentine
extinct, what both of them had got, devolved upon the Church: after him Julius
succeeded, and found the Church in a flourishing condition; Romagna was wholly
in its possession, the Barons of Rome exterminated, and gone, and their
factions suppressed by Pope Alexander, and besides, a way opened for raising
and hoarding of money never practiced before; which way Julius improving rather
than otherwise, he began to entertain thoughts, not only of conquering Bologna,
but mastering the Venetians, and forcing the French out of Italy. All which
great enterprises succeeding, it added much to his honor that he impropriated
nothing, but gave all to the Church. He maintained also the Colonnesi and
Ursini in the same condition as he found them, and though in case of sedition
there were those ready on both sides to have headed them, yet there were two
considerations which kept them at Peace. One was the greatness of the Church
which kept them in awe; the other was their want of Cardinals, which indeed was
the Original of their discontents, and will never cease till some of them be
advanced to that dignity; for by them the Parties in Rome and without, are
maintained, and the Barons obliged to defend them; so that the ambition of the
prelates is the cause of all the dissension and tumults among the Barons.

His present Holiness Pope Leo had the happiness to be elected at a time when
it was most powerful, and it is hoped, if they made the Church great by their
Arms, he by the integrity of his conversation* and a thousand other virtues
will enlarge it much more and make it more venerable and august.

CHAP. XII.
How many forms there are of Military Discipline, and of those Soldiers which
are called Mercenary
HAving spoken particularly of the several sorts of Principalities as I
proposed in the beginning; considered in part the reasons of their constitution
and their evil; and the ways which many have taken to acquire, and preserve
them; it remains that I proceed now in a general way upon such things as may
conduce to the offense, or defense of either of them.

We have declared before that it is not only expedient, but necessary for a
Prince to take care his foundations be good, otherwise his fabric will be sure
to fail.

The principal foundations of all States, (new, old, or mixed) are good Laws,
and good Arms, and because there cannot be good Laws, where there are not good
arms, and where the Arms are good, there must be good Laws, I shall pass by the
Laws, and discourse of the Arms.

I say, the Arms then with which a Prince defends his State, are his own,
Mercenary, Auxiliary or mixed. The Mercenary, and Auxiliary are unprofitable,
and dangerous, and that Prince who founds the duration of his Government upon
his Mercenary forces, shall never be firm nor secure, for they are divided,
ambitious, undisciplined, unfaithful, insolent to their friends, abject to
their Enemies, without fear of God, or faith to Men, so the ruin of that
person who trusts to them is no longer protracted, than the attempt is
deferred; in time of peace they divorce you, in time of War they desert you,
and the reason is because it is not love, nor any principle of honor that keeps
them in the field, it is only their pay, and that is not a consideration strong
enough to prevail with them to die for you; whilst you have more service to
employ them in, they are excellent Soldiers; but tell them of an engagement,
and they will either disband before, or run away in the battle.

And to evince this, would require no great pains; seeing the ruin of Italy
proceeded from no other cause, than that for several years together it had
reposed it self upon Mercenary Arms; which forces it is possible may have
formerly done service to some particular person, and behaved themselves well
enough among one another, but no sooner were they attackt by a powerful
foreigner, but they discovered themselves, and showed what they were to the
World: hence it was that Charles 8 chaulk'd out his own way into Italy; and
that person was in the right, who affirmed our own faults were the cause of our
miseries; but it was not those faults he believed, but those I have mentioned,
which being committed most eminently by Princes, they suffered most remarkably
in the punishment. But to come closer to the point, and give you a clearer
prospect of the imperfection and infelicity of those forces. The great officers
of these mercenaries, are Men of great courage, or otherwise; if the first, you
can never be safe, for they always aspire to make themselves great, either by
supplanting of you who is their Master, or oppressing of other People, whom you
desired to have preserved; and on the other side, if the Commanders be not
courageous you are ruined again; if it should be urged that all Generals will
do the same, whether mercenaries or others, I would answer, that all War is
managed either by a Prince or Republic: the Prince is obliged to go in person,
and perform the office of General himself: the Republic must depute some one
of her choice Citizens, who is to be changed, if he carries himself ill; If he
behaves himself well, he is to be continued, but so straightened and circumscribed
by his commission, that he may not transgress: and indeed experience tells us
that Princes alone, and Common wealths alone with their own private forces have
performed great things, whereas mercenaries do nothing but hurt. Besides, a
martial Commonwealth that stands upon its own legs, and maintains it self by
its own prowess, is not easily usurped, and falls not so readily under the
obedience of one of their fellow Citizens, as where all the forces are foreign.
Rome, and Sparta maintained their own liberty for many years together by their
own forces and Arms: the Swisses are more material than their Neighbors, and
by consequency more free. Of the danger of Mercenary forces, we have an ancient
example in the Carthaginians, who after the end of their first War with the
Romans, had like to have been ruined, and overrun by their own Mercenaries,
though their own Citizens commanded them.

After the death of Epaminondas the Thebans made Philip of Macedon their
General, who defeated their Enemies, and enslaved themselves. Upon the death of
Duke Philip, the Milanesi entertained Francesco Sforza against the Venetians,
and Francesco, having worsted the Enemy at Caravaggio, joined himself with him,
with design to have mastered his Masters, Francesco's Father was formerly in
the service of Joan Queen of Naples, and on a sudden marched away from her with
his Army, and left her utterly destitute, so that she was constrained to throw
her self under the protection of the King of Aragon, and though the Venetians,
and Florentines both, have lately enlarged their Dominion by employing these
forces, and their Generals have rather advanced than enslaved them; I answer
that the Florentines may impute it to their good fortune, because, of such of
their Generals as they might have rationally feared, some had no Victories to
encourage them, others were obstructed, and others turned their ambition
another way; he that was not Victorious was Giovanni Acuto, whose fidelity
could not be known, because he had no opportunity to break it, but every body
knows, had he succeeded, the Florentines had been all at his mercy: Sforza had
always the Bracceschi in opposition, and they were reciprocally an impediment
the one to the other. Francesco turned his ambition upon Lombardy, Braccio upon
the Church, and the Kingdom of Naples. But to speak of more modern occurrences.
The Florentines made Paul Vitelli their General, a wise Man, and one who from a
private fortune had raised himself to a great reputation: had Paul taken Pisa,
no body can be insensible how the Florentines must have comported with him, for
should he have quitted their service, and taken pay of their Enemy, they had
been lost without remedy, and to have continued him in that power, had been in
time to have made him their Master. If the progress of the Venetians be
considered, they will be found to have acted securely, and honorably whilst
their affairs were managed by their own forces (which was before they attempted
any thing upon the terra firma) then all was done by the Gentlemen and Common
People of that City, and they did very great things; but when they began to
enterprise at land, they began to abate of their old reputation and discipline,
and to degenerate into the customs of Italy; and when they began to conquer
first upon the Continent, having no great territory, and their reputation being
formidable abroad, there was no occasion that they should be much afraid of
their officers; but afterward when they began to extend their Empire, under
the command of Carmignola, then it was they became sensible of their error; for
having found him to be a great Captain by their Victories (under his conduct)
against the Duke of Milan, perceiving him afterward grow cool and remiss in
their service, they concluded, no more great things were to be expected from
him; and being neither willing, nor indeed able to take away his commission,
for fear of losing what they had got, they were constrained for their own
security to put him to Death. Their Generals after him were Bartolomeo da
Bergamo, Roberto da San. Severino, and the Conte de Pitigliano, and such as
they, under whose conduct the Venetians were more like to lose than to gain, as
it happened not long after at Vaila, where in one Battle they lost as much as
they had been gaining eight hundred years with incredible labor and
difficulty; which is not strange, if it be considered that by those kind of
forces the conquests are slow, and tedious, and weak; but their losses are
rapid and wonderful. And because I am come with my examples into Italy, where
for many years all things have been managed by mercenary Armies, I shall lay my
discourse a little higher, that their Original and progress being rendered more
plain, they may with more ease be regulated and corrected. You must understand
that in latter times when the Roman Empire began to decline in Italy, and the
Pope to take upon him authority in Temporal affairs, Italy became divided into
several States: For many of the great Cities took Arms against their Nobility,
who having been formerly favored by the Emperors, kept the People under
oppression, against which the Church opposed, to gain to it self a reputation
and interest in temporal affairs: other Cities were subdued by their Citizens
who made themselves Princes; so that Italy (upon the translation of the Empire)
being fallen into the hands of the Pope and some other Commonwealths; and those
Priests and Citizens unacquainted with the use and exercise of Arms; they began
to take foreigners into their pay: the first Man who gave reputation to these
kind of forces was Alberigo da Como of Romagna: among the rest Braccio and
Sforza (the two great Arbiters of Italy in their time) were brought up under
his discipline, after whom succeeded the rest who commanded the Armies in Italy
to our days: and the end of their great discipline and conduct was, that Italy
was overrun by Charles, pillaged by Lewis, violated by Ferrand, and defamed by
the Swizzers. The order which they observed, was first to take away the
reputation from the Foot, and appropriate it to themselves; and this they did,
because their dominion being but small, and to be maintained by their own
industry, a few foot could not do their business, and a great body they could
not maintain; hereupon they changed their Militia into horse, which being
digested into Troops they sustained and rewarded themselves with the commands,
and by degrees this way of Cavalry was grown so much in fashion, that in an
Army of 20000 Men, there was scarce 2000 Foot to be found. Besides they
endeavored with all possible industry to prevent trouble or fear, either to
themselves or their Soldiers, and their way was by killing no body in fight,
only taking one another Prisoners, and dismissing them afterward without
either prejudice or ransom. When they were in Leaguer before a Town, they shot
not rudely amongst them in the night, nor did they in the Town disturb them
with any sallies in their Camp; no approaches or intrenchments were made at
unseasonable hours, and nothing of lying in the field when Winter came on; and
all these things did not happen by any negligence in their Officers, but were
part of their discipline, and introduced (as is faid before) to ease the poor
Soldier both of labor and danger, by which practices they have brought Italy
both into slavery, and contempt.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Auxiliaries, mixed, and Natural Soldiers.
AUxiliaries (which are another sort of unprofitable Soldiers) are when some
potent Prince is called in to your assistance and defense; as was done not long
since by Pope Julius, who in his Enterprise of Ferrara having seen the sad
experience of his Mercenary Army, betook himself to auxiliaries, and
capitulated with Ferrand King of Spain, that he should come with his Forces to
his relief. These Armies may do well enough for themselves, but he who invites
them, is sure to be a sufferer; for if they be beaten, he is sure to be a
loser, if they succeed, he is left at their discretion; and though ancient
Histories are full of examples of this kind, yet I shall keep to that of Pope
Julius XI, as one still fresh in our Memory, whose Expedition against Ferrara
was very rash and inconsiderate, in that he put all into the hands of a
stranger; but his good fortune presented him with a third accident, which
prevented his reaping the fruit of his imprudent Election; for his subsidiary
Troops being broken at Ravenna, and the Swizzers coming in, and beating off the
Victors, beyond all expectation he escaped being a Prisoner to his Enemies,
because they also were defeated, and to his Auxiliary friends, because he had
conquered by other peoples Arms. The Florentines being destitute of Soldiers,
hired 10000 French for the reduction of Pisa, by which Counsel they ran
themselves into greater danger, than ever they had done in all their troubles
before. The Emperor of Constantinople in opposition to his Neighbors, sent
10000 Turks into Greece, which could not be got out again when the War was at
an end, but gave the first beginning to the servitude and captivity which those
Infidels brought upon that Country. He then who has no mind to overcome, may
make use of these Forces, for they are much more dangerous than the Mercenary,
and will ruin you out of hand, because they are always unanimous, and at the
command of other people, whereas the Mercenaries after they have gotten a
Victory, must have longer time, and more occasion before they can do you a
mischief, in respect they are not one body, but made up out of several
Countries entertained into your pay, to which if you add a General of your own,
they cannot suddenly assume so much Authority as will be able to do you any
prejudice, In short, it is Cowardice and sloth that is to be feared in the
Mercenaries, and courage and activity in the Auxiliaries. A wise Prince
therefore never made use of these Forces, but committed himself to his own;
choosing rather to be overcome with them, than to conquer with the other,
because, he cannot think that a Victory, which is obtained by other peoples
Arms. I shall make no scruple to produce Caesar Borgia for an Example. This
Duke invaded Romagna with an Army of Auxiliaries, consisting wholly of French,
by whose assistance he took Imola, and Furli: But finding them afterward to
totter in their faith, and himself insecure, he betook himself to Mercenaries,
as the less dangerous of the two, and entertained the Ursini and Vitelli into
his pay; finding them also irresolute, unfaithful, and dangerous, he dismissed
them, and for the future employed none but his own. From hence we may collect
the difference betwixt these two sorts of Forces, if we consider the difference
in the Dukes reputation when the Ursini and Vitelli were in his Service, and
when he had no Soldiers but his own: When he began to stand upon his own Legs,
his renown began to increase, and indeed, before, his esteem was not so great,
till every body found him absolute Master of his own Army.

Having begun my Examples in Italy, I am unwilling to leave it, especially
whilst it supplies us with such as are fresh in our memory; yet I cannot pass
by Hiero of Syracuse, whom I have mentioned before. This person being made
General of the Syracusan Army, quickly discovered the Mercenary Militia was not
be relied upon, their Officers being qualified like ours in Italy, and finding
that he could neither continue, not discharge them securely, he ordered things
so, that they were all cut to pieces, and then prosecuted the War with his own
Forces alone, without any foreign assistance. To this purpose the Old Testament
affords us a figure not altogether improper. When David presented himself to
Saul, and offered his Service against Goliath the Champion of the Philistius,
Saul to encourage him, accoutred him in his own Arms, but David having tried
them on, excused himself, pretending they were unfit, and that with them he
should not be able to manage himself; wherefore he desired he might go forth
against the Enemy with his own Arms only, which were his Sling and his Sword.
The sum of all is, the Arms of other people are commonly unfit; and either too
wide, or too strait, or too cumbersom.

CHARLES VII. the Father of Lewis XI. having by his Fortune and Courage
redeemed his Country out of the hands of the English, began to understand the
necessity of having Soldiers of his own, and erected a Militia at home to
consist of Horse as well as Foot, after which, his Son King Lewis cashiered his
own Foot, and took the Swissers into his pay, which error being followed by his
Successors, (as is visible to this day) is the occasion of all the dangers to
which that Kingdom of France is still obnoxious; for having advanced the
reputation of the Swisses he vilified his own people, by disbanding the foot
entirely, and accustoming his Horse so much to engage with other Soldiers, that
fighting still in Conjunction with the Swissers, they began to believe they
could do nothing without them; Hence it proceeds that the French are not able
to do any thing against the Swisses, and without them they will venture upon
nothing: So that the French Army is mixed, consists of Mercenaries, and
Natives, and is much better than either Mercenaries or Auxiliaries alone, but
much worse than if it were entirely Natural, as this Example testifies
abundantly; for doubtless France would be insuperable, if Charles his
Establishment was made use of, and improved: But the imprudence of Man begins
many things, which favoring of persent good, conceal the poison that is
latent, (as I said before of the Hectic Fever) wherefore if he who is raised
to any Sovereignty, foresees not a mischief till it falls upon his head, he is
not to be reckoned a wise Prince, and truly that is a particular blessing of
God, bestowed upon few people: if we reflect upon the first cause of the ruin
of the Roman Empire, it will be found to begin at their entertaining the Goths
into their Service, for thereby they weakened and enervated their own Native
courage, and (as it were) transfused it into them.

I conclude therefore, that without having proper and peculiar forces of his
own, no Prince is secure, but depends wholly upon fortune, as having no Natural
and intrinsic strength to sustain him in adversity: and it was always the
opinion, and position of wise Men, that nothing is so infirm and unstable as
the name of Power, not founded upon forces of its own; those forces are
composed of your Subjects, your Citizens, or Servants, all the rest are either
Mercenaries or Auxiliaries, and as to the manner of Ordering and Disciplining
these Domestics, it will not be hard, if the Orders which I have prescribed be
perused, and the ways considered which Philip the Father of Alexander the
Great, and many other Princes and Republics have used in the like cases, to
which Orders and Establishments I do wholly refer you.

CHAP. XIV.
The duty of a Prince in relation to his Militia.
A Prince then is to have no other design, nor thought, nor study, but War, and
the Arts and Disciplines of it; for indeed that is the only profession worthy
of a Prince, and is of so much importance, that it not only preserves those who
are born Princes in their patrimonies, but advances men of private condition to
that Honorable degree. On the otherside it is frequently seen when Princes have
addicted themselves more to delicacy and softness, than to Arms, they have lost
all, and been driven out of their States; for the principal things which
deprives or gains a man authority, is the neglect or profession of that Art:
Francesco Sforza by his Experience in War, of a private person made himself
Duke of Milan, and his Children, seeking to avoid the fatigues and
incommodities thereof, of Dukes became private Men; for among other evils and
inconveniences which attend when you are ignorant in War, it makes you
contemptible, which is a scandal a Prince ought with all diligence to avoid,
for reasons I shall name hereafter; besides betwixt a potent, and an impotent,
a vigilant and a negligent Prince there is no proportion, it being unreasonable
that a Martial and Generous person should be subject willingly to one that is
weak and remiss; or that those who are careless and effeminate, should be safe
amongst those who are Military and Active; for the one is too insolent, and the
other too captious, ever to do any thing well together; so that a Prince
unacquainted with the Discipline of War, besides, other infelicities to which
he is exposed, cannot be beloved by, nor confident in his Armies. He never
therefore ought to relax his thoughts from the Exercises of War, not so much as
in time of Peace, and indeed then he should employ his thoughts more studiously
therein, than in War it self, which may be done two ways, by the application of
the body, and the mind. As to his bodily application, or matter of action,
besides that he is obliged to keep his Armies in good Discipline and Exercise,
he ought to inure himself to sports, and by Hunting and Hawking, and such like
recreation, accustom his body to hardship, and hunger, and thirst, and at the
same time inform himself of the Coasts and situation of the Country, the
bigness and elevation of the Mountains, the largeness and avenues of the
Valleys, the extent of the Plains, the Nature of the Rivers and Fens, which is
to be done with great curiosity; and this knowledge is useful two ways; for
hereby he not only learns to know his own Country, and to provide better for
its defense, but it prepares and adapts him, by observing their situations, to
comprehend the situations of other Countries, which will perhaps be necessary
for him to discover: For the Hills, the Vales, the Plains, the Rivers, and the
Marshes (for Example) in Tuscany, have a certain similitude and resemblance
with those in other Provinces; so that by the knowledge of one, we may easily
imagine the rest: and that Prince who is defective in this, wants the most
necessary qualification of a General; for by knowing the Country, he knows how
to beat up his Enemy; take up his quarters; March his Armies; Draw up his Men;
and besiege a Town with advantage. In the Character which Historians give of
Philopomenes Prince of Achaia, one of his great Commendations is, that in time
of peace he thought of nothing but Military affairs, and when he was in Company
with his Friends in the Country, he would many times stop suddenly, and
expostulate with them; if the Enemy were upon that Hill, and our Army where we
are, which would have the advantage of the ground? How could we come at them
with most security? if we would draw off, how might we do it best? Or if they
would retreat, how might we follow? so that as he was traveling, he would
propose all the accidents to which an Army was subject; he would hear their
opinion, give them his own, and reinforce it with arguments; and this he did so
frequently, that by continual practice, and a constant intention of his
thoughts upon that business, he brought himself to that perfection, no accident
could happen, no inconvenience could occur to an Army, but he could presently
redress it. But as to the exercise of the mind, a Prince is to do that by
diligence in History, and solemn consideration of the actions of the most
Excellent Men; by observing how they demeaned themselves in the Wars, examining
the grounds and reasons of their Victories, and Losses, that he may be able to
avoid the one, and imitate the other; and above all, to keep close to the
Example of some great Captain of old (if any such occurs in his reading) and
not only to make him his pattern, but to have all his actions perpetually in
his mind, as it was said Alexander did by Achilles; Caesar by Alexander, Scipio
by Cyrus. And whoever reads the life of Cyrus written by Xenophon, will find
how much Scipio advantaged his renown by that imitation, and how much in
modesty, affability, humanity, and liberality he framed himself to the
description which Xenophon had given him. A wise Prince therefore is to observe
all these rules, and never be idle in time of peace, but employ himself therein
with all his industry, that in his adversity he may reap the fruit of it, and
when fortune frowns, be ready to defy her.

CHAP. XV.
Of such things as render Men (especially Princes) worthy of blame, or applause.
IT remains now that we see in what manner a Prince ought to comport with his
Subjects and friends: and because many have writ of this subject before, it may
perhaps seem arrogant in me, especially considering that in my discourse I
shall deviate from the opinion of other Men. But my intention being to write
for the benefit and advantage of him who understands, I thought it more
convenient to respect the essential verity, than the imagination of the thing
(and many have framed imaginary Commonwealths and Governments to themselves
which never were seen, nor had any real existence) for the present manner of
living is so different from the way that ought to be taken, that he who
neglects what is done, to follow what ought to be done, will sooner learn how
to ruin, than how to preserve himself; for a tender Man, and one that desires
to be honest in every thing, must needs run a great hazard among so many of a
contrary Principle. Wherefore it is necessary for a Prince that is willing to
subsist, to harden himself, and learn to be good, or otherwise according to the
exigence of his affairs. Laying aside therefore all imaginable notions of a
Prince, and discoursing of nothing but what is actually true, I say that all
Men when they are spoken of, especially Princes (who are in a higher and more
eminent station) are remarkable for some quality or other that makes them
either honorable or contemptible. Hence it is that some are counted liberal,
others miserable (according to the propriety of the Tuscan word Misero, for
Quaro in our language is one that desires to acquire by rapine, or any
otherway; Misero is he that abstains too much from making use of his own) some
munificent, others rapacious, some cruel, others merciful; some faithless,
others precise. One poor spirited and effeminate, another fierce and ambitious,
one courteous, another haughty, one modest, another libidinous, one sincere,
another cunning, one rugged and morose, another accessible and easy, one
grave, another giddy, one a Devote, and another an Atheist. No man (I am sure)
will deny but that it would be an admirable thing, and highly to be commended
to have a Prince endued with all the good qualities abovesaid; but because it
is impossible to have, much less to exercise them all, by reason of the frailty
and crossness of our Nature, it is convenient that he be so well instructed as
to know how to avoid the scandal of those Vices which may deprive him of his
State, and be very cautious of the rest, though their consequence be not so
pernicious, but where they are unavoidable, he need trouble himself the less.
Again, he is not to concern himself, if run under the infamy of those Vices
without which his Dominion was not to be preserved; for if we consider things
impartially, we shall find some things in appearance are virtuous, and yet if
pursued, would bring certain destruction; and others on the contrary that are
seemingly bad, which if followed by a Prince, procure his peace and security.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Liberality, and Parsimony.
TO begin then with the first of the abovementioned qualities, I say, it would
be advantageous to be accounted liberal; nevertheless liberality so used as not
to render you formidable, does but injure you, for if it be used virtuously,
and as it ought to be, it will not be known, nor secure you from the imputation
of its contrary: To keep up therefore the name of liberal amongst men, it is
necessary that no kind of luxury be omitted, so that a Prince of that
disposition will consume his revenue in those kind of expenses, and be obliged
at last, if he would preserve that reputation, to become grievous, and a great
exactor upon the people, and do whatever is practicable for the getting of
Money, which will cause him to be hated of his Subjects, and despised by every
body else, when he once comes to be poor, so that offending many with his
liberality, and rewarding but few, he becomes sensible of the first disaster,
and runs great hazard of being ruined, the first time he is in danger; which
when afterward he discovers, and desires to remedy; he runs into the other
extreme, and grows as odious for his avarice. So then if a Prince cannot
exercise this virtue of liberality, so as to be publicly known, without
detriment to himself, he ought if he be wise, not to dread the imputation of
being covetous, for in time he shall be esteemed liberal when it is discovered
that by his parsimony he has increased his revenue to a Condition of defending
him against any Invasion, and to enterprise upon other people, without
oppressing of them; so that he shall be accounted Noble to all from whom he
takes nothing away, which are an infinite number; and near and parsimonious
only to such few as he gives nothing to.

In our days we have seen no great action done, but by those who were accounted
miserable, the other have been always undone. Pope Lulius XI. made use of his
bounty to get into the Chair, but (to enable himself to make War with the King
of France) he never practiced it after, and by his frugality he maintained
several Wars without any tax or imposition upon the people, his long parsimony
having furnished him for his extraordinary expenses. The present King of Spain,
if he had affected to be thought liberal, could never have undertaken so many
great designs, nor obtained so many great Victories. A Prince therefore ought
not so much to concern himself (so he exacts not upon his Subjects, so he be
able to defend himself, so he becomes not poor and despicable, nor commits
rapine upon his people) though he be accounted covetous, for that is one of
those Vices which fortifies his Dominion, If any one objects that Caesar by his
liberality made his way to the Empire, and many others upon the same score of
reputation have made themselves great; I answer, That you are either actually a
Prince, or in a fair way way to be made one. In the first case liberality is
hurtful; in the second, it is necessary, and Caesar was one of those who
designed upon the Empire: But when he was arrived at that dignity, if he had
lived, and not retrenched his Expenses, he would have ruined that Empire. If
any replys, Many have been Princes, and with their Armies performed great
matters, who have been reputed liberal, I rejoyn, that a Prince spends either
of his own, or his Subjects, or other peoples. In the first case, he is to be
frugal: In the second he may be as profuse as he pleases, and baulk no point of
liberality. But that Prince whose Army is to be maintained with free quarter,
and plunder, and exactions from other people, is obliged to be liberal, or his
Army will desert him; and well he may be prodigal of what neither belongs to
him, nor his Subject, as was the case with Caesar, and Cyrus and Alexander; for
to spend upon another stock, rather adds to, than substracts from his
reputation, it is spending of his own, that is so mortal, and pernicious. Nor is
there any thing that destroys it self like liberality; for in the use of it,
taking away the faculty of using it, thou becomest poor and contemptible, or to
avoid that poverty, thou make thy self odious and a Tyrant; and there is
nothing of so much importance to a Prince to prevent, as to be either
contemptible or odious, both which depend much upon the prudent exercise of
your liberality. Upon these considerations it is more wisdom to lie under the
scandal of being miserable, which is an imputation rather infamous, than
odious, than to be thought liberal, and ^un your self into a necessity of
playing the Tyrant, which is infamous and odious both.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Cruelty, and Clemency, and whether it is best for a Prince to be beloved,
or feared.
TO come now to the other qualities proposed, I say every Prince is to desire
to be esteemed rather merciful than cruel, but with great caution that his
mercy be not abused; Caesar Borgia was counted cruel, yet that cruelty reduced
Romagna, united it, settled it in peace, and rendered it faithful: so that if
well considered, he will appear much more merciful than the Florentines, who
rather than be thought cruel, suffered Pistoia to be destroyed: A Prince
therefore is not to regard the scandal of being cruel, if thereby he keeps his
Subjects in their Allegiance, and united, seeing by some few examples of
Justice you may be more merciful, than they who by an universal exercise of
pity, permit several disorders to follow, which occasion Rapine and Murder; and
the reason is, because that exorbitant mercy has an ill effect upon the whole
universality, whereas particular Executions extend only to particular persons.
But among all Princes, a new Prince has the hardest task to avoid the scandal
of being cruel, by reason of the newness of his Government, and the dangers
which attend it: Hence Virgil in the person of Dido excused the inhospitality
of her Government.

Res dura, and regni novitas, metalia cogunt
Moliri, and late fines Custode tueri.
My new Dominion, and my harder fate
Constrains me to it, and I must guard my State.
Nevertheless he is not to be too credulous of reports, too hasty in his
motions, nor create fears and jealousies to himself, but so to temper his
administrations with prudence and humanity, that neither too much confidence
may make him careless, nor too much diffidence inrolerable. And from hence
arises a new question, Whether it be better to be beloved than feared, or
feared than beloved? It is answered, Both would be convenient, but because that
is hard to attain, it is better and more secure (if one must be wanting) to be
feared than beloved; for in the general, Men are ungrateful, inconstant,
hypocritical, fearful of danger, and covetous of gain; whilst they receive any
benefit by you, and the danger is at distance, they are absolutely yours, their
Blood, their Estates, their Lives, and their Children (as I said before) are
all at your Service, but when mischief is at hand, and you have present need of
their help, they make no scruple to revolt: And that Prince who leaves himself
naked of other preparations, and relies wholly upon their professions, is sure
to be ruined; for an^ity contracted by price, and not by the greatness and
generosity of the mind, may seem a good pennyworth; yet when you have occasion
to make use of it, you will find no such thing. Moreover Men do with less
remorse offend against those who desire to be beloved, than against those who
are ambitious of being feared, and the reason is because Love is fastened only
by a ligament of obligation, which the ill Nature of Mankind, breaks upon every
occasion that is presented to his profit; But fear depends upon an apprehension
of punishment, which is never to be dispelled. Yet a Prince is to render
himself aweful in such fort, that if he gains not his Subjects love, he may
eschew their hatred; for to be feared and not hated, are compatible enough, and
he may be always in that condition, if he offers no violence to their Estates,
nor attempts any thing upon the honor of their Wifes, as also when he has
occasion to take away any Man's life, if he takes his time when the cause is
manifest, and he has good matter for his justification: But above all things,
he is to have a care of intrenching upon their Estates, for men do sooner
forget the death of their Father, than the loss of their Patrimony: Besides
occasions of confiscation, never fail, and he that gives once way to that
humor of rapine, shall never want temptation to ruin his Neighbor. But on the
contrary, provocations to blood, are more rare, and do sooner evaporate: But
when a Prince is at the head of his Army, and has a multitude of Soldiers to
govern, then it is absolutely necessary not to value the Epithet of cruel, for
without that, no Army can be kept in unity, nor in disposition for any great
act.

Among the several instances of Hannibal's great Conduct, it is one, That
having a vast Army, constituted out of several Nations, and conducted to make
War in an Enemies Country, there never happened any Sedition among them, or any
Mutiny against their General, either in his adversity or prosperity: Which can
proceed from nothing so probably as his great cruelty, which, added to his
infinite Virtues, rendered him both aweful, and terrible to his Soldiers, and
without that, all his Virtues would have signified nothing. Some Writers there
are (but of little consideration) who admire his great Exploits, and condemn
the true causes of them. But to prove that his other Virtues would never have
carried him through, let us reflect upon Scipio, a person Honorable not only in
his own time, but in all History whatever; nevertheless his Army mutined in
Spain, and the true cause of it was, his too much gentleness and lenity, which
gave his Soldiers more liberty than was suitable or consistant with Military
Discipline. Fabius Maximus upbraided him by it in the Senate, and called him
Corrupter of the Roman Militia; The inhabitants of Locrus having been plundered
and destroyed by one of Scipio's Lieutenants, they were never redressed, nor
the Legat's insolence corrected, all proceeding from the mildness of Scipio's
Nature, which was so eminent in him, that a person undertaking to excuse him in
the Senate, declared, that there were many who knew better how to avoid doing
ill themselves, than to punish it in other people. Which temper would doubtless
in time have eclipsed the glory and reputation of Scipio, had that authority
been continued in him; but receiving Orders, and living under the direction of
the Senate, that ill quality, was not only not discovered in him, but turned to
his renown. I conclude therefore according to what I have said about being
feared, or beloved; That forasmuch as men do love at their own discretion, but
fear at their Princes, a wise Prince is obliged to lay his foundation upon that
which is in his own power, not what which depends on other people, but (as I
said before) with great caution that he does not make himself odious.

CHAP. XVIII.
How far a Prince is obliged by his promise.
HOw Honorable it is for a Prince to keep his word, and act rather with
integrity than collusion, I suppose every body understands: Nevertheless
Experience has shown in out times, That those Princes who have not pinned
themselves up to that punctuality and preciseness, have done great things, and
by their cunning and subtilty not only circumvented, and darted the brains of
those with whom they had to deal, but have overcome, and been too hard for
those who have been so superstitiously exact. For further explanation, you must
understand there are two ways of contending, by Law, and by force: The first is
proper to Men; the second to Beasts; but because many times the first is
insufficient, recourse must be had to the second. It belongs therefore to a
Prince to understand both, when to make use of the rational, and when of the
brutal way; and this is recommended to Princes (though abstrusely) by ancient
Writers, who tell them how Achilles and several other Princes were committed to
the Education of Chiron the Centaur, who was to keep them under his Discipline,
choosing them a Master, half Man and half Beast, for no other reason but to
show how necessary it is for a Prince to be acquainted with both, for that one
without the other will be of little duration. Seeing therefore it is of such
importance to a Prince to take upon him the Nature and disposition of a Beast,
of all the whole flock, he ought to imitate the Lion and the Fox: for the Lion
is in danger of toils and snares, and the Fox of the Wolf: So that he must be a
Fox to find out the snares, and a Lion to fright away the Wolves, but they who
keep wholly to the Lion, have no true notion of themselves. A Prince therefore
that is wise and prudent, cannot, nor ought not to keep his p^^ole, when the
keeping of it is to his prejudice, and the causes for which he promised,
removed. Were men all good, this Doctrine was not to be taught, but because
they are wicked, and not likely to be punctual with you, you are not obliged to
any such strictness with them: Nor was their ever any Prince that wanted lawful
pretense to justify his breach of promise. I might instance in many modern
Examples, and show how many Confederations, and Peaces, and Promises have been
broken by the infidelity of Princes, and how he that best personated the Fox,
had the better success. Nevertheless it is of great consequence to disguise
your inclination, and to play the Hypocrite well; and men are so simple in
their temper, and so submissive to their present necessities, that he that is
neat and cleanly in his collusions, shall never want people to practice them
upon. I cannot forbear one Example which is still fresh in our memory.
Alexander VI. never did, nor thought of any thing but cheating, and never
wanted matter to work upon, and though no man promised a thing with greater
asseveration, nor confirmed it with more oaths and imprecations, and observed
them less; yet understanding the world well, he never miscarried.

A Prince therefore is not obliged to have all the forementioned good qualities
in reality, but it is necessary he have them in appearance; nay, I will be bold
to affirm, that having them actually, and employing them upon all occasions,
they are extremely prejudicial, whereas having then only in appearance, they
turn to better account; it is honorable to seem mild, and merciful, and
courteous, and religious, and sincere, and indeed to be so, provided your mind
be so rectified and prepared that you can act quite contrary upon occasion. And
this must be premised, that a Prince, especially if come but lately to the
throne, cannot observe all those things exactly which make men be esteemed
virtuous, being oftentimes necessitated for the preservation of his State to do
things in humane, uncharitable, and irreligious; and therefore it is convenient
his mind be at his command, and flexible to all the puffs, and variations of
his fortune: Not forbearing to be good, whilst it is in his choice, but
knowing how to be evil when there is a necessity. A Prince then is to have
particular care that nothing falls from his mouth, but what is full of the five
qualities aforesaid, and that to see, and to hear him, he appears all goodness,
integrity, humanity, and religion, which last he ought to pretend to more than
ordinarily, because more men do judge by the eye, then by the touch, for every
body sees, but few understand; every body sees how you appear, but few know
what in reality you are, and those few d^re not, oppose the opinion of the
multitude who have the Majesty of their Prince to defend them; and in the
actions of all men, especially Princes, where no man has power to judge, every
one looks to the end. Let a Prince therefore do what he can to preserve his
life, and continue his Supremacy, the means which he uses shall be thought
honorable, and be commended by every body; because the people are always taken
with the appearance, and event of things, and the greatest part of the world
consists of the people: Those few who are wise, taking place when the multitude
has nothing else to rely upon. There is a Prince at this time in being (but his
name I shall conceal) who has nothing in his mouth but fidelity and peace and
yet had he exercised either the one or the other, they had robbed him before
this both of his power and reputation.

CHAP. XIX.
That Princes ought to be cautious of becoming either odious or contemptible.
ANd because in our discourse of the qualifications of a Prince, we have
hitherto spoken only of those which are of greatest importance, we shall now
speak briefly of the rest under these general heads. That a Prince make it his
business (as is partly hinted before) to avoid such things as may make him
odious or contemptible: and as often as he does that, he plays his part very
well, and shall meet no danger or inconveniences by the rest of his Vices:
Nothing (as I said before) make a Prince so insufferably odious, as usurping
his Subjects Estates, and debauching their Wives, which are two things he ought
studiously to forbear; for whilst the generality of the world live quietly
upon their Estates, and unprejudiced in their honor, they live peaceably
enough, and all his contention is only with the pride and ambition of some few
persons who are many ways, and with great ease to be restrained. But a Prince
is contemptable when he is counted effeminate, light, unconstant,
pusillanimous, and irresolute; and of this he ought to be as careful, as of a
Rock in the Sea, and strive that his in all actions there may appear
magnanimity, courage, gravity, and fortitude, desiring that in the private
affairs of his Subjects, his sentence and determination may be irrevocable, and
himself to stand so in their opinion, that none may think it possible either to
delude or divert him. The Prince who causes himself to be esteemed in that
manner, shall be highly redoubted, and if he be feared, people will not easily
conspire against him, nor readily invade him, because he is known to be an
excellent Person and formidable to his Subjects; for a prince ought to be
terrible in two places, at home to his Subjects, and abroad to his Equals; from
whom he defends himself by good Arms, and good Allies; for if his power be
good, his friends will not be wanting, and while his affairs are fixed at home,
there will be no danger from abroad, unless they be disturbed by some former
conspiracy, and upon any Commotion ab extra, if he be composed at home, has
lived as I prescribe, and not deserted himself, he will be able to bear up
against any impression according to the example of Nabis the Spartan. When
things are well abroad, his affairs at home will be safe enough, unless they be
perplexed by some secret Conspiracy, against which the Prince sufficiently
provides, if he keeps himself from being hated or despised, and the people
remain satisfied of him, which is a thing very necessary, as I have largely
inculcated before. And one of the best Remedies Prince can use against
conspiracy, is to keep himself from being hated or despised by the multitude;
for no body p^^ts, but he expects by the death of the Prince, to gratify the
people, and the thought of offending them will deter him from any such
Enterprise, because in conspiracies the difficulties are infinite. By
experience we find that many conjurations have been on foot, but few have
succeeded, because no man can conspire alone: nor choose a Confederate but out
of those who are discontented, and no sooner shall you impart your mind to a
Malcontent, but you give him opportunity to reconcile himself, because there
is nothing he proposes to himself, but he may expect from the discovery. So
that the gain being certain on that side, and hazardous and uncertain on the
other, he must be either an extraordinary friend to you, or an implacable Enemy
to the Prince if he does not betray you; In short, on the side, of the
Conspirators there is nothing but fear, and jealousy, and apprehension of
punishment, but one the Princes side there is the Majesty of the Government,
the Laws, the Assistance of his Friends and State, which defend him so
effectually, that if the affections of the people be added to them, no man can
be so rash, and precipitate as to conspire; for if before the execution of his
design, the Conspirator has reason to be afraid, in this case he has much more
afterward, having offended the people in the Execution, and left himself no
refuge to fly to. Of this many Examples might be produced, but I shall content
my self with one which happened in the memory of our Fathers. Hanibal
Bentiv^gli (Grandfather to this present Hanibal) was Prince of Bolonia, and
killed by the Canneschi who conspired against him; none of his race being left
behind, but John who was then in his Cradle: The Murder was no sooner
committed, but the people took Arms, and slew all the Canneschi, which
proceeded only from the affection that the House of the Bentivogli had at that
time among the populacy in Bolonia, which was then so great, that when Hanibal
was dead, there being none of that Family remaining, in a capacity for the
Government of the State, upon information that at Florence there was a Natural
Son of the said Bentivogli's (who till that time had passed only for the Son of
a smith) they sent Ambassadors for him, and having conducted him honorably to
that City, they gave him the Government, which he executed very well, till the
said John came of Age. I conclude therefore a Prince need not be much
apprehensive of Conspiracies, whilst the people are his friends; but when they
are dissatisfied, and have taken a prejudice against him, there is no thing,
nor no person which he ought not to fear. And it has been the constant care of
all wise Princes, and all well-governed States, not to reduce the Nobility to
despair, nor the people to discontent, which is one of the most material things
a Prince is to prevent. Among the best ordered Monarchies of our times, France
is one, in which there are many good Laws and Constitutions tending to the
liberty and preservation of the King: The first of them is the Parliament, and
the Authority wherewith it is invested; for he who was the founder of that
Monarchy, being sensible of the ambition and insolence of the Nobles, and
judging it convenient to have them bridled and restrained; and knowing on the
other side the hatred of the people against the Nobility, and that it proceeded
from fear (being willing to secure them) to exempt the King from the
displeasure of the Nobles, if he sided with the Commons, or from the malice of
the commons, if he inclined to the Nobles, he erected a third judge, which
(without any reflection upon the King, should keep the Nobility under, and
protect the people; nor could there be a better order, wiser, nor of greater
security to the King and the Kingdom; from whence we may deduce another
observation, That Princes are to leave things of injustice and envy to the
Ministry and Execution of others, but acts of favor and grace are to be
performed by themselves. To conclude, a Prince is to value his Grandees, but so
as not to make the people hate him.

Contemplating the life's and deaths of several of the Roman Emperors, it is
possible many would think to find plenty of Examples quite contrary to my
opinion, forasmuch as some of them whose Conduct was remarkable, and
Magnanimity obvious to every body, were turned out of their Authority, or
murdered by the Conspiracy of their subjects. To give a punctual answer, I
should inquire into the qualities and conversations of the said Emperors, and
in so doing I should find the reason of their ruin to be the same, or very
consonant to what I have opposed. And in part I will represent such things as
are most notable, to the consideration of him that reads the actions of our
times, and I shall content my self with the examples of all the Emperors which
succeeded in the Empire from Marcus the Philosopher, to Maximinus, and they
were, Marcus, his Son Commodus, Pertinax, Julian, Severus, Antoninus, his Son
Caracalla, Macrinus, Heligabalus, Alexander, and Maximinus.

It is first to be considered, That whereas in other Governments there was
nothing to contend with, but the ambition of the Nobles, and the insolence of
the people, the Roman Emperors had a third inconvenience, to support against,
the avarice and cruelty of the Soldiers, which was a thing of such difficult
practice, that it was the occasion of the destruction of many of them, it being
very uneasy to please the Subject and the Soldier together; for the Subject
loves Peace, and chooses therefore a Prince that is gentle and mild, whereas
the Soldier prefers a Martial Prince, and one that is haughty, and rigid, and
rapacious, which good qualities they are desirous he should exercise upon the
people, that their pay might be increased: and their covetousness and cruelty
satiated upon them. Hence it is, That those Emperors, who neither by Art, nor
Nature are endued with that address, and reputation as is necessary for the
restraining both of the one and the other, do always miscarry; and of them the
greatest part (especially if but lately advanced to the Empire) understanding
the inconsistancy of their two humors, incline to satisfy the Soldiers,
without regarding how far the people are disobliged. Which Council is no more
than is necessary; for seeing it cannot be avoided but Princes must fall under
the hatred of somebody, they ought diligently to contend that it be not of the
multitude; If that be not to be obtained, their next great care is to be, that
they incur not the odium of such as are most potent among them: And therefore
those Emperors who were new, and had need of extraordinary support, adhered
more readily to the Soldiers than to the people which turned to their detriment
or advantage, as the Prince knew how to preserve his reputation with them: From
the causes aforesaid, it happened that Marcus Aurelius, Pertinax, and Alexander
being Princes of more than ordinary Modesty, lovers of Justice, Enemies of
cruelty, courteous, and bountiful, came all of them (except Marcus) to
unfortunate ends. Marcus indeed lived and died in great honor, because he came
to the Empire by way of inheritance and succession, without being beholden
either to Soldiers or people, and being afterward endued with many good
qualities which recommended him, and made him venerable among them, he kept
them both in such order whilst he lived, and held them so exactly to their
bounds, that he was never either hated or despised. But Pertinax was chosen
Emperor against the will of the Soldiers, who being used to live licentiously
under Commodus, they could not brook that regularity to which Pertinax
endeavored to bring them; so that having contracted the Odium of the Soldiers,
and a certain disrespect and neglect by reason of his Age, he was ruined in the
very beginning of his reign; from whence it is observable, that hatred is
obtained two ways, by good works, and bad, and therefore a Prince (as I said
before) being willing to retain his jurisdiction, is oftentimes compelled to be
bad. For if the chief party, (whether it be people, or army, or Nobility) which
you think most useful, and of most consequence to you for the conservation of
your dignity, be corrupt, you must follow their humor and indulge them, and in
that case honesty and virtue are pernicious.

But let us come to Alexander who was a Prince of such great equity and
goodness, it is reckoned among his praises* that in the fourteen years of his
Empire, there was no man put to death without a fair Trial: Nevertheless being
accounted effeminate, and one that suffered himself to be managed by his
Mother. and falling by that means into disgrace, the Army conspired and killed
him. Examining on the other side the Conduct of Commodus, Severus, Antoninus,
Caracalla, and Maziminus, you will find them cruel and rapacious and such as to
satisfy the Soldiers, omitted no kind of injury that could be exercised
against the people, and all of them but Severus were unfortunate in their ends:
for Severus was a Prince of so great courage and magnanimity, that preserving
the friendship of the Army (though the people were oppressed) he made his whole
Reign happy, his virtues having represented him so admirable both to the
Soldiers and people, that these remained in a manner stupid, and astonished,
and the other obedient and contented. And because the actions of Severus were
great in a new Prince, I shall show in brief how he personated of the Fox and
the Lion, whose Natures and properties are (as I said before) necessary for the
imitation of a Prince. Severus therefore, knowing the laziness and inactivity
of Julian the Emperor, persuaded the Army under his Command in Sclavonia to go
to Rome, and revenge the death of Pertinax who was murdered by the Imperial
Guards; and under that color, without the least pretense to the Empire, he
marched his Army toward Rome, and was in Italy before any thing of his motion
was known: being arrived at Rome, the Senate were afraid of him, killed Julian,
and elected Severus. After which beginning, there remained two difficulties to
be removed before he could be Master of the whole Empire; The one was in Asia,
where Niger General of the Asiatick Army, had proclaimed himself Emperor: The
other, in the west, where Albinus the General aspired to the same: and thinking
it hazardous to declare against both, he resolved to oppose himself against
Niger, and cajole and wheedle Albinus, to whom he writ word, That being chosen
Emperor by the Senate, he was willing to receive him to a participation of that
dignity, gave him the title of Caesar, and by consent of the Senate admitted
him his Colleague; which Albinus embraced very willingly, and thought him in
earnest; but when Severus had overcome Niger, put him to death, and settled the
affairs of the East, being returned to Rome, he complained in the Senate
against Albinus, as a person, who contrary to his obligations for the benefits
received from him, had endeavored treacherously to murder him, told them that
he was obliged to march against him to punish his ingratitude, and afterward
following him into France, he executed his design, deprived him of his Command,
and put him to death. He then who strictly examines the Actions of this Prince,
will find him fierce as a Lion, subtle as a Fox, feared and reverenced by
every body, and no way odious to his Army: Nor will it seem strange that he
(though newly advanced to the Empire) was able to defend it, seeing his great
reputation protected him against the hatred which his people might have
conceived against him by reason of his Rapine. But his Son Antoninus was an
excellent person likewise endued with transcendant parts, which rendered him
admirable to the people, and grateful to the Soldiers; for he was Martial in
his Nature, patient of labor and hardship, and a great despiser of all
sensuality and softness, which recommended him highly to his Armies.
Nevertheless his fury and cruelty was so immoderately great (having upon
several private and particular occasions, put a great part of the people of
Rome, and all the inhabitants of Alexandria, to death) that he fell into the
hatred of the whole world, and began to be feared by his Confidents that were
about him, so that he was killed by one of his Captains in the middle of his
Camp. From whence it may be observed, That these kind of Assassinations which
follow upon a deliberate and obstinate resolution, cannot be prevented by a
Prince, for he who values not his own life, can commit them when he pleases;
but they are to be feared the less, because they happen but seldom, he is only
to have a care of doing any great injury to those that are about him, of which
error Antoninus was too guilty having put the Brother of the said Captain to an
ignominious death, threatened the Captain daily, and yet continued him in his
Guards, which was a rash and pernicious act, and proved so in the end. But to
come to Commodus, who had no hard task to preserve his Empire, succeeding to it
by way of inheritance, as Son to Marcus, for that to satisfy the people, and
oblige the Soldiers, he had no more to do, but to follow the footsteps of his
Father. But being of a brutish and cruel disposition, to exercise his rapacity
upon the people, he indulged his Army, and allowed them in all manner of
licentiousness. Besides, prostituting his Dignity, by descending many times
upon the Theater to fight with the Gladiators, and committing many other acts
which were vile, and unworthy the Majesty of an Emperor, he became contemptible
to the Soldiers, and growing odious to one party, and despicable to the other,
they conspired and murdered him. Maximinus was likewise a Martial Prince, and
addicted to the Wars, and the Army being weary of the Effeminacy of Alexander
(whom I have mentioned before) having slain him, they made Maximinus Emperor,
but he possessed it not long, for two things contributed to make him odious,
and despised. One was the meanness of his extraction, having kept sheep
formerly in Thrace, which was known to all the world, and made him universally
contemptable. The other was, that at his first coming to the Empire, by not
repairing immediately to Rome, and putting himself into possession of his
Imperial seat, he had contracted the imputation of being cruel, having
exercised more than ordinary severity by his Prefects in Rome, and his
Lieutenants in all the rest of the Empire; so that the whole world being
provoked, by the vileness of his birth, and detestation of his cruelty, in
apprehension of his fury, Africa, the Senate and all the people both in Italy
and Rome, conspired against him, and his own Army joining themselves with them,
in their Leaguer before Aquileia finding it difficult to be taken, weary of his
cruelties, and encouraged by the multitude of his Enemies, they set upon him,
and slew him.

I will not trouble my self with Heliogabalus, Macrinus, nor Julian, who being
all effeminate and contemptible, were quickly extinguished. But I shall
conclude this discourse, and say that the Princes of our times are not obliged
to satisfy the Soldiers in their respective Governments by such extraordinary
ways; for though they are not altogether to be neglected, yet the remedy and
resolution is easy because none of these Princes have entire Armies, brought
up, and inveterated in their several Governments and Provinces, as the Armies
under the Roman Empire were. If therefore at that time it was necessary to
satisfy the Soldiers rather than the people, it was because the Soldiers were
more potent. At present it is more the interest of all Princes (except the
great Turk and the Sultan) to comply with the people, because they are more
considerable than the Soldiers. I except the Turk, because he has in his Guards
12000 Foot, and 15000 Horse constantly about him, upon whom the strength and
security of his Empire depends, and it is necessary (postponing all other
respect to the people) they be continued his friends. It is the same case with
the Sultan, who being wholly in the power of the Soldiers, it is convenient
that he also wave the people, and insinuate with the Army. And here it is to be
noted, that this Government of the Soldans is different from all other
Monarchies, for it is not unlike the Papacy in Christendom, which can neither
be called a new, nor an hereditary Principality, because the Children of the
deceased Prince, are neither Heirs to his Estate, nor Lords of his Empire, but
he who is chosen to succeed, by those who have the faculty of Election; which
Custom being of old, the Government cannot be called new, and by consequence is
not subject to any of the difficulties wherewith a new one is infested; because
though the person of the Prince be new, and perhaps the Title; yet the Laws and
Orders of State are old, and disposed to receive him as if he were hereditary
Lord. But to return to our business, I say, That whoever considers the
aforesaid discourse, shall find either hatred or contempt the perpetual cause
of the ruin of those Emperors, and be able to judge how it came about that
part of them taking one way in their administrations, and part of them another,
in both parties some were happy, and some unhappy at last. Pertinax and
Alexander being but Upstart Princes, it was not only vain, but dangerous for
them to imitate Marcus, who was Emperor by right of Succession. Again, it was
no less pernicious for Caracalla, Commodus, and Maximinus to make Severus their
pattern, not having force nor virtue enough to follow his footsteps. So then if
a new Prince cannot imitate the actions of Marcus; (and to regulate by the
example of Severus, is unnecessary) he is only to take that part from Severus
that is necessary to the foundation of his State, and from Marcus, what is
convenient to keep and defend it gloriously, when it is once established and
firm.

CHAP. XX.
Whether Citadels, and other things which Princes many times do, be profitable,
or dangerous?
SOme Princes for the greater security of their Dominion, have disarmed their
Subjects; others have cantonized their Countries; others have fomented factions
and animosity among them; some have applied themselves to flatter and insinuate
with those who were suspicious in the beginning of their Government: Some have
built Castles, others have demolished them; and though in all these cases, no
certain or determined rule can be prescribed, unless we come to a particular
consideration of the State where it is to be used; yet I shall speak of them
all, as the matter it self will endure. A wise Prince therefore was never known
to disarm his Subjects; rather finding them unfurnished, he put Arms into their
hands; for by arming them, and inuring them to warlike Exercise, those Arms are
surely your own; they who were suspicious to you, become faithful; they who are
faithful, are confirmed; and all your Subjects become of your party; and
because the whole multitude which submits to your Government is not capable of
being armed, if you be beneficial and obliging to those you do arm, you may
make the bolder with the rest; for the difference of your behavior to the
Soldier, binds him more firmly to your Service; and the rest will excuse you,
as judging them most worthy of reward, who are most liable to danger. But when
you disarm, you disgust them, and imply a diffidence in them, either for
cowardice, or Treachery, and the one or the other is sufficient to give them an
impression of hatred against you. And because you cannot subsist without
Soldiers, you will be forced to entertain Mercenaries, whom I have formerly
described, and if it were possible for the said Mercenaries to be good, they
could not be able to defend you against powerful Adversaries, and Subjects
disobliged. Wherefore (as I have said) a new Prince, in his new Government,
puts his Subjects always into Arms, as appears by several Examples in History.
But when a Prince conquers a new State, and annexes it (as a Member) to his
old, then it is necessary your Subjects be disarmed, all but such as appeared
for you in the Conquest, and they are to be mollified by degrees, and brought
into such a condition of laziness and effeminacy, that in time your whole
strength may devolve upon your own Natural Militia, which were trained up in
your ancient Dominion, and are to be always about you. Our Ancestors (and they
were esteemed wise men) were wont to say, That it was necessary to keep Pisto^a
by factions, and Pisa by fortresses, and accordingly in several Towns under
their Subjection, they created, and fomented factions and animosities, to keep
them with more ease. This, at a time when Italy was unsettled, and in a certain
kind of suspense, might be well enough done, but I do not take it at this time
for any precept for us, being clearly in opinion that the making of factions,
never does good, but that where the Enemy approaches, and the City is divided,
it must necessarily, and that suddenly be lost, because the weaker party will
always fall off to the Enemy, and the other cannot be able to defend it. The
Venetians, (as I guess) upon the same grounds nourished the factions of the
Guelfs, and the Ghibilins in the Cities under their jurisdiction; and though
they kept them from blood; yet they encouraged their dissentions, to the end
that the Citizens being employed among themselves, should have no time to
conspire against them; which as appeared afterward, did not answer
expectation; for being defeated at Valia, one of the said factions took Arms,
and turned the Venetians out of their State. Such methods therefore as these,
do argue weakness in the Prince; for no Government of any strength or
consistance will suffer such divisions, because they are useful only in time of
Peace, when perhaps they may contribute to the more easy management of their
Subjects, but when War comes, the fallacy of those Counsels are quickly
discovered, Without doubt, Princes grow great when they overcome the
difficulties and impediments which are given them; and therefore Fortune,
especially when she has a mind to exalt a new Prince (who has greater need of
reputation than a Prince that is old and Hereditary) raises him up Enemies, and
encourages enterprises against him, that he may have opportunity to conquer
them, and advance himself by such steps as his Enemies had prepared. For which
reason many have thought that a wise Prince when opportunity offers, ought (but
with great cunning and address) to maintain some enmity against himself, that
when time serves to destroy them, his own greatness may be increased.

Princes, and particularly those who are not of long standing, have found more
fidelity and assistance from those whom they suspected at the beginning of
their Reign, than from them who at first were their greatest confidents.
Pandolfus Petrucci Prince of Sienna governed his State rather by those who were
suspected, than others. But this is not to be treated of largely, because it
varies according to the subjects; I shall only say this, That those Men who in
the beginning of his Government, opposed him (if they be of so such quality as
to want the support of other people) are easily wrought over to the Prince, and
more strictly engaged to be faithful; because they knew that it must be their
good carriage for the future that must cancel the prejudice that is against
them; and so the Prince comes to receive more benefit by them, than by those
who serving him more securely, do most commonly neglect his affairs.

And seeing the matter requires, I will not omit to remind a Prince who is but
newly advanced (and that by some inward favor and correspondence in the
Country) that he considers well what it was that disposed those parties to
befreind him; if it be not affection to him, but Pique, and animosity to the
old Government, it will cost much trouble and difficulty to keep them his
friends, because it will be impossible to satisfy them: and upon serious
disquisition, Ancient and Modern Examples will give us the reason, and we shall
find it more easy to gain such persons as were satisfied with the former
Government, and by consequence his Enemies, than those who being disobliged,
sided with him, and assisted to subvert it.

It has been a Custom among Princes, for the greater security of their
Territories to build Citadels and Fortresses to bridle and restrain such as
would enterprise against them, and to serve as a refuge in times of Rebellion;
and I approve the way because anciently practiced, yet no longer ago than in
our days, Mr. Nicolo Vitelli was known to dismantle two Forts in the City of
Castello, to secure his Government; Guidobaldo Duke of Urbin returning to his
State from whence Caesar Borgia had driven him, demolished all the strong
places in that Province, and thereby thought it more unlikely again to fall
into the hands of the Enemy. The Bentivogli being returned to Bologna, used the
same course: So that Fortresses, are useful, or not useful, according to the
difference of time, and if in one place they do good, they do as much mischief
in another: And the case may be argued thus, That Prince who is more afraid of
his Subjects than Neighbors, is to suffer them to stand: The Family of the
Sforza's, has and will suffer more mischief by the Castle of Milan (which ws
built by Francesco Sforza) than by all its other troubles whatever; so that the
best fortification of all, is not to be hated by the people, for your
Fortresses will not protect you, if the people have you in detestation, because
they shall no sooner take Arms, but Strangers will fall in, and sustain them.
In our times, there is not one instance to be produced, of advantage, which
that course has brought to any Prince, but to the Countess of Furly, when upon
the Death of Hier^nimo her Husband, by means of those Castles she was able to
withstand the popular fury, and expect till supplies came to her from Milan,
and resetled her in the Government; and as times then stood, the people were
not in a Condition to be relieved by any stranger. But afterward they stood
her in no stead when Caesar Borgia invaded her, and the people being incensed,
joined with her Enemy. Wherefore it had been better for her both then, and at
first to have possessed the affections of the people, than all the Castles in
the Country. These things being considered, I approve both of him that builds
those Fortresses, and of him that neglects them, but must needs condemn him who
relies so much upon them, as to despise the displeasure of the people.

CHAP. XXI.
How a Prince is to demean himself to gain reputation.
NOthing recommends a Prince so highly to the world, as great Enterprises, and
noble Expressions of his own Valor and Conduct. We have in our days Ferdinand
King of Aragon, the present King of Spain, who may (and not improperly) be
called a new Prince, being of a small and weak King, become for fame, and
renown the greatest Monarch in Christendom; and if his Exploits be considered,
you will find them all brave, but some of them extraordinary. In the beginning
of his Reign he invaded the Kingdom of Granada, and that Enterprise was the
foundation of his Grandeur. He began it leisurely, and without suspicion of
impediment, holding the Barons of Castile employed in that service, and so
intent upon that War, that they dreamt not of any Innovation, whilst in the
mean time before they were aware, he got reputation, and Authority over them.
He found out a way of maintaining his Army at the expense of the Church, and
the people, and by the length of that War, to establish such Order and
Discipline among his Soldiers, that afterward they gained him many honorable
Victories. Beside this, to adapt him for greater Enterprises, (always making
Religion his pretense) by a kind of devout cruelty, he destroyed and
exterminated the jews called Marrani, than which nothing could be more strange,
or deplorable. Under the same Cloak of Religion, he invaded Africa, made his
Expedition into Italy, assaulted France, and began many great things which
always kept the minds of his Subjects in admiration and suspense, expecting
what the event of his Machinations would be. And these his Enterprises had so
sudden a spring and result one from the other, that they gave no leisure to any
man to be at quiet, or to continue any thing against him. It is likewise of
great advantage to a Prince to give some rare Example of his own administration
at home (such is reported of Messer Bernardo da Milano) when there is occasion
for some body to perform any thing Extraordinary in the Civil Government,
whether it be good or bad, and to find out such a way either to reward or
punish him, as may make him much talked of in the world. Above all, a Prince is
to have a care in all his actions to behave himself so as may give him the
reputation of being excellent as well as great. A Prince is likewise much
esteemed when he shows himself a sincere friend, or a generous Enemy, That is
when without any hesitation he declares himself in favor of one against
another, which as it is more frank and Princely, so it is more profitable than
to stand neuter; for if two of your potent Neighbors be at Wars, they are
either of such condition that you are to be afraid of the Victor or not: In
either which cases it will be always more for your benefit to discover your
self freely, and make a fair War: For in the first cause, if you do not
declare, you shall be a prey to him who overcomes, and it will be a pleasure,
and satisfaction to him that is conquered to see you his Fellow-sufferer, nor
will any body either defend, or receive you, and the reason is, because the
Conqueror will never understand them to be his Friends, who would not assist
him in his distress; and he that is worsted will not receive you, because you
neglected to run his fortune with your Arms in your hands. Antiochus, upon the
invitation of the Etolians, passed into Greece, to repel the Romans: Antiochus
sent Ambassadors to the Achaians (who were in amity with the Romans) to persude
them a Neutrality, and the Romans sent to them to associate with them. The
business coming to be debatedin the Council of the Achaians, and Antiochus his
Ambassador pressing them to be Neuters; The Roman Ambassador replied, As to
what he has remonstrated, That it is most useful and most consistent with the
interest of your State, not to engage your selves in our War, their is nothing
more contrary and pernicious; for if you do not concern your selves, you will
assuredly become a prey to the Conqueror without any thanks or reputation; and
it will always be, that he who has least kindness for you, will tempt you to be
Neuters, but they that are your friends will invite you to take up Arms. And
those Princes who are ill advised, to avoid some present danger follow the
Neutral way, are most commonly ruined: But when a Prince discovers himself
courageously, in favor of one party, if he with whom you join overcome, though
he be very powerful, and you seem to remain at his discretion, yet he is
obliged to you, and must needs have a respect for you, and Men are not so
wicked, with such signal and exemplary ingratitude to oppress you. Besides
Victories are never so clear and complete, as to leave the Conqueror without
all sparks of reflection, and especially upon what is just. But if your
Confederate comes by the worst, you are received by him, and assisted whilst
he is able, and becomest a Companion of his fortune, which may possibly restore
the. In the second place, if they who contend be of such condition, that they
have no occasion to fear, let which will overcome; you are in purdence to
declare your self the sooner, because by assisting the one, you contribute to
the ruin of the other, (whom, if your Confederate had been wise, he
oughtrather to have preserved) so that he overcoming, remains wholly at your
discretion, and by your assistance, he must of necessity overcome. And hear it
is to be noted (if he can avoid it) a Prince is never to league himself with
another more powerful than himself, in an offensive War: because in that case,
if he overcomes, you remain at his mercy, and Princes ought to be as cautious
as possible, of falling under the discretion of other people. The Venetians
(when there was no necessity for it) associated with France against the Duke of
Milan, and that association was the cause of their ruin: But where it is not
to be avoided (as happened to the Florentines when the Pope and the Spaniard sent
their Armies against Lombardy) there a Prince is to adhere for the reasons
aforesaid. Nor is any Prince of Government to imagine that in those cases any
certain counsel can be taken, because the affairs of this world are so ordered,
that in avoiding one mischief, we fall commonly into another. But a Man's
wisdom is most conspicuous where he is able to distinguish of dangers, and make
choice of the least. Moreover a Prince to show himself a Virtuoso, and Honourer
of all that is excellent in any Art whatsoever. He is likewise to encourage and
assure his Subjects that they may live quietly in peace and exercise themselves
in their several Vocations whether merchandise, Agriculture, or any other
employment whatever, to the end that one may not forbear impro^ing or
imbellishing his Estate for fear it should be taken from him, nor another
advancing his Trade in apprehension of taxes; but the Prince is rather to
excite them by propositions of reward, and immunities to all such as shall any
way amplify his Territory, or powers. He is obliged likewise, at convenient
times in the year to entertain the people by Feastings and Plays, and
Spectacles of Recreation; and because all Cities divided into Companies, or
Wards, he ought to have respect to those Societies, be merry with them
sometimes, and give them some instance of his humanity, and magnificence, but
always retaining the Majesty of his degree, which is never to be debased in any
case whatever.

CHAP. XXII.
of the Secretaries of Princes.
THe Election of his Ministers, is of no small importance to a Prince; for the
first judgment that is made of him, or his parts, is from the persons he has
about him; when they are wise and faithful, be sure the Prince is discreet
himself, who as he knew how to choose them able at first, so he has known how
to oblige them to be faithful; but when his Ministers are otherwise, it
reflects shrewdly upon the Prnice; for commonly the first error he commits, is
in the Election of his Servants. No Man knew Antonio da Vanafro to be Secretary
to Pandolfo Petrucci Prince of Sienna but he could judge Pandolfo to be
aprudent Man for choosing such a one to his Minister. In the capacities and
parts of Men, there are three sorts of degrees; one Man understands of himself;
another understands what is explained; and a third understands neither of
himself, nor by any Explanation: The first is excellent, the second
commendable, the third altogether unprofitable. If therefore Pandolfus was not
in the first rank, he might be concluded in the second; for whenever a Prince
(...) the judgment to know the good, and the bad of what is spoken or done,
though his own invention be not excellent, he can distinguish a good servant
from a bad, and exalt the one, and correct the other, and the Minister
despairing of deluding him, remains good in spite of his teeth. But the
business is how a Prince may understand his Minister, and the rule for that is
infallible. When you observe your Officer more careful of himself, than of you,
and all his actions and designs pointing at his own interest and advantage,
that Man will never be a good Minister, nor ought you ever to repose any
confidence in him; for he who has the affairs of his Prince in his hand, ought
to lay aside all thoughts of himself, and regard nothing but what is for the
profit of his Master. And on the otherside, to keep him faithful, the Prince is
as much concerned to do for him, by honoring him, enriching him, giving him
good Offices and Preferments, that the wealth and honor conferred by his
Master, may keep him from looking out for himself, and the plenty and goodness
of his Offices, make him afraid of a change, knowing that without his Princes
favor he can never subsist. When therefore the Prince, and the Minister are
qualified in this manner, they may depend one upon the other: But when it is
otherwise with them, the end must be bad; and one of them will be undone.

CHAP. XXIII.
How flatterers are to be avoided.
I Will not pass by a thing of great consequence, being an error against which
Princes do hardly defend themselves, unless they be very wise, and their
judgment very good. And that is about Flatterers, of which kind of Cattle all
Histories are full; for Men are generally so fond of their own actions, and so
easily mistaken in them, that it is not without difficulty they defend
themselves against those sort of people, and he that goes about to defend
himself, runs a great hazard of being despised: For there is no other remedy
against Flatterers, than to let every body understand you are not disobliged by
telling the truth; yet if you suffer every body to tell it, you injure your
self, and lessen your reverence. Wherefore a wise Prince ought to go a third
way, and select out of his State certain discreet men, to whom only he is to
commit that liberty of speaking truth, and that, of such things as he demands,
and nothing else; but then he is to inquire of every thing, hear their
opinions, and resolve afterward, as he pleases, and behave himself toward
them in such sort, that every one may find with how much the more freedom he
speaks, with so much the more kindness he is accepted; That besides them, he
will hearken to no body; That he considers well before he resolves; and that
his resolutions once taken, are never to be altered: He that does otherwise,
shall either precipitate his affairs by means of his Flatterers; or by variety
of advices, often change his designs, which will lessen his esteem, and render
him contemptible. To This purpose I shall instance in one Modern Example.

Father Lucas, a Servant to Maximilian the present Emperor, giving a Character
of His Majesty, declared him a person that never consulted any body, and yet
never acted according to his own judgment and inclination; and the reason was,
because he proceeded contrary to the presriptions aforesaid, for the Emperor is
a close Man, communicates his secrets with no body, nor takes any man's advice;
but when his determinations are to be executed, and begin to be known in the
world, those who are about him begin to discourage and dissuade him, and he
being good natured does presently desist: Hence it comes to pass that his
resolutions of one day, are dissolved in the next, no man knows what he desires
or designs; nor no man can depend upon his resolutions. A Prince therefore is
always to consult; but at his own, not other peoples pleasure, and rather to
deter people from giving their advice undemanded; but he ought not to be
sparing in his demands, nor when he has demanded, impatient of hearing the
truth; but if he understands that any suppressed it, and forbore to speak out,
for fear of displeasing, then, and not till then, he is to show his
displeasure. And because there are those who believe that a Prince which
creates an opinion of his prudence in the people, does it not by any excellence
in his own Nature, but by the Counsels of those who are about him; without
doubt they are deceived; for this is a general and infallible rule, That that
Prince who has no Wisdom of his own, can never be well advised; unless by
accident he commits all to the Government and Administration of some honest and
discreet man: In this case it is possible things may be well ordered for a
while, but they can never continue; for his Minister or Vicegerent in a short
time will set up for himself; but if a Prince who has no great judgment of his
own, consults with more than one; their Counsels will never agree, nor he have
ever the cunning to unite them; Every man will advise according to his own
interest, or Capriccio, and he not have the parts either to correct or discover
it: And other Counselors are not to be found, for men will always prove bad,
unless by necessity they are compelled to be good. So then it is clear, That
good Counsels (from whomsoever they come) proceed rather from the Wisdom of the
Prince, than the Princes Wisdom from the goodness of his Counsels.

CHAP. XXIV.
How it came to pass that the Princes of Italy have most of them lost their
Dominions.
THE Qualities aforesaid being observed; they make a new Prince appear in the
number of the more Ancient, and render him presently more firm and secure in
his Government, than if he had descended to it by right of inheritance; for the
Actions of a new Prince are liable to stricter observation, than if he were
Hereditary, and when they are known to be virtuous, gain more upon people, and
oblige them farther than antiquity of Blood; because Men are more affected with
present, than passed things, and when in their present condition they find
themselves well, they content themselves with it, without looking out any where
else, employing themselves wholly in defense of their Prince, unless in other
things he be defective to himself: So that thereby he will have double honor,
in having laid the foundation of a new Principality, and embellished and
fortified it, with good Laws, good Force, good Friends, and good Example:
whereas he multiplies his disgrace, who being born Prince, loses his
inheritance by his own ill management and imprudence. And if the Sovereign
Princes in Italy, who in our time have lost their Dominions, be considered, as
the King of Naples, the Duke of Milan, and others, there will be found in their
beginning one common defect as to the management of their Arms, for the reasons
largely discoursed of before: besides some of them will appear to have been
hated by the people, or if they have had so much prudence as to preserve a
friendship with them, they have been ignorant how to secure themselves against
the Grandees; for without these errors no States are lost that have Money and
strength enough to bring an Army into the Field. Philip of Macedon (not
Alexander the Great's Father, but he who was overcome by Titus Quintus) had no
great force in comparison of the Romans and the Grecians which invaded him;
yet, being a Martial Man, and one that understood how to insinuate with the
People, and oblige the Nobility, he maintained War several years agaisnt both
of them, and though at last he lost some Towns, yet he kept his Kingdom in
spite of them. Those therefore of our Princes who for many years together were
settled in their Principalities, if they lost them afterward, they cannot
accuse fortune, but their own negligence and indiscretion, for not having in
quiet times considered they might change (and it is the common infirmity of
Mankind in a calm to make no reckoning of a Tempest) when adversity approached,
they thought more of making their escape than defense, resting their whole
hopes upon this, that when the people were weary of the insolence of the
Conqueror, they would recall them again. Which resolution is tolerable indeed,
when others are wanting, but to neglect all other remedies, and trust only to
that, is much to be condemned, for a man would never throw himself down, that
another might take him up; besides, that may not happen, or if it does, not
with your security, because that kind of defense is poor, and depends not on
your self, and no defenses are good, certain, and lasting, which proceed not
from the Princes own Courage and Virtue.

CHAP. XXV.
How far in human affairs Fortune may avail; and in what manner she may be
resisted.
I Am not ignorant that it is, and has been of old the opinion of many people,
that the affairs of the world are so governed by Fortune and Divine Providence,
that Man cannot by his Wisdom correct them, or apply any remedy at all; from
whence they would infer that we are not to labor and sweat, but to leave every
thing to its own tendancy and event. This opinion has obtained more in our
days, by the many and frequent revolutions, which have been, and are still seen
beyond all humane conjecture. And when I think of it seriously sometimes, I am
in some measure inclined to it my self; nevertheless that our own free will may
not utterly be exploded, I conceive it may be true that fortune may have the
arbitrament of one half of our actions, but that she leaves the other half (or
little less) to be governed by our selves. Fortune, I do resemble to a rapid
and impetuous River, which when swelled, and enraged, overwhelms the Plains,
subverts the T^ees, and the Houses, forces away the Earth from one place, and
carries it to another, every body fears, every body shuns, but no body knows
how to resist it; Yet though it be thus furious sometimes, it does not follow
but when it is quiet and calm, men may by banks, and fences, and other
provisions correct it in such manner, that when it swells again, it may be
carried off by some Canal, or the violence thereof rendered less licentious and
destructive. So it is with Fortune, which shows her power where there is no
predisposed virtue to resist it, and turns all her force and impetuosity, where
she knows there are no banks, no fences to restrain her: If you consider Italy
(the seat of all these revolutions) and what it was that caused them, you will
find it an open field, without any bounds or Ramparts of secure it; and that,
had it been defended by the Courage of their Ancestors, as Germany, and Spain,
and France have been, those inundations had never happened, or never made such
devastation as they have done. And this I hold sufficient to have spoken in
general against Fortune. But restraining my self a little more to particulars,
I say it is ordinary to see a Prince happy one day, and ruined the next,
without discerning any difference in his humor or Government; and this I impute
to the reasons of which I have discoursed largely before; and one of them is,
because that Prince which relies wholly upon Fortune, being subject to her
Variations, must of necessity be ruined. I believe, again that Prince may be
happy, whose manner of proceeding concerts with the times, and he unhappy who
cannot accommodate to them: For in things leading to the end of their designs
(which every man has in his eye, and they are riches and honor) we see men
have various methods of proceeding. Some with circumspection, others with heat;
some with violence, others with cunning; some with patience, and others with
fury, and every one (notwithstanding the diversity of their ways) may possibly
attain them. Again we see two persons equally cautious, one of them prospers,
and the other miscarri^s, and on the other side, two equally happy by different
measures, one being deliberate, and the other as hasty; and this proceeds from
nothing but the condition of the times which suits, or does not suit; with the
manner of their proceedings. From hence arises what I have said, That two
persons by different operations do attain the same end, whilst two others
steer the same Course, and one of them succeeds, and the other is ruined. From
hence likewise may be deduced the Vicissitudes of good; for if to one who
manages with deliberation and patience, the times and conjuncture of affairs,
come about so favorably that his Conduct be in fashion, he must needs be
happy; but if the face of affairs, and the times change, and he changes not
with them, he is certainly ruined. Nor is there any man to be found so wise,
that knows how to accommodate, or frame himself to all these varieties, both
because he cannot deviate from that to which Nature has inclined him; as
likewise because if a man has constantly prospered in one way, it is no easy
matter to persuade him to another; and he that is so cautious, being at a loss
when time requires he should be vigorous, must of necessity be destroyed;
whereas if he could turn with the times, his fortune would never betray him.
Pope Julius XI. in all his Enterprises, acted with passion and vehemence, and
the times and accident of affairs were so suitable to his manner of proceeding,
that he prospered in whatever he undertook. Consider his Expedition of Bolonia
in the days of Messer Giovanni Ben^ivogli, The V^netians were against it, and
the Kings of Spain and France were in treaty, and had a mind to it themselves;
yet he with his promptitude and fury, undertook it personally himself, and that
activity of his, kept both Spaniard, and Venetian in suspense (the Venetians
for fear; the Spaniards, in hopes to recover the whole Kingdom of Naples, and
the King of France came over to his side; for seeing him in motion, and
desirous to make him his friend, and thereby to correct the insolence of the
Venetian, he thought he could not deny him his assistance, without manifest
injustice; so that Julius with his rashness and huffing, did that which never
any other Pope could have done with all his cunning and insinuation: For had he
deferred his departure from Rome, till all things had been put into exact
order, and his whole progress concluded (as any other Pope would have done) he
could never have succeeded; The King of France would have pretended a thousand
excuses, and others, would have suggested twice as many fears; I will pass by
the rest of his Enterprises, which were all alike, and prospered as well, and
the shortness of his life secured him against change: for had the times fallen
out so, that he had been forced to proceed with accurate circumspection, he
would have certainly been ruined, for he could never have left those ways to
which his Nature inclined him. I conclude then, That whilst the obstinacy of
Princes consists with the motion of fortune, it is possible they may be happy;
but when once they disagree, the poor Prince comes certainly to the ground. I
am of opinion likewise, that it is better to be hot and precipitate, then
cautious and apprehensive, for fortune is a Woman, and must be Hectored, to
keep her under; and it is visible every day she suffers her self to be managed
by those who are brisk and audacious, rather than by those who are cold and
phlegmatic in their Motions, and therefore (like a Woman) she is always a
friend to those who are young; because being less circumspect, they attack her
with more security and boldness.

CHAP. XXVI.
An Exhortation to deliver Italy from the Barbarians.
HAving weighed therefore all that is said before, and considered seriously
with my self whether in this juncture of affairs in Italy, the times were
disposed for the advancement of a new Prince, and whether there was competent
matter that could give occasion to a virtuous and wise person to introduce such
a form as would bring reputation to him, and benefit to all his Subjects; it
seems to me that at this present so many things concur to the exaltation of a
new Prince, that I do not know any time that has been more proper than this:
and if (as I said before) for the Manifestation of the courage of Moses, it was
necessary that the Israelites should be Captives in Egypt; for discovery of the
Magnanimity of Cyrus, that the Persians should be oppressed by the Medes; and
for the illustration of the excellence of Theseus, that the Athenians should be
banished and dispersed; so to evince and demonstrate the courage of an Italian
spirit, it was necessary that Italy should be reduced to its present condition;
That it should be in greater bondage than the Jews; in greater servitude than
the Persians, and in greater dispersion than the Athenians, without Head,
without order, harras'd, spoiled, overcome, overrun, and over-flown with all
kind of Calamity: and though formerly some sparks of virtue have appeared in
some persons, that might give it hopes that God had ordained them for its
redemption; yet it was found afterward that in the very height and career of
their exploits, they were checked, and forsaken by Fortune, and poor Italy left
half dead, expecting who would be her Samaritan to bind up her wounds, put an
end to the Sackings and devastations in Lombardy, the Taxes and Expilations in
the Kingdom of Naples, and Tuscany, and cure her sores, which length of time
had fester'd and imposthumated. It Is manifest how she prays to God daily to
send some person who may redeem her from the cruelty, and insolence of the
Barbarians. It Is manifest how prone and ready she is to follow the Banner that
any man will take up; nor is it at present to be discerned where she can repose
her hopes with more probability, than in your illustrious Family, which by its
own courage and interest, and the favor of God and the Church (of which it is
now chief) may be induced to make it self Head in her redemption: which will be
no hard matter to be effected, if you lay before you the lives and actions of
the persons above named; who though they were rare, and wonderful, were yet but
men, and not accommodated with so fair circumstances as you. Their Enterprise
was not more just, nor easy, nor God Almighty more their friend than yours.
You have Justice on your side; for that War is just which is necessary, and
it is piety to fight, were no hope is left in any thing else. The people are
universally disposed, and where the disposition is so great, the opposition can
be but small, especially you taking your rules from those persons which I have
proposed to you for a Model. Besides, many things that they did were
supernatural, and by Gods immediate Conduct, the Sea opened, a cloud directed,
a rock afforded water, it rained Manna, all these things are recompensed in
your Grandeur, and the rest remains to be executed by you: God will not do
every thing immediately, because he will not deprive us of our free will, and
the honor that devolves upon us. Nor is it any wonder if none of the
forenamed Italians have been able to do that which may be hoped for from your
illustrious Family: and if in so many revolutions in Italy, and so long
continuation of War, their Military Virtue seems spent and extinguished; the
reason is, their old Discipline was not good, and no body was able to direct to
a better. Nothing makes so much to the honor of a new Prince, as new Laws, and
new Orders invented by him, which if they be well founded, and carry any thing
of Grandeur along with them, do render him venerable, and wonderful; and Italy
is susceptible enough of any new form. Their courage is great enough in the
Soldier, if it be not wanting in the Officer, witness the Duels, and Combats,
in which the Italians have generally the better by their force, and dexterity,
and stratagem; but come to their Battles, and they have oftener the worst, and
all from the inexperience of their Commanders; for those who pretend to have
Skill, will never obey, and every one thinks he has Skill, there having been no
body to this very day, raised by his virtue and fortune to that height of
reputation, as to prevail with others to obey him. Hence it came, that in so
long time, in the many Wars during the last twenty years, when ever an Army
consisted wholly of Italians, it was certainly beaten; and this may be
testified by Tarus, Alexandria, Capua, Genoa, Vaila, Bologna, and Mestri. If
therefore your illustrious Family be inclined to follow the examples of those
excellent persons who redeemed their Countries, it is necessary as a true
fundamental of all great Enterprises, to provide your selves with Forces of
your own Subjects, for you cannot have more faithful, nor better Soldiers than
they. And though all of them be good, yet altogether they will be much better,
when they find themselves not only commanded, but preferred, and caressed by a
Prince of their own. It is necessary therefore to be furnished with these
Forces, before you can be able with Italian virtue to vindicate your Country
from the oppression of Strangers: And though the Swiss, and Spanish Infantry be
counted terrible, they have both of them their defects: and a third sort may be
composed that may not only encounter, but be confident to beat them; for the
Spanish Foot cannot deal with Horse, and the Swiss are not invincible when they
meet with Foot as obstinate as themselves. It has been seen by experience, and
would be so again, the Spaniards cannot sustain the fury of the French Cavalry,
and the Swisses have been overthrown by the Infantry of Spain. And though of
this last we have seen no perfect Experiment; yet we had a competent Essay at
the Battle of Ravenna, where the Spanish Foot being engaged with the German
Battalions (which observe the same Order and Discipline with the Swisses) the
Spaniards by the agility of their Bodies, and the protection of their Bucklers,
broke in under their Pikes, and killed them securely, while the poor Germans
were incapable to defend themselves; and had not the Spaniards been charged by
the Horse, the German Foot had been certainly cut off. It Is possible therefore
(the defect of both those Foot being known) to institute a third, which may
buckle with the Horse, and be in no fear of their foot; which will be effected,
not by the variation of their Arms, but by changing their Discipline. And these
are some of those things which being newly reformed, give great grandeur and
reputation to any new Prince. This opportunity therefore is by no means to be
slipped, that Italy, after so long expectation, may see some hopes of
deliverance: Nor can it be expressed with what joy, with what impatience of
revenge, with what fidelity, with what compassion, with what Tears, such a
Champion would be received into all the Provinces that have suffered by those
barbarous inundations. What Gates would be shut against him? What people would
deny him obedience? what malice would oppose him? what true Italian would
refuse to follow him? There is not, there is not any body but abhors, and
nauseates this barbarous domination. Let your illustrious Family, then address
it self to the work, with as much Courage and Confidence as just Enterprises
are undertaken; That under their Ensigns our Country may be recovered, and
under their Conduct, Petrarch's Prophecy may be fulfilled, who has promised
that, Virtu contr' al furore
Prendera l' arm, and fia il combatter Corto.
Che l' antico valor
Ne' gl' Italici curr' non e ancor morto.
Virtue shall arm against rage, and in short sight
Prove the Roman Valor's not extinguished quite.


The Original of the words Guelf and Ghibilin, so much mentioned in History.
THese two Factions so famous in History, were eminent in Italy two ages before
Castruccio was born. Machiavel in his Treatise of the Wars of that Country,
affirms that Pistoia was the first place where those names of distinction were
used, but the account wherewith the public Libraries supply me, runs thus.
These two words, Guelf and Ghibilin, deduce their original from a schism which
molested the Church in the year 1130. by the competition of two Popes, Innocent
11. and Anaclet: the greatest part of Christendom acknowledged Innocent, who
was particularly supported by the Emperors of the West. Anaclet the Antipope
had persuaded into his interests, Roger Comte de Naples and Sicily, a martial
Prince, and descended from the Normans, who had conquered that Country. The
pretense of this double Election having kept a War on foot eight years
together, which was still favorable to Roger, the Emperor Conrad the third
marched himself at the head of an Army of Germans, into Italy, leaving his
Grandson Prince Henry to come after. Roger, to oppose him with men of his own
Nation, allured to the defense of his Countries Guelf Duke of Bavaria. During
the course of this War which began in the year 1139. it happened sometimes that
the Emperors Army was commanded by the said Prince Herny, who was brought up in
a Village in Germany called Ghibilin, whose situation being very pleasant, made
the very name of it ^ear to him. One day the Armies being drawn up, and ready
to engage, the Bavarians to encourage their Comrades, cried out in their
language, a Guelf, a Guelf; and the Emperors Troops (being at the same time as
well disposed to their General) to comply with the kindness he had for that
place, cried out on the other side, a Ghibilin, a Ghibilin. These words seemed
barbarous to the Italians that were with Roger, who came to Guelf to know what
they meant: He told them the Pope's Party were intended by the word Guelf, and
the Emperors by the word Ghibilin: from that time those names grew so common in
both Armies, that by them they answered their Who goes there? and they were
given to the Italians according to their several sides. It Is true, at first
they were used to discriminate only Anaclet's Party from the Emperors, but
afterward Roger having vanquished and taken prisoner Pope Innocent; as the
price of his liberty he obliged him to erect the Countries of Naples and Sicily
into Kingdoms, by which treaty Roger being taken off from the interest of the
Antipope, and engaging entirely with the Church, he affixed the name of Guelf
to the Pope's Party, and confirmed the name Ghibilin to the Faction of the
Emperor.

The Italians would fain have the credit of the Etymology themselves, and by a
certain gingling of words, (and that mightily strained) would have Guelf
derived from Guardatori di fe, because (forsooth) it is they who defend the
Faith of the Church: and that by corruption the word Ghibilin was formed from
Guida belli, that is Guidatori di Bataglia, a great Title, and suitable to the
Majesty of the Empire.

Be it which way it will, these two Factions were in the height of their
emulation two hundred years after, that is to say, about the year 1320. which
was very near the time that Castruccio was in his prosperity. And in Europe the
face of affairs stood thus.

The Popes (driven from Rome by the violence of the Emperors of the West) had
transferred the Holy Chair to Avignon in France. In the year 1320. it was
possessed by John XXII. a Prince of himself firm and entire, but one who by the
precipitate counsels of other people had excommunicated the Emperor Lewis of
the house of Bavaria, and been too busy with his fulminations against five
more Princes of Italy, who (being treated by him like Tyrants) confederated
against him; their names were Castruccio Sovereign of Lucca, Scaliger, Lord of
Verona, the Marquess d' Esti Lord of Ferrara, and Visconti, and Gonzague the
first Sovereign of Milan, and the other of Mantoua: which created troubles to
Italy.

The Empire of the East was at that time torn, and distracted by the ambition
of the Paliologi and others, whilst in the mean time the Sultan Orchan son of
Ottoman, swept away Lycaonia, Phrygia, and all the Coast of the Hellespont from
the Greeks.

The Empire of the West was then in dispute betwixt Frederick of Austria, and
Lewis of Bavaria, (whom Machiavel, by mistake or inadvertency, has called
Frederick, Lewis after long and bloody Wars overcome his Competitor, and made
several Voyages into Italy to invigorate and reinforce Castruccio and the
Ghibilins.

France was governed by Philip le Long, who at the solicitation of Pope John
passed an Army into Italy to the relief of the Guelfs, which Army was commanded
by Philip de Valois afterward King, but his Expedition did not answer
expectation; for either the cunning or bribes of the Ghibilins had dispelled
the storm which our preparations threatened upon Lombardy; or our Forces were
recalled upon some secret apprehension of a fourth War with the English, or by
the vast projects of a fifth Expedition to the Holy Land.

Spain was divided into five Kingdoms, each of which had its peculiar King;
four of them were Christians, and one a Mahumetan.

Navar had the same King with France. Philip the Long found a way to extend the
Salick Law into that Country, and defeat his Niece Jane of France, Daughter of
Lewis Hutin, of both Kingdoms at once.

Alphonso XI. as Mariana calls him, (the XII. as Garibay) had at that time the
Scepter of Castile, but his minority transferred the Conduct of Affairs into
the hands of the two Infanti, Don Pedro, and Don John, insomuch as by the
jealousy and division betwixt the two Regents, that Kingdom was exposed to
such disorders as are inseparable from the minority of a Prince. At length the
two Infanti were slain in the year 1320. in a Fight which their rashness caused
them to lose to the Mores under the walls of Granada.

Arragon was in obedience to Don Iacques the second of that name; He was
Brother to Fredrick, who reigned in Sicily to the prejudice of Robert, a Prince
of the House of Anjou. This Robert was King of Naples, sided with the Guelfs,
and leagued himself sundry times with the Florentines against Castruccio.
James, King of Aragon, designing to establish himself in Italy, and judging
that the Conquests which he mediated upon the Isles of Corsica and Sardinia,
depended much upon the Concord of his Subjects at home; He caused a General
Assembly of his Estates to be held in the year 1320. in which was concluded the
Union of the Kingdoms of Aragon and Valentia, with the Principality of
Catolonia.

Don Denis reigned in Portugal, a person eminent among his Subjects for
magnificent Building, and in great veneration for his Piety and Justice. But
the felicity of his Reign was disturbed by domestic broils which he had with
his Son, the Infant Don Alphonso, who succeeded him in the Crown. Don Denis
instituted the Order of Christ in the year 1320.

The More, Ismael, first of that name, had the Monarchy of Granada; the Battle
which he gained 1320. against the two Infanti of Castile, revived the affairs
of that Nation, which were in their declension before, and gave new alarms to
all Spain.

The King and Kingdom of England were both governed by favorites at that time.
Edward 2. gave his authority and confidence, one while to Gaveston, and then to
the two Spencers; and this weakness and imprudence of his created so many
discontents, and rendered him so odious to the people, that after much trouble
to quit himself of an Impostor who pretended to the Crown, he was forced to go
through a cruel War against the Nobility, and another no less dangerous against
Robert Bruce King of Scotland. These great stirs and commotions could not but
give some jealousies to France, which seeing the Provinces that the English had
on that side the Sea perpetually in Arms, was obliged to keep upon so strong a
Guard, as was little different from an open War.

It is not then to be admired, the affairs of Europe being in this confusion,
if Italy was left in prey to the Guelfs and the Ghibilins, and gave opportunity
to the laying the foundation of so many Principalities, that the most part of
them are still in existence. But it is certain, that neither Paulus Iovius,
Girolamo Briani, il Biondo, nor the rest of the Historians, who have written of
the Wars and Concussions of these two Factions, have left any thing comparable
to the adventures of Castruccio, they have lent me indeed some circumstances
for the illustration and ornament of this History, and I have been forced to
paraphrase upon five or six of the sayings of Castruccio to give them their
true Grace, and make them intelligible, I know not whether I have followed the
just temperament that is to be observed in a translation. It Is vicious to
assume such liberty as the History will not bear, but on the other, to tie ones
self up to the same, and same quantity of words, is as disingenuous and
servile. It Is true, the same comma's and stops were by no means to be
neglected, were all treatises that are translated, like the fallacious answer
of a Divine to Braccio Montone Sovereign of Perusia, which Braccio being a
Ghibilin as well as Castruccio, departed for the Siege of Aquila a Town in the
Kingdom of Naples, and being impatient to know his success, upon application to
an Astrologer, he received this answer, Ibis redibis non morieris in bello:
which if punctuated thus, Ibis, redibis non, morieris in bello, threatened the
said Braccio with the unfortunateness of his Expedition; whereas altering it
thus, Ibis, redibis, non morieris in bello, portended quite contrary. An
ambiguity like this was sent also to Manfred King of Sicily, not long before he
was defeated by Charles of Anjou. NO CARLO SARA VITORIOSO DEL RE MANFREDO, and
ought to be interpreted with great exactness and acuracy, the mistake of a
comma being as much as a man's life is worth. There is another kind of Tyranny
likewise, and that is when the Text of the Author is to regulate in a point of
Religion: but here we are not under any such necessities, and he who in a
quarrelsom capriccio, to defame my translation, would compare every line, and
put the English words all along under the Italian, would make a new and
pleasant kind of Dictionary, and the beauties which are peculiar to each
language, would be excellently presented.

THE LIFE OF CASTRVCCIO CASTRACANI OF LVCCA, Written by Nicolo Machiavelli and
Dedicated to Zanobi Buonbelmonti and Luigi Alamani his particular Friends.
IT seems (most Excellent Friends) to those who consider it, very strange, that
all, or the greatest part of them, who in this world have performed any thing
extraordinary, and raised themselves above the pitch of their Contemporaries,
have had their births and beginnings mean and obscure, or else infested and
perplexed with all the difficulties that fortune could present. For all of them
having been exposed to wild beasts when they were young, or being descended
from base Parentage, and ashamed of their Extraction, they have declared
themselves Sons of Jupiter, or some other Deity, of which sort the number being
so great, and their story so well known, to repeat them would be both
superfluous and troublesome. The reason I suppose to be, that fortune willing
to demonstrate to the world, that it is not any ones prudence, but she that
raises men to be great, begins to show and exercise her power at a time in
which prudence can pretend to no share in us; that all our successes may be
acknowledged to her. Castruccio Castracani of Lucca was one of this sort, who
in respect of the times in which he lived, and the place in which he was born,
performed great things; for in his beginning he was neither more happy not more
eminent than the rest, as you shall understand in my description of his life,
which I have thought good to transmit to Posterity, having observed many things
in it (both for virtue and event) of extraordinary example; and to you it
seemed most proper to direct it, as persons more delighted with honorable and
heroic actions, than any I know besides.

I say then, the Family of the Castracani is reckoned among the most
Illustrious Families in the City of Lucca, though at present (according to the
fatality of all worldly things) it seems to be extinct. Out of this house there
was born in former times one Antonio, who entering himself into Orders, was made
a Canon of Saint Mitchel in Lucca, and in token of Honor called Messer Antoin:
He had no kindred but one Sister, who was married long before to one
Buonaccorso Cinami: Buonaccorso being dead, and she being a Widow, she lived
with her Brother, with resolution to marry no more. Behind the house in which
he dwelt, Master Anthony had a Vineyard, which bordering upon several Gardens,
was accessible from several parts, and without much difficulty. It happened that
one morning about Sunrise, Madam Dianora (for that was the Sisters name)
walking out into the Vineyard to gather herbs for a Salad (as women frequently
do), she heard a rusling under the leaves, and turning toward it, she fancyed
it cried; advancing up toward it, she saw the hands and face of a child, which
tumbling up and down in the leaves, seemed to call for relief: Madam Dianora,
partly astonished, and partly afraid, took it up very tenderly, carried it
home, washed it and having put it in clean clouts, she presented it to Master
Antony, who understanding the case and seeing the Infant, was no less affected
with wonder and compassion than his Sister before him. Debating with themselves
what course was to be taken, it was concluded to bring it up, Anthony being a
Priest, and she having no children. They christened it Castruccio, by the name
of their Father, and looked to it as carefully as it had been their own.
Castruccio's graces increased with his years, and his wit was so pregnant, they
put him to nothing but he took it very well. Anthony designed him for a Priest,
and to resign his Canonship and other Benefices one day, and according to that
design he gave him education; but he could not find that Castruccio had
inclination to that kind of life; on the contrary, he perceived his natural
disposition tending quite another way.

In short, Castruccio was scarce 14 years old, but abating by little and little
of his awe and respects to Antonio and Dianora, he began to neglect his
Studies, to devote himself to Arms, and taking great delight in wrestling, and
running, and such violent exercises, his mettle was so well suited with the
strength of his body, that none of his companions were able to cope with him.
He troubled himself very little with reading, unless it were such things as
might instruct him for War, or acquaint him with the great actions of some
eminent Commander, which did not only disquiet Antonio, but afflicted him.

There was at that time in Lucca a Gentleman called Francisco, of the House of
the Guinigi a handsome man, very rich, and remarkable for many good qualities,
which recommended him to one of the first ranks in the Town. He had born Arms
all his life long, and for the most part under the Viscontis, Dukes of Milan.
He had with them engaged for the Ghibilins, and the City of Lucca looked upon
him as the very life of their party. It was at the time when these two great
Factions (the Guelfs and the Ghibilins) shared all Italy betwixt them, divided
the Popes and the Emperors, engaged in their different interests the
Inhabitants of the same Town, and the members of the same Family. Francisco
accompanied usually by persons of Quality of his Cabal, walked often before the
place of St. Michael, not far from the Palace of the Podestat or Governor. In
that Marketplace he took notice of Castruccio, who was often times playing
there amongst his School-fellows and Comrades. He observed the youth always
prescribed such sports to the rest, as he had chosen on purpose to prepare him
for the War. Francisco could easily perceived how much the agility of
Castruccio advanced him above his Companions, and he as easily perceived that
he assumed an authority over them, and that they on their part paid him a
reverence, and such a one as was accompanied with kindness and zeal. Francisco
took a great fancy to the boy, inquited what he was, and being informed by some
who were by, he had a months mind to have him himself: calling him to him one
day, he asked him if he did not prefer a Gentleman's Family, where he might
learn to ride the great Horse, and exercise his Arms before the Cloister of a
Churchman where he must spin out his days in idleness and melancholy. He no
sooner mentioned Horses and Arms, but Castruccio was ready to have leaped out
of his skin; but recollecting himself, a sentiment of modesty kept him from
answering, till the fine words of Francisco having given him more confidence,
he told him, that if he had the liberty of choosing he had rather a thousand
times be employed as a Gentleman, than in the way for which he was designed.
His resolution was so pleasing to Francisco, that not long after he made a
visit to Antonio, and begged Castruccio of him, in so pressing, and yet so
civil a manner, that Antonio finding it impossible to master the natural
inclinations of the youth, delivered him to Francisco.

By this means Castruccio changed his Education, and it is not to be believed
with what easiness he improved in those exercises which are fit for a Gentleman
to learn. It was to be admired with what address and vigor he mounted his
horse, with what grace he managed his lance, and with what comeliness his
sword; and this his dexterity distinguished him so highly from the crowd of his
companions, that it would have been imprudence in any one of them to have
contended with him, either at the Barrieri or Iusts. To all these advantages he
had an engaging way with him, that obliged wherever he came; his actions and
his words seemed premedtiate and studied, so careful, and so regular he was
lest he should say or do any thing that might any ways offends. He carried
himself always with respect to his superiors, with modesty to his equals, and
with civility and complaisance to those who were beneath him; so that these
good qualities did not only gain him the affection of Francisco's whole Family,
but the love and esteem of the whole City of Lucca.

he was eighteen years old when the Faction of the Guelfs drove the Ghibilins
out of Pania. Visconti Prince of Milan, a zealous Partizan of the Ghibilins,
solicited Succors from Francisco Guinigi, who casting his eyes upon
Castruccio, as the first mark of his affection, made him Lieutenant of a
Company of Foot, and marched with him to Visconti. The first Campania this new
Lieutenant made, put him into such reputation, that he eclipsed the glory of
all the rest who served in that War: He gave so great and so many testimonies
both of his courage and conduct, that his fame was spread all over Lombardy.
When also he came back to Lucca, and observed the Town had doubled the respect
which they had for him before, he applied himself to make new friendships, and
to that purpose made use of all the courtesy and insinuation that is necessary
in that case.

Not long after Francesco Guinigi fell sick, and finding himself near his end,
having but one Son of about 13 years of age, called Pagolo, he sent for
Castruccio, and committed the tuition of his Son, and the management of his
Estate into his hands, and having gently remembered Castruccio that he was the
Person who raised him, he begged that he would show the same generosity toward
Pagolo as he had done toward him; and if any thing was due to the bounty of
the Father, to return it upon his Son. He fancied he discerned in the
countenance of Castruccio all the marks and indications of a generous mind, and
died without being disturbed with the least suspicion of his ingratitude.

The trust, and his administration of so great an Estate made Castruccio more
considerable than before, but they created him likewise some enemies, and
lessened the affection which some had had for him: for knowing him to be of an
enterprizing spirit, many began to fancy his designs were tyrannical, and to
oppress the liberty of his Country. The Signeur Giorgio Opizi (chief of the
Guelfs Faction in Lucca) was the most to be apprehended of all those that
accused Castruccio with that abominable ambition. Opizi was of opinion that the
death of Francesco Guinigi, head of the adverse party, would leave him Master
of the Town, but he quickly found that the single reputation o^ Castruccio
would be a new impediment to his usurpation; so that thinking to rob him of the
affections of the people, he spread false reports, and aspersed him wherever
he came. At first these calumniations troubled Castruccio but little, but at
length they alarmed him to the purpose; for he suspected that Opizi would not
fail to set him at odds with the Lieutenant which Robert King of Naples had
settled in Lucca and that if that Governor was his enemy, he should in a short
time be turned out of the Town. And against so great danger, his provision was
this.

The Town of Pisa was then under the Government of Huguccione de Fagivola,
originally of the Town of Arrezzo; being chosen Captain by the Pisans, he had
made himself their Sovereign, and having given protection to certain Ghibilins
who were banished from Lucca, Castruccio entered into secret intelligence by the
privity of Huguccione, and being assured of his assistance he resolved the poor
Exiles should be restored. To this effect he agreed with his friends in Lucca,
who were of his Counsel, and jealous as himself of the power of the Opizi. All
necessary measures were taken by the Conspirators. Castruccio had the care of
fortifying privately a Tower in the City, called the Tower of Honor. He
furnished it with ammunition, in case he should be forced to defend it; and
having appointed the night for the execution of their design, Huguccione failed
not at the precise hour to be at the Rendezvous betwixt Lucca and the
neighboring Mountains. Upon a signal given to Castruccio he advanced toward
the Gate of St. Peter, and set fire to the Antiport next the ^ields, whilst
Castruccio broke down another on the other side of the Town. In the mean time
his associates cried out To your Arms, to excite the people to rise, and
thereby put all things into confusion. Huguccione entered with his Troops, and
having seized upon the Town, he caused all the Opizi to be murdered, and all
the rest of their party which fell into their hands. The Governor, for the King
of Naples was turned out, and the Government of the Town altered, as Huguccione
directed, who, to complete the desolations of Lucca, banished no less than a
hundred of the best Families that belonged to it* The miserable Exiles fled
part to Florence and part to Pistoia, two Towns of the Faction of the Guelfs,
and for that reason enemies to Huguccione, and the prevailing party in Lucca.

The Florentines and whole Faction of the Guelfs, apprehending this great
success would hazard to re-establish the power of the Ghibilins in Tuscany,
they entered into consultation which way those Exiles might be restored. They
set out a considerable Army, and encamped at Monte Carlo to open themselves a
passage to Lucca. Huguccione on his side drew the Lucca Troops together, and
put them under the Command of Castruccio, and then joining them with his own
from Pisa, and reinforcing them with a Squadron of German Horse which he got
out of Lombardy, he marched out to encounter the Florentines. Whereupon the
Florentines quitted their Post at Monte Carlo and entrenching betwixt
Monte-Catino and Pescia, Huguccione possessed himself of the quarter which they
had left. Their Armies being within two miles distance one from the other,
their Horse met daily and skirmished, and they had come certainly to a
peremptory Battle, had not Huguccione fallen ill just in the nick. His
disposition forcing him from the Camp to look out for better accommodation in
Monte-carlo, he left the Command of the Army to Castruccio, his retirement,
which discouraged his own men, and made them think of protracting the Battle,
animated the Florentines, but brought no great advantage to their affairs, In
short, the Florentines perceiving their Enemies without a General, began to
despise them, and Castruccio observing how much they were elated, endeavored
to augment it. He pretended great Consternation, and to make his fear the more
credible, he gave Orders that his Troops should be drawn up within the Lines,
but with positive inhibition for any of them to go forth, though not a moment
passed but the Florentines provoked them; but all to no purpose. Besides that,
this pretended terror in Castruccio redoubled the rashness of the Enemy, and
perfectly blinded them, he drew another advantage from it, which was to
discover exactly the disposition of their Army and the Order of their March.
When he had well observed them, and tempted their temerity as much as he
thought fit, he resolved to fight them the next Bravado they made, and omitting
nothing that might encourage his Soldiers, he assured them of Victory if they
followed his Commands. He had observed that the weakest and worst armed of
their Soldiers were disposed still in their wings, and their best placed in the
Body. Castruccio drew up in the same Order, but distributed his Soldiers quite
contrary, for the worst and most unserviceable he placed in the Body and his
best men in the wings, In this posture he drew out of the Trenches, and had
scarce formed his Battalia, before the Enemy appeared, and with his usual
insolence. Castruccio Commanded that the Body should march slowly, but the two
wings were to advance as fast as they could; so that when they came to engage,
there was only the wings that could fight; for Castruccio's Body having lagged
by Command, the Florentine Body had too far to march before they could charge
them, so as they remained idle, being neither able to do any thing against the
Main Body that was designed to oppose them, nor sustain those who were engaged
in the wings; so it happened that the Florentine wings (composed of the refuse of
their Soldiers) were easily broken by Castruccio's, which consisted of his
best, and when the wings of the Enemy (which were drawn up before their Body;
so as the whole Army was ranged in the figure of a half Moon) were routed, they
turned tail, ran among their own Body which was marching behind them, and put
all into Confusion.

The loss was very great to the Florentines, they left above 10000 men dead
upon the place Their best Officers, and the bravest of the Guelfs perished
there unfortunately, and to make the defeat the more lamentable, there were
several Reformades which died there, of extraodinary quality. Among the rest,
Piero Brother to Robert King of Naples; Carlo Nephew to the said King; Philip
Lord of Tarentum, who were all come, in Gallantry, to make that Compania with
the Florentines. But that which made all the more wonderful was that Castruccio
lost not above 300 men, though unhappily one of Hugucciones Sons were of that
Number, his Name was Francesco, who sighting briskly at the head of the
Volunteers, for want of good Conduct, was slain at the very first charge. So
eminent a Victory as this, must needs put Castruccio into a reputation beyond
expression; but Huguccione had like to have died, with mere jealousy, he
foresaw that nothing of all this would redound to him, but the vain honor of
commanding in chief, and that the real advantage would all fall to his
Lieutenant, so that to use him at that rate, was to rob him of his Sovereignty:
whereupon, nettled exceedingly, in great envy of his Fortune, he resolved he
should die. Whilst he was in this black resolution, and attended nothing but
some specious pretense to get Castruccio to him, and so draw him into his Net,
it happened that Agnolo Micheli (a Person of great alliance as any in Lucca, was
murdered by one who took Sanctuary in Castruccio's House, and was protected:
Huguccione's Officers pursued, and demanded the Criminal; but Castruccio denied
them, and suffered him to escape. Huguccione (who was then at Pisa) unwilling
to lose so fair an opportunity to revenge himself, sent for one of his Sons
called Nerli (whom he put before into possession of the Sovereignty of Lucca)
commands him to repair thither with all speed, and get Castruccio to his house
under pretense of supping with some of the most eminent in the Town; and
private Orders were given for the making him away, Nerli laid his ambush for
Castruccio very handsomely, for suspecting nothing, he came to the Feast, and
was arrested before he went out of the Palace. But Nerli (being over
circumspect, and imagining it might work some alteration in the Spirits of the
People, if he killed him bluntly without any formality) writ to his Father to
know how he should dispose of him. Huguccione, mad at his unseasonable
prudence, departed from Pisa at the head of 400 Horse, to go himself in person
to dispatch Castruccio; but, Huguccione was scarce got to Bagni, before the
Pisans revolted; cut his Deputies throat; and slew all his Family that were
left behind; and that he might be sure they were in earnest, they chose the
Conte de Guerardesc^, and made him their Governor. Though he had news of this
Rebellion before his arrival at Lucca, yet he thought it inconvenient to
return; on the contrary, he made all the have thither that he could, to be
there (if possible) before the report, lest if the news got before him, it
might have ill effect upon the Luccheses, and prevail with them to exclude him
their City. But the Luccheses had heard it before, had such designs of their
own, and the liberty of Castruccio was the thing they were to pretend.
Huguccione was admitted, but his presence was not sufficient to keep them in
their duties: They began to assemble in parties, to whisper and speak slightly
of him in private, then to murmur, then to tumultuate, and taking Arms by
degrees, they came boldly, and demanded Castruccio should be enlarged, and this
they did in so positive and audacious a manner, that Huguccione apprehending,
the consequences, delivered him to them. Castruccio not contented with that,
conceiving vaster designs than formerly, and egged on by an equal impulse of
honor and revenge, he assembled his friends, and taking the benefit of the
favorable disposition of the People, he resolved to oppose himself against
Huguccione, and forcing of him out of Lucca with all his party, Huguccione
retired into Lombardy to the Lords of Scala where not long after he died very
poor.

This was a happy turn for Castruccio, from the incommodities of a Prison, to
the Supremacy of a Prince; and yet this was not enough. Finding himself
accompanied by a great number of his Friends which encouraged him, and by the
whole body of the people, which flattered his ambition, he caused himself to be
chosen Captain General of all their Forces for a Twelvemonth; and resolving to
perform some Eminent action that might justify their choice, he undertook the
reduction of several places which had revolted from that City in favor of
Huguccione. Having to this purpose entered into strict alliance with the City
of Pisa, they sent him supplies, and he marched with them to besiege Serezane,
But the place being very strong; before he could carry it, he was obliged to
build a Fortress as near it as he could. This new Post in two months time,
rendered him Master of the whole Country, and is the same Fort that at this day
is called Serezanello, repaired since, and much enlarged by the Florentines.
Supported by the credit of so glorious an exploit, he reduced Massa, Carrara,
and Lavenza very easily: he seized likewise upon the whole Country of
Lunigiana, and to secure his Communication with Lombardy, he took Pont Remoli
by force, and drove out Anastasio Palavicini the Sovereign: So that full of
glory he returned to Lucca, where the People thronged to meet him, and received
him with all possible demonstrations of joy.

This was the happiest conjuncture for Castruccio in the world, for having been
so discreet before to make his interest with the most considerable of the
Luccheses, and among the rest with Poggio, Portico, Baccansachi, and Cecco
Guinigi, the favor of these great men, concurring with the inclination of the
people, and every thing else contributing to his happiness, he was solemnly
chosen their Sovereign Prince.

About this time Frederick de Baviere, King of the Romans passed out of Germany
into Italy, to be crowned Emperor there. Castruccio who had already wrought
himself in some measure into his favor, put himself at the head of 500 Horse,
and went to wait upon him, having left as his Deputy in Lucca, Pagolo Guinigi,
his Pupil, whom he had treated all along, as he had been his own Son, in
consideration of the benefits he had received from his Father. Frederick
received Castruccio with much kindness, and having done him several honors,
and granted him many signal perogatives, he made him his Lieutenant in the
whole province of Tuscany; besides all this, the Inhabitants of Pisa (at the
same time mutining against their Governor Gerardesca, and driving him out of
the Town) to defend themselves against his resentment, addressed to Frederick
for protection, and he gave the Sovereignty of that Town to Castruccio. His
choice was not unpleasing to the Inhabitants who knew not where to find a
better support against the Faction of the Guelfs, and particularly against the
attempts of the Florentine.

After this, Frederick returned into Germany, having made a Lieutenant General
of all Italy, and left him in Rome. There was not at that time either in
Lombardy or Tuscany, any of the Ghibilins of the Emperor's party, but looked
upon Castruccio as the true head of their Faction. Those who were banished
their Country upon that score, fled to him for protection, and promised
unanimously that if he could restore them to their Estates, they would serve
him so effectually, that the Sovereignty of their Country should be the
recompense of his kindness. The chief of them were the Guidi, Scolari, Uberti,
Gerozzi, Nardi, and Buomoccorsi, all Exiles of Florence: So that, flattered by
their promises, and encouraged by the strength of his own force, he entertained
a design of making himself Master of Tuscany, and to give more reputation to
his affairs, he entered into a League with Matteo Visconti Prince of Milan. He
put out a Proclamation afterward, that all his Subjects which were capable to
bear Arms, should be ready at a certain warning to put themselves into Service;
and for the better order of the Muster Rolls, by which his Militia was to be
regulated, the City of Lucca having five Gates, he divided the whole Country
into five parts, and disposed every Soldier under his officer with so much,
exactness, that in a short time he could march with 20000 Men, besides what he
could draw out of Pisa.

Whilst he was fortifying himself with Soldiers and Friends; it fell out, that
the Guelfs in Plaisansa having driven out the Ghibilins, and received
considerable succors from Florence, and the King of Naples came thundering
down upon the Territories of the Prince of Milan. The Prince desired Castruccio
to give the Florentines diversion; to carry the War into their Country, to
withdraw them from Lombardy, and thereby to put them upon the defensive,
Castruccio desired no more, and fell with a flying Army into the Valley of
Arno, took Fucechio and San-Miniato, and ravaged the Country so effectually,
that the Florentines were constrained to call back their Troops out of
Lombardy; but the necessity of another diversion called back Castruccio to the
recovery of Lucca. In his absence, the Family of the Poggi, which had been
always his friends, and contributed more to his Elevation, than any of the
rest; regreting that they had not been rewarded, according to the merits of
their Services, conspired with several others of the Inhabitants to bring the
City to revolt. They began the tumult one morning, and having put themselves in
Arms, they killed the Chief Officer which Castruccio had established for the
administration of justice. But whilst they were disposing themselves to push
on their Sedition, Stephano Poggio, an old Man, of a peaceable temper, and one
who had not meddled at all in the Conspiracy of his Relations, made use of the
authority he had with them, caused them to lay down their Arms, and offered his
intercession to Castruccio that they might obtain their demands. Upon the first
notice of this Commotion, Castruccio drew a party out of his Army, and leaving
the rest under the Command of Pagolo Guinigi, he marched with all diligence
back to Lucca, where finding things quieter than he expected, he knew very well
how to make his advantage of so temperate a submission, and disposed his Troops
and his Friends in all the Posts that might make him Master of the Town.
Stephano Poggio, who thought in this juncture he had highly obliged Castruccio,
came to make him a visit, and judged it unnecessary to beg any thing of him;
all that he requested was, that he would pardon his Family, allow something to
their ancient Services, and give some little Indulgence to the transports of
their youth. Castruccio received him with much affection, and told him that he
was more pleased to find those troubles appeased, than he had been offended at
the news of their Commotion; and having pressed him to bring the Malcontents
to him, he added, that he thanked his stars for giving him such an opportunity
of signalizing his Clemency. Upon Stephano's importunity, and Castruccio's
promise, they came all to attend him; but Castruccio apprehending that this new
Service of Stephano might some time or other be reproached to him again, he
resolved to make a signal Example; and accordingly regulating himself by the
severe politics of Usurpers who upon such nice and critical occasions make no
bones to sacrifice the innocence of particular man, to the conservation of the
multitude, he commanded that the Mutineers and Stephano with them should be
conducted to Prison, and from thence to Execution.

Whilst he was thus employed, the Florentines recovered San Miniato, and
Castruccio holding it imprudence to keep in the Field, whilst he was insecure
in the Town, resolved to give some relaxation to his Arms: He endeavored
privately to feel how the Florentines stood disposed to a Truce, and (the War
having exhausted their Coffers) he found them so coming, that it was concluded
for two years, upon condition that either party should retain what was then in
their possession.

Castruccio being disintangled from his foreign Embarrasments, applied himself
wholly to his security at home, and under several pretenses, to quit himself of
all those who were likely to dispute his Sovereignty of Lucca, not sparing his
Confiscations, and Proscriptions against the Exiles, nor the Executions of any
who were under his hands. To excuse himself he gave out that he had had too
much Experience already of the infidelity of those people, to trust them again;
But a strong Citadel which erected in the City, was the true way to continue
his Authority; and to give the more terror to the Citizens, he caused the
houses of his adversaries to be demolished, and the Citadel to be built of
their Materials. His peace with the Florentines, and his Fortifications at
Lucca, employed him not so much, as to lessen his thoughts how he might make
himself greater; being unwilling again to come to an open War, he entertained
private correspondencies, both on one side and the other. He had an ardent
desire to make himself Master of the Town of Pistoia, persuading himself it
would give him footing in Florence; and in this prospect he held a secret
Commerce of amity with the different parties, which were predominant in
Pistoia. This double intelligence was managed with that slyness and delicacy,
that each of them believed they were particularly in his Confidence. It was a
long time that these two opposite Cabals had divided, or rather distracted that
City. The one called the Faction of the Bianchi, had Bastiano da Possente for
its head; and the other called the Neri, was commanded by Iacopo de Gia. Each
of them boiling with desire to supplant its competitor, reposed much upon the
promises of Castruccio: and these two Heads of the Factions who had long been
suspected to one another, took Arms at length both at a time. Iacopo posted
himself toward the Gate that goes to Florence, and Bastiano toward that which
leads to Lucca. At first it was in debate severally by each of them, whether
they should call in the Florentines; but finding Castruccio more active, and
his Forces better Soldiers, each of them sent privately to him to solicit his
assistance: Castruccio carried it very demurely, and promised succor to both.
He told Iacopo, that in person he would relieve him; and to Bastiano he sent
word he would do it by Pagolo Guinigi his Lieutenant General, and the person of
the world he loved best, for he regarded him as his Son. Having acquainted them
both that they should expect their supplies about midnight, he agreed with
Pagolo, and causing him to march with part of his Troops to join with Bastiano
at one Gate, he with the rest advanced the common Road toward Iacopo. At both
Gates they were admitted as Friends; but no sooner were they entered, but upon
a signal given, Bastiano was killed on one side with all his chief friends, and
Iacopo and his friends escaped no better on the other; the rest of their parties
betaking to their heels, the whole Town was left at Castruccio's devotion. He
came in person to reassure the Magistrates, and brought them out of the Palace
whither they had fled to secure themselves; Having called the people together,
the promised to cancel all the old debts, did many acts of Grace, lessened
their imposts, and prevailed upon them to be obedient, by the force of his
caresses, and new privileges which he gave them. This profuseness of kindness,
had coax'd likewise the Inhabitants of the Country, they came in great throngs
to salute and recognize their new Prince, who sent them all home again in
peace, all mightily taken with his Virtues, and possessed with hopes of his
extraordinary benefits.

There was about this time some Mutinies in Rome, by reason of the dearness of
provisions. The scarcity that was suffered, proceeded from the absence of the
Popes, who kept then their Pontifical residence at Avignon, and it added much
to the revolt, that the Romans could not endure to be governed by a German.
This National animosity was the occasion of frequent Murders, and perpetual
disorder. Errico the Emperor's Lieutenant General found himself too weak to
apply any remedy, and apprehended (not without cause) that the Romans had
private intelligence with the King of Naples, that if their Forces should join,
he should be forced out of Rome, and the Pope be restored. He concluded
therefore his safest recourse would be to Castruccio; so that he sent to him
for supplies, and begged of him that he would come along with them in person.
Castruccio made no scruple of the Voyage, being equally transported to be able
to do a meritorious piece of service to the Emperor, and put himself in a
condition to be regarded at Rome, and looked upon as the Moderator of their
affairs whenever the Emperor should be absent. Leaving therefore the care of
Lucca to the charge of Pagolo Guinigi, and contenting himself only with a
Convoy of two hundred Horse, he came to Rome, and was received by Errico with
all possible honor. His presence having received the Authority of the Emperor,
he took a gentle way to pacify the people. The first thing he did, was to
provide plenty of all things, causing store of Corn to be brought thither from
Pisa, to take off the pretense of their revolt: After which mingling very
discreetly his favors and his chastisements, he reduced all the chief Citizens
to their obedience to Errico; In acknowledgment of which Castruccio was made
Senator of Rome, and several Honors conferred upon him with more than ordinary
Ceremony. The day of his promotion, he came forth in a Habit suitable to his
Dignity, but enriched with a delicate Embroidery, with two devices wrought in
artificially, one before and the other behind; The first was before, and in
these words, (as devout, as common) HE IS AS IT PLEASES GOD; and behind in
these, AND SHALL BE WHAT GOD WILL HAVE HIM.

Whilst these things were in Transaction, the Florentines incensed that to the
prejudice of their Truce, Castruccio had surprised the Town of Pistoia,
resolved to recover it by force* and thought it not likely to be difficult, if
they took the opportunity of his absence. Among the Fugitives from Pistoia who
had saved themselves in Florence, there were two principally considerable,
Cecchi, and Baldini. They were Men in Action, and had always retained a private
correspondence with their Friends in Pistoia; and they managed all things so
dexterously for a revolt, that they caused a good party of Florentines to enter
one night into the Town, who restored them their liberty, with the destruction
of all Castruccio's party

This news being brought to Rome, touched Castruccio to the quick, who taking
leave of Errico, with large Journeys came directly to Lucca.

The Florentines had notice of his return, and resolved stoutly to begin the
War upon him, that he might not have leisure to prepare; wherefore having
obliged all that (like themselves) were favorers of the Guelfish Faction, to
put themselves forward in some extraordinary manner, they raised a strong Army,
and marched with all diligence to possess themselves first of the Valley of
Nievole to facilitate their Communication with Pistoia; Castruccio on his side
with what Forces he could get together, marched directly for Monte-Carlo, and
having intelligence where the Enemy was encamped, and how numerous their Army,
he judged the danger would be as great should he go and confront them in the
plain of Pistoia, as to attend them in the Valley of Pescia. He concluded
therefore to draw them (if he could) into the streights of Seravalle, for
narrow passes, and rough and difficult ways were convenient for a small Army as
his was, which consisted of not above 12000 Men, and would be a disadvantage to
the Florentines, who were 40000 complete. Wherefore, though he was well enough
satisfied of the Courage of his Army, and understood the worth of every common
Soldier, yet he thought good to withdraw out of that Champagn Country, lest he
should suffer himself to be overwhelmed with the multitudes of his Enemies.

Seravalle, is a Castle betwixt Pescia, and Pistoia, situate upon a hill which
on that side puts a stop to the Valley of Nievole. This Castle stands not upon
the Road, but is about two flight shot higher, and the passage down into the
Valley, is rather strait than sleep, for the declension is very gradual to the
place where the waters divide, and pass to discharge themselves into the Lake
of Tucechio and that passage is so straight, that twenty Men in Front, take up
the whole breadth. There it was that Castruccio designed to engage the Enemy,
as well to give the advantage of the straight to the smallness of his own Army;
as to keep them from being sensible of the vast numbers of the Florentines; and
prevent the terror which they might inspire The Castle of Seravalle belonged to
the Signor Manfredi a German, who had made himself Lord of it, long before
Castruccio had seized upon Pistoia, and kept it by common consent both of the
Inhabitants of Pistoia and Lucca. Either because he kept his Neutrality very
strictly with both, or because the Castle was so strong of it self it needed to
fear neither. Castruccio knowing the importance of that place from the
beginning found a way to gain intelligence with a person who lived in the
Castle. The night before the day of the Battle, by the ministry of this Man,
Castruccio caused Four hundred of his Soldiers to enter, who cut the Throat of
Manfredi, and seized on the Castle. Having secured so considerable a Post
without noise, he endeavored to persuade the Enemy that he would not stir from
Monte-Carlo, thereby to draw them into his Clutches, and make them have with
all speed to gain the avenues to the Val de Nievole, and this plot of his
jumped exactly with the Florentine design. For they having no mind that Pistoia
should be the Theater of the War, and being willing to remove it into the Vale,
they encamped above Seravalle, with intention to have passed the Streights the
next day, not imagining in the least that the Castle was surprised. Castruccio
having notice of their motion; about midnight drew his Army out of their
quarters, and stole privately before break of day to the foot of Seravalle, The
accident was odd, for as he marched up the Hill on one side, the Enemy marched
up on the other: caused his Foot to advance by the way of the common Road, but
he drew out a party of Four hundred Horse, and commanded them toward the left,
on that side toward the Castle. There were Four hundred of the Enemies Horse,
that were a Forlorn to their Army, and the whole Infantry followed them, but
their Scouts were no sooner upon the top of the Hill, when on a sudden they
fell foul upon the Troops of Castruccio. They were strangely surprised for
knowing nothing of the taking of the Castle, they could not imagine the Enemy
would come to meet them: Insomuch that before they had leisure to put
themselves into a posture, they were constrained to engage tumultuosly with
those Troops which were drawn up in good Order, but they in confusion; Not but
some of the Florentine Cavaliers behaved themselves gallantly, but the noise of
so unexpected an Encounter, put them presently to a stand, and being defused in
the Army, it put all into great disorder and fear. The Horse and the Foot fell
foul upon one another, and both upon the baggage: Want of ground rendered the
Experience of the Officers of no use, and the streightness of the pass,
confounded all their Military cunning. The first Troops that Castruccio charged
upon the top of the Hill, were immediately routed and the small resistance they
made was not so much the defect of their courage, as the effect of the place,
with the incommodity of which, and the strangeness of the surprise, they were
constrained to give ground. There was no way left for them to run; on their
Flanks the Mountains were inaccessable, their Enemies were in the Front, and
their own Army in the rear. In the mean time, as this first charge of
Castruccio was not sufficient to stagger the enemies Battle, he drew out a
party of Foot, and sent them to join with the Horse in the Castle of Seravalle:
this body in reserve having possession of the Hills, and falling upon the flank
of the Florentines, forced them to give ground, and yield to the wild
incommodity of the place, and the violence and fierceness of the enemy. The
Reer-guard ran, and having got into the plain that looks toward Pistoia, every
man shifted as well as he could.

This defeat was bloody and great; among the multitude of prisoners, there were
many of the principal Officers; among the rest three Noble Florentines, Bandino
di Rossi, Francesco Brunilleschi and Giovanni della Tosa, without mentioning
several considerable Tuscans, and many of the King of Naples his Subjects, who,
by their Princes order, were in the service of the Florentine. Upon the first
tidings of their defeat, the Pistoians turned the Guelfs Faction out of Town,
and came with their keys and presented them to Castruccio, who pursuing his
Victory, carried Prato and all the Town in that plain, as well beyond as on
this side the Arno: after which he encamped with his Army in the plain of
Peretola, two miles from Florence, where he continued braving the City, and
passed several days in the enjoyment of his good fortune, parting the spoil,
and coining of money, thereby exercising with great ostentation a kind of
Sovereign right over their Territory; and releasing something of the rigor of
his discipline, he gave his Soldiers liberty to insult as they pleased over the
conquered; and to make his triumph the more remarkable, nothing could serve the
turn, but naked women must run Courses on horseback under the very walls of
the City. But this gallantry and ostentation entertained him but lightly, or
rather served but as a color to hide his greater designs; for in the mean time
he found a way to corrupt Lupacci, Frescobaldi, and some certain other
Gentlemen in the Town, who were to have delivered him a Gate, and brought him
into Florence in the night, had not their Conspiracy been discovered, and
defeated afterward by the punishment of the accomplices.

This great Town being so straightened, and so long blocked up, that the
Inhabitants seeing no other way of preserving their liberty, than by engagi^g
it to the King of Naples, sent Ambassadors to that Prince, and offered to throw
themselves into his arms. It was not only for his honor to accept of their
proffer, but for the general interest of the whole Faction of the Guelfs, which
without that could subsist no longer in Tuscany. The terms being agreed, the
treaty concluded, and the Florentines to pay him annually two hundred thousand
Florens, he sent them four thousand Horse under the Command of Prince Carlo his
Son.

During this negotiation an unexpected accident happened, which put Castruccio
into a cooler temper, and made him give the Florentines breath in spite of his
teeth: there was a new Conspiracy against him at Pisa, not to be suppressed by
his presence: Benedetto Lanfranchi, one of the chief Citizens in the Town, was
the author of it: Benedetto troubled to see his Country subject to the tyranny
of a Lucchese, undertook to surprise the Citadel, force out the Garrison, and
cut the throats of all that were friends to Castruccio. But as in those kind of
conjurations, if a small number be able to keep things secret, it is not
sufficient to put them in execution; and therefore whilst Lanfranchi was
endeavoring to hook in more associates, he met with those who were false, and
discovered all to Castruccio. Two Noble Florentines, Cecchi and Guidi, who were
fled to Pisa, were suspected to be the Traitors; and the suspicion of that
perfidy left an ill stain upon their reputation; which way soever it was,
Castruccio put Lanfranchi to death, banished his whole Family, and several of
the chief Pisans were left shorter by the head.

This plot discovering to Castruccio that the fidelity of the Towns of Pistoia
and Pisa would be always easily shaken; he put all things in practice that
cunning or open force could suggest to keep them in their duties: but whilst
his thoughts were upon the tenters about so important a care, the Florentines
had some respite to recover their Senses, and expect the Neapolitan Succors,
which being at length arrived under the Conduct of Prince Carlo, a general
Counsel was held of the whole Faction of the Guelfs. Upon the resolution taken
there, an Army was raised, the strongest that ever had been set out by that
party, for it amounted to 30000 Foot; and 10000 Horse. When their Forces were
ready, it was debated in the Counsel of War, whether they should begin with the
Siege of Pistoia or Pisa. The latter carried it, for it was fancied the
Conspiracy of the Pisans was so recent, that in probability it had left some
seeds for a second revolt; besides, the Conquest of Pisa would bring Pistoia
along with it.

This great Army opened their Campagn in the beginning of May 1328. Lastra,
Signia, Monte Lugo and Empoli were taken immediately, and it advanced
afterward to besige San-Miniato. But Castruccio without discomposure, either
by the greatness of their force, or the swiftness of their progress, believed
rather that the favorable instant was arrived in which fortune was to put into
his hands the supreme authority of Tuscany; and therefore judging this effort
of the enemy at Pisa would succeed no better than their designs at Seravalle,
he came and entrenched at Fucechio with 20000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, having put
5000 Foot into Pisa under the Command of Pagolo Guinigi.

Fucechio is a Castle seated so advantagiously, that there is not a better Post
in all the plain of Pisa; for it stands upon a little eminence equally distant
from the two Rivers Arno and Gusciana. The place of their encampment could have
been no where better chosen, for unless the enemy divided, and came upon them
in two Bodies, (which must needs weaken them much,) they could not cut off the
provisions which came to Castruccio both from Lucca and Pisa. To come and face
them in their trenches, would be rashly to engage themselves betwixt his Army
and Pagolo's. To turn toward Pisa, they must pass the River Arno, and leave
the enemy upon their backs, which was an attempt as dangerous as the other.
Castruccio's design was to make them pitch upon the last, and to invite them
the better to pass over the River; instead of bringing down his Line to the
bank, (as he might very well have done,) he turned it off short toward the
walls of Fucechio, not so much to shelter himself under the said walls, but
cunningly to leave the enemy such a space free, as might tempt them to pass the
River. And in the whole art of War, there is nothing so subtle as the election
of Posts and Encampments, and that was Castruccio's masterpiece.

The enemy having taken San. Miniato, consulted for some time whether they
should fall upon Pisa, or Castruccio in his Camp: at length, all things well
considered, it was concluded to march straight toward him. The River Arno was
at that time so low, it was fordable, but with trouble, for the Horse passed up
to the saddle, and the Foot with proportion. At last on the 10th of June in the
morning, the Florentines put themselves into Battalia, and began to pass the
River with a party of their Horse, and a body of 10000 Foot. Castruccio having
deliberated all things, and provided for more than one Event, commanded a
thousand Foot along the River, above the passage where the enemy appeared, and
sent a thousand more to post themselves below it; and then advancing himself at
the head of five thousand Foot and three thousand Horse, he came on
courageously against the enemy, as half of them were passed. The Florentine
Foot, tired with the incommodity of their passage, and the weight of their
Arms, advanced but faintly against him; and for their Horse, they that passed
first had made the bottom so loose, and so slipperry, that there was no passage
for those who were to follow: on the contrary, their Horses either stuck fast
in the mud, or their legs came up, and they threw their Riders into the water,
where many of them were drowned. So that the Florentines perceiving their
attempt there was not like to succeed, recovered the bank, and marching a
little higher, they searched for a better place: but wherever they made their
point, and endeavored to go over, Castruccio opposed them with the Infantry he
had drawn out, which being armed lightly with Targets and Darts, were every
where immediately, charged the enemy both in the Front and the Flank, and
setting up at the same time most hideous shouts, the Florentine Horse being
frighted with noise, and wounded with Darts, either run back, or threw their
Riders under their feet. As to the Florentines who had passed first, they
maintained their ground with a great deal of Gallantry, and till then the loss
was equal on both sides; for if Castruccio doubled his endeavors to force back
the enemy into the River, the enemy was no less zealous to gain as much ground
as might serve for drawing up their Army when it should get over. Both Generals
were very busy in the encouragement of their Soldiers, both with exhortation
and example. Castruccio, to vilify the enemy, remonstrated to his Army, that
they were the same people they had beat before at Seravalle; the Florentines
represented to their Troops how infamous it would be for so numerous an Army as
theirs to be worsted by a handful of men. But Castruccio, observing the Battle
grew tedious, and his own men began to be as weary as the enemy, and that there
were as many wounded and dead on the one side as the other, he caused another
Body of five thousand Foot to advance; as soon as they were got up to rear of
their companions, those who had been fighting all the while, and were then in
the front, were commanded to open to the right and left, and wheel off into the
rear, whilst the other advanced into the ground they had forsaken; but whilst
this was in agitation, the Florentines gained something upon them, but they
enjoyed it not long, for being to deal with fresh men, they were quickly
disordered, and followed with that vigor, they threw themselves into the
River. As to the Horse both of the one side and the other, no advantage was to
be observed. Castruccio being sensible that in number his was much inferior to
the enemy, had commanded his Troops to entertain their Horse with slight
skirmishing, only to gain time; for believing his Foot able to beat the
enemies, he intended afterward to join them with his Horse, and fall both
together upon the Cavalry of the Florentines. The Florentines tried another
passage above the first, thinking thereby to have flanck'd Castruccio
afterward; but the bank on the other side being bad, and defended by the
enemies Foot, they were repulsed again, and in as great disorder as before.
Then Castruccio came up to them, and charged them so smartly in all parts, that
they were totally defeated; so that of so vast an Army, scarce a third part
were saved, and several of their chief Officers taken. Prince Carlo saved
himself at Empoli with Michael Falconi, and Thadeo Albizi, Commissaries General
of the Florentine Army; one may easily imagine the plunder was great, and the
slaughter no less. In short, according to the exactest computation, there were
slain on the Florentine side 20231 men; on the side of Castruccio but 1570.

Here it was that Fortune began to be weary of the great actions of Castruccio,
and (inconstant as she was) instead of giving him long life that might have
crowned his felicity as if she had been jealous of his glory, she interposed
with the only obstacle that was able to interrupt the prosperity of so
incomparable a man.

This Illustrious Hero tired with the fatigues of a Battle, as painful as
glorious; coming out of the Fight with his imagination full of great things
that might follow, and running over in his mind the probability of his good
fortune, believing no hopes were left for the enemies loss, nor no bounds for
his victory, he marched directly for the Gate of Fucchio. It having been always
his principle to be first on horseback, and last that came out of the field, he
rested there some time, not out of ostentation, but to thank and caress the
Soldiers as they returned from the pursuit, and withal to be ready, in case
the enemy should rally. Whilst he was standing there, covered with sweat, his
heart panting, and out of breath, an unlucky cold wind came from the other side
of the Arno, and with a pestiferous quality so affected his blood, that he fell
immediately into the cold sit of an Ague: at first he neglected it, though he
found a general alteration, as believing himself sufficiently hardened against
the injuries of the air; but this negligence was very pernicious. The next
night his Fit increased, and his Fever was so violent, his Physicians gave him
over.

The universal sadness of the Soldiers made his triumphant Troops look as
melancholy as if they had been beaten. All his Officers stood about him with
tears in their eyes, but having taken then particularly by the hand, and
desired them to withdraw, he caused Pagolo Guinigi to be called, took him in
his arms, and with a feeble but affectionate voice, he spoke to him as follows.
Had I imagined (dear Son) that fortune would have stopped my course in the midst
of the way that conducted me to Glory, and so soon interrupted the felicity of
my Arms, I would have better enjoyed the fruit of my pains. It Is possible I
should not have left your Territory so large, but I should have endeavored to
have left it more quiet, by creating fewer enemies to my self, and less envy to
you. I should have contented my self (dear Son) with the Sovereignty of Lucca
and Pisa, and instead of intending the Conquest of Pistoia, and contracting the
hatred of the Florentines by so many affronts, I should have endeavored by all
means possible to have gained their affection: by so doing, if I had not
lengthened my days, I should have made them at least more happy, and left you
more quiet and secure. But fortune (who will have the ordering of all humane
affairs) gave me not so much judgment as was necessary to know her, nor so
much time as was requisite to master her, You have heard (for every body has
told you, and I never denied it) how I came into your Father's house, young,
inconsiderable, without hopes of advancement; in a word, in so mean a
condition, that without his kindness I could never have satisfied the ambition
of my nature. Your Father brought me up with the same care and tenderness as if
I had been his own, and I do acknowledge, if ever I gave any testimonies of
Valor and Magnanimity, they were but the effects of those great examples which
he set me, and the fair education I had from him, conducted me to that height
which, not only you, but all the World has admired. When he came to die, he
committed to my care and faith both your person and interest; have I betrayed
his confidence in any thing? can you complain that my generosity has not been
answerable to his? my heart does not reproach me by any ingratitude. I have not
only preserved to you the fortune of your Father; but to leave you the fruit of
my labors and success, I have declined all overtures of Marriage, lest happening
to have children of my own, my natural affection for them should have destroyed
my friendship for you; and lessened the acknowledgment which I owed to his
bounty. It touches, it touches, dear Charge, when we speak of these things. You
cannot comprehend the satisfaction I receive, to leave you Master of so
puissant a State; nor can you imagine how it troubles me to leave it so
unselted and perplexed. The City of Lucca is under your subjection, but be sure
it is not pleased with its condition: Pisa likewise is yours, but you know the
natural inconstancy of that people. Though it has been often subdued, and
passed from one servitude to another, yet it will always disdain to pay
obedience to any native of Lucca, and have a care how you regulate your
Politics in relation to this jealousy, which is inseparable from persons of
different Countries. The Town of Pistoia is a place that ought always to leave
upon your spirit some suspicion and umbrage of their fidelity. Besides, that it
is divided within it self, the ill treatment which it has received from us will
most sensibly excite it against our Family. But the worst of all is, the
Florentines are your neighbors, and you know mortally offended, as having been
worsted by me perpetually: but that is not sufficient to suppress them. They
will be now overjoyed and insult more upon the news of my death, than if they
had conquered all Tuscany. As to the Succors, you are to expect I will not
dissemble with you: you can hope for none but from the Emperor, or Princes of
Milan, and you will be deceived if you expect any from them; they are either
too slow, or too busy, or too remote. Depend not therefore upon any thing but
your own Conduct, upon the memory of my Achievements, and the consternation
which my Victory has brought upon our enemy. It will be no little advantage to
you if you can allure the Florentines to an accommodation, and their fear,
without doubt, sufficiently inclines them. Let your comportment with them for
the future be different from mine; and as I have always provoked them, and
believed nothing could so much contribute to my happiness, as to deal with them
as enemies, let it be your care to desire their amity, and found not your
repose upon any thing so much as an alliance with them. Nothing in this life
imports us so deep as the knowledge of our own tempers, and how to employ them;
but this Science belongs most properly to those who would govern; and it is
necessary for such to spin out their lives in the luxuries of peace, when they
find themselves unfit for warlike executions: my advice therefore (dear Charge)
is, that you would live in repose, and if you will make the advantage of the
troubles of my life to sweeten your own, you will remember to follow it.
Farewell, I am going, and with this double satisfaction, that as I have left you
the possession of a large Empire, so I have left you such percepts as will
secure it to you.

Castruccio ended this passionate discourse by griping Pagolo by the hand, who
heard him all the while with tears in his eyes: and as the last instance of his
gratitude, this great person called for all the brave and faithful Officers of
his Army, whether of Lucca, Pisa, or Pistoia, and having recommended to them
the interests of Pagolo, he obliged them to an oath of Allegiance, and as soon
as that oath was solemnly taken, the great Conqueror surrendered his soul. Never
was victorious Army so sad, never any Prince so lamented, nor any memory so
venerable. His exequies were honorably celebrated, and his body buried in the
Church of St. Francis in Lucca. Pagolo succeeded, but not with the virtue and
fortune of his predecessor; for not long after he lost Pistoia, and then Pisa,
and much ado he had to keep the Sovereignty of Lucca, yet that continued in his
Family to the fourth Generation.

These great actions do sufficiently prove that Castruccio was not only a man
rare in his own age, but would have been the same in any former. His stature
was higher, and his proportions better than ordinary: his aspect was charming,
and he had so much grace and goodness in his accost, that never man went
unsatisfied from his conversation: his hair was inclining to red, and he wore
it short above his ears: wherever he went, snow, hail, or rain, let the
weather be what it would, his head was always uncovered. He had all the
qualities that make a man great: grateful to his friends, terrible to his
enemies, just with his subjects, crafty with strangers, and where fraud would
do the business, he never troubled himself to conquer by force. No man was more
forward to encounter with danger, nor no man more careful to get off. He used
to say that men ought to try all things, and be terrified at nothing; for it
was clear God Almighty was a lover of Courage, because he made valiant men the
Ministers of his judgments, and corrected the poor spirited by them. He had a
strange presence of wit, and made his reparties with admirable quickness; he
would rally very handsomely, sometimes he would be pleasant and innocent, and
sometimes as bitter, and poinant. When occasion offered fairly, as he never
spared any body, so he was never offended when he was bitten himself. We have
some of his answers which he gave with much wit, and others of other peoples
which he heard with as much patience.

He caused a Bird to be bought one day, and gave a Ducat for it; one of his
acquaintance blaming him for giving so much: you (says Castruccio) would have
given a penny for it your self? the other answering yes; then (says Castruccio)
you would have paid dearer than I, for a Ducat is not so much with me.

Having a Flatterer about him who plagued him with perpetual requests, in great
scorn Castruccio spit upon his Clothes: The Flatterer replied wittily, a
Fisherman to get a pitiful little fish, is dabbled up to the neck, and shall I
be afraid of a little spittle, that am catching a Whale. Castruccio was pleased
with his answer, and rewarded him for it.

A certain Hypocrite who loved his gut as well as he, reproached Castruccio one
day, b^ the Luxury and Extravagance of his Table. If that were a sin (replied
Castruccio) the^^ would not be so much feasting upon Holy Days.

Passing one day through a street, where there lodged certain Women of but
indifferen^ reputation, and seeing a young man come from them who blushed, had
was in mighty confusion that Castruccio had seen him; Friend, says Castruccio,
You should not be ashamed when you come out, but when you go in.

He was always of an opinion that a Conqueror ought not to give too much
liberty to his new Subjects, which upon a time he explained very subtly to
some who understood him; Having a knot given him that was very fast tied, he
was desired to undo it, and having tried a good while to no purpose, My Friend
(said he a loud) If a thing that is tied can give me so much trouble, I shall
be much worse when once it is loosed.

He was often troubled with the assiduities of a person who pretended to be a
Philosopher, and was always molesting his Entertainments with his admonitions
and Morals; Castruccio weary of his insolence at his Table, told him, You
Philosophers are like Dogs, you never go any where but where you may have
something to bite. The Philosopher replied, No Sir, we are more like
Physicians, and go only to those who have extraordinary need of us.

Passing one day from Pisa to Legorn by water, a great tempest arose on a
sudden, and put Castruccio into some apprehension, which one of the Company
observed, and told him by way of reproach, that he wondered such a man as
Castruccio should be frighted, when he found no such passion in himself.
Castruccio replied, you have no reason Sir to be afraid; for every man values
his life according to its worth.

One asked him one time what he should do to make himself esteemed; he replied,
when you are invited to a Feast, have a care you do not set a wooden Statute upon
a joined stool.

A fellow boasting to him one day how many Books he had read, Castruccio told
him, It would have been more credit to have remembered half of them.

A great Drinker, who was a^ways debauching, used to value himself very much
upon this score, That though his Belly was always full of Wine, he never was
drunk. Castruccio told him, a Quart pot was the same.

A Friend of his seeing him engaged in a amor with a very pretty young Lass,
blamed him very seriously that he suffered himself to be so taken by a Woman,
you are deceived Sir, said he, she is taken by me.

One found fault with him exceedingly for being so delicate and so expensive in
his diet; You would not (said Castruccio) spend half so much in yours? and
being answered no, Then (replied Castruccio) you are a greater Miser, than I am
an Epicure.

He was invited one evening to Supper bp Faddeo Bernardi, a Lucchese, a very
rich and sumptuous Citizen; being arrived at the house, and conducted by Faddeo
into a Room, exceedingly well hung, the Pavement of Mosaique work, wrought
curiously into Flowers, and Leaves, and Branches, which yielded a most
excellent verdure. Castruccio admired it exceedingly, and pretending to have
occasion to spit, he turned about, this way and that way, and at last spit in
Faddeo's face; Faddeo was much troubled, but Castruccio excused it, and told
him, He thought he could have spit no where to have offended him less.

One asking very seriously how Caesar died? He answered as seriously, Would I
might die like him.

One of his Courtiers having an ambition to regal him, made a Ball one night,
and invited him to it; Castruccio came, entertained himself among the Ladies,
and being in a good humor, fell a dancing and solacing among them, and doing
some impertinencies which did not stand with the gravity of his rank: being
admonished by one of his Friends that it would detract from his esteem; He told
him, I thank you Sir for your caution, but he that is counted wise all day,
will never be thought a fool at night.

One coming to him to beg a boon that Castruccio was unwilling to grant,
Castruccio declined him, and would not seem for to hear; whereupon the
Petitioner threw himself upon the ground, and put his head to Castruccio's
feet; Castruccio reproving him, the other replied, You your self are the cause,
you heard so little when I stood up, I had a mind to see whether your Ears were
upon your Toes. Which answer got him more than he desired.

He was wont to say, The way to Hell was very easy, for Men went thither upon
their backs, and could find it with their eyes shut.

Another desiring a favor of him, with a thousand impertinent and superfluous
words: Hark you Friend, says Castruccio, when you would have any thing with me
for the future, send another Man to beg it.

Another great talker having tired him with a tedious discourse, excused
himself at last* and told him he was a fraid he had wearied him, No indeed Sir,
replied Castruccio, for I did not mind one word that you said.

He used to Droll upon a person, who having been a handsome boy, proved as
handsome a Man, His spite (said he) has been always against Married people:
when he was a boy he debauched Men from their Wives, and now he debauches Women
from their Husbands.

He saw an envious man laugh, and asked him, Do you laugh, said he, That things
go well with your self, or ill with other people.

When he was under the Tutelage of Francesco Guinigi, one of his Comerades
asking him merrily, what he should give him for a box at his Ear, Castruccio
answered immediately, a Helmet if you please.

He was forced to put a Citizen of Lucca to death, who formerly had been a
great instrument of his advancement; and being reproached by some body, for
dealing so severely with an old friend; No, says he, you are mistaken, it was
with a new foe.

Castruccio compared the prudence of those persons, who though they pretended
to Marry, would never be brought to it, to the discretion of those people, who
though they talked much of going to Sea, kept constantly at Land.

He used to say, he wondered much at one Custom among men: when they buy any
thing curious, either of Crystal or Glass, they sound it, and employ all their
senses to be sure it be good; but in choosing of a Wife, they use nothing but
their sight, as if she was taken only to be looked upon.

He was of opinion that after his Death there would be a general alteration;
and being asked when he came to die, how he would be buried, he replied, With
my face downward, for I am sure in a short time this Country will be turned
topsie turvey, and then I shall be in the same posture with other men.

Whilst he was in controversy with Huguccione, but had him in great
veneration for his bravery and Conduct; being asked in discourse whether for
the salvation of his Soul, he never had any thoughts of turning Monk, he
answered no, for to him it seemed very strange if Friar Lazarone should go to
Paradise, and Huguccione de Faggivola to Hell.

Being asked what time was most proper for a Man to Eat, to keep himself in
health, he answered, The rich when they are hungry, and the poor when they can.

Seeing a Friend of his make use of his Servant to put up his Breeches, he told
him, I hope e're long, you will have one to feed you.

Seeing over the door of a certain person this Inscription in Latin, God keep
this House from ill people; He cried, Then the Master must never come in to it.

Passing by a little House with a great Gate, he said, If they have not a care,
this House will run away through the Gate.

Being in discourse with the Ambassador of the King of Naples about the
settlement of their Frontiers; upon some controversy betwixt them, the
Ambassador asked him in a huff, Why then Sir you are not afraid of our King?
Castruccio replied gently, is your King a good a man, or a bad? being answered
a Good; Why then, said Castruccio, would you have me afraid of a good man?

We might add many other answers of his, all full of weight, as well as wit;
but these shall suffice. He dyed in the 44th year of his Age, and from the time
he came first to appear in the world, in his good and his bad fortune he
expressed always an equality and steddiness of spirit; and as he left several
Monuments of his prosperity and good fortune behind him; so he was not ashamed
to leave some memorials of his adversity: When he was delivered from
Huguccione's imprisonment, he caused the Irons with which he was manacled, to
be hung in the publickest place in his Palace, where they are to be seen to
this day, being willing that posterity might know, that how fortunate soever he
was in the main, he was not totally exempt from distress.

That which is still remarkable is, that having equalled the great actions of
Scipio and Philip the Father of Alexander, he died as they did in the 44th.
year of his Age, and doubtless he would have surpassed them both, had be found
as favorable dispositions at Lucca, as one of them did in Macedon, and the
other in Rome.

A Narrative of the Murder of Vitellozzo Vitelli, Oliveretto da Fermo, Signor
Pagolo, and the Duke de Gravina, (all of the Family of the Ursini) the one
committed by Duke Valentine, and the other composed by Nicolo Machiavelli.
DUke Valentine was returned from Lombardy, whither he had gone to excuse
himself in relation to certain Calumnies objected against him by the
Florentines about the revolt of Arezzo, and other Towns in the Vale de Chiana,
and being come to Imola, upon consultation with his Friends, he concluded upon
his expedition against Giovanni Bentivogli Sovereign of Bolonia, because Duke
Valentine had a mind to reduce that City, and make it chief of his Duchy of
Romagna; of which the Vitelli, Orsini, and their followers having notice, it
appeared to them all, that the said Duke Valentine grew too potent, and that
upon the taking Bolog^^, it was to be feared, he would endeavor to exterminate
them, and make himself the only great man in Italy. Hereupon a Diet was held at
Magione in Perugia, where the^e met the Cardinal Pagolo, the Duke de Gravina
Orsini, Vitellozzo Vitelli, Oliveretto da Fermo, Gianpagolo Baglioni, Sovereign
of Perugia, and Antonio da Venafro sent from Pandolfo Petrucci, as head of
Sienna. Upon serious deliberation about the greatness and disposition of the
Duke, it was concluded very necessary to restrain him in time; otherwise there
was great danger of a General destruction. Resolving therefore to desire aid of
the Florentines, and to continue their amity with the Bentivogli, they sent
Ambassadors to both; promising their assistance to the one, and begging the
assistance of the other against the Common Enemy. This Diet was quickly noised
all over Italy, and such of Duke Valentine's Subjects as were discontented
(among whom were the Urbinati) began to hold up their heads, and hope for a
revolution. While the people were in this suspense, certain of the Inhabitants
of Urbino, laid a plot to suprize the Castle of San. Leo, which at that time
was kept for the Duke, and the manner was thus; The Governor of the Castle was
busy in repairing it, and mending the fortifications, to which purpose having
commanded great quantities of Timber to be brought in, the Conspirators
contrived that certain of the biggest pieces should be laid (as by accident)
upon the bridge, which they knew could not be cran'd up without a great deal of
difficulty; whilst the Guards were employed in hoysting the Timber, they took
their opportunity, seized upon the Bridge, and then upon the Castle, which was
no sooner known to be taken, but the whole Country revolted and called in their
old Duke; yet, not so much upon the surprise of that Castle, as their
expectations from the Diet at Magione, by means of which they did not question
to be protected. The Diet understanding the revolt of Urbino, concluded no time
was to be lost, and having drawn their Forces together, they advanced, if any
Town was remaining to the Duke, to reduce it immediately. They sent a new
Embassy to the Florentines to solicit their Concurrence against the common
Enemy; to remonstrate their success, and to convince them that such an
opportunity being lost, was not to be expected again. But the Florentines had
an old pique to the Vitelli and Ursini upon several accounts, so that they did
not only not join with them, but they sent their Secretary Nicolo Machiavelli
to the Duke to offer him reception of assistance which he pleased to Elect. The
Duke was at Imola at that time in great consternation; for unexpectedly on a
sudden, when he dreamed nothing of it, his Soldiers revolted, and left him with
a War at his Doors, and no force to repel it: But taking heart upon the
Florentine Complement, he resolved with the few Forces he had left, to
protract, and spin out the War, and by propositions and practices of agreement,
gain time till he could provide himself better, which he did two ways, by
sending to the King of France, and by giving advance Money to all Men at Arms
and Cavalry that would come in. Notwithstanding all this, the Ursini proceeded,
and marched on toward Fossombrone, where being faced by a party of the Dukes,
they charged them, and beat them: The news of that defeat, put the Duke upon
new Counsels, to try if he could stop that humor by any practice of accord;
and being excellent at dissembling, he omitted nothing that might persuade them
that they were the Aggressors and had taken up Arms first against him: That
what was in his hands, he would willingly surrender; that the Name of Prince
was enough for him, and if they pleased, the Principality should be theirs; and
he deluded them so far, that they sent Signor Pagolo to him to treat about a
Peace, and in the mean time granted a Cessation of Arms: However the Duke put
no stop to his recruits, but reinforced himself daily with all possible
diligence; and that his supplies might not be discovered, he dispersed them as
they came, all over Romagna: Whilst these things were in transaction, a supply
of 500 Lances arrived to him from France; and though by their help he found
himself strong enough to confront his Enemy in the field, yet he judged it more
secure and profitable to go on with the cheat, and not break off the
Capitulation that then was on foot: And he acted it so well, that a Peace was
concluded; their old Pensions confirmed, 4000 Ducats paid down, a solemn
engagement given not to disturb the Bentivogli; He made an alliance with
Giovanni, and declared that he could not, and had no power to constrain any of
them to come personally to him, unless they pleased to do it themselves. They
promised on their part to restore the Duchy of Urbino, and whatever else they
had taken from him; to serve him in all his Enterprises: not to make War
without his leave; nor hire themselves to any body else. These Articles being
signed, Guid' Ubaldo Duke of Urbin fled again to Venice, having dismantled all
the Castles and strong holds in his Duchy before he departed; for having a
confidence in the people, he would not that those places which he could not
defend himself, should be possessed by the Enemy, and made use of to keep his
friends in subjection.

But Duke Valentine having finished the agreement, and disposed his Army into
quarters all over Romagna, about the end of November, removed from Imola to
Cesena, where he continued several days in consultation with certain
Commissioners sent from the Vitelli, and Ursini (who were then with their
Troops in the Duchy of Urbino) about what new Enterprise they were next to
undertake; and because nothing was concluded, Oliverotto da Ferno was sent to
propose to him, if he thought good, an expedition into Tuscany; if not, that
they might join, and set down before Sinigaglia. The Duke replied, That the
Florentines were his Friends, and he could not with honor carry the War into
Tuscany, but their proposal for Sinigaglia, he embraced very willingly. Having
beleaguered the Town, it was not long before they had News it was taken, but
the Castle held out; for the Governor refused to surrender to any body but the
Duke, whereupon they entreated him to come. The Duke thought this a fair
opportunity, and the better because he went not of himself, but upon their
invitation; and to make them the more secure; he dismissed his French, and sent
them back into Lombardy (only he retained a hundred Lances under the Command of
his Kinsman Monsieur de Candale.) Departing about the end of December from
Cesena, he went to Fano, where with all the cunning and artifice he could use,
he persuaded the Vitelli and Ursini to stay with the Army till he came;
remonstrating to them that such jealousies and suspicions as those, must needs
weaken their alliance, and render it undurable; and that for his part he was a
man who desired to make use as well of the Counsels, as the Arms of his
Friends. And though Vitellozzo opposed it very much, (for by the death of his
Brother he had been taught how unwise it was to offend a Prince first, and then
put himself into his hands) nevertheless persuaded by Paulo Ursino (who
underhand was corrupted by presents and promises from the Duke) he consented to
stay. Hereupon the Duke upon his departure the 30th of December. 1502. imparted
his design to Eight of his principal intimates (amongst whom Don Michael, and
Monsignor d' Euna were two) and appointed, that when Vitellozzo, Pagolo Ursini,
the Duke de Gravina, and Oliverotto should come to meet him, two of his
Favorites should be sure to order it so, as to get one of the Ursini betwixt
them, (assigning every couple his man) and entertain them till they came to
Sinigaglia; with express injunction not to part with them upon any terms till
they were brought to the Dukes Lodgings, and taken into Custody. After this he
ordered his whole Army, Horse and Foot (which consisted of 2000 of the first,
and 10000 of the latter) to be ready drawn up, upon the banks of the Metauro,
about five miles distant from Fano, and to expect his arrival. Being come up to
them upon the Metauro, he commanded out two hundred Horse as a Forlorn, and
then causing the Foot to march, he brought up the Rear himself with the
remainder.

Fano, and Sinigaglia, are two Cities in la Marca, seated upon the bank of the
Adriatic Sea, distant one from the other about 15 miles; so that traveling up
toward Sinigaglia, the bottom of the Mountains on the right hand are so near
the Sea, they are almost washed by the water, and at the greatest distance they
are not above two miles. The City of Sinigaglia from these Mountains is not
above a flight shot, and the Tide comes up within less than a Mile. By the side
of this Town there is a little River, which runs close by the wall next Fano,
and is in sight of the Road: So that he who comes to Sinigaglia, passes a long
way under the Mountains, and being come to the River which runs by Sinigaglia,
turns on the left hand upon the bank, which within a bow shot, brings him to a
Bridge over the said River, almost right against the Gate: before the Gate
there is a little Bourg with a Marketplace, one side of which, is shouldred up
by the bank of the River. The Vitelli, and Ursini, having concluded to attend
the Duke themselves, and to pay their personal respects, to make room for his
Men had drawn off their own, and disposed them into certain Castles at the
distance of six miles, only they had left in Sinigaglia, Oliveretto with a
party of about 1000 Foot, and 150 Horse which were quartered in the said Bourg.
Things being in this order, Duke Valentine approached, but when his Horse in
the Van came up to the Bridge, they did not pass, but opening to the right and
left, and wheeling away, they made room for the Foot, who marched immediately
into the Town. Vitellozzo, Pagolo, and the Duke de Gravina, advanced upon their
Mules to wait upon Duke Valentine; Vitellozzo was unarmed in a Cap lined with
green, very sad and melancholy, as if he had had some foresight of his destiny,
which considering his former courage and exploits, was admired by every body:
And it is said, that when he came from his house, in order to meeting Duke
Valentine at Sinigaglia, he took his last leave very solemnly of every body. He
recommended his Family and its fortunes, to the chief of his Officers, and
admonished his Grandchildren, not so much to commemorate the fortune, as the
magnanimity of their Ancestors. These three Princes being arrived in the
presence of Duke Valentine, saluted him with great civility, and were as
civilly received; and each of them, (as soon as they were well observed by the
persons appointed to secure them) were singled, and disposed betwixt two of
them. But the Duke perceiving that Oliveretto was wanting (who was left behind
with his Regiment, and had drawn it up in the Marketplace for the greater
formality,) he winked upon Don Michael (to whom the care of Oliveretto was
assigned) that he should be sure to provide he might not escape. Upon this
intimation, Don Michael clapped spurs to his Horse, and rid before, and being
come up to Oliveretto, he told him it was inconvenient to keep his Men to their
Arms, for unless they were sent presently to their quarters, they would be
taken up for the Dukes; wherefore he persuaded him to dismiss them, and go with
him to the Duke. Oliveretto following his Counsel, went along with him to the
Duke, who no sooner saw him, but he called him to him, and Oliveretto having
paid his Ceremony fell in with the rest. Being come into the Town, and come up
to the Duke's Quarters, they all dismounted, and attended him up, where being
carried by him into a private Chamber, they were instantly Arrested and made
Prisoners. The Duke immediately mounted, and commanded their Soldiers should be
all of them disarmed; Oliveretto's Regiment being so near at hand, were
plundered into the bargain. The Brigades which belonged to Vitelli, and Ursini
being at greater distance, and having notice of what had happened to their
Generals, had time to unite, and remembering the Discipline and Courage of their
Masters, they kept close together, and marched away in spite both of the
Country people, and their Enemies. But Duke Valentine's Soldiers, not content
with the pillage of Oliveretto's Soldiers, fell foul upon the Town, and had not
the Duke by the death of several of them, repressed their insolence, Sinigaglia
had been ruined. The night coming on, and the tumults appeased, the Duke began
to think of his Prisoners, resolved Vitellozzo, and Oliveretto should die, and
having caused them to be guarded into a convenient place, he commanded they
should be strangled; but they said nothing at their deaths, that was answerable
to their lives; for Vitellozzo begged only that the Pope might be supplicated
in his behalf, for a plenary indulgence. Oliveretto impeached Vitellozzo, and
laid all upon his back. Pagolo and the Duke de Gravina were continued alive,
till the Duke had information that his Holiness at Rome had seized upon the
Cardinal Orsino, the Archbishop of Florence, and Messer Iacopo da Santa Croce;
upon which News, on the 18th of January, they also were both strangled in the
Castle of Piene after the same manner.

THE STATE OF FRANCE, IN An Abridgment written by Nicolo Machiavelli, Secretary
of FLORENCE.
THE Kings and Kingdom of France are at this time more rich and more powerful
than ever, and for these following Reasons: First,

The Crown passing by succession of Blood is become rich, because in case where
the King has no Sons to succeed him in his paternal Estate, it falls all to the
Crown; and this having many times happened, has been a great corroboration, as
particularly in the Duchy of Anjou; and at present the same is like to fall
out to this King, who having no Sons, the Duchy of Orleans, and State of Milan
(his hereditary Countries) are like to devolve upon the Crown: So that at this
day most of the good Towns in France are in the Crown, and few remaining to
particular persons.

A second great Reason of the strength of that King is, That whereas heretofore
France was not entire, but subject to several great Barons, who were able not
only to expostulate, but to contend with the King (as the Dukes of Guienn and
Burbon did formerly) the said Barons are now most obsequious and dutiful.

A third reason is, because formerly all the neighboring Princes were ready
upon every occasion to invade the Kingdom of France; the Dukes of Burgundy,
Britannie, Guienne or Flanders, being always tempting them thereunto, and
giving them access, passage, and reception, as it happened when the English had
Wars with France, by their Confederacy with the Duke of Britagne, they got
admission into that Country, and gave the King of France his hands full: and in
like manner the Duke of Burgundy was as troublesome, by means of the Duke of
Bourbon. But now Britagne, Guienne, the Bourbonois, and greatest part of
Burgundy being united to that Crown, and very loyal and faithful; Those
neighboring Princes do not only want their old Confederates to invite and
assist them, but they have them for their Enemies; so that the King of France
is more strong, and his Adversaries more weak.

Another reason may be, That at this day the richest and most potent of the
Barons are of the Blood Royal; so that upon defect of those who are before
them, the Crown may come to them, upon which score they are firm to it, hoping
that some time or other it may fall either to them or their posterity, whereas
to mutiny or oppose, it might prejudice their succession, as it happened to this
King Lewis when he was taken in the Battle of Britagne, where in favor of the
said Duke of Britagne, he was personally in Service against the French. Upon
the death of King Charles, the Crown being legally in Lewis, it was disputed
whether that fault and defection of his should not be a bar to his succession,
and had it not been that he was very rich, by means of his frugality, and able
to bear the Port of that Dignity at his own expense, and the next Heir
Monsigneur d' Angolisme an Infant, he had lost it; but for these reasons, and
some favor which he had besides, Lewis was created King.

The last reason is, because the States of the Barons in France are not divided
among the Heirs, (as in Germany, and several parts of Italy) but descend still
to the Eldest Son who are the right Heirs; and the younger Sons are left, by
some little assistance from their Elder Brothers to shift for themselves;
whereupon they betake themselves generally to the Wars, endeavoring to advance
themselves that way, and raise themselves fortunes: and hence it is the
Frenchmen at Arms are better at this day, and stand fair for preferment.

The French Infantry cannot be good, for it being long since they had any War,
they must needs want experience. Besides in the Country, the Towns are full of
Tradesmen and Mechanics, all of them so curbed and cowed by the Nobless, that
they are grown pusillanimous and base; and therefore the King of France having
found them unfit, makes no use of them in his Wars, unless it be of his
Gascoigns who are something better than the rest, and the reason is, because
bordering upon the Spaniards, they are constantly upon duty, or communicate
something of their Nature: But for some years since they have shown themselves
better Theives than Soldiers; nevertheless in defending and assaulting of Towns
they do well enough, but in the field they are but indifferent, quite contrary
to the Germans and Swizzers, who are not to be dealt with in the field, but in
storming or defending a Town, they are good for nothing; and I suppose it
proceeds from hence that they cannot in both cases keep the same order which
they observe in the field. Wherefore the King of France makes use of Switzers,
and Lanzknights, because his men at Arms dare not rely upon his Gascoignes in
time of Service. And if his Foot were as good as his Men at Arms, no doubt but
the King of France would be able to defend himself against all the Princes in
Europe.

The French are naturally more fierce and hot, than dexterous or strong, and if
resisted handsomely in their first charge, they slacken and cool, and grow as
timorous as Women. They are likewise impatient of distress or incommodity, and
grow so careless by degrees, that it is no hard matter, finding them in
disorder, to master and overcome them.

And of this, Experience has been many times had in the Kingdom of Naples, and
last of all at Farigliano, where they were twice as many as the Spaniards, and
it was expected every hour when they should have swallowed them up:
Nevertheless, because winter came on, and the weather grew bad, they began to
straggle into the Neighboring Towns, where they might be at more ease, and
thereby leaving their Camp weak, and out of order, the Spaniards fell upon
them, and beat them beyond all expectation. And it would have been the same
with the Venetians, who had never lost the Battle of Vaila, had they forborne
following the French example but for ten days: But the fury of Bartolmeo d'
Alviano was too hot for them. The same happened again to the Spaniards at
Ravenna, who might have certainly ruined the French in respect of their ill
Government, and want of provisions which were intercepted on that side toward
Ferrara by the Venatians, and toward Bologna, by the Spaniards themselves; but
by the rashness of some, and the indiscretion of others, the French got the
Victory, and though as it was, it was bloody enough; yet it had been much more,
had the strength of either Army consisted in the same kind of men; but the
French force lying in his Men at Arms, and the Spaniards force in their Foot,
the slaughter was the less. He therefore who would conquer the French, must be
sure to preserve himself against their first impetus and attack, and in so
doing he shall be sure to prevail; for Caesar's character of them is true, At
first they are more than Men, at last less than Women.

France in respect of its greatness, and the convenience of its Rivers, is
opulent and rich; for their Commodities and labor are worth little or nothing,
by reason of the scarcity of Money among the people, which is so great, it is
with difficulty that they are able to raise so much as will pay the impositions
of their Lords, though they are generally but small; the reason is, because
every body gathers to sell as he has occasion, and no body can stay to finish
his harvest as it should be. So that if there should be any body (which is
seldom seen) so rich as to be a bushel of Corn beforehand, every body having of
their own, there would be no body to buy it: and the Gentlemen, of what they
receive of their Tenants, except it be for cloths, spend little or nothing; For
Cattle, and Poultry, and Fish, and Venison, they have enough of their own: so
that all the Money comes into the hands of the Lords, and doubtless at this time
they are exceedingly rich, for the people are so poor, he that has but a
Floren, believes himself a Prince.

The Prelates of France carry away of the Revenue of that Kingdom, because
there are several Bishops who have Temporal as well as Spiritual Revenues, who
having provisions enough of their own to keep their houses, spend not one
farthing of their income, but hoard it up according to the Natural covetousness
of the Prelates, and Religious; and that which accrews to the Chapters and
Colleges, is laid out in Plate, and Jewels, and Ornaments, for the decoration
of their Chapels; so that betwixt what is laid out upon their Churches, and
what is laid up by the Prelates, their money and their movables is of an
immense value.

In all Counsels for the Government and Administration of the affairs of that
Kingdom, the Prelates are always the greatest number, the other Lords not
regarding it so much, as knowing the execution must come through their hands: so
that both sides are contented, one to ordain, the other to execute, though
there are many times some of the ancienter and more experienced Soldiers taken
in to direct the Prelates in such things as are out of their sphere.

The Benefices in France (by virtue of a Custom and Law derived anciently from
the Popes) are conferred by the Colleges; insomuch as the Canons, when their
Archbishop, or Bishop dies, calling an Assembly, to dispose of their Benefices
to them that are thought most worthy, whence it comes that they are frequently
divided among themselves, because as many are preferred by favor and bribery,
as by piety and worth: and it is the same with the Monks in the election of
their Abbots. The other inferior Benefices are in the Gift of the Bishops. If
the King at any time would entrench upon this Law, and choose a Bishop at his
own pleasure, he must do it by force; for they will deny him possession; and
though perhaps it be forced, that King is no sooner dead, but his Bishop shall
be sure to be dispossessed, and another put in his place.

The French are naturally covetous, and desirous of other peoples goods, which
they will lavish and squander as prodigally as their own: a Frenchman shall
cheat, or rob you, and in a breath meet, and eat, and spend it as merrily with
you as you could have done your self; which is contrary to the humor of the
Spaniard; for if he gets any thing of you, you must look for nothing again.

The French are in great fear of the English, for the great inroads and
devastations which they have made anciently in that Kingdom; insomuch, that
among the common people the name of English is terrible to this day; those poor
wretches not being able to distinguish that the French are otherwise
constituted now than they were then; for that now they are Armed, good
Soldiers, and united, having possession of those States upon which the English
did formerly rely, as the Duchy of Burgundy, and the Duchy of Britagne; and
on the other side the English are not so well disciplined; for it is so long
since they had any War, there is not a man of them living who ever looked an
enemy in the face; and besides, there is no body left to join with them, if
they should land, but only the Archduke.

They are afraid likewise of the Spaniards, by reason of their sagacity and
vigilance. But whenever that King invades France, he does it with great
disadvantage; for from the place from whence he must march, to that part of the
Piraneans by which he must pass into France, the distance is so great, and the
Country so barren, that every time the Spaniards attempt any such thing, either
by the way of Perpignan, or Gehenna, they must needs be much incommoded, not
only for want of supplies, but for want of victuals to sustain them in so
tedious a march; because the Country behind them is scarce habitable for its
fertility, and that which is inhabited has scarce wherewithal for the
Inhabitants; so that in these respects, toward the Piraeneans, the French are
in little apprehension of the Spaniard.

Of the Flemmings the French likewise are in no fear; for, by reason of the
coldness of their Country, they do not gather enough for their own subsistence,
especially of Corn and Wine, with which they are forced to supply themselves
out of Burgundy, Piccardy, and other places in France. Moreover, the people of
Flanders live generally of their own manufacture, which they vend at the Fairs
in France, that is, at Paris and Lions, for toward the Seaside they have no
utterance for any thing, and toward Germany it is the same; for there are more
of their Commodities made than in Flauders: so that when ever their Commerce
with the French is cut off, they will have no where to put off their
Commodities, nor no where to supply themselves with victuals: so that without
irresistible necessity the Flemmings will never have any controversy with the
French.

But of the Swizzers the French are in no little fear, by reason of their
vicinity, and the sudden incursions to which they are subject from them,
against which it is impossible to make any competent provision in time, because
they make their depredations and incursions with more ease and dexterity than
other Nations, in respect that they have neither Artillery nor Horse; but
though the French have Towns and Countries very near them, yet being well
fortified and manned the Swizzers never make any great progress. Besides, the
disposition of the Swiss is apter to battle and fighting in the field, than to
the storming or defending of Towns: and it is very unwillingly (if ever) the
French come to cope with them upon the Frontiers; for having no foot that is
able to bear up with the Swizzers, their Men at Arms without Foot can do
nothing: moreover, the Country is so qualified, that there is not room enough
for the Men at Arms and Cavalry to draw up, and manage to advantage, and the
Swizzers are not easily tempted from their borders into the plain, nor to leave
such strong and well provided Towns (as I mentioned before) upon their backs,
left by them their supplies should be intercepted, and perhaps their retreat be
obstructed.

On the side toward Italy they are in no fear, in respect of the Apenine
Mountains, and the strong places which they have at the foot of them: so that
who-ever invades the Dominion of France in those parts, must be sure to
overcome, or by reason of the barrenness of the Country about, he will hazard
to be famished, or compelled to leave those Towns behind him which would be
madness, or to attaque them at disadvantage, which would be worse: so that on
the side of Italy they are in no danger, for the resons abovesaid; and
moreover, there is not a Prince in Italy able to undertake him, nor are the
Italians now in such unity as in the days of the Romans.

Toward the South, the Kingdom of France is in no apprehension, because it is
washed by the Sea on that side, and accommodated with Ports always full of
Ships, (partly of the Kings, and partly of other petty Princes) sufficient to
defend their Coasts from any sudden impression; and against any thing
premeditated, they will have time enough to prepare; for it requires time to
make a solemn invasion, and the preparation will be discovered by some body,
besides, for further security, there are always parties of Men at Arms scowring
upon the Coasts.

Their expense in keeping of their Towns is not so great; for the French
Subjects are very dutiful, and the fortresses are not kept at the charge of the
Kingdom, and on the borders (where Garrisons, and by consequence, expense would
be more necessary) those flying bodies of Men at Arms save them that charge:
for against any extraordinary insult, there will be time enough to provide, for
that requires time to be fitted, and more to be executed.

The people of France are very humble and obedient, and have their King in
mighty veneration. They live at very little expense, by reason of their great
plenty, and every body has something of his own: their clothing is course, of
very cheap stuff, and they use no kind of Silks, neither the men nor the women;
for if they should, they should be obnoxious to the Gentry, who would certainly
be even with them.

The Bishoprics in France, according to modern computation, are 146, and the
Arch-Bishopricks 18.

The Parishes are reckoned a million and 700, and the Abbeys 740. Of the
Priories there is no account.

Of the ordinary and extraordinary Entries of the Crown, I could get no exact
account, I inquired of several, and all told me they were as the King pleased
to require. Yet some persons told me that that part of his ordinary Revenue
which arises out of his Gabels upon wine, and bread, and flesh, and the like,
amounts to a million and seven hundred thousand Crowns: and his extraordinary,
by Taxes, amounts as he pleases: but in case they fall short, he has another
string to his bow, and that is by way of loans, which are seldom repaid. The
Letters to that purpose do commonly run thus: Sir, The King recommends himself
to you; and having at this time pressing occasion for money, He desires you
would furnish him with the sum contained in this Letter; which sums are paid in
to the next Receiver, and there are of them in every Town who receives all the
profits and revenue accrewing to the King by Gabels, Taxes, Loans, or otherwise.

Those Towns which are subject to the Crown, have no rules or orders but what
His Majesty is pleased to set them for raising of money either by Taxes or
otherwise.

The authority of the Barons over their Subjects, and half their Revenues
consists in bread, and wine, and flesh, as abovesaid, and so much a year for
hearth-mony, but it must not exceed six pence or eight pence a hearth, to be
paid every three months. Taxes and Loans they cannot require without the
consent of the King, which he grants very rarely.

The Crown receives no other advantage from them than in the revenue for salt,
and never taxes them but upon extraordinary occasion.

The King's order in his extraordinary expenses both in War and Peace, is to
command the Treasurers to pay the Soldiers, which they do by tickets of
assignment. The Pensioners and Gentlemen repair to the Generals with their
tickets from month to month, where they are entered, and having received a new
policy from three months to three months, the Pensioners and Gentlemen go then
to the Receivers of the respective Provinces where they live, and are paid
immediately.

The Gentlemen belonging to the King are 200, their pay 20 Crowns a month; and
paid as abovesaid, each hundred has a Captain.

The Pensioners are no set number, and their Pensions are as uncertain, being
more or less as it pleases the King: they are in a way of preferment, and
therefore there is no exact rules for them.

The office of the Receivers General of France, is, to receive so much for
fire, and so much for taxes by consent of the King; and to take care that both
ordinary and extraordinary expenses be paid at the time, and discharges given
as aforesaid.

The Treasurers have the keeping of the money, and pay it according to their
orders from the Generals.

The office of the Grand Chancellor is judicial land definitive, he can pardon
and condemn as he pleases, and that even in Capital Causes, without the consent
of the King. In Causes where the Clients are contumaciously litigious, He can
prefix them a day for the determination of their Suit: He can confer Benefices,
but that must be with the King's consent, for those grants are passed by the
King's Letters under the Broad-Seal, wherefore that Seal is kept by the said
Chancellor. His salary is 10000 Franks per an. and 11000 more for his Table,
which Table is intended for the repast and entertainment of such Gentlemen,
Lawyers and Counselors as follow in his train, when they think fit either to
dine or sup with him.

The sum which the King of England received annually from the King of France
was fifty thousand Franks, in consideration of certain disbursements by the
present King of England's Father in the Duchy of Britagne, but the time of
that payment is expired.

At present there is in France but one Grand Seneschal, when there are more, (I
do not mean Grand Seneschals, for there is never but one) their authority is
over the Militia both in Ordinary and Extraordinary, whom for the dignity of
their Office they are obliged to obey.

The Governors of the Provinces are as many as the King pleases, and have their
Commission for life or years, and their Salaries great or little, as he thinks
good to appoint: the other Governors, to the very inferior Officers in every
little Town, have all their Commissions from the Kings, for you must know there
is no office in that Kingdom, but is either given or sold by that King.

Of the quantity of distributions for the Gentlemen and the Pensioners, there
is no certain account, but as to them, the King's warrant is sufficient, for
they are not liable to the Chamber of Accounts.

The Office of the Chamber of Accounts is to view and audit the accounts of all
such as have any thing to do in the King's Moneys, as the Generals, the
Treasurers, and the Receivers.

The University of Paris is paid out of the Rents of the Foundations of the
Colleges, but very narrowly.

The Parliaments are five, of Paris, of Roan, of Tholose, Bordeaux and
Douphine, from either of which there is no appeal.

The Universities first were but four, at Paris, Orleans, Bourgi and Poictiers,
to which these at Tours and Angiers have been added since, but they are very
inconsiderable.

The standing Army is a great (both for number of Men and Artillery) as the
King pleases, and are quartered and disposed according to orders from him. Yet
every great Town upon the Frontiers have Artillery and Ammunition of their own,
and within these two years several more have been cast in several places of the
said Kingdom, at the charge of the Town where they were made, and to re-imburse
themselves, the are allowed a Toll of a penny an head for all Cattle, and as
much for every bushel of Corn, whilst the Kingdoms is under no danger of
invasion. The standing Force is divided into four Bodies, which are disposed
into four several Posts for the security of the Country, that is to say, into
Guienna, Piccardy, Burgundy, and Provence, but not precise number is observed
in any, for they are lessened, or increased, and removed from one place to
another, as they have occasion to suspect.

I have with some diligence inquired what moneys were assigned every year for
the charges of the King's Household, and his privy Purse, and I find it is what
he pleases himself.

His Archers are four hundred, designed for the Guard of his Person, among
which there are two Scotch. Their Salary is three hundred Franks a man every
year, and a Coat of the King's Livery. But there are 24 constantly at the
King's elbow, and their Salary is 400 Franks per an.

His German Foot-Guards consisted formerly of three hundred men, with each of
them a Pension of ten Franks a month, and two Suits of Apparel a year, that is,
Coats and Shoes, one for Summer, and the other for Winter; but of these Foot
there were 100 particularly near the King, their Salary being 12 Franks per
men's. and their Coats of Silk, which was begun in the time of King Charles.

The Harbingers are those who are sent before to take up Lodgings for the
Court, they are 32 in number, and each of them has a Salary of three hundred
Franks every year, and a Coat of the King's Livery. Their Marshals or chief
Officers are four, and have each of them 600 Franks per an. In taking up their
Lodgings, their method is this; they divide themselves into four parties, one
Marshal (or his Lieutenant, in case he cannot wait himself) stays where the
Court departed, to see all things rectified betwixt the followers of the Court,
and the Masters of the Houses: another of them goes along with the Court; a
third where the King lies that night; and the fourth where he lies the next, by
which means they keep so exact an order, that they are no sooner arrived, but
every man knows his Lodging, and is furnished with every thing got ready to his
hand.

The Provost del Hostel is a person who follows always the person of the King,
and his office is judiciary: wherever the Court goes, his Bench is the first,
and in all Towns where he comes the people may appeal to him as to their
Lieutenant. His ordinary Salary is 6000 Franks. He has under him two Judges in
Civil Causes, paid by the King, each of them 600 Franks per an. he has likewise
under him a Lieutenant Criminal, and 30 Archers paid as abovesaid. Those who
are taken by this Provost upon any criminal account, cannot appeal to the
Parliament. He dispatches all both in Civil and Criminal affairs, and if the
Plaintiff and Defendant appear once before him, it is enough, their business is
determined.

The Masters of the King's Household are eight, but there is no certain rule for
their Salary, for some have 1000 Franks per an. some more, some less, at it
pleases the King, over whom there is a Grand Master with a Salary of 11000
Franks per an. and his authority is only over the rest.

The jurisdiction of the Admiral of France is over all the Fleet, and Ships,
and Ports belonging to that Kingdom: He can seize, and make what Ships he
pleases, and dispose of them as he thinks good when he has done. His Salary is
10000 Franks.

The Knights of the King's Order have no certain number, depending wholly upon
the King's pleasure. When they are created they swear to defend the Crown, and
never upon on any terms to be engaged against it: they can never be degraded or
deprived of their Dignity but by death. The highest of their Pensions is 4000
Franks per an. some have less, for all are not equal.

The Chamberlains office is to wait upon the King, to see to his Chamber, and
to advise him: and indeed his Chamberlains are persons of the principal
reputation in his Kingdom: their Pensions are six, eight, and ten thousand
Franks per an. and sometimes nothing, for the King does often confer those
Places upon some great and rich stranger, whom he has a mind to oblige: but
though they have no Pensions, they are exempted from all Gabels, and have their
diet in Court at the next Table to the King's.

The Master of the Horse is to be always about the King; his authority is over
the 12 Quieries, and the same that the Grand Seneschal, the Grand Master, and
the Grand Chamberlains is over those who are under them. He has the care of the
King's Horses, and Harness, helps him up and down, and carries the Sword before
him.

The Lords of the King's Council have Pensions of betwixt six and eight
thousand Franks Per an. at the pleasure of his Majesty; their names at present
are, Monseigneur di Parigi, Mons. di Buonaglia, the Baylif of Amiens, Mons. du
Russi, and the Grand Chancellor; but Rubertet, and Mons. di Parigi govern all.

There is no Table kept for them since the death of the Cardinal of Roan, for
when the Grand Chancellor is absent, Parigi does that office for him, and takes
them with him.

The Title which the King of France pretends to the State of Milan, is thus;
His Grandfather married a Daughter of the Duke of Milan, who died without Heir
males.

Duke Giovanni Galeazzo had two Daughters women grown, and I know not how many
Sons. Of the Ladies, one was called Madona Valentina, and was married to Lewis
Duke of Orleans, Grandfather to this present King, descended lincally from
King Pipen. Duke John Galeazzo being dead, his Son Philip succeeded him, who
died without legitimate issue, leaving only one natural Daughter behind him.
Afterward that State was usurped illegally by the Sforzeschi, as is reported,
because they pretend it fell to the Heirs of the said Madona Valentina, and
that from the very day in which the Duke of Orleans married with the House of
Milan, he added to the three Lillies in his Coat of Arms, the Snake, which is
to be seen at this day.

In every Parish in France there is a person called a Frank Archer, who is paid
by the Parish, and is obliged to be always ready with a good Horse and Arms to
wait upon the King when ever they are required, whether abroad in time of War,
or at home upon any other occasion: they are bound likewise to ride up and down
for the security of such places as are liable to in-roads, or any ways
suspected; and, according to the number of the Parishes, they are 1700000 men.

Their Lodgings are appointed by the Harbingers according to every man's office,
and usually the richest men quarter the greatest Courtiers; and that neither
the Lodger nor Landlord may have reason to complain, the Court has appointed a
rate or rule to be observed generally for all people, and that is a sous or
penny a day for their Chamber; in which there is to be bed, and chairs, and
stools, and all things that are necessary.

There is an allowance likewise of two pence a day to every man for linen, (as
towels and napkins) and for vinegar and verjuice; their linen is to be changed
at least twice every week, but there being great plenty in that Country, they
change oftener, as Lodgers desire it; besides which, they are obliged to keep
their beds made, and their chambers swept and clean.

There is allowance likewise of two pence a day for the standing of every man's
horse; they are not bound to provide any thing for them, only to keep their
stalls clean, and carry out the dung.

Some there are who pay less, as their Landlords are good natured, or they can
make any shift: but this is the ordinary rule of the Court.

The English Title to the Crown of France, upon my best inquiry, I find to be
thus: Charles the sixth of France married his lawful Daughter Katharine to
Henry the fifth, Son and Heir to Henry the fourth, King of England: In the
articles of Marriage, (no notice being taken of Charles the seventh, who was
afterward King of France) besides the Dower that was given with Katharine,
Charles the sixth, Father to the said Katharine instituted Henry the fifth of
England (his Son in Law, and to be married to the said Katharine) Heir to that
Kingdom of France: and in case the said Henry should die before the said
Charles, and the said Henry leave Sons that were legitimate behind him, that
then the Sons of the said King Henry should succeed to the said Kingdom of
France, upon the death of the said, Charles the sixth; which was contrary to
Law, because Charles the seventh was prejudiced thereby, and was afterward of
no validity or effect: against which the English pretend that Charles the
seventh was illegitimate.

The Arch-Bishopricks in England are two.

The Bishopwricks two and twenty, and

The Parishes 52000.

THE STATE OF GERMANY IN An Abridgment written by Nicolo Machiavelli, Secretary
of FLORENCE.
OF the power of Germany no body can doubt, because it a bounds so exceedingly
in Men, and Money, and Arms. As to its wealth, there is not a Free Town in the
whole Country, but has a public stock aforehand of its own; and some say
Argentina (Strasburg) alone has a Million of Florens constantly in bank. The
reason of their opulence is because they have nothing to exhaust them, but
their Fortifications, and furnishing their Magazines (for reparations, and
recruits cost them but little.) In the latter they have a very good way, for
they have always in their public Stores, Meat and Drink, and Firing for a
Twelvemonth: Besides, to entertain the industry of their people, they have
wherewithal to set the poor on work, in case of any Siege, a complete year
together, so as they may subsist upon their own labor, without being
burthensom to the Town. Their Soldiers are but little expense to them for they
are always well armed, and well exercised; and on their Festival days, instead
of the Common recreations, one takes his Musket, another his Pike, one one sort
of Arms, another another, and practicing among themselves, they grow very ready
and dexterous; and after they are arrived at some degree of perfection, they
have certain Honors and Salaries conferred upon them, which is the greatest
part of their charge. So that in every free Town the public Treasury is rich.

The reason likewise why the private persons are rich, is this because they
live with great parsimony, and indeed little better than if they were poor; for
they are at no expense in their Clothes, their Buildings, nor the furnishing of
their Houses. If they have bread, and flesh, and any thing to keep them from
the cold, they are well enough; and he that wants them, is contented, and makes
some shift or other without them. Two Florens will serve them in Clothes ten
years; and according to his degree every man lives at this rate; they do not
trouble themselves for every thing they want, but only for those things that
are absolutely necessary, and by that means their necessities are much fewer
than ours: The result of which Custom is this, their Money goes not out of their
County, they contenting themselves with their own Native productions, whilst
in the mean time every man is permitted to bring in what Treasure he pleases
into Germany, to purchase their Commodities and Manufactures which in a manner
supplies all Italy; and their gain is so much the more, by how much a small
part of the profit of their labors, recruits them with Materials for new.

Thus do they live at liberty, and enjoy their own humors; for which reason
they will not be got to the Wars, but upon extraordinary pay and that will not
do it neither, unless they be commanded by their own Magistrates; Wherefore an
Emperor has need of more Money, than another Prince, because if men be in a good
condition already, they are not easily allured to the Wars.

As things stand now, the free States must unite with the Princes, before any
great exploit can be undertaken by the Emperor; or else they must enterprise it
themselves, which they would be able to do. But neither the one nor the other
desires the greatness of the Emperor; for if ever he should get those Free
States into his hands, he should be strong enough to overpower the Princes, and
reduce them to such a degree of subjection, that he would manage them as he
pleased himself, as the Kings of France have done formerly in that Country, and
particularly King Lewis, who by force of Arms, and the cutting off some few
Persons brought them to their present obedience. The same thing would happen to
the States, if the Princes should be cajoled, they would lose their freedoms,
be wholly at the disposition of the Emperor, and be forced to be satisfied with
what he would vouchsafe to afford them. The distance and division betwixt the
free States and the Princes, is supposed to proceed from the different humors
in that Country, which in general are two; The Swissers are become Enemies to
all Germany, and the Princes to the Emperor. It may seem strange perhaps, that
the Swissers, and free States should be at variance and enmity, seeing the
preservation of their liberty, and securing themselves against the Princes, is
the common interest of both: But their discord is from this, that the Swissers
are not only Enemies to the Princes, but to all Gentlemen whatever, and in
their Country, they have neither the one, nor the other; but live without
distinction of persons (unless in their Magistrates) in the most levelling
liberty in the world. This practice of the Swissers makes all the Gentlemen
which are remaining in any of the free Towns afraid of them; so that they
employ their whole industry in keeping their States at a distance with them,
and preventing any intelligence betwixt them. Moreover all of those States who
have been Soldiers, and had their Education in the Wars, are mortally their
Enemies moved thereunto by Emulation and Envy, because they themselves are not
so famous abroad, and their animosity is so great, that they never meet in the
sield (let their numbers be small, or great) but they fall together by the Ears.

As to the Enmity betwixt the Princes, and the free Towns, and the Swissers, I
need say no more, it being so generally known; as likewise of the jealousies
betwixt the Emperor and the Princes. You must understand, that the Emperors
principal apprehension is of the Princes, and not being able to correct them
alone, he has made use of the assistance of these free States, and not long
since, entertained the Swissers into his alliance, by whose means he thought
himself in a very good condition. So that these common dissentions being
considered, and the particular piques and suspicions betwixt one Prince, and
one State and another; it is no easy matter to unite the Empire; and yet it is
necessary it should be united, before any great thing can be performed by the
Emperor. And though he who believes Germany in a condition to do great things,
because there is visibly no Prince who has the power, or indeed the courage to
oppose the designs of the Emperor, as formerly has been done, yet he must know
that it is a great impediment to an Emperor not to be assisted by those
Princes, for though perhaps a Prince dares not contend with him, he dares deny
him his assistance; and if he dares not deny him that, he dares break his
promise upon occasion, and if he dares not do that, will at least make so bold
to deferr and delay the performance so long, that when his supplies do come,
they shall do the Emperor no good; all which things do infinitely disturb, and
embarras his designs. And this was found to be true, when the Emperor would the
first time have passed into Italy, in spite both of the French and the
Venetian; in a diet held at that time in Constance, he was promised by the
several Free States in Germany a supply of... thousand Foot, and 3000 Horse,
yet he could never get of them together above 5000, and that because by that
time the Forces of one State came up; another was ready to depart, their time
being expired and some sent Money in lieu; upon which score that Enterprise was
lost.

The strength of Germany consists in the free Towns rather, than in the
Princes; for the Princes are of two sorts, Temporal and Spiritual. The Temporal
Princes are brought very low, partly by themselves (every Principality, being
cantonized and distributed to several Princes by constitution of their
inheritances which are observed very strictly in those Countries) and partly
having been much weakened by the Emperor and his assistance from the said
States; so that now the amity of the Temporal Princes, is of little importance.
There are likewise Spiritual Princes, whose Territories, if not cantonized and
divided by those Hereditary Customs, are yet so weakened and enervated by the
ambition of their own free Towns, and the favor that the Emperor shows them,
that the Electoral Archbishops, and the rest have little or no power in the
great and chief Towns of their own Dominions; from whence it comes to pass,
that being divided at home, they cannot favor the Enterprises of the Emperor,
though they would themselves. But to come to the Free, and the Imperial Towns,
which are the strength of that Country, as being rich, and well-governed. Those
Towns for several reasons, are grown cooler in the assertion of their
Liberties, and much more in the acquisition of new, and that which they do not
desire for themselves, they do not care another should have. Besides they are
so many; and every one to be commanded by a General of their own, that their
supplies, when they are disposed to send them, come but very slow, and when
they do come, are not so useful as they should be, and of this we had an
Example not many years since. The Swissers invaded the State of Maximilian, and
Suevia: The Emperor contracted with the Free Towns to repel them, and they
obliged themselves to assist him with an Army of 14000 Men, but he never got
half of them, and the reason was as abovesaid, when the Forces of one Town came
up, another marched off, insomuch that the Emperor dispairing of success, came
to an agreement with the Swissers, and left Basil in their possession. And if
in this case, where their own interest was concerned, they have acted at this
rate, it may be guessed how they will behave themselves in the concerns of
other men; so that all these things laid together, though their power be great,
yet it can turn but to little account to the Emperor. And the Venetians by
their conversation and Commerce with the Merchants of Germany, in all their
Transactions hitherto with the Emperor, have understood him better than any
body else, and dealt more honorably by him; for had they been in any
apprehension of his power, they would have insisted upon some caution, either
by way of Money or Towns; and if they had seen any possibility of uniting the
whole power of the Empire, they would never have opposed it: But knowing that
to be impossible, it made them the more con^ident, and gave them hopes of
success. If therefore in a single City, the affairs of the multitude are
negligently managed, in a Province they will be much worse. Moreover those
little States are sensible, that an acquisition in Italy, or elsewhere, would
fall to the Princes, and not to them, because they might enjoy them personally,
which could not be done by a Commonwealth, and where the reward is like to be
unequal, people will not willingly be at an equal expense. Their power
therefore is great, but of little importance, and he who peruses what has been
said before, and considers what was been done for several years past, will sind
how little it is to be relied upon.

The German Men at Arms are well mounted, and many of them well enough armed,
but their Horses are heavy and unactive, and it is to be observed that in their
Encounters with the Italians or French, they can do nothing at all, not for any
fault in the Men, but the accoutrement of their Horses, for their Saddles being
little, and weak, and without bows, every little jostle tumbuls them upon the
ground: and another of their great disadvantages is, that the lower part of
their bodies are never armed whereby not being able to defend against the first
impression (in which the excellence of those Soldiers consist) they lie exposed
(upon the close) to the short Swords of the Enemy, and may be wounded both
themselves and Horses in those disarmed places, and it is in the power of every
Foot man to pull them off on their Horses, and rip their Guts out when they
have done, and then as to the manage of their Horses they are too heavy to do
any thing at all.

Their Foot are very good, and very personable men, contrary to the Swiss, who
are but small, rough hewn, and not handsome at all: But they arm themselves
(unless it be some few) only with a Pike and a Sword, that they might be the
more dexterous, and nimble, and light; and their saying used to be, that they
arm themselves no better, because they feared nothing but the Artillery against
which no Breast Plate, or croslet, or Gorget would secure them: other weapons
they despise; for it is said their order is so good, and they stand so firm to
one another it is impossible to break into them nor come near them if their
Pikes be long enough. They are excellent in a Field sight, but for the storming
of a Town they are good for nothing; and but little to defend one: and
generally where the Men cannot keep their old orders and manage themselves with
room enough, they are worth but little: Of this experience has been seen where
they have been engaged with the Italians, or assaulted any Town, as at Padua
where they came off very ill, though on the other side, in the Field they had
done well enough. For in the Battle of Ravenna, betwixt the French and the
Spaniards, if it had not been for their Lanceknights, the French had been
beaten; for whilst the Men at Arms were confronted, and engaged with one
another, the Spanish had the better of the French, and had disordered their
Gascoigns, so that had not the Germans came in and relieved them, they had been
utterly broken: and the same was seen lately when the Spanish King made War
upon the French in Guienna, the Spaniards were more fearful of a Body of 10000
German Foot, which the King of France had in his Service than all the rest of
his Army, therefore they declined coming to a Battle with all the Art they
could use.

THE DISCOURSES OF Nicholas Machiavel, UPON THE FIRST DECADE OF TITUS LIVIUS*

Faithfully Englished.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, Charles Harper, and John Amery, in
Fleetstreet. 1680.

NICOLO MACHIAVELLI TO ZANOBI BUOND ELMONTI And COSIMO RUCELLAI.
I Send you a Present which (though not answerable to my obligations) is
doubtless the greatest that Nicolo Machiavelli was able to send, having
expressed in it whatever I know or have learned by a long practice, and
continued reading of the affairs of this World than which neither you nor any
body else being to expect more, I am not to be blamed if my Present be no
better. You may complain indeed of the poverty of my parts, my narrations being
so poor; and of the weakness of my judgment, having perhaps mistaken in many
places of my Discourses: if so, I know not which of us is less obliged to the
other, I to you, for having forced me to write against my own inclination, or
you to me, for having performed it no more to your satisfaction. Accept it then
in the same manner as things are accepted from friends, among whom the
intention of the giver is always more considered than the quality of the gift,
and believe that as often as I think of it, I am satisfied in this, that however
I have been mistaken in many other circumstances, I have done wisely in this,
having chosen you above all others for the dedication of my Discourses, both
because in not doing it, I should have shown my self in some measure ungrateful
for the benefits received, and in doing it, I have transgressed the common
custom of Authors, who for the most part direct their Works to some Prince, and
(blinded with ambition and avarice) applaud and magnify him for all the
virtuous qualities, when perchance they ought rather to have reproached him
with all the vices imaginable. To avoid that error, I have made choice, not of
those who are actually Princes, but of such as by their infinite good parts do
merit to be so; not of those who are actually able to advance me to Honors,
Employments, and Wealth, but to those, who though unable, would do it if they
could: for, to judge right, men are rather to esteem those in whose nature,
than those in whose power it is to be liberal, and those who understand how to
govern a Kingdom, than those who do govern it without that understanding.
Accordingly Authors do commend Hiero the Syracusan, though but a private
person, above Perseus of Macedon, though a great King: because to Hiero there
was nothing wanting to be an Excellent Prince, but a Principality; and Perseus
had nothing but a Kingdom to recommend him to be King. Accept then) whether it
be good or bad) what you commanded your selves, and if you be so far in an
error as to approve my opinions, I shall not fail to pursue the rest of my
History, as I promised in the beginning. Farewell.

THE DISCOURSES OF Nicholas Machiavel, CITIZEN and SECRETARY OF FLORENCE, Upon
The First Decade of TITUS LIVIVS TO ZANOBIVS BOND MONTVS AND COSIMVS
RVCELLAIVS.
LIBER. I.
COnsidering with my self what honor is given to Antiquity, and how many times
(passing by variety of instances) the fragment of an old Statue has been
purchased at an high rate by many people, out of curiosity to keep it by them,
as an ornament to their house, or as a pattern for the imitation of such as
delight in that art; and with what industry and pains they endeavor afterward
to have it represented in all their buildings. On the other side, observing the
most honorable and heroic actions (described in History, performed by
Kingdoms and ancient Commonwealths; by Kings, great Captains, Citizens,
Legislators, and others, which have not only tired, but spent themselves in the
service of their Country) are rather admired than imitated, and indeed so far
shunned and declined, in all places, there is scarce any impression or shadow to
be seen in this age of the virtue of our ancestors; I could not at the same
time but admire, and lament it; and the more, by how much I observed in all
civil and personal controversies, in all diseases incident to mankind, recourse
is continually had to such judgments and remedies as have been derived to us by
our predecessors; for to speak truth, the Civil Law is nothing but the sentence
and determination of their Forefathers, which reduced into order, do show and
instruct our present Lawyers which way to decide; nor is the art of the
Physician any thing more than ancient experience handed down to our times, upon
which the Practiser of our age founds all his method and doctrine.
Nevertheless, in the ordering of Commonwealths, in the conservation of their
several members, in the Government of Kingdoms, in the regiment of armies, in
the management of War, in the administration of Justice, in the enlargement and
propagation of Empire, there is not to be found either Prince, Republic, great
Captain or Citizen, which repairs to Antiquity for example; which persuaded me
it proceeded not so much from niceness and effeminacy our present Education has
introduced upon the world, nor from the mischief which turbulent and seditious
idleness has brought forth in many Provinces and Cities in Christendom, as from
our ignorance or inadvertency in History not taking the sense of what we read,
or not minding the relish and poinancy with which it is many times impregnated;
from whence it comes to pass, that many who read are much pleased and delighted
with the variety of accidents contained in History, but never think them
intended for their imitation, that being a thing, in their judgments, not only
difficult, but impossible; as if the Heaven, the Sun, the Elements and Mankind
were altered and dispossessed of the motion, order and power with which they
were primitively invested. Being desirous to reduce such as shall fall into
this error, I have Judged it necessary to write upon all those Books of Titus
Livius, (which, by the malignity of time, have not been intercepted) what I
(according to ancient and modern opinion) shall think useful for their further
explanation; to the end, that they which shall peruse these my discourses, may
extract such advantage and document as is necessary for their proficiency and
improvement by History; and though my enterprise appears to be difficult, yet
by the assistance of those who put me upon it, I do not despair but to
discharge my self so, as to leave the way much more easy and short to any man
that shall desire to come after me.

CHAP. I.
What have been generally the principles of all Cities, and particularly of Rome
THose who shall read the Original of the City of Rome, by what Legislators
advanced and by what Government ordered, will not wonder it shall remain firm
and entire for so many ages, afterward so vast an Empire spring out of it as
that Commonwealth arrived to. Being to discourse first of its Original, it is
convenient to premise, that all Cities are built either by natives born in the
Country where they were erected, or by strangers. The first happens when, to
the Inhabitants dispersed in many and little parties, it appears their
habitation is insecure, not being able apart (by reason of their distance, or
smalness of their numbers) to resist an invasion, (if any Enemy should fall
upon them) or to unite suddenly for their defense, without leaving their Houses
and Families exposed, which by consequence would be certain prey to the enemy.
Whereupon, to evade those dangers, moved either by their own impulse, or the
suggestions of some person among them of more than ordinary authority, they
oblige themselves to live together in some place to be chosen by them for
convenience of provision, and easiness of defense. Of this sort, among many
others, Athens and Venice were two: the first that built under the authority of
Theseus, upon occasion of the like distance and dispersion of the natives. The
other (there being many people driven together into certain little Islands in
that point of the Adriatic Sea, to avoid the War which every day, by the
access and irruption of new Armies of Barbarians after the declension of the
Roman Empire grew intolerable in Italy) began by degrees among themselves,
without the assistance or encouragement of any Prince, to treat and submit to
such Laws as appeared most likely to preserve them: and it succeeded to their
desire by the long respite and tranquillity their situation afforded them; that
Sea having no passage at that end, and the Barbarians no ships to disturb them;
so that the least beginning imaginable was sufficient to exalt them to their
present authority and grandeur.

The second case, when a City is raised by strangers, it is done by people that
are free, or depending (as Colonies) or else by some Prince or Republic to
ease and disburthen themselves of their exuberance, or to defend some
Territory, which being newly acquired, they desire with more safety and less
expense to maintain (of which sort several were by the people of Rome all over
their Empire) otherwise they are sometimes erected by some Prince, not for his
residence so much as for his glory and renown (as Alexandria by Alexander the
great). But these Cities not being free in their Original, do seldom arise to
any extraordinary height more than to be reckoned the heads or chief of some
Kingdom. Of this sort was Florence, for (whether built by the Soldiers of
Silla, or perchance by the Inhabitants of the Mountain di Fiesole, who
presuming upon, and being encouraged by the long Peace under the Reign of
Augustus, descended from their Mountain to inhabit the plain upon the River
Arms) it was built under the Roman Empire, and could not upon those principles
exalt it self higher than the courtesy of the Prince would permit. The
Founders of Cities are free, when by themselves, or the Command of their
Sovereign they are constrained upon occasion of sickness, famine, or war, to
abandon their own, inquest of new Countries: and these do either possess
themselves of such Towns as they find ready* built in their Conquests, (as
Moses did), or they build them de novo, as Aeneas. In this case the power of
the builder, and the fortune of the building is conspicuous and honorable,
according as the cause from whence it derives its Original is more or less
eminent. His virtue and prudence is discernible two ways, by the election of
the Seat, and institution of the Laws; and because men build as often by
necessity as choice, and the judgment and wisdom of the builder is greater
where there is less room and latitude for his election; it is worthy our
consideration whether it is more advantageous building in barren and unfruitful
places, to the end that the people being constrained to be industrious, and
less obnoxious to idleness, might live in more unity, the poverty of the soil
giving them less opportunity of dissension. Thus it fell out in Raugia and
several other Cities built in such places; and that kind of election would
doubtless be most prudent and profitable, if men could be content to live
quietly of what they had, without an ambitious desire of Command. But there
being no security against that, but power, it is necessary to avoid that
sterility, and build in the fruitfullest places can be found, where their
numbers increasing by the plentifulness of the soil, they may be able not only
to defend themselves against an assault, but repel any opposition shall be made
to their grandeur; and as to that idleness to which the richness of the
situation disposes, it may be provided against by Laws and convenient exercise
enjoined, according to the example of several wise men, who having inhabited
Countries, pleasant, fruitful, and apt to produce such lazy people improper for
service, to prevent the inconvenience which might follow thereupon, enjoined
such a necessity of exercise to such as were intended for the Wars, that by
degrees they became better Soldiers than those Countries which were
mountainous and barren could any where produce. Among whom may be reckoned the
Kingdom of Egypt, which, notwithstanding that it was extremely pleasant and
plentiful, by the virtue and efficacy of its Laws produced excellent men, and
perhaps such as, had not their names been extinguished with time, might have
deserved as much honor as Alexander the Great, and many other great Captains,
whose memories are so fresh, and so venerable among us. An who-ever would
consider the Government of the Sultan, the discipline of the Mamalukes, and the
rest of their Militia before they were extirpated by Selimus the Turk, might
find their great prudence and caution in exercising their Soldiers, and
preventing that softness and effeminacy to which the felicity of their soil did
so naturally incline them.

For these reasons I conceive best to build in a fruitful place, if the ill
consequences of that fertility be averted by convenient Laws. Alexander the
Great being desirous to build a City to perpetuate his name Dinocrates an
Architect came to him, and undertook to build him one upon the Mountain Athos,
and to recommend and enforce his proposal, (besides the goodness of the soil)
he persuaded him it should be made in the shape and figure of a man (a thing
which would be new, wonderful, and suitable to his greatness). But when
Alexander enquired whence it was to be supplied, the Architect replied; he had
not considered of that; at which answer Alexander laughed very heartily, and
leaving him and his mountain to themselves, he built Alexandria, where people
might be tempted to plant by the richness of the Soil, the nearness of the Sea,
and convenience of the River Nile. Again, if we examine the Original of Rome,
and admit Aeneas for the first Founder, it will fall in the number of those
Cities built by foreigners: if Romulus, among such as were erected by the
natives; either way it was originally free, without any dependence. It will
appear likewise (as shall be shown more particularly hereafter) by what Laws
Romulus, Numa and others fortified and secured it; insomuch that neither the
fertility of the Soil, the commodity of the Sea, the frequency of their
Victories, nor the largeness of its Empire were able to debauch or corrupt it;
but it remained for several ages for piety and virtue more exemplary than any
other Commonwealth either since or before it. And because the great things
acted under that Government, and transmitted to us by Titus Livius, were
performed by public or private Counsel within or without the City, I shall
begin with what occurred in the Town, and was managed by public debate, (as
judging that most worthy our annotation) super-adding whatever depended
thereupon; and with these discourses I intend this first Book (or rather Part)
shall conclude.

CHAP. II.
The several kinds of Commonwealths and under which kind the Roman is
comprehended.
WAving the discourse of those Cities which in their beginning have been
dependant, I shall speak of such as were originally free, and governed
themselves according to their own fancies, Commonwealths or Principalities, as
their own inclinations lead them. Of these (according to the diversity of their
principles) their Laws and Orders were diverse. Some of them at their first
foundation received their Laws at one time from a single person, as the
Spartans from Lycurgus. Others received them by chance, at several times, upon
variety of accidents, as Rome; and that Commonwealth is doubtlesly happy, whose
good fortune it is to have a person so wise as to constitute and dispose its
Laws in such manner at first, that it may subsist safely and securely by them,
without necessity of new modelling or correction. Of this sort was Sparta,
which for more than 800 years was observed to remain entire and incorrupt,
without any dangerous commotion. On the other side, that City must needs be in
some measure unhappy, which, not having submitted to, or complied with the
prudence of a single founder, is necessitated of it selt to remodel and
reform^, Of these kinds, that is most unhappy whose principles were at first
remote and devious from the right way which might have conducted to perfection;
and indeed those Commonwealths which are in this degree, are almost impossible
to be established by any accident whatsoever. But others (whose Commencements
are good, and capable of improvement, though perhaps not exquisitely perfect)
may become perfect afterward by the concurrence of accidents, yet not without
danger forasmuch as most men are averse, and will not easily admit of any new
Law which introduces new Orders and Customs into a City, without great
appearance of necessity, and that necessity arising necessarily from some
danger impending, it many times falls out the Commonwealth perishes before
remedy can be applied. Of this the Commonwealth of Florence is instance
sufficient, which in the commotion of Aretz was the IIth. time reformed, and
the 12.th time confounded by the sedition of Prato.

But being now to discourse of the State of the Roman Commonwealth, and what
were the accidents and orders which advanced it to that perfection, it is
convenient to premise (what has been asserted by several Authors) that there
are but three sorts of Governments Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, to
either of which who-ever intends to erect a Government, may apply as he
pleases. Other (of no less reputation) are of opinion the forms of Government
are six, of which three are bad, and three good of themselves, but so easily
corrupted, even they become fatal and pernicious. Those which are good are the
three before mentioned, those which are evil are three others depending upon
the three former; and carrying so near a resemblance, they many times
interfere, and fall one into the other, as Monarchy into tyranny, Aristocracy
into Oligarchy, and Democracy into Anarchy and Confusion: insomuch, that
who-ever forms his Government of one of the three former, forms it for no long
time, because no care nor remedy can prevent, but it will degenerate into its
contrary, by reason of the similitude betwixt virtue and vice: and these
changes and variations of Government happened by accident amongst men; for at
the beginning of the World the Inhabitants being few, they lived dispersed
after the manner of beasts: afterward, as they multiplied, they began to unite
and, for their better defense, to look out for such as were more strong,
robust, and valiant, that they might choose one out of them to make him their
head, and pay him obedience; from hence the first distinction betwixt honest
and dishonest did arise: for observing that if any injured his Benefactor, it
immediately created an hatred and compassion among the rest, all people
abhorring him that was ungrateful, and commiserating him that was injured; lest
the same injustice might happen to themselves, they began to make Laws, and
ordain punishments for offenders; and this was the first appearance of justice
in the World; after which, being to make Election of their Prince, they did not
so much respect the ability of his body as the qualifications of his mind,
choosing him that was most prudent and just; but by degrees their Government
coming to be Hereditary, and not by Election, according to their former way,
those which inherited degenerated from their Ancestors, and neglecting all
virtuous actions, began to believe that Princes were exalted for no other end
but to discriminate themselvcs from their subjects by their pomp, luxury, and
all other effeminate qualities, by which means they fell into the hatred of the
people, and by consequence became afraid of them, and that fear increasing,
they began to meditate revenge, oppressing some, and disobliging others, till
insensibly the Government altered, and fell into Tyranny. And these were the
first grounds of ruin, the first occasion of Conjuration and Conspiracy
against Princes, not so much in the pusillanimous and poor, as in those whose
generosity, spirit and riches would not suffer them to submit to so
dishonorable administrations. The multitude following the authority of the
Nobles, took up Arms against their Prince, and having conquered and extirpated
that Government, they subjected themselves to the Nobility which had freed
them; and detesting the name of a single person, they took the Government upon
themselves, and at first (reflecting upon the late Tyranny) governed according
to new Laws devised by themselves, postponing particular profit to public
advantage, so that both the one and the other were preserved and managed with
great diligence and exactness. But their authority afterward descending upon
their Sons, (who being ignorant of the variations of fortune, as not having
experimented her inconstancy) and not contenting themselves with a civil
equality, but falling into rapine, oppression, ambition, and adulteries, they
changed the Government again, and brought it from an Optimacy to be governed by
few, without any respect or consideration of Justice or Civility; so that in a
short time it happened to them as to the Tyrant; for the multitude being weary of
their Government, were ready to assist any body that would attempt to remove
it, by which means in a short time it was extinguished.

And forasmuch as the tyranny of their Prince, and the insolence of their
Nobles were fresh in their memory, they resolved to restore neither the one nor
the other, but conclude upon a popular State, which was regulated so as neither
Prince nor Noble should have any authority: and there being no States but are
reverenced at first, this Populacy continued for some time, but not long,
(especially after its Founders) for it fell immediately into an irresistible
licentiousness, contemning all authority both public and private; and every
man living after his own mind, a thousand injuries were daily committed, so
that forced by necessity, by the suggestions of some good man or for avoiding
the like enormities, they returned to their primitive Kingship, and from thence
by degrees relapsed again in the manner, and upon the occasions aforesaid. And
this is the Sphere and Circle in which all Republics have, and do move; but it
seldom or never happens that they return to the same circumstances of
Government again, because it is scarce possible for any of them to be so long
lived, as to pass many times through the same mutations and remain upon its
legs. It sometimes comes to pass likewise, that in the conflicts and troubles
of a State, being destitute both of counsel and force, it becomes a prey to
some neighboring Commonwealth that is better governed than it: but admitting
that could not be, Governments would fall from one to another, and make an
infinite circulation. For these reasons all the foresaid forms of Government
are in my judgment infirm and unstable; the three good ones from the shortness
of man's life and the three bad ones from their proper imperfections.
Whereupon, the wisest Legislators finding this defect, and avoiding every one
of those kinds, they framed a Government which should consist of them all,
believing it to be more permanent and stable, because, Prince, Nobles and
People living in the same City, and Communicating in the same Government, they
would be all of them in sight of one another, and more capable of correction.
The person which in this kind has merited most praise was Lycurgus, who ordered
his Laws in Sparta in such manner that giving King Nobility and People each of
them their portion, he erected a Government that continued for more than eight
hundred years, to his great honor, and that Cities repose.

To Solon it happened clear otherwise, (who was the Athenian Legislator) whose
aiming only at a popular Government, was the cause it was so short lived, that
before he died he saw the tyranny of Pisistrates spring out of it; and though
forty years after the Tyrant's Heirs were expelled, and Athens restored to its
liberty, yet resuming the old model which Solon had recommended, it could not
continue above an hundred years, notwithstanding many new laws were super-added
to restrain the insolence of the Nobility, and the looseness of the Commons.
But there being no mixture and temperament of Principality and Optimacy with
the other, in respect of Sparta, Athens was but of little duration. But to
return to Rome, though it had not a Lycurgus to obstetricate at its birth, and
supply it with such Laws as might preserve its freedom so long.

Nevertheless, the accidents which happened upon the dissension betwixt the
people and the Senate produced that in some measure which was defective at its
foundation; for though in its beginning its Laws and Orders were imperfect, yet
it did not altogether deflect from the right way which was to conduct it to
perfection, Romulus, Numa, and all the rest of its Kings making many good laws
conformable to its freedom. But their ultimate design being to perpetuate their
Monarchy, though that City remained free, there were many things omitted by
those Princes which were necessary for its conservation. And though it fell out
their Kings lost their Dominion upon the abovesaid occasions, yet those who
expulsed them, creating two Consuls in their stead, they rather drove the name
than the authority of Kingship out of the City. After which, the Government
residing in the Consuls and Senate, it consisted only of two of the three
sorts, Monarchy and Aristocracy: it remained now to give place only to a
popular Government, and the Roman Nobility being grown insolent upon occasions
which shall be mentioned hereafter, the people tumultuated, took up Arms
against them, and prevailed so far, that (lest otherwise they might lose all)
it was consented the people should have their share, and yet the Senate and
Consuls on the other hand retain so much of their former authority as to keep
up their degrees as before: and this was the beginning of the Tribunes of the
people, after the creation of which, that State became better established,
every one of the three sorts having a share in the Government, and fortune was
very favorable, that though it suffered many mutations and passed from a
Monarchy to an Aristocracy, and from that to the people by the same gradations,
and the same occasions I have mentioned; nevertheless the power was not taken
from their Kings to transfer it upon the Nobles, nor from the Nobility to give
it wholly to the people; but remaining mixed and compounded of all three, that
Republic grew in time to be perfect, to which perfection the difference and
jealousies betwixt the Senate and people contributed exceedingly, as shall be
largely demonstrated in the two following Chapters.

CHAP. III.
Upon what accidents and tumults in Rome the Tribune of the people was created,
by which the Commonwealth became more perfect.
ACcording to the judgment of all Authors who have written of Civil Government,
and the examples of all History, it is necessary to who-ever would establish a
Government and perscribe Laws to it, to presuppose all men naturally bad and
that they will show and exert that natural malignity as often as they have
occasion to do it securely, for though it may possibly lie concealed for some
time, it is for some secret reason which want of president and experience
renders invisible; but time discovers it afterward, and is therefore justly
called the Father of truth.

After the expulsion of the Tarquins there appeared in Rome a very great union
betwixt the Senate and people; the Senate seemed to have deposited their old
arrogance, and taken up a gentleness and humility that rendered them grateful
even to the meanest mechanic: in this manner they curbed and constrained their
evil designs as having no hopes of success while the Tarquins were living, who
were formidable to the Nobility of themselves and would be much more, if the
people by any ill usage should be animated to join with them, and this was the
true ground of their hypocrisy. But no sooner were the Tarquins dead, and the
Nobility discharged of their fear, but they began to expectorate, and spit out
the venom had lain so long in their stomachs against the people using them
with all imaginable injury and contempt, which carriage of theirs gives good
testimony to my assertion, that man is naturally wicked, never does well but
upon necessity; and when at any time it is at his choice, and he may follow his
own genius with freedom, all things run immediately into disorder and
confusion; and that saying is not without reason, That Reputation and poverty
make men industrious, but it is Laws which make them good: otherwise, if people
did well of themselves, Laws would be useless; but where that is not to be
expected, Laws become necessary. No sooner were the Tarquins removed, and the
authority and terror wherewith they kept the Senate in awe, but it was thought
fit to find out some new invention that might restrain the Nobility, and keep
them in the same circles of humanity and justice as the Tarquins had done
whilst they were alive: at length, after many squables and contentions betwixt
the people and them, all was accommodated by the creation of a Tribune for the
security of the people, which Tribune was to be invested with such authority
and privilege as might enable him to become afterward an Arbitor betwixt
them, and a stop for the future to the insolence of the Nobility.

CHAP IV.
The dissentions betwixt the Senate and the people of Rome, were the occasion
that Commonwealth beam so powerful and free.
I Cannot in silence passover the tumults and commotions which happened in Rome
betwixt the death of the Tarquins, and the creation of those Tribunes. Nor can
I forbear saying something against the opinion of many who will needs have Rome
to have been a tumultuous Republic, so full of mutiny and confusion, that had
not its good fortune and valor supplied for its defects, it would have been
inferior to any other Commonwealth whatsoever. I cannot deny but fortune and
valor were the occasions of the Roman Empire; but, in my judgment, they do not
consider, that where the Soldier is good, the discipline is good; and where
the discipline is good, there is commonly good fortune: but to return to the
other particulars in that City, I say, those who object against the tumults
betwixt the Nobles and the people, do in my opinion condemn those very things
which were the first occasion of its freedom, regarding the noise and clamours
which do usually follow such commotions, more than the good effects they do
commonly produce, not considering that in all Commonwealths there are two
opposite humors, one of the People, the other of the Nobles; and that all Laws
which are made in favor of liberty, proceed from the differences betwixt them,
as may easily be seen in the revolutions of Rome: for from the time of the
Tarquins to the Gracchi, (which was more than three hundred years) in all the
tumults in Rome seldom any body was banished, and seldomer put to death: so
that it is not reasonable to esteem those popular tumults so dangerous and
horrible, nor to pronounce that a seditious and bloody Commonwealth, which in
so long time, among all their heats and animosities sent not above eight or ten
persons into banishment, executed but few, and condemned not many to any
pecuniary Mulct. Nor can it be called reasonably disorderly and irregular,
which produced so many examples of all sorts of virtue; for good examples
proceed from good Education, and good Education from good Laws, and good Laws
from those tumults, which many people do so inconsiderately condemn, and
who-ever examines their success, will not find they have produced any Laws or
Violence to the prejudice of the Common interest, but rather on the contrary.
And if any should object their ways were wild and unusual, to heat the people
roaring against the Senate, and the Senate railing against the people. To see
them running tumultuously about the streets, shutting up their shops, and
leaving the Town, I answer, that all Cities ought to be allowed some ways of
vent and evacuation for their passions, and especially those who expect
assistance from their people in time of exigence and danger; in which number
the City of Rome was one, and had this custom, that when the Commons had a mind
to a new Law, they either committed some of the aforesaid outrages, or else
refused to list themselves for the Wars, so that to appease, it was in some
measure necessary to comply with them, and the desires of a free people are
seldom or never destructive or prejudicial to liberty, because they commonly
spring from actual oppression, or an apprehension of it; and if perhaps that
apprehension should be vain, and ill grounded, there is the remedy of
Conventions, in which some honest man or good Orator may remonstrate their
mistake: and the people, though (as Tully says) they may be ignorant, yet they
are capable enough of the truth, and do easily submit to it, when delivered to
them by any person they think credible, and to be belived. So that it is an
obligation upon us to judge more moderately of the Roman Government, and to
consider that so many good effects as proceeded from that Republic, could not
have been produced but from suitable causes: and if their tumults were the
occasion of the creation of the Tribunes, they were more laudable than
otherwise; for besides that they secured a share of the Government to the
people, they were constituted as Guardians and Conservators of the Roman
liberty, as shall be shown in the Chapter ensuing.

CHAP V.
Where the Guardianship of liberty may be most securely deposited, whether
among the people or Nobility: and which has greater occasion to tumultuate, he
that would acquire more, or he that would defend and keep what he has.
THey who have given us the wisest and most judicious scheme of a Commonwealth,
have laid down the conservation of liberty as a necessary fundamental, and
according as that is more or less secured, the Government is like to be more or
less durable. But forasmuch as all Commonwealths consist of Nobility and
Populacy, the question arises, In whose hands that liberty is deposited most
safely. In old times among the Lacedaemonians, and in our times among the
Venetians, it was entrusted with the Nobility; but among the Romans with the
common people; for which reason it is to be examined which of them made the
better elections.

If we look back to their Originals, there are arguments on both sides; but if
we regard only their fate and conclusion, the Nobility must carry it, in
respect that the liberty of the Spartans and Venetians have been much longer
lived. But on the other side, (to justify the Romans) freedom is (I conceive)
most properly committed to their custody who have least appetite to usurp. And
doubtless, if the ends and designs both of the Nobility and Commons be
considered, it will be found the Nobility are ambitious of Dominion, while the
Commons have no other thoughts but to defend themselves against it; and, by
consequence, having less hopes to usurp, they have more inclination to live
free: so that the conservation of their liberty being committed to the people,
it is but reasonable to believe they will be more careful to preserve it; and
by how much they are less likely to usurp upon it themselves, with the more
vigilance will they secure it against the encroachments of others. On the other
side, he that defends the Spartan and Venetian constitution, alleges, that by
putting that power into the hands of the Nobility, two excellent things are
performed. One is, that thereby they satisfy their ambition who have the
greatest interest in the Commonwealth. The other, that they take from the
people all opportunity of exerting their natural turbulency and unquietness,
which has not only been the occasion of infinite dissentions, but is apt
likewise to enforce the Nobility upon such desperate courses as may in time
produce unremediable effects. Of this, Rome it self is proposed as an example,
where the Tribunes being invested with that authority, it was not sufficient to
have one Plebeian Consul, but the people must have both, and not content with
that neither, they would have the Censor, Praetor, and the other great
Magistrates of the City chosen out of the people. Nor was this enough, but
carried on with the same exorbitant fury, they began by degrees to adore such
men as they saw likely to confront and beard the Nobility, which humor was the
rise of Marius his greatness, and his greatness the destruction of Rome. All
this considered, it is no easy matter, upon impartial deliberation on both
sides, to pronounce which of the two is most safely to be trusted with the
liberty, because it is no less difficult to determine which is most pernicious
to a Commonwealth, he that (not satisfied with what he has) is ambitious of
more, or he that is content, and would secure what he has got. He that shall
examine it critically, will conclude thus; Either you argue for a Republic,
whose aim is to extend and propagate its Empire, as Rome; Or one whose designs
reach no further than to preserve what they have got. In the first case it is
necessary in all things to follow the example of Rome; in the second, Venice
and Sparta are rather to be imitated for the reasons aforesaid, which shall be
reinforced in the following Chapter. But to return from whence we have
stragled, and discourse of what men are most nocent in a Commonwealth, they
that are impatient to get, or they that are only fearful to lose; I say, that
when Marcus Menenius was made Dictator, and Marcus Fulvius Master of the Horse,
(both of them Plebeians) to inquire into certain Conspiracies that were entered
into at Capua, against the City of Rome, authority was given them at the same
time to examine and take cognizance of such persons as, by bribery, or any
other unlawful means, designed upon the Consulship, or any other of the great
offices in Rome: by which the Nobility being highly provoked, (as suspecting it
to be done in opposition to them) caused it to be spread abroad, that the
Nobility did not by any ambitious or irregular ways affect or design upon those
great places; but the Commons, who not daring to trust their preferment to
their extraction or virtue, took all extraordinary courses to advance
themselves to them. In particular they accused the Dictator, and that with so
much vehemence and success, he was glad to call a Council, and (having
complained very much of the calumniations of the Nobility) to lay down his
Dictatorship, and submit himself to the judgment of the people, by whom the
Cause being heard, he was fairly acquitted. There it was disputed very hard
which was most ambitious; He that would get, or He that would preserve; for a
violent appetite either in the one, or the other may be the occasion of great
disturbances, which in my judgment are oftener caused by them that are in
possession, because the apprehension of losing what they have got, produces the
same eagerness and passion, as desire of acquisition does in the other,
forasmuch as they seldom think themselves safe in what they have, but by new
accumulation; besides, the more wealth or Territory they have, the more power
or capacity they have to Usurp as they see occasion: to which may be added that
their incorrigible and ambitious deportments, do provoke and kindle a desire in
such as have not those dignities, to compass them if they can, and that for two
reasons, to revenge themselves upon them, by stripping them of all, and to
enrich themselves into the bargain by the wealth and honor which they see
others manage so ill.

CHAP. VI.
Whether in Rome such a form of Government could be established, as should take
away the animosities betwixt the Senate and the People.
WHat the continued jealousies betwixt the Senate and the People did produce,
we have already discoursed; but because the effects of them remained till the
time of the Gracchi, and were the occasion of the destruction of their liberty,
it may be demanded whether Rome might not have attained that height of
Authority and Grandeur under another form of Government that might have
prevented those animosities. To resolve this Question, it is necessary to look
back upon those Republics whose Fortune it has been to retain their liberty a
long time without those inconveniences, to examine what was their form, and
whether it was practicable in Rome. As Examples, we may produce Sparta and
Venice, the first Ancient, the latter more modern, both mentioned before Sparta
was governed by a King, and a small Senate; Venice did not divide the
Government into distinct Names; but all who were admitted to the administration
were called Gentlemen under one common appellation; and that, more by accident,
than any prudence in the Legislator; for when to those Rocks upon which that
City is now seated, many people did repair for the reasons abovesaid, in
process of time their number increasing so fast, that they could not live
peaceably without Laws, they resolved to put themselves under some form, and
meeting often together to deliberate upon that, when they found they were
numerous enough to subsist by themselves, they made a Law to praeclude all new
comers from the Government: and hinding afterward their numbers increase, and
that there were multitudes of Inhabitants incapable of public administration;
in honors to the Governors they called them Gentlemen of Venice, and the
others but Citizens; and this distinction might not only be instituted, but
continued without tumult, because when first introduced, all the Inhabitants
participating of the Government, no body could complain, and they who came
after, finding it firm and established, had no reason, nor opportunity to
disturb it; They had no reason, because no injury was done them; they had no
opportunity, because the Government restrained them, and they were not employed
in any thing that might furnish them with authority; besides those who came
after were not in number disproportionable to the Governors, the latter being
equally, if not more numerous than they; for which reasons the Venetians were
able not only to erect, but maintain their Government a long time without any
revolution.

Sparta being (as I said before) governed by a King and a small Senate, might
likewise preserve its Model a long time, by reason the Inhabitants were but
few, strangers excluded and the Laws of Lycurgus established with great
veneration, so that living by those Laws, all occasion of tumult was taken
away, and they might continue united a long time; for though the Offices and
Commands were conferred upon a few, yet the revenue of the Country being
equally distributed, the people were not Seditious, though they were kept at a
distance; nor did the Nobility provoke them by any insolence or oppression; and
this proceeded from the condition of their Kings, who being environed by the
Nobility, had no safer way to secure their dignity, than by protecting the
people from injustice and violence, by which means the fear, and the desire of
Command being taken from the people, the Emulations betwixt them and the
Nobility and the occasion of tumultuating ceased, so that it was not hard for
them to enjoy their tranquillity several Ages; Of the length of their
tranquillity, there were two principal causes; First, The number of the
Spartans being small, there was no necessity that their Governors should be
many; and next no strangers being admitted, they were not liable to be
corrupted, nor to increase to such a number, as might grow insupportable to
those few who were under their Government. These things being considered, it is
plain that the Roman Legislators could not have instituted a Commonwealth that
should be free from Sedition and Mutiny, any other way, than by imitating the
Venetians and Spartans, that is by not employing the people in their Wars, like
the Venetians, nor entertaining Foreiners into their City, as the Spartans. But
the Roman Legislators transgressing in both, the people grew strong, and by
consequence tumultuous; and if any way the Government were to be rendered more
quiet, this in convenience would follow, it would be rendered also more weak,
and all means be taken away that might conduct it to that height of grandeur
and authority, at which afterward it arrived; so that those applications which
prevented the tumults in Rome, prevented also its enlargement, and the extent
of its Empire, as it happens in most humane affairs, the removal of one
inconvenience is the contracting of another. For if you arm, and adapt a
numerous people for the War, by their means to enlarge your Territory; you put
them into a conditon of being unmanageable afterward, and not to be kept down
to your Discipline and Government; whereas if you keep them disarmed, and their
number but few, though you may make your self Arbitrary, you can never continue
it, for your Subjects will grow so poor spirited and vile, you will become a
pre to the first man that invades you. In all deliberations therefore, the
inconveniences are to be considered, and that resolution preferred, in which
their are fewest; for none can be taken that are absolutely free The Romans
then in imitation of the Spartans, might have set up a King for his life, and
appointed a little Senate; but by so doing, they could never have laid the
foundation of so vast an Empire, for an Elective King, and a small Senate would
have contributed but little to their unity and peace. He then who would set up
a new Commonwealth, should consider whether he would have it (like Rome) extend
its Dominion and Sovereignty; or keep it self within its own bounds without any
dilatation. In the first case it is necessary to imitate the Romans, and give
way to the tumults and public dissentions as well as he can; for without his
Citizens be numerous, and well disciplined and armed, he can never extend his
Dominion; and if he could, it would be impossible to keep it. In the second, he
is to frame to the Model of the Spartans, and Venetians; but because
augmentation of Empire, is commonly the destruction of such Commonwealths, he
is by all possible means to prohibit new acquisitions, because depending upon
weak Commonwealths, they are always destructive and pernicious, as experience
has shown in the Examples of Sparta and Venice. The first having subdued most
part of Greece, discovered, upon a slight accident, the weakness of its
foundation, for the Thebans revolting at the instigation of Pelopidas, gave
opportunity to other Cities, and quite ruined the Government. In like manner
Venice having conquered the greatest part of Italy, more by their Money and
Artifice, than Arms, presuming too much upon their force, and coming to a
Battle, they were worsted, and in one day lost all which they had got. I should
think therefore a Commonwealth that would stand a long time, should model it
self within according to the Example of Sparta and like Venice, seat it self in
so strong and inexpugnable a place, that it might not apprehend any sudden
insult; nor make it self so great on the other side as to become formidable to
its Neighbors; For the common Motives that excite people to make War upon a
Commonwealth, are two; either to conquer it themselves, or to secure themselves
against it, and by the aforesaid expedient, those two ways are totally
frustrated; for if it be hard of access, and well-disposed to defend it self,
it will seldom or never happen that any Body will attempt it. If it keeps
within its own bounds, and by experience be found free from ambition, no body
will fear it, nor will any body offend it; and questionless it would be the
more safe, if by the Laws and Constitutions it was forbidden to extend, for I
am clearly of opinion, that keeping things in this balance and Equilibrium, the
Government would be more civil, and the peace of the City more certain. But the
affairs of man being mutable, and nothing in them that is durable and firm;
there is a necessity that they either increase or diminish, and that necessity
does many times constrain us, to what in reason we should rather decline.
Whence it happens, That if a Government be erected apt to defend it self in
peace and security without extending its bounds, and necessity enforces it to
enlarge, That enlargement takes away its foundation, and ruins it the sooner.
So on the other side, when the Stars are so benign to a Commonwealth, as to
place it in peace, without any occasion of War, that peace begets idlness, and
idlness effeminacy or faction, which two things (and indeed either of them
alone) will be sufficient to subvert it. Wherefore, it being impossible, as I
conceive, to keep things in this balance and mediocrity; in the constitution of
all republics, particular care is to be had to what is most honorable; and
things are to be so ordered, that if necessity should compel them to enlarge,
they might do it in such manner as to be sure to keep it. But to return, a
Commonwealth, in my judgment, is better framed to the example of Rome, than
either to the Venetian or Spartan, it being so hard to hit the exact way
between the one and the other; and for the emulations betwixt the Nobility and
the People they are to be born as inconveniences, but such as are necessary for
a people that would rise to the Grandeur of the Romans; against which
nevertheless (as I have shown before) the authority of the Tribunes will be
some remedy, if invested with the power of impeaching, which was given to the
Tribunes in other States, as I shall show in my next Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
How necessary it is for the conservation of a State, that any Citizen be
securely accused.
THere is nothing of more importance to the safety of a State, than that
permission be given to such as are set up for the conservation of its liberty,
to accuse such persons to the People, the Senate, or other Magistrates, as
shall any way offend against the Constitutions thereof; and this practice has
two effects very profitable for the Commonwealth: the first is, the Citizens,
for fear of being accused, do not attempt any thing to the prejudice of the
State; and if they do, they are easily and readily suppressed: the other is,
that thereby a way is opened for the evacuation of such humors as are too
frequent among the Citizens of every great City; which humors, without some
legal vent, do usually recur to extraordinary ways that are absolutely
pernicious: wherefore there is nothing renders a Commonwealth more stable and
firm, than the provision of some legal course for the evaporation of those
humors which endanger it. This may be demonstrated by several examples, but
especially by that which is mentioned by Titus Livius in his discourse of
Coriolanus. He tells us, that the Nobility of Rome being exasperated against
the people, for that they thought their authority too much increased upon the
creation of their Tribunes; and it happening at that time, that in respect of the
great scarcity of provisions, the State had sent into Sicily for supplies;
Coriolanus being a great adversary to the popular Faction, advised that this
was a fair time to chastise the licentiousness of the people, and to take from
them that power which they had assumed to the prejudice of the Nobility, to
which purpose he persuaded the Senate against distributing the corn. This
counsel coming to the ears of the people, they were so highly incensed, that
they set upon him tumultuously as he came out of the Senate, and had certainly
killed him, had not the Tribunes interposed, and cited him to appear before
them in order to his defense. By which accident it is plain how much it is for
the interest of a Commonwealth, that a legal way be provided to discharge the
choler of the people, which otherwise will be apt to fly to extraordinary
courses, and without doubt produce more mischievous effects: for if a single
Citizen be cut off, (though possible unjustly) it begets little or no disorder
in the Commonwealth, because execution is done without private force, or
foreign assistance, (which are mortal things to a free State) and what is done
by course of Law, and public authority, is neither destructive nor dangerous.
And as to ancient examples, I think this of Coriolanus sufficient; from whence
every man may gather what mischief would have resulted to the Commonwealth of
Rome, had he been cut in pieces by the fury of the people; it would have
created private disgusts; those disgusts jealousies, those jealousies provision
of defense; that combinations; combinations parties; and parties destruction:
but by the interposition of public authority, all these evils were prevented.
We have seen in our time what inconveniences followed in Florence, because the
multitude had not a legal way of spending their indignations against one of
their Citizens. Francesco Valori was Prince of that City, suspected by many
people, as if he designed to make himself absolute, and by his haughtiness and
pride to exceed those limits which the Laws had prescribed: there being in that
Commonwealth no way to prevent it, but by setting up a faction in opposition to
his, he began to look out himself, and to make a party that might defend him.
The people on the other side having no legal way to suppress them, betook
themselves to their Arms. And whereas, if any ordinary way had been open to
have opposed him, his designs had been obviated by his single destruction;
being forced upon an extraordinary, it was effected not only by his, bu^ by the
ruin of many other eminent Citizens. To confirm what we have said, another
instance might be produced in the City in the case of Peter Soderini, which
happened for want of a Law whereby they might impeachany Citizen that aspired
to the Government. There were eight judges only in that commonwealth, which are
not enough to administer justice against a powerful man: in States that are
well constituted, it is necessary there be more; for where they are so few,
their dispatch is but small, and they are corrupted with more ease than where
they are many. If therefore there had been any such way allowed, upon his ill
Government, the Citizens would have formally impeached him, without calling in
an Army of Spaniards; and if his Government had been well, they durst not have
accused him, lest he should have accused them again; and by that means that
emulation would have been prevented which was the cause of so much mischief:
from whence it may be concluded, when ever foreign assistance is called in by
any party in a City, that it proceeds from the ill constitution of that
Government, and that there is no legal way of purging those humors which are
so natural to men; against all which, no remedy is more properly applicable,
than by authorizing several persons of quality and interest to receive
informations: which practice was so well followed in Rome, that in all
dissentions betwixt the Senate and the people, it was never known that either
Senate, or people, or any private Citizen whatever had recourse to foreign
assistance; for having justice at home, what need of fetching it from abroad?
To these Examples aforesaid, we may add another out of Titus Livius, who tells
us, that in Clusia the chief City of the Tuscans, Lucamon having vitiated a
Sister of one Aruns, and Aruns being unable to vindicate her, by reason of the
power of the delinquent, he addressed to the French, who at that time had the
Government of Lombardy, and possessing them with the profitableness of the
Expedition, he prevailed with them to bring an Army to revege him of that
outrage and injury which his Sister had received: and doubtless he would never
have betaken himself to the relief of a foreigner, could he have hoped for
reparation at home. But as liberty of just accusation is great security to a
State, so toleration of calumny is as dangerous on the other side, which we
shall evince in the following Chapter.

CHAP VIII.
Unjust calumnies are no less pernicious to a Commonwealth, than legal
accusations are profitable and good.
THough the valor of Furius Camillus (after he had raised their Siege, and
driven the French from their Leaguer before Rome) was so universally venerable,
that none of the Romans thought it diminution either to their reputation or
dignity to give him precedence; yet Manlius Capitolinus could not brook that so
much honor should be given him, seeing, in his judgment, he had done as much
toward the preservation of the City, and deserved as well, in saving the
Capital, as Camillus had done in the other; and in military experience he
thought himself no way inferior: so that full of envy, and unable to bear the
greatness of his Competitor, finding he could make no impression upon the
Senators, he turned himself to the people, and spread abroad several false
reports against him. Among other things, he puts it into their heads, that the
Treasure which was arised for payment of the French had not been given, but was
continued in the hands of private Citizens; which money, if reassumed, might be
applied to public use, and either lessen the duties, or discharge the debts of
the people. These pretenses had great influence upon the people, insomuch as
they began to talk, to murmur, to meet, to post themselves tumultuously in many
places in the City, which being observed, and thought very dangerous by the
Senate, they created a Dictator to take cognizance of the business, and
restrain the fury of Manlius. The dictator cited Manlius, and appointed him a
day; Manlius appeared, and being environed by the people as the Dictator was by
the Senate, silence being made, the Dictator asked Manlius in whose hands that
great Treasure he spoke of was detained, for he did assure him the Senators
were as desirous to discover it as the people: to which Manlius made no
positive answer, but by way of evasion, replied it was unnecessary (he thought)
to tell them what they knew already as well as he; upon which insolence, the
Dictator commanded him to prison; from whence it may be observed how detestable
such calumniations ought to be, not only in every free City, but in every civil
Society, and with what care and severity they are to be suppressed; and that is
done most commodiously, by allowing freedom of accusation; for as calumny is
pernicious, information is beneficial to a State.

Accusation and calumny differ in this point, that any man may calumniate
another where and when he pleases, without bringing testimony, or any other
circumstance to prove it: but in case of accusation it is quite another thing, a
man must bring his proofs, his witnesses, and other circumstances to make good
his charge. People are legally accused no where but before the Senates, the
Magistrates, or the People: but they are calumniated every where, within doors
and without, in the streets and the marketplace, and there most where there is
least accusation, and the Cities least disposed to receive them. Wherefore he
who would lay the foundation State, ought principally to provide that all
persons might have liberty to inform against any one, without suspicion or
fear; which being solemnly provided, and faithfully observed, his next business
is to secure them against scandals, and the calumniator can have no reason to
complain if he be punished, when there are public places appointed to receive
the accusations of such as are abused; and if in these things particular care
be not taken, great mischiefs will follow; for these kind of aspersions do not
correct, but provoke their fellow Citizens, and those who are accused are not
so much apt to fear the disgrace, as to hate the authors of the reports. In
these cases the Romans had very good Laws, and they stood them in good stead;
but we in Florence having neglected them, have suffered much by it, and he who
peruses the History of our City, will see how subject to calumniations in all
times those Citizens have been, who have employed in its most important
affairs. One is charged with embezling the public treasure; another for being
corrupted, and betraying some public enterprise; a third for ambition, and
commiting one insolence or another, from whence feuds and animosities do arise
on hands; and from thence divisions; from divisions parties; and from parties
destruction. Whereas, if in Florence authority had been allowed for the
accusation of Citizens, many mischiefs had been prevented, which followed for
want of it; for those Citizens who were accused (whether condemned or absolved)
would have not been able to have molested the State; and the impeachments would
have been fewer than the calumniations, because more people would have been
calumniated than accused, in respect that the first was so much the more easy
(as is said hefore) than the other. And these calumnies have advanced some
Citizens to great dignity; for having great adversaries that opposed their
designs, they joined themselves with the people, and making them their friends,
confirmed the ill opinion which they had of their adversaries before. Several
examples might be produced to this purpose, but I shall only instance in one.

The Florentine Army was encamped before Lucca under the Command of Giovanni
Guiccardini their Commissary. By his ill fortune or conduct the Town was not
taken; which of the two soever it was, Giovanni was aspersed, as having been
bribed by the Luccheses, which calumny being propagated by his enemies, netled
Giovanni, and almost brought him to despair; and though, in order to his
justification, he offered to put himself into the hands of the Captain, yet all
was to no purpose; for in that Commonwealth there was no body qualified to
clear him: from hence arose great contentions betwixt Guiccardin's friends,
(who were the greatest part of the Grandees in that City) and those who studied
novelty, which contentions, and others of the like nature, increasing daily
upon their hands, brought that poor Commonwealth into a most deplorable
condition. Manlius therefore spreading these false reports of the Senators
about Rome, was a calumniator, not an accuser; and the Romans in his case gave
manifest instruction how such people are to be punished, that is, that they be
obliged publicly to accuse, and when their charge is made good, that they be
rewarded or encouraged; but when it cannot be proved, that they be punished
like Manlius.

CHAP. IX.
How much a single person is necessary for the establishment of a new
commonwealth, or the reformation of an old.
IT may seem to some, that I have run too far into the Roman History, having
made no mention of the Founders of that Commonwealth, nor of the Orders which
they observed either in matters of Religion, or War. To ease them therefore of
their suspense, who are desirous to hear something to that purpose, I say, that
many perhaps may think it of ill example for the Founder of a State, as Romulus
was, to kill his own Brother, and afterward consent to the death of Titus
Tatius Sabinus, who was chosen his companion in the Government, supposing that
according to that president, any of his Citizens that were ambitious of
Command, might make away their adversaries or competitors, and remove any
obstucle that opposed them; and it were reasonable enough, were it not to be
considered to what end, and upon what motives that murder was committed.

This is to be taken for a maxim, and general rule, that it is impossible for
any Government either to be well founded at first, or will reformed afterward,
unless by a single person, by whose direction all Orders, all Laws are to be
made and promulged. He therefore who is the founder of a Commonwealth, if he
be an honest man, and aims not at his own interest, and the raising of his
Family, more than the advancement of his Country, must endeavor to get the
power into his single hands, nor will any wise man ever accuse him for any
action extraordinary that he shall do in order thereunto; or if the fact be to
be blamed, the effect will excuse it, especially if be good, as it was in
Romulus his case, for it is destructive and pernicious violence that is to be
reprehended, not that which tends to settlement and reformation. He is also to
be so prudent and virtuous, as not to leave the authority which he assumed in
inheritance to another, because men being more prone to evil than good, his
success or may employ that power to the prejudice of the State, which he in his
wisdom made use of to its benefit and advantage.

Moreover, though one be fittest to make Laws, yet when once made, they cannot
hold long, if left upon the shoulders of a single person, but when the care and
execution of them is transferred upon many, and many are concerned to maintain
them, it is much better; for though many be not so proper in laying the
foundations of a Government, because their diversity of opinions keeps them
from discerning what is absolutely for its good; yet when things are once
settled, and they have found it, that very diversity will be a means to preserve
it. And that Romulus was excusable for what he did to his Brother and
Companion, and that what he did was more for the common good than his own
private ambition or revenge, appears by this; that he had no sooner made them
away but, he constituted a Senate, by whose advice he acted in every thing,
reserving to himself only the power of calling them together, and commanding
the Armies when they should resolve of a War: and of this we cannot have better
evidence than that which followed after the expulsion of the Tarquins, there
being nothing innovated or altered by the Romans, only in stead of one
perpetual King, they created two annual Consuls; which shows that Romulus in
his first Institutions aimed rather at the election of a civil and a free, than
an absolute and tyrannical State. Many more examples might be produced to
fortify what is said, as those of Moses, Lycurgus, Solon, and other Founders
of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, who, by assuming a Monarchical authority, were
able to frame and impose such Laws as were for the benefit of the public; but
being so well known, it would be superfluous. I shall add only one, not so
famous perhaps, yet worthy to be considered by those who are desirous to be
good Legislators; and it is this, Agls King of Sparta observing his Citizens
had lost much of their ancient virtue, and by consequence were decayed both in
their power and Empire, imputing it in part to their deviation from the Laws of
Lycurgus, desired very earnestly to reduce them again, but before he could
bring it to perfection he was slain by the Spartan Ephori, as one who designed
to make himself absolute; but Cleomenes succeeding him in the Government,
having the same inclination, and perceiving by some Records and Writings which
Agis had left behind, what was his intention, he found that he could not do his
Country that service any way, but by making himself absolute: for by the
ambition of some persons, he found that he could not do the good which he
designed to the generality, by reason of the malevolence of a few, wherefore he
caused the Ephori, and who-ever else he thought likely to obstruct him, to be
killed, and revived the Laws of Lycurgus, which noble act might have recovered
that State, and have made Cleomenes as venerable as Lycurgus himself, had it
not been for the power of Macedon, and the weakness of other Commonwealths; for
not long after that reformation, being invaded by the Macedonians, it proved
unable to defend it self, and having no body to sustain it, was overcome; and
that just and honorable design was unhappily laid aside. Considering therefore
what has been said, I conclude, that a single person is best for the
institution or regulating of any sort of Government, and that for the death of
Remus and Tatius, Romulus was not to be blamed.

CHAP. X.
As they are to be praised who lay the foundations of any Republic or Kingdom,
so they are to be condemned who set up a Tyranny.
AMong all Excellent and Illustrious men, they are most praise worthy who have
been the chief establishers of Religion and Divine Worship: In the second place
are they who have laid the foundations of any Kingdom or Commonwealth; In the
third, those who having the Command of great Armies have enlarged their own, or
the Dominion of their Country; In the next, Learned Men of all Sciences
according to their several studies and degrees; and last of all (as being
infinitely the greatest number) come the Artificers and Mechanics; all to be
commended as they are ingenious or skilful in their Professions. On the other
side, they are infamous and detestable, who are contemners of Religion,
subverters of Governments, Enemies of Virtue, of Learning, of Art, and in short
of every thing that is useful and honorable to mankind; and of this sort, are
the profane, the seditious, the ignorant, the idle, the debauched, and the
vile. And although Nature has so ordered it, that their is neither wise man nor
fool, nor good man, nor bad, who if it were proposed to him which he would
choose of these two sorts of people, would not prefer that which was to be
preferred, and condemn the other; yet the generality of Mankind deluded by a
false impression of good, and a vain notion of glory, leaving those ways which
are excellent and commendable, either wilfully or ignorantly wander into those
paths which will lead them to dishonor; and whereas to their immortal honor
they might establish a Commonwealth or Kingdom as they please, they run
headlong into a Tyranny, not considering what fame, what glory, what
affection, what security, what quiet and satisfaction of mind they part with,
nor what reproach, scandal, hatred, danger and disquiet they incur. It is
impossible but all people, (whether of private condition in the Commonwealth,
or such as by their Fortune or Virtue have arrived to be Princes) if they have
any knowledge in History, and the passages of old, would rather choose (if
private persons) to be Scipio's than Caesar's; and (if Princes) to be
Agesilaus, Timolion and Dion, than Nabis, Phalaris, or Dionysius; because they
must find the one highly celebrated and admired, and the other as much abhorred
and condemned; they must find Timoleon, and the rest to have as much interest
and authority in their Countries, as Dionysius or Phalaris had in theirs, and
much more security. Nor let any man deceive himself with Caesar's reputation,
finding him so exceedingly eminent in History, for those who have cried him up,
were either corrupted by his fortune, or terrified by his power, for whilst
the Empire continued, it was never permitted that any man should speak any
thing against him, and doubtless had Writers had their liberty, they could have
said as much of him as of Cataline, and Caesar is so much the worst of the two,
by how much it is worse to effect and perpetrate an ill thing, than to design
it; and this they might judge by what is said of his adversary Brutus, for not
daring to speak downright of Caesar, by reason of his power, by kind of
reverse, they magnified his Enemy: After Rome also was grown to be an Empire,
and the Government in the hands of a single person, it may be observed how much
more happy and secure those Emperors were who lived like good Princes,
according to the dictate of the Laws, than those who lived otherwise; for
Titus, Nerva, Trajanus, Adrianus, Antoninus, and Marcus, had no need of
Praetorian bands, nor multitude of Legions to defend them, their own excellent
deportment, the benevolence of the people, and the affection of the Senate,
saved them that charge: It will appear likewise how to Caligula, Nero,
Vitellius, and several other Tyrannical Emperors; their Eastern and Western
Armies were not sufficient to secure them against the Enemies, which their
irregularity and ill manners had contracted; The History of which persons, if
well considered, would enable any Prince to distinguish betwixt the ways of
Honor and Infamy, of Security and Fear: For of XXVI Emperors betwixt Caesar
and Maximinus, XVI were murdered, and but X died in their beds; and though some
of those who were slain might possibly be good, (as Pertinax, and Galba) yet
they were murdered by reason of the corruption and ill discipline which their
Predecessors had left in the Army; and if among those who died naturally, there
were any Tyrannical, (as Severus) it is to be imputed to his great Courage and
Fortune, which are two things very seldom Concomitant in one man, it is legible
likewise in the same History upon what Basis and foundation a Monarchy must be
built, to make it solid, and permanent; for all those Emperors who succeeded by
hereditary right were ill men, except Titus only, and those who came in by
Election were good, as Nerva and the four which succeeded him; but when the
Empire became wholly Hereditary, it ran furiously to destruction. Let the times
therefore from Nerva to Marcus be displayed before your Prince, and let him
compare them which went before with those which came after, and then make his
choice when they would have been born, or when he would have been Sovereign; He
will find when good men were at the Helm, the Prince safe in the security of
his Subjects; Peace and Justice flourishing in the world; The Senate in
Authority; The Magistrates in Esteem; Rich men enjoying their Estates; Nobility
and Virtue Exalted; and all things quiet and well; No rancour; No
licentiousness; No corruption; No ambition to be found; the times were golden;
Every man enjoyed his opinion, and defended it as he pleased; In a word, He
will find the world triumphing in felicity, The Prince happy in the reverence
and affection of the people; and the people safe in the generosity of their
Prince. If then the Reigns of the other Emperors be contemplated, they will
appear full of commotion, discord, and sedition, assassinations in Peace;
Cruelty in War; Many Princes murdered; many Foreign, many domestic
embroilments; All Italy afflicted; and all its Cities destroyed; Rome burnt;
The Capitol by its own Inhabitants demolished; The ancient Temples desolate;
Religious Ceremonies profaned; and the whole City full of Adulteries; The Sea
covered with Exiles, and the Rocks with blood; Infinite Cruelties and
Barbaris^^s committed daily in the City; And Nobility, Riches, Honor, and
especially Virtue, grown to be Capital offenses. Informers and Calumniators
will be found to be rewarded; Servants instigated against their Masters;
Children against their Parents; and those few who were so unhappy as to have no
Enemies; to be destroyed by their Friends; Then it will appear what mighty
obligations Rome, and Italy, and the whole world had to Caesar; and doubtless
if the Prince be endued with the lest spark of humanity or good nature, he will
detest the imitation of the bad, and be inflamed with an ardent propensity to
the good. All which things considered, that Prince certainly which aims at
glory, and reputation in the world should desire a Government, where the
manners of his Subjects are corrupted and depraved, not to subvert and destroy
it like Caesar, but to rectify and restore it like Romulus, than which the
Heavens, cannot confer, nor man propose to himself greater honor. And if a
Prince who would regulate and reform a City, cannot do it, without depositing
his Authority; In that case he is excusable in some measure, if he dispenses;
but where he can retain the one, and accomplish the other, he is altogether
unpardonable; they therefore to whom the Heavens are so propitious as to
present such an opportunity, are to consider that they have two ways before
them, one leading to security whilst they live, and an honorable memory when
they are dead, the other to continual troubles here, and perpetual infamy
hereafter.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Religion and Ceremonies of the Romans.
THough Rome should have been founded by Romulus, and owe him (as his Daughter)
for her Birth, and Education; yet the Heavens foreseeing that the Constitutions
of Romulus would not be sufficient for so great an Empire, put it into the
heart of the Roman Senate, to create Numa Pompilius for his Successor, to the
end that what was left defective by the first, might be completed by the
latter. Numa finding the people martial and fierce, and being desirous by the
Arts of Peace to reduce them to civil obedience, he betook himself to Religion,
as a thing absolutely necessary to the maintenance of civil policy; and he
ordered things, so that for many ages together never was the fear of God so
eminently conspicuous as in that Commonwealth, which was a great promotion to
whatever was designed either by the Senate or Princes. And he who shall peruse
the infinite actions of that City collectively, or of several Romans in
particular will find those Citizens more tender of falsifying an Oath, than of
violating the Laws, judging an offense against God more heinous, than an
offense against Men, and God more able to punish it: Of this we have manifest
Evidence in the Examples of Scipio, and Manlius Torquatus, for after the defeat
which Hanibal had given the Romans at Cannas, the people tumultuating, and many
of them assembling in great fear to consider of their condition; They resolved
among themselves to leave Italy, and transplant into Sicily. Scipio having
notice, repaired to them immediately, and coming in suddenly among them with
his Sword drawn, he forced them to recant, and take a peremptory Oath not to
abandon their Country. Lucius Manlius Father to Titus Manlius (who was
afterward called Torquatus) was impeached by Marcus Pomponius a Tribune of the
people. Before the day arrived for the hearing of the Father, the Son coming to
the Tribune and threatening to kill him, unless he would swear to withdraw his
accusation, he forced him to his Oath, and he performed as he had sworn; and so
those Citizens who could not be retained by either the love of their Country,
or Laws; were kept at home by an Oath which they took upon force: and the
Tribune laid by his hatred to the Father, passed by the insolence of the Son,
and neglected the reflection it would have upon his own honor, to be punctual
in his Oath; which proceeded from nothing but those principles of Religion
which Nama had distused. And surely it will be found by whoever considers the
Roman History, how useful a thing Religion was to the governing of Armies, to
the uniting of the people, to the keeping men good, and to the deterring them
from being bad; so that should it fall into dispute whether Rome was most
obliged to Romulus or Numa, I am of opinion, Numa would have the pre-eminence,
because where Religion is fixed Military Discipline is easily introduced; but
where Religion is wanting, Discipline may be brought in with difficulty, but
never in perfection. It is to be seen likewise that for the constituting a
Senate, and establishing of Laws both Military and Civil, Romulus had no need
to pretend Divine Authority; but with Numa it was otherwise, he was of
necessity to pretend to it, and thereupon gave out that he had private
Conference with a Nymph, who dictated to him what he was to prescribe to the
people, and all was, because he had a mind to introduce new Laws and Customs
into that City, which he thought his own private authority would never effect.
And certainly never any man brought in new Laws, or set up any Doctrine
extraordinary, but with pretense of Religion; because otherwise they would
never have been admitted; for a man may be wise and know many things are good,
and yet want reasons and arguments to convince other people; wherefore to
remove that difficulty, prudent men do make that always their pretense, and
Solon, Lycurgus, and several others who had the same design, practiced the
same. The people (then) admiring the goodness and wisdom of Numa, submitted in
all things; True it is the devotion of the age, and ignorance of the people
contributed much, for thereby he was able to impress them with what new form he
thought good; and questionless, he that would establish a Commonwealth at this
day, would find it more easy among the rude people of the Mountains who have
not been acquainted with Civility, than among such as have been educated in
Cities, where their civility was corrupted; like rude unpolished Marble which
is more readily carved into a Statue, than what has been mangled already by
some bungling workman. So that all things considered, I conclude, That the
Religion introduced by Numa, was one of the first causes of that Cities
felicity, because Religion produced good Laws, good Laws good Fortune, and good
Fortune a good End in whatever they undertook. And as strictness in Divine
Worship, and Conscience of Oaths, are great helps to the advancement of a State
so contempt of the one, and neglect of the other are great means of its
destruction. Take away Religion, and take away the foundation of Government;
for though perhaps the goodness and fear of their Prince may sustain it for
some time, and supply the want of Religion in his subjects; yet because he is
mortal, and possibly but very short lived, that Kingdom can hardly outlive the
virtue of its Governor: Wherefore those States which depend only upon the piety
of their Princes, are of little duration, for commonly one dies with the other,
and the virtue of the Father seldom revives in the Son, as Dante has said very
wisely, Rade volte discende per li rami
L' tunn ana probitate, et questo vuole
Quel che la da, perch da lai si chiami.
Virtue's but seldom to the branches spread,
He who bestows't, has in his wisdom said,
Let him that wants, come to the fountainhead.


Things being thus, it is not sufficient for a Commonweal thor Kingdom to have
a Prince who Governs it wisely whilst he lives, but he must lay his foundation
so, as it may outlive him, and flourish when he is in his grave; and though
rude, and uncultivated people are more susceptible of new Laws, or new
Doctrines; yet men that are civil, and presume more upon their Education are
not altogether impenatrable. The people of Florence thought themselves no
fools, and they had a good opinion of their breeding; nevertheless they
suffered themselves to be deluded by Friar Girolamo Savonarola into persuasion
that he had Conference with God. A person of his gravity is not to be mentioned
but with reverence, and therefore whether true, or not true, I will not
determine, only this I shall say, many believed him, who never saw any thing
extraordinary to induce them; his Life, his Doctrine, the subject of his
discoursing being in their thoughts enough to convince them. Let no man
therefore despair of what another man has attained, for men (as I said in my
Preface) are born, live, and dye, in the same method as formerly.

CHAP. XII.
How necessary for the preservation of a State it is, that Religion be in
esteem, and how much Italy has suffered for want of it, by means of the Church
of Rome.
THose Princes and Commonwealths who would keep their Governments entire and
incorrupt, are above all things to have a care of Religion and its Ceremonies,
and preserve them in due veneration, for in the whole world there is not a
greater sign of imminent ruin, than when God and his Worship are despised.
This is easily understood by observing upon what foundation the Religion is
placed where every man is born. The Religion of the Gentiles ran much upon the
answers of Oracles, upon Divinations, and Soothsaying, upon which all the rest
of their Sacrifices, Rights, and Ceremonies did depend; for they did not doubt
but the same thing that could presage your fortune (be it good, or be it bad)
could as easily confer it; and therefore they built their Temples, they made
their Sacrifices, they offered up their prayers, and used all other Ceremonies
that might signify their veneration; for the Oracles of Delos, ^he Temple of
Jupiter Ammon, and such other things had a strange influence upon people, and
kept them in most wonderful devotion; but afterward when they began to speak
according to the interest or directions of great persons, and their partiality
began to be discovered; the people grew incredulous, and prone to all kind of
disturbance: A Prince therefore or Commonwealth ought most accurately to
regard, that his Religion be well founded, and then his Government will last,
for there is no surer way than to keep that good and united. Whatever therefore
occurs that may any way be extended to the advantage and reputation of the
Religion which they design to establish (how uncertain or frivolous soever it
may seem to themselves) yet by all means they are to be propagated and
encouraged, and the wiser the Prince, the more sure it is to be done; This
course having been observed by wise men, has produced the opinion of Miracles,
which are celebrated even in those Religions which are false; for let their
Original be as idle as they please, a wise Prince will be sure to set them
forward, and the Princes authority recommends them to every body else. Of these
miracles, there were many in Rome, as at the sacking of Urii, some of the Roman
Soldiers entering into the Temple of Juno, accosting her Image, and asking it
Vis venire Roman, will you come to Rome; To some of them she seemed to beckon
by way of consent, and, others fancied she said Yes; For those men being more
than ordinary religious (as Titus Livius infers from the devotion, and
reverence, and quietness wherewith they entered) they fancied they heard that
answer, which it is possible they expected before; and Camillus and the other
Magistrates of the City promoted their belief: And if this diligent care in
Divine Worship were regarded by Christian Princes according to the Precepts and
Instructions of him that gave it at first, the States and Commonwealths of
Christendom would be much more happy and firm: Nor can any thing portend the
ruin of our Church with more certainty, than that those who are nearest the
Church of Rome, (which is the head of our Religion) should have less Religion
than other people: and he who should consider the present practice, with the
primitive foundation, would find that either utter destruction, or some great
judgment was hanging over our heads. And for as much as some are of opinion,
that the felicity and welfare of Italy depends upon the Church of Rome, I shall
set down some few reasons to the contrary, which I have framed to my self, two
of which are in my judgment unanswerable: One is that by the corrupt example of
that Court, that Province has lost all its Religion, and all its Devotion,
which has been followed by many inconveniences, and disorders; for as the
Religiousness of the people presuppose all well, so where they are wicked, it
betokens the contrary; so then, we Italians have this Obligation to the Church
and its Ministers, that by their means we are become Heathenish and
Irreligious; besides another (little less pernicious) and that is, that we are
grown divided and factious, which must of necessity be our ruin, because never
was any Province happy or united, unless under the obedience of one
Commonwealth, or one Prince, as France and Spain at this time: and the reason
is, because Italy is not upon the same terms, as having no one Republic or
Commonwealth to govern it, but the Church, and though the Pope has assumed a
Temporal as well as Spiritual jurisdiction, yet he was never so courageous or
powerful as to possess himself of all, and make himself Prince; nor was he ever
so weak, but upon any apprehension of losing his Temporal Dominion, he could
call in some Foreign Potentate to defend him against any man who was grown too
formidable; and this has been seen anciently in many Examples, as when by
assistance of Charles the Great, he repelled the Lombards who in a manner hacd
made themselves Masters of all Italy; and when again in our days he retrenched
the power of the Venetians by the help of the French, after which he drove out
the French by the succor of the Swizzers. The Church therefore being neither
so strong as to conquer all Italy, nor so weak as to suffer it to be overrun
by any body else, has been the occasion that it never fell into the hands of
one person, but has been cantonized into several Principalities, by which means
it has been so weak and disunited, that it has been not only exposed as a prey
to the power of the Barbarians, but to every one that thought good to invade it
which is an unhappiness we Italians owe only to the Church: If any man suspects
what is said, and would be experience inform himself of the truth, it would be
necessary he should be so potent as to transplant the Court of Rome and all its
Authority in Italy into the Territories of the Swizzers, who are the only
people at this day which live either as to their Ecclesiastical or Military,
Discipline, according to the Model of the Ancients, and then he would quickly
find that the wickedness and depravity of that Court, would produce more
confusion and disorder in that Country than ever befell it by any accident
before.

CHAP. XXIII.
How the Romans pretended Religion many times to regulate their City, to
prosecute their Wars, and to pacify their tumults.
ANd I hold it not extravagant to produce two or three Examples in which the
Romans made use of their Religion both in the regulation of their City, and the
prosecution of their Wars; and although in Titus Livius they be very frequent,
yet I shall content my self with these.

After the people of Rome, had created their Tribunes with consular power and
all of them (except one) from among the Plebeans; there happening that year, a
furious Plague, a desperate Famine, and other Prodigies besides, the Nobility
in the next creation of Tribunes took advantage of that occasion, and pretended
that the Gods were incensed against the people, for that they had debased the
Majesty of the Empire, and that there was no remedy to appease them but to
reduce the Election of the Tribunes to its primitive institution; upon which
the people were so frighted, they chose all their Tribunes that year, out of
the Patricii. It was the same case in the taking of Veii The Romans had been
before it ten years, and no great lekelihood of carrying it; but the Tenth, the
Lake of Albin being miraculously swelled; so as to drown a good part of the
Country, the great Officers of the Army observing their Soldiers weary of the
Siege, and impatient to be at home; feigning to have consulted the Oracles,
they pretended that they had received this answer, That Veii should be taken
that year that Albin overflowed; which answer reflecting upon their Devotion,
the Soldiers reassumed their Courage, continued the Siege, and ( Camillus being
chosen Dictator) carried the Town; and thus you may see how the Romans made use
of their Religion to encourage their Army against the fatigues and dangers of a
tedious Leaguer, and to fright the people from entrenching upon the privileges
of the Nobility in the Election of their Tribunes; without which pretense it
would have been a hard matter to have persuaded either the one or the other.
There was another example to the same purpose, Terentillus, a Tribune of the
people, would needs make a Law (which was called Lex Terentilla, and shall be
mentioned hereafter) contrary to the interest, and inclination of the Senate.
The Senate resolved to oppose it, and the best means they could think of, was
pretense of Religion; of which they made use two ways; they ordered the Books
of the Sybils to be looked over, and this answer to be returned, That that very
year the City would be in great danger of losing its liberty, unless civil
Sedition was prevented; which artifice, (notwithstanding it was discovered by
the Tribunes) put the people into such a fright, they grew cool in the
business, and refused to stand by them. After this, they made use of the same
pretense another time; Appius Herdonius having got together of Slaves and
Exiles to the number of Four thousand men, seized upon the Capitol in the
night, and brought such a terror upon the City, it might very well be feared if
the Aequi and the Volsci (perpetual Enemies to the Romans) had taken their
opportunity and marched to Rome, they would have gone near to have mastered it:
However the Tribunes persisted, and nothing could serve their turns, but the
Lex Terentilla must be promulged; for they affirmed the Stories of being
invaded, were but suggestions and fallacies, and not one word of them true:
Hereupon one Publius Rubetius (a grave Citizen, and of good authority among
them) came forth of the Senate, and partly by fair words and partly by foul,
remonstrating the danger of the City, and the unseasonableness of their
demands, he played his part so well, that the Constrained the people to take an
Oath of fidelity ^o the Consul; and in testimony of their integrity, the people
ran to their Arms, and recovered the Capital from Herdonius; but Publius
Valerius their Consul being slain in the Conflict, Titus Quintius was chosen
immediately in his place; who to keep the populace employed, and leave them no
time to think of their Law Terentilla, Commanded them out of Town forthwith
against the Volsci, alleging that the Oath which they had taken to be true to
the Consul, obliged them to follow him; and though the Tribunes opposed it, and
objected that that Oath extended no further than to the Consul that was dead;
nevertheless Livy tell us, that such was the peoples tenderness and veneration
for Religion, that they chose rather to follow the Consul, than to strain and
presume upon their Consciences, giving this reason for it.

Nondum haec, quae nunc tenet seculum, negligentia deum venerat, nec,
interpretando sibi quisque jusjurandum, and leges aptas faciebat.

The neglect of the Gods, which has overspread this Age, was not then come to
that height, nor did everyman interpret his Oaths, and accommodate his Laws, to
his own interest and advantage.

Upon which the Tribunes perceiving their danger and that if they persist, they
should run a hazard of being utterly extinguished; they came to an agreement
with the Consul, received his Orders, obliged themselves not to insist upon the
Lex Terentilla for a Twelvemonth, in case the Consuls for the same time would
forbear drawing out the people. And thus you see how by pretense of Religion,
the Senate overcame a difficulty, which without it, it could never have done.

CHAP. XIV.
The Romans were wont to interpret their Auspices with accommodation to their
own pleasures and designs; and when at any time they were forced to transgress
they managed it wisely, and pretended to be very precise; and if any body
rashly despised them, he was sure to be punished.
AMong the Gentiles, Auguries were a great part of their Religion (as I have
said elsewhere) and they contributed not a little to the well being of the
Roman Commonwealth; for which reason the Romans had them in particular care,
above any other Ordinance, and made use of them in the creation of Consuls, in
the undertaking of Enterprises, in drawing out their Armies, in their Battles
and Engagements, and in every other business of importance, whether Military or
Civil; nor would they ever begin an Expedition, till they had possessed the
Soldiers that the Gods had promised them success; Among the several Orders of
Auspices, they had one called the Pullarii, who were to give their presages
before ever they fought with their Enemy: If the pullen, over which they had
inspection, Eat, it was a good Omen, and they might with confidence engage; if
they did not Eat, It was an ill sign, and they were obliged to forbear:
Nevertheless, when reason told them their Enterprises were practicable, they
went roundly about them, though perhaps their Auspices were averse, but acted
with great nicety and cunning, that it might not seem done in defiance of
Religion: This was practiced by Papirius the Consul before his Battle with the
Samnites after which they never recovered. For being drawn up with his Army
against the Samnites, with all visible advantage, and being willing to fall on,
he commanded the Pullarii to try their Experiment; the Chickens refusing to
peck, was a great trouble to the chief of the Pullarii, who observed the great
alacrity of the Soldiers, and the great confidence of the General; that an
occasion therefore of so signal a Victory might not be taken from the Army, he
returned answer to the Consul that the Omen was good; Papirius put his Men
immediately into Battalia, and advanced against the Enemy; but some of the
Pullarii having told it up and down among the Soldiers, that the Pullets did
not eat, it came to the ears of Spurius Papirius, Nephew to the Consul, who in
great have advertising his Uncle, received this answer, Spurius be you
diligent, and observe your Orders; to my self and my Army the Auspicia are
good; if the Pullarius has told me false, the misfortune will be to him; and
that the event night correspond to his Prognostic, he commanded the Pullarii
to be placed in the front of the Battle; His Commands being executed, it happened
by accident as they were advancing to the fight, the chief of the Pullaru was
killed by a dart from one of the Roman Soldiers, which being told to the
Consul, Now (said he) all will be well, the Gods are appeased, and the blood of
the Author has atton'd for his lie; and so by a discreet accommodation of his
designs to the Auspices, he went on to the Combat, his Army taking no notice
that he had violated their Religion. Had Appius Pulcher been so ingenious in
Sicily in the first Punick War, it had fared better with him when he came home,
but being to fight the Carthaginian Army, he consulted the Pullarii, who
informing him that the Pullen would not eat, We will see then (said he) if they
will drink, and caused them to be thrown into the Sea: and coming afterward to
an Engagement, his Army was defeated, himself condemned at his return, and
Papirius advanced, not so much because one had prevailed, and the the other was
beaten, as because one had prudently evaded the Omen, and the other rashly
defied it: and these Auguries were invented for no other end, but that the
Soldiers might go to the fight with more confidence and alacrity; for their
alacrity was observed to contribute much to their success; and this practice
was so fortunate to the Romans, that foreign Governments began to make use of
it; as I shall show by one Example in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XV.
How the Samnites in the extremity of their affairs, as their last refuge, had
recourse to Religion.
THe Samnites had long War with the Romans, fought several Battles with them,
and in the last fight in Tuscany, were so utterly broken, that their Army was
destroyed, their chief Officers slain, and the Tuscans, Gauls, and Umbri,
(their allies) incapable of giving them any further assistance; so that Livy
tells us, Nec suis, nec externis viribus jam stare poterant, tamen bello non
abstinebant, adeo ne infeliciter quidem defensae libertatis taoedebat and
vinci, quam non tent are victoriam Malebant. That though they were reduced to
such a condition, That they could neither support themselves by their own
strength, nor the supplies of their Friends, yet they continued the War; so
that the unhappiness of their defense could not discourage them, but they chose
rather to be conquered, than not to try for the Victory. Hereupon knowing that
no Victory is to be expected, where the Soldier is diffident; and that nothing
enhanses them like a Religious opinion; as their last effort, they concluded
(by the Ministry of Ovius Paccius their Priest) to revive an old Ceremony,
which they did in this manner; Altars being erected, and solemn Sacrifice made,
betwixt the flaming Altar, and the bones of the Victims, the Officers having
first sworn never upon any distress whatsoever to abandon the fight; the
Soldiers were called over one by one, and in the same place (before several
Centurions with their naked Swords in their hands appointed to that purpose)
required to swear, first, that they would not deride any thing that they should
either hear or see; after which, with execrable words, and Verses full of
horror, they caused them to take their Oaths to be ready at the Command of
their Generals, never to fly, and to kill any of their fellows that offered to
turn his back: and if ever they broke them, they imprecated a judgment upon
themselves, and their race. Some of them being scrupulous, and unwilling to
swear, were killed upon the place, which struck such terror into the rest, that
none of them refused. And that this Ceremony might be performed with more
magnificence, there being 40000 Men in the field, half of them were clothed in
white, with Plumes of feathers upon their Helmets, in which posture they
encamped not far from Aquilonia; Papirius was sent against them, and in his
Speech to his Soldiers, he had this Expression, Non enim Crist as vulnera
facere, and picta, at* aurata scuta, transire Romanum pilum. For their feathers
made no wounds, nor could the paint or glittering of their Shields protect them
against the darts of the Romans. And to take off the opinion from his Soldiers,
that the solemnity and Nature of their Oath, might make the Enemy desperate; he
told them, That that would be rather a terror, than an encouragement to them
when they came to consider that by their own folly they had brought themselves
in danger of the Gods, the Romans, and their Comerades. In short the Samnites
wear beaten, the Roman virtue, and the memory of their own frequent misfortunes
prevailing against all the forced courage which either their Oath or their
Religion could give them. Nevertheless their sense of it was visible, seeing
they made use of it as their last remedy, when they had no other hopes to
recover their spirits.

This might possibly have been better brought in among my foreign discourses,
but depending upon one of the ancientest and most important Ceremonies of the
Roman Commonwealth, lest I should divide my matter, and give too much occasion
to look back, I thought it not improper to insert it in this place.

CHAP. XVI.
A people accustomed to the dominion of a Prince, though by accident they may
acquire their liberty, yet it is with great difficulty, if they maintain it.
IF the Records of ancient History will serve our turn, it is manifest by many
examples, that a people born and bred up in subjection to a Prince, cannot
without great difficulty preserve its liberty, if by any accident it attains
it, as the Romans did upon the expulsion of the Tarquins and not without
reason; for the people is like a wild beast, (which, though naturally fierce,
disposed to live in the woods, and to find out dens and converts to conceal it
self) yet having been always brought up as it were in prison and servitude, if
by accident it breaks its bonds and escapes out into the field, it is in a
maze, knows not whither to run, where to sustain, or where to conceal it self,
as having been accustomed to bondage and confinement; by which means, if worth
the looking after, it is easily recovered. It is the same with a people which
has lived always in subjection, who, understanding nothing of public offense
or defense, and knowing as little of Princes as Princes do of them, are with
the greatest ease imaginable reduced to a yoke which is commonly more grievous
than what they escaped from before; and this happens to them where they are not
totally debauched (for where the Mass is corrupted, they cannot subsist a
moment): I speak now of those where the malignity is not so diffused, but that
there are still left more good men than bad; in which case another difficulty
does likewise occur, and that is, whenever the yoke of tyrranny is shaken off,
and liberty set up, it follows continually that many enemies are created, whose
interest it is to subvert it, and no friends made that shall have any advantage
by supporting it. By enemies I mean all those privado's and favorites of
Princes who have enjoyed the perferments and wealth of their Master, and cannot
but be disgusted to find themselves dispossessed; wherefore they are constantly
ready to take any occasion of restoring their old Prince, that they themselves
might be restored to their authority and employment. And for friends whose
interest it is that (upon the shaking off their Tyrant) their liberty should be
preserved, they are not to be expected, because in free States, honors and
offices are conferred upon such as by their virtue, some great atcheivment for
the benefit of the Commonwealth, or some other honorable action have seemed to
deserve them; and when a man receives no more than what he thinks he has
deserved, he ascribes it to his own merits rather than to the liberality of the
State, and holds himself not obliged. Besides, the common utility resulting
from a free State, though it be in their power, it is not at all in their
knowledge; for who is it that considers, or takes care that every man enjoys
quietly what God has given him; that their wives be not dishonored, their
children abused, nor their fellows oppressed? For who is it that will think
himself bound to any man for doing him no wrong? and things being so, a free
State newly acquired, never creates such friends as will be half so solicitous
for its conservation, as those enemies who have been dispossessed of their
fortunes and preferment* will be to undermine it, and restore their old Master
again: and if it be enquired what course is to be taken against the
inconveniences and disorders which follow thereupon; there is not a more
efficacious, safer, and more necessary remedy, than to kill the Sons of Brutus,
who (as History tells us) entered into a conspiracy against the State, with
other young Gentlemen of Rome, for no other reason but because they could not
be so loose and licentious under the Consuls as under the Kings; as if their
freedoms were incompatible, and the liberty of the people was servitude to
them: wherefore he who proposes to govern a people, whether by the way of
Monarchy or Republic and does not secure himself of those who are adverse to
the change, must never think to effect, or at least to enjoy it long: and on
the other side, it is convenient he should know the infelicity of those Princes
who cannot secure their Dominion without murder and blood; by which means the
multitude is incensed, and become mortally their enemies: he who has but few
enemies may secure it the better; but where the multitude is provoked, no
security is to be had; and the more cruelty is used, the weaker the Government;
so that when all is done the surest remedy is to indulge the people, and make
them your friends. And now (though I may seem something confused and
immethodical in speaking sometimes of a Prince, and then of a Republic) I
shall take the liberty to do it here briefly, that I may have no occasion
hereafter. A Prince therefore who, by usurping upon the liberties of the
people, has made them his enemies, (if he desires to reconcile himself) is
above all things to consider what the people affect, and he shall find it to
consist principally in two things; one is, revenge upon those who have been
instrumental in their slavery; and the other is restitution of their liberty.
In the first the Prince may gratify them fully, in the second but in part. Of
the first we have an exact instance. Clearchus Governor of Heraclia being
banished for his tyranny, a controversy betwixt the Nobility and the Commons
happening afterward in that Town, it fell out, that the Nobility finding
themselves the weaker, addressed to Clearchus, and having entered into
confederacy with him, they gave him admission and overcoming the people, he
took away their liberties. But Clearchus perceiving himself in the clutches of
the Nobility, and not only subject to their insolence, (which was neither to be
satiated nor corrected) but to the rage and fury of the multitude, which could
by no means digest his encroachments upon their liberty, he resolved at one
blow to rid himself of his Grandees, and reconcile himself to the people, and
taking his opportunity, he cut off all his Nobility with great satisfaction to
the rest. The other thing which they desire with so much favor is restitution
of their liberty in which the Prince cannot totally comply without degrading
himself: he is therefore to examine upon what grounds the people are so fond of
it, and he will find that some few indeed are zealous for their liberty, in
hopes of office and preferment; but the greatest part desire it only to be
secure against oppression, and to live comfortably, and at ease. For in all
Governments, whether Republic or Monarchical, forty or fifty men go away with
all the commands and offices of importance, which number being small, it is no
hard matter for a Prince to secure himself against them, by cutting them off,
or by such addition to their former advantages as may in some measure oblige
them.

The rest, whose aim is only to live quietly, are easily satisfied by
constituting such Laws and Ordinances as may make the power of the Prince
consistant with the security of the people. If a Prince does this, and be
observed upon no accident whatever to violate their Laws, the people will
quickly be contented, and believe themselves safe. And of this the Kingdom of
France is an example; being quiet, and at peace, because the Kings are bound by
innumerable Laws, which comprehend the security of the Subject; for by the
first institution of that Monarchy, the Kings have the disposition of their
Revenue, and the management of their Armies, but in every thing else they are
circumscribed by the Laws. That Prince therefore, or Commonwealth, which at its
first erection secures not it self, is obliged to do it at the first
opportunity, as the Romans did when they murdered the Sons of Brutus, and he
that slips it will repent when it is too late: for the people of Rome (not yet
entirely corrupted) having recovered their liberty, it was sufficient to
maintain it, that they made away the Bruti, and extinguished the Tarquins,
which otherwise was not to have been done, had the whole mass and body of the
people been debauched, as I shall show in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XVII.
A people wholly corrupted in their manners, may possibly recover their
liberty, but they will find insuperable difficulty to maintain it.
HAd not Kings been expelled as they were in Rome, that City, in my opinion,
must of necessity have declined, and its ancient virtue and the authority been
lost; for if the corruption of those Kings be considered, had it been
propagated but to the third succession* it would easily have diffused it self
among the people; and that being infected, nothing could have preserved the
City, much less have restored it to its former vigor and reputation; but the
trunk being entire, and the distemper only in the head; by taking off that, the
members were capable of being preserved. and their liberty recovered. And this
may be laid down as a positive truth, that a City accustomed to the dominion of
a Prince (if the manners of the people be corrupted) can never make it self
free, though the Prince and his whole race be extinguished; for some new Lord
or other will always spring up, unless by accident the courage and fortune of
some good Citizen concurs to its preservation; and even then its liberty will
be continued no longer than the life of that person; as it happened in Syracuse,
which remained free during the lives of Dion and Timoleon, (though in different
times) but when they were dead, it relapsed, and fell under the same tyranny as
before: but the most evident example of all was in Rome which City having
turned out the Tarquins, found out a way of setting up, and maintaining their
liberty a long time; yet when Coesar was slain, and Caligula, Nero: and the
whole race of the Caesar's extirpated; the Romans were so far from maintaining
it, that they could not so much as introduce the least form or appearance of
liberty; and the reason of that diversity in the same City was no other, but
because in the time of the Tarquins the people were not generally so vicious as
afterward in the reign of Caligula and Nero: for at the expulsion of the
Tarquins, to possess the people then against tyranny, it was sufficient to
tender them an oath, by which they engaged never to admit single person again
in Rome: whereas afterward, upon the death of Caesar and the rest, neither the
authority nor rigor of Brutus, with all his Legions in the East was able to
dispose the people to the assertion of that liberty which so happily had been
set up by the first of Brutus his name. So strangely had the Faction of Marius
diffused their poison among the Commons, of which Caesar being head, he had
opportunity of blinding the people, and coaxing them into servitude so slily,
they could not perceive the yoke into which they were thrusting their necks.
Though this example of the Romans be pregnant enough, yet it is not brought in
for any want in our own times. For in Naples and Milan the manners of the
people being totally debauched, nothing could do, no opportunity could restore
them to a condition of liberty. It Is true, upon the death of Philip Visc^nti,
the Milaneses attempted, but they could never effect it. For which reason it
was very happy for the Romans that their Kings discovered their depravity so
soon; for by that means they were driven out before their wickedness could
dilate, and spread it self among the people; which if it had done, the troubles
and tumults which succeeded thereupon had never had so good end, as to make
rather for the advantage than prejudice of the City: from whence it may be
inferred, that where the multitude is not corrupt, tumults and disorders do no
very great mischief; where it is corrupt, Laws may be well constituted and
provided, and ye do no good; unless executed by some person so severely, that
the people are compelled to observe them, and by strict observation to become
good; which is a thing I can neither say has happened hitherto, or promise it
ever will. For it is clear, (as I said before) that a City declining, upon the
corruption of the Mass, can never recover, unless it be by the virtue and
magnanimity of some active Citizen, who takes the administration of Justice
into his own hands, and sees every thing faithfully performed, and even then,
that good man is no sooner in his grave, but the people are in their old
servitude again. Thus it fell out with the Thebans; Epaminondas, by his virtue
and conduct, enabled them to keep up a form of a Common wealth whilst he was
alive, but, alas, at his death it was quickly dissolved; the reason is, because
no man is sufficiently long lived, to reclaim a City that has been long
accustomed to licentiousness, and to reduce it to be good. So that though it
happens to have such a good man among them, and he lives a long time; nay
though there be two successions of good men, if the third (as I said before) be
defective, all goes to wrack, it must necessarily be ruined, unless by many
dangers, and great effusion of blood it happens to be preserved; because that
corruption which renders it so unapt and indisposed to a free life, proceeds
from the great inequality in that City and to reduce things to an equality,
extraordinary ways must be used which few people know, and fewer will take, as
shall be shown more particularly in another place.

CHAP. XVIII.
A corrupt City having made it self free, how its liberty may be maintained;
and not having made it self, how its liberty may be procured.
I Think I shall not be extravagant, if to what has been said already, I add
another quaery Whether, in a corrupt City, a free State may be maintained (if
by any accident it be set up); or, if there be no such thing already, how it is
to be obtained? I answer, both of them are hard; and though a certain rule
cannot be prescribed, (unless we knew the degrees of its corruption);
nevertheless, it being good that every thing be fairly discust, this question
shall not be suffered to pass.

I shall presuppose, that the City of which I speak is corrupt in extremity,
and in that case the difficulty increases with proportion; for no Laws nor
Customs can restrain an universal depravity; because, as good Customs cannot
subsist without good Laws, so good Laws cannot be executed without good
Customs: besides, the Laws which are made in the minority and innocence of a
Commonwealth, are not suitable or efficacious when it is grown wicked and
robust; for the Laws of a City do vary upon several accidents and emergencies,
but the Statutes and fundamental Orders are seldom or never changed, for which
reason new Laws are not so necessary afterward, as good Statutes at first: but
to illustrate it farther. By ancient Statute and Custom time out of mind, the
Commonwealth of Rome was divided betwixt the Senate and the People, and all
authority was derived either from the People, or Senate, or Tribunes, or
Consuls; as also their creation of Magistrates, and enacting of Laws: these
Customs were little (if at all) changed in all the revolutions of that State;
but the Laws for punishing malefactors, and regulating enormities, were enacted
or repealed as the exorbitance of the people did fluctuate and require, as the
sumptuary Laws, the Law against adultery, ambition, and several others,
instituted from time to time, as the Citizens grew corrupter. But the old
customs of State being retained, (though tainted, and sharing in the corruption
of the people) the reviving of old Laws, or introducing of new, was not
sufficient to keep the Citizens good, but it would have contributed much, had
the old Customs been reformed when those new Laws were introduced, and a new
form of Government set up: for that those ancient Customs are of no use or
advantage where a City is overflown with such a deluge of corruption, is
apparent by their methods in the creation of Magistrates, and the exhibition of
Laws. The Consulship, nor any other office or dignity was never conferred by the
people of Rome upon any body but by formal application, which Custom was
originally very good, because none sought for them who was conscious of being
unfit; forasmuch as to be repulsed was a dishonorable thing, and to make
himself sit, every man chose to be virtuous. But afterward the manners of the
people growing so fatally corrupt, this Custom lost its primitive convenience,
and became not only useless but pernicious; for they who had most power, not
they who had most virtue and capacity, pretended to the Magistracy; the poor
and the virtuous not daring to appear for fear of an ignominious repulse: but
this inconvenience (like the City it self) was not the product of a day, it
stole into the Commonwealth, lay concealed, increased, and exerted it self by
degrees, as all other inconveniences do. (...) having conquered Africa and
Asia, and reduced the greatest part of Greece, the Romans began to hug
themselves in their liberty, as not knowing any enemy they ought in reason to
fear: this security and unhappy scarcity of enemies was the occasion that in
their creation of Consuls the people of Rome began to regard riches and favor
more than ability and virtue; preferring such persons as could entertain and
treat people handsomely, before such as were grave, and could only conquer
their enemies; afterward, from those who were most plausible, they came down,
and created such as were most powerful; so that persons of virtue and capacity
were totally excluded. In the making of Laws, a Tribune and any one Citizen had
power to propose any thing to the people which they thought of importance to
the public; before whom it was canvas'd and discussed, every man having free
liberty to object, or promote it (as his judgment directed) before it could
pass.

And this Custom was good likewise whilst the Citizens were so too; for it was
always, and is still convenient, that if any man be wiser than the rest, and
can contrive any thing for the security or benefit of the public, that he have
liberty to propose it; and it is as useful on the other side, every man have
the same freedom to ventilate and examine it; that all being well argued, and
every man's opinion heard, the best may be chosen. But as the Citizens grew
corrupt, this Custom grew incommodious: none but great men proposed any thing
to the people, and what they did was not for the common, but their own private
interest, and which was worse, no man had the liberty to dispute it; so that
the people were either circumvented, or forced to consent to their own ruin
and destruction. So then, to have maintained Rome free in such an age of
corruption, it was necessary, as they altered their Laws according to the
prevalence of each vice, so they should have altered their fundamentals, in the
making of Laws, and creation of Magistrates; for the same Customs are not
equally convenient where the people are not equally good, no more than the
forms can be alike where the matter is contrary. But it is worth our inquity
whether these Customs be to be reformed at a blow, as soon as their
inconvenience is descried, or by degrees, before every body observes them. I
say both of them are almost impossible: for to alter them by degrees, requires
some wise and sagacious Citizen, that can foresee the dangers at a distance,
and trace them to their first causes; but of such persons perhaps a City may
never see one, or if it does, how hard is it for him to persuade other people:
for people accustomed to a way are not easily got out of it, especially when
the mischief is rather in probability than prospect. And when these old Customs
are to be reformed, (as appearing unprofitable and dangerous for the
Commonwealth) though they be easily discovered, they are hard to be removed,
especially at once; because the common mass being infected, common ways are too
weak; and recourse must be had to extraordinary, as violence and arms; for
before the fabric of the Government can be changed and modelled to your
desire, it is necessary above all things to make your self Master of the City,
and to be able to dispose of it at your pleasure: and because to reform a
State, and reduce it to a Civil Regiment, presupposes a good man; and to usurp,
and make ones self Prince by violence, presupposes an ill; therefore it seldom
falls out that a good man makes himself Prince by unjust means, be his ends
never so good; nor will an ill man, who has made himself Prince, ever do good*
it never falls into his thoughts to employ that authority well which he has
unjustly acquired. From the causes aforesaid therefore arises the difficulty
(or rather impossibility) in a corrupt City, to maintain a free State, much
less to erect one; and if there should be any way found out to effect it, it
would (in my judgment) be necessary to frame it rather according to a Regal
than a Popular State; that those persons whose insolence is incorrigible by the
Laws, may be bridled and restrained by some supreme Magistrate in the nature of
a King; and to attempt any other way, must be either vain and temerarious, or
exorbitantly cruel. For though Cleomenes (being a single person) killed the
Ephori, (as is said before) and Romulus, his Brother, and Titus Tatius, and
afterward employed their authority to the advantage of the public; yet it is
to be considered, that the subjects neither of the one or the other were so
vicious or depraved as those of whom we have treated in this Chapter, and
therefore they were able to do what they pleased, and excuse it when it was
done.

CHAP. XIX.
Though a weak Prince succeeds an excellent, the Government may stand; but if
one weak Prince succeeds another, it is impossible.
IF the virtue and conduct of Romulus, Numa, and Tullius (the three first Kings
of Rome) be considered, it will be found to have been much for the advantage of
that City to have its first King martial, and fierce; the second King, quiet
and religious; and the third (like the first) active, and warlike again. For,
as after the first institution, it was necessary there should be somebody to
dispose the people to ways of Religion, and civil conversation; so it was
necessary again after that, that the next King should reassume the vigor and
magnanimity of their predecessor; otherwise the minds of the Citizens would
have grown effeminate, and the City have become a prey to any of its
neighbors. Wherefore it is to be considered, that a Prince not altogether so
valiant and enterprizing, may maintain the Government upon the score of his
Predecessor, and enjoy the fruits of his courage and labor; but if it happens
he be long lived, and that he is not succeeded by a martial Prince to revive
the activity of the Founder, the Government must necessarily be ruined. On the
other side, if two Princes immediately succeeding, are martial and heroic,
they are observed to do great things, and to advance the Government
exceedingly: David, without doubt, was a person no less excellent in military
experience than in learning and wisdom; and so great was his courage, that he
left his Kingdom to his Son Solomon in quiet and peace, who by arts of peace
rather than war enjoyed it happily his time upon account of his Father; but he
could not leave it to Rehoboam as he had received it of his Father: for
Rehoboam being neither like his Grandfather in courage, nor his Father in
wisdom, succeeded scarcely to the sixth part of his Empire. Bajazet the Turkish
Scholar, though more studious of peace than of war, enjoyed the labors of
Mahomet his Father, who having (like David) subdued all his neighbors, left
him a Kingdom entire, that might be peaceably maintained; but had ( Bazjazet's
Son) Selimus now reigning, taken after his Father, and not his Grandfather,
that Empire had been ruined; but he out-goes the glory of his Grandfather.

From hence may be observed, that after an excellent and magnificent Prince, a
pusillanimous may succeed, and the Government stand; but if one poor-spirited
Prince succeeds another immediately, it is impossible it should subsist, unless
(like France) it be supported by its old Customs and Laws: I call those Princes
weak and pusillanimous, who are not conversant, nor addicted to the exercise of
Arms, and do conclude, that the tranquillity of Numas's Reign (which continued
for many years) was to be attributed to the courage and activity of Romulus,
which was revived again in Tullus the third King, after whom followed Ancus, a
Prince of so excellent a temper, that he knew how to comport as well in the
calms of peace as the tempests of war. His first practice was gentle, and by
methods of peace, but finding he was looked upon as effeminate, and grew
contemptible to his neighbors, he perceived the way to preserve his dignity,
was, to betake himself to martial courses, and manage his affairs rather like
Romulus than Numa. From hence an useful example for all Princes may be taken,
and it may be observed, that whoever is in the possession of a State, and
follows the example of Numa, may either keep it, or lose it, according to the
different circumstances of fortune, or time. But he who imitates Romulus, and
is armed with wisdom and prowess, shall be sure to keep it, unless some
extraordinary and irresistible power intervenes to supplant him. And it is in
probability to be thought, that had not the third King of Rome proved a martial
Prince, and one who knew by his Arms to recover his declining reputation, he
could never (or with great difficulty) have regained it, or performed those
exploits which he did afterward: so that whilst Rome was a Monarchy, and under
the Government of Kings, it was under a double danger of destruction, either by
the mildness; or the tyranny of its Prince.

CHAP. XX.
Two good Princes, immediately succeeding, may do great things; and
well-grounded Commonwealths having always a virtuous succession, their
Conquests and Acquisitions must of necessity be according.
WHen Monarchy was banished by the Romans, their dangers were banished with
them, and they lay under no fear of either weak Prince or Tyrant; for the
command of the Empire was put into the hands of the Consuls, who came to that
authority, not by inheritance, or any indirect or violent ambition, but by the
suffrage of the people, and were always excellent persons. The City of Rome
enjoying from time to time the benefit of their fortune and virtue, might
without much difficulty arrive at the highest top of greatness and dignity, (as
it did) in the same number of years as it was under the Government of Kings.
For we see in the examples of Philip of Macedon, and his Son Alexander the
great, that a succession of two martial Princes (without a peaceable
interposed) is sufficient to conquer the World. And if it were possible in a
Monarchy, it is easy in a Commonwealth, in whose power it is to elect, not only
two, but an infinite and continued succession of virtuous persons; so that in a
well-ordered Commonwealth, the succession is constantly good.

CHAP. XXI.
How much that Prince or Commonwealth is to be condemned, which neglects to
train up Soldiers of its own.
THE Princes and Commonwealths of our times, if to defend themselves, or offend
their enemy, (as occasion serves) they be unable to bring Soldiers of their
own into the Field, they may thank themselves, and acknowledge (with Tullus)
that it is not so much want of capacity in their subjects, as want of wisdom in
them for neglecting to train them For when Tullus came to the Crown, Rome had
been forty years together in peace, (during all Numa's Reign) and there was not
a man to be found who had ever seen the face of an enemy, nevertheless his own
designs being martial, he resolved to make no use of the Samnites or Tuscans,
or any other Mercenary, but as a wise Prince, to discipline his own; and his
art and experience was such, that in a short time he made them excellent
Soldiers; and there is nothing more certain, than that where men are unapt for
war, the fault is not in the situation or nature of the place, but in the
carelessness or defect of the Magistrate; of which we have a fresh and memorable
example. There is scarce any body ignorant, that of late years the English
invaded France, and entertained no Soldiers but their own; and yet, though
England had had no wars of thirty years before, and had neither Officer nor
Soldier who had ever seen a Battle, they ventured to attack a Kingdom where
the Officers were excellent, the Soldiers very good, having been trained up
for several years together in the Italian wars. This proceeded from the
prudence of the Prince, and the excellence of that Government, in which (though
in times of peace) the exercise of Arms is not intermitted; Pelopidas and
Epaminondas having relieved Thebes, and rescued it from the tyranny of the
Spartans, finding themselves in the middle of a servile and effeminate people,
they so ordered it by their virtue and discipline, that they brought them to
the use of Arms, took the field with them against the Spartans, and overthrew
them. From whence that Historian infers, that there are Soldiers not only in
Lacedemon, but wherever there are men, if there be any body to exercise and
train them; which Tullus performed most exquisitely among the Romans, and is
most excellently expressed by Virgil, in these words.

-- Desidesque movebit
Tullus in arma viros.
No soft unactive people Tullus knows,
But trains up all promiscuously to blows.
CHAP. XXII.
What is to be observed from the Combat betwixt the three Roman Horatii, and
the three Alban Curiatii.
BY Articles betwixt Tullus King of Rome, and Metius King of Alba, it was
agreed, that whichsoever of the two sides should overcome, that King should
have the dominion of the other. The Curiatii were all killed; but one of the
Horatii being left, Metius and his Albans fell into subjection to the Romans.

Horatius returning in great triumph into the City, and meeting a Sister of his
(who was married to one of the Curiatii) lamenting the loss of her Husband, in
a great passion he killed her; for which inhumanity being brought to his trial,
he was, after many arguments, discharged, but more upon his Fathers
intercession than his own merits. In which accident there were three things
considerable; that we are never to venture our whole fortune upon the success
of a Party; another is, that offenses and deserts are not equally rewarded a
well-ordered City; the third, that no compact is well made, where the
performance is or ought to be suspected. For to become servile, and in
subjection to another City, is a thing of such moment and importance, that it
is not to be believed that any Prince or State whatsoever should be content
that their liberty should be exposed to the success or courage of three of
their Citizens; and this was evident in Metius; for though upon the Victory of
the Romans he seemed to acquiesce, and promised obedience, as by Articles was
agreed, yet in the first Expedition the Romans undertook against the Veientes,
it is manifest he would have deceived Tullus, as one who repented of the
covenants which he had made: but because of the third we have spoken largely
already, in the next two Chapters we shall speak only of the other two.

CHAP. XXIII.
That our whole fortune is not to be ventured upon part of our force, and that
for that reason the keeping of passes is many times dangerous.
IT was never thought discretion to put your whole fortune in danger, unless
your whole force was ready to defend it. This error is committed several ways;
one is when, like Tullus and Metius, they commit the fortune and virtue of so
many men as either of them had in their Army, to the fortune and virtue of
three particular persons, which was but a pitiful part of either of their
strength, not considering how, by that agreement, all the pains which their
Predecessors had taken to establish their liberty, and enable their fellow
Citizens to defend it, was rendered vain and ineffectual, by putting it into the
power of three persons to destroy it; than which (in my judgment) those two
Kings could not have done worse. Another great error is, when, upon the
approach of an enemy, we trust all to the keeping of an avenue, or the defense
of a pass, unless it may be done with our whole force: in that case indeed the
resolution is good; but if the passage be narrow, and not room enough for your
whole power, it is uncertain and dangerous; and that which persuades me to be
of that opinion, is the example of such as having been invaded by a potent
Enemy, though their Country was environed with Mountains and Rocks, yet they
would not attend, and engage the Enemy upon the passes or Mountains, but
marched out of their holds to encounter him; or else (which is as bad) they
forsook their advantages, and expected him in some plain or convenient place
within: And the reason is (as aforesaid) because many men cannot be brought to
defend such places as are Rocky, for want of subsistence; and the passage being
straight, it can receive but few people, and by consequence is not able to
sustain the insult of a very great Army, and the Enemy may bring as may as he
pleases to attack it, because his business is not to fix there, but to pass
through and be gone: whereas he who is to defend it, cannot be in any
considerable Body, being (by reason of the uncertainty of the Enemies approach)
to lie there continually, though (as I said before) the places are both barren
and straight. Having lost therefore that pass which you imagined to keep, and
upon which your Army and People did wholly rely, the remainder of your Army,
and Subjects are possessed with such a fear, that you can have no farther trial
of their courage, but all goes to wrack, and your whole fortune lost, but with
part of your Army. With what difficulty Hannibal passed the Alps betwixt France
and Lombardy, and betwixt Lombardy and Tuscany, there is no body ignorant;
nevertheless the Romans chose rather to attend him upon the Tesin, and
afterward in the plain of Arezzo, where the danger was equal both to the Enemy
and them; than to carry their Army up into the clouds upon the Rocks and the
Snow, to be consumed by the incommodity of the place, before the Enemy came at
them. And whosoever shall read History deliberately, shall find few great
Captains that would coop themselves up in such passes and streights, not only
for the reasons abovesaid, but because all of them cannot be stopped the
Mountains in that respect being like the fields, having not only their Roads
and Highways, but bypath and passages, which though not observed by
Strangers, are well enough known to the Inhabitants, who will be always ready
to conduct the Enemy, to remove them farther off who lie constantly upon them.
Of this a late Example may be brought, in the year 1515, when Francis King of
France designed to pass into Italy for the recovery of Lombardy, the great
objection by those who were against the Expedition, was, That the Swizzers
would obstruct his passage over the Mountains, which argument was found idle
afterward, for the Kings of France waving two or three places which they had
guarded, passed by a private and unknown way, and was upon their backs in
Italy, before they perceived him; so that being mightily surprised, the Enemy
quitted his Posts, and retired into Italy, and all the Lombards submitted to
the French; they being deceived in their opinion, who thought the French were
with more Ease and Convenience to be obstructed in the Mountains.

CHAP. XXIV.
In well Ordered Governments, offense and desert are never set one against the
other, but he who does well, is rewarded, and he who does otherwise, is
punished.
THE merits of Horatius were very great, having by his own single valor and
conduct, overcome the Curiatii; after which he committed a most abominable act,
in killing his own Sister: which Murder was so heinous in the Eyes of the
Romans, that he was brought to a Trial for his life, though his deserts were so
fresh and considerable; which at first sight seem ungrateful in the people; but
he who examins it strictly, and weighs how necessary and sacred a thing Justice
ought to be in every Commonwealth, will find them more blameable for
discharging, than they would have been for condemning him; and the reason is,
because in a well constituted State no man's good actions should indemnisie him
for doing ill; for punishment being as due to ill actions, as rewards are to
good, having rewarded in a man for doing well, he is satisfied for what he did,
and the obligation discharged; so as if afterward he commits a Crime, he is to
be punished severely according to the Nature of his offense; by the observation
of which Orders, a City may continue free a long time, which otherwise will
quickly go to ruin. For if a Citizen having performed any great Exploit for
his Country, should expect not only honor and reward for what he has done, but
privilege, and impunity for any mischief he should do afterward, his
insolence would in a short time grow insupportable, and inconsistent with Civil
Government. So then it is very necessary for discouragement from ill actions,
to recompense good, which was the practice in Rome, and though where a
Commonwealth is poor, her t^wards cannot be great; yet even out of that small
stock, she is to be punctually grateful, for a thing (how little soever) given
in acknowledgment of ones good Service (let it be never so great) is looked
upon as Honorable, and received as a Magnificent reward. The Stories of
Horatius Cocles, and Mutius Scaevola are generally famous. Coals with
incomp^rable courage maintained fight against a great body of the Enemy upon
the Bridge over Tiber, till it was cut behind him, and their passage
obstructed: The other designing against the life of Porsenna King of Tuscany,
and killing his Secretary by mistake, being apprehended and brought before the
King, to show the courage and constancy of the Romans, he thrust his own hand
into the fire, and burnt it off before his face; and how were they gratified?
marry each of them had two Staiora's, which is as much ground as can be sown
with two Bushels of Corn. The History of Manlius Capitolinus is no less
remarkable: Having relieved the Capitol (which the French had surprised in the
night) and beaten them out again, his Comerades in requital gave him a certain
measure of Flower, which (as times went then) was a mighty reward, and esteemed
so adequate to the Service, that Manlius afterward either out of ambition or
ill nature, causing a tumult in Rome, and endeavoring to debauch the people,
(his former exploits being as they thought amply rewarded) without farther
regard to him, they threw him headlong down that Capitol, which he had so
gloriously preserved.

CHAP. XXV.
Though it is many times convenient to reform the old Fundamental Customs of a
free City, yet it is convenient still to retain some shadow and appearance of
their ancient ways.
HE who desires to set up a new form of Government in a Commonwealth, that
shall be lasting, and acceptable to the people, is with great caution to
preserve at least some shadow and resemblance of the old, That the people may
(if possible) be insensible of the innovation; for the generality of Mankind do
not penetrate so far into things, but that outward appearance, is as acceptable
to them as verity it self. For this cause the Romans at the beginning of their
liberty, when their Kings were expelled, thought it expedient to create two
Consuls instead of one King, assigning them only XII Lictors, that their number
might not exceed what attended upon the King. Besides this, there was an
anniversary Sacrifice in Rome, in which the Ministry of the King was of
necessity required: To salve that defect, the Romans created a chief of the
said Sacrifice with the Title of Royal Priest (but with subordination to the
High Priest) by which Artifice the people were satisfied with their Sacrifice,
and took no occasion to complain for the expulsion of their King. He therefore
who desires to reform the policy of a State, and to introduce a new, is to
disguise it to the people by the retention (at least in appearance) of some
part of the ancient Customs, that may keep them from discerning it; and if at
any time by accident there be a necessity of changing the power, the number and
duration of the Magistrates, it will be convenient to continue the Name. This
(as I said before) is to be observed by any one who would establish an absolute
power either in a Republic; or Monarchical way, but he who would erect such an
absolute power, as by Authors is called Tyrannies must unravel the whole
bottom, and innovate all.

CHAP. XXVI.
A new Prince in a new Conquest, is to make every thing new.
WHoever makes himself Lord of a City or State (and especially if he finds
himself weak, and suspects his ability to keep it) if he intends not to
continue the Government in the old way, either by Kingship or Commonwealth,
the best course he can take is to subvert all, to turn every thing topsie
turvy; and make all things as new as himself. To alter the Magistracy, create
new Titles, elect new persons, confer new Authorities, advance the Poor, and
impoverish the Rich, that what is said of David, may be said of him, Esurientes
implevit bonis, and divites dimisit inanes. He filled the hungry with good
things, and the rich he sent empty away. Besides it is his interest to build
new Cities, to erect new Corporations; to demolish and uncharter the old; to
shift the Inhabitants from one place to another; in a word, so to toss and
transpose every thing, that there be no honor, nor wealth, nor preferment in
the whole Province, but what is ownable to him. And for this he need go no
farther than Philip of Macedon (Father to Alexander the Great) for his pattern,
who by this practice, of a small Prince, made himself Monarch of all Greece, of
whom it is said, That he removed his people, as a Shepherd did his fold. Those
ways are cruel, and contrary not only to all civil, but to all Christian, and
indeed human conversation; for which reason they are to be rejected by every
body, for certainly it is better to remain a private person, than to make ones
self King, by the calamity and destruction of his people. Nevertheless, he who
neglects to take the first good way, if he will preserve himself, must make use
of this bad; for though many Princes take a middle way betwixt both, yet they
find it extreme difficult and dangerous; for being neither good nor bad, they
are neither feared nor beloved, and so unlikely to prosper.

CHAP. XXVII.
Men are as seldom perfectly bad, as they are perfectly good.
IN the year 1505. Pope Julius II. marched his Army into Bologna to drive the
Family of the Bentivogli out of that State, where they had commanded with
Supremacy a hundred years. In the same Expedition he resolved to remove John
Pogolo Baglione out of Perugia (where he had Usurped) and in a word, all such
Tyrants as had got any Church Lands into their possession. Coming to the Town
with the desire and resolution aforesaid, he attended not till he could march
in with his Army; but entered as it were naked and disarmed (though John Pagolo
was in person in the City, and many of his party which were got together to
defend him) so that transported with the usual vehemence wherewith he managed
all his affairs, he put himself (with his bare guards) into the hands of his
Enemy; yet he succeeded so well, that he carried Pagolo off with him, and put
in another Governor in behalf of the Church. Wise men who were then about his
Holiness, admiring the temerity of the one, as much as the pusillanimity of the
other, could not imagine how it should come to pass, that Pagolo having his
Enemy as it were naked in his hands, and by consequence an opportunity (with
perpetual glory to himself) to have secured him, and pillaged his Equipage (for
all the Cardinals were then with him, with the most precious of their Jewels)
should so strangely neglect it; especially when they considered that it was
neither Conscience nor good nature which restrained him; for neither of those
were to be supposed in a man who had been naught with his own Sister, and
murdered several of his Relations, to make his way to the Government;
wherefore it was concluded to happen, because it is so provided by providence,
that no man can be exquisitely wicked, no more than good in perfection; for
where there is any thing great and magnificent in a mischief, they know not how
to commit it: So John Pagolo who made no bones of either Parricide or Incest,
could not (or to speak more properly) durst not make use of his opportunity to
perpetrate a thing, which would have filled the world with admiration of his
courage, and made his memory venerable to posterity; for he would have been the
first who had given his Cardinals to understand how little it is to their
reputation to Lord it, and luxuriate as they do; and the greatness of the Fact
would have lessened the Scandal, and prevented any danger that might ensue.

CHAP. XXVIII.
For what reasons the Romans were less ungrateful to their Citizens, than the
Athenians.
WHoever reads and observes the passages in Commonwealths, will find a touch of
ingratitude toward their Citizens in them all, but less in Rome than in
Athens; and perhaps in any other Republic whatever. The reason (I suppose)
was, because Rome had not that occasion of Jealousy as Athens had: For in
Rome, from the expulsion of the Kings, to the time of Silla and Marius, the
liberty of the City was never disturbed by any man within it; so that there
being no reason to apprehend, there was no reason to persecute. In Athens it
was otherwise; for their liberty being invaded and taken away by Pisistratus
when it was most flourishing, and complete; and that by a pretense of advancing
it; They no sooner recovered it; but remembering the injuries which they had
received, and their passed servitude, they flew out into such an exorbitancy of
revenge, that they punished not only the faults of their fellow Citizens, but
the least umbrage, and appearances of them, from whence followed the
Banishment, and Execution of so many excellent persons; Hence came the
Ostracism Laws, and all the rest of the outrages committed afterward upon the
chief of their City, for as ye Writers of Politics observe very well, the
people are more cruel and vindicative who have lost and recovered their
liberty, than they who have preserved it, as it was left them by their Fathers.
He therefore who considers what is said, will neither condemn Athens, nor
magnify Rome; but impute all to necessity upon the diversity of accidents
which happened in each City. And certainly, if it be seriously considered, it
will appear, that if the liberty of the Romans had been oppressed, as the
liberty of the Athenians was, Rome would have been no better natured, or shown
more compassion to its fellow Citizens, than Athens did: And this may be
infallibly deduced by what happened (after the expulsion of the Kings) against
Collatinus and P. Val^rius; for Collatinus (though he had been very active in
asserting their liberty) was banished for bearing only the Name of Tarquin; and
the other had like to have ran the same destiny, for building a house only,
upon the top of Mount Celius, which they suspected was to command the City. So
that it may probably be presumed (by its suspicion and severity in the two
cases aforesaid) that Rome would have exercised the same ingratitude, had it
been injured in its minority, as Athens had been. And that I may have no
occasion to discourse of ingratitude hereafter; I shall speak of it more
largely in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XXIX.
Whether the Prince, or the People, is most subject to be ungrateful.
ANd because we have undertaken to enlarge upon this subject, I think it not
amiss to examine which are most frequently guilty of ingratitude, the Prince,
or the People: For better explication, I say, That men are ungrateful, either
out of suspicion, or avarice. For if a Prince, or Republic send out any of
their great Captains upon some important Expedition, which the said Captain
atchieves, and gains honor to himself, and reputation to his Master, in this
case the Prince, or State, is obliged to reward him; but if instead of
rewarding, they casheer, or disgrace him, or out of a covetous principle, deny
him his pay, the ingratitude is inexcusable: and leaves a scandal behind it
that can never be worn out, and yet many Princes are too guilty of it;
Cornelius Tacitus gives us the reason in this Sentence, Proclivius est
injuriae, quam beneficio vicem exolvere, quia gratia oneri, ultio in quaestu
habetur. It Is more natural to return an injury, than a courtesy, because
courtesies are burthensom, but revenge is sweet. But if this ingratitude either
in Prince or People, proceeds not so much from avarice, as suspicion, in that
case it is somewhat excusable, and of that kind we read of good store, as when
a General has conquered a Province or Empire for his Master, when he has
exterminated his Enemies, enriched his Army, and gained himself a great Name,
it is impossible but he must be so acceptable to his own Soldiers, and so
dreadful to his Enemies, as must beget a jealousy in the Prince; for the
Nature of man being jealous and ambitious, and not to be confined within the
bounds of his fortune, it cannot be but if the Prince has taken a fancy that
the glory of his General, is a diminution to his, the General must by some
vainglorious, or discontented action, establish and confirm it; and then what
has the Prince to do? but to secure himself either by causing him to be
murdered, by taking away his Command, lessening his reputation with the
Soldiers and People, and by all ways of industry possessing them, that the
Victory was not obtained by any Conduct of his, but by the kindness of Fortune,
vileness of the Enemy, or prudence and good management of the rest of the
Officers.

After Vespasian (being in Judea) was declared Emperor by his Army, Antonius
Primus being at the same time in Illyria with another Army, declared for the
Emperor, and marched into Italy against Vitellius who was then Paramount in
Rome; and having beaten him in two pitched Battles, he entered the City in the
Name of Vespasian: So that Mutianus being sent against Vitellius by Vespasian,
he found the Enemy broken, the Town taken, and all things done by Antonius to
his hand. And how was he requited? Why Mutianus took away his Commission,
removed him from the Army, and by degrees so lessened his Authority in Rome,
that Antonius going into Asia to make his Complaints to Vespasian, was received
so coldly, that in a short time he was stripped of all kind of authority, and
died very miserable: and of this Nature examples are very frequent in History;
every body knows how in our times Gonsalvo Ferrante, being the King of
Arragon's General in the Kingdom of Naples against the French, behaved himself
so well, that by his singular Conduct he conquered it, and put it wholly under
the obedience of his Master, who coming afterward to Naples himself, took from
him the Command of his Army, dispossessed him of many strong places which he
held in that Country, and carried him with him into Spain, where not long
after, he died in obscurity. But there is no remedy; these kind of jealousies
are so natural to Princes, that it is almost impossible for them to be grateful
to any man, who has performed any great thing for them. And if it be so with
Kings, no wonder if it be so with the people, for in a free State, they have
always two principal ends, one is to enlarge their Dominions, the other to keep
what they have got, and their eagerness to both these, makes them so often
guilty of ingratitude. As to the first point, we shall speak elsewhere; the
errors in preserving their liberty; to disgust such persons as ought to be
rewarded, and to suspect such as ought to be trusted; and though such practices
are the occasion of great mischiefs in a corrupt Commonwealth, and Tyranny does
many times ensue (as in Rome by Caesar, who took that by force, which the
ingratitude of the people denied to his merits,) yet in a Town that is entire,
and incorrupt, they do very well, and add much to the duration of their
liberty, to enforce great and ambitious men for fear of punishment to comport
themselves better. In my judgment of all the Commonwealths that ever had
Empire, Rome was the least ingratful for the reasons abovesaid, there being
never an Example of its ingratitude but in the case of Scipio: For Coriolanus
and Camillus were banished for their injuries to the people, and though one of
them remaining obstinate, was never recalled; yet the other was not only
recalled, but so restored to the affections of the people, that all his life
after, they adored him as a Prince. But their jealousy of Scipio was of such a
sort, as had never been known before, proceeding from the Ornaments of his
body, and the endowments of his mind; His youth, his wisdom, his excellent
qualifications had rendered him too admirable; the powerfulness of his Enemy,
the danger and tediousness of the War (which he had concluded in a very short
time) his deliberation in resolving, and his quickness in Execution, had gained
him a greater reputation, than was ever got by any General before him, insomuch
as the Senators, Pretors, and all the chief Magistrates in the City began to
fear and respect him. This was no pleasing sight to the graver sort, because it
had not been formerly the Custom in Rome; whereupon Cato (a man of great esteem
for his piety and justice) took up the Cudgels against him, and complained
publicly that the City could not be called free, whilst the Magistrates were
in awe of any particular Citizen; if then in a thing so nearly importing their
liberty, the people followed the opinion of Cato, in my judgment they were in
some measure to be excused. In short, my opinion is, as I said before, that it
is avarice and suspicion which makes men ungrateful: To the first of which the
people are not naturally addicted; and to the last, with much less propensity
than Princes, as having less occasion, which shall be proved hereafter.

CHAP. XXX.
What rules are to be observed by a Prince or Commonwealth to avoid this Vice
of ingratitude, and how a General or great Citizen is to demean himself to
elude it.
TO avoid the necessity of living always in suspicion, and being ungrateful to
his Ministers, a Prince ought to go personally with his Armies, as was done at
first by the Emperors of Rome, as the great Turk does now, and as all they do
and have done that are valiant and courageous; for in so doing, the honor and
profit of their Victories accrews to themselves; but where they are not present
at their Conquests themselves, the honor redounds upon their Officers, and they
have not any complete enjoyment of their successes, till they have eclipsed, if
not extinguished that glory in other people, which they durst not venture for
themselves; so that their ingratitude, and injustice to their Officers, does
them more mischief, than their Conquests do them good. But when out of
negligence, or imprudence, they lie at home idle themselves, and send their
Generals in their stead, know no better precept to give them, than what they
know already themselves. As to the General, if he finds that jealousy
inevitable, he has his choice of two things. As soon as the War is ended, he is
voluntarily to lay down his Commission; and to present it to his Master, before
he has occasion to demand it, using great care that none of his actions
discover him to be either insolent or ambitious, that his Prince having no
cause to suspect him, may have the greater obligation to reward him. If this
way does not please, the other is quite contrary; and that is, to declare
himself boldly, and try always to set up for himself, cajoling and sweetning
his Soldiers and Subjects, making new alliances with his Neighbors, seizing
upon the strong Towns, corrupting the Officers, and where they will not be
corrupted, securing them some other way, and by doing thus, he shall be even
with his Lord, for his ingratitude designed: And besides these two ways, there
is none that I know. But (as I said before) because men can neither be good nor
bad in extremity, it happens that great men are unwilling to quit their
Commands, and retire after the gaining of a Victory; behave themselves modestly
they cannot: and to use rigor in an honorable way is impossible. So that
whilst they are in suspense, and uncertain which course to steer, they are
many times destroyed. As to a Commonwealth that would preserve and exempt it
self from this detestable vice of ingratitude, the same remedy cannot be
prescribed, as was prescribed to a Prince; for not being able to manage its
Wars in Person as a Prince may do, the command of their Forces must of
necessity be committed to some of their Subjects. The best way they can take,
is to follow the Example of Rome, and that will render them less ungrateful
than their Neighbors. In the wars of the Romans, by ancient Custom all people
were employed, as well Nobles as others, and from thence it came that they were
always well furnished with Generals and Officers of all sorts, which kept them
from being jealous of any one, having so many of equal merit to oppose him:
Besides which, there were express Laws against ambition, and all people so
narrowly observed, that no man durst discover the least design or inclination
that way; and in the creation, of Dictators, he was commonly preferred, who
debased himself most, or discovered least desire to obtain it; by which means
preventing the occasion of suspicion, they prevented the ingratitude. That
State therefore which would avoid the guilt of ingratitude, is to imitate Rome,
and that person who would avoid the effects, must observe how the Romans
defended themselves.

CHAP. XXXI.
That the Romans used no extraordinary punishments toward their great
Captains, when they committed an Error of ignorance, or malice, provided the
Government was not damnified by it.
THe Romans (as I said before) were not only less unthankful, than their
Neighbors but they were more human and gentle in the punishment of their
Generals, than any other State; if their miscarriage was malicious, they
punished it not severely; but if it was by ignorance or mistake, instead of
revenging, they did many times reward it; and this they did upon very grave
consideration, for the Romans understood the charge of an Army to be so great a
care, and of such transcendant importance, that whoever undertook it, ought to
have his mind free and indisturbed by any other respects or troubles
whatsoever, for his thoughts being with his troubles, he would never mind his
Army, nor take any advantage. For Example, an Army is sent into Greece against
Philip of Macedon, or into Italy against Hanibal, or those people upon the
Frontiers, which had been conquered before, and the Captain who has the General
Command, is laden with all the cares which do commonly attend great and
extraordinary Enterprises. Now if to those necessary cares for his Army, there
should be superadded a fear, and apprehension of being punished at his return
(if things went otherwise than well) and perpetual reflection upon those who
have been abused and put to death upon the same score, it must needs disturb
the tranquillity of his mind, and make him unfit for any great action. The wise
Romans thought the infamy and dishonor of losing a Battle, punishment enough,
without heaping one affliction upon another. And as to those whose errors
proceed rather from malice than ignorance, we have another Example. Sargius,
and Virginius had each of them an Army, and were encamped before Veii: Sargius
was posted against the Tuscans, and Virginius on the other side against any
body else. It happened the Falisci having joined with several of their neighbors,
came to fall upon Sergius. Sergius had notice, and found himself too weak; yet
rather than send to his Companion for supplies, he chose to be routed; and
Virginius on the other side, though he knew his distress, would by no means
relieve him, unless he desired it; so that that Roman Army was cut off by the
ambition and emulation of their Generals; a thing of very ill example, had it
been suffered to pass without punishment.

Nevertheless, whereas other States would have punished them with death, Rome
inflicted only a pecuniary mulct, but their crime deserved sharper correction,
but the Romans were unwilling to do any thing against custom, which (as is said
before) is very sacred with them. As to the errors of ignorance, we have
another example in Varro, by whose folly and rashness the Romans having lost
the Battle of Cannas against Hanibal, and brought their whole Government in
danger, had Hanibal known how to use, as well as gain a Victory; yet his
offense having in it more of ignorance than malice, when he came back, the
Senate went out to meet him in their Formalities, and not being able to
congratulate his success, they gave him thanks for his return, and that De
salute reipublicae non desperasset, That he did not despair of their affairs,
When Papirius Cursor the Dictator would needs put Fabius to death, because
contrary to orders he had fought with the Samnites among other reasons which
the Father of Fabius urged against that sentence, this was one, that the people
of Rome had till that time never been so severe upon any of their Commanders
for the loss of a Battle, as Papirius would now be upon the Victor for gaining
one.

CHAP. XXXII.
A Commonwealth or Prince is not to defer his beneficence till the necessity of
the object requires it.
THE liberality of the Romans to the people succeeded very well when Prosenna
invaded Rome in behalf of the Tarquins; for the Senate apprehending the people
might be brought to restore the Kings rather than endure the war, to oblige
them, releast their gabels upon salt, and all their other duties, declaring the
people were sufficent benefactors to the public; in providing, and bringing up
their children: all which was done to cajole them into such an humor as might
make them endure the siege, and swallow the calamities of the War: but let no
man rely upon this example, and defer his indulgence to the people, till the
enemy be upon his back; for it shall never succeed so well to him as it did to
the Romans, because the multitude will think themselves more obliged to the
enemy than to him, and believe, that when the necessity is over, they shall be
as bad as before. The reason why this way succeeded so happily to the Romans,
was, because their State was but new, and scarce settled, and the People were
sensible that several Laws were made before for their advantage and reputation;
as particularly the Law of appeal to the people: so as they were able to
satisfy themselves that the benefits which were conferred upon them by the
Senate, proceeded rather from a disposition in the Senate to do them good, than
from any apprehension of the enemy: besides, the injuries and outrages of their
Kings lay fresh and heavy upon their memories. But these cases happening very
seldom, it is but very seldom that such remedies succeed; wherefore it is better
for any Commonwealth or Prince to consider the worst beforehand, and what
people he is most like to have need of in time of adversity; and to live so
with them in time of prosperity, as that they may be encouraged to relieve him
upon any distress. And he who acts otherwise, whether Prince or Commonwealth,
(but especially a Prince) and presumes, when the danger is hanging over his
head, that it is time enough to favor the people, will find himself mistaken,
and the people readier to contribute to his ruin than defense.

CHAP. XXXIII.
If an inconvenience increases either within a State, or against it; it is
better to temporize and comply, than to endeavor to remove it by violence.
THe Roman Commonwealth increasing in Empire, Reputation and Force, their
neighbors not having considered it, nor what damage that greatness might pull
down upon them, began now (when too late) to discover their error; and being
willing to do that now which had been more easy before, forty little States of
them confederated against Rome. The Romans, among their usual provisions in
case of imminent danger, created a Dictator, who, without any man's advice,
might resolve as he pleased, and execute his resolutions without being called
to an account. This Magistrate was not only the occasion of overcoming their
enemies at that time, but was very useful upon all accidents afterward when
their dominion increased. Which may teach us, that when either at home within,
or abroad against a Commonwealth, an inconvenience arises, (whether from an
inward or an outward cause it is not material) it is better counsel to comply
and temporize, than to endeavor furiously to suppress it; for to resist, is to
augment it, and to pull down upon our heads what we were but afraid of before.
And these kind of accidents fall out in a Commonwealth oftener from intrinsic
than extrinsick causes, where the power and authority of some Citizen is
permitted to increase too fast, and more than is convenient for the honor or
benefit of the State; or when such Laws are abrogated or neglected as were most
for the interest of their State; which error, if suffered to run on, will be
more dangerous to oppose than to comply with; for it is so much the harder to
find out these inconveniences in the beginning, by how much it is natural for
all people to favor every thing that is new, especially if introduced by a
young man, with the least show or pretense of advantage: for if a young
Gentleman appears in a Commonwealth endued with more than ordinary qualities,
the eyes of the whole City are immediately upon him, they run unanimously to
respect him, and pay him all the honor that can be imagined; so that if he has
the least spark of ambition or vainglory, he is presently puffed up, and
inflamed with the contemplation of his own worth, and the affection of the
people: and when he is arrived at such an height, as to be as visible as their
error, then it is too late; there are but few remedies in the case; and when
most of them are applied, they do but magnify his power. Many examples might
be brought to this purpose, but I shall only instance in one.

Cosimo di Medicis (from whom the famous Family of the Medici in our City had
their first grandeur) was in such reputation for his wisdom; and his fellow
Citizens were so ignorant, that he began to be formidable to the State, and the
Magistrates began to think it difficult to take him down, but destructive to
let him stand. There was at that time in Florence a person of great experience
in matters of State, called Nicolo da Uzano, who being well advised of the
first fault which he had committed in not considering in time the
inconveniences which might follow upon Cosimo's reputation, resolved to
obviate the second; that is, that no force should be used to oppress him, as
knowing that course would be the ruin of the State; and so it proved not long
after his death. For the Citizens which remained, not following his counsel,
began to combine, and fortify against Cosimo, and indeed forced him out of
Rome. Whereupon, his party being increased, in a short time called him home
again, and made him their Prince, to which dignity he could never have arrived,
but by the opposition of his enemies.

The same happened to Julius Caesar, whose great virtue and excellent
qualifications recommended him so highly to the favor of Pompey and the
people, that by degrees he became terrible, and their favor was turned into
fear; of which Cicero complains, when he says that Pompey began to fear him too
late; for when his fear prompted him to look out for a remedy, that remedy
hastened the ruin of the State. I say then (when this case happens) it is
incomparably better to temporize, than to endeavor to repel the mischief which
threatens by violence and force. For many times, by that means, it passes as it
came, and goes out of it self, or else the damage it brings is the longer a
coming. In these cases Princes ought to be very vigilant, lest going about to
retrench and lessen the great power of a neighbor, they give him opportunity
to increase it, and bring themselves into greater danger: you are therefore to
compare your own strength, and your enemies; and if you find your self the
stronger, to attaque him courageously; but if weaker, you had better be quiet,
lest it happens to you as it did to those little States who confederated
against Rome, to whom (as appeared by the event) it had been much better to
have sat still, and endeavored their friendship, than to have irritated the
great power of the Romans, and forced them to a war; for the Romans had never
got to that height, if that confederacy had not given them occasion of trying
all experiments for their defense, and put them among the rest, upon the
creation of Dictators, by which new invention they not only mastered all
dangers that threatened them, but prevented a thousand mischiefs into which
(without that remedy) the Commonwealth would most certainly have fallen.

CHAP. XXXIV.
The Dictatorship was useful, not hurtful to the Commonwealth of Rome; and how
that Power which is usurped, and illegally assumed, is pernicious to a State,
not that which is conferred legally by the suffrage of the people.
THere are those to be found who have said that the Dictatorship was the ruin
and destruction of that Commonwealth, alleging that the first Tyrant that was
ever in that City, set himself up, under the title of Dictator, and affirming
that Caesar could not under any other name have justified his Tyranny.

Those who maintain that opinion did not examine it thoroughly, and are not for
that reason to be believed. For it was not the name or dignity of the Dictator
which brought Rome into slavery, but the authority assumed by the Citizens upon
the perpetuation of that office; and if there had been no such thing as
Dictator, Caesar had taken some other Title upon him to compass his designs;
for when ones power is absolute, he can assume what name he pleases; but it is
not a great Title that gives any man power. Whilst the Dictatorship was
disposed by public suffrage, it was very beneficial; those who attained it by
ways extraordinary, abused it exceedingly; the rest were never known to have
done any injury to the Commonwealth through all the Dictatorships: the reason is
probable, because a man must be endued with many good qualities before he can
usurp such an authority. He must be abundantly rich; he must know how to
insinuate with every body; he must have a great party, and make every man his
friend, which is not practicable where the Laws are in force; and if he had all
those qualifications, they would render him so formidable, that the free voices
would ever concur in his election: besides, the Dictator was not perpetual, but
created only upon particular exigence, and with limited power, extending no
farther than the present danger, during which he had power to dispose of all
things at his pleasure, and punish as he thought good without any appeal; but
he could do nothing in diminution to the Government, he could not entrench upon
the authority of the Senate or People, abrogate their old Laws, or institute
new: so that the shortness of his Dictatorship, the limitation of his
authority, and the incorruption of the people, made it impossible for him to
transgress, and do any mischief to the City; and on the contrary, that Office
has been always beneficial, and, in my judgment, the principal in Rome, and has
contributed more than all the rest to make it Mistress of the World; for
without that, that City had never been able to have obviated so many dangers,
nor gone through so many difficulties, against which their accustomed and
ordinary means would have been of little validity, as being too tedious, and
slow; (no one Counsel or Magistrate being able to do all things alone but being
in a mutual necessity the one of the other) for in cases which require
immediate remedy, time passes away, and is often lost whilst they are in their
counsels, and when they come to a resolution, it is too late, and their remedies
dangerous.

Wherefore I think it convenient that a Commonwealth have a certain way to be
used only in case urgent necessity, as the Seignory of Venice, (which at this
day is the best regulated Commonwealth in the World) that State in time of
imminent danger has a reserved power to confer authority upon some few of their
Citizens, by virtue of which they may order all as they please, without the
consultation of the rest, for when a Commonwealth is destitute of some such
custom, it must of necessity be ruined by sticking to their old, or break them
to preserve it self; and it were to be wished that nothing might happen in a
Commonwealth that might give occasion for these extraordinary ways; for though
those extraordinary ways may sometimes be good, yet the example is ill, and
introduces a custom of breaking old orders for good, which afterward, under
that pretense, will be broken for ill: wherefore that Commonwealth can never be
perfect, that by its Laws has not provided against every thing, prepared
remedies for every accident, and appointed in what manner they shall be
managed; which is to be done no better way than by a Dictator, or some such
Magistrate to be created upon extraordinary occasion; for without them they
must certainly be ruined: and one thing very remarkable in this order, is, the
wisdom of the Romans in the formality of its election: for the Dictators being
introduced with some diminution to the Consuls, (who being from heads of the
City brought down to obedience like other people, might possibly resent it, and
in time be the occasion of dissension in the City) they committed their
election into the hands of the Consuls, to the end that upon any extraordinary
emergence, when Rome should have occasion of so extraordinary a Magistrate, the
Consuls should comply the more willingly, because they had the making them
themselves; for the wounds which a man gives himself spontaneously, and of his
own election, are not so grievous as what he is forced for to bear. But toward
the latter end of their Empire, the Romans, instead of a Dictator, invested
their Consul with an equivalent authority in these words, Videat Consul, ne
Respublica quid detrimenti capiat; Let it be the Consuls care that the
Commonwealth receives no prejudice. So that to return to our matter, I
conclude, that the neighboring States conspiring against the Romans, and
endeavoring to oppress them, made them contrive better, not only for their
defense, but to put themselves into a posture, with more vigor, and counsel,
and authority to repel their invasion, and turn their force upon them.

CHAP. XXXV.
How it came to pass that the Creation of the Decem-virat was prejudicial to
the liberty of that State, though it was done freely, and by public suffrage.
IN the last Chapter we have shown that a power legally conferred, and by the
suffrage of the people, is not dangerous to the State; but that which is
usurped, and gotten by force, to which the election of the Decem-viri may seem
to be contrary, who were chosen by the people of Rome to make their Laws, and
reform extravagancies in the Commonwealth, which Decem-viri by degrees
encroached upon their liberties, and made themselves Tyrants. Wherefore we are
to consider what is said, with limitation and restraint; and respect both the
manner in which such power is conferred, as likewise the time it is to continue,
whether for longer or shorter: for an absolute power (though granted but for a
year) is very dangerous, and produces such effects as are suitable to the mind
of the person to whom it is granted. And the power of the Decem-viri (if
examined) will be found much greater than the power of the Dictators. For
notwithstanding the creation of the Dictator, the majesty of the Consuls and
Senate remained, together with the authority of the Tribunes, which were as
bounds to restrain and circumscribe the jurisdiction of the Dictator; and
although the Dictator had power to remove any one out of the Consulship, or
take from him his Tribunitial authority; yet he could not vacat or abolish the
whole Orders of Senators, Consuls, and Tribunes, make new Laws, nor introduce a
new form of Government. So that their eyes being always upon him, he was forced
(as it were) to intend only such things as were for the benefit of the
Commonwealth. But in the creation of the Decem-viri it was otherwise; for the
whole power of the people was transferred to them, the Consuls and Senate being
cashiered, and the power of the Tribunes of the people almost quite laid aside;
so that standing alone in the Government, without Consuls, or Tribunes, or
appeal to the people, or any other Magistrate to correct or control them; it
was no strange thing that the very next year after their creation, they should
become intolerable and insolent, especially being instigated by the ambition of
Appius, And for this reason it is to be observed, that when it is said, a Power
conferred legally, and by the suffrage of the people, is never prejudicial to
the State; it is to be supposed to be conferred with due circumstances, and for
a certain time; but when the people is cheated, and gives it imprudently and
rashly, as in this case of the Decem-viri, things never go better, which is
easily proved by considering what it was that kept the Dictators so good, and
made the Decem-viri so wicked: and weighing withal the manner which other
Republics that were reputed well ordered, observed, in conferring their
authority for a long time, as the Spartans to their Kings, and the Venetians to
their Dukes: both of them prescribing them rules and limits that they were not
to exceed, and appointing such guards upon them as should be able (though they
were never so ill disposed of themselves) to keep them from employing their
power to the detriment of the State.

Nor is it sufficient if this Power be conferred upon good men; for men are
frail, and easily corrupted, and then in a short time he that is absolute may
easily corrupt the people, contract friendships, make parties, heap up riches,
and commit a thousand extravagancies; nor can the poverty of their persons, or
the want of relations prevent it, for wealth, and honor, and every thing
follows them which are absolute, as we shall show particularly when we speak of
the creation of the Decem-viri.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Citizens who have executed the greatest Offices, ought not afterward. to
disdain or scruple the less.
MArcus Fabius and Cais Manlius being Consuls, the Romans obtained a glorious
Victory over the Veientes, and the Etrusci, in which was slain Quintus Fabius
Brother to the Consul, who was chosen the year before. From whence occasion is
offered of admiring the excellence of the Roman constitution; and observing how
well it was accommodated for the enlargement of their Empire, from whose Model
the more the Commonwealths of our days do recede, the more do they wander and
deviate from the best. For though the Romans affected glory and command as much
as other people, they did not disdain notwithstanding to obey in their Armies,
the same persons whom they had formerly commanded; and serve as private
Soldiers, where they had formerly been Generals. This is a practice contrary to
the opinion and genius of our age so much, that in Venice it is provided by a
public Law, that a Citizen who has had a greater command, may refuse to accept
of a less (and the City allows it) which Law though it may be convenient for
private persons, must needs be prejudicial to the public; because the public
may with more confidence commit an inferior command to a great Officer, than
prefer an inferior Officer to a great command: For to a young Soldier, those
places of importance are not safely entrusted, unless persons of experience and
wisdom be placed about him, by whose Counsel he may be directed: And if the
Romans had done then, what the Venetians and other Commonwealths do now, and
not suffered any man who had ever been Consul, to serve in any other quality,
many things had befallen them that would have endangered their liberty; and
again, if any young Officers had been admitted to the supreme commands, and no
body placed about them to manage and direct them, they would have grown
dissolute and careless, and many things have happened that might have ruined the
State.

CHAP. XXXVII.
What troubles and offense was created in Rome by the Agrarian Law; and how
dangerous it is to make a new Law opposite to an old Custom, with too much
retrospection.
IT is observed by most ancient Writers, that as men are afflicted in
adversity, so they are satiated in prosperity; and that joy and grief have the
same effects: For when men are not necessitated to fight, they fight for
ambition, which is so powerful in our minds, that let us arrive at what height
of good fortune we can, we are never contented, but are still laboring for
more; and this happens to us, because we are naturally capable of desiring many
things, which we are unable to compass; and therefore our desire being greater
than our power to acquire, our minds are never at rest with what we enjoy. And
this is the occasion of all our varieties of fortune, for when we are always
driving at more, and fearful of losing what is already in our possession, we
are apt to fall into suspicions, from thence into quarrels, and from thence
into Wars, which do usually bring after them the ruin of our Country. This we
have discoursed, to give you a better contemplation of the People of Rome,
which by a kind of necessity was forced by their Tribunitial power to fortify
themselves against the oppressions of the Patricii; but when they had obtained
what indeed necessity impelled them to desire, being instigated by their
ambition, they went on further, and contended with the Patricii both for Honor,
and Estate; which was the occasion of the Seditions about the Agrarian Law, and
by degrees the destruction of the Commonwealth. And because it is necessary in
every well ordered State, that respect be had rather to the enrichment of the
Public, than particular Citizens, the people of Rome could not (in what
belonged to this Law) but err against the Fundamentals of their Government, if
they were so constituted, that process of time could give no occasion of
difference, unless we will rather affirm that at first all things were so well,
that it was beyond the power of time to disorder them: Be it which way it will,
it is certain this Law was never mentioned in Rome, but with great
controversy, and tumult. This Law consisted principally in two heads. One was,
That no Citizen of Rome should be permitted to possess more than a certain
proportion of Land. The other, that what Land should be taken from the Enemy,
should be divided equally among the people; both of which Articles were against
the interest of the Nobility; for most of them having more Land than was
allowed by this Law, their fortunes by it were to be confiscated, and half of
them taken away; and then by the distribution of what they should take from the
Enemy, they should lose all opportunity of enriching themselves for the future;
which being certainly true, and this Law so perfectly pernicious to the
interest of the Nobility, it was never mentioned by the Tribunes, but the
Patricii opposed it, and with all the eagerness imaginable; yet not always by
force, but sometimes by evasion, either commanding out their Armies upon some
pretended design, or by setting up another Tribune in opposition to him who
proposed the Law, that thereby they might dissolve it, or else by sending new
Colonies. And so it happened when the Colony was sent to Antium at the time when
the difference was so high betwixt the Patricii and the Agrarians, that no
other expedient could be found to keep them from blood. Livy tells us, That
there were very few that would list themselves upon that account, to fill up
the number of that Colony, so much more did the people prefer an alotment about
Rome, than in any other place. But afterward the quarrel grew higher, and to
appease their Seditions, the Romans were glad to send their Armies sometimes to
the extremest parts of Italy, and sometimes beyond them. But afterward it
falling out that the Lands which they took from the Enemy were remote, at great
distance from Rome, and not to be cultivated with any convenience, the people
grew weary, and insisted not so fiercely on their Agrarian Law: They began also
to be more moderate in those kind of confiscations, but when any Country was
seized, they sent Colonies to plant them: With these Arts they skinned over
their animosities till the time of the Gracchi, who reviving them again, gave
occasion to the ruin of their Government: for the Nobility having increased
their strength, the quarrel advanced so far, that they came to blows, and the
Magistrate being unable to restrain them, the fury of the Faction increasing,
each party began to look out for a head. The people chose Marius, and made him
four times Consul, (with some little interval) which authority he managed so
well to his own advantage, that by the power and interest which he had got in
that time, he made himself thrice Consul afterward. The Nobility having no
other remedy against so growing a Plague, applied themselves to Sylla, and
having made him their chief, they fell to down right Wars, which were carried
on with much blood and variety of fortune, till at last the Nobility prevailed.
The same faction revived again in the days of Caesar and Pompey, and was
attended by the destruction of the State: For Caesar espousing the Marian
party, and Pompey the Syllan; Caesar overcame, and was the first that set up a
Tyranny in Rome; after whose time that City could never recover its liberty.
This was the beginning, and this was the end of the Agrarian Law, which may
seem to contradict what we have said elsewhere. That the discords and enmity
betwixt the people and Senate of Rome conduced to the enlargement of their
Empire, and the conservation of their liberty, by giving opportunity for the
making of such Laws, as were great corroboration to their liberties and
freedom; but I answer, That the effects of the Agrarian Law, does not hinder,
but that what we have said may be true; for so great was the ambition of the
Nobility, that had it not been curbed and checked several ways, it would have
usurped upon the City, and got the whole power into its hands. And if we
observe that the Agrarian dispute was three hundred years together in Rome,
before it could subvert it, we may easily imagine, the ambition of the Patricii
would have done it much sooner, had it not been balanced and depressed by the
people with their Agrarian Laws, and some other inventions. From whence
likewise we may observe that wealth is more estimable among men, than honor;
for when the Patricii were in controversy with the people about Titles and
Honor, they never went so high as to give them any extraordinary disgust: But
when their Estates and Fortunes were at stake, they defended them with such
zeal, that they chose rather to put the whole Commonwealth into a flame, than
to part with them quickly. The great authors of that Conflagration were the
Gracchi, whose good will and intentions toward the people, was much more to be
commended than their wisdom. For to remove an inveterated inconvenience, and to
that purpose to make a Law with too much retrospection, is ill Counsel (as I
said before) and hastens that ruin which it was designed to prevent; but with
Patience and Compliance, the mischief is either delayed, or spends it self in
time, before it does any great hurt.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Weak Commonwealths are generally irresolute, and ill advised, taking their
measures more from Necessity, than Election.
THe Volsci, and the Equi understanding that Rome was sadly visited with a
Contagion, concluded it a fair opportunity to conquer it, and having betwixt
them raised a powerful Army, they invaded the Latini, and Hernici; overran
most of their Country, and forced them to send to Rome for assistance. The
Romans returned answer, that they should put themselves in Arms, and make as
good defense as they could; for the Sickness was so raging, they could give
them no relief. which shows the generosity and wisdom of that Senate, That in
all conditions, and under the greatest of their Calamities never receded from
its Majesty and Grandeur; but at all times would have the disposal of the
affairs of its Subjects, and when necessity required, made no scruple to
command things contrary to their old ways of proceeding. This I say, because
formerly the Senate had forbidden them to arm, upon any occasion whatever; and
perhaps another Council would have thought it derogatory to their Grandeur, to
permit them to defend themselves: But this Senate was endued with admirable
prudence, understood how things were to be taken, and rejected; and of two
evils, how to make choice of the least. It troubled them much that they were
not in condition to protect them; and it troubled them no less, That they would
be forced to defend themselves, upon their own score without succors from
Rome; yet finding there was a necessity of it, the enemy being at their Gates,
and threatening them with death, they retained their authority, and with great
gravity sent them word to defend themselves and raise what forces they could.
This may seem but a common resolution, and what any other Commonwealths would
have taken as well as that; but weak and ill ordered Commonwealths cannot come
off with so much honor. Duke Valentine having taken Faenza, and overrun most
part of Bologna, demanded passage of the Florentines to march his Army to Rome.
The Florentine Council met, and consulted, and there was not one man who
thought it convenient to grant it. This was not according to the discretion of
the Romans; for the Duke being very strong, and the Florentines but weak, it
had been more for their honor to have granted him passage, when they could not
obstruct it; that what they could not resist, might have been imputed to their
courtesy. But there is no remedy, it is the property of weak States to do every
thing amiss, and never to do well but in spite of their teeths, for there is
no such thing as prudence amongst them. And this Florence has verified in two
other cases.

In the year 1500. when Lewis XII. had repossessed himself of Milan, he had an
inclination to restore Pisa to the Florentines upon the payment of 50000
Florens: To this purpose he sent thither his Army under the Command of
Mounsieur de Beaumont in whom (though a French man) the Florentines had great
confidence. Beaumont came up with his Army betwixt Cassina and Pisa, and lodged
it conveniently for the battering the Town: having been two or three days
before, it and all things ready for the assault, Commissioners came out, and
offered to surrender to the French, upon condition that he would engage upon
the honor of his Master that it should not in four months time be delivered to
the Florentine; to which the Florentines not consenting, the Commissioners
returned. The cause why the Florentines refused it, was their jealousy of the
King, though they had put themselves under his protection. They did not
consider that the King could better have put the Town into their hands when he
was Master of it himself (and if he had refused it, it would have discovered
him) than promise to do it when he was not in possession, and yet they be
forced to purchase that promise at a very great rate. Two years after, Arezzo
revolted, and the King sent Seigneur Iubalt with supplies to the Florentines,
who had besieged the Town. Iubalt was no sooner arrived, but the Inhabitants of
Arezzo made him the same proffer, and the Florentines could not be brought to
consent: Iubalt resented it, and knowing it to be a great fault, he practiced
privately with the Aretines, without Communicating with the Florentine
Commissaries: An agreement was clapped up betwixt them, by virtue of which
Iubalt entered the Town, and reproached the Florentines by their indiscretion,
as people wholly inexperienced in the affairs of the world. He told them, if
they desired to have it, they should signify it to the King, who would be
better able to gratify them in the Town, than without. The Florentines were
highly offended, and spoke very hardly of Iubalt, till they considered that of
Beaumont had done the same at Pisa, they had both as well as one I say
therefore, that weak and irresolute States, do seldom take good Counsels,
unless they be forced; for their weakness suffers them not to deliberate, where
any thing is doubtful; and if that doubt be not removed by a violent necessity,
they never come to a resolution, but are always in suspense.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Diverse People have many times the same Accidents.
WHoever compares past things with the present, will find that in all Ages men
have had the same humors and appetites as now. So that it is an easy matter by
consulting what is passed, not only (in all commonwealths) to see what will
follow, but to provide such remedies as their Predecessors did apply; or if
there be no Presidents, to invent new remedies according to the similitude of
the accidents. But because these considerations are neglected, History not
read, or not understood at least by him who governs, it comes to pass that all
Ages have their miscarriages and troubles. The City of Florence after the
Government had stood 94 years, having lost a good part of its Territory, as
Pisa, and other Towns, was forced to make War upon those who possessed them;
and the Inhabitants being strong, and unwilling to restore them, much was spent
in the War; to very little purpose. Their great expense, occasioned great
Taxes, and their impositions upon the people, made them mutinous, and unquiet.
These affairs were administered by a Magistracy of ten Citizens, who were called
the Dieci della Guerra: The people began to repine and to complain that the
said Counsel was the cause of the War, and that they embezled their Money. That
the best way would be to remove them from that Office or when their time was
expired to choose no more, but let the Government fall back into its old
channel again. These grave Persons who had the superintendancy of the War, were
no sooner discharged, but things grew worse and worse, and instead of
recovering Pisa, and the rest of the Towns in dispute, they lost Arezzo, and
several other places. The people finding their mistake, and that their malady
was rather from the Fever, than the Physician, they restored the ten
Commissaries, which before they had cashiered. The people of Rome had the same
fancy against the Consuls, and would not believe but they were the causes of
all their distractions, and that to settle all things, and preserve themselves
in peace, the best way would be to remove them entirely, and provide that there
should never be any more, or else to restrain and limit their authority in such
manner, that they should have no power over them, either within the City or
without. They believed that all proceeded from the ambition of the Nobility,
who not being able to chastise the people in the City, because they were
protected by their Tribunes, contrived to carry them out of Town under the
command of their Consuls, to correct them where they should not be capable of
any redress. The first man who had the confidence to propose it, was
Terentillus a Tribune, who moved that it might be committed to five persons to
consider the power of the Consuls, and to appoint limitations. The Nobility
opposed it, and (it is probable) employed all their interest against it, for it
was no less than to debase the Majesty of the Government, and leave themselves
no dignity in the commonwealth. Nevertheless the obstinacy of the Tribunes was
such, that the Name of Consul was laid aside, and after several experiments,
the people chose rather to create their Tribunes with Consular power, than to
create new Consuls again, showing thereby that their quarrel was not so much
against the authority, as Name: But they found their error at length, and
restored their Consuls, as the Florentines did their Council of ten.

CHAP. XL.
The creation of the Decem-virat in Rome; what things are most remarkable in
it; and how far such a Constitution may be useful or pernicious to a
Commonwealth.
BEfore we discourse of the troubles and commotions which happened in Rome by
means of the Decem-virat, it will not be amiss to give a short history of its
Creation, in which there are many things well worthy our remark, as well for
the preservation as destruction of a State; and this discourse will remonstrate
the errors both of the Senate and People in prejudice to the liberty, and of
Appius (chief of the Decem-viri) against that tyranny which he designed to
erect. The Romans therefore after a long debate betwixt the Nobility and People
about the Constitution of such Laws as might settle and establish the liberty
of their State, by common consent, sent to Athens Spurius Posthumus, with two
other persons, for exemplifications of such Laws as Solon had made there, that
thereby they might model their own. As soon as they were returned they chose
certain learned and grave men to peruse the said Laws, and select such as they
thought convenient for the Romans. The persons created for this office were ten
of the principal Citizens (with Commission for a year) among whom, Appius
Claudius was one, a witty, but a turbulent man. And that they might act freely,
without any awe or impediment in their affairs, they laid aside all the other
Magistrates, (in particular the Tribunes and Consuls) and forbad all appeal to
the people; so that this Magistracy were complete Sovereigns in Rome. Not long
after Appius assumed the whole authority of the ten, his Companions paying a
reverence, as their Superior, by reason of his interest with the people; for he
had made himself so popular on a sudden, it was almost a miracle to consider
how soon his nature was changed, and he of their only cruel and fierce
adversary become their greatest Courtier and Favorite.

The first year all went very well, and he who presided marched only with
twelve Lictors before him; when any Citizen was to be tried for murder, they
framed the Process, but appointing a day, left it to be judged by the people,
though their jurisdiction was Sovereign, and without any appeal. They writ
their Laws in ten Tables, but before they were ratified they exposed them to
the people that every man might see them at his pleasure, and approve or object
as he saw occasion. When Appius perceived the end of his Commission
approaching, he caused it to be rumoured among the people, that to complete
all, and give perfection to their designs, it would be convenient to add two
Tables more to their Ten, in order to which the common people consented that
the Decem-virat should be continued for a year; and they did it with the more
readiness, that neither the Consuls nor Tribunes might be restored, but Causes
be left to their own judgment, as is said before. A day being appointed for a
new creation, it is not to be imagined how all the Nobility stickled, and
endeavored to gain that honor which they had so stiffly impugned by their
applications to the people, whom they had so highly provoked. But among them
all, none was so solicitous for the continuation of the Decem-virat, as Appius
Claudius who pressed it of the people with so much instance and humanity, that
he began to be suspected by his associates, Credebant enim haud gratuitam in
tanta superbia Comitatem fore; They could not imagine a person of his pride
would stoop to such flatterry without some great design: that they might defeat
neatly, and with cunning, what they could not do by force; though he was the
youngest of them all, they committed the nomination of the next ten to him,
supposing he would have observed ancient rules, and not named himself, which
was a practice of no use nor reputation in Rome, Ille verb impedimentum, pro
occasion arripuit he spoiled their Plot made advantage of their impediment,
and named himself among the foremost, to the amazement and displeasure of all
the Nobility.

This Creation was no sooner over, but both Nobility and People began to be
sensible of their error; for, as was said of him, Finem fecit ferendae alienae
personae, Appius began to show himself, and lay aside the disguise he had put
on: he began to act according to his own natural pride, and in a little time
had made his Colleagues as bad as himself. To terrify the Senate and people
both, the first day of their Magistracy they multiplied their Lictors to 120,
whereas formerly they had but 12, which were carried before every one of them
by turns, but now every one of them had as many. This terror for some time was
equally diffused, but afterward they began to favor the Nobility, and insult
upon the people only; and if any of the people that had been injured by any of
the Decem-viri, and had no right done him by the first, to whom he addressed,
if he appealed to another, he was sure to be worse; insomuch as the people
finding their error, began in their affliction to look upon the Nobility; Et
inde libertatis captari auram, unde servitutem timendo, in eum statum
rempublicam adduxerant; and from thence hope for their liberty, from where
their apprehension of servitude had brought their Commonwealth into the
condition in which it was.

And this affliction in the people was no little satisfaction to the Nobility,
Ut ipsi taedio praesentium, Consules desiderarent; that the tediousness of
their sufferings might make them restore their Consuls. By this time their
years was expired, and the two Tables to be added to the ten, both ready, and
wanted nothing but publication; the Decem-viri had no mind to lay down, but
began to think of continuing their authority by force, to which end they raised
themselves Guards out of the young Nobility, and paid them out of the Estates
of those who were condemned. Quibus donis juventus corrumpebatur, and malebat
licentiam suam, quam omnium libertatem; by which preferment the youth were
debauched, and chose rather to be licentious themselves than that their Country
should be free.

Whilst things were in this posture, the Sabini and the Volsci made War upon
the Romans and invaded them with a great Army. The Romans were in great
consternation and the Decem-viri began to find the weakness of their
Government, for without a Senate they were at a loss to manage their War; and
with it their authority would be supplanted. But being necessitated at last,
they came to a resolution, and resembled the Senate. Many speeches were made
against the Decem-viri, in particular by Valerius and Horatius; and doubtless
their authority had been utterly exploded, but that the Senate; in spite to
the people, chose rather to continue them, lest, if they were deposed, the
people should set up their Tribunes, and the Consuls be quite laid aside;
whereas, if afterward the Decem-viri could be brought fairly to lay down, by
degrees the Consuls might be restored, and the Tribunes be cashiered. Hereupon
the Senate silently, without further prosecution of them, prepared for the War,
and sent forth two Armies under the Command of several of the Ten, but Appius
Claudius was left behind for the Government of the City. Whilst his Colleagues
were abroad, it was his fortune to fall in love with a Plebeian's daughter
called Virginia, and not being able to persuade, he would take her away by
force; Virginius the Father of the Virgin was willing to defend the chastity of
his Daughter, and knowing no other way to secure it, he got Appius to be
imprisoned: whereupon great tumults succeeding in Rome, and in the Army, the
Soldiers returned, and joining with the people they encamped upon the holy
Mountain, where they resolved to continue till the Ten had resigned, Tribunes
and Consuls were restored, and the Commonwealth had recovered its old liberty
and freedom. This is the story of the Decem-virat, as shortly related as could
be, in which it may be observed, that the people of Rome fell into subjection
and servitude upon the same causes as other Commonwealths very frequently do;
that is, by the too great desire of the people to be free, and the too great
ambition in the Nobility of Command: when these two Factions cannot agree, they
are forced to refer all to some third person in whom they confide; and then
begins the Tyranny. The Decem-virat was erected in Rome by consent both of the
Nobility and People, and invested with so much power, out of a hatred which the
Nobility bare to the Tribunitial, and the people to the Consular authority: as
soon as the Decem-viri were chosen, Appius pretended highly for the people, and
promised to be their Champion, whereupon they favored him exceedingly. And (be
it in what City it will) whenever the people are brought to extol and applaud a
person, for no other reason, but because it is in his power to punish their
enemies; if that person be cunning and industrious, their liberty is lost, and
he can usurp when he pleases; for by the assistance of the people he may master
the Nobility; and when they are down, it will be no hard matter to subdue the
people, who will have no body to fly to, nor no body to support them: but
before the Nobility be suppressed, he is by no means to meddle with the people.
And this has been the method of all those who have laid the foundation of
Tyranny in any Commonwealth; which if Appius had followed, he had not lost his
illgot authority so soon: but he went quite contrary, and with as much
imprudence as was possible, ran himself into the displeasure of the same
persons which advanced him; and ingratiated with those who were against his
preferment, and were no way able to sustain him, whereby he lost his old
friends who were powerful, and endeavored to get new that could do him no
good. For though the Nobility have naturally no aversion to Tyranny; yet that
part of the Nobility which shares not in the profits is always an enemy to the
Tyrant, and their ambition and avarice is so great, all the riches and honors
in the Tyrants disposal are too little to take them off. Hence it is that the
aggressor in any enterprise is of necessity to be stronger than his adversary;
and he who in the establishment of a Tyranny makes the people rather than the
Nobility his friends, will be stronger and more secure than he who goes the
other way, cajoles with the Nobility, and disobliges the People: for the people
being always stronger in the City, by their friendship, a Tyrant may subsist
without any foreign supplies. This was visible in the case of Nabis the Tyrant
of Sparta, who having the affections of the people, and secured himself of some
of the Nobility, defended himself against all Greece, and the whole power of
the Romans, which without the hearts of the people he could never have done.
But he who makes his interest with the Nobility, cannot maintain himself
without foreign assistance; for he will want Guards for the security of his
person, Soldiers to do the Office of the Militia in the Country, and
Confederates and Allies to succor him in his distress; whereas if he could be
supplied in these three defects, it might be possible for him to subsist
without the friendship of the people. But Appius failing in these, miscarried
in the very beginning of his Tyranny.

In the creation of the Decem-virat the Senate and the People were guilty of
very great error; for though in our discourse of Dictators we have said before,
that those Magistrates only are pernicious to the public liberty, who set up
themselves by force, not they who are legally chosen and by the suffrage of the
people; yet the people are to take special care in the election of their
Magistrates, that they may not easily usurp. But the Romans instead of placing
Guards about their Decem-viri that might have kept them in order, they not only
took their Guards away, but displaced all the rest of their Magistrates, and
made them absolute for that year, and all out of a design to countermine one
another; the Nobility to suppress the Tribunes, and the people the Consuls. So
that it happened to them, as Ferdinand King of Arragon was wont to say it happened
to men that hated one another; that is, that they acted like birds of prey, all
of them pursuing the quarry with equal rapacity; but the little birds not
regarding the greater over their heads, are easily interrupted, and made prey
themselves. But we have said enough to demonstrate the ill Counsel of the
Romans in thinking to preserve their liberty by the creation of the
Decem-virat, and the errors of Appius in driving at the Sovereignty, and
miscarrying so soon.

CHAP. XLI.
For a mean man to grow immediately insolent, or a meek man immediately cruel,
without just steps of gradation, is both imprudent and unprofitable.
AMong the rest of Appius his faults in the management of his Tyranny, it was
of no little ill consequence that he changed his humor so suddenly: his
cunning in cajoling the people, and pretending to be of their party, was good:
his invention to renew the creation of the Ten was no worse; his boldness in
presenting himself contrary to the expectation of the Nobility was well enough,
and his creating Colleagues for his turn was not amiss. But having gone thus
far, (as is said before) to change his nature in a moment; of a friend, to
become an enemy to the people; of an humble and affable man, to show himself
proud; of a mild man, to become difficult and perverse; and all this with so
little circumstance, that the whole World might see it was either the falsness
or levity of his temper, was high indiscretion: for he that has ever pretended
to be good, and is willing for his advantage to become otherwise, must not do
it at a leap, but by degrees, and upon occasion, that before the diversity of
his deportment deprives him of his old friends, he may have gained himself new,
without diminution to his authority; otherwise being discovered and deserted,
he is certainly ruined.

CHAP. XLII.
How easily men's manners are corrupted.
IT is remarkable likewise in the passages of the Decem-viri, that men are
easily corrupted, and become wicked, be their education never so good. The
youth which Appius debauched, and took for his Guards, is sufficient to prove
it; who, though of honorable extraction, and brought up with all possible
advantage, suffered themselves to be corrupted by their preferments, became
favorers of tyranny, and perfer'd their own licentiousness before the liberty
of their Country. Quintus Fabius did the same, who, though an excellent person
at first, and one of the Decem-viri of the second creation, blinded with
ambition and enveigled by the cunning of Appius, changed his good humor into
bad, and grew as intolerable as he; which things, if seriously considered,
should make all Legislators (either in Commonwealths or Kingdom) the more
careful and diligent to restrain the ambition of mankind, and take from them
all hopes of impunity when they offend in that kind.

CHAP. XLIII.
Those Soldiers which fight for their own honor are the best, and most to be
trusted
FRom the same History it may be observed how much it imports the prosperity or
adversity of affairs to have the minds of the Soldiers quiet, and ready to
engage upon a principle of honor, rather than to have them turbulent, and
disposed to fight upon every man's ambition: for whereas the Roman Armies were
always Victorious under the conduct of the Consuls; under the Decem-viri they
were always unfortunate: from hence likewise it may be collected how unsafe it
is to commit the defense of our affairs to a mercenary Army who have nothing to
encourage or oblige them but their pitiful pay, which is not considerable
enough to make them so faithful as to lay down their lives in your quarrel, For
in an Army where the Soldier is not bound to the person for whom he fights by
some particular obligation, or the expectation, of more than ordinary advantage
by the Victory if the enemy be strong, they will make but little resistance;
and this kindness and affection of the Soldiers to the General cannot be but
where they are subjects fighting under a good Prince or a lawful Magistrate in
defense of their Posterity and Religion: so that it is necessary for every King
or Commonwealth who desires to defend himself well, to train up his own
Subjects in Military Discipline, that he may safely depend upon them in time of
distress; and it has been the practice of all those who have done any great
things. The Roman Armies under the Decem-viri had doubtless the same courage as
under the Consuls: but not being so well affected toward the one as the other,
they would not put it forth, nor give such testimonies as formerly: but when
the tyranny of the Decem-virat extinguished, and their liberty was recovered,
having then the same tenderness and affection to their Country, they fought as
well as before, and their enterprises had the same happy success.

CHAP. XLIV.
A multitude without an head is altogether unserviceable; nor is any man to
threaten that has any thing to desire.
UPon the accident of Virginius, the people having taken Arms, and retired to
the holy-Mount, the Senate sent to them to know upon what account they had
abandoned their Officers, and betaken themselves to that Mount: and the
authority of the Senate was so venerable among the people, that having no head
among them, there was no body durst return an answer: Titus Livius tells us,
Non defuit quid responderetur, deerat qui responsum daret; They wanted not what
to say, but who to deliver it. For having no certain Commander, every private
person was unwilling to expose himself to their displeasure. From whence we may
understand how useless a thing the multitude is without a head, which being
observed by Virginius, he caused twenty Military Tribunes to be made, with
power to treat and expostulate with the Senate instead of a Head.

The people insisting to have Valerius and Horatius sent to them, to whom they
would communicate their grievances, Valerius and Horatius refused to go till
the Decemviri had laid down their authority; which being at length obtained
with much concertation; Valerius and Horatius repaired to the people, and
understood that they would have new Tribunes to be chosen; they would have
appeals from every Magistrate to the people; and they would have the Decem-viri
to be delivered up into their hands, that they might burn them alive: the
Ambassadors liked the first of their demands, but refused to consent to the
last as impious, telling them, Crudelitatem damnatis, in crudelitatem ruitis:
You condemn cruelty, and practice it your selves: and before you will be free,
you will tyrannize over your adversaries; advising them to lay that Article by,
and mention the Decemviri no farther, but to address themselves to the
reassumption of their power and authority, after which they would not want ways
of receiving satisfaction; for then every man's life and fortune would be at
their disposing. Hence we may learn how weak and imprudent it is to desire a
thing, and before we receive it, declare to what ill use we intend it,
especially if we mean to do mischief, it is just as you should say, pray give me
your Sword, that I may run you through, It Is sufficient to borrow the Sword, and
when you have it, you may do as you please.

CHAP. XLV.
It Is a thing of ill Example to break a new Law, especially for the Maker: and
it is no less dangerous to the Governor of a State, to multiply injuries, and
repeat them every day.
THe Commotions about the Tyranny of the Decem-viri being composed, and Rome
restored to its old form of Government again; Virginius cited Appius before the
the people to answer what he had attempted upon his Daughter. Appius appeared
with his Nobility about him; Virginius commanded him to Prison: Appius cried
out, he appealed to the people: Virginius replied, That he who had taken away
those appeals from the people, ought not to have any benefit by them, nor be
permitted to implore their protection, whose Laws and Liberties could receive
no protection from him. Appius insisted, that they ought not to violate a thing
which they had urged with that eagerness, and ordained with that zeal. And
though indeed the life of Appius was wicked enough, and there was no punishment
that he did not deserve; yet it was inhospitable and contrary to all civil
Society, to violate their own Laws, which were but newly made, and passed with
so much importunity: for in my judgment there is nothing so indecorous, nor of
so ill example in a Commonwealth, as the infraction of a new Law, by the
Legislator himself.

When in the year 1494. the State of Florence was restored by the assistance of
a Friar called Hieronimo Savonarolo (whose writings give sufficient testimony
of his Learning and integrity) having among other things for the security of
the Citizens, obtained a Law for appeals to the people in matters of State,
both from the Senate and the Council of Eight (which Law he had a long time
solicited, and got with much difficulty at last) It happened that not long after,
there were five persons condemned to death by the Senate, which persons
endeavoring very earnestly to appeal to the people, they were denied that
liberty, and could not have the benefit of that Law; which was greater
diminution to the reputation of the Friar, than any thing that had ever happened
before: For if that Law was of such importance as he had pretended, it ought to
have been observed; if nor, why was it solicited so earnestly? And it was the
more remarkable in the Friar, because in his many Sermons and Discourses
afterward to the people, he neither blamed the breaking of that Law, nor went
about to excuse it, for being to his purpose, he would not condemn it, and
excuse it he could not, having nothing to say; which action having discovered
the ambition and partiality of his mind, took much off from his repute, and
loaded him with scandal. It is of great inconvenience likewise in a State, to
revive, and ferment the humors in the minds of the Citizens, by a daily
renovation of their injuries upon one person or other, as it happened in Rome
after the Decem-virat, was dissolved, and the Tribunitial authority
re-established by the people: For all the Decem-viri, and several other
considerable Citizens were Accused, and Condemned, in so much as there was a
General consternation among the Nobility, who thought there would be no end of
their condemnation, till they were utterly extinct: Which proceeding and
apprehension, would doubtless have produced great troubles in the State, had
not they been prevented by Marcus Duellius the Tribune, who published an Edict,
That for a twelvemonth it should not be lawful either to cite or accuse any
man that was Citizen of Rome; by which act of Moderation, he secured the
Nobility. From whence we may discern how unsafe it is for any Prince or
Commonwealth to keep the minds of their Subjects in perpetual fear and
suspense; and without doubt nothing can be more pernicious; for men being
insecure, and jealous of being questioned for some Capital offense, will look
out for protection, and not only so, but are provoked to more boldness, and
become less scrupulous of doing great mischiefs. If therefore such Commotions
happen, it is better if possible to compose them without blood, but if Example
must be made, it is to be done at once, that afterward the people may be
reassured, and recover their old security, and tranquillity of mind.

CHAP. XLVI.
How men leap from one passion to another, and how they who at first aim at
nothing but self-preservation, when secured of that, grow oppressors of other
People.
AFter the people of Rome had recovered their liberty, and had by so much
improved their former condition, by how much they had made many new Laws to
fortify their power, one would have expected they should have been quiet, and
after so much trouble and embroilment, enjoyed some time of repose; but it fell
out quite contrary, they were more perplexed than before, every day producing
some new Sedition or Disturbance: Of which, Livy giving the reasons so clearly,
I do not think it amiss to insert them in this place. These two Orders (says
he) were in perpetual opposition; when the people were humble, the Nobility was
proud, when the populace was quiet, and content with their bounds, the young
Nobility took their time to be insolent; and when the Tribunes interposed in
their behalf, they made little progress at first, and at length were as much
injured themselves. The graver sort of the Nobility on the other side, though
they thought their own youth to be too furious and insolent, yet they had
rather if one side must transgress, that it should be their own, than the
peoples: So that their immoderate desire of preserving their privilege, was
the cause that when either party was prevalent, it employed its whole power in
oppressing the other. It is common among men, when they would secure
themselves, to injure other people; they begin first to do mischief, to revile,
or to beat, or what other outrage they are able, as if the injury they would
avoid themselves, was to be thrown upon their Neighbor, and there was no
Medium betwixt doing, and suffering of wrong. From hence we may see after what
manner (among other things) Commonwealths are dissolved, and how suddenly men
pass from one ambition to another, according to that true saying which Salust
put into the mouth of Caesar. Omnia mala exempla, bonis initiis Orta sunt. All
disorders and abuses, are good in their beginnings. The first thing an
ambitious Citizen endeavors, is so to fortify, that he may defend himself not
only against his private adversary, but against the public Magistrate, if at
any time he would offend him; to which end he makes what friends he can, by
furnishing them with Money or supporting them against their Oppressors; and this
seeming very honest in appearance, people are easily deluded, and no body goes
about to prevent it; so that no obstacle being given, he grows insensibly so
great, that not only the private Citizens, but the Magistrate begins to
apprehend him; and then there is no resisting him without manifest danger, for
the reasons (which I have mentioned before) of the dangerous contending with
inconvenience that has got that growth and maturity in a City. What is then to
be done? Let him alone in his prosperity, and he enslaves you for ever, unless
death or some other kind accident delivers you: If you think to remove him on a
sudden, you do but add to his power and hasten your own ruin; for finding
himself in such a posture that his Friends, his Enemies, the Magistrates, and
all people are afraid of him, he will then begin to domineer, and dispose of
all things according to his own judgment and pleasure; If there be any way to
prevent it, it is by watching in time, by having a diligent eye over your
Citizens, that under color of doing good, they may not be able to do mischief;
and that they may have as much reputation as may serve, not ruin their
liberty: but of this more hereafter.

CHAP. XLVII.
Though the people, in things that are discoursed in general, are many times
mistaken, yet when they are reduced to particulars, they are more sensible and
judicious.
THe Name of consul (as we said before) being grown odious to the people of
Rome they resolved to have them created for the future out of the Populace; or
else to limit and circumscribe their authority with such rulers as they should
think fit. The Nobility, to prevent both inconveniences, took a way betwixt
both, and was contented that they should create four Tribunes with consular
authority, to be chosen indifferently out of the people, and Senate. The people
were well enough satisfied, as thinking by that means the Consulship would
extinguish, and that they should have a share of the supreme dignity
themselves. But observe what followed when they came to the creation of their
Tribunes, and it was not only in their power, but expected, that they should
have been all made out of the people, they chose them all out of the Nobility,
which gave occasion to Livy to say, Quorum Comitiorum eventus docuit, alios
animos in Contentione libertatis and honoris, alios secundum deposita Certamina
in incorrupto judicio esse. The success of that Election did show, That when
their honor and liberty were in controversy, the people were of one mind;
when they were secure and free, they were of another. Considering with my self
what might be the reason, I suppose it is because men are more apt to be
mistaken in generals, than in particulars. The people thought themselves more
worthy of the Cousulship than the Nobility, because they had the greatest
interest in the City; They underwent the greatest difficulty in the Wars, and
it was their Arms which defended its liberty, and propagated the Empire of
Rome: according to which argument, their desires seeming but reasonable, they
resolved they would have them in spite of all opposition: But when they came
to particulars, and to examine their own private Capacities for Government,
they found themselves so weak and defective, that though altogether they
thought themselves able enough, yet they could not find one man they judged
proper for the employment; ashamed therefore of their incapacity, they gave
their voices for such as they found were more really worthy; which Titus Livius
admiring, has these words, Hanc modestiam, aequitatemque and altitudinem animi
ubi nunc in uno inveneris, quae tunc populi universi fuit? Where will you find
nowadays, that Modesty, that Equity, that Magnanimity in one man, that was
then obvious in the whole body of the people? To the same purpose there happened
another notable Example in Capua, after Hanibal had defeated the Romans at the
Battle of Cannas. After that defeat, the Inhabitants of Capua began to mutiny
against the Government (as indeed all Italy did at that time) the grounds of
their discontent, was an old pique betwixt the people and Senate, which the
first thought then to improve to the destruction of the other. Pacuvius Calanus
being a very wise man, and at the Helm at that time, considering with himself
of what dangerous consequence a tumult might prove in so populous a City,
resolved to find out some way to accommodate their difference. To this end, he
assembled the Senate, and in few words remonstrated to them the implacable
hatred which the people had to them; That they were in great danger of being
murdered by them, and the City delivered up to Hanibal, by reason that the
condition of Rome was become so deplorable; and at length he concluded, that if
they would commit the whole matter to him, he would find out an expedient to
unite them, and his expedient was to lock up the Senate in the Palace, and by
putting them into the peoples power, to preserve them. The Senate submitted,
were locked up in the Castle, and having assembled the people, he told them,
That the hour was now come for redeeming their liberty, and chastising the
insolence of their Nobility, who had so often abused them. He told them he had
them all locked up in his Custody, to be disposed of as they pleased; but
because he could not think it was their desire to leave the City without a
Government, before they proceeded to the execution of the ancient Senators, it
would be necessary, as he conceived, to think of creating a new one; to that
purpose he had brought the Names of the old Senators in a Purse, would draw
them out one by one, and as they resolved upon another to succeed in each
place, he would see the old one delivered out to execution. The people were
content, and Pacuvius drew one, and named him aloud, upon which a great noise
was raised, some said he was cruel, others he was proud, and others that he was
arrogant: Then says Pacuvius, he is unfit to be continued, pray will you make
choice of another in his stead. Silence was commanded, and one of the people
was named; He was named no sooner, but some began to hum, others to laugh, and
all to revile, and so proceeding from one to another, they were all concluded
unfit for so honorable a degree. Paccucius taking the occasion, told them,
since you are sensible it is unfit that the City should be without a Senate;
and since you cannot agree about the Election of a new; it would be expedient
in my judgment, that you propose some way of reconciliation; for doubtless the
fear in which the Senators have been, must of necessity have so humbled them,
that that gentleness and humanity which you have sought for elsewhere, may now
be found in them. The people began then to discover in particular, the fault
which they had committed in judging in general, and declared they were ready
for any reasonable reconciliation. And in this manner it is that most people
deceive themselves in judging generally of things and their accidents, which
upon particular examination they do easily discover.

After the year 1414. the chief of the Florentines being driven out of the
City, it was left wholly without order or government, overwhelmed with
licentiousness and ambition, and the interest of the public running headlong
to ruin. Many of the popular party foreseeing the inevitable destruction of
the City, and not knowing to what else to impute it, they charged it upon the
ambition of some persons among the Nobility, which (as they pretended)
formented their disorders, to take away their liberty, and model the State
according to their own fancies, and designs. And these Mutineers were in all
places; in the Streets, in the Houses, in the palaces, declaring publicly, and
threatening that if ever they came to the government, they would look farther
into the business, and punish all those which they should find conscious of it.
It happened afterward that some of these Citizens were advanced as they desired;
but when they were at that height, and saw things nearer than before, they
became sensible of their error, and found that it was not the ambition of the
Nobility, but the malignity of the times, which was the occasion of all their
trouble and commotion; so as they became new men, and exercised a new way of
administration; Insomuch that those who had heard them complain and threaten
when they were in private capacity, seeing them now at the helm, and performing
nothing that they had promised, did not look upon it as conviction of their
judgment, so much as corruption of their minds. Which thing being frequent
among them, gave occasion to the Proverb, Costoro hanno un animo in Piazza, et
uno in Palazzo. They are of one mind in the Town, and another in the Throne.
Thus, by serious consideration of what has been said we may see how to open the
eyes of the people, and reduce them to a sense of their errors, if we take them
from their general and abstracted notions, and fix them upon particulars, as in
the case of Paccucius in Capua, and the Senate in Rome. Again, I am of opinion
that no wise man is to decline the judgment of the people in the distribution
of Offices and Honors, and such particular affairs; for in those things they
are almost infallible, and when they do mistake, it is rather to be attributed
to the obstinacy of some few, to whom that business is referred, than to the
ignorance of the whole body; which being certainly so, I think it not
superfluous to show in my next Chapter the Order which the Senate observed to
overreach the people in those kinds of distributions.

CHAP. XLVIII.
To prevent the advancement of mean people to the Magistracy, it is
particularly to be contrived that the competition be, betwixt the best and most
Noble, and the wickedest and most abject.
WHen the Senate began to apprehend, that the Tribunes wnuld be chosen out of
the people, and invested with Consular power; they had two ways, one of which
they constantly made use of. They put the best and most honorable persons to
stand, or else by their Money they foisted in some sordid and ignoble Plebeian,
among those of the better sort which pretended to the Magistracy, and demanded
it for him: The last way made the people ashamed to confer it: the first made
them ashamed to remove it; which reinforces what I have said so often before,
that though in generals the people may be mistaken, in particulars they are
provident enough.

CHAP. XLIX.
If those Cities which have been free from their foundation (as Rome) have
found it difficult to contrive such Laws as might maintain them so. Those which
have been always servile, will find it almost impossible.
THe Government of Rome, and its affairs abroad and at home, do sufficiently
show how hard it is to establish such Laws in a Commonwealth as my preserve it
always in a good and quiet Estate. It had first Romulus, then Numa, Tullus
Hostilius, Servius, and others, who employed their industry and capacity to
regulate it well, and prescribe good Laws; after which, ten Citizens were
created on purpose, and yet new difficulties arose every day, which required
new remedies: One of their great expedients (which indeed contributed much to
the incorruption of that City) was the creation of the Censors, to correct the
exorbitances, splendour, and ill husbandry of the Citizens; and although in the
beginning it was with some inconsideration decreed that those Officers should
be created for five years, yet by the prudence of Mamercus the Dictator, that
error was afterward rectifyed, and the time of their continuance reduced to 18
months, which disgusted the then Censors so highly, that they found means to
turn Mamercus out of the Senate, to the great regret, both of the Senators and
people. And because the History does not show how Mamercus defended himself, it
must needs be the neglect of the Historian, or the defect of the Laws; for it
is not to be thought that in a perfect Commonwealth, a Citizen should be so ill
treated for promu^ging a Law so much for the security of their liberty, and his
innocence left without sanctuary or protection. But to return to my design, I
say, it is not to be admired if Cities conceived, and born, and brought up all
along in servitude, find so much difficulty to regulate, and preserve
themselves in tranquillity and peace (as was to be seen in Florence) when Rome
and other States (which have been free from the beginning) have scarce been
able to do it. Florence was in Subjection to the Roman Empire, and governed by
other people, so long that it had searce any hopes of ever being free.
Afterward having time to breath, it began to look up, and make Laws for it
self, but mingling them with their old Laws, which were bad, they did them no
good. For two hundred years together their Government was in this manner, so
that it was scarce worthy the name of a Commonwealth. And the same
inconveniences have been incident to all Cities whose beginnings have been
servile like that. And though the Florentines did many times by public and
free suffrage transfer an Authority upon a few of their principal Citizens, to
examine and reform all things; yet those few regarded not so much the common
enterest and liberty, as their own private design and advantage in the whole
manner of their proceedings; which was so far from producing any order or
settlement as was intended, that it augmented the disorder, and made things
worse than before. To pass by other things which are likewise to be observed, I
say that in every Commonwealth it is particularly to be considered in whose
hands the Cognizance of Capital offenses is placed, and who has the execution
of the Sanguinary Laws: This was well ordered in Rome, an appeal lying to the
people from all the courts and Magistrates of the City; and if at any time by
that appeal, the delay of execution became dangerous to the State, they had
recourse to the Dictator, who commanded execution immediately; but they never
made use of their refuge, but in extreme necessity.

But Florence, and other Cities born in servitude and Subjection, had not the
benefit of such an Officer, but were governed by strangers upon whom the Prince
had transferred his Authority; which Custom they kept up, after they had made
themselves free, and continued the same Authority in a Foreigner, whom they
called their Captain, which was a dangerous thing, considering how easily he
might be corrupted by the better sort of the Citizens: Afterward the Custom
changed with the revolutions of State; and eight Citizens were created to do
the Office of the Captain, which alteration proved much for the worse, for (as
I said before) a few men preferred to the government, are always liable to be
caressed and cajoled by the Nobility, to the prejudice of the people. Against
which inconvenience, Venice provided very well, where there is a Council of
Ten, which can punish any Citizen whatever without any appeal; yet for fear
they should not be sufficient (though they have authority enough) for the
punishment of persons of more than ordinary quality, they have constituted the
Quarantie to assist them, and the Council of Pregui besides, which is the
highest Council of that City; so that if any man will accuse, there are judges
enough ready to hear him. If therefore in Rome which was originally free, and
modeled and governed by the Counsels of so many wise men, new faults were daily
discovered, and fresh occasions for new Laws, to be made for the preservation
of their liberty; it is not to be admired, if in other Cities it was worse,
where their Original was not so free, nor so many wise men to model, and
instruct them.

CHAP. L.
No Magistrate or Council ought to have power to check or control the public
acts of the City.
TItus Quintius Cincimatus, and Cneus Julius Mentus being Consuls together in
Rome, but at perpetual odds, the affairs of that State was at a stand, their
Laws were not executed, their Wars were not prosecuted, nor any thing managed
as it should be. The Senate observing it, persuaded them to make a Dictator, by
whom the State might be reformed, and their differences composed, which had
hitherto hindered the reformation: But the Consuls, how contrary so ever in
other things, consented not to do it, the Senate having no other remedy,
addressed to the Tribunes, who by the Authority of the Senate required, and
compelled the Consuls to the Creation of a Dictator: In which place it is
remarkable how beneficial the assistance of the Tribunitial power was, not only
to defend the people against the insolence of the Nobility, but to control and
restrain the emulation and difference among themselves. And here it is
carefully to be provided in the settlement of a Commonwealth, that it be not in
the power of a few persons to whom the Government is entrusted, to quash or
obstruct any Customs or Acts that are necessary to its subsistence: For
Example, If you authorize a Council, or any other persons to distribute
Honors, dispose of Offices, or execute any other of your commands, you must
either lay a strict injunction or necessity upon them to do as you appoint, or
provide, so that if it be neglected by them, it may be done by some body else;
otherwise things are ill managed, and the order is defective, as is manifest by
that example in Rome, it the perverseness of the Consuls had not been opposed by
the Authority of the Tribunes. In the Republic of Venice, the grand Council
(or Senate) has the distribution of Honors, and the Election of Magistrates,
both abroad and at home; and it happening one time, that the Senate either upon
some disgust, or false suggestion omitted to creat Successors to the
Magistrates at home, or to their Officers abroad, there followed great
disorders immediately; the Territory and City wanting their lawful judges,
could have no justice in any thing, till the Senate was appeased. And this
inconvenience would in time have brought the City into an ill condition, had it
not been prevented by the wisdom of some Citizens, who taking the opportunity
obtained a Law, That there should be no vacancy of Offices, either within the
City or without, but the old Offices should be continued till their Successors
were chosen, by which Law they deprived that great Council of a power to
interrupt the course of Justice, which could not have been suffered without
hazard to the State

CHAP. LI.
A Prince or Commonwealth that is constrained to do a thing, is to seem to do
it frankly, and without any compulsion.
A Wise man orders his affairs so, that whatever he does, seems rather
voluntary and gracious, than done by force and compulsion, be his necessity of
doing it never so great, which point of wisdom being well observed by the
Romans, got them great reputation among the people, especially when they
decreed stipends to the Soldiers out of the public Treasury, who before were
obliged to serve at their own proper charges; for seeing their Wars were like
to be tedious, and their Armies to be carried into far Countries, before they
could be finished, they found neither the first could be continued, nor the
latter performed but at the public expense, wherefore the Senate was forced
and necessitated to pay the Soldiers out of the public stock; yet they did it
so slyly, and with that artifice, that though compelled by necessity, it was
received as a grace, and gained them exceedingly the affections of the people,
who had never so much as mentioned it by their Tribunes, or thought of it
themselves: So that never any thing was received with more demonstration of
joy. But the Tribunes were not so well satisfied, but endeavored to possess
the people that it was not an act of that grace as they imagined; and that if
they looked closely into it, it would appear rather a grievance, than a
benevolence; for how was this Money to be raised, but by Taxes and Impositions
upon the people? so that if the Senators were bountiful, it was out of other
men's purses. But all would not do, let the Tribunes say as they pleased, the
people believed themselves highly obliged; and then the manner of raising the
Money made it much the more grateful, for it was done with more than ordinary
equity, the greatest part of it being levied upon the greatest men, and the
poor favored as much as was possible.

CHAP. LII.
The best and most secure way to repress the insolence of an ambitious and
powerful State, is to preclude and stop up those ways by which he would come to
his greatness.
BY what has been said before, it appears what affection the Senate conciliated
among the people, not only by the frankness of their bounty, but by their
kindness in collecting it; which order, if continued to the people, would have
prevented all the tumults which happened afterward in that City, and deprived the
Tribunes of their great credit and authority. And indeed there is not a better
or more secure way to suppress the insolence, or cross-bite the designs of an
ambitious Citizen, than to take the same ways to prevent, which he takes to
advance them; which course, if it had been followed by the adversaries of
Cosimo de Medici would have been much more for their advantage than to have
forced him out of the Town. For had they applied themselves to caressing and
insinuating with the people, (which was the way he took to fortify himself)
they had disarmed him without any tumult or violence, and taken from him the
only arms upon which he depended for his defense. About the same time Piero
Soderini by his extraordinary beneficence got him self a great interest and
reputation among the people, and was publicly esteemed the great Champion and
Protector of their liberties: and doubtless his adversaries, who began to grow
jealous of his greatness, had done much more wisely, and honorably, and
safely, to have gone the same way to work, and countermined him by their
indulgence to the people, than to oppose themselves downright, and ruin him
and their whole Country together; for could they by any art or insinuation have
gained the affections of the City, they had taken from him the only thing upon
which he relied, without noise or confusion, and they might have opposed in all
his counsels, without fear of the people: if he be urged here, that if the
Citizens which were enemies to Piero committed an error, in not taking the same
course to retain as he had done to debauch the people, Peter committed the same
fault by not making use of the same instruments which his adversaries employed
against him; it is answered, that Soderini indeed might have tried, but he
could have done it neither with honor or case; for the way that his
adversaries took was to set up the Medici, by whose assistance they bearded him
exceedingly, and ruined him at last; and it had been dishonorable for Soderini
to have deserted the liberties of the people, which he had undertaken to
defend, and gone over to the party of the Medici; nor could he have done it so
secretly or suddenly, but the people would have smelt it, and have turned the
violence of their affection into as furious and hatred, which would have made
his destruction much more easy to his enemies, for who-ever was but suspected
to be a favourer of the Medici, was thought, ipso facto, an adversary to the
people. It is necessary therefore in all deliberations to weigh all things, to
consider what danger and what advantage every thing will yield, and make choice
of what is least dangerous: otherwise it will happen to you as it did to Marcus
Tullius, who raised and augmented the greatness of Mark Anthony by the same way
which he intended for his destruction; for when Mark Anthony was declared an
enemy by the Senate, having a great Army attending him, and most of them of
Caesar's old Soldiers, Cicero to draw them off from him, persuaded the Senate
to put Octavius at the head of their Army, and sent him (with the Consuls)
against Antonius, pretending that the very name of Octavius (being Nephew to
Caesar) would bring over all his Unckles party to him, whereby Antonius would
be so weakened it would be no hard matter to reduce him. But it happened quite
contrary; for Antonius having gained Octavius to his side, they joined their
Forces against Tully and his Senate, and ruined their whole Party. Which might
have been easily foreseen; nor ought Cicero so imprudently to have revived the
name of Caesar, by whom the whole world was brought into servitude, and
especially Rome; nor have persuaded himself that a Tyrant or any of his race
would ever restore that liberty which his Predecessor had suppressed.

CHAP. LIII.
The people (deceived with a false appearance of good) do many times desire
that which turns to their destruction: and how great hopes and large promises
do easily debauch them.
AFter the taking of Veii by the Romans, a report being spread of the
convenience and pleasantness of the Town, and richness of the Country about it,
the people of Rome began to fancy that it would be much for their advantage to
transplant one half of their City, and send them thither to inhabit, for there
were many fair houses to receive them; and it could be no weakening or
diminution to Rome, seeing the distance betwixt the two Cities was so small;
Veii would be taken rather for a member of Rome, than a distinct and particular
City. The Senate and graver sort of Citizens had so little inclination to this
design, that they resolved to die before ever they would consent to it. The
people were so mad upon it on the other side, that when it came to a debat, and
it was to be resolved what was to be done, the dispute was so hot, they had
proceeded to blows, and the whole Town been engaged in blood, had not the
Senate interposed certain ancient and eminent men, who by their interest and
veneration among the people defended the blow, and appeased them for that time.
In which passage there are two things considerable: the first, that the people
being deceived with a false imagination of good, do many times solicit their
own ruin, and run the Commonwealth upon infinite dangers and difficulties,
unless some person in whom they have great confidence strikes in to instruct
them which is the good, and which is the evil; and when by accident it falls
out that the people (having been formerly deceived either by persons or things)
cannot repose that confidence in any one, then of necessity all goes to wrack,
and nothing can prevent it: to this purpose Dante in his discourse about
Monarchy, tells us, Il popolo molte volte grida
Vivala sua morte, and muoia la sua vita.
The enraged multitude do often cry
Give us our death, our life we do defy


This incredulity is many times the occasion that good counsels are neglected,
as it happened to the Venetians when invaded by several enemies at one time, they
could not take off any one of them, by restoring what they had taken wrongfully
from other people; which was the occasion of the war, and almost of their
ruin. From whence we may consider the easiness and difficulty of persuading
the people, and make this distinction, if the affair proposed be in appearance
either magnanimous, or profitable, though at the bottom it be never so
distructive, the people are always easy to be persuaded: on the other side, if
any thing be offered (how honorable, how useful soever) with the least show or
glance of cowardice or inconvenience, they are never, or with great difficulty
to be wrought to it. To confirm this, we have many examples both modern and
ancient in Rome and other places. From hence sprang their jealousies against
Fabius Maximus, who could never beat it into the heads of that City, that it
was better for their Common wealth to protract, and spin out the war, than to
push things on, and bring all to the hazard of a Battle; for the people looking
upon it as cowardly and base counsel, and not discerning the utility at the
bottom, would by no means admit it; and Fabius wanted rhetoric to enforce it
upon them: and so strangely are they blinded sometimes with their bravery and
courage, that though the Romans had committed the same error once before, and
given authority to Fabius his Master of the Horse to fight when he saw occasion
whether Fabius would or not; (which authority had like to have ruined the whole
Army, had not Fabius with his prudence prevented it) yet that experiment doing
no good, they were guilty again* and invested Varro with the same power, upon
no other account, but because he had swagger'd up and down the Town, that
whenever they qualified him with such a Commission, he would fight Hanibal,
cut him to pieces; they believe what he said, give him authority; and what
followed? Why they were beaten at Cannas; the Roman Army cut off; and the Roman
Empire almost extinguished. And not unlike this was the example of Marcus
Centenius Penula, (a mean person, and considerable for nothing but some small
command in the Army) who presented himself one day to the Senate, and offered
if they would give him power to raise an Army of Volunteers where he pleased
all over Italy, he would undertake in a short time to beat Hanibal out of it.
The Senate was sensible the proposition was rash, yet (considering withal that
if they should deny him, and report should come of it afterward to the people,
it might dissatisfie them; beget some tumult in the City; and be the occasion
of envy and animosity to themselves) they granted his request, choosing rather
to expose all those who were so ill advised as to follow him, than run the
hazard of new dissentions at home. Having got his Commission, and afterward
his Men, with a confused and disorderly Army he marches against Hanibal, and
fought him, but he failed of his promise, for he was killed himself, and most
of his Forces. In Greece in the City of Athens, Nicias, a grave and wise
Citizen, could never persuade the people against an Expedition into Sicily; but
persuing it against all sober advise, they miscarried, and their own Country
was ruined. Scipio, when he was made Consul, desired that he might have Africa
for his province, and he would undertake to demolish Carthage but the Senate
being averse upon the judgment of Fabius Maximus, Scipio threatened to propose
it to the people, as knowing very well how gratf^ul it would be to them, We
might produce examples of the same nature out of our own City of Florence, as
when Hercules Bentivogli General of the Florentine Army, with Antonio
Giacomini, having defeated the Forces of Bertolomeo at San Vincenti, they went
to besiege Pisa, which enterprise was debated and concluded by the people, upon
the great promises which Hercules had made, though indeed the wiser sort of
Citizens were against it; but the multitude were possessed with great matters
that would be done, and nothing could dissuade them. I say then, there is not
an easier way to ruin a State where the authority is in the people, than to
put them upon some gallant, but desperate enterprise; for where there is any
thing of magnanimity in their nature, it is sure to be embraced, and it is not
in the wit of men to dissuade them: but as this is many times the ruin of the
State, so it is more often and more certainly the destruction of those Citizens
which promoted and commanded it, for the people full of expectations of
victory, when they find they have miscarried, never impute it to an ill
accident or fortune, but throw all upon the ignorance or treachery of their
Commanders, which seldom escape without being banished, imprisoned, or killed;
as has happened to several of the Carthaginian and Athenian Captains. Nor does it
avail that they have been victorious before; for their present misfortune
drowns all, as it fell out to Antonio Giacomini our General, who not taking
Pisa as he promised, and the people expected, fell into so great disgrace with
them, that notwithstanding the many great things which he had done, he was
permitted to live, more by the favor and humanity of the Governors, than by
gratitude or good nature of the people.

CHAP. LIVE.
How great the authority of a grave man is, to assuage the tumultuousness of
the people.
THe second thing remarkable, that was mentioned in my last Chapter, is, that
their is nothing more certain to appease a popular tumult, and reduce the
people to reason, than the interposition of some wise person of authority among
them; as Virgil has told us with very good reason.

Tum pietate gravem, ac meritis si forte virum quem
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus adstant.
If in their tumults, a grave man appears,
All Is whist, and nothing stirring but their ears.
He therefore who commands in a mutinous Army, or in a seditious City, and
desires to appease either the one or the other, is in my judgment to present
himself with the most grace and advantage that he can; adorned with all the
ornaments of his dignity, and whatever else may make him venerable to the
people. Not many years since Florence was divided into Factions, the Frateschi
and the Arabiati; and their animosity was so great, they came to blows, and the
Frateschi were overthrown, and Pagolantonio Soderini slain among the rest, who
was as eminent a Citizen as most of his time; upon the strength of this Victory
the people ran in a tumult to his house, with intention to plunder it; but his
Brother Francesco (then Bishop of Volterra, and Cardinal now) being accidently
there, as soon as he understood how things were, and perceived the rabble to
increase, he called for the richest of his Robes, and having put them on, and
his Episcopal Rochet over them, he marched out into the crowd, and by the
Majesty of his person, and the efficacy of his language, prevailed with them to
forbear, and to return peaceably to their houses; which action was so grateful
to the City, that it was celebrated publicly many days after. I conclude
therefore that there is not a surer, nor more necessary way to compose the
distractions of the people, than the appearance of some grave person in such a
posture as may make him venerable to them. To return therefore to what we said
before, it may be seen from hence, with what obstinacy the Romans accepted of
that proposition for transplanting to Veii, because they thought it profitable,
and did not perceive the inconvenience that was in it; for as there happened many
tumults thereupon, so much more mischief had followed, had not the Senate and
some other grave persons interposed, and by good fortune restrained them.

CHAP. LV.
How easily things are managed in a City where the Commons are incorrupt; how
hard it is to erect a principality where there is an equality; and where it is
not, a Commonwealth is impossible.
THough we have declared before what we thought was to be expected from a City
whose inhabitants were totally corrupt; yet that will not hinder us from
considering the subtilty of the Senate in relation to a vow which Camillus had
made to consecrate the tenth part of the spoils of the Veientes to Apollo;
which spoils being fallen into the clutches of the Common people, the Senate
had no way but to publish an Edict, requiring all of them at a certain time and
place to bring in the tenth part of their gains. It Is true, that Proclamation
had no great effect, because another expedient was found out to satisfy the
vow; yet it is remarkable, the confidence the Senate had in the good nature and
compliance of the people; and the great opinion that they would punctually
bring in whatever they were commanded. On the other side it is observable,
that the people went not about to shuffle or defraud the Edict by bringing in
less than their due; but declared frankly against it, as a thing illegally
required. Which example, with many other which I have mentioned before, are
brought to show the probity and religion wherewith that people was endued, and
what good might be expected from them: and certainly where there is not that
submission and conformity, no confidence is to be had; as in those Provinces
which are corrupted at this day, in Italy above all the rest, and I may say in
France and in Spain, which are likewise in some measure under the same
corruption; for tho they are not perhaps subject to so many, and so dangerous
disorders as we are in Italy; yet it proceeds not from the meliority of the
people, but from the excellence of their constitution, being governed by a
Monarchy, which keeps them united, not only by the virtue and example of their
Prince, but by the Laws and Customs of each Kingdom, which are preserved to
this day. Germany is the place of the whole World where the footsteps of the
old Romans virtue and fidelity is conspicuous; and that fidelity is the cause
why so many Cities live happily in liberty; for they are so careful and
studious of their Laws, that that very one thing keeps them from servitude, and
being overrun by their enemies; and if any instance be desired of this more
than ordinary probity in the Germans, I shall produce one, not unlike that
before, betwixt the Senate and the people of Rome. It is the custom in those
States when they have occasion for money upon the public account, for the
councils and Magistrates in authority to lay a tax of one or two per cent. upon
all the inhabitants under their jurisdiction, according to their respective
Estates; at the day and place appointed for payment, every man appears with his
money, and having taken his oath first that the sum he pays is according to the
full of his Estate, he throws it into a chest provided for that purpose, and no
notice taken what it is he throws in; from whence we may conclude that there is
still some sparks left in that people of their old ingenuity and religion: nor
is it to be doubted but every man pays his due, for otherwise the sum would not
amount to the imposition, nor to what they formerly paid; whereby the fraud
would be discovered, and they become liable to a new tax: which integrity and
justice is the more admirable in our days, because it is to be found no where
but in Germany, and the reason (as I conceive) is twofold; one, because they
have had little or no commerce with their neighbors, neither trading into
foreign parts, nor admitting foreigners into theirs; contenting themselves with
their own diet, and clothes, and commodities, and thereby preventing all
occasion of evil conversation, which is the corruption of good manners,
especially among the French, the Spaniards and Italians, which are wicked
enough to debauch the whole World. The other reason is, because those
Commonwealths who have preserved their liberties, and kept themselves
incorrupt, do not suffer any of their Citizens to live high, and at the rate of
a Gentleman; but they live all in an equality and parity, as those few Noblemen
or Gentlemen who are there are very odious to the people; and whenever any of
them fall by accident into their hands, they die without mercy, as those who
are the fountain of all their luxury, and the occasion of their scandal. I call
those Gentlemen who live idly and plentifully upon their Estates without any
care or employment, and they are very pernicious wherever they are; but above
all, they are most dangerous, who, besides their great revenues, have their
Castellanies, their Jurisdictions, and their Vassels, which pay them fealty and
homage: of these two sorts the Kingdom of Naples, the Territories of Rome,
Romagna and Lombardy are full; for which reason there is no such thing as a
free State in all those Countries, because the Gentry are mortal enemies to
those constitutions, and it would be impossible to erect a Republic where they
had the dominion; if any alteration be to be wrought, it is by reducing them
into a Monarchy; for the matter being so corrupt, that the Laws are become
ineffectual to restrain them, there is a necessity that force be applied, and
that by a regal power the licentiousness and ambition of the Grandees be
reduced into order: this may be illustrated by the example of Tuscany, which is
a small Territory, and yet has three considerable Commonwealths in it, as
Florence; Siena and Lucca; and the rest of the Cities of that Province, though
they depend upon them, yet their minds and their laws show a strange propensity
to freedom; all which proceeds from the scarcity of Gentry in those parts,
especially with such power and jurisdiction as aforesaid. On the contrary,
there is so great an equality among them, that if a prudent and public man
should happen among them, who had any knowledge of that kind of Government, he
might easily form them into a solid Commonwealth: but hitherto it has been
their misfortune to have no such man: I conclude therefore, that he who would
establish a Commonwealth, where the Country consists most of Gentlemen, will
find it impossible, unless he ruins them first; and on the other side, he who
would set up a Monarchy or Principality where the equality is great, must
select the most considerable and unquiet amongst them; give them Castles, and
Lands, and Preferments, and any thing that may oblige them to his side: by
which means they shall not only maintain the power of their Prince, but their
own insolence and ambition, and the people be forced to submit to a yoke, to
which nothing else could compel them: for whilst there is a due proportion
betwixt the Prince and the Subject, all things go well, and every man enjoys
his Estate: but to settle a Republic in a Country disposed to Monarchy, or to
erect a Monarchy where the condition of the people have a tendency to a
Commonwealth, requires a person of more than ordinary authority and brain: Many
have tried it, but very few have succeeded; the greatness and difficulty of the
enterprise confounding them so at first, that they know not where they are, and
give over as soon as they have begun. But it may be objected, that the
constitution of the Venetian Government confutes my position, That no
Commonwealth can be established where the Gentry are considerable; for under
that State no man is admitted to any office but those who are Gentlemen. I
answer, that the Venetian Gentry are nothing but name; for their Lands and
Possessions are very few, the principal part of their Estates lying in their
merchandise and goods: besides, none of them have any Seigneuries or
Jurisdiction over the people, so that a Gentleman among them, is but a title of
honor and pre-eminence, founded upon none of those things which in other
places make them so considerable. For as in other Commonwealths the Citizens
are distinguished into several Orders, so Venice is entirely divided into two,
the Populace and the Gentry, the Gentry having, or being capable of all honors
and employments, from which the Populace are utterly excluded; which for the
reasons abovesaid, it has produced no disturbance in that State. These things
being considered, let him who desires to erect a Government, settle a
Commonwealth where there is a parity among the inhabitants; and a Monarchy
where there are many great men, and the Gentry numerous. Otherwise his
Government will be incongruous, and of little duration.

CHAP. LVI.
Great accidents, before they happen to any City or Province, are commonly
prognosticated by some sign, or predicted by some men.
HOw it comes to pass, I know not; but by ancient and modern example it is
evident, that no great accident befalls a City or Province, but it is presaged
by Divination, or Prodigy, or Astrology, or some way or other; and that I may
not go far for my proof, every one knows what was foretold by Friar Girolamo
Savonarola before the Expedition of Charles viii into Italy; besides which it
was reported all over Tuscany, that there were armed men seen fighting in the
air over the Town of Arezzo, and that the clashing of their arms in the
conflict was heard by the people.

It is generally known in Florence, that before the death of the old Laurence
de Medici the Duomo or chief Church in that City was struck with lightning, and
the people destroyed: and before Piero Sodermi (who was made Gonfaloniere for
his life by the people) was banished and degraded, the Palace was burned by
lightning likewise: many other instances might be produced, which I omit for
brevity sake: I shall only add one which is mentioned by Livy before the coming
of the French to Rome. Marcus Ceditius a Plebeian acquainted the Senate, that
passing one night about twelve a clock through the Via-nova, he heard a voice
(bigger than a man's) which advised him to let the Senate know, the French were
upon their march to Rome. How these things could be, it is to be discoursed by
persons well versed in the causes of natural and supernatural events; for my
part I will not pretend to understand them, unless (according to the opinion of
some Philosophers) we may believe, that the air being full of intelligences and
spirits, who foreseeing future events, and commiserating the condition of
mankind, gives them warning by these kind of intimations, that they may the
more timely provide and defend themselves against their calamities. But
whatever is the cause, experience assures us, that after such denuntiations,
some extraordinary thing or other does constantly happen.

CHAP. LVII.
The multitude united, is formidable and strong, but separated, is weak and
inconsiderable.
THe Romans being overthrown, and their Country much wasted, upon the coming of
the French; many of them (contrary to an express Order and Edict of the Senate)
transplanted to Veii, and left Rome. Whereupon, by a new Proclamation, the
Senate commanded, that by a precise day, and upon a certain penalty, they
should return to their old habitations: when the news of this Proclamation was
first brought to Veii, it was despised and laughed at by every body; but when
the day appointed for their return arrived, there was not a man but packed up
his goods, and came back as was required, and as Livy says in the case, Ex
ferocibus universis, singuli metu suo obedientes; Not one of them who were so
contumacious together, but apart began to fear, and that fear made him
obedient. And certainly nothing can give us a more lively description of the
nature of a multitude than this case. They are bold, and will speak liberally
against the decrees of their Prince; and afterward when they see their
punishment before their faces, every one grows fearful of his neighbor, slips
his neck out of the collar, and returns to his obedience. So that it is not
much to be considered what the people say, either of their Princes good
management or bad, so they be strong enough to keep them in their good humor
when they are well disposed, and provide (which they are ill) that they do them
no hurt. But this ill disposition of the people, I mean all ill dispositions
but what arise either from the loss of their liberty, or the loss of some
excellent Prince still living, upon whom they had settled their affections.

For the evil dispositions proceeding from these causes are transcendently
dreadful, and strong remedies are to be applied to restrain them.

In other cases their anger is nothing, especially having no body to head them;
for as there is nothing so terrible as their fury in one case, so there is
nothing so vain and inconsiderable in the other, because, though they have
betaken themselves to their Arms, they are easily reduced, if you can but avoid
the first heat of their fury; for by degrees they will cool, and every man
considering it is his duty to return, will begin to suspect himself, and think
of his security, either by making his peace, or escape. Whenever therefore the
multitude is in a mutiny, their best way is immediately to choose themselves a
Head, who may correct, keep them united, and contrive for their defense, as the
Romans did when leaving Rome upon the death of Virginia; for their protection
and security, They created twenty Tribunes from among themselves: and if this
course be neglected, it happens to them as Livy presaged in the foregoing
Sentence, That as nothing is more courageous than the multitude united, so
nothing is more abject when they are separate and divided.

CHAP. LVIII.
That the multitude is wiser, and more constant than a Prince.
THat nothing is more vain and inconstant than the multitude, Titus Livius and
all other Historians do agree. You shall many times find them condemning a man
to death, and lamenting him when he is dead, and wishing for him again. This
happened in the case of Manlius Capitolinus, who being suspected to design
against their liberty, was by the people thrown headlong down the rock, and in
a short time exceedingly regretted. The words of our Author are these. Populum
brevi, posteaquam ab eo periculum nullum erat, desiderium ejus tenuit. When
their fear of him was over, their affection revived. And in another place where
he shows the accidents which happened in Syracuse after the death of Girolamo
Nephew to Hierone, he says, Haec natura multitudinis est, aut humiliter servit,
aut superbe dominatur. The nature of the Multitude is, to be servilly obedient,
or insolently Tyrannical.

Things being thus, I know not whether I shall not seem too bold; to undertake
the defense of a thing, which all the world opposes; and run my self upon a
necessity of either quitting it with disgrace, or pursuing it with scandal; yet
methinks, being to maintain it with arguments not force, it should not be so
criminal. I say then in behalf of the multitude; that what they are charged
withal by most Authors, may be charged upon all private persons in the world,
and especially upon Princes; for whoever lives irregularly, and is not
restrained by the Law, is subject to the same exorbitancies, and will commit as
bad faults as the most dissolute multitude in the world: And this may be easily
known, if it be considered how many Princes there have been, and how few of
them good, I mean of such Princes as have despised, and broke through those Laws
which were intended to restrain them. The Kings in Egypt were not anciently of
this sort, for they were governed by Laws in those Provinces from the very
beginning; and the Kings of Sparta were the same: Nor need we look back so far
for examples; we have the Kings of France in our own days, whose Kingdom in my
judgment, is at this time the most regular, and best governed in the world.
Those Princes therefore who are born under such Laws and Constitutions, and
obliged to live by them, are not to be reckoned or compared with the dissolute
and mutinous multitude; but they are to be considered with a multitude under
the same Laws and restrictions; As the people of Rome were whilst their
Commonwealth was incorrupt, and they were found neither to be insolent in
authority, nor slavish in their subjection; but by their Laws, and their
Magistrates, they kept up their dignity with honor: And if at any time
necessity required that they should appear against the power of any particular
person; they did it effectually, as in the cases of Manlius, the Decem-viri,
and others who designed to enslave them. On the other side, when it was for the
interest of the Public, they were as obsequious and dutiful to the Dictators
and Consuls, as they had been obstinate before. Nor was their regret for
Manlius when he was dead, at all to be admired; it was the memory of his
virtues that caused it, which are commendable even among Enemies. The same
thing might have happened to the best of Princes; for all writers agree, that
virtue is laudable wheresoever it is to be found. And I am of opinion, that
could Manlius have been raised again, and presented to them in the height of
their sadness, they would have served him as before, discharged him of his
imprisonment, but condemned him to death. Nor are Princes (and those held very
wise) exempt from this kind of inconstancy. They have put many to death, and
lamented them afterward; as Alexander for Clito, and other of his friends, and
Herod for Mariamnes. But what Titus Livius says of this subject, is not
intended of a multitude regulated by Laws, as the Romans were; but a loose and
disorderly multitude, like the people of Syracuse, who behaved themselves like
madmen, and committed the same faults that Herod and Alexander had committed
before them. The multitude therefore is no more to be accused of fury and
inconstancy, than a Prince; for they are both subject to extravagance, when
they have no Laws, nor no rules to restrain them. And of this (besides what I
have said) there are many examples, not only among the Roman Emperors, but
among other Princes and Tyrants, which have been guilty of more giddiness and
inconstancy, than any multitude whatever. I conclude therefore against the
common opinion, that the people are no more light, ungrateful, nor changeable
than Princes; but that both of them are equally faulty, and he that should go
about to excuse the Princes, would be in a very great error; for a people which
governs by Law, and is well ordered, shall be as stable, as wise, and as
grateful as a Prince, and perhaps more, though he be never so wise: And on the
other side, a dissolute and irregular Prince shall be more mutable, imprudent,
and ungrateful, than any multitude whatever, and that not so much from any
diversity in his Nature (for they are much at one, and if there be any
excellence, it is on the side of the people) as from their greater or lesser
respect to the Laws under which they are to live: And he who shall consider the
people of Rome, will find that for 400 years together, they hated the very name
of a King, were ambitious of honor, and studious exceedingly for the good of
their Country, as may be justified by many examples. If it be objected that the
Romans were ungrateful to Scipio, I refer them to what I proved so largely
before, that the people are less ungrateful than Princes. And as to prudence,
and constancy, I affirm, They have much the advantage, and are more wise, more
steady, and more judicious than Princes; for which reason the voice of the
people, is resembled to the voice of God, because by some occult and singular
quality it does often presage things that are wonderful, and relating to their
own welfare or calamity. In giving their judgment about dubious things, you
shall seldom find them mistake, if at any time two eminent Orators equally
excellent in their profession, do controvert and discourse a thing pro and con
before them, they will assuredly take the most rational side; which shows they
are no less capable of truth, than other people. And if in matters of honor,
or enterprise which carry an appearance of public utility, they be sometimes
mistaken, (as is said before) the Princes are more, by reason of their
passions, and perturbations of mind, to which they are much more obnoxious than
the people. In the election of Magistrates they are more dexterous, and
judicious than Princes, nor, shall the people be ever persuaded to advance a
corrupt, and infamous man, which among Princes is easy and common. If it takes
a disgust or abhorrency to any thing, it is not readily removed, but sticks by
them for several ages, which among Princes is not so; both which points may be
evicted by the people of Rome, who in so many hundred years, and so many
elections of Consuls, and Tribunes, never made four elections that they
repented of afterward, and for the name of a King they abhorred it so
perfectly, that no virtue, no former Service to his Country could excuse any
man whom they suspected to aspire to it. It is evident likewise that those
Cities which are governed by the people, have enlarged their Territories in a
short time, and extended their Empire farther, than those who have been subject
to Princes; as Rome after the expulsion of Kings, and Athens after they had
rescued themselves from the tyranny of Pisistrates; which can proceed from
nothing, but that the Government by a free State is intrinsically better, than
the Government by a Prince: Nor can Livy's expression about the levity of the
Syracusans oppose my opinion; for let all the good and ill qualities of the
Prince and people be compared, and it will be found, That the people are less
extravagant, and more honorable of the two. And if in the instituting of good
Laws, the ordaining of new Statutes, and the making new Orders for civil
conversation and Society, Princes have the better, yet the people preserving,
and executing them better than they, are doubtless as worthy of praise, as the
Founders themselves. To be short, Principalities and Republics have both of
them subsisted several years, and both of them had occasion to be regulated and
reformed; for a Prince that is licentious, and does what he has a mind to; has
a mind to that which does him hurt, and is a weak man for his pains; and the
people which takes the same liberty, is as mad on the other side. And if the
comparison be made betwixt mixed Principalities, that are circumscribed, and
bounded by Laws, and popular Governments under the same ties and restrictions;
the people will be found more virtuous than the Princes; but if it be betwixt
loose and dissolute Governments both of the one kind, and the other, the errors
on the side of the Princes will appear more great, more numerous, and more
incapable of redress; for in popular tumults, a sober man may interpose, and by
fair words reduce them to reason; but to an enraged Prince, who dares
intercede; or what remedy is there to repair to, but violence, and the Sword?
From whence we may judge and distinguish betwixt the inconvenience of the one
and the other: The people are appeased with gentleness, and good words; and the
Prince not to be prevailed upon, but by violence and force; and if it be so,
who is it that will deny, That the Disease is more dangerous, where the Cure is
most difficult? Moreover when the people tumultuate, there is not so much fear
of any present mischief that they are likely to commit, as of the consequences
of it, and that it may end in a tyranny. But with ill Princes it is quite
contrary, the present misery is the most dreadful, because they hope when he
dies, their liberty may be recovered. You see then the difference betwixt them;
one is more dangerous at present, and the other for the future; the cruelty of
the people extends only to such as (in their opinion) conspire against the
common good. The severity of the Prince, is more against them who design
against his particular interest. But this opinion of the people goes daily down
the wind; for every man has liberty to speak what he pleases against them
(though even the Government be popular:) But against a Prince no man can talk
without a thousand apprehensions, and dangers. Nor will it seem to me
incongruous (the matter having drawn me thus far) in my next Chapter to
discourse what Confederacies are most safe, those which are made with Princes,
or those which are made with Commonwealths.

CHAP. LIX.
What Leagues or Confederacies are most to be trusted; Those which are made
with Princes, or those which are made with free States.
BEcause Princes with Princes, and free States among themselves, and many times
with Princes do enter into leagues of friendship and confederacy, I thought it
not amiss to enquire in this place, whose faith is the most firm, and in whose
amity the greatest confidence is to be reposed. Having considered it diligently
with my self, it seems to me that in many cases they are alike, and in some
they differ. And first, when necessity of State requires, and there is any
visible danger of losing the Government, neither the one nor the other are so
precise, but they will make bold with their engagements, and behave themselves
ingratefully: Demetrius Poliorcetes had obliged the Athenians by many good
Offices; but his Army being aftewards defeated, and himself flying to them for
refuge, as to his Confederates, and Friends, he was repulsed, and not admitted
into the City, which troubled him more than the loss of his Army. Pompey being
beaten in Thessalia by Caesar fled likewise into Egypt to Ptolomy, whom he had
formerly restored to his Kingdom, and was murdered by him for his confidence.
In both these Examples the ingratitude seems to be the same; yet the inhumanity
was greater on the Princes side, than on the Commonwealths; but be it as it
will, when the State is in danger, they are neither of them scrupulous. And if
there be any Prince or Commonwealth so punctual as to preserve their league,
though with destruction to themselves; it may proceed from the same causes. It
may very well happen that a Prince may confederate with some other great
Potentate, (who though unable to defend him at that time; may give him hopes
notwithstanding of restoring him some other) and persevere in his Confederacy,
as thinking that by having made himself of that Princes party, he has rendered
his accommodation with the adversary imposible. This was the case of all the
Neopolitan Princes who sided with the French in their Expedition unto those
parts: And as to the free States, they suffered of old something in this
Nature, as Saguntum in Spain, which City chose rather to expose its self to
direption, and all the Calamities of War, than forsake its confederacy with the
Romans, and in the year 1512. Florence did almost the same to continue its
amity with the French. So that computing every thing, and considering what both
parties have done upon such imminent and irresistible danger, I believe there
is more constancy and firm friendship to be found among Commonwealths than
among Princes; for though perhaps they may have the same sentiments and
inclinations as Princes; yet their motions, and resolutions being slower, they
are longer before they violate their faith. But when their leagues and
confederacies are to be broken, upon the bare prospect of advantage; in that
case your Commonwealths are much more religious and severe; and examples may be
brought where a small gain has tempted a Prince, when a great one could not
move a Commonwealth. Themistocles in an Oration to the Athenians, told them,
That he had something to advise that would be infinitely to their advantage,
but durst not communicate it in public, because to publish it, would hinder
the Execution; whereupon the people deputed Aristides to receive it; and act in
it afterward as he should think convenient. Themistocles acquainted him, That
the whole Grecian Fleet (though under their passport and parole) were in a
place where they might be all taken or destroyed, which would make the
Athenians absolute Masters in those Seas; and Aristides reported to the people,
That the Council of Themistocles was profitable, but would be a great dishonor
to their State; upon which it was unanimously rejected. But had the same
occasion been offered to Philip of Macedon, or some other Princes, they would
not have been so tender; for it was a practice among them (and especially with
Philip) who got more by breaking his faith, than by all his other designs. As
to the breaches upon the non-observance of Articles, they are ordinary things,
and I have nothing to say of them: I speak only of extraordinary occasions, and
am of opinion from what I have said, That the people do transgress less in that
Nature, than Princes, and may therefore with more confidence be trusted.

CHAP. LX.
How the Consulship, and other Dignities in Rome were conferred without respect
of age.
IT is manifest in the History of the Roman Commonwealth, that after the people
were made capable of the Consulship, the Citizens were promiscuously preferred
without respect either of age or extraction; but any man was advanced for his
Virtue, whether he was a young man, or an old: and this was evident in Valerius
Corvinus, who was created Consul in the 23 year of his age; upon which
consideration in one of his Speeches to the Army, he told them that the
Consulship was, Praemium Virtutis, non Sanguinis. The reward, not of Nobility,
but Virtue. Whether this was prudently done, or not, may admit of dispute: But
as to the receiving all sorts of persons to that dignity without consideration
of their blood; there was a necessity of that, and the same necessity that was
in Rome, may happen in any other City that desires to do the same great things
which were done in Rome, of which we have spoken elsewhere. For men are not to
be persuaded to suffer, but in hopes of reward; and that hope cannot be taken
away, without manifest danger. It was but equitable therefore that the people
should be capable of the Consulship, that being nourished a while with only the
hopes, they might at length be so happy as to have it in effect. A City that
employs not its people in any great affair, may order them as it pleases; but
if it designs to extend its Empire, and do as the Romans did, there must be no
distinction. And that no regard ought to be had of any man's age, appears by
this, That in the election of a young man to a degree, in which the wisdom of
an old man is requisite, the multitude being to elect, it is necessary that the
young man be recommended by some extraordinary Exploit; and when a young man is
so happy, as to have made himself conspicuous in the City by some honorable
Achievement, it were not only hard, but inconvenient if the said City might
not receive the benefit of his virtue immediately, but be forced to attend till
his mind as well as body was super-annuated, and all that vigor and
promptitude lost, which at that time might have been so serviceable to his
Country: at which age Valerius Corvinus, Scipio, Pompey, and many others did
great things, and were permitted to triumph for their pains.

THE DISCOURSES OF Nicholas Machiavel, CITIZEN and SECRETARY OF FLORENCE, Upon
The First Decade of LIVY TO ZANOBI BVONDELMONTI, AND COSIMO RVCELLAI.
LIBER II.
The Preface.
IT is the common practice of Mankind, to commend the ancient, and condemn the
present times; but in my judgment not always with reason; for so studiously are
they devoted to things of antiquity, that they do not only admire what is
transmitted by old Authors, but applaud and cry up when they are old, the
passages and occurrences in their youth. But my opinion is, This their way of
computation is many times false, and that upon several accounts. First, because
of such very ancient things we can have no absolute knowledge; for most
commonly in the Narrative of affairs, what is infamous, or ill done, is
pretermitted in silence, whilst what is well done, and honorable, is related
with all the Arts, and amplifications of Rhetoric; for so much are Historians
accustomed to attribute to the fortune of the Conqueror, that to increase his
praise, they do not only exspatiate upon his Conduct, and Exploits, but they do
likewise so magnify and illustrate the very actions of the Enemy, That they
who come after beholding things at a great distance, have reason to admire
those times, and those men, and by consequence to love them. Besides it being
envy or fear which disposes people to hatred; neither of those passions
extending to what cannot possibly hurt them, two great causes are wanting of
finding fault with Antiquity; for as things so long passed cannot any way
prejudice, so they cannot provoke to envy or discontent: But present things
which are obvious to our own sense, are universally known, and no circumstance
that passes (whether good or bad) that can be totally concealed; from whence it
proceeds, that observing with the excellence and virtue of our present affairs,
whatever is concomitant of imprudence or vice, we are in a manner compelled to
postpone them to things of antiquity, where the good only is displayed, and the
bad passed by, though perhaps the present things are more worthily glorious. I
do not intend any thing hereby of the Arts and Sciences of our predecessors, so
highly improved and illustrated, that it is not in the power of time either to
add any thing, or substract. I only speak of the manners and civil
conversations of men; in which indeed we have not so many virtuous examples, as
were to be found among our Ancestors: So that it is not altogether unjustly if
antiquity be preferred; yet are not our present transactions to be always
condemned as worse than the former, as if antiquity had no errors at all.
Humane affairs are in perpetual fluctuation, and have their times of decrease,
as well as advancement. A City or Province founded by some excellent person
upon good Principles and Laws, not only stands, but flourishes and increases a
long time in honor, authority, and wealth; and those persons whose happiness
it is to be born under those governments whilst they are glorious, and
powerful, are apt to prefer their old Customs, to the disparagement of the new;
yet they are in an error, and for the reasons abovesaid. But those who are born
when the State is in its declension, do not so much transgress when they
commend what is passed, and decry what is present; which things (having
seriously considered with my self) I conceive to be caused, because the world
has been always the same, and made up promiscuously of good things and bad; yet
these good and bad things have varied sometimes, and as it were transmigrated
from one City, and one Province to another; so that in those places where
virtue has been a long time predominant, vice has stolen in by degrees, and
supplanted it; which is evident by the revolutions of Kingdoms and Empires,
where virtue and justice has had its time, and been transfused afterward into
other Countries. However the world was the same, though its virtue and
magnanimity was unstable, removing and shifting from the Assyrians first, to
the Medes, from the Medes to the Persians, and from them to the Romans; and if
after the Roman Empire, there has been no government so great as to comprehend
and ingross the virtue of the whole world; yet the same virtue that was of old
among the Romans is not extinct, but dispersed and branched out into several
Kingdoms and Provinces, as the Kingdom of France, the Kingdom of the Turks, the
Kingdom of the Sultan, the Empire of the Germans, and the Sect of the Saracins,
which conquered so many Provinces, and committed such devastations, as were the
ruin of the Empire of the East. In these Kingdoms rent and divided from the
Empire of the Romans, the old Roman virtue is diffused, and retains still
something of its pristine luster, so that it may without injustice be admired
in some places: Which being so, he who is born in those Provinces where the
Roman virtue and discipline is still in being (but declining) if he applauds
his old Countrymen, and blames his Contemporaries, his error is not great: But
he that is born in Italy, and is not in his heart a Tramontan, or in Greece,
and is not a Turk, must needs bewail his own times, and cry up his
Predecessors, in which he will find many things well worthy his admiration;
whereas in these there is nothing but wickedness and obloquy, no Religion, no
Laws, no Discipline, but all things impure and brutish, and they are the more
detestable and deplorable, by how much the same persons who would be imitated,
and are set aloft to command all, and correct those that are vicious, are most
dissolute, and most vicious themselves.

But to return to our discourse, I say, That though humane judgment is frail,
and may be mistaken in its Character of such things as by reason of their
antiquity, cannot fall so perfectly under ones Cognizance; yet that will not
excuse old men for preferring the transactions in their youth, because both the
one and the other were equally liable to their knowledge; nor would they be of
that opinion, if men had the same sentiment and appetite as long as they lived;
but our affection altering, and our rational Soul being otherwise disposed than
formerly, we judge otherwise of things, though the times be the same; for how
is it possible the same things should please in our youth and old age, when
their Studies, and delights are so different and remote? For (to say no more)
as the quickness and vigor of the body decreases in old men, so their judgment
and prudence increase proportionably; and thence it follows that the same
things which seemed tolerable in their youth grow insupportable when they are
old; so that the fault is more in their judgment, than the age, for supposing
those things to be good, which, being wiser, by experience, they find to be
otherwise. To which it may be added, that the desires of mankind are immense,
and unsatiable; that naturally we are covetous of every thing, whereas fortune
allows us but little; That from thence it happens that no ^an is contented,
every man despises what he is already possessed of, commends what is passed,
condemns what is present, and longs for what is to come, though induced by no
reasonable occasion. Things being thus, I cannot resolve my self whether ever I
may not be of that number, who in these my discourses have so highly magnified
the old times and exploits of the Romans, to the diminution of our own: and
truly, were not the virtue of that age as clear as the Sun, and the wickedness
of ours as manifest as that, I should have been more moderate, and feared to
have run into the same error which I have condemned in other people.

But things being so evident, I may with boldness deliver my opinion of both
times, to the end that the minds of such young persons, as shall peruse my
conceptions, may be admonished to avoid those vices which are so prevalent now,
and prepared to imitate the virtue of our Ancestors, whenever occasion shall
be offered. For it is the office of a good man to recommend that to other
people which he thinks for the interest and honor of his Country, though
perhaps the adversity of his fortune, and the malignity of the times will not
suffer him to practice it himself; that by his instructions so many, at least
some one may be so fortunate as to be able to follow him.

Wherefore having in may first Book done with what I proposed about the
original institution of Government, and what was in my judgment necessary to
preserve them: I shall now in this second, discourse of what the Romans did
abroad for the enlargement and augmentation of their Empire.

CHAP. I.
Whether the virtue or fortune of the Romans was the occasion of the greatness
of their Empire.
MAny have thought, and Plutarch (a grave Author) among the rest, that the
people of Rome where more beholding to their fortune than virtue, in the
acquisition of their Empire; and among other reasons, he infers it from their
own silent confession, in having erected more Temples to Fortune than to any of
their Gods. Livy seems to be likewise of the same opinion; for he seldom
introduces a Roman speaking any thing of virtue, but immediately it is followed
with fortune, with which nevertheless I can by no means comply, nor believe it
will hold water; for though no Commonwealth be to be found that has made such
progress as the Roman, why should it be rather imputed to their good Fortune
than the solid constitution of their Laws? the courage of their Armies, and the
excellent conduct of their Emperors, extended their Empire; and then their own
just measures, and the wise institutions of their first Legislator preserved
what they got, as we shall hereafter more largely discover. it is objected,
that the Romans were never at one time involved in two considerable wars,
(which is imputed rather to their fortune than wisdom) for they had no quarrel
with the Latins till they had subdued the Samnites, and were forced to make war
in their defense; they had no controversy with the Tuscans till they had
beaten the Latins, and with their frequent victories almost extinguished the
Sabines, whereas if two of these States had confederated, and joined their
powerful Armies against them, no doubt but the affairs of the Romans would have
been in very great danger. But be it as it will, this is most certain, they
never had two great wars upon their hands at a time; but they began one when
they ended the other, or the end of the first was the beginning of the second;
and this may be observed in the series of their wars, for (to pass by their
quarrels before Rome was taken by the French) whilst the Aequi and Volsci were
powerful and strong, they had no enemies but they; when they were conquered,
their war broke out with the Samnites; and though before that was perfectly
concluded, the Latins rebelled; yet before it could be brought to a war, the
Samnites had made their peace, and joined their Army with the Romans, to reduce
the Latini. That war being finished, the war with the Samnites revived, and was
the occasion of much mischief to the Samnites; after which, the Romans began
with the Tuscans, and that being composed, the Samnites broke out again upon
the passage of Pyrrhus into Italy, who being repulsed into Greece, they had
opportunity for their wars with the Carthaginians, and their first war with
that State was no sooner determined, but the French, and the inhabitants on
this and the other side of the Alps conspired so effectually against them, that
betwixt Popolonia and Pisa (where the Tower of St. Vincent is at this day to be
seen) the confederates were routed with a very great slaughter.

This war being concluded, for twenty years together they had no considerable
war, for they had no body to fight with but the Ligures, and the resicts of
those French who were remaining in Lombardy. In this posture they continued
till the second Punick war, which lasted 16 years, and perplexed them
exceedingly. That war being ended with a great deal of honor, their next
enterprise was against the Macedonians; after which their war happened with
Antiochus in Asia, and when he was overcome, there was not a Prince or State in
the whole World, which by it self, or conjunction with the rest, was able to
contend with the Romans. But before this last victory, who-ever considers the
method of their wars, and their manner of proceeding, shall find great virtue
and wisdom intermixed with their good fortune, so that the reason of their good
fortune is easily discovered; for this is most certain, when a Prince or
Commonwealth arrives at that height of reputation that no neighbour-Prince or
people dares venture to invade him, (unless compelled by indispensible
necessity) he may do what he pleases, it is in his Election with whom he will
make war, and with whom he will be at peace; for his neighbors being afraid of
his power, are glad to be his friends; and those Potentates who are farthest
off, and have no commerce with them, look on as unconcerned, as if the
consequence could have no reflection on them; and in this error they do many
times continue till the calamities be brought home to their own doors; and
then, when it is too late, they have nothing but their own private force to
oppose, which is too weak when the enemy is grown so strong. I will not enlarge
upon the Samnites, nor recount how they stood still, and looked on, while the
Romans conquered the Aequi and the Volsci; but to avoid prolixity, I shall pass
to the Carthaginians, who were of great power and authority when the Romans
were at war both with the Somnites and Tuscans; they had the command of all
Africa, and were supreme in Sicily, Sardinia, and great part of Spain. Blinded
with their power, and (as they thought) secure in their distance, it never,
came into their heads to invade them at that time, or to give any assistance to
the Samnites or Tuscans; but (according to the practice of the World with
things that are new, and increasing) they rather sided with them, and desired
their friendship, not so much as perceiving their error, till the Romans had
conquered all the intermediate States, and began to contend with them for the
Empire of Sicily and Spain. And what happened to the Carthaginians, happened
likewise to the French, to Philip of Macedon, and to Antiochus; each of them
believing (whilst the Romans were employed in their wars with other people)
that they would either be overcome, or that they themselves should have time
enough to make peace or war with them, as they saw it most for their advantage:
so that considering what is good, I am of opinion that the same fortune and
prosperity may be expected by any Prince or State which exercises the same
virtue and industry as the Romans have done before them. And here we might very
properly discourse of the Roman method in the invasion of other Provinces, but
we have done that at large in our Treatise called the Prince; yet this I shall
say in short, that the Romans made always sure of some friend or other in the
Provinces against which they designed, that might be a means to admit them, and
gave them entrance, and help afterward to keep what they had been
instrumental in getting. So by intelligence with the Capuans they invaded
Samnium; by the help of the Camertines they got into Tuscany; by the Mamertines
into Sicily; by the Saguntines into Spain; Massinissa gave them entrance into
Africa, the Etoli into Greece, Eumenes and other Princes into Asia, and the
Massilienses and Hedai into France; and as by their correspondence they
conquered most of those Countries, so by their interest they preserved them;
which way, if diligently observed by other people, it will be found that their
prosperity depended less upon fortune than those States who observed not that
course: but to illustrate what we have said, and make it so plain and
perspicuous that every one may see how much more their virtue than their
fortune contributed to their Empire; in our next Chapter we will consider what
those people were whom the Romans subdued, and with what obstinacy they
defended their liberty.

CHAP. II.
With what Nations the Romans contended, and with what obstinancy those Nations
resisted.
NOthing made it so difficult for the Romans to conquer their Neighbors, and
some other remoter Provinces, as the love which the people of those times did
bear to their liberty: for in defense of that, they were so indefatigably
studious, that nothing but singular and extraordinary virtue could have subdued
them: and this is demonstrable by the many and great dangers to which they
exposed themselves, sometimes to preserve, and sometimes to recover it; as also
by the severity of their revenge upon those who had usurped it. It Is evident
likewise in History what detriment the People and Cities have suffered whilst
they were in servitude and subjection; and whereas now adays there is but one
Province which can boast of free Cities, in ancient times there was not one
Province but had plenty. In Italy from the Alps (which divide Tuscany and
Lombardy) to the extremest part of that Country, there were many free States;
as the Tuscans, the Romans, the Samnites, and others; nor is there mention of
any King (but what reigned in Rome) besides Porsena King of Tuscany, the
extinction of whose Line, though not set down in History, yet it is manifest
that Tuscany was free at the time when the Romans encamped before Veii; so well
satisfied with their liberty, and so abhorring from the very name of a King,
that the Veientes having for their better defense created one in their own
Town, and sent to the Tuscans to implore their assistance against the Romans,
after a grave and solemn debate, it was resolved, no assistance should be sent
whilst they were under the dominion of a King; as thinking it unfit to engage
in the defense of a Country that had betrayed it self, and prostituted to the
dominion of a single person. Nor is this universal affection to liberty so
wonderful in the people.

Experience tells us, that no Cities have augmented their Revenues, or enlarged
their Territories, but whilst they were free and at liberty: and certainly it is
a prodigious thing to consider to what height and grandeur in an hundred years
time the City of Athens arrived, after it had freed it self from the tyranny of
Pisistrates; but much more to consider the greatness of Rome upon the expulsion
of her Kings; and the reason of all is, because in Commonwealths private
wealth and emolument is not so much aimed at as the improvement of the public;
nor is there any where so much care of the public as in free States, where
whatever is equitable, and for the common advantage, is decreed and executed,
without respect to particular persons, who may perhaps be sufferers thereby;
whereas in Cities that are governed by a Prince it falls out quite contrary;
for there, what makes commonly for the advantage of the Prince, is prejudice to
the public: so that when a Free State degenerates into a Tyranny, the least
mischief that it can expect, is, to make no further advancement in its Empire;
and no farther increase either in riches or power; but for the most part it
goes backward, and declines: and if it should so happen that the Tyrant should
be a virtuous man, and one who by his courage and military discipline should
enlarge his Dominions; yet whatever he took would be converted to his own
private use, without any benefit to the public. For he dares not advance any
of those Citizens (how worthy and honest soever) left he should have occasion
to suspect them afterward. Nor can he make those Cities which he subdues,
dependant or tributary to that where he is absolute; for it is not the interest
of a Tyrant to make his Subjects powerful or united; but to keep them low, and
divided, that every Town, every Province may depend wholly upon himself; so
that the Conquests of an Usurper may turn to his own profit, but never to the
public; to which purpose many things are very handsomely written by Xenophon
in his Treatise of Tyranny; and things being thus, no body is to admire if our
Ancestors had so great a zeal for their liberty; and the very name of a Tyrant
was so odious to them, that when long since news was brought to the Army of the
assassination of Hieronymo the Nephew of Hiero of Syracuse, and the whole Camp
was in an uproar against the Conspirators; yet when it was told them that they
had proclaimed Liberty, and a free Government, they laid by their indignation
against the Tyrannicids, and being pacified with the very name of Liberty, fell
into consultation how it was to be preserved. Nor is it to be wondered at then,
if their revenge be so violent and extraordinary upon those who would violate
it; of which, though there be many examples, I shall instance only in one, but
that most remarkable and horrid; and happening in Corcirca a City in Greece: for
all Greece being divided, and consisting of two Factions, one of them under the
protection of the Athenians, and the other of the Spartans; and in Corcirca the
Nobility prevailing, and having usurped upon the liberty of the people, it
happened that the people being reinforced by the assistance of the Athenians,
overpowred the Nobility, and conquered them again. Having restored their
liberty, and shaked off their servitude, they clapped up all the Nobility in a
large prison, and bringing them forth by ten at a time, as if they were to be
banished, they put them to death with most exquisite torments; which severity
coming by degrees to the ears of the remainder, they resolved to do what was
possible to defend themselves against it, upon which they stood upon their
guard, and would suffer none of the Officers to come in; whereupon, in a great
fury, the people ran thither, pulled off the covering of the house where they
were, and throwing down the walls, buried them all in the ruins: and of this
sort of cruelty there were many other examples in that Province; for the people
are usually more impetuous in revenging the loss of their Liberty, than in
defending it.

But it may (not unfitly) be admired in this place what should be the cause
that the ancients should be more zealous for public liberty than we in our
days: if my opinion may pass, I think it is for the same reason, that in those
times men were more robust, and stronger than now; which proceeds much from
the diversity betwixt their Education, their Religion and ours: for whereas our
Religion gives us a just prospect and contemplation of things, and teaches us
to despise the magnificence and pomp of the World; the Ethnicks valued them so
highly, and believing them their chiefest happiness, it made them more fierce
and busy to defend them, and this may be collected from several of their
customs; for if the sacrifices in their days be compared with the sacrifices in
ours, theirs will be found magnificent and horrid; ours delicate and neat, but
neither so magnificent nor cruel. They wanted not pomp nor formality in those
ceremonies, and yet to make them the more venerable and solemn, they added
blood and slaughter to them, offering up infinite numbers of beasts, which
being slain before the people, made them more hard-hearted and cruel. Moreover
the Religion of the Gentiles did not place their beatitude any where but upon
such as were full of worldly glory, and had done some great action for the
benefit of their Country. In our Religion the meek and humble, and such as
devote themselves to the contemplation of divine things, are esteemed more
happy than the greatest Tyrant, and the greatest Conqueror upon Earth; and the
summum bonum, which the others placed in the greatness of the mind, the
strength of the body, and whatever else contributed to make men active, we
have determined to consist in humility, abjection, and contempt of the World;
and if our Religion requires any fortitude, it is rather to enable us to suffer
than to act. So that it seems to me, this way of living, so contrary to the
ancients; has rendered the Christians more weak and effeminate; and left them as
a prey to those who are more wicked, and may order them as they please, the
most part of them thinking more of Paradise than Preferment, and of enduring
than revenging of injuries; as if Heaven was to be won rather by idleness than
arms: but that explication of our Religion is erroneous, and they who made it
were poor and pusillanimous, and more given to their case than any thing that
was great: for if the Christian Religion allows us to defend and exalt our
Country, it allows us certainly to love it, and honor it, and prepare our
selves so as we may be able to defend it. But that lazy and unactive way of
education, and interpreting things falsely has been the cause that there are not
so many Commonwealths as formerly in the World, nor so many Lovers and
Champions for their Liberty: and yet I believe the greatness of the Roman
Empire contributed something, by reducing all the free States and Republics
under their Dominion.

Nevertheless when that great Empire was broken and dissolved, very few of
those poor States could recover their liberty: but when it began first to
increase and extend it self, no Country was without them, and wherever the
Romans carried their Arms, they found little Commonwealths banding and
confederating against them, and defending their liberties with all imaginable
constancy; which shows that the Romans were a people of more than ordinary
courage, or they could never have subdued them. The Samnites alone will be
example sufficient, who (as Livy reports) were so powerful, and so hearty
defenders of their liberty, that for 46 years together they maintained War with
the Romans; and though they had received many losses, and such devastations had
been committed in their Country, yet they could never be wholly reduced before
the Consulship of Papyrius Cursor, the Son of the first Papyrius. But it is a
spectacle worthy of any man's pity, to see a Country so full (formerly) of brave
Cities, and brave men, and all of them free; now desolate and uninhabited, and
scarce any body left; to which condition it could have never been reduced but
by the discipline, and diligence, and courage of the Romans: but all this
proceeded from diversity of Constitution, for all Cities and free States
whatsoever, increase not only in riches and authority, but in the numbers of
their men: for who is it that had not rather procreate and have children where
he may marry and enrich himself freely, than where there is danger that what he
gets painfully, and lays up carefully for his children, may be ravished from
them by a Tyrant.

In a free State you may be sure your children shall be no slaves, and that if
they behave themselves virtuously, they shall be sure of preferment, and
perhaps come to be Princes; riches increase there faster, and that not only by
tillage and agriculture, but by traffic and arts; and people do naturally
throng to those places where they may get what they lawfully can, and keep
securely what they have got. The quite contrary happens in Countries that are
servile, and their condition is worse, as their servitude is greater: but there
is no servitude so severe as to depend upon a Commonwealth, and that for two
reasons; first because it is more durable, and less hopes of recovering their
liberty; and secondly, because it is the practice of all Commonwealths to
impoverish and weaken whatever they conquer, to fortify themselves; which
with Princes is not the way, unless they be very barbarous indeed, and like the
Eastern Princes, who not only ruin whole Countries, but destroy all human
conversation: but where Princes are well instituted, they know better things,
and do many times indulge their new Conquests as much as their own Territories,
leaving them the exercise of their Arts, and the enjoyment of their Laws; so
that though they cannot increase their wealth as where they are free; yet they
are not so subject to be ruined as where they are slaves: I speak now of
servitude to a foreign Prince, for the usurpation of a Citizen I have spoken
before. All which being considered, no wonder if the Samnites whilst they
enjoyed their liberty were so courageous and strong, and when it was once lost
grew so abject and contemptible. Titus Livius tells us in his History of the
Punick War, that the Samnites were so overlaid and cowed by one single Legion
of the Romans at Nola, that they sent Ambassadors to Hanibal to beg his
assistance, and that the said Ambassadors in their Oration to Hanibal, the
better to move his compassion, had this expression, We are the People who for
an hundred years together waged War with the Romans with our own private
Forces, and bore up many times against two Armies and two Consuls at once; but
now our misery is so great, and our spirits so low, we are unable to defend our
selves against one pitiful Legion.

CHAP. III.
It contributed much to the grandeur of the City of Rome, that they ruined the
neighboring Cities, and admitted strangers to their own dignities and
privileges.
CRescit interea Roma, Albae ruinis; The ruin of Alba was the rise of the
Romans. 'Twas the saying of Livy, and it is true; for who-ever would make any
City great, and apt for dominion, must endeavor with all industry to throng it
with inhabitants, otherwise it will be impossible to bring it to any great
perfection. And this is done two ways, by love and by force: the first by
giving passage and security to all persons that will come and inhabit there,
that every man shall be free; the second by destroying the neighbor Cities,
and forcing the people to come and dwell in yours. The Romans observed both
ways, and grew so numerous upon it, that in the time of their sixth King they
had 80000 men in the Town able to bear Arms, proceeding in some respects like
the Countryman, who to make his plant larger, and more fruitful, cuts off its
first shoots, that the juice and virtue which otherwise would dilate into the
branches, being kept close to the trunk, might break out with more vigor
afterward, and make it more beautiful and fertile. And that this way is
necessary for the propagation of the strength and authority of a City, appears
by the example of Athens and Sparta, which Cities, though they were both free,
numerous in Men, and happy in their Laws; yet they could never arrive at the
grandeur of the Romans, though Rome seemed more tumultuous, and not so well
governed as they, and all for the reason abovesaid: for Rome having by both
those ways increased the number of their Citizens, was able to set out an Army
at one time of 280000 men, whereas Sparta and Athens could never exceed 20000.
which is not to be attributed to the excellence of the situation of Rome; but
to the diversity of their Conduct; for Lycurgus the Founder of the Spartan
Commonwealth, conceiving nothing could be more pernicious to it, nor more
easily abrogate his Laws, than intermixing with new inhabitants, he provided
with all possible industry that his Citizens should have no commerce or
conversation with strangers. To that end he not only prohibited the admission
of foreigners, and their marrying with them, but that there might be no
encouragement or occasion of intercourse betwixt them, he put out a certain
Money of Leather, so pitifully inconsiderable, that he presumed no Merchants
would trouble themselves to import any foreign Commodities for it; by which
means that City was never in a capacity of being very populous: And because all
human affairs do hold some proportion and analogy with Nature; and it is
impossible that a slender trunk, should bear vast and ponderous branches, it is
not to be expected that a small Commonwealth consisting of a small number of
Citizens, should subdue, or at least keep and maintain greater and more
populous States than themselves; and if it should happen that they should
conquer them at any time, upon every slight accident they would be subject to
lose them, like the tree it would be too weak for its boughs, and every puff of
wind apt to blow it down. And thus it fell out with Sparta, though it had
conquered all Greece, made it self absolute through that whole Province; yet
Thebes no sooner rebelled, but all the rest of the Cities revolted, and having
lost its great Empire in a moment, it remained like a Tree destitute of its
Branches. But with Rome it was otherwise, its Root and Trunk was strong enough
to support its Branches how heavy and spacious soever; and this was the great
cause of the greatness of the Roman Empire, which Livy expressed in two words,
when he said, Crescit interea Roma, Alvae ruinis.

CHAP. IV.
There are three ways which Commonwealths have taken to enlarge their
Territories.
HE who has read and observed the History of our Ancestors must find, That
Commonwealths had generally three ways of enlarging their Empire. One is that
which was observed of the Tuscans of old, who entered into a League of
Confederacy with several other Commonwealths, with condition of Equality, that
no particular should have any degree or authority above the rest, and that
comprehension should be left for all their new Conquests to come in, not much
unlike the practice of the Swizzers in our times, and the Achaians, and
Aetolians of old. And because the Romans had in those times much controversy
with the Tuscans and their Confederates, I shall enlarge my self something in
the explanation of their affairs, of which, though there be but little Monument
in History, yet we are assured, that before the greatness of the Romans, the
Tuscans were very powerful both by Sea, and by Land; of which power it is no
small argument, their sending a Colony into the Mare superum to a place called
Adria, which grew so considerable and famous, that it denominated that whole
Sea, and it has been called the Mare Adriaticum ever since. It is known
likewise that their Empire extended from the Tyber to the foot of the Alps,
which comprehends the greatest part of Italy at this day; though 200 years
before the Romans came to any considerable strength, the Tuscans received a
great defeat by the Gauls; who under the Command of Bollovesus, either in quest
of new quarters, or tempted by the pleasantness of the Country, having passed
the Alps, possessed themselves of that Province called Lombardy, and gave it
the name of Gallia Cisalpina; after which they turned out the Natives, settled
themselves there, and built several Cities, which they enjoyed, till in process
of time, they also were supplanted by the Romans. And this was the method of
the Tuscans proceeding, and the manner of their confederating with their
Neighbors, which was no less than XII Cities; of which Clusium, Veii, Fesulae,
Aretium, and Volterra were the chief; but yet with all their assistance they
could not exceed the limits of Italy, nor indeed conquer all that, for reasons
which we shall mention hereafter. Another way of extending your Empire, is by
associating with several Cities, but so as that the dignity of the Command, the
seat of the Empire, and the honor of the Enterprise may remain with you; which
was the way observed by the Romans. The third is the way of the Spartans and
Athenians, who entertained no Confederates, but what ever Territories they
Conquered, they annexed them to their own: which way is undoubtedly the worst
of the three, as appeared by the two said Republics, who were ruined upon no
other account, but because they had grasped more Dominion than they were able
to hold. For it is a thing in it self very arduous and difficult, to keep a
City in subjection by a continued force, especially if ever it was free;
wherefore unless your Citizens be very numerous, and your associates very
considerable, by whose assistance you may be able to keep what you conquer, it
will never be in your power to enlarge your dominion very much, and the
Spartans and Athenians miscarrying in their way, miscarried likewise in their
end, and all their great conquest came to nothing: The Romans took the second
way, and succeeded to that vast and extraordinary power, by associating equally
in many things, with many States, but reserving always to themselves the Seat
of the Empire, and the chief command in their Wars, by which means it came to
pass, that their Confederates (ere they were aware) subjected themselves to the
Romans, at the expense of their own labor, and blood. For after they had
carried their Arms out of Italy; reduced several Kingdoms into Provinces, and
the Inhabitants being accustomed to live in subjection, without much difficulty
submitted, the Romans bearing the name of the War, and the Nations that were
conquered knowing nothing of their Allies, submitted to their dominion, and
would own no body else: whereby it happened that their associates in Italy
being over-powred by the multitude of provinces which had submitted to the
Romans, and by the strength and populousness of Rome, began to find their error
by degrees, but too late, and when they had no way left to defend themselves;
for if any of them conspired, they were quickly suppressed, and made Subjects
of Associates. This way of administration, and enlarging their Empire was
peculiar to the Romans; no other people observed it, and certainly no better is
to be found. The next way of confederating (which was practiced by the Tuscans,
Achaians, and Aetolians in old time, and by the Swizzers of late) is the best
way next to that of the Romans; for though it cannot arrive at any great
Empire, the Confederacy consisting of so many free Cities, which being all to
be consulted, makes their resolutions very tedious, besides, the Citizens are
not so vigorous in a War, where the prize is to be divided into so many parts;
yet for these reasons it has two advantages of the third. First, whatever it
gains, it keeps a long time, and loses very hardly; and secondly, it engages
not so rashly in War, but enjoys with more ease and felicity the blessings of
peace: for they are longer in their consultations and debates, where there is
to be a general Diet and Convention, than where things are to be dispatched
within the Walls of one City, Besides experience tells us that this way has
certain bounds, which have not been exceeded by any example we can find. For
after XII or XIV Cities have confederated, they admit no more into the League,
as holding themselves enough, and sufficient for their defense, nor are they
much solicitous of extending their Empire, because they are under no necessity
of making themselves stronger; and their conquest would be of little advantage
to every particular State, for they would be forced upon one of these two
rocks, either to incorporate them into their League, and then the multitude
would breed confusion, or make them their Subjects which they will hardly
continue: When therefore they are got to such a number in their association, as
that they seem safe against foreign invasion, and strong enough to defend
themselves; They take one of these two ways, either they receive their
Neighbor States or Cities into their protection (by which means they draw vast
sums of Money sometimes, that are easily distributed) or else they ^ight for
other people, and receive pay from this or that Prince, as the Swizzers do now,
and other Nations have done of old. To this purpose Titus Livius gives us an
account That at a conference betwixt Philip of Macedon and Titus Quintus
Flaminius, an Aetolian Praetor being present, there happening some words
betwixt the said Praetor and King Philip, King Philip reproached him by the
avarice, and inconstancy of his Country, as a people that were not ashamed to
take pay on one side, and send supplies to the other, by which means it was
frequently seen that in both Armies the Aetolian Colors were displayed; from
whence we may conclude that this way of proceeding by League and Confederacies,
has been always the same, and has had the same effects. The third way of
subjecting your conquests and annexing them to your own dominions, is very
incommodious, and instable; and if it were so to a Commonwealth well
constituted and armed, it must needs be much worse to a Government that is
weak, as most of the Italian States are at this day; but the Roman way is the
best, and most to be admired; for there is no example of any body that made use
of it before them, nor has any body imitated them since; and as to the practice
of the Tuscans, and Aetolians in their Confederations, there is no body follows
it now a days, but the Swizzers, and the Suevians: Which being so, and so many
brave things performed by the people of Rome as well for the conservation, as
the augmentation of their Empire, it is not strange our affairs succeeded no
better, and that we have been a prey to whoever would invade us; for (to say
nothing of the rest) it has doubtless becom'd the Tuscans if they could not
have imitated the Roman Discipline, nor followed their measures in extending
their Empire, at least to have followed the example of their own Ancestors, who
though they brought not their Empire to that Grandeur and immensity as the
Romans; yet they enlarged it as far as they thought good, and as far as
consisted with the Nature of their Government; and by doing so, they kept it a
long time, with immortal honor to their memory, till they were first shaken by
the Gauls, and afterward so totally ruined by the Romans, that there is scarce
the lest token left, that there was ever any such thing; which having brought
it into my mind to consider what may be the causes of this oblivion of things,
I shall discourse of them in the following Chapter.

CHAP. V.
The variation of Religions and Languages, with the accidents of Deluges and
Plagues have been the cause that many great things have been forgotten.
IN my judgment it may be objected to those Philosophers who hold the world to
be Eternal, that if so long a course of antiquity was true, it would be but
reasonable that the memory of some of their affairs should have lasted above
five thousand years: yet there may be some reasons given for that oblivion of
things, and they seem twofold, partly from the Nature of Man, and partly from
the influence of the Heavens; the memory of great things are abolished from the
nature of Man, by the variation of their Religion, or Language; for when a new
Religion is introduced, the first care of him that would propagate it, is to
explode, and extinguish whatever was memorable in the old, to give the greater
credit to his new innovation; and if it fall out that the introducers of this
new Sect, be of a different language, all goes to wreck, and whatever was
before, is easily forgotten. And that this is so, appears by the institution of
the Christian Religion, whose first establishers did principally intend the
cancelling and extirpation of all old Ethnic Customs, Ceremonies, and
Theology; and if there remained any memory of their affairs, it was because
there was no new language introduced with it, the Christians being constrained
to explain themselves in Latin; whereas could they have done it in a new
tongue (considering their other persecutions) we may conclude there would have
been no memory left of their Religion or Worship: For so diligent and zealous
was Saint Gregory, and other Moderators of the Christian Religion, in
abolishing the superstitions of the Gentiles, that they caused the works of all
the Poets and Historians to be burned, which made any mention of them; they
threw down their Images and Idols, and destroyed all that might afford the
least memory of Paganism; to which diligence of theirs, if a new language had
been added, in a short time all would have been utterly forgotton; what
therefore was done by the Christians for the extirpation of Gentilism, it is
not improbable but the Gentiles might have done of old for the extirpation of
the Religion before. And because in five or six thousand years, Religion may be
twice or thrice changed, no wonder if what was before be so entirely lost, that
if there remains any thing of it, it is looked upon as fabulous and incredible,
as it happened to the Histories of Diodorus Siculus, which gives an account of 40
or 50000 years, and are not unworthily accounted false. As to the Celestial
causes from the influence of the Heavens, they are such as destroy mankind in
general, or reduce it to a very small number, as great Mortalities, Famines,
and inundations of Water, but especially the last, because the mischief is more
universal, and if any be saved, it is only the Mountaneers, which being
commonly barbarous, have no knowledge of antiquity, and by consequence can
convey nothing of it to their posterity; and if it so happens that among them
which are preserved, some one man may be more learned than ordinary, and have
some knowledge of affairs, to give himself a name and reputation afterward, he
conceals, preverts, and transmits them as he pleases; so that there remains to
posterity no more than he thought fit to communicate. Nor do I believe it is
doubted but these accidents happen, and Famine, and Pestilence do sometimes
rage in the world, seeing all Histories mention them, and this oblivion of
things is a certain effect of them: Nor is it unreasonable to think that the
great Universe has its way of evacuation, as well as the Microcosm; for as in
that, when the humors are redundant, and the body unable to digest them,
Nature exerts, and finds out some way to throw them off, without which the
person must certainly miscarry; so it is in the other, when all Countries are
repleat, and no room left for those that are to come; when the Cunning and
Malignity of mankind is at the height, there is a necessity the world should be
purged by some of those three ways, that men being reduced in their numbers,
and humbled under the consideration of their Mortality, may (if possible)
become better: which being so, no wonder if the Tuscans formerly so famous for
their administration both in War and in Peace, so eminent for their Courage,
and so venerable for their Religion, should be oppressed by the Romans, and so
totally abolished, that (as is said before) there remains nothing of them but
the name.

CHAP. VI.
How the Romans proceeded in making of War.
WE have already discoursed of the way of the Romans in extending their Empire;
we shall now speak of their Customs in the management of their Wars, by which
it will appear with what wisdom they deviated from the common ways of the
world, and by what easy methods they arrived at that Supremacy and Grandeur.
He who makes War at his own choice (and is under no constraint) or else by
ambition, has doubtless this end; To get what he is able, and to keep it whilst
he can, and rather to enrich than impoverish his own Country: for such a one it
is necessary to have regard to his charge, and to see that neither the
conquering nor maintaining are more expensive to him, than will consist with
his revenue. This the Romans observed very strictly, by coming strong and
suddenly into the field; for by that one practice, all their Wars with the
Latini, Samnites, and Tuscans, were dispatched in a short time. And whoever
considers their Wars from the beginning of Rome, to the Siege of the Veientes,
will find that they were determined in a very short time, some in six, some in
ten, and some in twenty days. For their Custom was, upon the first appearance
of a War, immediately to draw out their Army, and seeking out the Enemy, they
did what they could to bring him to a Battle; having beaten him (by reason of
the surprise.) The Enemy (that his Country might not wholly be harrassed) for
the most part proposed an agreement, in which the Romans were sure to insist
upon some part of their Territory; which either they converted to their
particular profit, or consigned to some Colony which was to be placed there for
the security of their Frontiers; by which means the wars being ended in a short
time, their Conquests were kept without any considerable expense, for the
Colony had that Country for their pay, and the Romans had their Colonies for
their security. Nor could there be any way more advantageous and safe; for
whilst there was no enemy in the field, those guards were sufficient; and when
any Army was set out to disturb them, the Romans were always ready with another
in their defense, and having fought them, they commonly prevailed, forced them
to harder conditions, and returned when they had done: by which means they
gained daily upon the enemy, and grew more powerful at home: and in this manner
they proceeded till their Leaguer before Veii, where they altered their method,
and allowed pay to their Soldiers for the better continuation of the war,
whereas before that, their wars being short; there was no necessity of paying
their Armies. Nevertheless, though they paid their Soldiers from that time,
and maintained war at greater distance, (whereby they were obliged to continue
longer in the field) yet they left not their old custom of dispatching it as
soon as they could, with respect to the circumstances of place and time; for
which reason they continued their Colonies: and besides their old custom of
shortning their wars as much as they were able, the ambition of their Consuls
contributed exceedingly; for their Consulships being but for a year, and six
months of that to be spent in their employments at home, they were as diligent
and vigorous as possible, because they were not capable of triumphing till the
war was concluded: and then for continuing their Colonies; the great advantage
and convenience that resulted from them, was sufficient to prevail. This
practice therefore was observed perpetually among the Romans in the management
of their wars; only they varied something about the distribution of the prey,
in which formerly they were more liberal than in aftertimes; either because
they thought it not so necessary when the Soldiers were paid; or else because
their spoils being greater than before, they thought convenient that the
public should have its share; that upon any new enterprise they might not be
constrained to lay new taxes upon the people; and by this way their Coffers
were filled in a short time. So that by these two ways, by the distribution of
their prey, and the settling of Colonies, Rome grew rich by its wars, whereas
other Princes and States (without great discretion) grow poor: and so great was
every man's ambition of enriching the Aerarium, that by degrees it came to that
pass, no Consul was permitted to triumph, unless he returned with a vast
quantity of silver or gold, or some other inestimable commodity, and put it
into the treasury. So that the designs of the Romans tended wholly to this, to
finish the war quickly, by forcing the enemy to a Battle; or else to harrass
and tire them with frequent excursions, that thereby compelling them to
dishonorable conditions, they might make their advantage, and become more
powerful and rich.

CHAP. VII.
What proportion of Land the Romans allowed to every man in their Colonies.
I Think it no easy matter to set down the exact proportion of Land, which the
Romans assigned to every single person in their Colonies; for I believe they
gave more or less according to the barrenness or fertility of the soil; and
that in all places they were sparing enough. And the first reason that induces
me, is, that thereby they might send more men and by consequence their
frontiers be better guarded: another is, because living at home indigent
themselves, it is not to be supposed they would suffer those whom they sent
abroad to grow too opulent and rich: and in this I Am much confirmed by Livy,
where he tells us that upon the taking of Veii, the Romans sent a Colony
thither, and in the distribution of the Land allotted every man no more than
three acres, and a little more according to our measure.

They might consider likewise that their wants would not be supplied by the
quantity so much as the improvement and cultivation of their Land. Yet I do not
doubt but they had public Pastures and Woods to sustain their Cattle, and
supply themselves with firing, without which a Colony could hardly subsist.

CHAP. VIII.
What it is that disposes some people to leave their native Countries, to
dispossess other people.
SEeing I have spoken already of the Military Discipline of the Romans; and how
the Tuscans were invaded by the French; it follows properly enough that we say
something of their several kinds of War, which are two: one sort of commenced
upon the ambition of some Prince or commonwealth, in hopes to extend, and
enlarge his Empire; as those wars which were made by Alexander the Great, by
the Romans, and by one Prince against another: which wars, though dangerous,
are not yet so pernicious as to supplant the inhabitants, and drive them out of
their Country; for the Conqueror contents himself with his Victory, and the
submission of the people allows them their own Laws, and many times their
Estates. The other kind of war is much more dangerous and destructive, and that
is when an entire Nation with their Wives and their Children, compelled either
by hunger, or war, leaves its own Country, to fix themselves somewhere else,
not to extend their dominion, or exercise any authority, (as in the other) but
to kill or expel all the Natives, and possess themselves of their Estates.

This war indeed is most bloody and dreadful, as Salust shows very well in the
end of his Bellum Iugurthinum, where, after Iugurtha was beaten, speaking of
the invasion of the Gauls he tells us, Cum caeteris Gentibus a populo Romano de
imperio tantum fuisse dimicatum, cum Gallis, de singulorum hominum salute; With
other Nations the Romans fought only for Empire and Dominion, with the Gauls
they fought for their Country and Lives. For when a Prince or Commonwealth
invades a Country according to the first way, it is sufficient, if those who
are at the Helm be removed or destroyed; in this every man's life is in danger;
for when a whole Nation transplants, and invades a new Province, not only the
Colonies, but the Natives must be extinguished, that they may fix themselves
upon their Lands, and possess themselves of their Goods: and by these kind of
people the Romans were three times invaded. First by the Gauls, who took Rome,
and (as I said before) drove the Tuscans out of Lombardy; of which invasion
Titus Livius gives two reasons: one was the pleasantness of the Country, and
the delicacy of the Wine, wherewith (being then but ill provided in France)
they were infinitely taken: the other was, the Country was grown so exceedingly
populous, that it was not able to sustain its own natives; whereupon the
Princes of those parts judging it necessary to find them new quarters they
appointed which were to transplant, and putting Bellovesus and Sicovesus (two
French Princes) at the head of them they sent one part of them into Italy, and
the other into Spain: it was Bellovesus lot to invade Italy, and he did it so
effectually, that he possessed himself of all Lombardy, and made the first war
upon the Romans that was ever made upon them by the French. The second time
they were invaded in this manner was likewise by the French, and it was after
the first Punic war, in which invasion the Gauls lost above 200000 men betwixt
Pisa and Piombino: the third and last was by the Germans and Cimbrians, who
having defeated several Armies of the Romans, were at last themselves defeated
by Marius. From whence we may observe the great courage and constancy of the
Romans of old, that could not only bear up against three such dangerous
invasions, but overcome them at last; whereas afterward their courage began to
fail, and they were not able to resist the inundation of those Barbarians; for
when the Goths and the Vandals invaded, they possessed themselves of the whole
Western Empire, without any considerable opposition. The reasons which move
these Nations to transmigrate (as I said before) is necessity, and that
necessity proceeds either from famine, or from wars and disturbances at home;
and when they undertake these Expeditions with vast and innumerable numbers,
they invade with irresistible violence, put all the Natives to the sword;
possess themselves of their Estates; establish a new Kingdom, and change the
very name of the Province, as Moses did of old, and the Barbarians since, who
possessed themselves of the Roman Empire.

From hence are all the new names in Italy and elsewhere imposed by their
several Conquerors: Lombardy was called anciently Gallia Cisalpina, Francia
(from the Franks) was called anciently Gallia trans Alpina, Sclavonia was
called Illyria, Hungaria, Pannonia, Anglia, Britannta; Moses gave the name of
Judea to that part of Syria which he conquered, and many other Countries have
changed their names upon the same occasion, which would be too long to recount.
And because I have said before, that sometimes these kind of people are forced
out of their Country by intestine troubles and disturbances, I shall present
you with one example of the Maurusians an ancient people of Syria, who
foreseeing the invasion of the Hebrews, and knowing themselves unable to oppose
them, thought it more wisdom to forsake their Country betimes, and preserve
themselves, than to expect their coming, and lose both; whereupon they packed
up their goods, and with their wives and children removed into Africa, where
they drove out the inhabitants, and settled in their Country: so that they who
were too weak to defend their own Province, were strong enough to force out
another people. To this purpose Prooopius who writes the wars of Bellisarius
against the Vandals (who had settled themselves in Africa) tells us, that upon
certain pillars in the houses where these Maurusians had lived, he himself read
these words, Nos Maurusii qui fugimus a facie Jesus latronis filii Navae; We
Maurisians fled hither from Jesus the Usurper, who was the son of Navi. By
which we may perceive the occasion of their departure out of Syria. And
certainly these Nations forced out of their own Country by irresistible
necessity, are more than ordinarily dreadful, and not to be opposed but by a
potent and well disciplined people: but when they move in small numbers, their
danger is not so great, because they dare not use that violence, but are put to
their wits, and to possess themselves of some quarters by cunning and
insinuation, which they are to keep afterward by ways of amity and friendship,
as Aeneas did, and Dido, the Massilians and others, who by the assistance and
friendship of their neighbors, made good what they had possessed. But the
people that came out of their own Countries the most numerous and strong, were
the Scythians; for their Country being barren and cold, and the natives too
numerous to be sustained in it, they were forced abroad, as having nothing to
preserve them at home. And if now for five hundred years and upwards we have
not heard of any such transmigration, I conceive the reasons may be several:
the first may be the great evacuation in those Countries, from whence the Roman
Empire was invaded. A second may be, because Germany and Hungaria (from whence
those inundations came) is better cultivated and improved, so as they can live
plentifully at home, without rambling abroad: another reason may be, that the
Germans, Poles, Cimbrians, and other Nations which border upon the Scythians,
being martial people, and continually at wars with them, are as it were a
Bulwark to these parts, and keep the Scythians from all new invasions. The
Tartars likewise have been many times upon their march with very great Armies,
but they have been always encountered and repulsed by the Poles and Hungarians,
which has given them occasion frequently to boast, that were it not for their
arms and resistance, not only Italy, but the very Roman Church had been many
times sensible of the barbarity of the Tartars.

CHAP. IX.
What those occasions are which do most commonly create War among Princes.
THe occasion of the War betwixt the Samnites and the Romans, who had been a
long time in league together, was the common cause betwixt all Princes and
Governments, and was either fortuitous, or designed. The war betwixt the
Samnites and the Romans was fortuitous; for when the Samnites made war upon the
Sidicins, and afterward upon the Campani, they intended not any controversy
with the Romans; but the Campani being beaten, and betaking themselves to the
Romans for relief, (contrary to the expectation both of the Romans and
Samnites) the Romans being in league with the Samnites, could not, without
violence to the said league, give them protection; upon which (having no other
way to secure themselves) the Campani submitted to the Romans, and made
themselves their subjects; and the Romans, how unjust soever they thought it
before to assist the Campani (whilst they were but associates) against the
Samnites, their old friends, yet now they were become their subjects, and had
incorporated with their State, the case was altered, and they thought it very
reasonable, supposing, that if they should refuse to defend them, they should
discourage all others that had an inclination to do the like, which would have
been contrary to the great design of the Romans to propagate their Glory and
Empire. The same accidental cause gave occasion to their first War with the
Carthaginians, upon the Romans protecting the Massinenses in Sicily. But their
second war with the Carthaginians, was designed; for Hanibal the Carthaginian
General fell upon the Saguntins in Spain, (who were in alliance with the
Romans) not so much out of malice to the Saguntins, but that the Romans being
provoked to their defense, should give the Carthaginians occasion to transport
the war into Italy.

This way of provoking and hedging in a War has been always practiced among
Potentates, especially where they had any faith or respect for other people;
for, that the peace which has been a long time betwixt them upon articles of
alliance may seem firm and inviolate, they will not meddle with him against
whom they do principally design, but turn their arms upon some of his friends
and confederates that he is most particularly obliged to receive into his
protection, knowing, that if he appears in their defense, they must have
occasion to fight him; if he does not, but disowns his allies, they publish his
weakness and infidelity to the World, and by either of those ways they do their
business. This example of the Campani is of singular importance, as well to
those who would make war upon any body, as those that are in distress; for when
you are unable to defend your self, and unwilling to fall into their hands that
invade you, the best and most safe way is to put your self in subjection to
some neighboring Prince, as the Campani did then, and the Florentines
afterward when they found themselves too weak to support against the power of
Castruccio of Lucca; for finding that Robert King of Naples would not protect
them as friends, they threw themselves into his arms to be defended as his
subjects.

CHAP. X.
That, according to the common opinion, money is not the sinews of War.
BEcause it is easy to begin war as a man pleases, but harder to end it; every
Prince before he undertakes an enterprise is obliged to consider his own
strength well, and to regulate by it. But then he must be so wise too as not to
make a wrong judgment, and that he will certainly do as often as he computes it
by his Bags, by the situation of his Towns, or the affection of his Friends,
rather than by his own proper Power and Arms. Money, and Towns, and Friends are
all good, when in conjunction with a strong Army of your own, but without it
they do nothing: without Men, to what purpose is either Money or Towns? and the
affection of your subjects will hold no longer than you are able to defend
them. There is no mountain, no lake, no straight inaccessible, where there is
no force to defend it. Vast sums of money are not only incapable of protecting
you, but they expose you to more danger; nor can any thing be more false than
that old and common saying, That money is the sinews of the war: Quintus Curtius
was the first author of it in the war betwixt Antipater of Macedon, and the
King of Sparta, where he tells us, that for want of moneys the Spartans were
forced to fight, and were beaten; whereas, could they have protracted but some
few days, they had had the news of Alexander's death, and got the victory
without fighting a blow; but wanting money, and apprehending their Army would
moulder, they were constrained to come to a Battle, and were defeated; which
was the occasion of that Apophthegm, That money is the sinews of war: which
saying is now adays in every Princes mouth, but improperly, in my judgment:
for relying wholly upon that Maxim, they think their treasure is sufficient to
defend them, not considering that, if that would have done it, Darius would
have conquered Alexander; the Grecians the Romans; Duke Charles the Swizzers:
and of late the Pope and Florentines united, would not have found it so hard to
have mastered Francesco Maria (Nephew to Julius 2d.) at the Battle of Urbin.
But these whom I have mentioned, presuming more upon the multitude of their
bags than the goodness of their men, were all beaten and overcome. Craesus the
King of Lydia carrying Solon into his Treasury, and showing him an immense
quantity of riches, asked him what he thought of his power; to which Solon
replied, I think it never the greater for this; for War is carried on, and
Battles are fought more with iron than gold; and it might happen for ought he
knew, that some body might come with his iron and take it all from him. Again,
when after the death of Alexander the Great, a great Army of Gauls transplanted
into Greece, (from whence they passed afterward into Asia) before they began
their march, the Gauls sent Ambassadors to the King of Macedon to treat an
accord; which being almost concluded, to make the Ambassadors more pliable, the
said King shows them his treasure, which consisted of a vast quantity of silver
and gold, which the Ambassadors had no sooner seen, but longing impatiently to
be at it, they broke of the treaty, and brought their Army into his Country; so
that that very thing in which he had reposed his great confidence and security
proved his ruin and destruction. The Venetians not long since had their
Coffers well stored, yet they lost all, and their wealth was not able to defend
them. So that I do affirm it is not money, (as the common opinion will have it)
but good Soldiers that is the sinews of war: for money cannot find good
Soldiers, but good Soldiers will be sure to find money; had not the Romans
done more in their wars with their iron than their gold, the treasure of the
whole World would not have been sufficient for them, considering their great
enterprises abroad, and their no less difficulties at home; but fighting with
iron, they had no want of gold, for those who were afraid of their Armies
supplied them. And if the King of Sparta was forced to run the hazard of a
Battle, and was beaten for want of moneys, it was no more than what has happened
to others, and might have happened to him upon other occasions: for it falls out
of many times that for want of provisions an Army is forced either to fight or
to starve; in which case there is no General so weak but he will choose that
which is most honorable, where fortune has some power to befriend him. Again,
a General having news of supplies that are coming to the enemy, considers with
himself whether he had not better engage them as they are, than attend till
their recruits come up, and then fight them with more disadvantage: sometimes
likewise it falls out, (as it did to Asdrubal in the Country of the Piseni,
when he was surprised by Claudius Nero, and the other Roman Consul) that a
General is either forced to fight or to fly, in which case it is incomparably
more safe to hazard all in a Battle, than to lose all in a Flight. Which being
so, we see there are many causes that constrain a General to fight upon
disadvantage; among which, if want of money be one, there is no more reason we
should therefore call that the sinews of war, than any of the rest which do the
same thing: so that money is not so much the snews of war, as good soldiers:
it is true, money is requisite for the carrying on of a war, but not principally,
and in the first place; for good soldiers have many times been contented
without it, though it is but seldom they want it, for it is as impossible for
good soldiers to want money, as it is for money alone to make good soldiers.
And this is clear by the testimony of Historians in a thousand places. Pericles
persuaded the Athenians to a war with all Peloponnesus, and assured them of
success, upon consideration of their industry and riches; the Athenians
undertook the War, and for some time prospered with their industry, but at last
it appeared that the conduct and discipline of the Spartans was too hard for
the Athenians industry and treasure. Livy desides this controversy the best of
any man, where, in his comparison of Commanders, enquiring what would have been
the event if Alexander the Great had turned his Arms against the Romans, he
declares that in war there are three things fundamentally necessary, good
Soldiers, good Officers, and good fortune; and then arguing whether Alexander
or the Romans were more considerable in those three points, he concludes,
without the least mention of money. It is not improbable but the Campani, (of
whom we have spoken in the former Chapter) when they undertook the assistance
of the Sidicins against the Samnites measured their power more by their money
than their men; from whence it happened that' being defeated in two Battles, they
were forced to submit, and become tributary to the Romans.

CHAP. XI.
It Is not discretion to enter into strict amity with a Prince, whose reputation
is greater than his strength.
THe Sidicins were in a great error to desire the assistance of the Campani
against the Samnites, as being (by reason of their luxury) unable to assist
them, but the error of the Capuans was greater, in not knowing their own
weakness and incapacity to defend them: both their errors Livy has very well
described in these words, Campani magis nomen in auxilium Sidicinorum, quam
vires ad praesidium attulerunt; The Capuans made a great noise, but they
brought no force to the relief of the Sidicins.

And here it is not unseasonable to consider, that the leagues which are made
with Princes whose distance is too great, or power too little to relieve one,
are more honorable than safe, and give more reputation than security to the
person that desires them. This was experienced by the Florentines in the year
1489, when the Pope and King of Naples invaded them; for they were at that time
confederate with the King of France, yet they had more reputation than
assistance thereby. The same would happen likewise to such of the Italian
Princes as should confederate with Maximilian the Emperor, and in confidence of
his alliance, undertake any great enterprise, because that alliance would be
one of those that bring more reputation than relief. So then, as it was a great
error in the Capuans, when they were unable to defend themselves, to undertake
the protection of the Sidicins, so it is and will be the same in whoever
follows their example. It was the same case with the Tarentini, who would needs
interpose betwixt the Samnites and the Romans, to mediate a peace: for when
both Romans and Samnites were in the field, and their Armies preparing for an
engagement, the Tarentini sent Ambassadors to the Consul, to let him know from
the Senate of the Tarentini, that they would have peace betwixt them and the
Samnites, and that they were resolved to take Arms against them which refused
it. But the Consul smiling at their imprudence, in the presence of the said
Ambassadors, caused a charge to be sounded, and immediately marching his Army
against the enemy, he let them see by his proceedings what answer they deserved.

Thus you have seen to what errors Princes are subject, who undertake the
protection of other States; I shall now in the next Chapter remonstrate what
ways are most convenient for their own proper defense.

CHAP. XII.
Upon an apprehension of being invaded, whether it be better to make war, or
expect it.
AMong wise men, and very good Soldiers, I have heard it often disputed,
whether when two Princes are of equal strength, and one of them designing war
(visibly) against the other) it be better for that Prince which is like to be
invaded, to sit still, and expect him at home; or to begin with him, and make
the first inroad himself? There are arguments on both sides, and they who think
it best to be the aggressor, and fall upon the Enemy first, may allege the
Counsel which Craesus gave to Cyrus, when being with his Army upon the
Frontiers of the Massageti, Thamyris Queen of that Country sent to him to take
his choice whether she should fight him within her Country, or upon the
Frontiers: if he desired to advance, she would stand still and expect him; if
he had rather fight where he was, she would be with him immediately: when it
came to be debated in Counsel, Craesus, contrary to the opinion of the rest,
was for marching to her; and the reason he gave, was, because if she should be
beaten at any distance, Cyrus would get but little of her Country, for she
would have time to recruit, whereas, if she were beaten at home, he would be
able to sit so close upon her skirts, that she being never capable of rallying,
or bringing another Army into the field, must of necessity lose her whole
Kingdom: Hanibal gave the same Counsel to Antiochus, assuring him that if the
Romans were any way to be conquered, it was by carrying the war into Italy, for
by so doing he might have the benefit of their Arms, their Wealth, and their
Allies; but whilst the war was abroad, and Italy undisturbed, he would leave
the man inexhaustible magazine that would supply them with what and wheresoever
they had occasion; and at last Hanibal concluded that Rome was to be taken more
easily than the Empire, and Italy it self, than any of its Provinces.
Agathocles being unable to resist the Carthaginians at home, invaded their
borders, and forced them to a peace; and Scipio in the same manner to remove
the war out of Italy, transported it into Africa. Those who are on the other
side do argue as stiffly, that there can be nothing more dangerous than to
hazard an Army in an enemies Country, at a great distance from their own; and
they produce the Athenians for an instance, who, whilst they kept themselves
upon the defensive part, and expected their enemies at home were always
victorious; but when they began to make war at a distance, and send Armies into
Sicily they lost their liberty, and everything else. They produce also the
Fable of Antius King of Lybia, who being invaded by Hercules the Egyptian, was
invincible whilst he kept himself within his own borders but being inveigled
out by the subtility of his enemy, he lost both his Kingdom and Life; upon
which occasion that story was raised of Antius; that being born of the earth,
(as they pretended) so often as he touched it, so often he received new vigor from
his Mother, which Hercules perceiving, got him up in his arms, crushed him to
death.

They produce likewise more modern examples. Every body knows that Ferrand King
of Naples was esteemed a wise Prince in his time, and hearing two years before
his death that King Charles viii of France was preparing to invade him, he let
him alone; but falling sick afterward, as he lay upon his deathbed, he called
his Son Alphonso to him, and among other things, charged him that he should
expect the King of France upon his Frontiers, and fight him there, but that by
no means he should be tempted beyond them; and it had been better for Alphonso
to have followed his Counsel, for neglecting it afterward, and sending an Army
into Romagna he lost both Army and Kingdom without striking a blow: But besides
these arguments on both sides, it is urged in behalf of the Aggressor, that he
invades with more confidence and courage than his Adversary receives him (which
is a great advantage and enhancement to his Army) That he brings many
inconveniences upon the person whom he invades, to which he would not be
liable, if he expected him at home. For when the enemies Country is wasted, and
their Houses plundered, his Subjects are not much to be trusted, nor can any
more Taxes be laid upon them, without great difficulty, by which means (as
Hanibal said) their Magazines will be spent and their fountain dried up that
was to supply them with all Provisions for War. Besides, if your Army be in the
Enemies Country, it will be under a greater necessity of fighting, and by
consequence will fight more desperately than at home. But to this it is
answered on the other side, That it is more for your advantage to attend your
enemy in your own Country, than to seek him abroad; for thereby you may furnish
your self with Victuals and Ammunition, and all other necessaries without any
inconvenience, and distress him by driving the Country. You may likewise with
much more ease incommode and frustrate his designs, by your better knowledge of
the Country, and what places are more proper to attack him in; as also you may
attack him with your whole force at once, or give him battle as you please,
which out of your own Confines is not to be done: Moreover if Fortune should be
adverse, and it be your chance to be beaten; more of your Men will escape where
their refuge is so near, and you will sooner rally them again: In short, if you
fight at home, you venture your whole force, and not your whole fortune: but if
you fight abroad, you venture your whole fortune with but part of your force:
Others there have been, who with design to weaken the Enemy, and fighting him
afterward with more ease and advantage, have suffered him quietly to march
several days Journey into their Country, and possess himself of several Towns;
but whether they did well or not, I will not determine, only I think this
distinction is to be considered, whether my Country be strong in Fortresses,
and Men; as the Romans were of old, and as the Swizzers at this day; or whether
it be weak and unfortified, as the Territory of the Carthaginians formerly, and
France and Italy now. In this case the Enemy is by all means to be kept at a
distance, because your chief strength lying in your Money, and not in your Men,
whenever you are interrupted in raising or receiving of that, your business is
done; and nothing interrupts you so fatally, as an Enemy in your Country. And
of this the Carthaginians may be an example, who whilst they were free at home,
were able by their Revenue and Taxes to wage War with the Romans themselves;
whereas afterward when they were assaulted, they were not able to contend with
Agathocles. The Florentines, when Castruccio of Lucca brought his Arms into
their Country, could not support against him, but were forced to put themselves
under the Dominion of the King of Naples, to procure his protection; but
Castruccio was no sooner dead, but they were agog again, and had the confidence
to invade the Duke of Milan, and to attempt the beating him out of that
Province; so courageous were they in their foreign War, and so abject at home.
But when Countries are in a posture of defense, and people Martial and well
disciplined (as the Romans of old, and the Swizzers at this day) it is better to
keep off; for the nearer they are to their own Country, they are the harder to
overcome, because they can raise more force to defend themselves, than to
invade another people. Nor does the opinion of Hanibal affect me at all; for
though he persuaded Antiochus to pass into Italy he did it as a thing that
would have been more for his own, and the Carthaginian than for Antiochus his
advantage; for had the Romans received those three great defeats which they
received of Hanibal in Italy, in the same space of time, in France or any where
else, they had been ruined irrecoverably, for they could neither have rallyed,
nor recruited so soon. I do not remember any foreign Expedition by the Romans
for the Conquest of any Province, in which their Army exceeded the number of
50000. But upon the invasion of the Gauls, after the first Punick war, they
brought 118000 Men into the Field for their defense: Nor could they beat them
afterward in Lombardy, as they did at first in Tuscany, because it was more
remote, and they could not fight them with so much convenience, nor with so
many men. The Cimbri repulsed the Romans in Germany, but following them into
Italy, they were defeated, and driven out again themselves; and the reason was,
because the Romans could bring more forces against them: The Swizzers may
without much difficulty be overpowered abroad, because they seldom march above
30 or 40000 strong; but to attack and beat them at home, is much more
difficult, where they can bring into the field 100000 and more. I conclude
therefore that that Prince whose people are in a posture, and provided for War,
does wisely if he expects a Potent and dangerous Enemy at home, rather than to
invade him in his own Country: But that Prince whose Country is ill provided,
and whose Subjects are ill disciplined, does better if he keeps the War as far
off as he can: and by so doing, each of them (in his several degree) will
defend himself best.

CHAP. XIII.
That from mean to great fortune people rise rather by fraud than by force.
I Have found it always true, that men do seldom or never advance themselves
from a small beginning, to any great height, but by fraud, or by force (unless
they come by it by donation, or right of inheritance). I do not think any
instance is to be found where force alone brought any man to that Grandeur, but
fraud and artifice have done it many times, as is clear in the lives of Philip
of Macedon, Agathocles the Sicilian, and several others, who from mean and
inconsiderable extraction, came at length to be Kings. Xenophon in his History
of Cyrus insinuates the necessity of fraud when he represents (in his first
Expedition against the King of Armenia) how all Cyrus his actions and
negotiations were full of fallacy and deceit, and that it was that way he
conquered his Kingdom, and not by bravery and force, by which he implies that
no Prince can do any great matters without that art of dissembling Besides he
represents him juggling, and playing of tricks with his own Uncle by the
Mother-side, the King of the Medes, and shows that without that excellence, he
had never been King; and indeed I am of opinion that from a mean and base
fortune never any man came to be very great by downright generosity and force;
but by fraud alone there have been many, as particularly John Galeazzo, who by
that alone wrested the Government of Lombardy out of the hands of Messer
Bernardo, his Uncle. And the same courses which Princes are forced to in the
beginning of their authority, the same courses are taken by Commonwealths at
first, till they be settled in their government, and have force sufficient to
defend themselves. Rome (which either by change or election took all ways to
make it self great) was not without this; and what greater cunning or artifice
could it use in the beginning of its greatness, than what it did take, and is
mentioned before. For by their fair carriage and insinuation, they got several
Cities into consideration, and under that name, they subjected them insensibly,
and made them their slaves. The Latins, and other Neigbouring, people were of
this sort, by whose Arms and Alliance, the Romans having conquered their
Enemies, they were rendered so powerful that they began to handle them now, not
as Associates, but Subjects; nor could the Latini be convinced of their
servitude, till they saw the Samnites twice over-thrown, and forced to accept
of their Conditions. Which Victories, though they gained the Romans great
reputation abroad, among remote Princes, who understood more of the name, than
the power of the Romans, yet they created envy and jealousy among those who
were nearer and more sensible of their greatness; and this jealousy and
apprehension was so great, that not only the Latins, but the Colonies in Latium
and Campagnia (which had been sent thither not long before) confederated
against the Romans, and resolved to make War upon them. And this War was
commenced in the same manner (as I have said before) most other Wars are
commenced. Not by downright denunciation of War against the Romans, but by
defending the Sidicins against the Samnites, who made War by allowance from the
Romans. Nor was there any other reason of their Conspiracy, but because the
Conferates began to smell out their cunning, and to be sensible that under that
false title of Allies, they were in great danger of being made slaves, which
Annius Selinus (a Latin Praetor) in an Oration to the Counsel expressed very
properly in these words, Nam si etiam nunc sub umbra faederis aequi, servitutem
pati possumus, quid obest quin proditis Sidicinis, non Romanorum solum, sed
Samnitium dictis pareamus? For if even now under the shadow of an equal
Confederacy, we can endure servitude: What hinders but that we betray the
Sidicins, and put our necks under the feet not only of the Romans, but the
Samnites. Which things being so, it is manifest the Romans wanted not at the
beginning of their rise, that dexterity of cheating that is so necessary to all
people that are ambitious of raising themselves to a great height, from an
inconsiderable beginning; which artifice is always the less scandalous, by how
much he that does practice it, understands better how to disguise it by some
honorable pretense, as the Romans did very well.

CHAP. XIV.
Many People are mistaken, who expect with meekness and humility to work upon
the proud.
IT falls out many times that humility and modesty toward such as have any
picque or prejudice to you, is so far from doing good, that it does a great
deal of mischief and of this the debate and consultation of the Romans about
the preservation of their peace with the Latins, is an example, from whom they
were in expectation of a War. For the Samnites complaining to the Romans that
the Latins had invaded them, the Romans (unwilling to exasperate them more, who
were already too prone to be quarrelling) returned this answer, that by their
league with them, the Latins were not tied up from making War as they pleased.
The Latins were so far from being satisfied by the mildness of their answer,
that it made them more insolent; insomuch that not long after they professed
themselves their Enemies, as appears by that speech of the aforesaid Annius in
the Council aforesaid, where he tells the Latins, Tentastis patientiam negando
militem: Quis dubitat exarsisse eos? Pertulerunt tamen hunc dolorem. Exercitus
nos parare adversus Samnites foederatos suos audierunt, nec moverunt se ab
urbe. Unde haec illis tanta modestia, nisi a conscientia virium, and nostrarum,
and suarum. You tried their patience before, in refusing them supplies; who
doubts but they were netled? yet they swallowed it: They had notice of our
preparations against the Samnites their Confederates, and stirred not in their
defense. Whence comes this mighty modesty, and good nature? from nothing but a
sense of the disparity betwixt our strength, and their own. From hence it is
clear, the patience and civility of the Romans, augmented the arrogance of the
Latins: and that it is the interest of all Princes to be very cautious of
condescending from their dignity, or stooping willingly to any thing that may
give the Enemy an opinion of his weakness or pusillanimity; for it is better to
lose any thing bravely and by open War, than to part with it poorly in hopes to
prevent it; and it many times happens that those who part so easily with their
Lands or Moneys to prevent a War, do rather excite, than satisfy the Enemy,
whose nature commonly is such, that upon the discovery of their impotence or
fear, his desires increase, and new things are successively demanded; nor will
your friends be so ready to assist, if they find you timorous and irresolute.
But if as soon as you have notice of the designs or insolence of the Enemy, you
immediately prepare to correct him; he will not invade you so boldly, though he
be stronger than you, and then your friends will come in more freely to your
assistance, who, had you abandoned your self, would certainly have forsaken
you. This is intended only where you have but one Enemy; where you have more,
the best way is to give and promise what you think fit, that if possible, you
may draw off some or other of them from their Confederacy, and so break their
League by dividing them.

CHAP. XV.
Weak States are irresolute and uncertain in their Councils, and slow Councils
are most commonly pernicious.
FRom these occasions and beginnings of the War betwixt the Latins and the
Romans, we may observe, that in all consultations, it is best to come
immediately to the point in question, and bring things to a result, without too
tedious an hesitation and suspense. And this we may learn from the Council
which the said Latins took at that time when their war with the Romans was in
debate. For the Romans, suspecting the defection of the Latins, for their
better information, and that they might reduce them (if possible) without
blows, sent to them to send over eight of their Principal Citizens to Rome, to
consult with them about keeping of the Peace. The Latins being conscious to
themselves of many things which they had acted against the pleasure of the
Romans, called a Council to consider of the persons that were to go, and what
their Comissioners should say when they came there. The Council being divided,
one man proposing one thing, and another man another, Annius the Praetor had
this expression, Ad summam rerum nostrarum pertinere arbitror, ut cogitetis
magis, quid agendum nobis, quam quid loquendum sit, facile erit explicatis
Consiliis, accommodare rebus verba. I conceive it more pertinent to our
business, That you consider rather what is to be done, than what is to be said;
for when you are come to a resolution, it will be no hard matter to accomodate
your words. Which saying was doubtlesly true, and ought to be regarded by all
Princes and Commonwealths. For whilst we are ambiguous, and uncertain what is
to be done, we cannot tell how to adapt and accommodate our language; but when
we are come to a resolution, and have decreed what is to be done, it is not so
difficult. I have inserted this passage the more willingly, because I my self
have known this irresolution do much mischief, to the detriment and dishonor
of our State; and it is a fault peculiar to all weak and improvident Princes
and Governments to be slow and tedious, as well as uncertain in their Councils,
which is as dangerous as the other, especially when the debate is about the
relief or protection of a friend; for your slowness does no good to him, and
exposes your self. These uncertain or tedious resolutions proceed either from
want of courage and force, or from the crossness and malevolence of the
Counselors, who carried away by some private passion of their own, will rather
ruin the State, than not accomplish their revenge, so that instead of
expediting and pushing things to a conclusion, they impede and obstruct
whatever is before them. For your good Citizens (though the vogue of the people
runs the more dangerous way) will never hinder the coming to a result,
especially in things that will not dispense with much time. Girolamo a Tyrant
in Syracuse being dead, and the War betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians very
hot, a Council was called by the Syracusans, and it was debated which side they
should take. The question was canvas'd with such order by both parties, that it
remained in ambiguo, and nothing was resolved, till at length Appolonides (one
of the Principal in that City) in a grave and prudent Oration remonstrated,
That neither they were to be blamed who had spoken for the Romans, nor they who
adhered to the Carthaginians, but the length and uncertainty of their debate;
for that irresolution would be the occasion of certain ruin; but if they came
to a conclusion, with which side soever they joined, they might hope for some
good. Titus Livius could not better have displayed the danger of this kind of
suspense, than in this case of the Latins; whose assistance against the Romans
being desired by the Lavinians, they were so long in their debate, that when at
last they came to a resolution, their supplies were scarce gone out of their
Gates, before they had news that their Confederates were beaten. Whereupon
Milonius the Praetor said very wittily, This little ground which we have
marched, will cost us very dear to the Romans; and this happened to them for the
tediousness of their Councils; for they should either have assisted, or denied
them out of hand; had they denied them, the Romans had not been disgusted; had
they complied, they might have supported their Associates, and have kept them
from being ruined; but doing neither, they destroyed their friends, and
hazarded themselves. Had this precept of bringing things to a speedy
resolution, been followed by the Florentines, they had prevented many mischiefs
and damages which they met withal upon the coming of Lewis XII into Italy
against the Duke of Milan; for the said King Lewis having resolved upon the
said expedition, he proposed to their Ambassadors in his Court, that the
Florentines should not interpose or concern themselves in the quarrel, upon
which terms, he would receive them into his protection, and defend them from
any harm; the Ambassadors agreed, and a Months time was allowed for
ratification from the City. But the ratification was deferred (by the
imprudence of some persons who favored the Duke of Milan's interest) till the
French had almost conquered all, and being offered then, it was refused by the
King of France (who knew well enough that the Florcntines were then forced to
what they did; and desired his amity more out of fear, than affection) which
piece of delay cost the Florentines a good round Sum of Money, and might well
have been their ruin; as just such an accident was afterward. And this
indiscretion of theirs was the greater, because they were no way serviceable to
the Duke of Milan; who, if he had prevailed, would doubtless have shown himself
a greater Enemy to them, than the King of France. Of this slowness, and
uncertainly of Councils, I have spoken before, but new occasion presenting it
self, I have discoursed of it again, as a thing worthy the observation of all
Commonwealths, especially like ours.

CHAP. XVI.
How much the Soldiers of our times do differ from the Discipline of the
Ancients.
THe Battle which the Romans fought with the Latins, in the Consulships of
Manlius Torquatus, and Decius, was the greatest and most important that ever
they had in any War, with any other Nation. For as the Latins lost all by
losing the Victory, and the Romans got the Dominion of them: So the Romans had
they lost the Battle, must have lost their liberty with it, and turned Subjects
to the Latins. Livy tells us the same thing, for (says he) the Latin Army was
in nothing inferior to the Romans; their courage the same, their constancy the
same, and their numbers the same; if the Romans had any advantage, it was in
their Generals, which indeed were better than the Latins, and it is expressed
by several, both Latins and Romans who have left an account of that Battle to
posterity; that wherever Manlius had been, that side would certainly have
conquered. In this Battle there were two things very exemplary and remarkable:
One of the Consuls, to keep his Soldiers firm in their obedience, and preserve
their Military Discipline, caused his own Son to be slain for transgressing his
Orders, though he gained the Victory by the means. The other devoted himself
freely to death, for the good of his Country; for the dispute was like to be
very hard, fighting against the Latins, who (as Livy tells us) had the same
Language, the same Customs, the same Arms, the same Discipline with the Romans;
the Soldiers, the Captains, the Tribunes both in one Army and the other, had
been Comerades and served formerly together, not only in the same Army, or
Garrison, but in the same Company and Band. It was necessary therefore, being
equal in their numbers, and equal in their courage, that something
extraordinary should be done, that might render the Soldiers fiercer, and more
obstinate to overcome, upon which fierceness and obstinacy the whole hopes of
the victory did depend; for whilst there is any such in the breasts of the
Soldiers, they never think of running, but press still on for victory and
prize; and because there was more of this constancy and fortitude in the
breasts of the Romans, than in the breasts of the Latins, partly the destiny,
and partly the bravery of the Consuls effected that for the good success of
their Army, and the preservation of their Discipline, Torquatus killed his Son,
and Decius himself. Titus Livius in his description of the equality of their
force, gives us an exact account of the Orders which they observed in their
Armies and Fights, and he has done it so largely, I need not repeat it all, but
shall only select what I think most particularly remarkable, and what, if
observed by the Generals of our days, might have prevented very great
disorders. I say then that according to Livy's description, their Armies were
divided into three principal Schieri or Squadrons. The first consisted of their
Hastati, which were most of them young men in the flower of their age digested
into Manipuli or small parties, and disposed at a certain distance with Pikes
or Darts in their hands, from whence they were called Hastati. The second
Squadron was as numerous as the first, and divided into as many Manipuli, but
their distance was something greater, and it consisted of choice men, from
whence they were called Principes. The third and last Squadron was the biggest
of the three, and had almost as many in it as both the other: and this was made
up of the ancientest and most experienced Soldiers, whom they called Triarii.
They too had their certain distances, but something greater than in either of
the other. In their Battles, the Hastati were in the Van; the Principes behind
them, and the Triarii in the Rear. To every one of these Squadrons there was a
body of Horse, which being drawn up in two divisions, and disposed one of the
right, and the other on the left hand of the Army, represented two wings, and
were therefore called Ala. These three Squadrons preceded and followed one
another exactly, but the Hastati in the first Squadron were drawn up closer,
That, being to receive the first impetus of the Enemy, they might endure it the
better. The Principes that followed them was not in such close order, but were
disposed at more distance, to the end that if the Hastati should be forced to
retire, they might be received into that Squadron without disorder or
confusion. But the Triarii were drawn up with greater spaces and intervals than
both the other, and for the same reason, that if they were repulsed, that might
fall back among them, and make an entire Body together: Being drawn up in this
order, the Hastati began the sight; if they were over-powred by the Enemy and
forced to give ground, they fell back to the Principes, and uniting with them,
renewed the fight in one body; if they were both of them too weak, and unable
to bear up against the Enemy, they retreated gradually into the spaces betwixt
the Triarii, and then all the three Squadrons being joined, the whole Army
charged in a body, and if they were beaten, farewell, there was no more
reserves, but the Battle was lost; and because whenever the Triarii was
engaged, the whole Army was in ^^nger, this Proverb grew very frequent, Res
reducta est ad Triarios. Things are now at the Extremity. The Generals of our
times, having laid aside all the old discipline of the Romans, have neglected
this among the rest, to their no little prejudice. For he that draws up his
Army in a posture with two such reserves, must be beaten three times before he
can be utterly defeated; whereas once beating will do the Enemies business. But
he that trusts only to the first shock (as the Christian Armies do generally
now) may easily be broken, the least disorder, or relaxation of courage, putting
all to the rout. And that which is the reason why our Armies are so quickly
defeated, is, because they have lost the old way of falling back one body into
another, and rallying three times. For whoever draws up his Army according to
Modern Custom, does it with one of these two inconveniences, He either draws up
his several Squadrons shoulder to shoulder, and by enlarging his Ranks, makes
his Files very thin (which weakens his Army very much by leaving the distance
so small betwixt the Front, and the Rear) or else he draws them up deeper,
according to the manner of the Romans; but then their Files are so close, that
if the Front be beaten (there being no spaces in the Battle to receive them)
they entangle and confound one another; so as the Front being repulsed, falls
foul upon the middle Squadron, and both of them upon the third, whereby they
are embarrassed, and hindered from advancing or receiving the Enemy in any
order, and the whole Battle is lost. The Spanish and French Armies at the
Battle of Ravenna (where Monsieur de Foix the French General was slain) fought
very well, being drawn up according to the mode of our times, with their Fronts
so extended, that their Battalions were much more in wideness than depth and
his was done in respect of the ground, which in that place was very spacious
and large; for being sensible that retreats are more difficult where the Files
are too deep, they drew them up large in the Front to prevent it as much as
possible: But when they are straightned for room they are forced to be
contented, and draw up as well as they can, for there is no remedy. They are
subject likewise to the same disorders in their Marches and Incursions into the
Enemies Country, whether to forage, or upon some other design. In the War
betwixt the Florentines and Pisans (upon their Rebellion after the King of
France's passage into Italy) coming to a Battle at Santo Regolo, the
Florentines were defeated by their own Horse, which being drawn up in the Front
of the Army, and charged smartly by the Enemy, were put into disorder, and
forced to fall foul upon their Foot, which broke the whole Army. And I have
been many times assured by Monsieur Griacus de Burgo (an old Officer of Foot in
the Florentine Army) that their Foot had not fled that day, but for the
disorder of their own Horse; The Swizzers (the best Soldiers of our times) when
they are drawn up with the French, will be sure to be drawn up in the Flanks,
that if their Horse should be beaten, they may not be driven in among them. And
though these things seem easy to be understood, and more easy to practice,
yet there has not been one of our late Generals that has found the way of
imitating this old method, or correcting the new; for though they also have
their Armies divided into three Squadrons, which they call the Vanguard, the
Body, and the Rear; yet they use them only in their Marches, and Incampments;
but when they come to a Battle, it is seldom seen but they are drawn up as
abovesaid, and altogether run the risk of one shock, and no more. And because
some people to excuse their ignorance, pretend the Execution of the Cannon,
will not suffer them to make use of the old order, I shall examine in the next
Chapter whether that can be a just impediment, or not.

CHAP. XVII.
How the Armies of our times are to judge of Artillery, and whether the general
opinion of it, be true.
WHen I consider with my self how many Field Battles were fought by the Romans
in several times, it falls into my thoughts to examine what many people have
believed, that had there been great Guns in those days, as there are now, the
Romans could never have overrun Provinces, nor made them tributary so easily,
nor have done so many great things as they did; for by reason of these
firearms, Grenades, and such kind of Engines, people are sooner terrified,
and cannot show their valor so freely as heretofore; To which it is added,
that Armies come with more difficulty to a Battle, and that their Orders and
Ranks are not so easily kept, so that in time the whole business of War will be
dispatched by the Cannon. Not thinking it improper to enquire into these
opinions; to examine whether Artillery have added or subtracted from the
strength of our Armies, and taken away, or given more occasion to our Captains
of doing brave things; I shall begin with their first opinion, that the Romans
would not have made those vast Conquests, had there been Artillery in those
days: In answer, I say, that War is twofold, defensive, or offensive; and it is
first to be considered, which of these two Wars it does most mischief or good;
and though it may be said it does great mischief in both, yet I am of opinion,
it is much more prejudicial to him that is upon the defensive, than him that is
upon the offensive part. The reason is, because he who defends himself, is
either blocked up in some Town, or straightned in his Camp: If in a Town, it is
either small (like your Citadels) or large: In the first case the besieged is
lost; for the force of those Guns is such, that no wall is so thick, but in a
few days they will beat it down: So that if he has no retreat, nor time to stop
up the breaches, or throw up new works within, the Enemy enters pell mell at
the breach, and the Cannon of the Town does the Garrison very little good; for
this is a Maxim, where people can fall on in a crowd, and run headlong in their
fury to a storm, great Guns do never repel them. Wherefore the fierce assaults
of the Tramontani are not so easily sustained, as the attacks of the Italians
who fall not on with that fury and impatience as the other, but march up cooly
and quietly to the Battle, and do rather skirmish, than storm. Those who enter
a breach in this gravity and state, are sure to go to pot, for the Artillery
does certain execution upon them: But those who fall on briskly, and crowd one
another into the breach (if there be no new works or retrenchments thrown up
within) enter as they please without any great prejudice by the Cannon; for
though some of them may be killed, yet they cannot be so many as to hinder the
taking of the Town. That this is true, we find by many instances in Italy, and
among the rest in the Siege of Brescia, the Town revolted to the Venetians,
only the Castle stood firm for the French. That the Town might receive no
prejudice from the Castle, the Venetians fortified the great Street that comes
down from the Castle with great Guns in the Front, Flanks, and every where, so
that they thought themselves secure not only from sallies within, but from
relief without. But Monsieur de Foix made no reckoning of them; for marching
thither with a Body of Horse, he alighted, and charging boldly through the said
Street, relieved the Castle, without any considerable loss. So that he who is
shut up in a small place, his walls battered down, and has nothing left but his
Artillery to defend him, is in very great danger, and can hardly escape: If the
place you defend be a large Town, where you have room enough to retire, and
throw up new works; yet your disadvantage is great, and the Enemies great Guns
shall do more mischief upon you, than yours upon him. For first you must be
forced to advance your Cannon, and raise them to some higher place; for whilst
they are level with the ground, every blind, or small work that the Enemy
throws up, is sufficient to secure him; and being forced to plant them higher,
either upon the top of some Wall, or Church, or Mount (erected on purpose) you
fall under two inconveniences; One is, that you cannot bring such large Guns
upon those places, as he can bring without, because in those little places,
great Guns are not to be managed; The other is, that if you could get them up,
they cannot be so easily secured, because they cannot have the convenience of
works or baskets to defend them, as the Enemy has whose Guns are planted as he
pleases. So that it is almost impossible for him that is besieged, to keep his
Cannon long upon a high place, without being dismounted, if the Enemy without
has any store of Artillery; and to keep them upon the ground, is to have little
or no use of them, as I said before: so that when all is done, the best way to
defend a Town is as they did of old, by their small shot, and the courage of
the Soldier: And yet though small shot be of some use to the besieged, it
cannot countervail the damage which they receive from the Enemies great shot,
for by them their walls are battered, and beaten down into the Ditches, so that
when the Enemy comes to storm (which he may do with more ease when the Ditches
are filled up with the ruins of the walls) the besieged are under great
disadvantage. Wherefore, as I said before, those Guns are more beneficial to
the besieger, than the besieged. And if you do not defend your self either in a
great Town or a little, but shall choose rather some strong and convenient
place, where you may encamp and entrench, so as not to be forced to an
Engagement, but with advantage to your self; I say that in this case you have
no better way now, than the Ancients had of old, and that many times your great
Guns are more inconvenient, than otherwise; for if the Enemy falls upon your
back, with any advantage of ground, as may easily happen; That is, if he gains
by accident any eminence that commands your Camp, or surprises you before your
intrenchments are finished, he quickly dislodges you, and compells you to
fight. This was the case with the Spaniards before the Battle of Ravenna, who
entrenched upon the River Roncus, but made their (...) too low, whereupon the
French having the advantage of the ground, with their great Guns played so
furiously over them into their Camp, that the Spaniards (...), and forced
afterward to give them Battle. And if you shall choose such a place to
^^trench in, as commands the whole Country, and fortify it so well, that the
(...) you, yet the Enemy will have the same ways of provoking and (...) you, as
were practiced of old, that is, by making inroads, and plundring your Country;
by (...) your Roads, and intercepting your Convoys, and a thousand other (...)
and (...) dities which he will put upon you, against which your Artillery will
(...). So that considering what has been said, and that the Roman Wars (...)
most (...) offensive; they would have had advantage by them, and in probability
(...) their conquests, had there been any Artillery in their times. As to the
(...), that by reason of those great Guns, men could not show their valor so
much as an ancient times; I answer, it is true, and the danger is greater when
they come to place their ^adders, and make an assault dully and heavily, and
rather one by one, than in a body; their Officers being in the same hazard, and
liable to be killed at greater distance, nor can the strongest guards, nor
choicest men about them, secure them; yet for all these great dangers, no
memorable instance can be produced of any great damage that ever was received.
For Towns are not taken usually by storm, or assault; but by way of Leaguer as
formerly; and in those that are taken by storm, the danger is not much greater
than it was then; for even in those times, whoever undertook the defense of a
Town, had his Machines and instruments of War, which though not discharged with
such force, did the same execution. And as to the reaching of Commanders at a
distance, and killing them in the midst of their Reserves, there have been
fewer of them slain (since great Guns came up) in 24 years Wars in Italy, than
there was in any ten years in the time of the Romans; for unless it were Count
Lodovic della Mirandola (who was killed in Ferrara, when the Venetians invaded
that State) and the Duke of Nemours who was killed at Cirignuola, there has not
been one great Officer slain; for Monsieur de Foix at Ravenna dyed by the
Sword. So that if men show themselves not so courageous as formerly; it is from
the weakness and ill order of their Armies, rather than the Artillery: And
whereas it is said that these great Guns are an impediment to their fighting,
and that the decision of Battles will by degrees be left to the Artillery; I
reply, That that opinion is clearly a mistake, and has been judged so by all
those who are for the old way of Discipline. For he that would have his
Soldiers good, must exercise them well, and with frequent Alarms (true or
false, it is no matter) accustom them to the Enemy, bring them to handy-stroaks,
and as it were to take one another by the beards; by which means they will come
to a greater dexterity in handling their weapons, and grappling with the Enemy;
and for the same reason, the Foot are rather to be relied upon than the Horse;
for if your Foot be nimble and good, you may fall with more security upon an
Enemy perplexed and embarrassed with a train of Artillery, than you could of
old when they had their Elephants, their Chariots with Cythes, and such other
devices. And if the Romans could find out remedies daily against such daily
inventions, no question but they would have found out some or other against
great Guns; and so much the more easily, because the danger of the Guns is
sooner over, than the danger of the other: for the execution which is done by
the Cannon, is done before the engagement begins; The execution by the Chariots
and Elephants, during the whole fight; besides the Cannon is easily avoided by
the Infantry, either by posting themselves behind some bank, or clapping down
upon their bellies; and yet of this so easy and obvious an evasion, experience
tells us there is seldom any necessity; for it is a hard matter to point your
great Guns so exactly, but that either they will be mounted too high and shoot
over you, or too low, and never come at you: And when the Battle is joined,
it is as clear as the day, that neither great nor small shot is of any
advantage; for if the Artillery be placed before the Army, it is odds but it is
taken; if behind, the execution it does, is upon themselves; and on either side
it can gaul you but little, before you get to it, and either cloy, or secure
it, and if an example be required, we have one ready in the Swizzers, who at
Navarre in the year 1513. without Horse or Artillery, or any such thing, fell
upon the French Camp, and overcame them, though they were as strong as Trenches
and Artillery could make them; and another reason is (besides what has been
urged before) because Artillery ought to be guarded (if you would have it do
service) with walls or ramparts, or some such thing as may secure it from being
taken, otherwise it will be of no use, as when in field fights, it has nothing
to defend it, but the Bodies of men. In the Flanks they are of no use, more
than the old Roman Engines in those days who were placed out of their
Squadrons, that they might be managed with more dexterity, and (whenever
overlaid by the Horse or any thing else) they were received into their Legions:
and if there be any way of making advantage of Artillery in a field fight, it
is this; He that uses it otherwise, understands not very well, and puts his
confidence in that which may easily deceive him: The Turk indeed by the help of
his great Guns-obtained two or three Victories against the Sophy, and the
Sultan; but if produced more from the novelty of the noise, and the terror it
brought upon their Horse, than any great execution they did. I conclude
therefore that Artillery may be good, in an Army that is stout; but where they
are used in an Army that is raw and inexperienced, they are of little
advantage, if the Enemy be either courageous or strong.

CHAP. XVIII.
How by the authority of the Romans, and the universal Discipline of the
Ancients, the Foot are more serviceable than the Horse.
BY many Arguments and Examples, it may be proved that the Romans in their
Military exploits had greater estimation for their Infantry, than their Horse;
and how all their principal designs were executed by their Foot: This appeared
in their Wars with the Latins, when the Roman Army being overpowered, and
giving ground in that great Battle near the Lake of Regillum, the Roman General
caused his Cavalry to dismount, and fight on foot, and by so doing, they
recovered their ground, and got the Victory; by which it is manifest the Romans
thought them more serviceable on foot than on horseback, and in that posture
placed more confidence in them. The same thing they practiced in many other
fights, and always with good success: nor can the raillery of Hanibal be
objected against this, who when news was brought him at the Battle of Cannas,
that the Consuls had caused all their Horse to dismount, resolving to fight it
out on foot, cried out in derision, Quam mallem vinctos mihi traderent Equites.
They might as will have bound them, and delivered them to me, Which expression
though coming out of the mouth of an excellent person, yet his single authority
is not to be put in the balance against the judgment of the whole Roman
Commonwealth, and the experience of so many brave Captains as had been educated
under it; and if it were, there are reasons to defend it: The Foot can get into
several places, where the Horse cannot get: The Foot keep their ranks better
than the Horse, and in any disorder, are sooner rallyed, and in a posture
again, whereas the Horse are more unmanageable, and when once out of order,
with great difficulty to be rallyed. Besides (as it is among men) so it is
among Horses, some are high spirited and courageous, others are untoward and
dull; and it frequently happens, that a mettled Horse, has a cowardly Rider, or
a mettled Rider a dull Horse; be it which it will, the disparity is
inconvenient. A body of Foot well ordered and drawn up, will easily be too
hard, for the same number of Horse; but the same number of Horse, will have
hard service to break a Body of Foot, if there be any thing of proportion
betwixt them; and this opinion is confirmed not only by ancient and modern
examples, but by the relations and constitutions of Legislators, and whoever
else have left any rules and directions for the Government of an Army; for
though they tell us, indeed, That at first, Horse were in greatest reputation,
because the way of ordering of Foot was not known; but as soon as the way of
managing them was found out, and their usefulness was discovered, they were
preferred to the Horse. Not but that Horse are very necessary in an Army to
scout abroad, make incursions into the Enemies Country, pursue the Enemy when
he runs, and confront their Horse when they come to a Battle, yet the hopes and
strength of an Army lies more especially in the Foot, and if any one error in
the Conduct of our Italian Princes has contributed to the enslaving of their
Country, it is their neglecting to improve themselves in the management of
Foot, and addressing themselves wholly to the Horse. And this fault proceeded
from the malignity of the Officers, or the ignorance of those who governed the
State: For this last 25 years, the Commands of the Italian Militia being in the
hands of Reformades and Soldiers of fortune, who had no settled Estates, they
made it their design to preserve their Commands by all possible means, though
with never so much prejudice to their Masters: And because a great Body of
Foot, was not like to be long paid (nor would there always be occasion to use
them) and a little one would not turn to account; they applied themselves
wholly to the Discipline of Horse; for 200 or 300 Horse was a fair Command, and
maintained the Officers in a good reputation; nor was the charge so great, but
their Governors could pay them. For the better insurance therefore of their
places, they began to undervalue and decry the Foot service, in such manner,
that by degrees, they were almost wholly laid aside; so that in the greatest of
their Armies, there were very few Foot; the unhappiness of which practice, with
other irregularities in our days, has made the Italian Militia so weak, it has
not been able to defend it self against the insults, and depredations of
foreigners. So then the Foot is with more confidence to be relied upon, than
the Horse; and that this was the judgment of the Romans, appears by another
example. The Romans were encamped before Sora, and a party of Horse sallying
out of the Town to beat them from some post, was met by a Roman Captain at the
Head of his Troop, who charging his adversary, it was their fortune both of
them to be slain. However, their Troops continued the fight, though their
Officers were dead, and the Romans to facilitate their Victory, dismounted in
the middle of the fight, and forced the Enemy to do the same, if they had a
mind to defend themselves; so that the nature of the fight was changed; the
Foot service was preferred, and the Samnites were routed. Nothing can be more
plain, that the Foot were preferred, than this case; for though upon other
occasions the Consuls many times dismounted their Troops, yet it was to
reinforce and bring off the Foot, that were overlaid by the Enemy; but here
they dismounted not to relieve their own Foot, or to engage with the Enemies,
but fighting Horse against Horse, and finding their Victory doubtful, they
thought, though they could not master them on Horseback, they might do it on
foot, and accordingly they alighted: I conclude therefore, that a Body of well
ordered Foot is very hardly to be broken, but by another Body of the same.
Crassus and Marcus Antonius, with a small Body of Horse, but a good Army of
Foot, overrun and harrassed the whole Country of the Parthians for several
days together, though the Parthians had a vast Army of Horse to defend it.
Crassus it is true miscarried in the Expedition, but it was more by the
falsehood, than gallantry of the Enemy; for relying too much upon their
promises, he was reduced to such distress for Provisions, that he and his whole
Squadron were lost; nevertheless in the midst of these exigences, being in an
open and Champian Country, where there were no Mountains, no Woods, no Rivers
to shelter or ease them, far from all relief, and nothing left to sustain them,
the Foot brought themselves off under the command of M. Anthony, and behaved
themselves so well in the opinion of the Parthians themselves, that their vast
Army of Horse durst not venture upon them: But to what purpose do we trouble
our Reader with examples so remote, we have testimony nearer home that will do
it effectually. We have known in our time 9000 Swizzers at Novara attack 10000
Horse, and as many Foot (being most Gascoignes) they never regarded: After this
26000 Swizzers set upon the King of France in Milan, who had with him 20000
Horse, 40000 Foot, and a hundred pieces of Artillery, and though they did not
vanquish him, as at the Battle of Novara, yet they fought him bravely for two
days together, and though worsted at last, yet the greatest part of them got
off. Marcus Regulus Attilius, placed such confidence in his Foot, that he not
only opposed them to the Enemies Horse, but to their Elephants; and though his
success did not answer his expectation, yet it hindered not, but that as great
matters might have been expected from his Foot. So then whoever would defeat a
Body of Foot well ordered, must do it with another Body better ordered than
they, or it is never to be done. In the time of Philip Visconti Duke of Milan,
16000 Swizzers having made a descent into Lombardy, Carmignuola the said Dukes
General marched against them with about 1000 Horse and some Foot; for not being
acquainted with their way of fighting, he thought they would have been
sufficient, but having fallen upon them with his Horse, and been repulsed with
loss, being a wise man, and one that knew how to frame himself to every
accident, he recruited very well, marched against them again, and coming to an
engagement, caused all his Cuirassiers to dismount, and at the Head of his
Foot, fall on upon the Swizzers, who were not able to resist them. For the
Cuirassiers being completely armed, forced their way into the Body of the
Swizzers without any loss, so as their whole Army was defeated, and cut off,
and none left alive, but what were preserved by the humanity of Carmignuola. I
do not doubt but many people are well enough satisfied in their judgments, that
Foot are more serviceable than Horse, yet such is the infelicity of our times,
that neither ancient nor modern examples, nor the confession of those who have
tried them are sufficient to prevail with our Princes to correct this Error, or
to believe that to give reputation to the Arms of a Province, it is necessary
to revive this Order, countenance their Foot, and see them well paid; and then
doubtless they will repay him by their noble Exploits. But they deviate from
this way, as they do from the rest, and therefore no wonder if their Conquests
be more to the detriment, than augmentation of their State.

CHAP. XIX.
The Conquests of Commonwealths that are ill governed, and contrary to the
Model of the Romans, do conduce more to the ruin, than advancement of their
affairs.
THese false opinions of the use and excellence of Horse and Foot, are so
rooted in the minds of men, and so confirmed with ill Examples, that no body
thinks of reforming our late errors, or restoring the old Discipline of the
Romans. Thirty years since who could have persuaded an Italian that 10000 Foot
could have assaulted 10000 Horse, and as many Foot, and have beaten them? Yet
this was done by the Swizzers at Novara. For though all Histories ring of it,
yet none of our people will believe that it is possible to do now, what was
anciently done. They object the excellence of our Horse, and say they are so
well armed, that they are able to repulse not only a Body of Foot, but even a
Mountain or Rock; and by these kind of fallacious Arguments, they deceive
themselves, not considering that Lucullus with a few Foot defeated 150000 of
Tigranes Horse, and yet they had a sort of Cuirassiers among them like ours.
This Exploit of Lucullus we have seen acted over again by the Germans in Italy,
as if on purpose to convince us of our error. Which if Princes and
Commonwealths could be persuaded to believe, they would commit fewer faults,
be more strong against the insults of the Enemy, and not place all their hopes
in their Heels, as they do at this day; and those who had the Government of any
Civil State, would know better how to conduct and manage themselves, either as
to the enlargement, or conservation of their Dominion, and find, that Leagues
and Confederacies, rather than absolute Conquests; sending Colonies into what
they had conquered; making public feuds of the spoils of the Enemy; to infest
and perplex the Enemy rather with Excursions, and Battles, than Sieges; to keep
the public rich, and the private poor, and with all possible caution to keep
up the Discipline of the Army, are the ways to make a Commonwealth formidable
and great. These are the true ways of enlarging, an Empire; all the rest are
uncertain, or pernicious; and if thereby any to whom these ways are not
pleasing, they are by any means to lay aside all thoughts of extending their
Dominion; to think only of regulating their Laws at home and providing for
their defense, like the little States in Germany, which by so doing have lived
in peace and tranquillity for many years together. But how industrious and
careful soever we are, in abstaining from injury, or using violence to our
Neighbor, some body or other will be injuring us, and it will be impossible to
live always in quiet; from which provocation will arise, not only a desire in
us, but a necessity of vindicating our selves, and retaliating upon them; and
when this desire is once kindled, if our Neighbors do not supply us, with
occasion, we can find it at home, as will inevitably fall out where Citizens
are opulent and strong. And if the Cities of Germany have continued free, and
at peace a long time, it proceeds from a peculiar disposition in that Country,
which is scarce to be found any where else. That part of Germany of which I now
speak (like France and Spain) was subject to the Empire of the Romans: But when
afterward that Empire began to decline, and the title of the Empire was
removed into that Province, Those that were the wealthiest and most powerful of
the Cities (taking advantage of the pusillanimity or distresses of their
Emperors) made themselves free, paying only a small annual Rent for the
redemption of their Liberties; which being permitted, by degrees all those
Cities which held immediately of the Emperor, and had no dependence upon any
body else, redeemed themselves in that manner. Whilst these Cities were
employed in this Traffic with the Emperor, it fell out that several
Corporations that belonged to the Duke of Austria, rebelled, and having
established their Liberty, they increased so fast in reputation and wealth,
that instead of returning to their subjection to the Duke, they became terrible
to all people about them. From hence it is, that in our days this Province is
said to consist of the Swizzers, the free Towns, the Princes, and the Emperor.
And if in the diversity of their constitutions, no Wars do arise, or at least
continue any time, it is from their universal respect and defense to the
Emperor, who, though his force be not great, has such reputation among them,
that upon any controversy betwixt them, he can easily compose it, and this it
is that has kept them quiet so long, that in man's memory they have had little
or no troubles, but what happened betwixt the Swizzers and the House of Austria;
and though for many years past, the title of Emperor, has been in the said
House; yet has it not been able to reduce the pertinacy of the Swizzers, though
it has attempted it very solemnly. Nor did the rest of the Princes and free
Towns in Germany contribute their assistance against the Swizzers, partly
because they were favorers of Liberty, and partly because being poor
themselves, they had no mind the House of Austria should be rich. Germany being
constituted in this balance, and aequilibrium, it rather reverences than fears
the Authority of the Emperor, and is quiet and at peace, because the
particular Princes, and States being contented with their own moderate
Dominions, and in awe one of another, do forbear those injuries and
encroachments which are common in other places; whereas if its constitution was
otherwise, the people would certainly think of enlarging as well as their
Neighbors, and by consequence interrupt that happy tranquillity which at
present they enjoy. In other Countries where there is not that exact proportion
and equality of power betwixt the Princes and free Towns, it is not so easy to
preserve them in peace; so that those Commonwealths which have an ambition of
extending their Empire, must do it by confederation, or by the ways of the
Romans, and whoever takes any other course, rather ruins, than advantages
himself; for new Conquests are prejudicial a thousand ways, and, especially
when your force does not increase with your Territory, and you are not able to
keep what you conquer; and this happens when the expense of an Enterprise is
greater than the profit, though it succeeds. This was the case with our
Florentines, and the Venetians, who after they had conquered Lombardy and
Tuscany, were much weaker than before, when one of them was contented with the
Dominion of the Gulf, and the other with a territory of six miles about. We all
think of getting what we can, but take no care which way we shall keep it;
which is the more inexcusable, because we have the Roman example before our
eyes, which we may follow if we please, whereas they had no such advantage, but
wrought all out by their own industry, and wisdom. But there is another way by
which new Conquests do a great deal of mischief, and especially to a well
ordered Commonwealth; and that is when the City or Province that is conquered,
is voluptuous, or effeminate; as it happened first to the Romans, and then to
Hannibal in the Conquest of Capua, where the contagion of their ill manners
spread it self so suddenly among the Soldiers, that had Capua been farther off,
the remedies not so near, or the Romans in the least measure corrupted
themselves, that Conquest would have been the ruin of their State: For it was
true what Livy told us in these words, Iam tunc minime salubris militari
disciplinae Capua, instrumentum omnium voluptatum, delinitos militum animos
avertit a memoria patriae. Capua at that time was no place for Military
Discipline; for being the instrument and contriver of all sorts of sensuality,
it debauched the minds of the Soldier from the memory of his Country. And
certainly such Cities and Provinces do revenge themselves of their Conqueror
without effusion of Blood; for diffusing their ill manners among his people,
they become so weak and enervated thereby, that they are at the mercy of
whoever assails them: which Iuvenal has excellently well expressed, when he
tells us that by their conversation among strangers, the Roman manners were so
changed, that instead of their old temperance and parsimony, they were given up
wholly to luxury and excess.

-- Stevior armis
Luxuria incubuit, victumque ulciscitur Orbem.
What by the Conquered world could never be
Revenged by force, is done by luxury.
Things being thus, and even the people of Rome, notwithstanding the excellence
of their constitution and discipline, being subject to suffer, and be corrupted
by their new acquisitions; what will become of those who have no such virtue
nor education to defend them? but besides all the errors abovementioned, are
guilty of another as dangerous as the rest, and that is, by making use in their
Wars, not of their own Subjects or Soldiers, but of Auxiliaries, and Hirelings.

CHAP. XX.
No Prince, or Commonwealth without manifest danger, can employ foreign Forces,
either Auxiliary, or Mercenary.
HAd I not discoursed at large in another place about the inconvenience of
Auxiliary or Mer^^^^^^ Forces, in respect of ones own, I would have taken this
opportunity to have spoken more of it here, than I shall do now: but having
done it already, I shall only touch upon it at present, which I cannot forbear,
upon a new occasion which I have met withal in Livr. I call those Forces
Auxiliaries, which a Prince or Confederate sends to your assistance under his
own Officers, and pay. Of this sort were the two Leg^ons which after the defeat
of the Samnites, upon the importunity of the Capu^^ (...) left with them for
the security of their City. But those Legions which were intended for the
defense of that City, languishing in ease, and wallowing in luxury, began to
forget the Disciplne of their Country, and their Reverence to the Senate, and
contrive how they might make themselves Masters of the Town, conceiving the
Inhabitants unworthy to enjoy those possessions which they were unable to
defend. But this Conspiracy was discovered in time, and not only prevented, but
punished by the Romans, as we shall show more largly hereafter: At present I
shall only say this, that of all Soldiers, none are employed with so much
hazard, as your Auxiliaries. For first, neither Soldiers nor Officers receiving
pay from you, but from the Prince or State by whom they are sent, they have but
little regard either to your interest or authority; but when the War is done,
give themselves wholly to pillaging and mischief, and that not only with the
Enemy, but their Friends; moved sometimes by their own, and sometimes by the
avarice of their Prince. The Romans when they left those Legions at Capua, had
no thoughts of breaking their league, or offering them any injury; but the
Soldiers being depraved by the licentiousness of the place, and encouraged by
the pusillanimity of the Inhabitants, took occasion to conspire, and doubtlesly
had they not been prevented, had seized upon the Town. This we could enforce
with several other examples, but the case is so plain, I shall content my self
with this, and that of the Regini, whose Inhabitants were not only robbed and
dispossessed, but murdered by a Legion which the Romans sent to them for their
security. So then in prudence a Prince or Commonwealth is to take any course,
rather than to bring himself into a necessity of employing Auxiliaries,
especially when he is to rely wholly upon them; for no treaty or accommodation
can be made with the Enemy, but shall be more for his advantage, than to
entertain such Forces. And if old passages be consulted, and considered
together with the new, it will be found that for one time in which they ever
did good, there are hundreds in which they have done harm: Nor can an ambitious
State or Prince have a more commodious occasion to possess himself of a City or
Province, than when he is invited in this manner for its assistance and
defense. Wherefore, he whose indiscretion is so great as to make use of such
Armies, not only for his defense, but his conquests of other people, takes a
course that must necessarily undo him; for he aims at the acquisition of what
he cannot keep any longer than his Auxiliaries will give him leave, for they
can take it from him when they please: But such is the unhappiness of human
ambition, that fixing their eyes only upon present satisfaction, they never
think of inconveniences that will follow, whereas if they would reflect upon
ancient examples, they would find that the less injurious they were to their
Neighbors, and the more generosity they show toward them, the more ready
would they be to throw themselves into their Arms, as shall be shown in the
next Chapter, by the example of the Capuans.

CHAP. XXI.
The first Praetor which the Romans ever sent out of their own City, was to
Capua, and that was 400 years after they began first to make War.
THe People of Rome (as we have said many times before) in the management of
their Wars, and the enlargement of their Empire differed much from the methods
of our times: For the Cities which they conquered (if they did not think fit to
demolish them) were left free, with the exercise of their own Laws, as before,
and that without any other mark of subjection, than the subscribing certain
Articles of Agreement, and whilst they kept them, they kept their old
Privileges and Dignity. And this Custom they observed till they carried their
Arms into Foreign Countries, and began to unravel the Governments where they
conquered, and reduce whole Kingdoms and States into Provinces: This will be
cleared, if we consider that the first Praetor which was ever sent abroad by
the Romans, was to Capua; not out of any ambitious design, but at the request
of the said Capuans to rectify and compose some differences, which they could
not do among themselves. The Antiates following the example of the Capuans, and
moved by the same necessity, desired a Praetor likewise, because at that time,
as Livy tells us, Non solum arma, sed jura Romana pollebant. Not only the Arms,
but the Laws of the Romans were victorious. And this way of lenity in their
Government, contributed exceedingly to the enlargement of their Empire; for
those Cities or States which have been accustomed to their own Liberty and
Laws, do more easily submit to a Dominion that seems remote and at a distance
(though indeed it may have something of servitude in it) than to that which is
always before their Eyes, and keeps them in perpetual apprehension of slavery;
and there is this advantage besides, That if in the administration of Justice,
or the management of public affairs, any thing be acted to the displeasure of
the people, it has less infamous reflection upon the Prince who leaves them to
their own Customs and Laws, than upon him who sets up Magistrates of his own,
and dispatches all things by them; and this way takes off a great deal of
hatred and calumny from the Prince, which would otherwise fall heavily upon
him. Of the certainty of this opinion, we have a fresh instance in Italy; every
body knows that Genoua was oftentimes in the possession of the French, and that
that King (excepting of late years) used always to send thither a Governor of
his own; at present, (the necessity of his affairs requiring it) he has given
them the election of their own Governor, and it is constantly a Genouese. No
body questions but this way is most pleasing to the City, and by consequence
their affections must be much enlarged to the King. For it is the Nature of
Mankind (and inseparable from it) to trust those with more frankness, who are
least like to oppress them; and to fear those least, who are most merciful and
humane. This gentleness and familiarity in the Romans prevailed so far upon the
Capuans, that they made it their solemn request, that they would send them a
Praetor, which if the Roman austerity had but pretended to have done, they
would not only have refused, but used all means to have freed themselves from
them. But what need we go to Rome and Capua for examples, when we have them at
home? Every one knows how long it is since Pistoia threw it self voluntarily
into the Arms of the Florentines: Every one knows the jealousies and emulations
that were betwixt them and the Florentines, Pisans, Lucchesi, and Sanesi: and
this diversity of humors proceeded not from any neglect in the Pistoians of
their affairs, or from any disesteem they had of their liberty, more than the
others; but from an ancient experience they had had of the affection and
tenderness of the Florentines, and that was the true cause why they threw
themselves under their protection; whereas carrying themselves more severely to
the rest, they were so far from coming in, and submitting to their
jurisdiction, that they did what they could, and tried all ways possible to
disclaim it. And doubtless had the Florentines, by their Leagues, or supplies
comported themselves with more kindness to their Neighbors, and not incensed
them by their austerities, they had been Masters of all Tuscany at this hour;
Not but that Arms and Severity are to be used upon occasion, but mild ways are
to be tried first, and extremities only in extremity.

CHAP. XXII.
How uncertain the judgments of most People are, in things of greatest
importance.
HOw false and erroneous the opinions of men are, all persons can testify who
have any conversation in their Counsels; which unless managed by persons of
more than ordinary sagacity, are for the most part contrary to the truth. And
because men of these excellent qualifications, in corrupted States (especially
in times of peace) by reason of the envy or ambition of other people, are
subject to be hated; such Counsels are frequently followed, as the deluded
Commons think best, or such as are recommended by those who are more solicitous
of the favor, than the benefit of the people: But their errors being
discovered in the time of their adversity, necessity directs them to those
persons whom in the time of prosperity they despised, as shall be shown at
large in convenient place. Moreover humane consultations are subject to certain
accidents by which men are frequently deluded, unless their experience be more
than ordinary, which accidents are apt by their likelihood and probability to
persuade people to whatever they desire. This I mention, in consideration of
the advice of Numisius the Proetor (after the Latins were defeated by the
Romans) and of what was not long since generally believed when Francis I. of
France invaded Milan, which was defended by the Swizzers. For Lewis XII. being
dead, and Francis d' Angolesme succeeding in that kingdom, he had a great
design of recovering Milan, which not many years before had been taken from
them by the Swizzers, at the encouragement of Julius II. To facilitate his
Enterprise, he made it his business to gain a party in Italy, and having made
sure of the Venetians, he addressed himself to the Florentines, and Pope Leo X.
conceiving it would be a great corroboration to his affairs if he could make
them, seeing the Forces of the King of Spain were in Lombardy, and the
Emperors at Verona. Pope Leo could not be brought to consent, being persuaded
(as is said) by his Counsel, that if he kept himself Neuter, he should be
certain of Victory; for it was not for the interest of the Church, that either
the King of France, or the Swizzers should be too potent in Italy; but he who
would restore it to its ancient Liberty, must deliver it from the servitude
both of the one and the other: And because both of them together were not to be
dealt withal, nor indeed either of them apart, as things stood then; occasion
was to be expected, and they were to attend till the King of France and
Swizzers had fought, and one of them beaten the other, and then before the
Conqueror had recruited, or recovered what he had lost in the Battle, the Pope
and his Friends should fall upon him, and so both of them be expulsed. It was
impossible he should ever have a fairer opportunity; for the Enemy were both of
them in the Field, and the Popes Army strong upon the borders of Lombardy
(under pretense of securing the Territories of the Church) where it might
attend the event of the Battle, which the vigor, and strength of both Armies
portended would be bloody, and when they had destroyed one another, and were
both of them weakened, then might his Army fall securely upon them, possess it
self of Lombardy, and govern all Italy as he pleased himself. These were the
Counsels which were given his Holiness, and at first they seemed solid enough,
but how vain they proved afterward, the event did clearly demonstrate; for the
Swizzers after a long and bloody Fight being defeated the Popes and the King of
Spains Forces were so far from taking that opportunity of falling upon the
French (as they had promised themselves) That they prepared to run away, nor
would that have secured them, had not they been befriended by the humanity (not
to say laziness) of the King of France, who contenting himself with one
Victory, never regarded a second, but struck up a Peace with the Pope: And
truly at a distance these Counsels seemed not unreasonable, though in reality
they were irrational and idle; for the Conqueror seldom loses many men, what he
loses is in the Fight, and the greatest part of the execution is in the
pursuit; but grant a Battle is a long time before it be decided (which
notwithstanding happens but seldom) and that many are slain and disabled of the
conquering side, yet the reputation of Victory gives the Conqueror such esteem,
and strikes such awe and terror into all people, as transcends the
consideration of any loss he can sustain: so that he is in an egregious error,
who thinks a victorious Army may be the more easily overcome by reason of the
prejudice it received in the Fight; for it is madness to attempt such an Army
with a less number, than you would have engaged it before; because their late
fortune will add to their courage. This appeared by the experience of the
Latins; by the Counsel of Numisius the Praetor; and by the losses of the people
who followed it. For the Romans having beaten the Latins with much ado, and
such slaughter of their own men, that they seemed to have got nothing of a
Victory but the Name; Numisius proclaimed it up and down, that then was the
time to recover their liberty, and that if with new Forces they fell suddenly
upon the Romans, before they were recruited, or had any expectation of being
invaded, they would certainly be overthrown: Upon which the Latins believing
him, raised a new Army, and fell upon the Romans, but they were presently
defeated, and suffered the inconvenience, to which all people are subject that
follow such Counsels.

CHAP. XXIII.
How the Romans upon any accident which necessitated them to give judgment upon
their Subjects, avoided always the mid way.
JAm Latio is status erat rerum, ut neque bellum neque pacem pati possent. The
Latins were now in such a condition, that they were neither fit for War nor
Peace. And what Livy said of Latium, is true every where else; That Prince or
Commonwealth is at the highest pitch of unhappiness, which is in such a
condition, as that he can neither receive Peace, nor maintain War: And this
happens, when people are conquered, and necessitated to submit upon such hard
terms as in their hearts they disdain, or else (to go on with the War) are
constrained to implore their assistance, who will make them a prey. The ways by
which we are brought into so sad a condition, are commonly ill Counsels, for
want of just consideration of our affairs, both as to Money and Men. For that
Commonwealth or Prince who takes right measures in those, shall very hardly
fall into the d^^^resses of the Latins, who accepted the condition of the
Romans when they should have refused them; and declared War against the Romans
when they should have desired a Peace; so that as they ordered the matter, the
enmity and amity of the Romans did equally afflict them. The first that
overcame them was Manlius Torquatus, and after him Camillus, who seized upon
all their Cities, and putting Garrisons in them, returned to Rome, and in his
account to the Senate acquainted them, that the whole Country of the Latins was
then in their hands. And because the Sentence and Judgment of the Senate at
that time upon the Latins is more than ordinarily remarkable; That it may be
readier for the imitation of Princes when occasion is offered, I shall set down
the ^^rds which Livy makes Camillus speak, which confirm what we have said
about the ways which the Romans observed in the enlargement of their Empire;
and shows, that in their determinations in matters of State, they left the
middle ways, and followed only the extremes. For Government is nothing but
keeping Subjects in such a posture as that they may have no will, or power to
offend you. And this is done either by taking away all means from them of doing
you any hurt; or by obliging and indulging them so, as they may not in reason
hope to better their fortune; all which will appear, first by Camillus his
Speech to the Senate, and then by their resolution upon it. His words were
these, Dii immortales ita vos potentes hujus Consilii fecerunt, ut sit Latium,
an non sit, in vestra manu posuerint. Itaque pacem vobis, quod ad Latinos
attinet, parare in perpetuum, vel soeviendo, velignoscendo potestis. Vult is
crudeliter consulere in debitos victosque? licet delere omne Latium. Vultis
exemplo Majorum augere rem Romanam, victos in Civitatem accipiendo? Materia
crescendi per summam gloriam suppet it. Certe id firmissimum imperium est, quo
obedientes gaudent. Illorum igitur animos dum Expectatione stupent, seu poen^,
seu beneficio praeoccupari opportet. The Gods have put it into the power of
this Reverend Council, to determine whether the Latins shall be a people, or
not. As to them, your peace will be perpetual, which way soever you take; Are
you disposed to severity, and will destroy those poor people that are
conquered, and your Prisoners? They are at your mercy, and you may extinguish
their very name. Are you disposed according to the example of your Ancestors to
propagate your interest by receiving them into your City? You have an
opportunity of doing it with the highest advantage and glory. Certainly no
Empire is so firm, as where Subjects exsult in their obedience. It will be
expedient therefore, whilst they are in amazement and suspense, to settle their
minds one way, either by punishment or pardon. According to the Consuls
proposal, the Senate came to an issue, and gave sentence Town by Town,
according to the Nature of their deserts; but all in extremes, without any
mediocrity; for some they not only pardoned, but loaded them with benefits,
made them f^^e of their own City, and gave them many other privileges, and
exemptions, and the^^ ^y secured them not only from Rebelling, but from ever
conspiring again. The rest whom they thought fit to make examples, were brought
Prisoners to Rome, punished with all kind of severity, Their Houses destroyed,
their Lands confiscated, their Persons dispersed, so as it was not possible for
them any way to do any mischief for the future. This was the way the Romans
took in the settlement of Latium, which ought to be observed and imitated by
all wise Princes and States; and if the Florentines had followed it in the year
1502. when Arezzo and the whole Valley of Chiana rebelled, they had continued
their Authority, augmented their State, and supplied themselves with those
Fields which they wanted for their subsistence. But they took the middle way
(betwixt the extremes of rigor and remission) which is always most dangerous;
they kept the City, removed the Magistrates, degraded the great Men, banished
some, and executed others. If any in their Councils advised to have the City
demolished, it was answered, It could not be done without dishonor and
rexection upon their own; as if Florence was so weak and inconsiderable, it was
not able to keep a Garrison in Arezzo. This Argument was of that sort which
carry some appearance, but are not really true. It Is much as if we should argue
a Parricide or Felon, or other egregious Malefactor, is not to be put to death,
lest it should be thought the Prince or Republic was too impotent to restrain
them any other way. But those who are of that opinion are to consider, that
when a private person, or whole City offends so highly against his Prince, or
his Government; To make them examples to other people, and bridle them so as
they may be sure to be no more guilty for the future, the surest way is utterly
to destroy them; and it is more honorable for a Prince to extirpate them quite
at once, than to endeavor to preserve them with a thousand difficulties and
dangers: For whoever he be that knows not how to punish his delinquents
according to the merits of their offenses, and so as to secure himself for the
future, is either a weak, or a poor spirited Prince. To confirm what is said,
we may produce another example of the Romans, in their Sentence upon the
Privernates; from whence (as Livy says) two things are to be concluded; one is,
that Rebels are to be pardoned frankly, and obliged; or utterly extinguished.
The other that generosity of mind, and steddiness and constancy in our answers
when given to wise men, make strangely for our advantage. The Roman Senate was
assembled to give Sentence upon the Privernates who had been in Rebellion, and
being reduced by force of Arms, had sent several of their chief Citizens to
implore the mercy of the Romans: being brought into the Senate (where every
body was persuading according to his inclination, some for mercy, and some for
severity) one of the Senators (before they could come to a resolution) asked
one of the Petitioners, Quam poenam meritos Privernates censeret. What
punishment he thought his fellow Citizens deserved: To which he replied, Eam
quam merentur qui se liberate dignos censent, The same that they deserve, who
desire to be free. The Senator continuing, Quid si poenam remittimus vobis,
qualem nos pacem vobiscum speremus? If we should pardon you this time, what
peace could we hope for from you? To which he answered, Si bonam dederitis, and
fide lem and perpetuam; si malam, haud diuturnam. If it be upon good terms, it
will be firm and perpetual; if upon ill, it will hardly last long. Upon which
the better part of the Senate (though some opposed it) declared, Se audivisse
vocem liberi and viri; nec credi posse illum populum aut hominem denique in ea
condition cujus eum paeniteat, diutius quam necesse sit mansurum. Ibi pacem
esse fidam, ubi voluntarii pacati sint, neque eo loco ubi servitutem esse
velint, fidem sperandam. That he had spoke like a man, and like a Freeman.
That it was not to be imagined any people or private person would submit to a
condition that oppressed him, longer than by necessity he was constrained. That
if any peace be lasting and inviolable, it is where the parties do voluntarily
subscribe, not where servitude and slavery is imposed. And thereupon it was
decreed, that the Privernates should be Civitate donati, and enjoy all the
Privileges of the Romans, concluding, Eos qui nihil praeterquam de liberate
cogitant dignos esse qui Romani fiant. That they deserved to be Romans, whose
liberty was the greatest part of their care. And this frank and generous way of
answering, took mightily with those grave men, as knowing that whatever they
had said otherwise, would not have been from the heart, but with compliance and
submission to their fortune and distress. And this is most certain, whoever
speaks otherwise (especially if either he has been or but thought himself free)
does but equivocate, and he that believes him, takes wrong Counsels, such as
are neither good for himself, nor satisfactory to them, which many times
produces Rebellion, and the ruin of the State, And things being so, we
conclude, according to our proposition in the beginning of our discourse; That
upon any great Sentence to be given against a people or City that has been
formerly free, the surest way is, to wave all moderation, and either to caress
or extinguish them. He that proceeds otherwise, will find himself in an error,
as the Samnites were, when having enclosed the Romans ad Turcas Caudinas, they
neither discharged them freely, nor put them to the Sword, as one of their
grave Citizens advised; but abused them, and pillaged them, and dismissed them
sub jugum when they had done. But not long after, they were made sensible of
their error, and that the old Citizen was in the right; as we shall show more
at large hereafter.

CHAP. XXIV.
That in the generality, Castles and Citadels, do more mischief than good.
TO the Statesmen of our times, it may perhaps seem indiscretion or
inadvertancy in the Romans, that being desirous to keep Latium, and Privernum
in subjection, they built neither Castles nor Citadels to secure them: and
indeed they differed exceedingly from our Florentine Politicians, who are of
opinion that not only Pisa, but all other Cities whatever are to be kept under
that way, and surely had the Romans been like us, they would have been of the
same opinion; but differing in their courage, their judgment, and their power,
they differed likewise in their resolutions. Nor during all the time of their
liberty, were the Romans known to build any Castle or Citadel to keep any City
in awe, or any Province in peace; only some indeed which were fortified before,
they garrisoned, and continued; which being so, and quite contrary to the
Sentiment of our times, I think it not amiss, if in this place I inquire
whether such things be profitable or unprofitable to the persons who build
them. It is therefore to be considered, that such Fortresses are erected,
either to repel an Enemy, or restrain a Subject, and keep him in obedience. In
the first case I do pronounce them unnecessary; in the second dangerous. They
are dangerous, and do rather obstruct than promote obedience in the Subject;
because the great danger of Rebellion proceeds from hatred which the people
have conceived against their Prince, that hatred proceeds from his injustice to
the people, and he is said to be unjust when he governs them arbitrarily, and
by force, which is never so manifest, as when he builds such Castles and
Citadels among them, that no man might be able in any manner to oppose him.
Which being so, those kind of Fortifications are not only useless and improper
to keep the Subject in subjection; but dangerous, seeing by presumption upon
them, Princes are encouraged to treat their Subjects worse than otherwise they
would do, by which they contract the odium of the people; and what is the
consequence? Rebellion and Blood, and Confusion: Neither when troubles arise,
and Wars break out, is there that defense or security in them, as is now adays
imagined; for there are only two ways of keeping a conquered people in
obedience, you must either have a standing Army (as the Romans had) always
ready to subdue them; or you must divide, disperse, or destroy them in such
manner, that they may never get together again to disturb you: For though you
impoverish and plunder them never so much, Spoliatis arma supersunt, They will
find Arms to revenge themselves; and if you disarm them never so carefully,
Furor arma, ministrat. Their fury will supply them. If you cut off their
Commanders, like Hydra's, others will succeed, and do as much mischief: If you
build these Castles, in time of Peace they may be serviceable, and make you
more bold, and secure against your Subjects; but when War comes, and both your
Subjects and Enemies infest you, it is impossible they should defend you
against both. And if ever they were useless, it is now since the use of
Artillery is known, against the fury of which no little Fort (from whence other
Guns cannot play with security again, and where they want ground for repairing
their breaches, or making new retrenchments upon occasion) can possibly stand:
and being so, consider seriously with your self whether these kind of
Fortresses are like to keep your old Subjects, or your new Conquests in
obedience? If your Territory be hereditary, and you have received it from your
Ancestors, to build Castles to keep your own natural Subjects in obedience,
will be to little purpose, for the reasons abovesaid, seeing they will be but a
means to make you and your posterity the more Tyrannical, and by consequence
expose you to the hatred of the people, against which they will be afterward
unable to defend you. So that for these reasons, that neither he himself nor
his heirs may have occasion to entrench too much upon the people; and the
people have no occasion to abhor him, a wise Prince will never build Citadels;
and though Francesco Sforza Duke of Milan was reputed a wise Man, and built a
Citadel at Milan to secure his Usurpations, yet his wisdom did not appear in
that, for it proved afterward the ruin of his posterity. For presuming upon
that, they took the more confidence to oppress the people, which incensed them
so highly, that they revolted upon the first approach of an Enemy, and turned
their Prince out of that Province. So that that Citadel did him no good in time
of War against the incursions of the Enemy; and in time of Peace, making him
more insolent, it did but expose him to the hatred of the people; whereas if no
Citadel had been built, and yet they had been so indiscreet as to have behaved
themselves insolently to their Subjects, some or other of them who had been
injured would have remonstrated to their Prince, the danger of his courses,
before he had contracted the general odium; by which there would have been a
possibility that he might have reformed, and reconciled himself to his
Subjects; and had he done so, he would have better defended himself against the
French with the affections of his people, and no Citadel; than with a Citadel,
and no affections of the people. Besides there are many ways of losing these
Citadels; by force, by fraud, by corrupting the Governor, by starving, and by
storm. And if you have lost a City, which you are in hopes of recovering by the
favor of the Citadel, which still holds out for you; it will require an Army
as much as if there were no Citadel at all; and so much the stronger, by how
much it is probable the people may be more incensed from the mischief which they
have received out of the Castle, than they would have been, had there been no
Castle at all. Experience it self has since taught us that that Citadel of
Milan was of no advantage, either to the Dukes of Milan, nor French in time of
their adversity; but in time of Peace did them much prejudice, by hindering them
from taking such ways as might have obliged the people, and rendered them well
affected to their Government. Guido Ubaldo Son to Fred^ric Duke of Urbin, was a
great Captain as any in his time, being driven out of his Country by Coesar
Borgia (Son to Alexander VI.) and recovering it afterward by an accident, he
caused all the Fortresses in the whole Province to be dismantled, and
destroyed; as things which he had found by experience were more to his
prejudice than security. For being beloved by the people, he would not do them
the injury to put Garrisons in them; and if he had, upon any invasion from the
Enemy, he could not have kept them without a field Army to relieve them. Julius
the Pope, having driven the Bentivogli out of Bononia, built a Citadel there,
and put in such a Governor as partly by his own ill nature, and partly by the
instructions o^ his Master, killed many of the Citizens, and committed several
cruelties, which provoked the Bononians so exceedingly, that they rebelled, and
recovered the Citadel, which had the Governor been more moderate, might have
been longer in his power. Nicolo de Castello Father of the Vitelli, (returning
into his Country, from whence he had been banished by the Popes) immediately
demolished two Fortresses which had been raised by Sixtus IV. as judging the
hearts of the people more like than those Castles, to secure him. But of all,
there is no example, evinces the unusefulness of these kind of Garrisons, and
the convenience of taking them away, more than that which happened lately at
Genoa; for the said City revolting from Lewis XII. of France, in the year 1507.
Lewis came with a strong Army into Italy, and having reduced it, built a Castle
of greater strength and capacity than any of that time; for it was built upon a
promontory that Commanded the Sea called Godefa, the Harbor, and the Town, so
that by all people it was held inexpugnable. But the French being driven out of
Italy in the year 1512. Genoa rebelled (notwithstanding the Castle) and Ottanio
Fegosa taking the Government upon him, in sixteen months brought the Castle to
such extremity, that it was forced to surrender; whereupon, though he was
advised to keep it as a refuge in case of any disaster; yet being a wise man,
and knowing well that a Prince is in nothing so safe, as in the affections of
his Subjects, he caused it to be demolished, and he found the benefit of that
Counsel, for by it he has held that Government to this day; and that so
strongly, that whereas before, the appearance of a thousand Foot was sufficient
at any time to have carried it; his adversaries assaulted it with ten thousand,
and could do him no wrong. So that we see the demolishing de Fegosa no hurt,
and the making it did the King of France no good; for when he was able to bring
an Army into Italy, he was able to recover Genoa without the help of the
Castle; but when he could bring no Army, he could not keep it, though the
Castle was for him: From whence it follows, that as the building of it, was a
great expense, and the loss of it a great dishonor to the King of France; so
the taking of it was great glory to Ottaviano, and the ruining it, a great
advantage. And it is the same thing with those who build them in their new
Conquests, to keep their new subjects in obedience, which if the example of
Genoa and the French should be insufficient to prove, the Cities of Florence
and Pisa, will do it effectually. The Florentines built a Citadel at Pisa, and
several other Fortresses to keep it in aw; not considering that a City which
had been free, and in continual emulation of the Florentine greatness, was not
any other way to be kept to its duty, unless (according to the practice of the
Romans) they made a fair and honorable league with it, or utterly subverted
it. But how much those Fortresses answered their designs, appeared when Charles
VIII. made his Expedition into Italy, to whom they were generally surrendered,
either through the fear or falsehood of their Governors. So that had not they
been built, the Florentines had never relied so much upon them for the keeping
of Pisa, but had thought of some safer way to have secured it against the King
of France. I conclude then, that to keep ones own Native Country in subjection,
Fortresses are dangerous, and to keep new Conquests, they are ineffectual: To
prove that the authority and practice of the Romans ought to be sufficient, who
whenever they had a mind to restrain the power, and bridle the fury of the
people, did it not by erecting new Fortresses, but by demolishing the old. If
it be objected that Tarentum of old, and Brescia of late years were recovered
by the fidelity of the Castles, when the Towns had revolted. I answer, that as
to the recovery of Tarentum, the Castle contributed nothing, for the Consul
Quintus Fabius was sent thither with an Army strong enough to have retaken it,
had there been no Castle at all: and, what advantage was it to the Romans that
the Castle held for them, if the recovery of the Town required a Consular Army,
and the presence of so great a Soldier as Fabius Maximus; and that they might
have retaken it without the help of the Castle, is clear in the example of
Capua, which they recovered, when there was no Castle to befriend them. In the
case of Brescia, the circumstances were very extraordinary; for it seldom
happens that when a City revolts, and the Castle holds out for you, That the
Castle has a field Army hard by, and ready to relieve you. Monsieur de Foix
General for the King of France, being with his Army at Bologna, and
understanding the desection of the Brescians, marched immediately to recover
it, and in three days time (by the help of the Castle) was Master of it again.
So that it was not wholly by the benefit of the Castle that Brescia was
recovered, but by the presence and dextery of Monsieur de Foix and his Army.
And this example may be sufficient to balance all others to the contrary; for
we see daily in our times, multitudes of Castles taken and retaken, and
following the fate of their Cities, and that with no more difficulty or variety
of fortune, than when there are none at all; as has been visible in Lombardy,
Romagna, the Kingdom of Naples, and all other quarters of Italy. And as to
those Citadels which are built in your new Conquests, to defend you from your
Enemies abroad; they also are absolutely unnecessary, where you have an Army in
the field; and where you have none, they are of no use. A good Army without any
such Forts, is sufficient to defend you. And this has been found by experience
by all those who have been thought excellent in the Arts of War, or of Peace;
and particularly by the Romans and Spartans: The Romans never erected any new
Castles, and the Spartans never suffered any old; but what Cities soever they
conquered, down went their Walls; nay, even in their own Cities they would not
permit any fortification, as believing nothing so proper to defend them as the
virtue and courage of their Citizens. A Spartan being demanded by an Athenian,
Whether the Walls of Athens were not very beautiful? Yes, says the Spartan, if
it was but inhabited by Women. A Prince therefore who has a good Army in the
field, may have some benefit by his Castles, if they be upon the Frontiers of
his Country, or in some places upon the Coast, where they may ^etard and
entertain an Enemy for some time till the Army can come up: But if the Prince
has no Army on foot, let his Castles be where they will, upon the Frontiers or
elsewhere, they are either unserviceable or dangerous: dangerous, because they
are easily lost, and made use of by the Enemy against you; or if they be too
strong to be taken, yet the Enemy marches on, and leaves them unserviceable
behind him. For an Army that has no Enemy in the field to confront it, takes no
notice of Cities or Castles, but passing by as it pleases, rambles up and down,
and ravages the whole Country; as may be observed both in ancient History and
new. Francesco Maria not many years since invaded the Duchy of Urbin, nor
concerned himself at all, though he left ten of his Enemies Cities behind him.
Wherefore that Prince who has a good Army, need not stand upon Castles; and he
that has no Castles, need not trouble himself to build any; all that he is to
do, is, to fortify the Town of his own residence as well as he can, and
accustom the Citizens to Arms, that he may be able to sustain an Enemy, at
least for a while, till he can make his conditions, or procure relief; All
other designs are expensive in times of Peace; and unprofitable in time of War;
so that he who considers what has been said, must acknowledge that as the
Romans were wise in every thing else, so more particularly in their affairs
with the Latins, and Privernates, in not thinking of Castles and Fortresses,
but of more noble and generous ways of securing their allegiance.

CHAP. XXV.
To attempt a City full of intestine divisions, and to expect to carry it
thereby, is uncertain and dangerous.
THe divisions in the Commonwealth of Rome were so great betwixt the People and
the Nobility, that the Veientes and Hetrusci, taking the opportunity, conspired
its destruction, and having raised an Army, and harrassed their whole Country,
the Senate sent out G. Manlius, and M. Fabius against them; whose Army
encamping near the Enemy, were so provoked by the insolence of their language,
that the Romans laid aside their private animosities, and coming to a Battle
overthrew them; by which we may observe how easily we err in our Counsels, and
how we lose things many times the same way by which we intended to gain them.
The Veientes thought by assaulting the Romans whilst they were embroiled in
their intestine divisions, they should certainly overcome them; and their
invading them at that time, united the Enemy, and ruined themselves; and not
without reason, for the occasion of discord and faction in a Commonwealth is
idleness, and peace; and there is nothing unites like apprehension, and War. So
that had the Veientes been wise as they should have been, they should have
forborne making War upon them at that time, and have tried other artificial ways
to have destroyed them. The surest way is to insinuate, and make your self a
Mediator betwixt them, and to take upon your self the arbitration, rather than
they should come to blows. When it is come to that, you are privately and
gently to supply the weaker side; to foment and continue the War, till they
consume one another; but be sure your supplies be not too great, lest both
parties begin to suspect you, and believe your design is to ruin them both,
and make your self Prince. If this way be well managed, it will certainly bring
you to the end which you desired; for when both sides are weary, they will
commit themselves to your arbitration. By these Arts, the City of Pistoia
returned to its dependence upon Florence; for laboring under intestine
divisions, the Florentines favoring first one side, and then the other (but so
slily that no occasion of jealousy was given to either) brought them both in a
short time to be weary of their distractions, and throw themselves unanimously
into their arms. The Government of the City of Siena had never been changed by
their own domestic dissentions, had not the Florentines supplied both parties
underhand, and fomented them that way, whereas had they appeared openly and
above board, it would have been a means to have united them. I shall add one
example more, Philip Visconti Duke of Milan made War many times upon the
Florentines, hoping by the dissentions of the City to have conquered them the
more easily, but he never succeeded. So that complaining one time of his
misfortunes, he had this Expression, The follies of the Florentines have cost
me two millions of Money, to no purpose. In short, as the Veientes and Tuscans
found themselves in an error (when they thought by help of the differences in
Rome, to have mastered the Romans) and were ruined themselves for their pains.
So it will fare with whoever takes that way to oppress or subvert any other
Government.

CHAP. XXVI.
He who contemns or reproaches another person, incurs his hatred, without any
advantage to himself.
I Look upon it as one of the greatest points of discretion in a man, to
forbear injury and threatening, especially in words: neither of them weakens the
Enemy, but threatening makes him more cautious, and injury the more inveterate,
and industrious to revenge it. This is manifest by the example of the Veienti
(of which I discoursed in the foregoing Chapter) for not contenting themselves
with the mischiefs that they brought upon them by the War, they added contumely
and opprobrious language, which so provoked and enflamed the Roman Army, that
whereas before they were irresolute, and seemed to decline it, they now fell
upon them unanimously, and over-threw them. So that it ought to be the
principal care in an Officer that neither himself nor his Soldiers do incense
and exasperate his Enemy by ill language; for that makes him but the more so,
does not at all hinder him from revenging himself, but does the Author more
mischief than the Enemy. And of this we have a notable example in Asia. Gabades
the Persian General having besieged Amida a long time, without any considerable
progress; weary of the tediousness of the Leaguer, and hopeless of success, he
resolved to draw off and be gone; but as he was raising his Camp, the Garrison
perceiving it, got all upon the Walls, and with the basest and most provoking
circumstances imaginable upbraided them with Cowardice; which nettled Gabedes
in such manner, that he changed his Counsels, sat down again, and plied it
with that industry and indignation, that he took it in few days, and gave it up
to the fury of the Soldier. The same thing happened to the Veienti (as I said
before) who not co^tenting themselves to make War upon the Romans, went up
under their very Noses to reproach them; and what followed? they irritated them
so, that they settled the courage, and united the animosities of the Roman
Army, and put them into so high a sit of impatience, that they forced the
Consul to a Battle, in which the Veientes received the reward of their
contumacy. He therefore who is General of an Army, or Governor of a
Commonwealth, and commands or governs discreetly, ^hkes particular care that
such ill language be not used either in the City or Army, to one another, nor
to the Enemy: For to an Enemy, they make him but worse, unless such remedies be
applied, as are practiced by wise men. The Romans having left two of their
Legions at Capoua, they conspired against the Capouans (as shall be described
more largely hereafter) which occasioned a great sedition, but it was
afterward appeased by Valerius Corvinus, and among other things necessary in
that juncture, an Act of Oblivion was passed, with great penalty to any man
that should upbraid any of the Soldiers by their Sedition. Tiberius Grachus
having the command of a certain number of Servants (in the time of Hanibal's
Wars) which the scarcity of men, had forced the Romans to Arm, made it no less
than death for any man to reproach them by their servitude. So mindful were the
Roman Officers always of preventing such exprobration, as knowing that nothing
provokes and incenses a man so highly as to have his imperfections ripped up,
whether in earnest, or in jest, it is the same thing. Nam facetiae asperae,
quando nimium ex vero traxere, acrem sui memoriam relinquunt; for biting,
raillery, especially with a tincture of truth, leaves an ill impression upon
the Memory.

CHAP. XXVII.
Wise Princes, and well governed States ought to be contented with victory; for
many times whilst they think to push things forward, they lose all.
THat we use our Enemy with rude and dishonorable language, proceeds either
from insolence upon some victory past or extraordinary confidence of obtaining
it, which being false, perplexes our understanding, and makes us err not only
in our words, but our actions. For from the time that error seizes upon our
judgments, it makes us many times lose the occasion of a certain good, in hopes
of a better that is but uncertain, which is a point not unworthy our
consideration, seeing thereby our reason is disturbed, and our State many times
brought in danger of ruin; and this I shall demonstrate by examples both
ancient and modern, because arguments cannot do it so distinctly. Hanibal after
he had defeated the Romans at Cannas, sent Messengers to Carthage with the news
of his Victory, and to desire Supplies. The Senate was a long time in Counsel
what was to be done, Annon, a grave and solid Citizen being present, advised
them to make wise use of their Victory, and think of making Peace with the
Romans, which they might do upon better conditions, now they were Conquerors,
than they were in reason to expect upon any disaster. That the Carthaginians
had satisfied the whole world that they were able to balance the Romans; for
they had fought with them, and beaten them; and having gone so far with honor
and success, they ought not (at least in his judgment) expose what they had
got, and by hoping for more, run a hazard of losing all: But this Counsel was
not followed, though afterward, when too late, it was found to be the better.

Alexander the great had conquered all the East, when the Commonwealth of Tire
(a great Town situate like Venice in the water) amazed at the grandeur of
Alexander, sent Ambassadors to him to offer him their obedience and subjection
upon what terms he pleased, only they were unwilling either himself, or any of
his Army should come into their Town. Alexander disdaining to be excluded by a
private City, to whom the whole world had opened their Gates; rejected their
offers, sent their Ambassadors back, and went immediately to besiege it. The
Town stood in the Sea, and was well provided both with Victual and Ammunition;
insomuch as at four months end Alexander began to consider that that single
Town had deprived his glory of more time, than many other of his Conquests of
much greater importance: Whereupon he resolved to come to an agreement with
them, and to grant them the conditions which they demanded at first; but the
Tyrians transported with pride, not only refused his proffers, but put his
Messengers to death; upon which in a rage Alexander caused it to be assaulted
immediately, and it was done with that fury, that the Town was taken and
sacked, and part of the people put to the Sword, and the rest made slaves. In
the year 1512. a Spanish Army came into the Dominions of the Florentines to
restore the Medici in Florence, and tax the City; and they were called in, and
conducted by the Citizens themselves, who had promised, that as soon as they
appeared in those parts, they would take Arms, and declare for them; being
entered in the plain, and finding no body to join with them, or supply them,
scarcity of provisions prevailed with the Spaniard to think of a Treaty, and
propose it to the Enemy, but the Florentines were too high, and re^used it,
which was the loss of Prato, and the ruin of their State. So then a Prince
that is attacked by another Prince more potent than himself, cannot be guilty
of a greater error, than to refuse an agreement, especially when it is offered;
for it can never be so bad, but it shall have in it something of advantage for
him who accepts it, and perhaps contribute to his Victory. It ought therefore
to have satisfied the people of Tire, that Alexander accepted of the conditions
which he had formerly denied them; and it had been Victory enough for them,
that with Arms in their hands they had forced so great a Conqueror to
condescend. It was the same case with the Florentines; they ought to have been
contented, and thought it honor enough that the Spanish Army complied, and was
reduced to a condition of granting part of their desires, though they would not
gratify them in all; for it was plain, the design of that Army was to change
the Government; to break their league with the French; and to raise what Money
upon them they could. Though of these three points, they had obtained the two
last, and the first alone had remained entire to the Florentines (that is to
say, the Government of the City) every Citizen (besides the security of his
life) would have had some honor and satisfaction, without concerning
themselves so much for the loss of the other two. And though by the posture of
their affairs their success seemed to be certain; yet they ought not to have
exposed things to the discretion of Fortune, seeing their all was at stake,
which no wise man will hazard but upon inevitable necessity. Hanibal having
left Italy, where he had been sixteen years together with a great deal of
honor, being called home to the relief of his own Country, found Asdrubal and
Siphax defeated; the Kingdom of Numidia lost; The Carthaginians retired, and
cooped up within the circumference of their own walls, so as they had no hopes
but in Hanibal and his Army. Hanibal being sensible that this was the last
cast, and that if he miscarried, his Country was quite lost, resolved to put
nothing to a hazard, till he had tried all other ways; and was not ashamed to
make the first overture of a Peace, as knowing that if there was any hopes left
for his Country, it was in that, rather than War; but being refused, he
resolved to fight (though with very little hopes) supposing he might possibly
win the day, or if he did lose it, it should not be without leaving some
testimony of his courage and generosity. If then Hanibal, a person of that
great Experience and Conduct, at the head of a great Army, chose rather to have
had things determined by treaty and accommodation, than Battle; upon the loss
of which, the wealth and liberty of his Country depended: what is he to do, who
has not his courage nor experience? But men are subject to strange and
imaginary hopes, upon which reposing with too much confidence, they take their
measures amiss, and are many times ruined.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How much it is for the interest of all Governments that all injury be
punished, whether against the public, or particular persons.
IT is easily known to what men are often transported by choler and
indignation, by what happened to the Romans, when they sent the three Fabii
Ambassadors toward the Gauls, who were entered into Tuscany, and had laid
siege to Clusium. For the Clusians being besieged, sent to the Romans to
relieve them, and the Romans sent to the French to require them in the name of
the people of Rome, to withdraw their forces out of Tuscany; The Roman
Ambassadors arrived at the Army, but being better Soldiers than Orators, when
the Armies came to engage, they put themselves at the head of the Clusians, to
fight against the French, which being observed by the French, turned all their
former hatred to the Tuscans, upon the Romans, which was much increased after
they had sent Ambassadors to complain of it at Rome, and to require that those
who had committed that fault, might be delivered up into their hands, to make
satisfaction for their offense. But instead of granting their demands, or
punishing their delinquency themselves, they were created Tribunes with
Consular authority. Which coming afterward to the Ears of the French, finding
those persons advanced, who ought rather to have been punished, they
interpreted it as done in affront to them, and being enflamed with anger and
disdain, they marched directly to Rome, assaulted and took it, all but the
Capitol, which happened to them for nothing, but that the Romans (when their
Ambassadors had contra jus gentium, fought against the French) had been so far
from doing them justice, that the said Ambassadors were advanced and preferred.
For which reason, a Prince and Commonwealth is to take care that no such injury
be done, not only to a Nation, or Commonalty, but to any particular person; for
if a man be highly offended either by a State, or private person, and has not
the satisfaction he desires, if it be in a Republic, he ceases not to pursue
his revenge, though with the ruin of the State. If it be under a Monarchy, and
he finds himself touched in point of honor, if he has the least spark of
generosity in him, he will never be quiet till he be revenged, though with
never so much prejudice to himself, of which case we cannot have an apter and
truer example, than in Philip of Macedon, the Father of Alexander the great.
Philip had in his Court a young Gentleman of very exquisite beauty called
Pausanias, with whom Attalus (a great favorite of the said Philips) was
enamoured; having tempted and solicited him many times to satisfy his passion,
and found him always averse, he resolved to do that by force or surprise, which
he could not do otherwise: To this purpose he made a solemn feast, and invited
Pausanias, and several other great persons: when they had filled themselves
will with their good cheer, he caused Pausanias to be taken from the Table, and
carried to a private place, and not only satisfied his own lust, but caused him
to be vitiated by several others. Pausanias complained heavily to King Philip,
who having kept him for some time in hopes of doing him justice, instead of
performing, he advanced Attalus to the Government of a Province in Greece:
Which Pausanias resenting; in great anger that his adversary against whom he
had so long, and so earnestly solicited, should now be preferred, he began to
turn his indignation upon the King, who had refused to right him, rather than
upon the person who had done him the wrong: Insomuch that the very morning his
Daughter was married to Alexander of Epirus, as Philip was going to the Temple
to celebrate the Nuptiality with his Son Alexander on one hand of him, and his
new Son-in-Law on the other, Pausanias assaulted and slew him. This example is
much like that of the Romans, and is to be observed by any man that governs;
who is never to despise any body so as not to believe but he who is injured
will revenge himself some time or other, though with never so much danger and
detriment to himself.

CHAP. XXIX.
Fortune casts a mist before peoples eyes, when she would not have them oppose
her designs.
IF the course of humane affairs be considered, it will appear, that many
accidents, arise, against which the Heavens do not suffer us to provide: And
when this happened at Rome, where there was so much Virtue, and Piety, and Order,
well may it happen more frequently in those Cities and Provinces where there
are no such things to be found. And because the place is remarkable, to show
the influence which the Heavens have upon human affairs, Titus Livius has
discoursed of it largely and efficaciously, telling us, That the Stars to make
us sensible of their power, first disposed the said Fabii (who were sent
Ambassadors to the French) to fight as abovesaid, to the end that upon that
occasion, they might make War upon Rome. In the next place, they besotted the
Romans so, as they did nothing worthy of the name of Romans in order to their
defense, having banished Camillus (the only person capable of standing them in
stead) to Ardea. Again, when the French were upon their march toward Rome,
those who to repel the inroads of the Volsci, and other bordering Enemies, had
made Dictators many times, and with very good success, made none upon the
approach of the French. They were so slow likewise, and so remiss in the
raising of Men, and so tedious in furnishing them with Arms, that they could
scarce draw out any considerable force against them, till the Enemy was as far
as the River Allia which is within ten miles of Rome, and when their Army was
come thither, it was not encamped by the Tribunes with the usual diligence and
discretion, they having neither chosen a good place, nor drawn their line, nor
fortified themselves with Trenches, nor Stoccadoes as formerly, nor done any
thing for their security, either humane, or divine: When they came to fight,
they drew up their men so awkwardly and untowardly, that neither Soldier nor
Officer did any thing worthy of the Discipline of the Romans, so that the
Battle was lost without any effusion of Blood, the Romans running at the very
first charge, the greatest part of them to Veii, the rest to Rome, and in such
consternation, that they fled directly to the Capitol before they went home to
their houses. So that the Senate without so much as thinking to defend their
City, any more than the rest, never caused the Gates to be shut, but part of
them fled away, and part into the Capitol. There, it is true they began to
observe better orders than before, and managed things with less confusion; They
discharged all those that were unserviceable, and furnished themselves with
what provision they could get, that they might be able to hold out. The
greatest part of those useless people which were turned out of the Capitol, as
old Men, Women, and Children, fled into the Neighboring Cities; the rest
continued in Rome, and were a prey to the French. So that if a man should have
read their Exploits in former times, and compared them with their actions then,
he would not have believed them to be the same people; and Titus Livius gives
the reason after he had described all the disorders aforesaid in these words,
Adeo obcaecat animos fortuna, cum vim suam ingruentem refringi non vult. So
strangely does fortune blind other people, when she would not be obstructed in
her designs; and there can be nothing more true. Wherefore men are not so much
to be blamed or commended for their adversity or prosperity; for it is
frequently seen, some are hurried to ruin, and others advanced to great honor
by the swing and impulse of their fate, wisdom availing little against the
misfortunes of the one, and folly as little against the felicity of the other.
When fortune designs any great matter, she makes choice of some man of such
courage and parts, as is able to discern when she presents him with an
occasion: and so on the otherside, when she intends any great destruction, she
has her Instruments ready to push on the wheel, and assist to her designs; and
if there be any man capable of obstructing them in the least, she either rids
him out of the way, or deprives him of all authority, and leaves him without
any faculty to do good. And this is abundantly cleared by this place, where
Fortune, to amplify Rome, and bring it to that Grandeur to which it arrived
afterward; thought fit to debase it, (as we shall show at large in the
beginning of our third Book) but would not utterly destroy it: For which
reason, though she permitted Camillus to be banished, she would not suffer him
to be killed; though she let Rome be taken, she preserved the Capitol: Though
she intimidated the Romans, and would suffer them to do nothing wisely for the
safety of the City, yet she left them so much wisdom as secured the Capitol:
That Rome might be taken, she caused the greatest part of the Army that was
defeated upon the Allia, to retire to Veii, thereby cutting off all ways for
the defense of Rome: But in the midst of her Career, when she seemed in such
haste, and so impatient of its destruction, she prepared every thing that was
necessary for its preservation; having conveyed a good Army to Veii, and
Camillus to Ardea, that once again they might make head under a General whose
reputation was never fully'd with the ignominy of such a loss, but stood clear
and entire for the recovery of his Country: And here we might bring store of
modern examples to prove what is said, were not this sufficient without them.
Yet this I shall assert again (and by the occurrences in all History there is
nothing more true) That men may second their fortune, not resist it; and follow
the order of her designs, but by no means defeat them: Nevertheless men are not
wholly to abandon themselves, because they know not her end; for her ways being
unknown and irregular, may possibly be at last for our good; so that we are
always to hope the best, and that hope is to preserve us in whatever troubles
or distresses we shall fall.

CHAP. XXX.
Princes and Republics that are truly magnificent, do not make their Leagues
and Alliances with Money, but by their virtue, reputation, and force.
THe Romans were besieged in the Capitol, and though they were in expectation
of relief from V^ii and Camillus, yet Famine constraining them, they proposed a
parley with the French, and were to pay a certain Sum of Money for their
liberty; The Articles were signed, all things concluded, and Commissioners sent
in to receive the Money, when on a sudden Camillus appears with his Army, as if
fortune had done it (says Livy). Ut Romani auro redempti non viverent. That it
might not be said the Romans had ever been ransomed: Which point is not only
observable in this place, but in the whole progress of the affairs of that
Commonwealth, where it may be seen that they never got Town, nor never made
Peace with their Money; whatever they did, was bravely, and with their Arms,
which I think is more than can be said of any other State in the world. One of
the great marks of the puissance of this Commonwealth, was the manner of her
living with her Neighbors. When things are so managed in a Government, that the
Neighbors purchase its amity, and make themselves its Pensioners; it is a
certain sign of the potency of that Government: But when the Neighbors on the
contrary receive Money from it, it is as infallible a sign of its weakness. If
one reads the Roman History, he shall find the Massilians, the Edui, the
Rhodians, Hiero of Syracuse, and Massi^issa, as they were Neighbors, so they
were Tributaries to the Romans, contributing to their expenses, and Taxes as
there was occasion, without expectation of any other recompense, but
protection. Where a Prince or Commonwealth is weak, it is otherwise, as it
appeared by our own City of Florence, which in former times when it was in its
greatest reputation, paid annual stipends to most of the little Governments in
Romania, besides what was received by the Perugians, Castellans, and all their
other Neighbors; whereas had it been strong, and well Armed, it would have been
quite otherwise, and all the rest would have given Florence Money for her
protection. Nor were the Florentines singular in this case, the Venetians did
the same, and so did the King of France, who notwithstanding the greatness of
his Kingdom, was tributary to the Swizzers, and the King of England, which
proceeded from his having disarmed the people, and preferring a present
opportunity of squeezing them, and avoiding an imaginary danger, before the
doing those things that might have secured his State, and made it happy for
ever; which practice though for some time it may produce quiet and repose, yet
the end is troubles, and losses, and ruin without remedy.

It would be too tedious to recount how often the Florentines, the Venetians,
and the Kingdom of France have bought off their Wars, and submitted to such
dishonorable terms, as the Romans could never be brought to but once. It would
be too tedious to recount how many Towns the Florentines, and the Venetians
have brought with their Money, which have been the occasion of great disorders
afterward, and proved that what is gotten by gold, is not to be kept with iron.

This point of generosity, and this manner of living the Romans observed very
punctually whilst they were free; but after they fell under the Government of
Emperors, and those Emperors grew bad, they began to degenerate too, and prefer
the shadow before the Sun. They began to be Pensionaries first to the
Parthians, then to the Germans, and by degrees to all their Neighbors, which
was the first step to the ruin of that great Empire; and ^ll these
inconveniences proceeded from the disarming of the people, and neglecting to
train them up to Military Discipline, from whence a greater mischief does
arise; and that is, That the nearer the Enemy approaches, the weaker, and more
unable he finds you; and therefore not being strong enough of your self to
repel the Enemy from your borders, you are forced to pay tribute to your
Neighbors to undertake it for you; which being to be raised and extorted from
your Subjects, renders them more feeble and impotent. By which means it happens
sometimes that those States which are in this condition, may perhaps make some
little resistance upon the Frontiers, but if the Enemy passes that, all is gone
without remedy. But all this is disorderly, and unnatural; for as nature in all
animals has fortified the vital and principal, and not extreme parts of the
body, because the body can subsist without the one, but not without the other.
So it is in all Governments, the heart and center is to be fortified, rather
than the Frontiers: But this was very ill observed by the Florentines, for
whenever an Enemy had past our borders, and took his way toward the City,
there was no body in a condition to oppose him. It was the same with the
Venetians not many years since, and had not their City been as it were swadled
with the Sea, it had been certainly destroyed. This indeed has not been seen so
frequently in France, because it is so great a Kingdom, and too strong for most
of its neighbors; nevertheless when in the year 1513 they were invaded by the
English, the whole Kingdom trembled, and the King of France himself, and many
others were of opinion, that if he lost one Battle, the whole Kingdom was gone.
With the Romans it was quite contrary; the nearer the Enemy approached the
City, the stronger he found it: this was evident in Hanibal's invasion, though
he had forced his way into Italy, fought three great Battles with the Romans,
and beat them in every one, though they had lost so many brave Soldiers and
Officers, yet they were not only able to continue the War, but to conquer them
atlast, and all by fortifying the heart and center of their Country, and
leaving the extremities to shift for themselves: for the vitals and
fundamentals of their State was the People of Rome, the Country of the Latins,
the neighboring Cities that were in League, and their Colonies from whence
they drew so many Soldiers as were able to fight, and entertain the whole
World. And this Hanno the Carthaginian understood very well: for when after the
Battle at Cannas Hanibal sent Mago to Carthage to give them an account of the
particulars of the Victory, Mago having exceedingly magnified the exploits of
his Brother, and debased the Condition of the Romans, Hanno interrupted him,
and inquired whether any of the Roman Cities, or any of their Confederates had
revolted? whether any of their Senators were come in to Hanibal? or whether
they had sent any Ambassadors to him to treat? and when Mago denied that any
thing of all this had passed, Hanno replied, Hostium ergo multum superest, and
bellum tam integrum habemus, atque habuimus qua die Annibal Italian est
ingressus; There is work enough behind, and the War is as entire as when
Hanibal passed first into Italy. It is apparent therefore, both by what is said
in this Chapter, and what has been said often before, that there is great
difference betwixt the present and ancient methods of the Romans; and if we
seriously consider it, we shall not wonder that so many Towns are taken and
lost, and so many Governments subverted, as we have seen in our days: for where
discipline is neglected, and military virtue laid aside, all things are
committed wholly to Fortune, which being various and unconstant, produces
various mutations; and this vicissitude and unconstancy of affairs will
continue till some excellent person arises to restore the ancient discipline,
and restrain fortune from giving such evidences of her power every hour of the
day.

CHAP. XXXI.
How dangerous it is to believe Exiles too far.
I Think it not amiss in this place to show how much it imports all persons not
to give too much credit to those who are banished, for many times they are but
the practices and stratagems of Princes and States. We have a memorable example
of their inconstancy in Livy, though something improper. When Alexander the
Great passed into Asia with his Army, Alexander of Epirus his Kinsman and
Uncle passed with another into Italy, invited by the Exiles of Lucca, who put
him in hopes that by their means he should be Master of that whole Province:
but when he was come into Italy, instead of assisting him, they conspired
against him, and slew him, upon promise of indemnity, and restitution of their
Estates. From whence we may learn what faith is to be given to such as are
banished out of their own Country: for as to their engagements, they are
nothing; it is not to be doubted but when ever they can return by any other
means, they will leave you, and betake themselves to any body else,
notwithstanding any promise or engagement to you; and that which makes their
promises and confidence the less to be trusted, is, because their extreme
passion and desire to come home, make them believe many things that are
impossible, and pretend many things that they do not believe: so that betwixt
what they believe, and what they pretend, they feed you with fair hopes, but if
you depend upon them, you are undone, your expense is all lost, and your whole
enterprise miscarries; I shall only give you an instance in the aforesaid
Alexander, and Themistocles the Athenian; Themistocles being in rebellion
against the Athenians, fled into Asia to Darius, whom he solicited with large
promises to an expedition into Greece. Darius was persuaded, and passed into
Greece, but Themistocles being unable to make his promises good, either for
shame of what he had done, or fear of punishment for what he had not, he
poisoned himself; and if Themistocles a man of that Excellence and Virtue could
delude the King, and promise more than he could perform, how little are they to
be trusted, who having no such thing to restrain them, give themselves up
wholly to their passion and desires? Princes therefore and States ought to be
very tender of undertaking any enterprise upon the encouragement of an Exile,
for they seldom succeed. And because it seldom happens that Towns are taken by
intelligence within, I shall discourse of it in my next Chapter, and add what
variety of ways the Romans used to come by their Conquests.

CHAP. XXXII.
How many several ways the Romans used to Conquer their Towns.
THe Romans being a martial people, and given wholly to war, they considered
every thing very diligently that might any ways conduce to the facilitating
their designs; whether it was matter of charge, or any thing else: for this
reason they seldom attempted any Town by the way of siege, because they thought
the expense and incommodity of that way would be more than could be recompensed
by the taking it; so as they never tried that whilst there was any other hopes;
and in all their great Wars, there are but very few examples of any long
Leaguers by them. The ways which they took were commonly either by storm, or
surrender: when they took a Town by storm, it was either by open force, or
stratagem. Open force was, when they made their attaque without battering the
walls, which they called Aggredi urbem cum Corona; To begirt a Town, because
they drew their whole Army round the Town, and fell on in all quarters, and in
this manner it happened sometimes that they carried very considerable places at
one Storm, as when Scipio took new Carthage in Spain. If this way was
ineffectual, they battered down the walls with their Rams, and other, engines
of War. Sometimes they min'd, and entered the Towns under ground, as they did at
Veii; sometimes that they might fight with the Enemy upon equal terms, they
built wooden Towers, or raised Mounts to the height of the walls from whence
they might plague and molest them within their Works. The besieged were in most
danger in the first case upon a general assault, for their walls were to be
made good in all places at once, and it fell out many times, that there were
not men enough to supply and relieve all parts; or if they had men enough to do
that, they were not all of an equal courage, and when any gave ground, the
whole Town was like to be lost, and by this means that way was often succesful.
When this way miscarried, they seldom sat down before a Town, or went formally
to beleaguer it, because it could not be done but with greater hazard to their
Army, for their quarters being to be extended, and their guards round about the
Town, they must of necessity be thinner and weaker in some places, and unable
to make any considerable opposition, if the Enemy should make any considerable
eruption, so that the sudden and brisk way was preferred: when their walls were
battered with their Engines, those who were in the Town defended themselves
much as we do now against great Guns, by repairing their breaches as well as
they could. Their way of defeating their mines was by countermining, and
opposing themselves personally against the Enemy, or disturbing them with their
inventions, as particularly, putting of feathers, and oils, and other stinking
stuff into barrels of wood, they set them on fire, and then tumbled them among
the Enemy, that what with the fire, the smoke, and the stench, they might not
be able to endure them* their Towers of wood, they destroyed commonly by
throwing fire into them; and then for the mounts which were raised against the
walls, their way was to dig under the walls, and steal away their earth, or by
loosening the foundations of the mount, till it all fell to the ground. But
these ways of taking a Town are not long to be tried; if they carried it not
quickly, they raised their siege, and sought out some other way of prosecuting
the War, as Scipio did when he went over into Africa, for having assaulted
Utica, without any success, he altered his Counsels, raised his Siege, and
addressed himself wholly to the bringing the Carthaginian Army to an
engagement; yet sometimes they continued their Siege, as they did at Veii,
Carthage, and Jerusalem: as to their way of taking of Towns by fraud and
intelligence, (as they took Paloepolis) the Romans and others attempted many
places after that manner, but they seldom succeeded; for those secret
correspondencies are easily discovered, and the least discovery spoils the
whole design, because the conspiracy is commonly discovered before it comes to
execution, it either being unpracticable in it self, or betrayed by the
infidelity of some of the Conspirators, there being a necessity of meeting and
discoursing with such persons, as it is not lawful to discourse with, but upon
some specious occasion, But suppose it be not discovered in the management,
there are so many difficulties in putting it into action, that it is almost
impossible to overcome them; for if you come too soon, or too late, all is
spoiled: if any noise be made, (as by the geese in the Capitol) the least
disorder, the least error or mistake destroys the whole enterprise. Besides,
these things being executed in the night, the darkness strikes a terror into
the instruments, and the more, because they are commonly unacquainted with the
place or people which they are to attaque, and therefore every little noise or
accident is sufficient to confound them, and every trifling imagination will
make them turn their backs; but no body was so daring and succesful in these
fraudulent and nocturnal designs as Aratus Sicionius, though in the daytime he
was but like other men, which was rather from some secret virtue in him, than
any excellence in the way. And as to the taking of Towns by surrender, they
either surrender freely, or by force. When they do it freely, it is done out of
some extrinsick necessity, (as when Capua surrendered to the Romans, for fear of
falling into the hands of the Samnites) or else out of desire to be well
governed, as being taken with the administration of that Prince to whom they
surrender; and thus it was with the Rhodians, the Massillians, and other Cities
which gave themselves up to the Romans upon no other inducement, but that they
might live more happily under the Roman Laws, and be under a better
Constitution. But there are many Cities which surrender by force, which force
proceeds either from the fatigues and calamities of a tedious Siege, or from
continual excursions and depredations to which they are subject; and against
which they have no other way to secure themselves. And then all the ways we
have mentioned, the Romans made more use of this, carrying on their wars with
their neighbors 450 years together, in this manner for the most part; for
though they tried all the other, they found this the more profitable and safe.
In Sieges there is delay and loss of time, in storms, hazard and danger; and
uncertainty in conspiracies: but in bringing things to a Battle, it has been
seen that by beating the enemies Army, they have got a whole Kingdom in a day,
whereas an obstinate Town has cost them several years.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How the Romans upon any Expedition, gave their Generals general Commissions.
I Am of opinion, that to read the History of Livy, with any profit and
advantage we must consider not only the actions, but the whole means and
process both of the People and Senate of Rome. Among other things, it is very
remarkable with what authority they invested their Consuls, Dictators and
Generals of their Armies, and it was so great, that the Senate reserved to it
self only the power of making Peace, or new Wars as they saw occasion; all the
rest was left to the discretion of the Consul, who might fight, or not fight,
assault this Town or that Town as he pleased, without any contradiction.

This may be proved by many examples, by more especially by what happened in an
Expedition against the Tuscans; for Fabius the Consul having defeated the Enemy
at Sutri, resolving to pass the Forest of Gimina with his Army, and invade
Tuscany, he was so far from receiving Orders from the Senate, or consulting
them in the business, that he gave them not the least notice, though the War
was to be removed into another Country, and like to be very dangerous; which
appeared by the resolution of the Senate in that very case; for having heard of
his Victory at Sutri, and apprehending that he might fall upon such counsels,
and pass his Army into Tuscany, through that dangerous Forest, they sent two
Ambassadors to him to advise him from that Expedition; but they came too late,
for he was gone before, and having overrun the whole Country, and routed the
Enemy, instead of hindering his design, the Ambassadors went back with the news
of his Victory. This custom of the Romans, if it be seriously considered, will
be found to be very solid and wise. For should the Senate have been consulted
by their Generals upon every particular occasion, and have expected all their
Orders from them, it would have made their Generals less circumspect, and
vigorous, because the honor of the Victory would not accrue totally to them,
but they must participate with the Senate. Besides, the Senate understood very
well that Fortune is various, and that many accidents and advantages happen
which cannot be known or improved by any but those who are present; so that if
they should desire to be consulted in things of which they can have no
knowledge, they must of necessity err, though they were persons of never so
much experience and wisdom. Wherefore they gave their General absolute power of
disposing all things at his own will, and the whole honor of the Expedition
was to be his, that it might be a spur to prick on his diligence, and a bridle
to regulate his rashness. And this I have thought fit to insert, that I might
show how much the famous Commonwealths in our times do differ from the Romans,
particularly the Venetians and Florentines, who are so strict with their
General, that if a great Gun be but to be planted against a Town, the Senate
must be advised, and give order how, and from whence it is to play. But this
custom deserves commendation as much as the rest, which all together, have
brought their affairs into that sad condition in which they are at present.

THE DISCOURSES OF Nicholas Machiavel, CITIZEN, and SECRETARY OF FLORENCE, Upon
the First Decade of TITUS LIVIVS.
LIBER III.
CHAP. I.
That a Sect or Commonwealth be long-lived, it is necessary to correct it
often; and reduce it toward its first Principles.
IT IS a certain truth, that the things of this World are determined, and a set
time appointed for their duration; but those run through the whole course which
is assigned them by their Stars, who keep their body in such order, that it may
not alter at all, or if it does, it is for the better. I speak now of mixed
bodies, as Commonwealths, and Sects, and I say, that those alterations are
salutiferous, which reduce them toward their first principles; and therefore
the best ordered, and longest lived are they, who (by their own orders) may be
often renewed, or else by some accident (without the help of the said orders)
may tend to renovation: it is as clear as the day, that no bodies of men are of
long duration, unless they be renewed; and the way to renew them (as is said
before) is to reduce them to their principles. For the Fundamentals of all
Sects, Commonwealths and Kingdoms have always something of good in them, by
means of which they recover their first reputation and grandeur. And because in
process of time that goodness corrupts, that body must of necessity die, unless
something intervenes that reduces it to its first principles. The Physician
speaking of the body of man, tell us, Quod quotidie aggregatur aliquid, quod
quandoque indiget curatione; That there is not a day passes, but it contracts
something which afterward will require to be cured. It Is the same with the
Body Politic; and as to them, I say that they are to be cured, by being
renewed; and they are renewed, partly by external accident, and partly by
internal prudence. The first happens as it were by destiny or fate, as that
Rome should be taken by the French, that thereby it might reassume its old
customs and virtues, and revive its ancient Worship, Religion and Justice,
which were superannuated and decayed, as appears very plain by the description
of their preparation against the French, in which it is declared by Titus
Livius, that upon the marching out of their Army, and investing their Tribunes
with Consular power, they observed no religious ceremony: at the same time they
not only refused to correct the three Fabii, who contra jus gentium had fought
against the French, but created them Tribunes. And it is easily to be presumed
that they made less account of the good Laws and Constitutions ordained by
Romulus and other wise Princes, than was reasonable and (perhaps) necessary to
preserve the liberty of their State. This foreign invasion happened to them
therefore, that all the obsolete Laws of that City might be revived, and that
the people might be taught that it was necessary not only to maintain Religion
and Justice, but to respect their good Citizens, and esteem their virtue above
the advantages which they seemed to want, for want of their assistance. And it
fell out exactly, for Rome was no sooner taken, but they began to renew the
Orders of their old Religion: they punished the Fabii who had fought against
the Law of Nations, and conceived so great a value for Camillus, that the
Senate and People both laid aside their old animosity, and placed the whole
burden of the Commonwealth upon his single shoulders. It Is necessary therefore
(as was said before) that men which live together under a Government, be often
reminded by these exterior or interior accidents. The interior way is when
there is a Law which takes an account of all people in that Corporation; or
else when there is some excellent person among them who by his virtuous example
does the same thing, so that this happiness results to a Commonwealth either by
the virtue of some great person, or the authority of some Law. And as to this
last, the Orders which reduced the Commonwealth toward its first principles,
were the Tribunes of the people, the Censors and all the other Laws against the
ambition and insolence of man; which Laws have need to be revived and quickened
by the virtue of some Citizen; who with great courage and generosity shall put
them in execution in despite of all the power of the delinquents. The most
remarkable executions before the taking of Rome by the French, were the death
of Brutus his Sons, the punishment of the Decem-viri, the execution of Sp.
Melius: after the City was sacked by the French, the most considerable were the
death of Manlius Captolinus, the death of the Son of Manlius Torquatus, the
prosecution of Papirius Cursor against. Fabius the Master of his Horse, and the
accusation against Scipio; which things being extraordinary, were the more
remarkable, and when ever any of them happened, they reminded the people of their
beginning, and that they were to live according to Law. But when these examples
began to be more rare, men took occasion to grow worse, and their exorbitancies
were with more danger and tumult; for if in ten years space no examples be
made, nor no execution done, people begin to forget and despise the Laws, and
unless something happens that may remember them of the punishments, and infuse
something of fear into them, the Delinquents will grow so numerous that it will
be dangerous to punish them. To this purpose they who governed the State of
Florence from the year 1434 to the year 1494 were wont to say, that it was
necessary every five years to review the State; for otherwise it would be very
hard to maintain it: They called reviewing the State, reducing the people to
the same terror and awe, as they had upon them of old, when every man was
punished according to his crime, let his quality be what it would. But when the
memory of these punishments are lost, and suffered to go to decay, men take the
confidence to attempt any thing, and speak ill of whom they please, against
which no remedy is so proper as reducing them toward their first principles,
which is to be done by the example of some excellent person, inciting you to
such executions, without dependence upon any Law; and they are many times of so
great reputation, that good men desire to imitate them, and bad men are ashamed
to live contrary to them. Those who in Rome lived after this manner were
Horatius Cocles, Scaevola, Fabritius, the two Decii, Regulus Attilius and some
others, whose rare and virtuous example had the same effect in Rome, that good
Laws, and good Customs would have had; and if every ten years some of those
examples or executions aforesaid had happened in that City, the minds and manners
of the people could never have been so corrupted, but as those virtuous
examples, and heroic punishments grew seldom, and scarce, so corruption began
to multiply, for after Regulus his time, there was not any such example to be
seen; and though the two Cato's succeeded, yet there was such great distance
betwixt them, that their examples could do but little good, especially the last
of the Cato's, who finding the greatest part of the City debauched, could not
work any considerable reformation upon them. And so much for Civil Governments;
as to the conservation of Sects, the same renovation is necessary, as may
appear by the example of the Roman Religion, which would doubtless have been
lost before this, had it not been reduced toward its first principle by St.
Francis and St. Dominick, who by their poverty, and Christian-like examples
revived it in the minds of men, where it was almost effaced; and prevailed that
the looseness and depravity of the Prelates and Cardinals did not ruin it; for
men seeing them live in that indigence and poverty; by confessing their sins to
them, and hearing them preach, they began to learn meekness and charity, and
obedience; not to upbraid people by their vices, but to leave them to God,
whereas their lives must necessarily be bad, who neither see nor feel what
punishment is. So then it is this renovation and reduction to its first
principles, that has, and does still maintain our Religion. And as to Kingdoms,
they as well as Commonwealths have occasion to reform, and reduce as the other;
which course has been of no small advantage to the Kingdom of France; for that
Kingdom living under Laws and Customs more than any other, the said Laws and
Customs are preserved and executed by Parliaments, and especially by that of
Paris, which revives them every time it makes out process against any great
Person, or opposes the King in its arrests: and hitherto it has preserved it
self by its severity against Delinquents, without regard to the greatness of
their quality, whereas should they pass unpunished, they would multiply so
fast, that they would become incorrigible in a short time, and not to be
reformed but with the disorder, if not the dissolution of the whole Government.
We may conclude therefore, that there is no safer way of preserving a
Commonwealth, Kingdom or Sect, than by reforming and reducing them to their
primitive reputation, which is to be done rather by good Laws, and examples at
home, than foreign force; for though that way be effectual sometimes, (as it
was in Rome) yet it is so uncertain and dangerous, it is not to be desired. And
to demonstrate how much particular examples have conduced to the grandeur of
Rome, and what great effect they have wrought, I shall make them the subject of
my discourse in this third Book; and although among them some great examples
might be produced, which have been exhibited by Kings, yet History having
spoken of them so largely, I shall pass them by without speaking any thing of
them but what belongs to their own private advantage. And begin with Brutus the
Father of the liberty of the Romans.

CHAP. II.
It Is the part of a wise man sometimes to pretend himself a fool.
NO man was ever so commendable for his wisdom and prudence, as Iunius Brutus
for counterfeiting the fool. For though Livy gives us but one reason why he did
so, and that is, that under that contempt he might live quietly, and enjoy his
patrimony in peace; yet it is probable by his ways of proceeding, that he did
it, that thereby he might be less under the observation of the Kings, and have
fairer advantage of expelling them, and delivering his Country, when occasion
should be offered. And that this was in his thoughts, may be presumed from his
interpretation of the Oracle of Apollo, to which when the Tarquins repaired to
understand which of them should succeed in the Government, it being answered
that the Government should come to him who first kissed his Mother, the
Tarquins thought it not to be accomplished till they came to Rome; but Brutus
pretending to slip, fell down upon the ground, and kissed it, as the common
Mother of us all. And afterward upon the death of Lucretia in the presence of
her Father, and Husband, and Kindred, he was the first that drew the dagger out
of the wound, and conjured all the slanders by, that for the future they should
never suffer a King in Rome. This example may be followed by those who are
disguisted with their Prince, but so as first to consider their own power
exactly, and if they find it sufficient, they may profess themselves publicly,
and declare open War; and it is the most safe, and most honorable way: but if
their force be but small, and they find themselves that way too weak, they are
with all industry to endeavor to insinuate with the Tyrant, serving him in his
pleasures, applauding him in all his actions and words, and imitating him in
every thing he does. By this means you shall be secure from danger, enjoy all
the pleasures and delights of the Court, and be ready for any occasion of
effecting your designs. Others are of opinion that you keep such a distance
with the Prince, as that you be neither so near him as to be covered with his
ruins, nor so remote, but that you may take the advantage of his destruction
to advance yourself; and this middle way was certainly the best, if it were
easy to be kept, but because I think it impossible, it is necessary to take to
one of the other two, and either to remove your self quite, or get in as near
him as you can; he who does otherwise, is in a great deal of danger, especially
if he be a man of any Eminence and Estate: for it is not enough to say, I
expect nothing, I desire neither honor nor preferment, I had rather live at
ease, without any controversy or trouble, for those sayings are oftener heard
than believed: nor can great men, if they did really desire it, continue in
that condition, because no body believes them, and no body will suffer them. A
man is therefore rather to play the fool like Brutus, and he does it abundantly
that flatters and applauds every thing his Prince sees, or speaks, or does, how
contrary soever it be to his own judgment and mind. And as Brutus was wise in
pretending that folly; till occasion was offered for the deliverance of his
Country, so he was a severe assertor of its liberty, when obtained, of which
severity we shall speak in the next Chapter.

CHAP. III.
The liberty newly acquired, could not have been preserved, but by the
execution of Brutus his Sons.
THe severity of Brutus in maintaining that liberty which he had procured in
Rome, was no less necessary than profitable. It Is an example well worthy to be
transmitted to posterity, to see a Father sitting in judgment upon his Sons,
and not only sentence them to death, but be present, and a spectator of their
execution. But so it is decreed, and it will be found so by all that are
conversant in Antiquity, that upon any alteration of Government, (whether from
better to worse, or worse to better, it is the same thing) it is necessary
severe example should be made of somebody that opposed it, if you desire the
new form would be preserved. In short, this I affirm, that whoever sets up a
Tyranny, cannot hope to maintain it, but by cutting off Brutus; and whoever
sets up a free State, is as unlike to continue it, but by taking off Brutus his
Sons; and of this we have discoursed so largely before, there is no need of
enlarging here, I shall add only one example which happened in our Country and
times. Piero Soderini having restored the liberty of Florence believed that by
his patience and moderation he could have mollified their minds, who like the
Sons of Brutus were impatient of reviving the old tyranny again. But he was
highly mistaken, and so much the more to blame, by how much he was a wise man,
and knew well enough that there was a necessity of removing such persons as by
their ambition opposed themselves against him; yet though there was a necessity
to do it, and he had so fair an occasion, he let it pass, and never made use of
it: for besides that, he believed his patience and good nature would have
wrought upon some, and his munificence and bounty upon others (as he often
declared among his friends) he had an opinion, that to make a stout and
vigorous opposition against his Enemies, it would be necessary for him to take
upon him an extraordinary authority, which would not only be a breach of the
Laws, but of the civil equality of the City: and if he should assume such a
power, and perhaps exercise it well himself, yet the people would be so
terrified thereby, that after his death they would never agree to the making
their Gonfaloniere for life, which office he thought fit to have augmented and
maintained: this consideration, though wise and good in it self, was not
prudent at that time, because we are never to entertain a present mischief in
hopes of a future good, especially when, for ought we know, that good may be
oppressed by that mischief: he ought rather to have had a care that the end of
his intentions might have appeared for the good and benefit of his Country, and
not out of any particular ambition; and to have provided that whoever succeeded
him afterward in his dignity, should not be able to employ that authority to
the ruin of the State, which he was forced to take upon him to preserve it.
But the good man was mistaken in his first opinion, as not understanding that
the malice of mankind is not to be extinguished with time, nor appeased with
presents; for could he have imitated the severity of Brutus, he had preserved
his own dignity, and the liberty of the State. But as it is a difficult thing
to preserve the liberty of a State, so it is no less difficult to preserve the
authority of a King, as shall be shown in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
A Prince is never safe in his new Conquests, whilst they are in being whom he
dispossessed.
THe death of Tarquinius Priscus by the Sons of Ancus, and the death of Servins
Tullius by Tarquinius Superbus shows how dangerous it is to disposses any man
of a Kingdom, and suffer him to live, though you endeavor by all means
possible to cares him. Tarquinius Priscus thought his Title unquestionable,
being made King by the People, and confirmed by the Senate; nor could it enter
into his thoughts that the malice and indignation of the Sons of Ancus should
be so great, as to keep them from submitting to that wherewith the whole City
of Rome was contented. Servius Tullius was mistaken in the same manner, in
thinking with new favors and obligations to have pacified the Sons of Tarquin.
So that from the first example, a Prince may take warning, and not delude
himself with an opinion he is safe, whilst any of them are living whom he
dispossessed; and from the second he may inform himself, that old injuries are
never cancelled by new favors, especially if the favors be not equivalent to
the injury. And without doubt Servius Tullius was ill advised to believe that
the Sons of Tarquin would be content to be his Sons-in-Law, when it was their
due to be his King. And this ambition, and impatience to govern, is so great
and insatiable in mankind, that it not only affects those persons who have some
right and expectation to govern, but those likewise who in reason can have no
such expectancy, as in the example of Tullia the Daughter of Servius, but
married to one of the Tarquins: which Tullia was so enflamed with a desire of
governing, that not contented with being a King's Daughter, transported with
rage, contrary to all silial duty and affection, she incited her Husband
against her Father, and forced him into a conspiracy, not only against his
Kingdom, but Life. Whereas if Tarquinius Priscus and Servius Tullius had known
how to have secured themselves against those they had supplanted, they had
neither lost their Kingdoms nor Lives. But Tarquinius Superbus was expelled for
not observing the Laws and Practices of the ancient Kings his Predecessors, as
shall appear in the next Chapter.

CHAP. V.
How a King may lose his Kingdom, though he comes to it by inheritance.
TArquinius Superbus seemed to have secure possession of the Kingdom upon the
death of Servius Tullius, who dying without heirs, left him nothing of that
trouble and vexation which his Predecessors encountered. For although the way by
which he came to the Government was irregular and abominable; nevertheless had
he followed the steps of his Predecessors, and observed their old rules, he
would not have run himself so fatally in to the displeasure of the Senate and
People, nor have provoked them to have been so diligent in his expulsion. Nor
is it to be believed that his Son Sextus his deflowring of Lucretia was the
chief cause that he lost his Kingdom, but his infraction of the Laws, his
tyranny, his usurpation upon the Senate, and his engrossing all authority to
himself: for he had brought things to that pass, that those affairs which were
formerly debated publicly by the Senate, and according to their sentiment and
order were put in execution, were now transacted and determined privately in
his own Palace, with great dissatisfaction and offense; so that in a short time
Rome was deprived of the liberty which it enjoyed under other Kings: nor was it
enough for him to disoblige the Senate, but he run himself into the odium of
the people, harassing them out by mechanic and servile employments to which
they had never been used in the days of his Predecessors; by which cruel and
insolent actions he had so incensed and inflamed the minds of the Romans
against him, that they were ready for rebellion the first opportunity that
offered it self; and if that accident had not happened to Lucretia, as soon as
any other had fallen out, it would have had the same effect. And if Tarquin had
governed, and lived according to the example of his Ancestors, and his Son
Sextus had committed that error, Brutus and Collatinus would have addressed
themselves to Tarquin (and not to the people of Rome) for justice against his
Son. Let Princes therefore observe that they begin to ruin their own dignity
and power, when they first go about to transgress and violate the old Laws and
Customs of their Ancestors: and if after they are removed, and dispossessed of
their authority, they should grow so wise as to understand the felicity of
governing a Kingdom with good Counsel, their loss would be more insupportable,
and they would condemn themselves to a greater punishment than any body else
would condemn them; for it is easier to be beloved by good people, than bad, and
to obey Laws, than to command them; and to understand the way by which this is
to be done, they have no more to do, but to observe the lives of good Princes,
as Timoleon the Corinthian, Aratus Sicionius and others, in which they will
find so much ease and security to him that governs, and them that are governed,
that they will be tempted to imitate them, if for nothing but the easiness of
it. For when men are governed well, they desire no other liberty; as it happened
to the people who were governed by the two persons above named, whom they
compelled to continue their Princes whilst they lived, though they endeavored
several times to have laid down, and betaken themselves to a private condition.
And because in this and the two precedent Chapters, we have discoursed of the
hatred contracted against Princes, and the Conspiracy of the Sons of Brutus
against the State, and others against Tarquinius Priscus, and Servius Tullius,
I think it not amiss to speak of Conspiracies more largely in my next Chapter,
as being a subject well worth the observation both of Princes and private
Persons.

CHAP. VI.
Of Conspiracies.
I Did not think it inconvenient in this place to discourse something of
Conspiracies, seeing they are things of such consequence and danger, both to
Princes and private Persons; for by them more Princes have lost their States
and their Lives than by open War; and the reason is, because few persons are
qualified to make War, but every body can conspire. On the other side, for a
private person, no enterprise is more dangerous and rash; for let him manage it
as wisely as he can, it is full of difficulty, and uncertainty of success; and
from hence it is that among so many Conspiracies there are so few which arrive
at the end that was designed. To the end therefore that Princes may learn how
to defend themselves; and private persons might be more cautious of engaging
themselves in them, but may rather be contented to live quietly under the
Government where they are placed, I shall enlarge upon the subject, and leave
nothing behind that is considerable for the document either of the one or the
other. It is a certain truth, and well said of Cornelius Tacitus, that men are
to pay an honor and respect to things past, and obedience to things present:
that they ought to desire good Princes, but when they are once in authority,
they are to be endured, and those who go about to conspire against them, do
most commonly ruin themselves or their Country.

To come therefore to the point, we are first to consider against whom these
Conspiracies are made, and we shall find them either against their Country, or
Prince: and of these two sorts of Conspiracies we shall discourse at present,
because of those which are entered into, to deliver up a besieged Town to the
Enemy, or upon such occasion, we have spoken amply before. And first of the
Conjurations against a Prince, and the occasions of them, which are many, but
one of more importance than all the rest, and that is the hatred of the people:
for that Prince who has contracted the universal odium of the people, may with
reason believe that some of those whom he has offended will study to revenge
themselves; and they will be the more industrious in it, by how much they
observe the general discontent and animosity against him. A Prince therefore is
by all means possible to prevent the hatred of the People, (but having spoken
of it before, I shall not enlarge upon it again.) For by keeping himself from
the general hatred, particular offenses will not be able to amount to a War;
first, because all men have not the same resentment, and will not put
themselves in danger to revenge an injury; and then because if the discontented
were all of a mind, and had power to do it, yet they are discouraged by the
affection which they observe in the multitude toward their Prince. The injury
done by the Prince, is either upon the Estate, Blood, or Honor of the Subject:
where the injury extends to Blood, threatening is very dangerous, and much more
than downright execution; for when a man is killed, he is past thinking of
revenge, and those who are alive will quickly forget him; but when a man is
threatened, and finds himself under a necessity of suffering, or doing something
extraordinary, he becomes immediately dangerous, and ought to be regarded by
the Prince, as I shall show hereafter. Next to this necessity for the
preservation of ones life; Honor and Estate are the two tenderest points in
which men are soonest offended, and of which the Prince is likewise to have a
particular care, for no man can be pillaged so perfectly, but he will have a
Knife left to revenge himself; nor no man can be dishonored to such a degree
of debasement, but he will have courage enough left to attempt something in
revenge; and in point of honor, no injury goes so near a man as what reflects
upon the woman; and next to that, is to be despised. This was it that armed
Pausanias against Philip of Macedon, and many other Subjects against many other
Princes. In our times Julius Belanti had never conspired against Pandolfus
Tyrant of Siena, had he not first given him his Daughter to Wife, and then
taken her from him again, as we shall show more at large hereafter. The great
motive of the Conjuration of the Pazzi against the Medici was the Patrimony of
Giovanni Bonromei, which was given from them by the award of the Medici. But
there is another motive (and that no small one) which makes people conspire
against their Prince, and that is a desire of rescuing their Country from
tyranny and usurpation. This was it which set Brutus and Cassius at work
against Caesar. This was it which excited others against Phalaris, Dyonisius,
etc. and against this there is no remedy, but depositing their usurpations, and
because there are few will do that, there are but few which escape the ill
consequence.

Ad Generum Cereris, sine caede, and sanguine pauci
Descendunt Reges, and sicca morte Tyranni.
Slaughter and Blood pursues, he seldom lies
Dry in his Coffin that a Tyrant dies.
But in Conspiracies, as I said before, the dangers are so great and various,
that there is not only a hazard in the designing, management, and execution,
but even after the execution is done. The Conspirators are either one or more;
one cannot properly be called a Conspiracy, but a firm resolution in a single
person to make away his Prince; this way of Conspiracy is more secure than the
other, because till it comes to execution, it can never be known, no body being
privy to his secret, and therefore no danger of coming to the ears of the
Prince. These kind of resolutions may fall into the heart of any man, great or
small, noble or ignoble, favorites or strangers: no man but some time or other
may have access to his Prince, and he that has opportunity to speak with him,
has opportunity to do worse. Pausanias murdered Philip of Macedon as he was
going to the Temple attended with a thousand of his Guards, and walking betwixt
his own Son and his Son in Law; but Pausanias was a Gentleman, and very
conversant at Court, but there was a poor contemptible Spaniard who stabbed
Ferdinand King of Spain in the Neck, and though the wound was not mortal, yet
it was enough to show us that there is no man so inconsiderable, but if he has
courage to undertake, he may have opportunity to it: Dervis a Turkish Priest
drew his Sword upon Bajazet Father to this Present Emperor, and though he did
not kill him, yet it was not for want either of courage or opportunity. Nor is
it to be doubted but there are many ill enough disposed, who wish from their
hearts to be revenged on their Tyrants, but there are few that dare venture,
and scarce one of those few but dies in the attempt, and no man will expose
himself where there is no hopes to escape. But enough of this pertinacious
malevolence in a single person, we will speak now of Conspiracies betwixt a
number: I say that in History all Conspiracies are found to be acted by great
Persons, and such as have familiarity with their Prince: for others, unless
they be mad men or fools, will never attempt it, because people that are weak,
and remote from the Court, are destitute of all those hopes and conveniences
that are requisite for the execution of such a design. First, men of slender
fortune or interest cannot impart themselves freely, no body will be true them,
because no man can concur with them upon any of those hopes which do usually
encourage men to the undertaking of any great danger; so that they can hardly
communicate to two or three persons, but one of them is an informer, and the
other are ruined. But if they should be so happy as not to be betrayed, the
execution is attended with so many difficulties by reason of the difficulty of
their access, that it is impossible but they must miscarry: and if great
persons, and such as are very conversant with their Prince are subject to such
hazards, those doubtless must be much more who are under none of those
qualifications. Wherefore, when men of mean fortune, or little access at Court
consider their own weakness and inability, they are discouraged from any such
designs; and if at any time they be offended, and would do their Prince a
mischief, they content themselves with libelling and railing, and expect when
persons of greater access and capacity should revenge them upon his person, and
if any of these persons are so far transported, as to attempt any thing of this
nature, their good will is more to be commended than their discretion. We see
then, where any great Conspiracy has been made, it has been by great persons,
and such as have been familiar with their Prince, and that as often upon the
score of benefits, as injuries received; so it was in the Conspiracy of
Perennius against Commodus, Plautianus against Severus, Sejanus against
Tiberius, all of them preferred by their several Emperors, and advanced to such
Honors, Authority and Estates, that their power seemed to want nothing of
perfection, but the Imperial Ensigns, and that they might have them as well as
the rest, they conspired every one of them against their Prince, and their
Conspiracies had such ends as their ingratitude deserved. However, in the
memory of our Fathers the Conspiracy of Giacopo d' Apiano against Messer Piero
Gambacorti Prince of Pisa had a better end; for the said Giacopo having been
brought up, and caressed, and advanced by the said Piero deposed his
Benefactor, and took away his Government for his pains. Another of the same
nature was that of Coppola in our days against Ferdinand of Arragon, though it
had not the same success; for Coppol^ being arrived at that height of
Authority, that there was nothing but the bare name wanting to make him King,
he attempted for that, and lost his life in the business. And certainly if any
Conspiracy might have succeeded, it was his, being a person as powerful as the
King himself, and seconded with all the conveniences he could desire: but the
same greediness of dominion that blinded him in the undertaking, blinded him in
the prosecution of his design; for had it been managed with the least prudence,
it would have been impossible to have miscarried.

A Prince therefore who would preserve himself against Conspiracy, is to have
an eye rather upon those he has obliged, than those he has offended; for they
that are offended have not those frequent opportunities that the other have;
and for the disposition, it is much alike, the desire of dominion being as
great if not greater than the desire of revenge; so then authority is to be
given to his friends with that caution, that there be always some space or
interval left betwixt the preferment of the Favorite, and the sovereignty of
the Prince, lest if his ambition should not be satisfied, he should aspire
immediately at the Crown. But to return to our design, I say, that
Conspiratours being to be great men, and such as have easy access to the
Prince, we are now to enquire into the successes of their Plots, and see what
have been the causes of their prosperity or miscarriage. And because (as I said
before) the danger is considerable in the management, execution, and
afterward; for that reason there are very few of them that arrive at their
proposed end. In their contrivances and consultations there is such
extraordinary danger, that unless they be carried on with singular caution and
prudence, they will be easily discovered; and they are discovered two ways,
either by downright impeachment, or by conjecture and presumption. Impeachment
proceeds either from infidelity or folly in those persons with whom you have
communicated; infidelity is easily found, for you cannot communicate in that
nature but with such of your Confidents as you suppose will venture their lives
for you; or else with such persons as are dissatisfied with the Government: of
such kind of Confidents, one or two may possibly be found, but when you begin
to multiply them, and commit your secret to more, you must necessarily be
betrayed; for their affection to you must be very great, if the apprehension of
the danger, and the fear of the punishment do not deter them: besides, men are
many times mistaken in the affection of their friends; for they can never be
assured of them till they have made experiment, and to make experiment in such
ways as this, is exceedingly dangerous, and if perchance you have had trial of
them in some other matters of importance in which they have behaved themselves
faithfully and well, yet you can take no true measures from that, because this
surpasses all other dangers whatsoever. If you presume upon his discontent,
animosity to his Prince, you may be casily deceived, for as soon as you have
discovered your design, you have given him a power to reconcile himself, and
his rancour must be very great, or your influence extraordinary to keep him
faithful: hence it is that many Conspiracies are discovered, and as it were
nipp'd in the Bud; and when any of them are kept private where many persons are
privy, it is looked upon as a miracle, as that of Piso against Nero, and in our
times that of the Pazzi against Lorenzo, and Giuliano de Medici, in which
though fifty were concerned, it was never discovered till it came to execution;
for discoveries by indiscretion, they happen when one of the Conspirators talks
carelessly, so as some servant or third person picks it out, as it happened to the
Sons of Brutus, who in their Negotiations with Tarquin's Ambassadors, were
overheard, and accused by one of the Servants: another way is when out of
levity you communicate with some Child or Woman that you love, or such other
incontinent person, as Dinus did, who being (with Philotas) entered into a
Conspiracy against Alexander the Great, imparted it to a Boy that he loved,
called Ficomachus who told it to his Brother Cibalinus, and Cibalinus
discovered it to the King. As to discoveries by circumstances and conjecture,
we have an example in the Pisonian Conspiracy against Nero, in which Scevinus
one of the Conspirators having the day before Nero was to have been murdered,
made his Will, ordered Milichius his Freeman to furbish up his old rusty Sword,
enfranchised all his Slaves, distributed Money among them, and caused Plagets
and L^gatures to be made to bind up Wounds, he gave occasion of conjecture to
Milichius, who accused him thereupon to Nero, and Order being given for his
apprehension, Scevinus was taken into custody, and with him Natalis another of
the Conspirators, who had been observed to have talked privately with him a
long time the day before, and not agreeing about their discourse, they
contradicted one another, and were forced to confess all.

From these occasions of discovery it is impossible to be secured, but either
by malice, imprudence, or inadvertency, all will out when ever the Conspirators
exceed the number of three or four. For if more than one of them be taken, it is
impossible but they must interfere, because two people cannot hang together so
exactly in a Story. If there be but one apprehended, and he be a stout man,
perhaps he may have that constancy and resolution as to conceal his
Confederates; but then his Confederates must have as much courage as he, and
not discover themselves by their slight; for whose heart soever fails, whether
his that is apprehended, or his that is escaped, it is the same thing, for the
Plot is discovered. That example which is mentioned by Titus Livius is very
rare and unusual, where in a Conspiracy against Girolamo King of Syracuse, he
speaks of one of the Conspirators called Theodorus, who being seized, concealed
his accomplices with incomparable constancy, and accused all the Kings Friends;
and his Companions were so confident in his courage, that none of them fled, or
made the least discovery by their fear. These are the dangers which are to be
passed in the conduct or management of an Enterprise, before it comes to
execution; and as there are dangers, so there are ways of evading them.

The first, the surest, and indeed the only way is not to give your
Confederates time to discover you, but to communicate the business to them when
it is just ready for execution, and not before. Those who take that course, are
free from the danger of Threatenings and Negotiations, and commonly from all the
rest; and have been observed frequently to come to good end, and there is no
man that is wise, but would carry it so if he could. I shall give you only two
Examples. Nelimatus being unable to endure the Tyranny of Aristotimus King of
Epirus, got several of his Friends and Relations together into his house, and
exhorting them to the deliverance of their Country, some of them desired them
to consider, and prepare themselves; whereupon Nelimatus caused his Servants to
make fast the doors, and protested to all the whole Company, that they should
swear to go immediately about it, or he would deliver them up Prisoners to
Aristotimus, upon which they all took the Oath, and falling incontinently to
the work, they effected their design, as Nelimatus had contrived it. One of the
Magi having by fraud possessed himself of the Kingdom of Persia, and Orthanus a
great Person of that Kingdom, having discovered the cheat, he had a conference
with six others of his own quality, to contrive how they might rescue their
Country from the Tyranny of that Usurper, and (as in the case before) when some
of them desired time, Darius (one of the six) stood up and declared boldly,
That if they would not execute it presently, he would accuse them every one,
and doing it forthwith, they prospered accordingly. Not unlike these two, was
the way which the Aetolians used in the Assassination of Nabis the Tyrant of
Sparta: They sent one of their Citizens called Alexamenes to him with 30 Horse,
200 Foot under a pretense of a supply, commanding the Soldiers to be obedient
to the orders of their chief Officers, but acquainted nobody with the design
but Alexamenes himself. Alexamenes marched to Sparta with his Forces, but
communicating nothing of his instructions, till they were fit to be executed,
he did his business, and the Tyrant was slain; by which reservedness they
avoided the first dangers of being discovered, which are obvious in the
management, and whoever takes the same course, shall avoid them as well as
they. Piso (whom I have mentioned before) was a man of honor and reputation, a
great intimate of Nero's, and one in whom he placed a great deal of confidence.
Nero visited him often, and was many times treated very magnificently in his
Garden: Piso by virtue of this intimacy was able to make choice of such
Accomplices as were stout and courageous, and disposed to such an Exploit (which
for great men to do, is no difficult matter) and when occasion was offered, to
break the business to them so suddenly, that having no time either to
deliberate or deny him, he must necessarily succeed; and he who examines all
the other Examples that are mentioned, will find very few, but have been
managed the same way. But men of little experience in the affairs of the world,
do many times commit great errors, and more, when their designs are
extraordinary, as in this. A Plot then is never to be imparted, but upon
necessity, and when it is ripe for execution; and when you do communicate, do
it but to one, and that a person of whom you have had long experience, or one
that is prompted by the same interest and provocation as your self; and to find
one person so, is much easier than to find many, and by consequence that way is
nothing so dangerous. Besides, if you should be mistaken in your confidence,
you have more remedy and defense, than where the Conspirators are several; for
I have heard wise men say, that to a single person a man may say any thing;
(for if nothing be to be produced under your hand) your no, will be as good as
his yea: But writing is to be shunned as a rock, for nothing is of so much
conviction, as a note under a man's own hand. Plautianus desiring to murder
Severus the Emperor, and his Son Antoninus; committed the execution to
Saturninus a Tribune, who had more mind to betray, than obey him; but
suspecting that when he came to accuse him, Plautianus should have more credit
than he, he desired a Warrant under his hand to confirm his Commission, which
Plautianus granted, being blinded with ambition, whereby it happened that he
was accused, convicted, and condemned, whereas without that Note, and some
other circumstances, Plautianus would have been acquitted, and his accuser been
punished, so obstinately did Plautianus deny all. In the Pisonian Conspiracy,
there was a Woman called Epicaris, who had been formerly one of Nero's Misses.
This Epicaris thinking it of importance to bring in a Captain of certain
Galleys which Nero kept for his Guard, she communicated the Plot, but concealed
the Conspirators, and the Captain betraying her, and accusing her to Nero,
Epicaris maintained the contrary with such constancy, that the Emperor was
amazed, and discharged her. So then, he that communicates a thing of this
Nature to one, runs but these two dangers, either of being spontaneously
accused, and proof brought to make it good; or else being accused by accident
and of force, as when his Confederate is apprehended upon suspicion, and
impeaches him upon the Rack, in both which cases there is something to be said;
for in the first he may pretend malice, in the second fear, and that the
extremity of his torture constrained him to say false: So that it is great
wisdom to communicate with no body, till your designs be ripe but to proceed
according to the examples aforesaid; but if you must communicate, to do it but
to one alone, and by himself; in which though there be some danger, yet there
is much less than where you communicate with many. Another way, and not unlike
this, is when the fury or violence of a Tyrant necessitates you to do that to
him, which otherwise he would be sure to do to you; and sometimes it is so
sudden and fierce, it leaves you scarce time to think of securing your self.
This is an exigence and necessity that has most commonly a good end, and to
prove it, I will produce two examples, and no more. Commodus the Emperor had
two Captains of his Guards (one of them called Lettus,, and the other Elettus)
particularly in his favor, and Martia was the most intimate of his Concubines.
They having taken the liberty to admonish him of his ill Courses, and the
reflection his ill conversation had both upon his Person and Government, he
resolved to rid himself of his Monitors, and to that end writ down the names of
Martia, Lettus, Elettus, and others (who he designed should be put to death the
next night) and put the Note under his Pillow. Being gone out into a Bath, a
Child that he loved exceedingly, being rummaging about the room, happened upon
this Paper, and going out with it in his hand, Martia met him by accident, took
it from him, read it, sent it immediately to Lettus and Elettus, who being
sensible of their danger, resolved to prevent him, and without more ado, killed
Commodus in the Evening.

Antoninus Caracalla the Emperor, was with his Army in Mesopotamia, and having
made Macrinus his General (a better Statesman than Soldier) it happened (as it
does to all Princes that are wicked) that he began to apprehend (what he knew
he deserved) that some body conspired against him. To be more certain, he writ
privately to a friend (called Maternianus) in Rome, to consult the Astrologers,
and give him notice whether any body was contriving against the Empire.
Maternianus writ him word he had consulted them, that there were those who did
aspire at the Empire, and that Macrinus was the man. This Letter coming by
accident to the hands of Macrinus, before the Emperor saw it, he found the
necessity that was upon him either to kill or be killed; and thereupon
committed the execution to a confident of his called Martialis (whose Brother
Antoninus had slain not many days before) who killed him accordingly. We see
then that this necessity which allows us no time, has the same effect in a
manner with the course which was taken by Nelimatus of Epirus, as I have
mentioned before. We see likewise, that (as I said in the beginning of these
discourses) that Commination and threatening does a Prince more mischief, and
are the occasion of more Plots, than violence it self. A Prince therefore is to
have a care of that; to caress those that are about him, and keep them in their
Allegiance by his courtesy and kindness; if that will not do, he is to secure
himself otherwise as well as he can, but never to bring them into a condition
of thinking themselves under a necessity of killing or being killed. As to the
dangers which attend the execution of a Plot, they proceed either from a sudden
alteration of Orders; a sudden defection of courage in him that is to execute;
some imprudence in the attempt; or some imperfection in the act, as when all
are not killed that were intended. And first we must understand that there is
nothing gives so much Embarrasment, and distraction to the action of men as new
and contradictory orders to be executed in an instant. and quite contrary to
what was determined before. And if in any thing this variation be dangerous, it
is in Martial affairs, and in such things as we have now spoken of; for in
those cases there is nothing so necessary as that every man may know certainly
his part, that beforehand he may contrive with himself, and conclude upon all
the circumstances of the Fact; whereas if they have framed their designs, and
fixed upon their way, and immediately new Orders are brought repugnant to the
former, it disturbs all, and the whole Plot must be ruined; so that it is
better to execute it according to the first Order, though there be something of
inconvenience, than to vary your Orders, with a thousand times more: But this
is meant only where the variation is sudden, for where you have time enough, it
is not so dangerous. The Conspiracy of the Pazzi against Lorenzo and Giuliano
de Medici is very well known. Their first Orders were, That an entertainment
should be made for the Cardinal of St. George, to which the Medici should be
invited, and killed. Every man's Office was assigned; some were to kill them;
some were to secure the Palace; and others to ride up and down the City, and
proclaim liberty to the people: It happened when the Pazzi, Medici, and
Cardinal were altogether in the Cathedral in Florence at Divine Service, news
was brought that Julian would not be at Dinner: Hereupon the Conspirators
consulting again, it was resolved to alter the Plot, and do that in the Church
which was designed in the Chamber: This sudden alteration, discomposed the
whole order; for Giovan batista da Montesecco would not consent to add
Sacrilege to his Murder, and commit it in the Church; upon which they were
forced to appoint another in his place, and shift all their Agents from one
Office to another, and their time being too short to fix their resolutions,
they committed so many errors in the execution, that all of them miscarried.
And among the Conspirators, when things come to be executed, their heart many
times fails them, either out of sudden reverence, or sudden fear; for the
presence and Majesty of some Princes is so aweful, it either mitigates or
frightens the fury of the Executioner; Marius being taken and kept Prisoner by
the Minturnenses, they sent a Servant to kill him; but the poor slave was so
terrified at the sight of his Person, and the Memory of his Name, that his
courage failed, and he was not able to go through,; and if the consideration of
his quality, and the Majesty of his Countenance could do so much, in a person
that was a Prisoner, and in distress; how much more are they effectual in a
free Prince, magnificently adorned, and as nobly attended. Certainly such a
sight is able to strike terror into the boldest person, and work compassion in
the most cruel miscreant.

Some there were who conspired against Sitalcis King of Thrace: The day was
appointed for the execution; they met at the place, where the Prince was; but
when the stroke was to be given, no body durst venture, they departed as they
came, every body blamed one another, but no body knew what was the impediment,
and having attempted it often with the same intimidation, they were discovered
at last, and received punishment for an offense which they might, but would not
put in execution. Alfonso Duke of Ferrara had two Brothers, who conspired
against him, and employed Giannes a Priest and Chantor in the said Dukes
Chapel, to bring the Duke to them, which he did many times, and it was in
their power to to have killed him; but yet not any of them durst strike him, so
that at length they also were discovered, and received their reward. This
remorse can proceed from nothing but the terror of his presence, or the
influence of his behavior and humanity, which compels them to mercy. But the
defects and disappointments in these kind of executions, proceed either from
imprudence, or terror, with either of which, the minds of the Conspirators
being disturbed, they become so confused and distracted, they can neither say,
nor do any thing as they should. And that men are subject to those confusions
and surprises, cannot be better demonstrated than by Livy's description of
Alexamenus the Aetolian, of whom we have spoken before: For when the time was
come for the execution of his design against Nabis the Spartan, having imparted
it to his friends, Livy tells us, Collegit, and ipse animum, confusum tantae
cogitatione rei. He recollected his mind, which was in some measure confounded
with the contemplation of the Enterprise For there is no man, how resolute and
bloody soever he be, but must be surprised and discomposed in such cases as
those, wherefore for such Exploits, experienced men, and such as have been used
to those kind of affairs, are to be chosen, and no other, though never so
stout: for he that has had no trial of himself in that nature, ought not to
presume barely upon his courage; nor can he promise himself any certain
success, by reason that the terror and perturbation of his mind is many times
so strong, that it makes his Weapon fall out of his hand, or words fall from
his Mouth, which discover the whole Plot. Lucilla the Sister of Commodus,
ordered Quintianus to kill her Brother: Quintianus waited for Commodus as he
came into the Amphitheater, and meeting him when he came, he ran at him with
his naked Sword, crying aloud, Questo ti mando il Senato, The Senate sends you
this; but those words gave an alarm, and he was seized before he could lift up
his arm to give the blow. Messer Antonio da Volterra, deputed (as is said
before) to kill Lorenzo de Medici, when he advanced to assault him, cried out,
Ah Traitor! but that exclamation was the preservation of Lorenzo, and the ruin
of the Conspirators. But these Enterprises are difficult, when directed only
against one person, for the reasons abovesaid, yet when they are bent against
two, they are much more, because in several places it is impossible any design
should be well executed at once; so that to conspire against a Prince in that
way, is a doubtful, dangerous and imprudent thing. Were it not for the
reverence I bear to the Author, I should scarce believe what Herodian says of
Plautianus, that he committed to one single Centurion called Saturninus, the
killing of Severus and Antoninus who lived in several places; for it is so
irrational a thing, that nothing but his Authority could have persuaded me to
it. Certain young Gentlemen of Athens conspired against Diocles and Hippias,
two Tyrants in that City. They killed Diocles, but Hippias escaped, and
revenged his death. Chiones and Leonides of Heraclea, two of Plato's Disciples,
conspired against Clearchus and Satirus, two Tyrants of that place; Clearchus
was murdered, but Satirus survived and revenged it. The Pazzi (whom we have so
often mentioned) killed only Julian de Medici, his brother escaping; so that
from these Conspiracies against several persons, all wise people will abstain,
as things that are fatal to themselves, their Country, and every body else; for
those who escape are thereby rendered the more cruel and Tyrannical, as appears
by the aforesaid examples in Florence, Athens, and Heraclea. And therefore the
Conspiracy of Pelopidas against the Tyrants of Thebes was admirable, in respect
of the success, seeing not only one, but ten of them were to be murdered; and
that he was neither a favorite, nor had easy access to them; but was a Rebel,
and in banishment; yet he overcame all these difficulties, got into Thebes,
killed the Tyrants, and delivered his Country; but with the assistance of Caron
one of the Tyrants great Counselors who gave him admission, and contributed
much to his success. But let no man presume upon this example, for it is looked
upon not only as a rare thing, but as a miracle. The execution of such a design
may be interruped likewise by a false imagination, or some unexpected accident
happening in the very act. The very morning that Brutus and his Confederates
were to murder Caesar, it happened that he had a long discourse with Cn.
Popilius Lenas one of the Conspirators, which the rest of the accomplices
observing, concluded that Popilius had discovered all to Caesar, and was giving
him an account; whereupon it was proposed to kill Caesar presently, and not to
defer it till he was in the Senate; and doubtless they had done it, but that
their discourse broke off; and Caesar went away without any Commotion. These
imaginations are sometimes very considerable, and to be regarded with a great
deal of prudence, and the rather, because they are easily taken up; for he who
is conscious to himself, is always apt to suspect that they are talking of him;
and it may so fall out, that a word spoken to another intent, may gaul and
disturb you as much as if it were spoken on purpose, and either force you to
fly, or so hasten and precipitate the execution, that you run your self upon
many inconveniences, especially where many are privy to the Plot. As to the
accidents, because they are unexpected and occasional, no directions can be
given against them, but examples by which men are to regulate and be cautious.
Julius Belanti of Siena (whom we have mentioned before) being incensed against
Pandolfus, who had given him his Daughter in Marriage, and taken her from him
again, conspired his death, and laid his design thus, Pandolfus went almost
every day to visit one of his Relations that was sick; and in his passage went
commonly by Julius his house: upon this consideration, Julius got all his
accomplices together into his house, with intention to assault him as he went
by; to which purpose he armed them all, and disposed them into the Porch, that
they might be ready upon a signal to be given from a Window above: It happened
that Pandolfus being just by, the person at the Window gave the signal, when by
accident in the very nick of time Pandolfus met a friend, and stopped to salute
him: Some of his Attendants passing on, heard a noise of Arms, took the Alarm,
and discovered the Ambuscade; so that Pandolfus was miraculously preserved,
Iulio and his Companions forced to fly from Siena, and all by the accident of
this rencounter, which not only hindered the execution at that time, but
defeated the whole enterprise.

But against these accidents no remedy can be prescribed, because they happen
so rarely; however it is necessary to think of us many, and provide against
them as well as we can. It remains now that we say something of those dangers
which we incur after execution is done; of which sort there is but one, and
that is, when somebody is left alive that may revenge it: as his children,
brothers, kinsmen, and such others to whom the sovereignty may descend by right
of inheritance, and these may be left to revenge the death of their
Predecessor, either by your negligence, or by some of the accidents aforesaid,
as it happened to Giovan-Andrea da Lampognano, who conspiring with other persons,
killed the Duke of Milan, but they left two of his Brothers and one of his Sons
behind, who revenged it in due time. But in these cases the Conspirators are to
be excused, because there is no remedy to be provided; but where by their own
imprudence or negligence they suffer any such to escape, there it is otherwise,
and they are highly to be condemned. At Forum Livii some there were who
conspired against Count Girolamo, ^lew him, seized upon his wife and children,
(which were very young) and clapped them in Prison: a great mind they had to the
Castle, but the Governor was refractory, and would not admit them; the
Counsels (called Madonna Caterin^) made them a proposition, that if they would
suffer her to go into him, she would prevail with the Governor to surrender,
and that in the mean time her children should be left as hostages in their
hands. The Conspirators believed her, and let her go in, but she was no sooner
in the Castle, but she began to upbraid them by the death of her Husband, and
threaten them with all possible revenge; and to convince them that her care and
compassion for her children should not restrain her, she showed them her
genitals through the windows, to let them know, that if they killed those, she
had wherewithal to have more: so that perceiving their error too late, and
being destitute of all counsel, their indiscretion was punished with their
perpetual banishment. But of all dangers after the fact is committed, none is
so fatal as the affection of the people to their Prince whom you have slain.
For their revenge is not possible to be prevented. Of this, the murder of
Caesar may be an example: for the people of Rome being his friends, his death
was thoroughly revenged upon the Conspirators, who afterward (though in several
times and places) were all of them slain. Conjurations against ones Country are
not so dangerous as Conjurations against ones Prince; for in the contrivance
and management the dangers are not so many; in the execution they are but the
same; and after the fact is committed, they are nothing at all. In the
management and preparation the dangers are not so many, because a Citizen may
make his party, and put his affairs in a posture without discover^ (...) ^is
orders be not interrupted, bring his designs to a very good end; or if they be
in^errupted by some Law, it is in his power to adjourn the execution, or find
out some other way that may be more commodious; but all these (it is to be
understood) are to be done only in Commonwealths, where the manners of the
people are beginning to be corrupted; because where the City is incorrupt, such
designs will never come into any of their thoughts; but in a corrupt Republic
where the dangers are not so great, there are many ways for private Citizens to
make themselves Princes; because a Commonwealth is not so quick and dexterous
as a Prince, their suspicion is less, and by consequence their caution:
besides, they are commonly in more awe of their Grandees, and therefore the
Grandees are more bold and courageous against them. Every body has read
Catilins's Conspiracy written by Salust, and can tell how Catiline (after it
was detected) not only continued in Rome, but came audaciously into the Senate,
and had the confidence to talk insolently both to the Senate and Consul; so
great reverence had that City, for its Citizens. And when things were gone so
far, that he had left the City, and was got to the head of an Army, Lentulus,
and the rest of the Conspirators had never been seized, had not there been
Letters produced against them under their own hands.

Hanno a great Citizen in Carthage had a mind to usurp; and in order thereto;
he had contrived at the Wedding of one of his Daughters to poison the whole
Senate, and then make himself Prince: when his plot was discovered, the Senate
troubled themselves with no farther provision against it, than by making a Law
against exorbitant feasting upon such kind of occasions, so great was their
respect to a Citizen of his quality! But in a Conspiracy against ones Country,
the greatest danger lies in the execution; for it seldom happens that a
particular Citizen is strong enough to subdue a whole Country; and every man is
not General of an Army, as Caesar, Agathocles, Cleomenes and others were, who
had their Armies ready to back their designs. To such the way is easy and
secure; but they who want those advantages must manage their business with more
cunning, or employ foreign assistance: this cunning and artifice was used by
Pisistrates the Athenian; for having overcome the Megarenses, and thereby got
himself great reputation among the people, he came forth of his house one
morning, and showed himself wounded to them, complaining that the Nobility had
abused him, and desiring that he might be permitted to have a guard for the
security of his person; which being granted inconsiderately, gave him
opportunity by degrees to make himself absolute. Pandolfus Petrucci (with other
Exiles) returned to Siena; and by way of contempt was made Keeper of the
Palace, which was a mechanic employment that others had refused. Yet those few
armed men who were under his Command by virtue of that place, by degres gave
him such reputation, that at length he made himself Prince. Others have taken
other ways, and by time, and their industry, arrived at the same dignity
without any danger: but those who have endeavored to make themselves Masters
of their Country by their own force, or foreign supplies; have had various
events, as fortune was pleased to befriend them! Cataline was ruined: Hanno (of
whom we have spoken before) failing in his poison, armed many thousands of his
Partisans, which were all slain with him. Certain of the principal Citizens of
Thebes, by the help of a Spartan Army, made themselves Masters of that City,
and tyrannized over it: so that if all conspiracies against their Country be
examined, there will none, or but very few be found to have miscarried in the
management; but the whole stress of their good or bad fortune has layn upon the
execution, which being once passed, they are subject to no more dangers than
what depend upon the nature of the Government; for when a man usurps, and makes
himself a Tyrant, he exposes himself to those natural and inseparable dangers
which are the consequences of Tyranny, against which he has no other remedies
than what have been described before.

This is what I have thought convenient to write upon the subject of
Conspiracies; and if I have discoursed only of those which are executed by the
sword, and not by poison, it is because they have the same orders and methods.
True it is, the way of poison is the most dangerous, as being the more
uncertain, because every one has not convenience, but is forced to confer with
other people, and the necessity of that Conference is much to be feared:
besides, many things happen which makes your potion ineffectual, as it fell out
to those who killed Commodus; who having disgorg'd his poison, forced the
Conspirators to strangle him. Princes then have no Enemy to which they are more
dangerously exposed, than to these Conspiracies, because they are never
undertaken against any of them, but they take away his life, or reputation. If
they succeed, he dies; if they miscarry, and the instruments be put to death,
it is looked upon as a pretense and invention of the Prince to satiate his
avarice or cruelty upon the blood or fortunes of his enemies. My advice
therefore is (both to Prince and Commonwealth, that upon the discovery of a
Conspiracy, (before they think of revenge) seriously to consider the quality of
it, and to compare the condition of the Conspirators with their own: if they
find them potent and strong, till they have furnished themselves with a
proportionable force, no notice is to be taken; if notice be taken, they are
unable to defend themselves, and certainly ruined; for the Conspirators finding
themselves discovered, will grow desperate, and be under a necessity of
venturing, let the success be what it will. The Romans may be an example of
this way of dissembling; for having (as we said before) left two of their
Legions at Capua for the security of that City against the Samnites; the
Commanders of the said Legions conspired to make themselves Masters of the
Town. The Romans having notice of their designs, committed the prevention of it
to Rutilius their new Consul, who to lull and delude the Conspirators, gave out
that the Senate had confirmed that Station to those Legions for another winter,
which the Legions believed, and thinking then they should have time enough,
they neglected to hasten their design, till at length observing the Consul to
draw them away insensibly, and dispose them into other parts, they began to
suspect, and that suspicion made them discover themselves, and put their plot
in execution. Nor can an example be brought more properly for either sides; for
by it we may see how cool and remiss people are when they think they have time
enough; and how sudden and vigorous when necessity presses them. And the Prince
or Commonwealth which would defer the discovery of a Plot, cannot do it with
more advantage to himself, than by giving the Conspirators some handsome
occasion to believe that they may execute it with more ease and security
another time; for thereby the Prince or Commonwealth will have more leisure to
provide for their defense: they who have proceeded otherwise, have but hastened
their own ruin, as we have seen in the case of the Duke of Athens, and
Gulielmo de Pazzi. The Duke having made himself Sovereign in Florence, and
understanding there were Conspiracies against him; without enquiring farther
into the business, caused one of them to be apprehended, which giving an alarm
to the rest, they immediately took arms, and turned the Duke out of his
Supremacy. Gulielmo being Commissary for that City in the Val di Chiana in the
year 1501, having news of a great Plot in Arezzo in favor of the Vitelli, and
that their design was to renounce the dominion of the Florentines, he marched
thither directly, without considering the power of the Conspirators, or his
own, or so much as furnishing himself with what Forces he might have done; and
by the advice of the Bishop his Son, causing one of the Conspirators to be
seized, the rest fell presently to their arms, disclaimed the Florentines, and
took their Commissary prisoner. But when Conspiracies are weak, and in their
infancy, if they be discovered, they are to suppress them out of hand, without
any suspense, and not to follow the example either of the Duke of Athens, or
Dion of Syracuse, of whom the first caused a Citizen who had discovered a plot
to him, to be put to death, that the rest observing how unwilling he was to
believe any thing of them, might be the more secure, and hold themselves
obliged. Dion on the other side suspecting the affections of some people,
caused one of his Confidents called Calippus to pretend a Conspiracy, and see
if he could draw them in; but both these practices succeeded very ill, for by
the first, all people were discouraged from making any discovery, and all
Conspirators confirmed; and by the other, a way was recommended for the
murdering of himself; for Calippus finding he had an opportunity to practice
without danger, he did it so effectually, that it cost Dion both his Government
and Life.

CHAP. VII.
How it comes to pass that in the changes of State, from liberty to servitude,
and from servitude to liberty, some are very innocent, and others very bloody.
SOme people perhaps may wonder how it should come to pass that Governments
should be changed from one form to another, sometimes easily, and without
blood, and sometimes with great difficulty and slaughter, be the variation as
it will, either from liberty to tyranny, or from tyranny to liberty. And this
diversity of mutations is so strange, that as History tells us, they happen
sometimes with infinite effusion of blood, and at other times without the least
injury to any body: as in Rome, when the Government was taken from the Kings,
and put into the hands of the Consul^, no body was expulsed, or so much as
molested but the Tarquins; but in other alterations it has been otherwise, and
the cause of this diversity may (in my judgment) be deduced from the manner in
which that State was acquired; if it was obtained by force, it could not be
without injury to many people, and then when ever it is destroyed, it will
necessarily follow that all those who were injured before, will endeavor to
repair and revenge themselves; which is not to be done without great tumult and
slaughter. But when a Commonwealth is fixed gradually, and by universal consent
of the people, when it comes to be changed, there is no need of disturbing any
body ^lse; for the bare removal of those who are then in authority, will
effectually do the business. Of this sort was the revolution at Rome upon the
translation of the Government from the Kings to the Consuls; and the accident
at Florence in the year 1494, when the Medici were expelled without the least
prejudice to any body else; for they having been advanced by the general vote
of the people, there was no need of doing more than turning them out of the
City. Such mutations are not therefore so dangerous; but those others where
many have been injured, and as many are to be revenged, have been so dreadfully
destructive, that the very History of their consequences is enough to terrify
the Reader; but all Books being full of them, I shall speak no more of them in
this place.

CHAP. VIII.
He who would change the form of a Government, is to consider seriously upon
what grounds he does it, and the disposition of the Subject.
IT has been said before, that an evil disposed Citizen can do no great hurt
but in an ill disposed City, which conclusion (besides my former arguments) is
much fortfied by the examples of Sp^rius Cassius, and Manlius Capitolinus;
Spurius was an ambitious man, and being desirous to procure to himself
extraordinary authority in Rome, by favoring the people in the sale of such
Lands as the Romans had conquered from the Hernici, the Senate discovered it,
and grew so jealous of him, that when in a speech of his to the people he
proffered to give them the money which had been received for corn that the
Senate had sent for out of Sicily, the people absolutely refused it; supposing
that Spurius intended that their liberty should make it good: but had the
people of Rome at that time been corrupt, or ill disposed, they had taken his
money, and opened him a way to the making himself absolute; but the example of
Manlius Capitolinus is greater than this, for by that we may see how the
courage and integrity which he expressed to his Country in their wars against
the Gauls, was afterward clowded and extinguished by an infatiable desire of
authority arising from an emulation of Camillus, whom the Romans had advanced
to a greater degree of honor; and so strangely was he blinded with this
passion, that not considering the state and incorruption of the City, or how
indisposed the people were to any such enterprise, he began to make parties,
and raise tumults in Rome both against the Senate and Laws. In which passage it
was evident how well that Government was constituted, and how well that people
was disposed; for in this case (though the Nobility and he were great friends,
and fierce defenders of one another interest) none of them, nor his very
relations appeared in his behalf; and whereas at other Trials the friends of
the criminal used to accompany him to the Bar in mourning, and with all other
circumstances of sadness that they (...) of, to work (if it were possible) the
Judges to compassion; Manlius went alone, without so much as one friend to
attend him: the Tribunes of the people who were in other things always opposite
to the Nobility, and created on purpose to balance their power; when they found
the design tending to the ruin of them all, they joined heartily with them to
remove so common a destruction: and the people of Rome, who were zealous in any
thing that made for their advantage, and lovers of any thing that crossed the
Nobility, (though they also had their kindness for Manlius;) nevertheless when
the Tribunes cited him, and referred him to the judgment of the people, they
condemned him to death, without any consideration of his former services.
Wherefore I am of opinion, that in the whole tract of this History there is not
an example that with more efficacy demonstrates the justice of that
Commonwealth in all its orders and degrees of men than this; seeing there was
not one Citizen appeared in the defense of Manlius, who was a person of known
virtue and endowments, and had done many honorable things both in public and
private, and the reason was, because the love to their Country had a greater
influence upon them than any other respect; and the consideration of the
present danger of their affairs, being stronger than the memory of his past
merits, they chose to free themselves by decreeing his death. Titus Livius,
tells us, Hunc exitum habuit vir nisi in libera Civitatenatusesset,
memorabilis; This was the end of a man who had been very memorable, had he been
born any where but in a free State. And in his case there are two things very
remarkable; one, that in a corrupt State glory and authority is acquired a
quite contrary way, than where they live exactly according to the true rules of
policy and justice; the other, (not much unlike the former) that men in their
affairs, especially of greatest importance, are to consider the times, and
accommodate thereunto; and those who by the unhappiness of their election, or
their natural inclination do otherwise, live always unfortunately, and are more
unsuccessful in all their enterprises than they who comply with the times. And
doubtless, by the forementioned expression of the Historian, had Manlius been
born in the days of Marius and Sylla, when the Mass was corrupt and depraved,
and susceptible of any form his ambition would have imprinted, he had had the
same success that they had when they aspired to be absolute. So again, had
Marius and Sylla come into the World in the time of Manlius, they had
miscarried as he did, and been lost in their first attempt. For one man by his
ill customs and conversation may indeed give a touch and tincture of corruption
to the people, but it is impossible his life should be long enough to debauch
them so totally that he may expect any advantage of it in his time; or if he
should be so happy, and live long enough to infect a whole City; yet so
impatient are the desires of man, that they cannot restrain their passions, or
attend an opportunity of pursuing them wisely, but they circumvent and delude
themselves in those very things of which they are most eagerly ambitious; so
that sometimes for want of patience, and sometimes for want of judgment they
venture rashly upon things before the matter be prepared, and are ruined in
their designs. He therefore who would alter a Government and set up himself,
must attend till time has corrupted the Mass, and by degrees brought all into
disorder, which of necessity must follow, when it is not (as we said before)
purged and refined by the Examples of good Men or good Laws, that may reduce it
toward its first principles. Manlius then had been a great and memorable
person, had he been born in a corrupt City; for whoever designs any innovation
in a State, whether it be for the restitution of liberty, or the erection of
Tyranny, is particularly to regard the manners of the people, and to consider
how far they are disposed to submit to his ambition; and by so doing he may be
able to judge of the success of his Enterprise. For to endeavor to make a
people free, that are servile in their Nature, is as hard a matter, as to keep
them in servitude, who are disposed to be free. And because we have said
before, That in all their operations men are to consider and proceed according
to the quality of the times, we shall speak of it at large in the following
Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
How he that would succeed, must accommodate to the times.
I Have many times considered with my self that the occasion of every man's good
or bad fortune consists in his correspondence and accommodation with the times.
We see some people acting furiously, and with an impetus; others with more
slowness and caution; and because both in the one and the other they are
immoderate, and do not observe their just terms, therefore both of them do err;
but their error and misfortune is least, whose customs suit and correspond with
the times; and who comports himself in his designs according to the impulse of
his own Nature. Every one can tell how Fabius Maximus conducted his Army, and
with what carefulness and caution he proceeded, contrary to the ancient heat
and boldness of the Romans, and it happened that grave way was more conformable
to those times; for Hanibal coming young and brisk into Italy, and being elated
with his good fortune, as having twice defeated the Armies of the Romans, that
Commonwealth having lost most of her best Soldiers, and remaining in great fear
and confusion, nothing could have happened more seasonably to them, than to
have such a General who by his caution and cunctation could keep the Enemy at a
Bay. Nor could any times have been more fortunate to his way of proceeding; for
that that slow and deliberate way was natural in Fabius, and not affected,
appeared afterward when Scipio being desirous to pass his Army into Africa to
give the finishing blow to the War, Fabius opposed it most earnestly, as one
who could not force or dissemble, his Nature, which was rather to support
wisely against the difficulties that were upon him, than to search out for new.
So that had Fabius directed, Hanibal had continued in Italy, and the reason was
because he did not consider the times were altered, and the method of the War
was to be changed with them: And if Fabius at that time had been King of Rome,
he might well have been worsted in the War, as not knowing how to frame his
Counsels according to the variation of the times. But there being in that
Commonwealth so many brave men, and excellent Commanders of all sorts of
tempers and humors, fortune would have it, That as Fabius was ready in hard
and difficult times, to sustain the Enemy, and continue the War; so afterward
when affairs were in a better posture, Scipio was presented to finish and
conclude it. And hence it is, that an Aristocracy or free State is longer
lived, and generally more fortunate, than a Principality, because in the first
they are more flexible, and can frame themselves better to the diversity of the
times: For a Prince being accustomed to one way, is hardly to be got out of it,
though perhaps the variation of the times require it very much. Piero Soderini
(whom I have mentioned before) proceeded with great gentleness and humanity in
all his actions; and he and his Country prospered whilst the times were
according; but when the times changed, and there was a necessity of laying
aside that meekness and humility, Pi^^ was at a loss, and he and his Country
were both ruined.

Pope Julius XI. during the whole time of his Papacy carried himself with great
vigor and vehemence; and because the times were agreeable, he prospered in
every thing; but had the times altered, and required other Counsels, he had
certainly been ruined, because he could never have complied. And the reason why
we cannot change so easily with the times, is twofold; first, because we cannot
readily oppose our selves against what we naturally desire; and next, because
when we have often tried one way, and have always been prosperous, we can never
persuade our selves that we can do so well any other; and this is the true
cause why a Princes fortune varies so strangely, because she varies the times,
but he does not alter the way of his administrations. And it is the same in a
Commonwealth, if the variation of the times be not observed, and their Laws and
Customs altered accordingly, many mischiefs must follow, and the Government be
ruined, as we have largely demonstrated before; but those alterations of their
Laws are more slow in a Commonwealth, because they are not so easily changed,
and there is a necessity of such times as may shake the whole State, to which
one man will not be sufficient, let him change his proceedings, and take new
measures as he pleases. But because we have mentioned Fabius Maximus, and how
he kept Hanibal at a Bay, I think it not amiss to enquire in the next Chapter
whether a General who is resolved upon any terms to engage, can be obstructed
by the Enemy.

CHAP. X.
A General cannot avoid fighting, when the Enemy is resolved to Engage him upon
any terms.
CNeus Sulpitius Dictator ( says Livy) adversus Gallos bellum trahebat, nolens
se fortunae committere adversus hostem, quem tempus deteriorem indies, and
locus alienus, faceret. Cneus Sulpitius the Dictator declined fighting with the
French, because he would not expose himself unnecessarily against an Enemy, who
by the incommodity of the season, and inconvenience of his Station was every
day in danger to be undone.

When such a fault happens as deceives all, or the greatest part of Mankind, I
think it not improper to reprehend it over and over again; and therefore though
I have formerly in several places shown how much our actions in great things,
are different from those in ancient times; yet I think it not superfluous to
say something of it here.

If in any thing we deviate from the practice of the Ancients, it is in our
Military Discipline, in which we are so absolutely new, that there is scarce
any thing used that was preferred by our Ancestors; and the reason is, because
Commonwealths and Princes, being unwilling to expose themselves to danger, have
shifted off that study and charge upon other people: And when in our times any
Prince goes in person into the field, no extraordinary matter is to be
expected, for he takes the command upon him to show his grandeur and
magnificence, more than for any thing else. Yet they commit fewer faults (by
reviewing their Armies sometimes, and keeping that command in their own hands)
than Republics are wont to do, especially in Italy, where trusting all to
other people, they understand nothing of War themselves; and on the other side,
in their Counsels and determinations (which to show their superiority they
reserve to themselves) they commit a thousand times more errors than in the
field, some of which I have mentioned elsewhere, but I shall speak here of one
of them, and that of more than ordinary importance, when these unactive
Princes, or effeminate Commonwealths send out an Army, the wisest thing which
they think they can give in command to their General, is to enjoin him from
fighting, and above all things to have a care of a Battle, supposing that
therein they imitate the wisdom of Fabius Maximus, who preserved the State, by
deferring the combat; but they are mistaken, and do not consider that most
commonly that injunction is either idle, or dangerous; for this is most
certain, a General who desires to keep the Field, cannot avoid fight when the
Enemy presses, and makes it his business to engage him. So that to command a
General in that Nature, in as much as to bid him fight when the Enemy pleases,
and not when he sees occasion himself. For to keep the field, and avoid
fighting, is to be done no way so securely as by keeping 50 miles off, and
sending out store of Spies and Scouts that may give you notice of the Enemies
approach, and opportunity to retreat. There is another way likewise to secure
your self, and that is to shut your self up in some strong Town, but both the
one and the other are dangerous. In the first case, The Country is exposed to
the depredations of the Enemy, and a generous Prince will sooner run the hazard
of a Battle, than spin out a War with so much detriment to his Subjects. In the
second, your ruin is evident; for cooping up your Army in a City, the Enemy
will block you up, or besiege you, and then the multitude of your men will
quickly bring a scarcity of provisions, and supplies being cut off, you will be
forced to surrender; so that to avoid fighting either of these two ways, is
very pernicious. Fabius his way of standing upon his guard, and keeping his
Army in places of advantage is laudable and good, when your Army is so strong,
that the Enemy dares not attack you: Nor can it be said that Fabius declined
fighting, but that he deferred till he could do it with advantage; for had
Hanibal advanced against him, Fabius would have kept his ground and engaged
him, but Hanibal was too cunning for that; so that Hanibal as well as Fabius
avoided fighting; but if either of them would have fought upon disadvantage the
other had only three remedies; that is, the two foresaid, and flying. That this
which I say is true, is manifest by a thousand examples, but more particularly
by the War which the Romans made upon Philip of Macedon; Philip being invaded
by the Romans, resolved not to come to a Battle; and to avoid it, he (as Fabius
did in Italy) encamped his Army upon the top of a Mountain, and entrenched
himself so strongly, that he believed the Romans durst not have ventured to
come at him: But they not only adventured, but removed him from the Mountain,
forced him to fly with the greatest part of his Army, and had it not been for
the unpassableness of the Country which hindered the pursuit, the Macedonians
had all been cut off. Philip, then, being unwilling to fight, and having (as I
said before) encamped upon the Mountains not far from the Romans, durst not
trust himself to his advantages; and having found by experience that he was not
secure there, he would not pin himself up in a Town, but made choice of the
other way, and kept himself at a distance; so as when the Romans came into one
Province, he would remove into another, and what place soever the Romans left,
he would be sure to come to: At length finding this protraction of the War,
made his affairs but worse, and that his Subjects were harrassed by both
Armies, he resolved to try his fortune, and bring all to the decision of a
Battle: But it is convenient to avoid fighting when your Army is in the same
condition as those of Fabius, and Sulpitius; that is, when it is so
considerable that the Enemy fears to attack you in your entrenchments; and
though he has got some footing in your Country, yet not so much as is able to
supply him with provisions; in this case it is best to decline fighting, and
follow the example of Sulpitius, Nolens se fortunae committere, etc. But in all
other cases it is not to be done, but with dishonor and danger; for to fly (as
Philip did) is as bad as to be routed, and more dishonorable, because he gave
no proof of his courage, and though he escaped by the difficulty of the
Country; yet whoever follows his example without that convenience, may chance
to be ruined. No man will deny but Hanibal was a great Soldier, and of more
than ordinary experience; when he went into Africa against Scipio, if he had
seen it for his advantage to have protracted the War, he would have done it,
and perchance (being a great Captain, and having as good an Army) he would have
done it the same way as Fabius did in Italy; but seeing he did not do it, it is
probable he was diverted by some extraordinary occasion. For that Prince who
has got an Army together, (if he perceives that for want of pay, or supplies,
he is not likely to keep them long) is stark mad if he tries not his fortune
before his Army disbands, for by delaying, he is certainly lost; by fighting he
may possibly overcome: And above all things, whether we are victorious or
beaten, we are to behave ourselves honorably, and it is more honorable to be
overcome by force, than by some error to run your self into incommodities that
ruin you afterward. It Is not unlikely but Hanibal might be impelled by some
such necessity; and on the other side Scipio (if Hanibal should have deferred
fighting) might have chose whether he would have attacked him in his Trenches,
because he had already conquered Syphax, and got such footing in Africa, that
he was as safe, and with as much commodity as in Italy; but it was otherwise
with Hanibal when he had to do with Fabius; and with the French when they had
to do with Sulpitius. And he who invades an Enemies Country, avoids fighting
with more difficulty, as being obliged (when ever the Enemy appears to obstruct
him) to give him Battle; and if he sets down before any Town, he is obliged so
much the more, as in our times it happened to Charles Duke of Burgundy, who was
beaten up in his Leaguer before Morat by the Swizzers, and defeated. And the
same thing fell out to the French at the Seige of Novarra, where they were
attacht and beaten by the Swizzers.

CHAP. XI.
One person that has many Enemies upon his hands, though he be inferior to
them, yet if he can sustain their first impression, carries commonly the
Victory.
THe power of the Tribunes of the people was great and necessary in the City of
Rome to correct the ambition of the Nobility, who otherwise would have
debauched the said City much sooner than they did: But as it happens in other
things, so it happened in this; in the best and most beneficial thing to the
Commonwealth, there was an occult, and remote evil that lay snug, which
required new Laws, and new methods to suppress. For the insolence of the
Tribunitial authority grew so great, that it became terrible both to the Senate
and people, and had doubtlesly produced some great mischief to the
Commonwealth, had not Appius Claudius by his great wisdom, found out a way to
temper and balance their fury, by the intercession of their Colleagues, and
the way was by choosing out some person among the Tribunes, whom either out of
fear, or corruption, or love to his Country they could dispose to withstand the
designs of his Brethren, and oppose himself against them, whenever their
resolutions were tending to the diminution of the Nobility, or prejudice of the
State. Which way of restraining the petulancy of the Tribunes was for a long
time of great advantage to the Romans, and may give us occasion to consider,
whether a combination of several great persons, against one less powerful than
they (whilst united) is like to be successful against him that is alone; or
whether the single person has the advantage against the Confederacy. I answer,
That those whose Forces are united, are many times stronger, but their
performances are seldom so great, as the single persons, though he be nothing
so strong, for committing an infinite number of other things (in which the
single person has the advantage) he will be able with a little industry to
break, and divide and enfeeble them: To this purpose there is no need of going
to antiquity for examples (where there is plenty enough) the passages of our
own times will furnish us sufficiently. In the year 1484, all Italy
confederated against the Venetian, who, when they were so over-powr'd and
distressed that they were unable to keep the field, found a way to work off
Count Lodavic (Governor of Milan) from their League, by which means they not
only obtained a Peace, and restitution of what they had lost; but they got a
good part of the Duchy of Ferrara; so that they whose Forces were too weak to
appear before the Enemy; when they came to treat, were the greatest gainers by
the War. Not many years since, the whole Christian world seemed to conspire
against France; yet before the end of the War, the Spaniard fell off from the
League, made his Peace with the French, and forced the rest of the
Confederates, one after one, to do the same. And from hence we may easily
collect that as often as many Princes or States are confederated together
against any single Prince or Commonwealth, if the single Prince and
Commonwealth be strong enough to withstand their first impression, and spin out
the War, he will certainly prevail; but if his force be not sufficient to do
that, he is in extraordinary danger, as it happened to the Venetians; for had
they been able to have sustained their first shock, and protracted the War,
till they had debauched some of the Confederates, the French had never done
them so much mischief, and they had preserved themselves from ruin: But their
Army being too weak to confront them, and their time too little to divide them,
they were undone; and this is evident by what happened afterward; for as soon
as the Pope had recovered what he had lost, he reconciled himself, and became
their friend; the Spaniard did the same, and both of them would have been glad
to have continued Lombardy to the Venetians, rather than the French should have
got it, and made himself so considerable in Italy. The Venetians at that time
might have prevented a great part of their calamities, had they given some
small part of their Territory to the Enemy, and thereby have secured the rest;
but then they must have given it in time, and so as it might not have appeared
to have been done by necessity, as they might well have done before the War was
commenced; when that was begun, it would have been dishonorable, and perhaps
ineffectual. But before those troubles, there were few of the Venetian Citizens
that could foresee a danger; fewer that could remedy it; and none at all that
could advise. To conclude therefore this Chapter, I do pronounce, that as the
Roman remedy against the ambition of their Tribunes, was the multitude of them,
out of which they always found some or other, that they could make for the
interest of the Public; so it is a ready remedy for any Prince that is engaged
against a confederate Enemy, when he can break their League, and work any of
the Confederates to a separation.

CHAP. XII.
A wise General is to put a necessity of fighting upon his own Army, but to
prevent it to his Enemies.
WE have formerly discoursed of what use and importance necessity is in humane
Exploits, and shown how many men, compelled by necessity, have done glorious
things, and made their memories immortal. Moral Philosophers have told us, That
the Tongue, and the Hands are noble Instruments of themselves; yet they had
never brought things to that exactness and perfection, had not necessity
impelled them. The Generals therefore of old, understanding well the virtue of
this necessity; and how much more desperate and obstinate their Soldiers were
rendered thereby, made it their care to bring their Soldiers into a necessity
of fighting, and to keep it from their Enemies; to which end, they many times
opened a passage for the Enemies Army, which they might easily have obstructed;
and precluded it to their own, when they might as easily have passed. Whoever
therefore, desires to make his Garrison stout and courageous, and obstinate for
the defense of a Town, or to render his Army pertinacious in the Field, is
above all things to reduce them into such a necessity, or at least to make them
believe it: So that a wise General, who designs the besieging of a Town, judges
of the easiness or difficulty of the expugnation, from the necessity which lies
upon the Citizens to defend themselves: If the necessity of their defense be
great, his enterprise is the more difficult, because the courage and obstinacy
of the besieged is like to be the greater; but where there is no such
necessity, there is no such danger. Hence it is that revolted Towns are much
harder to be recovered, than they were to be taken at first; for at first
having committed no fault, they were in fear of no punishment, and therefore
surrendered more easily: But in the other case having the guilt of their defect
up their Spirits, they are fearful of revenge, and so become more obstinate in
their defense. These are not unusual, and yet there are other causes which
render the minds of people obstinate in their defense, and one of them is the
natural hatred and animosity which is frequently betwixt neighboring Princes
and States, which proceeds from an infatiable desire of Dominion in Princes,
and as zealous an inclination to liberty in Commonwealths, especially if they
be constituted as in Tuscany, where that emulation and jealousy has made them
refractory both on the one side, and the other. Hence it is, though that the
Florentines have been at greater charges than the Venetians, yet their acquests
are not so much, because the Towns in Tuscany were most of them free, and by
consequence more difficult to be brought to subjection; whereas the Towns which
the Venetians conquered, having been most of them under Princes, and accustomed
to servitude, it was indifferent to them under whose dominion they were; and
they are so far from resisting a change, that they do many times desire it. So
that though the Cities upon the Frontiers of the Venetian, were generally
stronger, than those upon the Frontiers of the Florentine, yet they were
reduced with more ease; because being not so free, they were less obstinate in
their defense: when therefore, a wise General resolves upon a Siege, he is with
all diligence to take away that necessity from the Citizens which may make them
inflexible, either by promising indemnity, if they have deserved to be
punished; or if it be only their liberty of which they are fearful, by assuring
them that his designs are not against that, but only against the ambition and
exorbitancy of some particular persons; which kind of promises had strange
effects in the facilitating of Enterprises, and the taking of Towns; for though
wise men will easily discover the fraud, yet the multitude are commonly so
impatient of War, and so mad to be at quiet, that they shut their Eyes against
any thing of mischief that comes to them under propositions of peace; by which
means many Cities have lost their liberty, as it happened to Florence not long
since; and to M. Crassus and his Army heretofore, who though he was sensible
that the promises of the Parthians were fraudulent, and made only to keep his
Soldiers from that necessity of defending themselves, yet he could not convince
them, nor prevail with them to stand bravely upon their Guard, but being
blinded with their overtures of Peace, both Army and General were cut off, as
may be seen by the History. The Samnites, put on by the ambition of some of
their Citizens, brake their Peace with the Romans, and invaded their Country;
but being afterward sensible of what they had done, they sent Ambassadors to
Rome offering restitution of what they had taken, and to deliver up the Authors
of that Counsel into their hands, ^o be punished as they pleased; but being
rejected, and their Ambassadors sent home without any hopes of agreement,
Pontius their General used it as an argument to encourage his men to fight more
obstinately, that the Romans having refused their fair overtures of Peace, were
resolved upon War; and therefore there was no other course, but of necessity
they must fight. And (says he) Iustum est bellum, quibus est necessarium and
pia arma, quibus nulla nisi in armis spes est. That Wur is just that is
necessary, and Arms are piously taken up by him, who has no other hopes to
secure himself. Upon which necessity he founded the hopes of his Victory. C.
Manlius was at the head of an Army against the Vejentes, and part of the Army
of the Vejentes being got into his Camp Manlius to cut of their retreat,
doubled his Guards at the gates, and fortified all the Passes by which they
were to return; but the Vejentes perceiving they were desperate, fought with so
much courage and fury, that they killed the Consul, and had cut off his whole
Army, had not one of the Tribunes very wisely opened them a way to be gone: In
which action we may observe that whilst the Vejentes were under a necessity of
fighting, there was no resisting of their courage; but when a way was opened
for their retreat, they chose rather to fly. The Volsci and the Equi were
entered upon the confines of the Romans, who sent their Consuls against them
with an Army: and coming to a Battle, it happened that in the heat of it, the
Volsci were enclosed by the Romans, and as it were shut up in their own Camp.
Vettius Mescins their General, finding their exigence, and that there was a
necessity of being killed; or making their way by the Sword, Ite mecum (says he
to his Soldiers) Non murus, nonvallum, armati armatis obstant, virtute pares,
(quae ultimum and maximum telum est) necessitate superiores estis. Follow me
then courageously, you have no Wall, no Rampart, nothing but armed men to
withstand you: you are equal to them in valor, and being under necessity, have
the same advantage of the Weapon. For Livy calls it in this place the highest
and heaviest of weapons.

Camillus one of the wisest of all the Roman Generals (having stormed and
entered Veii with some part of his Army) to facilitate his Victory, and take
away from the Enemy that last necessity of fighting; gave Orders (and so loud
that the Vejentes might be sure to hear) that no Soldier should dare to touch
any man who had thrown down his Army, by which Proclamation every man was
encouraged to throw down his Arms, and the City was taken with so little loss,
that since that time, that Stratagem has been used by several Commanders.

CHAP. XIII.
Whether we are more safe in a good General with a bad Army, or a good Army
with a bad General.
MArtius Coriolanus being banished from Rome, retired to the Volsci, where
having got an Army together, he returned to Rome to revenge himself for the
injury his fellow Citizens had done him, and he had done it effectually, had
not the Prayers and Piety of his Mother prevailed more upon him, than all the
power of the Romans. From which passage Titus Livius observes, that the Roman
Commonwealth increased more by the virtue of their Commanders, than by the
excellence of their Soldiers; because though the Volsci had been always beaten
before; yet when they got a Roman General, they were too hard for the Romans:
But though Livy was of that opinion in that place, yet in many parts of his
History there are instances, where the private Soldiers have done great things,
and sometimes fought better and in better order, after their Consuls were
killed, than they had done whilst they were living. Thus it happened in the
Army which the Romans had in Spain under the Command of the two Scipio's,
which, when both their Commanders were slain, behaved it self so well, that it
not only defended it self, but defeated the Enemy, and preserved that Province
to the Romans, So that in the whole, there are examples on both sides, where
the Soldiers have done bravely, and got the Victory by their valor, and where
the Conduct of the General has done as much as a whole Army; from whence it may
be concluded that they are mutually useful, and that the Soldier is as much
advantaged by the excellence of his General, as the General by the courage of
his Army. However, this I think will not be unworthy our consideration, whether
is most formidable, a good Army under a bad Commander, or a good Commander with
a bad Army: In the opinion of Caesar neither of them was considerable; for when
he went into Spain against Afranius and Petreius, who had a good Army under
their command, he went with much confidence; because, as he said himself, Ibat
ad exercitum sine duce, He went against an Army without a head; reflecting
thereby upon the insufficiency of their Generals. Again when he went into
Thessaly against Pompey, his expression was Vado an ducem fine Exercitu. I go
now against a General without an Army. It remains now that we consider whether
it be most easy for a good Captain to make a good Army, or a good Army to make
a good Captain. But to this, in my opinion, it is easily answered; for many
good men in an Army can sooner select one out of their number, and instruct him
so, as that he may be fit to command the rest, than the best General in the
world can make an Army expert and ready. Lucullus when he was sent against
Mithridates, was utterly unexperienced in matters of War, yet being in a good
Army, where his inferior Officers were good, he quickly became a good General.
The Romans for want of men, were forced to arm their Servants, and having
referred them to be disciplined by Sempronius Gracc^us, in a short time he made
them excellent Soldiers. Pelopidas and Epominandas after they had rescued their
Country from the Tyranny of the Spartans, in a short time made their
Countrymen so good Soldiers, that they were not only able to contend, but to
conquer the Spartans. So that the case is equal, and which soever is good, may
make the other so too. Nevertheless a good Army, without a good Commander,
grows insolent and dangerous, as it happened in the Macedonian Army after
Alexander was dead, and as it is in civil Wars among all old Soldiers; so that
I think if there be more confidence to be reposed in the one than in the other,
it is to be rather in the General, than the Army, especially if he has time to
instruct and discipline his Men; for an Army without a head, is insolent and
mutinous. Those Captains therefore are worthy of double honor, who have not
only the Enemy to overcome; but are to instruct, and prepare their Forces,
before they bring them to engage. And in doing so, they do highly recommend the
Conduct of their General, which is so rare a thing, that if the trouble were
laid upon many, they would be much less esteemed and respected than they are
now.

CHAP. XIV.
What strange effects new inventions have sometimes in a Battle, and how new
Noises have the same.
WHat strange consequences have succeeded from sudden and unexpected accidents
that have been seen or heard in the heat of the Battle, appears by several
examples in History, but especially in the conflict betwixt the Romans and the
Volsci, where Quintius observing one of the wings of his Army to stagger and
give ground, cried out to them to stand firm, for that in the other wing the
Victory was theirs; with which words he not only reincouraged his own men, but
put such a terror upon the Enemy, that they fled in good earnest. And if in a
well ordered Army those unexpected vociferations have such wonderful effect, in
a tumultuous and ill governed Army they have much more, where everything is
more subject to the agitation of such winds* and of this we have a memorable
example of our times. The City of Perugia not many years since was divided into
two parts, the Oddi, and the Baglioni. The Baglioni prevailing, the Oddi were
banished. But the Oddi having got an Army together, and brought them privately
to a place not far from Perugia, by the favor of their friends they were let
one night into the Town, and possessed themselves as far as the Piazza. And
because the Streets were chained up from one side to other to hinder the
passage of the Horse, the Oddesche had a man who went before them with a great
engine of Iron wherewith he brake the chains, and he had done his work so
effectually, that he had broke all the chains, but what opened into the Piazza
the alarm being taken, and every body crying out Arm, Arm, he who broke down
the chains being pressed so close by the throng that was behind him, that he
had not room for his blow, cried out to those that were next Back, Back,
intending only to have made more room for his arm: But they who were next him
calling back to those who were behind them, by degress the word went through
the whole Army, and they who were in the Rear not knowing the reason, began to
run, and being followed by those who were next, the whole Army retreated by
little and little, till at last they brake out into an absolute flight, by
which inconsiderable accident, the Oddi were defeated of their design. So that
it is to be considered, that in a Battle, order is not only to be taken that
the Army be well drawn up, and put in a good posture to fight; but that no such
trifling accident be able to discompose it: For if for any thing the popular
multitude be unfit for the Wars, it is because every noise, rumor, or alarm,
distracts them, and puts them to the rout. Wherefore it ought to be a principal
care in a good General to appoint such persons as are to receive all orders and
words of command, and derive them to the rest, that by so doing the Soldiers
being accustomed to their Officers, may not receive any such orders, but from
such persons as are commissioned thereunto, the want of which custom has many
times produced very great confusion. As to apparitions, and such things as are
many times seen, it is the part of a good General, to contrive and exhibit (in
the very height of the Battle) such sights as may encourage his own men, and
discourage the Enemy; for among many accidents which conduce to your victory,
this may be especially effectual. To this purpose is that invention of which
Sulpitius made use against the French; being drawn up, and ready to engage the
Enemy, he caused all the Servants and refuse of his Army to be armed and
mounted upon the Mules and Horses belonging to the Baggage; and having
furnished them so formally with Colors and Trumpets that they appeared a
complete body of Horse, he disposed them behind a hill, where they were to
continue, till in the heat of the fight, they were to come forth and show
themselves to the Enemy; which stratagem being as well executed as devised,
struck such a terror into the French, that it lost them the day. So that a good
General has a double care upon him, to contrive by these new surprises to
intimidate the Enemy; and to provide that if any such practices be used upon
him, he may discover, and defeat them. Thus an Indian King served Semiramis,
who observing the said King to be very strong in the number of Elephants, to
fright and persuade him that she was as strong as he, she caused several of her
Camels to be dressed up, and covered with the Skins of Bufaloes and Bulls, that
they might look big, and carry the representation of Elephants; and having done
so, she marched them in the Van of her Army, but her design did not take; for
the King having intelligence of it, perverted it into her prejudice.

The Fidenates being besieged by Mamorcus the dictator, to terrify the Roman
Army contrived to have several of the Townsmen in the heat of the Engagement to
come suddenly out of the Town with Fireworks at the end of their Lances,
hoping that the newness of the sight might be a means to disturb them. And hear
it is to be noted, that when such stratagems have more of reality than
pretense, they may very well be made use of, because having something of
solidity in them, their weakness is not so soon discovered, but where they have
more of appearance and fiction than truth, it is best either not to use them at
all, or if you do, to keep them at such a distance, as that their fallacy may
not be discerned; as Sulpitius did with his Muletiers; for when they are
intrinsically weak, their vanity appears upon their approach, and they do more
mischief than good, as the Elephants of Semiramis, and the false fires of the
Fidenates, which fires though at first, they gave some disturbance to the Roman
Soldiers; yet the Dictator coming in, and questioning them aloud whether they
were not ashamed to be smoaked like Bees out of their Huts; encouraging them to
turn again, he cried out, Suis flammis delete Fedenas quos vestris beneficiis
placare non potuistis, Go to, destroy the Fidenae with their own fires, seeing
all your kindnesses have not been able to oblige them; and by so doing, he
defeated the Fidenates, and made their project unprofitable.

CHAP. XV.
One General is best for an Army, and that to govern it by Commissioners, is
not so good.
THe Fidenates having rebelled, and cut off that Colony of the Romans that was
amongst them, the Romans created four Tribunes, and invested with Consulary
power, whereof one being left behind for the security of the City of Rome, the
other three were sent against the Fidenates and Veientes; but disagreeing among
themselves, they came off with dishonor, though their loss was not much: That
they gained no more honor, they may thank themselves; that they received no
more loss, they may thank their good Soldiers. However the Romans finding the
inconvenience, returned to their old way of Dictators, that what three persons
had disordered, might be remedied by one. From whence we may discern the
inconvenience of many Commanders either in an Army or Town, which Livy has
expressed very clearly in these following words, Tres Tribuni potestate
Consulari, documento fuere, quam plurium imperium bello inutile esset, tenendo
ad sua quisque Consilia, cum alii aliud videretur, apperuerunt ad occasionem
locum hosti; These three Tribunes with Consular power, gave us to understand
the uselesness of multiplicity of Commanders, for each of them adhering to his
own Counsels, whilst one was for one thing, and another as positive for
another, nothing was done, and they gave the enemy an advantage. And though
this be example enough to prove the inconvenience of many Commanders, yet for
better illustration I shall add some others both ancient and modern. In the
year 1500 King Lewis XII of France having retaken Milan, sent his Army to Pisa
to recover it for the Florentines; who to command it had sent thither two
Commissaries, one of them called Giovan-battista Ridolsi, and the other Luca d'
Antonio de gli Albizzi. Giovan-battista was a person of reputation and gravity,
and being ancienter than Luca, Luca left the whole administration to him; but
though he showed no ambition in opposing him; he did it abundantly by his
silence, and fullenness; neglecting, and undervaluing every thing that was
done; so that he was so far from assisting his Colleague either with his
counsel or person, that he appeared as if he had been utterly ignorant in
matters of war: but it proved otherwise afterward, when upon some accident
Giovan-battista was recalled, and Luca remained behind with absolute Command;
for then he gave ample testimony both of his courage and conduct, which before,
whilst he had a Colleague, no body could have believed. To this purpose I shall
add another saying of Livy, who giving an account how Quintius and Agrippa (his
Colleague) being sent against the Aequi, Agrippa would needs have the whole
management of the war to be committed to Quintius, for (says he) Saluberrimum
in administratione magnarum rerum est, summam imperii apud unum esse; In the
administration of great affairs it is best that the Sovereign power be invested
in one person. Which is contrary to the present practice of our Princes and
States, who do often depute more than one Commander both to their Armies and
Towns; which (however they think it for the best) must needs breed
inconceivable confusion. And if the cause of the ruin of so many Italian and
French Armies in our times, be enquired into, it will be found to be the
multitude, and emulation of their Commanders, and it be may safely concluded,
that it is better to send a man of ordinary prudence, and experience, upon any
expedition, than two of the wisest and best Soldiers they have, with equal
commission.

CHAP. XVI.
That in times of difficulty, virtue is in esteem; in times of ease and luxury,
men of riches and alliance are in greatest request.
IT always was, and always will be the fortune of persons of more than ordinary
endowments, to be laid aside and neglected in times of peace, especially in a
Commonwealth; for that envy which is contracted by their virtue, sets up many
Citizens against them, who will not only be their equals, but superiors. To
this purpose Thucidides (a Greek author) has a place in his History, where he
shows how the Republic of Athens, having had the better in the Peloponesian
War, depressed the pride of the Spartans, and subdued the greatest part of
Greece, was so inhansed and elated with their success, that it was proposed to
fall upon Sicily.

It was seriously debated in Athens whether the said enterprise should be
undertaken or not; Alcibiades and other Citizens of his party promoted it
highly, not so much in respect of the public good as their own private
advantage, expecting that the management of that war would be placed in their
hands. But Nicias (a person of the greatest reputation in Athens) dissuaded it;
and his great argument to make the People believe he spoke his judgment, and
more for the benefit of the Commonwealth than any interest of his own, was,
that he advised rather contrary to his own advantage, because in time of peace
there were many of his fellow Citizens before him, but in time of war he knew
he should be the first: by which we may see it has been an ancient infirmity in
Commonwealths not to value persons of worth in time of peace, which disobliges
them doubly; to see themselves deprived of their dignities, and to see others
preferred to them of less sufficiency than they, which error has been the
occasion of much confusion; for those persons who find themselves neglected,
and know the reason of all is, the tranquillity of the times, make it their
business to embroil them, and put their Country upon war, though never so much
to its prejudice. And thinking sometimes with my self what remedies were most
proper, I could light but on two, one was to keep the Citizens from growing too
rich, that wealth without virtue might not be sufficient to advance any man, or
able to corrupt other people, or themselves: the other, so to prepare and adapt
themselves for war, that they may never be surprised, but have always
employment forth bravest of their Citizens, as Rome had in the time of her
prosperity. For that City having Armies always abroad, there was constant
exercise for the virtue of their Citizens: nor could a man of worth be
degraded, nor an improper man be preferred in his place, because when ever such
a thing was done, (whether by way of error or experiment, it was the same) the
disorders and dangers which followed, were so sudden and great, that they
quickly found their mistake, and returned to their old method again. But other
Cities and States not so well constituted as that, which make war only in cases
of necessity, cannot defend themselves from those inconveniences but are always
in trouble and disorder, when ever that excellent Citizen which is neglected is
vindicative, and has any reputation or part in the City. And though for some
time Rome kept her self free from these inconveniences, yet after she had
conquered Carthage and Antiochus, (as has been said before) and seemed to be
past all fear of war for the future, she chose several Commanders for her Army,
not so much for their conduct or virtue, as for those qualities which were
likely to recommend them to the people. Paulus Aemilius stood many times for
the Consulship, and was repulsed; nor could he ever be made Consul till the
Macedonian war, which was committed unanimously to his conduct, because they
saw it was like to be dangerous and difficult. After the year 1494 our City of
Florence being engaged in several wars* in which none of our Citizens had
performed any great matter, at last the City happened upon a person who showed
them after what manner an Army was to be commanded, his name was Antonio
Giacomini; whilst the war was dangerous, and there was any trouble or
difficulty to manage it, Antonio was free from the ambition of his fellow
Citizens, and had no competitor in his election to be Commissary, and General
of their Armies: but when those were past, and new wars that were more easy
and honorable were to be undertaken, he had so many competitors, that when
three Commissaries were to be chosen for the reduction of Pisa, Antonio could
not obtain to be one: and though it be not manifest what inconveniences
accrewed to the Commonwealth by the waving of Antonio, yet it may be easily
conjectured, for the Pisans being distressed for want of provisions, and having
nothing left wherewithal to defend themselves, (had Antonio been there) would
have been forced to have surrendered at discretion; but being besieged by such
Officers as knew not how to streighten or press them, they held out so long,
that the Florentines were glad to buy them out at last, whereas they might as
well have had them by force. No question but Antonio resented it highly, and he
had need be a good man, and of more than ordinary patience not to think of
revenging himself, though with the subversion of the whole City, (if he could)
and the ruin of every private Citizen, which is to be carefully prevented by
every State, as shall be shown in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XVII.
A man is not to be disobliged, and employed afterward in any matter of
importance.
A Commonwealth is diligently to provide that no Citizen be entrusted in any
weighty affair, who has received any remarkable injury; Claudius Nero (who
divided the Army which was designed to confront Hanibal, and marched away with
a strong party into la Mara to join with the other Consul, and engage Asdrubal
before he got up with his supplies to Hanibal) having formerly commanded the
Roman Army in Spain against the said Asdrubal, had come off with dishonor; for
though he had enclosed Asdrubal and his whole Army, and so possessed himself of
all passes, that he must either fight with disadvantage, or perish with hunger,
yet he was over-reached with the subtilty of the Carthaginian, who drilled him
on with pretended overtures of peace, till at length in the night he stole his
Army through the woods, and got of where he was safe. This passage being known
in Rome, was no small diminution to Nero's reputation both with the Senate and
the People: but being afterward made Consul, and sent with an Army against
Hanibal, he ventured upon that desperate counsel of dividing the Army, which
was a thing so doubtful and uncertain in the opinion of the Romans, that the
City was in strange anxiety and suspense till they had the news of his Victory.
It is reported that when Claudius Nero was questioned afterward by his friends
what it was that moved him to so hazardous an enterprise, in which, without
necessary provocation, he had ventured the whole liberty of their Country, he
answered, he had done it, because he knew if he succeeded, he should recover
that honor which he had lost in Spain; if he miscarried, and his design should
have a contrary end, he should have had the satisfaction to have been revenged
of the City and Citizens, by whom he had been so ingratefully, and so
indiscreetly calumniated. And if the indignation arising from these kind of
provocations could work so strongly upon a Roman Citizen, in those times when
Rome was in its innocence; we may easily imagine what prodigious effects it may
have upon persons in a City not so well constituted as that; and because
against these kind of disorders (to which all Commonwealths are subject) no
certain remedy can be prescribed, it follows that no Commonwealth can be
possibly perpetual, forasmuch as a thousand unexpected accidents fall in, to
hasten its destruction.

CHAP. XVIII.
Nothing is more honorable in a General, than to foresee the Designs of his
Enemy.
IT was the saying of Epaminondas the Theban, that no one quality was more
useful and necessary in a General, than to be able to know the resolutions and
designs of his Enemy, and discover that by conjecture, which he could not do by
any certain intelligence. Nor is it difficult only to understand his designs,
but his actions; and of those actions not only such as are performed privately,
or at a distance, but such as are done (as it were) before his Face. For it
many times falls out, that when a Battle continues till night, he who has the
better, believes he has the worst; and who has lost all, supposes he has the
Victory. Which mistakes has put the Generals many times upon pernicious
counsels, as it happened betwixt Brutus and Cassius; for Brutus having defeated
the Enemy with his Wing. Cassius supposing he had been lost, and his whole Body
dispersed, killed himself in despair. In our times, at the Battle of S. Cilicia
in Lombardy, Francis King of France coming to an engagement with the Swizzers,
the Fight continued till night: a body of the Swizzers remaining entire, and
hearing nothing of the defeat and execution of their Comrades, concluded the
Victory was theirs, which error was the occasion that they marched not off as
they might have done, but kept their ground till the next morning, at which
time they were charged again, and overthrown.

The same error had almost ruined the Armies of the Pope and King of Spain, who
upon a false alarm of the Victory of the Swizzers, passed the Po, and advanced
so far, that ere they were aware they had like to have fallen into the mouths
of the victorious French. The like fell out of old in the Camps of the Romans
and Aequi; Sempronius the Consul being commanded out with an Army against the
enemy, and forcing him to a Battle, it continued till night without any visible
advantage on either side. Night coming on, and both Armies sufficiently spent,
neither of them retired to their Camps, but betook themselves to the
neighboring hills, where they believed they should be more safe. The Roman
Army divided into two parts, one went with the Consul, and the other with
Tempanius the Centurion, by whose courage the Roman Army was preserved that
day. The next morning the Consul hearing no more of the enemy, retreated
toward Rome; the Aequi with their Army did the same, for both of them though
they had been beaten, and marched away without regarding the loss or plunder of
their Camps* it happened that Tempanius being behind with his squadron, and
marching off as the rest, he took certain of the wounded Aequi prisoners, who
informed him that their Generals were gone out of the field, and had quitted
their Camps. Upon enquiry finding it to be true, he entered into the Roman, and
secured it, but the enemies Camp was given in prey to the Soldier, after which
he returned with Victory to Rome, which Victory consisted only in having the
first intelligence of the enemies disorder: from whence it is observable that
two Armies engaged, may be each of them in the same distress and despair, and
that that Army goes away with the Victory which has first notice of the
necessities of the other, and of this I shall give a pregnant example of late
days, and at home. In the year 1498 the Florentines had a great Army in the
Country of Pisa, and had besieged that City very close. The Venetian having
undertaken its protection, and seeing no other way to relieve it; to divert the
enemy, and remove the war, they resolved to invade the Territory of the
Florentine; to which purpose they raised a strong Army, marched into their
Country by the Val di Lamona, possessed themselves of the Town of Marradi, and
besieged the Castle of Castiglione which stands above upon an hill. The
Florentines upon the alarm resolved to relieve Maradi, and yet not weaken their
Army before Pisa, whereupon they raised a new Army both Horse and Foot, and
sent them thither under the Command of Iacopo Quarto Appiano (Lord of Piombino)
and the Count Rinuccio da Marciano. The Florentine Army being conducted to the
hills, the Venetian raised his siege before Castiglione, and retreated into the
Town: the Armies being in this posture, and facing one another for several
days, both of them suffered exceedingly for want of all manner of Provisions;
at length neither of them being very earnest to come to a Battle, and each of
them being ignorant of the others distress, they resolved the next morning to
break up their Camp, and each of them to retire, the Venetian toward
Berzighella and Faenza, and the Florentine toward Casaglia and Mugello. The
morning being come, and the Baggage sent away before, a poor Woman happened to
come into the Florentine Camp, from Marradi to see some of her Relations who
were in the service of the Florentine: by this Woman the Florentine Generals
had notice that the Venetians were gone; whereupon reassuming their courage,
they altered their counsels, pursued the enemy, and writ Letters to Florence,
that they had not only beaten the Venetians, but made an end of the War. Which
Victory proceeded from nothing but because they had the first news of the
retreat of the Enemy, which if it had come to the other side, as it did to
them, the consequence would have been the same, and the Florentines have been
beaten.

CHAP. XIX.
Whether for the Government of the multitude, obsequiousness and i^dulgence be
more necessary than punishment.
THe Roman Commonwealth was perplexed with the dissentions betwixt the
Nobility, and the people; nevertheless, their foreign Wars requiring it, they
sent forth with their Armies, Quintius and Appius Claudius: Appius being rough,
and cruel in his commands, was so ill obeyed by his Soldiers, that he was
defeated, and fled out of his Province. Quintius being more gentle and benign,
was better obeyed, and carried the Victory where he was; from whence it appears
more conducing to the well governing of a multitude, to be rather obliging,
than proud, and pitiful, than cruel. However Cornelius Tacitus tells us, (and
many others are of his mind) In multitudine regend^ plus paena quam obsequium
valet, That to the managing of a multitude, severity is more requisite than
mildness. And I think both may be true to his distinction, of Companions and
Subjects; if those under your command be Companions and fellow Citizens with
you, you cannot securely use them with that severity, of which Tacitus speaks;
for the people of Rome having equal authority with the Nobility, was not to be
used ruggedly by any man that was put over them for but a while. And it has
been many times seen that the Roman Generals, who behaved themselves amicably
toward their Soldiers, and governed them with mildness, have done greater
things than those who used them with austerity, and kept them in perpetual
fear, unless they were endued with more than ordinary virtue, like Manlius
Torquatus. But he whose command is over his Subjects, (of whom Cornelius
speaks) is to have a care they grow not insolent, and contemn him for his
easiness, and there, is rather to use severity than gentleness with them; yet
that is to be done (too) with such moderation, that they may be kept from
abhorring him; for the hatred of the Subject is never good for a Prince, and
the best way to prevent it, is by not interrupting the Subject in the quiet
enjoyment of his Estate; for blood (unless there be some design of rapacity
under it) no Prince does desire it, but upon some extraordinary necessity, and
that necessity happens but seldom. But when cruelty and rapine meet together in
the nature of one person, there never wants desire, nor pretenses for cruelty,
as I have demonstrated largely in another Treatise upon this occasion. Quintius
therefore deserved more praise than Appius deserved: and the saying of Tacitus
is true enough with the aforesaid restriction, but not in the case of Appius:
and because I have spoken of kindness and severity, I will give you one
example, how mildness prevailed more upon the Falisci than violence could do.

CHAP. XX.
One instance of humanity wrought more upon the Falisci, than all the force of
the Romans.
CAmillus having besieged the Falisci, and attempted many things against them
but in vain, a Schoolmaster who had the tuition of several of the principal
young Gentlemen of that City, thinking to gratify Camillus, and ingratiate
with the people of Rome, carrying them out of the walls, under pretense of
exercise and recreation, he conveyed them all into the Camp of Camillus, and
presenting them to him, told him, that by their means he might become Master of
the Town: Camillus was so far from accepting his present, that he caused the
Paedagogue to be stripped, and his hands tied behind him, and then putting a rod
into every one of the young Gentlemen's hands, he caused them scourge him back
again into the Town: which piece of humanity and justice when the Citizens
understood, they resolved to defend themselves no longer, and so immediately
surrendered: a great example doubtless, and by which we may learn, that many
times kindness and generosity moves an Enemy more than all the force and
artifice of war; for it is frequently seen that those Provinces and Cities which
no violence or stratagem have subdued, have been melted and wrought upon by one
single act of pity, chastity, or liberality: and of this History is full of
many other examples besides. Pyrrhus could not be got out of Italy by all the
power of the Romans; and yet Fabritius sent him packing by one act of
generosity, and that was giving him notice that some of his intimates would
poison him, and had made overtures to the Romans to that purpose. Again, Scipio
Africanus got not so much honor by the taking of Carthage, as he did by one
act of chastity, when he sent home a young beautiful Lady (that was taken
prisoner, and presented to him) untouched to her Husband; for at the news of
that one act, all Spain was astonished, and began to admire the virtue and
innocence of the Romans, which virtue is a thing so universally celebrated,
that there are no great persons endued with it, but are highly esteemed by all
people, as appears by all Ethics, Politics, and History, among which, the
History of Xenophon is abundantly copious, in demonstrating what Honors and
what Victories accrewed to Cyrus upon the bare account of his affability and
mildness; and how he was never guilty of the least pride, or cruelty, or
luxury, or any other vice that defiles the conversation of man. Nevertheless,
seeing Hanibal did the same things, and by a contrary way, it will not be amiss
in the next Chapter to enquire the reason.

CHAP. XXI.
How it came to pass that Hanibal by methods quite contrary to what were
practiced by Scipio, did the same things in Italy that the other did in Spain.
I Doubt not but it may seem strange to some people, that other Captains who
have taken a quite contrary way to what is prescribed in my last Chapter,
should notwithstanding have had the same success; for from thence it seems to
follow, that Victory does not depend either upon humanity or justice, when we
see the same praise and reputation acquired by quite contrary habits: and to
prove this, we need not go far for examples, the same Scipio whom we mentioned
before, being with an Army in Spain, carried himself with so much piety, and
justice, and liberality to all people, that he got the love of the whole
Province: on the other side we see Hanibal in Italy acting quite contrary, and
with violence, cruelty, rapine, and all manner of infidelity persecuting the
people, and yet with the same laudable effects as Scipio had in Spain. And
considering with my self what might be the reason, they seemed to me to be
several. The first is, because men are studious of novelty, and that not only
those who are under slavery or subjection, but those who are free, and in
peace; for (as is said before) men are as well satiated with happiness, as
afflicted with misery.

This desire (therefore) of change opens a door to any man that invades a
Province with any considerable force: if he be a foreigner, they all follow
after him, if a native, they attend him, assist him, and encourage him: so that
let him take which way he pleases, he must needs make great progress in those
places. Again, people are generally excited two ways, either by love, or by
fear; so that he that is feared, is often times as readily obeyed as he that is
beloved, and sometimes more. It is not material therefore to a Commander which
of these two ways he takes; for if he be a virtuous person, and of any
extraordinary faculties, he will be admired by the people, as Hanibal and
Scipio were, whose great worth effaced, or covered all the faults that they
committed. But in either of these two ways, great inconveniences may arise, and
such as may ruin a Prince. For he who desires to be beloved, upon the least
excess or immoderation in his Courtship, is subject to be despised; and he on
the other side who affects to be feared, upon the least extravagance makes
himself odious: and to keep the middle way exactly, is not possible to our
nature; wherefore it is necessary to those who exceed in either kind, to atone
for it with some extraordinary virtue, as Hanibal and Scipio did, who though
persons of great prudence and conduct, yet it appeared that both of them
suffered by their manner of living, as well as they were advanced. Their
advancement is mentioned before; their sufferings (as to Scipio) was the
rebellion of his Army, and part of his friends in Spain, which proceeded from
nothing but want of being feared, for men are naturally so unquiet, that every
little door that is opened to their ambition sets them agog, and abolishes all
that love which they owed to their Prince for his humanity toward them, as in
this example of the Friends and Army of Scipio; wherefore Scipio was
constrained to make use of that severity in some measure, which he had always
declined. As to Hanibal, there is not any particular example where his cruelty
or infidelity did him hurt; only it may be supposed that they were the occasion
why Naples and several other Towns stood so firm to the Romans. It is plain
likewise that his bloodiness and impiety made him more odious to the people of
Rome, than all the Enemies that ever that City had: for whereas when Pyrrhus
was with a great Army in Italy, they gave him notice of a design on foot to
have poisoned him, they were so inveterate against Hanibal, that they never
forgave him, but when they had defeated and disarmed him, they pursued him to
the death. And these sad inconveniences happened to Hanibal from no other causes,
but because he was impious, unfaithful, and cruel: but then on the other side
he had the advantage of being admired of all Writers for keeping his Army
without any mutiny or dissension either against him, or among themselves,
though it consisted of so many different Nations, which could be derived from
nothing but the awe and terror of his person; which terror was so great,
(considered with the reputation and authority that he received from his valor)
that thereby he kept his Soldiers united and quiet. I conclude therefore, it
imports not much which way a General takes, so there be any great excellence in
him to recommend it; for (as is said before) both in the one and the other
there is danger and defect, if there be not some extraordinary virtue to
balance it. And if Hanibal and Scipio, one by laudable, and the other by
ignominous and detestable ways arrived at the same end, and had the same
effects, I think it convenient in my next Chapter to discourse of two Roman
Citizens, who by diverse ways (but both honorable) arrived at the same pitch of
glory and renown.

CHAP. II.
How the austerity of Manlius Torquatus, and the humanity of Valerius Corvinus
gained each of them the same honor and reputation.
THere were two famous Captains contemporary in Rome, Manlius Torquatus, and
Valerius Corvinus, both of them equal in courage, equal in their triumphs, and
each of them (as to the enemy) acquired all with equal virtue and terror; but
as to their own Armies, and manner of discipline, it was quite different.
Manlius commanded with all kind of severity, excused his Soldiers from no
labor, nor no punishment. Valerius on the other side used them with as much
gentleness and familiarity: Manlius to keep his Soldiers strictly to their
discipline, executed his own son; which Valerius was so far from imitating,
that he never offended any man: yet in this great diversity of conduct, the
effects were the same, both as to the Enemy, the Commonwealth, and themselves;
for none of their Soldiers ever declined fighting; none of them rebelled, or
so much as disputed their commands, though the discipline of Manlius was so
severe, that afterward all excessive and extravagant commands were called
Manliana imperia: in which place it is not amiss to enquire how it came to pass
that Manlius was constrained to so rigorous a method; what it was that made
Valerius comport himself so mildly: how it was that this different way of
proceeding should have the same effect; and last of all, which of the two is
most worthy thy to be imitated. If Manlius be considered as he is represented
by the Historian, he will be found to be very valiant, carrying himself with
great piety to his Father, and Country, and with great reverence to his
Superiors, which appeared by his defense of his Father with the hazard of his
own life against a Tribune who accused him; and by his fighting with the Gaul,
in the behalf of his Country, which notwithstanding he would not undertake
without orders from the Consul; for when he saw a vast man, of a prodigious
proportion, marching forth upon the Bridge, and challenging any of the Romans,
he went modestly to the Consul for leave, and told him, Injussa tuo adversus
hostem, nunquam pugnabo, non si certain victoriam videam; Without your
permission I will never engage with the enemy, though I was sure to overcome:
and the Consul giving him leave, he conquered his enemy. When therefore a man
of his constitution arrives at such a command, he desires all men may be as
punctual as himself* and being naturally brave, he commands brave things, and
when they are once commanded, requires that they be executed exactly; and this
is a certain rule, when great things are commanded, strict obedience must be
expected, otherwise your enterprise must fail. That therefore those under your
command may be the more obedient to your commands, it is necessary that you
command aright; and he commands right, who compares his own quality and
condition with the quality and condition of those they command; if he finds
them proportionable, then he may command, if otherwise, he is to forbear; and
therefore that saying was not amiss, that to keep a Commonwealth in subjection
by violence, it was convenient that there should be a proportion betwixt the
persons forced, and forcing; and whilst that proportion lasted, the violence
might last too, but when that proportion was dissolved, and he that was forced
grew stronger than he that offered it, it was to be doubted much his authority
would not hold long. But to return; great things therefore, and magnificent,
are not to be commanded but by a man that is great and magnificent himself; and
he who is so constituted, having once commanded them, cannot expect, that
mildness or gentleness will prevail with his subjects to execute them: but he
that is not of this greatness and magnificence of mind, is by no means to
command extraordinary things; and if his commands be but ordinary, his humanity
may do well enough, for ordinary punishments are not imputed to the Prince, but
to the Laws and Customs of the place: so that we may conclude Manlius was
constrained to that severity by his natural temper and complexion; and such
persons are many times of great importance to a Commonwealth, because by the
exactness of their own lives, and the strictness of their discipline, they
revive the old Laws, and reduce every thing toward its first principles:

And if a State could be so happy to have such persons succeeding one another
in any reasonable time, as by their examples would not only renew the laws,
restrain vice, and remove every thing that tended to its ruin or corruption,
that State would be immortal. So then Manlius was a severe man, and kept up the
Roman discipline exactly, prompted first by his own nature, and then by a
strong desire to have that obeyed, which his own inclination had constrained
him to command. Valerius Corvinus on the other side might exercise his
gentleness without inconvenience, because he commanded nothing extraordinary,
or contrary to the customs of the Romans at that time; which custom, being
good, was sufficient to honor him, and not very troublesome to observe, whereby
it happened that Valerius was not necessitated to punish offenders, because there
were but very few of that sort, and when there were any, their punishment (as
is said before) was imputed to the Laws, and not to the cruelty of the Prince;
by which it fell out that Valerius had an opportunity by his gentleness to gain
both affection and authority in the Army, which was the cause that the
Soldiers being equally obedient to one as well as the other, though their
humors and discipline were different, yet they might do the same things, and
their actions have the same effects. If any are desirous to imitate either of
them, they will do well to have a care of running into the same errors as
Scipio and Hanibal did before, which is not to be prevented any other way, but
by singular virtue and industry. These things being so, it remains now that we
enquire which of those two ways are most laudable to follow, and it is the
harder to resolve, because I find Authors are strangely divided, some for one
way, and others for the other. Nevertheless, they who pretened to write how a
Prince is to govern, are more inclinable, to Valerius than Manli^s, and
Xenophon in his character of Cyrus jumps exactly with Livy's description of
Valerius, especially in his expedition against the Samnites when he was Consul:
for the morning before the Fight he made a speech to his Soldiers with that
mildness and humanity, that the Historian tells us, Non alias militi
familiarior dux fuit, inter infimos militum omnia haud gravate munia obeundo.
In ludo praeterea militari, cum velocitatis, viriumque inter se aequales cort
amina ineunt, comiter facilis vincere, ac vinci, vultu eodem; nec quenquam
aspernari parem qui se offerret; factis benig nus prore; dictis, haud minus
libertatis alienae quam suae dignitatis memor, and (quo nihil popularius est)
quibus artibus petierat Magistratum, iisdem Gerebat. No General was ever more
familiar with his Soldiers; no Soldier too mean for him to converse with, no
office too base for him to undertake. In their Military recreations when they
ran, or wrestled for a prize, he would not only run or wrestle, but win or
lose, be overcome, or conquer, with the same evenness, and unconcernment; nor
did he ever disdain or refuse any man that challenged him. In his actions, he
was bountiful, as occasion was offered; in his words, he was as mindful of
other peoples liberty, as of his own dignity, and (which is the most grateful
thing to the people in the world) the same arts which he used in the obtaining,
the same he exercised in the management of his Magistracy.

Livy speaks likewise very honorably of Manlius* acknowledging that his
severity upon his Son, made the whole Army so obedient, and diligent, that it
was the occasion of their victory against the Latins; and he goes so far in his
praise, that after he has given an exact account of the Battle and victory; and
described all the dangers and difficulties to which the Romans were exposed, he
concludes that it was only the Conduct and courage of Manlius that got the
victory that day; and afterward comparing the strength of both Armies, he does
not scruple to say, that on which side soever Manlius had been, that side would
certainly have had the day. Which being so, makes my question very hard to
determine, nevertheless, that it may not be altogether unresolved, I conceive
that in a Citizen brought up under the strictness of a Commonwealth, the way of
Manlius would be best, and least subject to danger, because it seems most for
the interest of the public, and not at all proceeding from private ambition;
besides to carry ones self severely to every body, and pursue nothing but the
benefit of the Public, is not a way to make parties, or friends, without which
there can be no troubles in a State. So that he who proceeds in that manner,
must needs be very useful, and not at all suspicious to the State. But the way
of Valerius is quite contrary; for though the Commonwealth reaps the same
fruits as in the other; yet jealousies will arise, and people will be fearful
that in the end his great favor among the Soldiers will be employed to set up
himself, with very ill consequences upon their liberty. And if in Publicola's
time these ill effects did not happen, it was because as then the minds of the
Romans were not corrupt, nor had he been long enough in authority. But if we
consider a Prince, as Xenophon did, in that case we must leave Manlius, and
follow Valerius clearly; because a Prince is by all means to endeavor the
obedience of his Subjects and Soldiers by ways of amity and kindness. They will
be obedient, if they find him virtuous, and a strict observer of his Laws; they
will love him, if they see him courteous, and affable, and merciful, and endued
with all the good qualities which were in Valerius, and which Xenophon
attributes to Cyrus. For to be particularly beloved, and have an Army true to
his interest, is instar omnium, and answers to all other policies of State. But
it is otherwise when an Army is commanded by one who is a Citizen of the same
City with the rest of his Army; for he is subject to the same Laws and
Magistrates as well as they. In the Annals of Venice we read, that in former
times the Venetian Galleys returning from some expedition, and lying near the
Town, there happened a quarrel betwixt the Citizens and the Seamen, which
proceeded so far, that it came to a tumult, both sides betook themselves to
their Arms, and neither the power of their Officers, the reverence of the
Citizens, nor the authority of the Magistrate was able to quiet them: But as
soon as a certain Gentleman appeared, who had commanded them the year before,
remembering with what courtesy he had behaved himself, their kindness to him
prevailed above all other courses, and they gave over the combat, and retired;
but that affection, and ready obedience to his commands, cost the poor
Gentleman very dear; for thereby he became so obnoxious to the Senate, that not
long after, they secured themselves against him, either by imprisonment or
death. I conclude then, that a Prince may better follow the example of
Valerius; but to a Citizen, it is dangerous both to himself, and the State; to
the State, because that way leads directly to Tyranny; to himself, because (let
his intentions be never so innocent) he will certainly be suspected, and bring
himself in danger. So on the other side, the severity of Manlius is as
pernicious in a Prince, but in a Citizen it is convenient, and particularly for
the State; for it never does hurt, if the hatred which follows your severity be
not increased by a jealousy of your great virtue and reputation, as it
happened to Camillus.

CHAP. XXIII.
Upon what occasion Camillus was banished from Rome.
WE have concluded in the Chapter before, that to imitate Valerius may
prejudice your Country, and your self; and that to imitate Manlius may be
convenient for your self, and prejudicial to your Country; which opinion is
much confirmed by the case of Camillus, whose proceedings were more like
Manlius, than Valerius; for which reason, Livy speaking of him tells us, Ejus
virtutem milites oderant^, and Mirabantur. His virtue was both odious, and
admirable to his Soldiers. That which made him admired was his Diligence,
Prudence, Magnanimity, and Conduct: That which made him hated was, that he was
more severe in punishing, than liberal in rewarding. And of this hatred Livy
gives these following reasons: First, because he caused the Money which was
made of the goods of the Vejentes to be applied to public use, and not
distributed with the rest of the prey: Next, because in his Triumphal Chariot
he caused himself to be drawn by four white Horses, which was accounted so
great a piece of arrogance, that it was thought he did it to equalize the Sun.
A third was, that he had devoted a tenth part of the spoils of the Vejentes to
Apollo, which (to keep his Vow) was to be taken back again from the Soldiers
who had got it in their clutches: From whence it may be observed, that nothing
makes a Prince more odious to the people, than to deprive them of their
possessions, which is a thing of so great importance, that it is never
forgotten; because upon every little want, it comes fresh into their Memories,
and men being daily subject to those wants, will daily remember it; and next to
this is, being insolent and proud, which is likewise extremely odious to the
people, especially if they be free. And although perhaps no detriment accrews
to them from his pride, yet they are observed always to detest him that uses
it. So that a great person is to avoid it as a rock, because it begets hatred,
and that without any advantage, which makes it a very rash, and imprudent thing.

CHAP. XXIV.
The prolongation of Commissions brought Rome first into servitude.
IF the dissolution of the Roman Commonwealth be accurately considered, it will
be found to proceed partly from the differences about the Agrarian Law, and
partly from the prorogation of their Magistrates, which errors, had they been
known in time, and due remedies applied, would not have been so pernicious, but
Rome might have enjoyed her freedom longer, and perhaps with more quiet. For
though from the prolongation of Offices* there were no tumults no^ seditions to
be seen in that City; yet it was clear that those Magistrates which were
continued took much upon them, and by degrees their power and authority became
a great prejudice to the liberty of the State. Had all the Citizens who were
continued, been wise, and honest like L. Quintius, they would not have incurred
this inconvenience. The goodness of Quintius appeared in one thing very
remarkably; a meeting being appointed for accommodation of the differences
betwixt the Nobility, and the People; the people continued their authority to
their Tribunes another year, as believing them very proper to resist the
ambition of the Nobles: The Senate to retaliate upon the people, and show
themselves as considerable as they, continued the Consulship to Quintius; But
Quintius refused it absolutely, alleging that ill examples were to be stifled,
and not increased by others that were worse, and therefore pressed them to the
election of new Consuls, and prevailed with much importunity and contention.
Had the rest of the Roman Citizens imitated this person, they had never
admitted that custom of proroguing of Magistrates, and then the prolongation of
their Commands in the Army had never been introduced, which very thing was at
length the ruin of that Commonwealth. The first person whose Commission was
continued in Rome, was P. Philo, who having besieged Pale-polis, and by the
time his Consulship was to expire, reduced it to such extremity, that the
victory seemed already in his hands. The Senate would not send another to
succeed him, but continued his authority with the Title of Proconsul, which
thing (though done then upon grave consideration, and for the benefit of the
public) proved afterward of such ill consequence, that it brought that City
in servitude and slavery: For by how much their Wars were more remote, by so
much they thought these prorogations convenient; from whence it happened, that
fewer of the Romans were prepared for Military Commands, and the glory of their
Victories redounded but to few: and besides, he whose Commission was renewed,
and had been a long time accustomed to the Army, might insinuate so, and gain
such an interest in it, as might make it disclaim the Senate, and acknowledge no
Head but their General. This it was that enabled Marius and Sylla to debauch
the Army; this was it that enabled Caesar to conquer his native Country; which
miseries had never happened, had not that custom of continuing Magistrates, and
Commanders been introduced. If it be objected, that their great affairs could
not have been managed as so great a distance, without that prorogation of
commands; I answer; That it is possible their Empire might have been longer
before it came to that height; but then it would have been more lasting, for
the adversary would never have been able to have erected a Monarchy, and
destroyed their liberty so soon.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Poverty of Cincinnatus and several other Citizens of Rome.
WE have said elsewhere, that nothing is of more importance to the conservation
of the liberty of a State, than to keep the Citizens low, and from being too
wealthy. Whether there was any Law to that purpose, or what that Law was, I
must acknowledge my ignorance, (especially when I consider with what zealand
passion the Agrarian was opposed) yet it is clear by experience, that for 400
years after the building of Rome, that City was in very great poverty: And it
is probable the great cause of it was, that poverty was no impediment to
preferment: Virtue was the only thing required in the Election of Magistrates,
and the distribution of Offices; and wherever it was found, let the person or
family be never so poor, it was sure to be advanced; which manner of living,
made riches contemptible: And this is manifest by the following example.
Minutius the Consul being circumvented, and he and his whole Army, as it were
blocked up by the Aequi, the Romans were so possessed with the danger of their
Army, that they betook themselves to the creation of a Dictator, which is their
last remedy in their greatest afflictions: They concluded upon L. Quintius
Cincinnatus, who was then (when they sent for him) in a little Country farm at
Plough, which Livy magnifies exceedingly, and says; Operae pretium est audire,
qui omnia prae divitiis humana spernunt, neque honori magno locum, ^^que
virtuti putant esse, nisi effuse affluant opes: It is pleasant to hear some
people talk of r^ches, as if nothing in this world were comparable to them; as
if all honor and virtue depended only upon the Estate. Cincinnatus (as I said
before) was at Plough in his Farm, (which consisted only of four acres of
ground) when the Ambassadors came to him from the Senate to salute him
Dictator, and to remonstrate their distress. Having received their message, he
made no delay, but called immediately for his Robe, came directly for Rome,
raised his Army, and marched away for the relief of Minutius: having defeated
at the Enemy, and pillaged their Camp, he would not suffer the Army of Minutius
to participate in the prize, telling him, I do not think it reasonable that you
should have share in the prey, who was so near being a prey your self After
which he degraded Minutius of his Consulship, and made him only a Legate with
this expression; You shall continue here in this Station; till you learn to
behave your self more like a Consul. The same Dictator, in the same expedition,
made L. Tarquinius his Master of his Horse, though he had none to be Master of
his own, for his poverty was such, he was forced to serve on foot. It Is
remarkable how in those days poverty and honor were not so inconsistant as
now, and that to an excellent and worthy person as Cincinnatus was, four acres
of Land was a sufficient Estate. In the days of A^tilius Regulus poverty was in
the same reputation; for being at the head of an Army in Africa, and having
conquered the Carthaginians, he made it his request to the Senate that he might
be permitted to come home, and husband his own Farm, which his Servants had
neglected. And this frugallty of the Romans is exceedingly wonderful; for
looking for nothing but praise and honor from their Victories, they brought
all their prize into the public Treasury: and doubtless had Regulus proposed
any thing of advantage to himself by that War, he would never have been
concerned to have had his four acres neglected by his Servants. Nor was the
modesty and magnanimity of the Romans less remarkable, who being put into
command, and placed at the head of an Army, thought themselves above any
Prince; no King, no Commonwealth was able to dismay them: But when their
Commissions expired, and they were returned privately to their houses; no body
so frugal, no body so humble, no body so laborious, so obedient to the
Magistrates, or respectful to their superiors as they; insomuch that one would
have thought it impossible the same minds should have been capable of such
strange alterations. And this poverty continued till the time of Paulus Emilius
(which was the last age of that Commonwealths happiness) for though he by his
Triumph enriched the whole City, yet not regarding his own fortunes, he
continued poor himself, and poverty was in that esteem, that Paulus to gratify
and encourage one of his Sons-in-Law who had behaved himself bravely in those
Wars, gave him a silver Cup, which was the first piece of Plate that was ever
seen in his family. And here I have a fair occasion to enlarge upon poverty,
and show how much more useful it is to Mankind than riches, and how many
excellent Arts it has produced and improved, which riches and luxury have
destroyed: But this having been treated of so amply by other people before, I
shall mention it no farther at this time.

CHAP. XXVI.
Women are many times the destruction of States.
IN the City of Ardea there was a great controversy betwixt the Patricii and
the People, about the Marriage of a young Lady; who being a great Fortune, had
a great many Servants, but more especially two, one of them a Patrician, the
other a Plebean. Her Father being dead, her Guardian would needs bestow her
upon the Plebean; her Mother was for the Nobleman; not agreeing among
themselves, it came to a tumult, and by degrees to blows; insomuch as the whole
Nobility appeared in Arms for the one, and all the people for the other. The
result was, the people being beaten out of the Town, and sending to the Volsci
for aid, the Nobles sent to Rome. The Volsci were readiest, and coming first to
the assistance of the Plebeans, they clapped down before the Town. They had not
entrenched themselves long, but the Roman Army came upon their backs* and shut
them up betwixt the Town and them; insomuch that they were quickly distressed,
and forced to surrender at discretion. The Romans entered the Town, killed all
that were accessory to the sedition, and settled their affairs. In which passage
there are many observable things. First, we see Women have been the occasion of
much desolation, prejudice, and dissension: The Rape of Lucrece lost the
Tarquins their Government; the attempt upon Virginia, was the ruin of the
Decem-viri. And Aristotle in his Politics imputes the abomination of Tyranny
to the injuries they do to people upon the account of Women, by their
Debauchments, their Violences, or Adulteries, as we have showed at large in our
Chapter about Conspiracies. So that in the Government of any Kingdom or
Commonwealth, those things are not to be reckoned as trifles, but as the
occasions of much mischief, and are by all means to be prevented, before the
rancour has taken too deep root, and is not to be cured, but by the destruction
of the State: as it happened to the Ardeates, who let it go so long among their
fellow Citizens, that at last they came to an absolute division not to be
composed nor settled, but by foreign assistance, which is always the forerunner
of servitude and slavery.

CHAP. XXVII.
How the civil discords in a City, are to be composed, and of the falsity of
that opinion, That the best way to keep a City in subjection, is to keep it
divided.
IN the reconciliation of a City that is laboring under civil dissentions, we
are to follow the example of the Roman Consuls, and observe their method in
composing the distractions among the Ardeates, which was by cutting off the
chief Actors, and confiscating their Estates. And to compose the distractions
of a City, there are three ways; either by cutting off the chief actors (as the
Romans did) by banishing them the City, or by forcing them to an accommadation
upon such penalties as they shall be afraid to incur: of these three ways the
last is most dangerous, uncertain, and unprofitable, because it is impossible
where much blood has been shed, or much injury done, that that peace should
last long, which was made by compulsion; for seeing, and hearing, and
conversing with one another daily, their animosities must of necessity revive,
and provoke them to new outrage, by presenting them with new occasions of
indignation and revenge: and of this we cannot have an apter example than in
the City of Pistoia, which 15 years since (as it is now) was divided into the
Panciatichi, and Cancellieri (only then they were at open defyance, which now
they are not.) After many contests and disputes among themselves, they
proceeded to blood, to the plundering and demolishing one another houses, and
committing all other hostilities imaginable: The Florentines whose business it
was to unite them, used this third way, which rather increased, than mitigated
their tumults; so that weary of that way, and grown wiser by experience, they
made use of the second; banished some of the Ringleaders, and imprisoned the
rest, whereby they not only quieted their differences then, but have kept them
so ever since. But doubtless the safest way had been to cut them off at first,
and if those executions were forborne then by us, or have been since by any
other Commonwealth, it is for no other cause, but that they require a certain
generosity and greatness of spirit, that in weak Commonwealths is hardly to be
found. And these are the errors, which as I said in the beginning, are
committed by the Princes of our times, when they are to determine in such great
controversies; for they should inform themselves how others have comported in
the same cases before them; but they are so weak by reason of the slightness of
our present education, and their unexperience in History, that they look upon
the examples of the ancients as inhumane, or impossible: So that our modern
opinions are as remote from the truth, as that saying of our wise men was upon
a time, Che bisognavatener Pistoiacon le parti, and Pisacon le fortezze: That
Pistoia was to be kept under by factions, and Pisa by a Citadel; but they were
mistaken in both. What my judgment is about Citadels, and such kind of
Fortresses, I have delivered elsewhere; so as in this place, I shall only
demonstrate how unpracticable it is to keep Towns in subjection by fomenting
their differences and factions, and first it is impossible to keep both parties
true to you (be you Prince, or Commonwealth, or whatever) for men are naturally
so inconstant, it cannot be that those parties which favor you to day, should
be affected to you always; for they will still look out for some new Patron,
and Protector: so that by degrees one of the parties taking some disgust
against you, the next War that happens, you run a great hazard of losing your
Town. If it be under the Government of a State, the City is in more danger,
than in the other case, because each party looks out for friends among the
great ones, and will spare no pains nor money to corrupt them. From whence two
great inconveniences do arise: One is, you can never make them love you,
because by reason of the frequent alteration of Governors, and putting in
sometimes a person of one humor, and sometimes another of another; they can
never be well governed And then the other is, by this fomenting of Factions,
your State must be necessarily divided. Blondus speaking of the passages
betwixt the Florentines and Pistoians, confirms what we have said in these
words, Mentreche i Florentini dis^gnavano de riunir Pistoia, divisono se
Medesimi. Whilst the Florentines thought to have united the Pistoians, they
divided themselves. In the year 1501. Arezzo revolted from the Florentines, and
the Valleys di Tenere, and Chiana were entirely overrun by the Vitelli, and
Duke Valentine. Whereupon Monsieur de Lant was sent from the King of France to
see all that they had lost, restored to the Florentines. Wherever Monsieur de
Lant came observing the persons that came to visit him, did still profess
themselves of the party of Morzocco, he was much dissatisfied with their
factions, and more that they should declare themselves so freely; for (said he)
if in France any man should pronounce himself of the King's party, he would be
sure to be punished, because it would imply that there was a party against the
King, and it was his Masters desire, that his Kingdom and Cities should be all
of a mind: If therefore a Prince believes there is no way for him to keep his
Towns in obedience, but by keeping up Factions, it is a certain argument of his
weakness; for being unable by force and courage to keep them under, he betakes
himself to these pernicious arts; which in peaceable times may palliate a
little, but when troubles, and adversity come will assuredly deceive him.

CHAP. XXVIII.
A strict eye is to be kept upon the Citizens, for many times under pretense of
Officiousness, and Piety, there is hid a principle of Tyranny.
The City of Rome being distressed for want of provisions, and the public
stores being unable to supply it, it came into the thoughts of Spurius Melius
(a rich Citizen of those times) to furnish the Common people gratis out of his
own private stock, whereby he wrought himself so far into the favor of the
people, that the Senate suspecting the ill consequences of his bounty, began to
conspire his destruction before his interest became too great, to which purpose
they created a Dictator, who put him to death: from whence it may be observed,
that many times those actions which seem charitable and pious at first sight,
and are not reasonable to be condemned, are notwithstanding cruel and dangerous
for a State, if not corrected in time. To make this more clear, I say a
Commonwealth cannot be well governed, nor indeed subsist without the assistance
and ministry of powerful and great men: and yet on the other side that power
and reputation of particular Citizens is the occasion of tyranny. To regulate
this inconvenience, it is necessary, that seeing there must be great men,
things should be so ordered that they may have praise and reputation by such
things as are rather useful than prejudicial to the State. Wherefore it is
carefully to be observed what ways they take to acquire their reputation; and
they are usually two, either public or private. The public way is when they
arrive at their reputation by some good counsel, or some great exploit which
they have achieved for the benefit of the public: and this way of reputation
is not only not to be precluded to the Citizens, but to be opened by such
promises of reward for their good counsels or actions as may both dignify and
enrich them; and when a reputation is gained by these plain and sincere ways,
it is never to be feared. But when their courses are private, (which is the
other of the two ways) they are dangerous, nay totally pernicious. Those
private ways are by obliging particular persons, by lending them money, by
marrying their relations, by defending them against the Magistrates and doing
several other particular favors which may encourage their Clients to violate
the Laws, and vitiate the Commonwealth; for which cause it ought to be so well
fortified with good Laws, that the endeavors of such ambitious men may be
either discouraged or defeated; and on the other side rewards proposed to such
as arrive at their greatness by any extraordinary exploit. In Rome the highest
reward of those persons who behaved themselves gloriously for the good of their
Country, was a triumph besides which they had other inferior honors, for more
inferior services, and to restrain or punish the ambition of those who went
about by private and clandestine ways to disturb the peace of their Country,
their greatest remedy was to accuse them to the people, and when those
accusations were insufficient, (the people being blinded by some specious
pretense of benefit and advantage) they created a Dictator, who with a kind of
regal authority was to reduce the delinquent from his aberrations, or punish
him as he did Spurius Melius; and the leaving of one such fault unpunished, is
enough to ruin a Commonwealth, for a single example afterward will hardly be
effectual.

CHAP. XXIX.
That the transgressions of the people do spring commonly from the Prince.
PRinces cannot reasonably complain of the transgressions of their subjects,
because it is necessarily their negligence, or ill example that debauches them:
and if the people of our times are infamous for thefts, and robberies, and
plundering, and such kind of enormities, it proceeds from the exorbitance and
rapacity of their Governors. Romania (before Pope Alexander VI exterminated
those Lords who had the command in those parts) was a place of all kind of
dissoluteness and iniquity, every day, and every trivial occasion producing
notorious murders and rapines; which was not so much from any depravity in the
nature of the people, (as some persons would have it) as from the corruption of
their Princes; for being poor of themselves, and yet ambitious to live in
splendour and magnificence, they were forced upon ill courses, and indeed
refused none that could supply them. To pass by several others, one of their
detestable ways was to make Laws against such and such things, which after they
were published, they themselves would be the first that should break, to
encourage others to do the same; nor was any man ever punished for his
inobservance, till they saw enough involved in the same praemunire; then
(forsooth) the Laws were executed most strictly, not out of any true zeal to
justice, but out of a desire to be fingring the Fines; from whence it followed,
that by grievous mulcts and expilations the people being impoverished, were
constrained to use the same violences upon those who were less potent than
they; by which means men were not so much corrected, as instructed to do ill;
and all these mischiefs proceeded from the iniquity of their Princes. Livy has
a story to this purpose, where he tells us, that the Roman Ambassadors (passing
with a great present to Apollo, which was taken out of the spoils of the
Venetians) were taken by the Corsairs of Lipari in Sicily, and carried with it
into that Island. Timasitheus Prince of that Town understanding what the
Present was; whither it was going, and from whom it was sent, (though born at
Lipari) behaved himself in that like a Roman, and remonstrated to the people
the impiety of the fact, which he pressed upon them so home, that by common
consent the Present was restored, and the Ambassadors dismissed; the words of
the Historian are these, Timasitheus multitudinem religione implevit, quae
semper regenti est similis: which agrees with that saying of Lorenzo de i
Medici.

Et quel che fa li Signor fanno poi molti,
Che nel Signor son tuttigl' occhi volti.
A Prince does naught (or regular, or rude,)
But's followed straight by th'gaping multitude.
CHAP. XXX.
A Citizen who would do any great matter by his own authority, must first
extinguish all envy. In what manner things are to be ordered upon the approach
of an enemy, and how a City is to be defended.
THe Senate of Rome having intelligence that the Tuscans had made new levies of
men to make a new inroad into their Country; and that the Latini and Hernici
(formerly in amity with the Romans) had confederated with the Volsci,
(implacable enemies to the very name of a Roman) they concluded that War would
be dangerous. Camillus being Tribune at that time, and invested with Consular
authority, they thought he would be able to defend them, (without creating a
Dictator) if the rest of his Colleagues would entrust him with the chief
Command; to which they readily condescended, Nec quicquam (says Livy) de
majestate sua detractum credebant, quod Majestati ejus concessissent; Nor did
they think any thing subtracted from their authority that was added to his.
Upon which Camillus (taking their paroles for their obedience) caused three
Armies to be raised. The first he designed against the Tuscans, and commanded
it himself. The second was to continue about Rome to attend the motions of the
Latiny and Hernici, and was commanded by Quintus Servilius. The third was left
in the City, as Guards for the security of the Gates, and the Court, and to be
ready upon any accident that should arise, and the Command of this Army was
committed to Lucius Quintius. The care of his Magazines was referred to Horatius
one of his Colleagues, who was to see them furnished with such arms and
provisions, and other things as were necessary in times of War. He caused
another Tribune of his Colleagues (called Cornelius) to preside in the Senate,
and public Counsel, that he might be present in all their debates,, and ready
to advise in all their daily transactions. So excellent were the Tribunes in
those times, that when the safety of their Country was at stake, they were
equally disposed either to command or obey. And here may be observed the great
ability which a wise and good man has to do good, by the suppression of envy,
which is many times a great impediment to the good which some persons would do,
could they but get up into such authority as is requisite in affairs of
importance. This envy is extinguished two ways; either by some great and
difficult accident, in which every man forseeing his own ruin, lays his
ambition aside, and submits himself voluntarily to the obedience of some person
from whose virtue he may hope to be delivered: such a person was this Camillus,
who having been three times Dictator, and acted in all his administrations more
for the good of the public, than any benefit of his own, and given many
excellent testimonies of his integrity and conduct besides, his Colleagues were
not scrupulous to transfer their authority, nor the people at all apprehensive
of his greatness, nor any (how great soever) ashamed to be inferior to him.

Wherefore it was not without reason that Livy used that expression, Nec
quicquain, etc. The other way of extinguishing envy, is, when either by
violence, or the course of nature your competitors die; that is, such persons
as envying your reputation and grandeur, and disdaining that you should be
above them, cannot contain themselves, and be quiet, but rather than not
satisfy the perversity of their minds, will be contented their Country should
be ruined, especially if they have been brought up in a corrupt State, and not
been meliorated by their education.

Against this sort of envy there is no remedy but in the death of the Subject.
And when an excellent person is so happy as to have these impediments removed
by the course of nature, without any machination or concurrence of his, he
becomes great and honorable without obstacle, and may exercise his virtues
without any offense. But when he has not this good fortune, and nature is so
unkind as to suffer them to live, it is necessary he remove them some
extraordinary way, and make it his whole business to find one; yet with that
caution and deliberation, that he be sure his way be practicable before he
ventures upon it. He who reads the Bible soberly, and consideratly, will find
Moses (for the promotion and establishment of his Laws) was forced to put
several to death, for no other reason but because out of envy they opposed his
designs: and this necessity of removing Competitors was not unknown to Girolamo
Savonarola the Friar, and Pietro Soderini Gonsaloniere of Florence. The Friar
could not Master it for want of authority; and those of his followers who could
have done it, had no true knowledge of his mind; yet that was not his fault,
for his Sermons were full of declamations against the wisdom of this World, and
invectives against the wise men, by whom he intended such envious persons as
opposed his Doctrines and Institutions. Soderini was in hopes by the goodness
of his conversation, and his beneficence to all people, that he should have
been so fortunate as to have outlived and worn out the envy of his
adversaries, seeing he was but young, and found new Clients coming in daily to
his party, whom his excellent deportment had drawn over. So that he abstained
from all kind of severity and violence, not considering that time is not to be
lost; that goodness is ineffectual; that fortune is changeable; and that
envious persons are not to be obliged by all the presents and good offices in
the World, So that both these persons were ruined at last, one of them because
he had not authority enough to master the envy of his adversaries; the other
because he did not do it (though he had authority) in time. The other thing
remarkable in that Story, was, the order taken by Camillus for the safety of
Rome, both abroad and at home. And certainly it is not without reason that good
Historians (as ours is) set down certain distinct and particular cases, that
posterity may learn upon such accidents in what manner to defend themselves: it
is to be observed likewise, that the most dangerous and unprofitable defense is
that which is made by tumult and disorder; and this is apparent by that third
Army which Camillus left as a Guard to the City, which many would have thought
unnecessary, because the Citizens were generally armed, and martial; so that
their needed no more than to have armed the rest upon occasion, without
troubling them with an Army. But Camillus (and any other wise man would have
done the same) was of another opinion; for a multitude is not to be trusted
with arms but in an orderly and regular way. For which reason, and according to
which example, he who has the Government of a Town, is above all things to
avoid arming the people in a confused and tumultuous way; but is rather to cull
and select such as he dare trust with arms, and such as he is satisfied will
obey him, let him send or command them wheresoever he pleases. The rest are to
be required to keep at home, and every man look to the defense of his own
house. He who is besieged, and observes this course, may defend himself well
enough; he that does otherwise, does not follow the example of Camillus and
will hardly defend himself.

CHAP. XXXI.
Powerful States, and excellent Persons, retain the same mind and dignity in
all kind of conditions.
AMong the rest of the great actions and words which our Author commemorates,
and mentions as certain arguments of the great virtue and excellence of
Camillus, in a speech of his to his Soldiers, he brings him in with this
expression; Nec mihi Dictatura animos fecit, nec exilium ademit; I was neither
elated with my Dictatorship, nor dejected with my Banishment. From whence we
may observe that great men are never discomposed; let fortune vary as she
pleases, let her advance them sometimes, and depress them at others, they are
in the same settlement and tranquillity, so quiet and firm in their minds, that
every man may see it is not in the power of fortune to disorder them; whereas
pusillanimous and mean spirited persons, inebriated with their good fortune,
and attributing all to their own virtue and good conduct, make themselves
odious and insupportable to all that are about them, and that arrogance exposes
them to many revolutions, which coming upon them on a sudden, do so terrify
and dismay them, that they run into the other extreme, and become as abject and
vile. Hence it is that in time of adversity such Princes think more of their
escape than defense, having made themselves incapable of that by their ill
management before. And as this diversity of temper is many times to be found in
particular Persons, and Princes; so it is incident to Commonwealths, as may be
seen by the example of the Romans and Venetians. The first were never dejected
by any ill fortune, nor transported by any good; as appears by their defeat at
the Battle of Cannas, and their Victory against Antiochus: their defeat at
Cannas was the third which they had received, and for that reason was very
considerable; yet they were not so terrified, or cowed, as to commit any thing
contrary to the old dignity of the Romans; for they resolved to continue the
war; they raised more forces; they refused to redeem their prisoners upon any
new terms; and could not be brought to make any overtures of Peace, either to
Hanibal, or the Senate at Carthage; but for want of others, they armed their
old men, and their servants. and resolved wholly upon war; for which obstinacy
and refractoriness, when Hanno was told, he made a speech to the Senate, and
remonstrated how little they were to presume upon their Victory at Cannas: we
see then the Romans were not to be terrified or discouraged by any adversity of
fortune; we shall show now how far they were on the other side from insulting
in their good. Antiochus, before he came to a Battle, sent Ambassadors to
Scipio to desire a Treaty: Scipio sent him these Conditions, that he should
return with his Army into Syria, and leave the rest to the Romans. Autiochus
thought that unreasonable, fought him, was beaten, and afterward sent
Ambassadors again to Scipio, with instructions to accept of whatever terms the
Conqueror should give: Scipio never thought of altering his first propositions,
though made before the Battle was won, but told them, Quod Romani si vincuntur,
non minuuntur animis, nec si vincunt insolescere solent; That (...) man's were
never dejected by ill for^une, nor elated by good. The Venetians acted quite
the other way, who having got a little good fortune, (ascribing it to a wrong
cause, as if it had proceeded from their own power and virtue) had the
insolence to call the King of France Son of St. Mark, and taking a fancy that
they should bring their Commonwealth to as great a condition of grandeur and
power as the Romans, they despised the Church, and all the Princes of Italy
besides. Afterward, when their fortune began to change, and they received a
small defeat at Vaila by the French; they lost their whole Empire in a day;
part revolted, and part they gave up themselves to the Pope, and King of Spain;
and so much had they abandoned themselves to fear and consternation, that they
sent Ambassadors to the Emperor to make themselves his Tributaries, and writ
poor and mean Letters to the Pope to move him to compassion, and to this
extremity of dejection they were brought in four days time, by the loss but of
one half of their Army; for the other of their Proveditory retreated, and came
off safe to Verona with more than 25000 horse and foot; so that had there been
any courage either in the Citizens or Senate, they might quickly have
recruited, and shown their force again; and if they could not have conquered,
they might at least have lost all with more reputation, or possibly have
brought the enemy to some honorable accord: but the poorness of their spirit,
and the illness of their military discipline took from them at one time both
their courage and state: and so it will be with whosoever follows the example
of the Venetians: for this insolence in good fortune, and dejection in bad,
proceeds from their manner of education; which if vain and idle, will make you
so too; whereas if it be otherwise, it will give you a better notion of the
World, and teach you in both fortunes to behave your self with more moderation:
and as this is true in single persons, so it is in Commonwealths, which are
good or bad according to their manner of living. We have often said it before,
and think it not amiss to repeat it again, that the foundation of all
Governments consists in their Military discipline; and that where that is
defective, neither their Laws, nor any thing else can be good; for through the
whole tract of this History, it appears that there is a necessity your Militia
should be good, and that cannot be good, but by continual exercise, which you
cannot be sure of unless it consists of your own Subjects. and because you are
not always in War, and it is impossible you shall be, therefore it is necessary
that they be exercised in times of Peace, which is not to be done by any but
your own Subjects, in respect of the charge.

Camillus (as is said before) marched out with his Army against the Tuscans,
but his Soldiers having had a sight of the Enemy, found their Army so great,
that they were discouraged and dismayed, and thought themselves so much
inferior, that they were not able to fight the^. Camillus understanding this
terror in his Camp, went up and down among the Soldiers, and having reprehended
their fear, and said many things to encourage them, and drive that fancy out of
their heads, at last without further directions, Come (said he) Courage! Quod
quisque didicit aut consuevit, faciat. Do what you have been taught and
accustomed, I desire no more. From whence it may be collected that he would not
have used those words, had not his Army been exercised before, and that in
times of Peace as well as War: For no good is to be expected, nor no General to
trust himself to an unexperienced or undisciplined Army, which will certainly
be his ruin, though he were as good a Commander as Hanibal himself. And the
reason is, because when an Army is engaged the General cannot be present in all
places, to supply all defects, and remedy all errors; so that he must
necessarily miscarry, unless he has such persons disposed up and down in the
Army, as are capable of understanding his mind, and executing his Orders. Which
being so, the Roman discipline is to be followed, and the Citizens of every
City are to be inured to their Arms in times of Peace as well as war, that when
they are brought to fight, they may not be at a loss, or meet with any thing
new, or unaccustomed to them; by which means it will come to pass, that they
will not be surprised or terrified in any condition, but retain still the same
courage and sense of their dignity; But where the Citizens are undisciplined,
and rely more upon their fortune, than experience, their hearts will change
with their fortune, and they will give the same testimony of themselves, as the
Venetians have done.

CHAP. XXXII.
The ways which some people have taken to prevent a Peace.
THe Circei and the Velitrae two of the Roman Colonies, revolted, in hopes the
Latin would have been able to defend them. The Latins being defeated, and
they frustrated of their hopes, it was the advice of several Citizens, that
they should send Ambassadors to Rome to reconcile themselves to the Senate; But
those who had been ringleaders in the defection, apprehending the punishment
would fall heavy upon their heads, perverted that design; and to run things
beyond all possibility of Terms, they incited the people to arm, and invade the
Frontiers of the Romans. And doubtless when Prince or Commonwealth are desirous
to prevent an agreement, there is no safer, nor surer way, than by running the
people into some unpardonable offense, that the fear of being punished may keep
them averse from all overtures of Peace. After the first War betwixt the
Carthaginians and Romans, those Soldiers which had been employed by the
Carthaginians in Sicily and Sardigna, as soon as the Peace was concluded, went
over into Africa, where being denied or delayed in the demands of their pay,
they took Arms, and putting themselves under the command of two of their
Officers, Matho, and Spendio, they plundered several of the Carthaginian Towns,
and possessed themselves of others. The Carthaginians (to try all ways, before
they came to extremity) sent Asdrubal (on of their Principal Citizens)
Ambassador to them; who having been formerly their General, it was probable,
might have some Authority among them. Asdrubal being arrived, and Matho, and
Spendio desirous to put the Soldiers beyond all possibility of pardon,
persuaded them that the best and most secure way would be, for them to kill all
the Carthaginians that were Prisoners with them, and Asdrubal among the rest.
Whereupon they killed them all, with a thousand circumstances of cruelty and
torture; to which piece of wickedness they added another by publishing an Edict
importing, That all the Carthaginians which should be taken for the future,
should be treated the same way. And thus they prevented all propositions of
Peace, and rendered their Soldiers obstinate and implacable to the
Carthaginians.

CHAP. XXXIII.
To the obtaining a Victory, it is necessary your Army has a confidence not
only in one another, but in their General.
TO win a Battle, and overcome an Enemy, it is necessary to give your Army such
a confidence, as may make them believe that nothing is able to withstan^ them;
and the way of infusing this confidence is, by Arming, and exercising them
well, and giving them a knowledge and acquaintance one with the other; which
confidence and acquaintance is not to be expected, but where your Soldiers are
your own Subjects, and have been brought up together. The General is to be so
qualified, that the Soldiers may have confidence in his Wisdom, and Conduct;
and they will always have such a confidence if they see him careful, and
regular, and courageous, and one who preserves the majesty of his command with
discretion and reputation; which he will do, if he punishes strictly, and put
his Soldiers upon no over-hard and impertinent duty; keeps his promises;
represent victory easy, either by concealing or extenuating the dangers, or by
encouraging them bravely against them; and these things rightly observed, are
of great consequence both to the Authority of the General, and the obtaining
the Victory. The way which the Romans took to give this assurance to their
Armies, was, by pretense of Religion; for which cause before the creation of
their Consuls; the raising, or marching, or engaging of their Armies, their
Augures and Auspices were consulted: and without some of these, no wise General
would undertake any great Enterprise, believing they should certainly miscarry,
unless the Soldiers were thoroughly convinced that the Gods were on their side.
And when any of their Consuls or other Commanders fought in defiance of these
Auspices, he was punished, as Claudius Pulcher for despising the Omen of the
Chickens. And although this is obvious in every part of the Roman History; yet
it is better proved by the complaint of Appius Claudius to the people, against
the insolence of their Tribunes, where he tells them that by their means, the
Auspices, and other religious Customs were neglected or corrupted, His words
are these, Eludant nunc licet Religionem; quid enim interest si pulli non
pascentur, si ex cavea tardirts exierint, succinuerit avis? Parvasunt haec, sed
parvaista non contemnendo, Majores nostri maximam hanc Rempublicam fecerunt.
Let them laugh at Religion as they please, and cry, what are we concerned if
the Pullets will not eat, if they come lazily out of their Penns; or if a bird be
disposed to sing? It Is true they are but trifles, yet by not dispising those
trifles, our Ancestors brought this Commonwealth to the Grandeur it is at. And
it was true; for those little things were sufficient to keep the Soldiers
confident and united, which are two things go very far in a Victory, though
without virture and valor, they are not always successful. The Prenestini
being in the Field with their Army against the Romans, they went and lodged
themselves upon the River Allia (in a place where the Romans had been beaten by
the French) that the consideration of the place might be an encouragement to
their own men, and a terror to the Romans. And though this design was not
improbable for the reason abovesaid, yet it apeared by the success, that true
courage is not disturbed by every little accident, as was well expressed by the
Dictator to his Master of the House, Vides tu, fortuna illos fretos, ad Alliam
consedisse, at tu fretus armis, animisque invade mediam acien. You see, by
their posting themselves upon the Allia, they rely wholly upon Fortune; do you
trust to your Arms, end your courage and attack their main Battle. And he was
in the right; for true courage, good discipline, and a confidence arising from
so many Victories, cannot be discomposed by such frivolous stratagems; light
things will not dismay them, nor every disorder distract them. For even in the
absence of their Officers, Soldiers that are expert, and accustomed to Arms,
are not easily beaten. As appeared by the two Manlii (both Consuls, and making
War upon the Volsci) who having indiscreetly sent part of their Army to
forage, it fell out, that both the commanded party, and those which were left
behind, were encompassed by the Enemy, and as it were besieged both at a time,
out of which danger the Soldiers were delivered, more by their own courage,
than any conduct in the Consuls; whereupon Livy tells us Militum, etiam sine
Rectore stabilis virtus tutata est. The steadfast courage of the Soldiers
defended them, without any help from their General. Fabius had likewise an
excellent way to confirm his Soldiers and possess them with a confidence, which
I cannot omit: Having invaded Tuscany with a new Army; supposing the novelty of
the Country, and their inexperience of that Enemy might have some influence
among them, to give them a confidence, he called them together before the
Battle, and having in a grave Oration given several reasons why they might hope
for the Victory, he told them, That he had another reason behind, more certain
than all of them, but in that he must be private; for to discover it, would be
to defeat it: A wise way, and deserves well to be imitated.

CHAP. XXXIV.
What vogue, fame or opinion disposes the people first to favor some
particular Citizen; and whether they, or a Prince distributes their Offices
with most prudence and judgment.
WE have shown before, how Titus Manlius (called afterward Torquatus)
preserved his Father L. Manlius from an accusation which Pomponius the Tribune
had exhibited against him to the people. And although the way which he took to
preserve him was violent and irregular; yet his filial affection to his Father
was so grateful to the people, that they not only not reprehended him for what
he had done, but advanced him to honor; for being not long after to choose
Tribunes for their Legions, T. Manlius was the second that was made. And here I
think it not amiss to consider the way which the the people of Rome took in the
distribution of their honors, and election of Magistrates; and to inquire into
the truth of what I asserted before, That the distributions of the people are
better, and more exact than the distributions of a Prince; for the people
follow the common and public character of every man, unless by some particular
notion of his actions, they presume, or believe otherwise. There are three ways
by which a man may gain esteem and reputation with the people. The first is by
extraction, when the Parents having been great men, and serviceable to the
Commonwealth, the people take a fancy that their Children must of necessity be
the same, until by some ill act they convince them of the contrary. The second
way is to associate with grave persons, of good esteem, and such as are reputed
discreet and sober by every body; and because nothing indicates and discovers a
man so much as the Company which he keeps; he who keeps good Company, may be
concluded to be good; for of necessity persons so conversant together, must
have something of similitude. But their is another way of gaining the favor of
the people, which exceeds them both; and that is by performing some
extraordinary action, whether public or private, it matters not, so you come
honorably off. And the judgments which are made in this case, are much better
than the other: For the arguments taken from the virtue of the Parents, are
doubtful and fallacious; nor can any man conclude any thing, till experience
resolves him. The presumptions in the second from their conversations and
Company, are much better than the first, but not comparable to the third; for
reputation from Ancestors or Company depends barely upon opinion, and hopes,
till some great action be performed that testifies your virtue, and determines
the doubt; and then if this action be performed when you are young, it makes
the impression much deeper, and so fixes your reputation, that you must commit
many ill actions before you can expunge it: Those therefore who would advance
themselves in a Commonwealth, are to take this course, and endeavor to do some
remarkable thing at first; which was done at Rome very frequently by several
young persons, either by the promulgation of some Law for the benefit of the
public; or by the accusation of some great person for transgressing the Law;
or doing some other great or new thing that may make you be talked of. Nor are
these things necessary only to recommend you at first; but they are necessary
likewise to maintain and augment your reputation; so that they are to be
renewed and repeated often as long as you live; as Manlius did; for after he
had defended his Father so honorably, and by that noble action laid the
foundation of his esteem, many years were not past before he fought singly with
a French man, and having slain him very bravely, he took a Gold Chain from his
neck, which gave him the name of Torquatus; and having given these testimonies
of his courage in his youth, when he came to riper years he made himself as
famous for discipline and justice by the example upon his Son, whom he caused
to be put to death for fighting contrary to Orders, though he defeated the
Enemy; which three great instances of his courage and virtue, made his name so
honorable both then and ever since, that no Victory, no Triumph could have
done more. And good reason, for in victories, many equalled, and some exceeded
him; but in these three very few came near, but no body exceeded him.

Scipio the elder was not so glorious by all his triumphs, as for having in his
youth so manfully defended his Father at the Battle upon the Tesin; and after
the Battle of Cannas forced certain young Romans with his Sword drawn to take
an Oath not to desert their Country as they had resolved to do before; which
two actions were the foundations of his following reputation, and served as
steps to his Triumphs both over Spain and Africa which favor and good opinion
of him was highly increased, by his returning a Daughter and a Wife (both of
them great Beauties, and both of them his Prisoners) immaculate and untouched,
one to her Father, and the other to her Husband, in his Wars in Spain. And this
way of proceeding is not only necessary for such as would gain honor and
promotion in a Commonwealth; but for Princes likewise and Kings who are
desirous to retain their reputation with their subjects. For nothing recommends
a Prince more efficaciously to the people, than in his youth to give them some
taste or specimen of his virtue, by some remarkable act, or proposal for the
benefit of the public; especially if it has any tendancy to justice,
magnanimity,, liberality, or the like; for things of that nature that are
extraordinary, whether acted, or spoken, are transmitted to posterity with so
much reverence, that they even come to be Proverbs among the people: But to
return, I say then, when the people designs to confer honor upon a Citizen,
upon one of these three accounts, they go upon very good grounds, but
especially upon the last, when several and reiterated examples make him more
known; for then it is not possible they should be deceived, and in young persons
they are certain presages of their deportment for the future. I speak only of
those degrees which are given at first, before any firm experience has made
them better known, or that they pass from one action to a contrary, in which,
both as to mistakes, and corruption, the people do not err so often as
Princes. And because it may happen that the people may be deceived by report or
opinion, or perhaps the actions of a man, as believing them more considerable
and estimable than they are (which cannot easily happen to a Prince, by reason
of his Council which are by, and always ready to inform him) that the people
may not want such Monitors; those who have laid right foundations for a
Commonwealth, have provided that when the great and supreme Offices of a City
are to be supplied, where it would be dangerous to entertain any incapable
persons, if they find the people disposed to the creation of any man who is
known to be improper, it may be lawful for any Citizen; nay, an honor to any
one that shall publicly discover his defects, that thereby the people
understanding him better, may be better able to choose. That this was the
practice in Rome appears by the Oration of Fabius Maximus, which he made
publicly to the people in the second Punick War, when at the creation of the
Consuls, the people were inclined to create T. Ottacilius, whom Fabius
conceiving an unfit man for those times, remonstrated his thoughts so
effectually to them, that he put him by that degree, and prevailed with the
people to give it another person that deserved it much better. Which being so,
the people in the election of their Magistrates do judge according to the best
and truest tokens that they can observe; and could they be as well counseled
in these affairs as Princes, they would commit fewer errors than they do. So
that that Citizen who would work himself into the favor of the people, must do
some great matter, or express some great instance of his virtue or parts, that
he may seem to imitate Manlius, and get as much honor as he.

CHAP. XXXV.
What dangers they incur, who make themselves authors of any Enterprise, and
the more extraordinary the design, the greater the danger.
IT would be too long, and difficult a task to discourse at large of the danger
there is in being the head in any new enterprise; what hazards there are in the
Conduct, and how impossible to maintain it. Reserving that therefore for a more
convenient place; I shall speak here only of the dangers to which such
Citizens, or other persons are subject who advise a prince to make himself head
of any important design, and do it with that eagerness and impetuosity, that
the whole enterprise may be imputed to him. The first thing I would recommend
to their observation is, that Counsels are commonly judged by their success; if
their success be unfortunate, the whole scandal of the miscarriage falls upon
the author. If it prospers, and the event be good, he is commended, but at a
distance, and his reward is not commensurate with the danger. The present
Emperor of the Turks Sultan Selimus (as it is reported by some that came late
out of that Country) having made great preparations for an Expedition into
Syria and Egypt changed his design upon the persuasion of one of his Bassa's,
and with a vast Army marched against the Sophie of Persia. Arriving in an open
and ^rge Country, but for the most part Deserts and dry and no Rivers to supply
them, many Diseases were contracted in his Army, insomuch as with hunger and
sickness, it dwindled away (as many of the Romans had done in that Country
before) till at last (though he had the better of the War) he had lost most of
his men; upon which the Emperor being highly enraged, caused the Bassa who had
counseled him thither to be slain. We read likewise of several Citizens
advising and Enterprise, upon the miscarriage of which they were all of them
banished. At Rome certain Citizens proposed and promoted very earnestly the
making one of the Consuls out of the people, and having prevailed, the first of
them which went out with their Army being beaten and over-thrown, the authors
would doubtless have found the inconvenience of their Counsel, had not the
people (in whose favor it was given) appeared in their protection. So that
this is most certain, all Counselors of this kind (whether to Princes or
Commonwealths) are betwixt those two rocks; if they do not advise what in their
judgments they think profitable for their Masters, and that frankly and without
respect, they fail in their duties, and are defective that way; again if they
do counsel freely, they bring their lives and fortunes in danger, because such
is the natural blindness of Mankind, they cannot judge of the goodness or
badness of any thing, but by the success; and considering with my self, what
way was most likely to avoid this infamy or danger, I can find no better than
to take all things moderately, to assume and impropriate no enterprise; to
deliver your opinion frankly, but without passion, and to defend it so
modestly, that if it be followed by your Prince or Commonwealth, it may appear
to be their voluntary act, and not done upon your importunity; in that case it
will not be reasonable to complain of your Counsel, when executed by the
concurrence of the rest; for if there be any danger, it is where things are
done in contradiction of the rest of the Counsel, who upon any miscarriage will
be sure to combine against you, and procure your destruction: and though
perhaps in this case there may want something of that glory which accrews to a
single person, who carries a design against the opposition of the rest,
especially if it succeeds; yet there are two advantages on your side; for first
you will not run so great a hazard in the miscarriage, and then if you advise a
thing modestly, which by the obstinacy and contradiction of the rest is carried
against you, the miscarriage of their Counsel, will make much more to your
reputation. And although a good Citizen is not to desire to raise his credit
upon the misfortunes of his Country, nor indeed to rejoice in what happens of
it self; yet when a thing is done, it is more satisfaction to have your Counsel
applauded, than to be in danger of being punished. Wherefore I am of opinion,
in these doubtful and difficult cases, there can be no better way for the
Counsel either of a Prince or State, than to deliver themselves modestly and
freely; for to be sullen and say nothing, would not only betray your Country,
but expose your self, because in time you would become suspected; and perhaps
it might befall them as it did to one of the Counsel of Perseus King of Macedon,
who being defeated by Emilius Paulius, and escaping with some few of his
friends, one of them (in discourse of his Master's misfortune) began to find
fault; and blame several passages in his Conduct, which as he pretended might
have been managed much better. At which the King being enraged, turned to him,
told him, And do you ( like a Traitor as you are) tell me of it now, when it is
past remedy? and killed him with his own hands; so that he paid dear for being
silent, when it was his duty to have spoke, and for speaking when it was
discretion to have been silent; nor did his forbearing to give his advice
secure him from danger; so that I am confirmed in my opinion that the best way
is to observe the directions above said.

CHAP. XXXIV.
The reason why at the first Charge, the French have been, and still are
accounted more than Men, but afterward less than Women.
THe arrogance of that French man who challenged the stoutest of the Romans to
fight with him upon the Bridge of the Arrien, and was afterward killed by T.
Manlius Torquatus, puts me in mind of what Livy says in many places, of the
French, that in their first attack they are more fierce and daring than men,
but afterward more fearful and pusillanimous than Women. And many people
enquiring into the cause, do attribute it to the peculiarity of their
temperature and nature: I am of opinion that there is much of that in it; yet I
cannot think but that Nature which makes them so furious at first, may be so
invigorated and improved by art, as to continue their courage to the last. To
prove my opinion, I do affirm there are three sorts of Armies. In the first
there is courage and fury, joined with order and discipline; and indeed their
courage and fury proceeds from their discipline. And of this sort were the
Armies of the Romans, for all Histories do agree that there was always good
order by reason of their long discipline and experience. Nothing was done in
their Armies, but with great regularity, and express order from their General.
They neither eat, nor slept, nor bought, nor sold, nor did any other action
either military or civil, but by permission of the Consul; and therefore these
Roman Armies, who by their discipline and courage subdued the whole world, are
the best example we can follow; they who do otherwise, do ill, and though
perhaps they may do something extraordinary sometimes, yet it is more by
accident than judgment: But where well ordered courage meets with good
discipline, and is accommodated to the circumstances of manner, and time,
nothing dismays them, nothing withstands them; for the goodness of their order
giving new life and courage to their men, makes them confident of Victory, and
that confidence never suffers them to give ground, till their whole order be
broken. There is another sort of Armies which are acted more by fury than
discipline (as in the Armies of the French) and there it is quite otherwise,
because not succeeding in their first charge, and not being sustained by a well
ordered courage, that fury upon which they wholly relied growing cold and
remiss, they are quickly overthrown. Whereas the Romans fearing nothing of
danger, by reason of their good order and discipline, without the least
diffidence or question of the Victory, fought on still obstinately, being
animated with the same courage, and agitated by the same ardor at last as at
first, and the more they were pressed, the better they resisted. The third sort
of Armies is where their is neither natural courage, nor discipline and order,
as in our Italian Armies now adays, which are so useless and unserviceable,
that ^^^ess they light upon an Enemy who runs by some accident, they are never
like to have a Victory; and this is so obvious every day, it needs no example
to prove it. But because by the testimony of Livy every one may know what is
the right discipline, and what is the wrong, I will give you the words of
Papirius Gursor in his reprimande to Fabius the Master of his Horse. His words
are these, Nemo hominum; nemo Deorum verecundiam hebeat. Non edicta
Imperatorum, non auspicia observentur: Sine Commeatu, vagimilites in pacato, in
hostico errent; immemores Sacramenti, se ubi valent exauctorentur; infrequentia
deserantur signa; neque conveniatur ad edictum: nec discernatur interdiu,
noctu; aequo, iniquo loco, jussu, injussu Imperatoris pugnetur; Non signa, non
ordines serventur? latrocinii modo, caeca and fortuita, pro solenni and sacrata
Militia, sit. Let them bare no respect or reverence either to God or man: Let
neither the orders of the General, nor the directions of the Auspices be
observed; Let the loose and vagabond Soldier infest his own Country as much as
the Enemies: Let them forget their Oaths, and disband as they please: Let them
run from their Colors as they think good, and not come back when they are
required: Let them fight hand over head, without consideration of time, or
place, or order of their Officers: Let their ranks be confused, and their
Colors deserted: In a word, Let their whole Conduct be blind and fortuito like
thieves, rather than the solemn and sacred Militia of the Romans. By this we
may easily see whether the Militia of our times be blind and fortuitous or
whether it be solemn, and sacred, how far is it short of the old discipline of
the Romans, which consisting in exact order, produced courage and constancy in
the Soldiers; and how far behind the French, among whom though their is not
that just order and constancy, yet there is courage enough.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Whether fighting in small parties, or pickeering before a Battle be necessary;
and how the temper of a new Enemy is to be found without them.
IN humane affairs (as we have said before) there is not only a perpetual and
unavoidable difficulty in carrying them to their perfection, but there is
always some concomitant mischief so inseparable from it, that it is impossible
to arrive at the one without the other. This is visible in all the actions of
mankind, so that that perfection is acquired with much difficulty, unless you
be so favored by fortune, that by her force she overcomes that common and
natural inconvenience: and of this, and duel betwixt Manlius Torquatus and the
Frenchman put me in mind, where, as Livy tell us, Tantiea dimicatio ad
universi belli eventum momenti fuit, ut Gallorum exercitus, relictis trepide
Castris, in Tiburtem agrum, mox in Campaniam transierit; The success of that
duel was of so much importance to the success of the War, that thereupon the
French Army drew off in a great fear into the Tiburtine Country, and afterward
marched away into Campania. From whence I infer, on the one side, that a good
General is to avoid any thing that (carrying but small advantage with it) may
have an ill influence upon his Army; to fight therefore in parties, and venture
your whole fortune upon less than your whole Army, is rash and imprudent, (as I
have said before, where I dissuaded the keeping of passes.) On the other side,
I observe, when an experienced General comes against a new enemy that has the
reputation of being stout, before he brings him to a Battle, he is obliged to
try him by slight skirmishes and pickeerings, that by so doing he may bring his
Soldiers acquainted with their discipline, and way of sighting, and remove
that terror, which the fame and reputation of their courage had given them. And
this in a General is of very great importance, and so absolutely necessary,
that he who engages an unknown enemy with his whole Army, before he has made an
essay of his courage, runs himself and his Army into manifest danger. Valerius
Corvinus was sent by the Romans with an Army against the Samnites, a new enemy
with whom they had never had any conflict before; and Livy tells us he sent
small parties abroad, and caused them to entertain light skirmishes with the
enemy, Ne eos novum bellum, ne novus hostis terreret; Lest his Soldiers should
be terrified with a new war, and a new enemy. But then the danger is, that your
men being overcome, their terror should be increased; and that which you
intended to animate, should discourage and dismay them: and this is one of
those good things which have so near a conjunction with evil, that it is no hard
matter to take one for the other. My advice therefore is, that a wise General
abstains from any thing that may strike a terror into his Army; for then the
Soldiers begin to apprehend, when they see their Comrades killed before their
face. For which reason those pickeerings and slight skirmishes are to be
avoided by all means, unless upon great advantage, or some more than ordinary
hopes of success. Again, it is not his interest certainly to defend any pass,
where he cannot upon occasion bring his whole Army to engage: neither are any
Towns to be made good, but such as are of importance to the subsistence of his
Army, and without which both that and himself must be ruined; and no such Towns
are to be fortified, but where not only a good Garrison may be disposed and
supplied, but where in case of a Siege your whole Army may be brought to
relieve it: other Towns are rather to be quitted than kept; for to abandon a
Town whilst your Army is in the field, is no disrepute to you, nor
discouragement to your Soldiers: but when you lose a place that you undertook,
and every body expected you would defend, that abates much of your credit, and
is a great prejudice to you; so that it will be with you as it was then with
the French, a trifling loss will endanger the whole war.

Philip of Macedon (the Father of Perseus) a martial Prince, and of great
reputation in his time, being invaded by the Romans, quitted and destroyed a
great part of his Country, which he supposed he should be unable to defend, as
judging it better, and more consistent with his honor to suffer it to be
possessed by the enemy as waste and neglected, than to undertake, and not be
able to defend it. The affairs of the Romans being in a very ill condition
after the battle at Cannas, they refused their assistance to several of their
friends and allies, giving them leave to defend themselves if they could: which
resolutions are much better than to attempt to defend that which is not in our
power; for in the first case we lose only our friends; but in the last, both
our friends and our selves. To return therefore to our skirmishes, I say, that
when ever for the discovery of the enemy, or acquainting his Soldiers with the
way of their sighting, a General is constrained to make use of them, he is to
do it with that art and advantage, that he may run no hazard of being worsted:
or else to follow the example of Marius, (which is the better way of the two)
who marching against the Cimbri, a fierce and numerous people which had invaded
Italy for prey, and beaten one Roman Army already; observing his Army to be
afraid, he thought it would be necessary before he came to a general
engagement, to contrive some way or other to dispossess them of their fear;
whereupon, as a wise Officer, he disposed his Army (more than once or twice) in
some secure place upon the road by which the Cimbrian Army was to pass, from
whence his men might have a view of their march, and accustom themselves to the
sight of them; to the end that seeing them to be nothing but a confused and
disorderly multitude, incommoded with baggage, and either very ill accoutred,
or utterly unarmed, they might recover their spirits, and grow impatient to be
at them: and this prudent invention of Marius ought to be diligently imitated
by other people, lest they fall into the dangers aforesaid, and come off like
the French, Qui obrem parvi ponderis in Tiburtem agrum, and in Campaniam
transierunt; Who upon a trifling accident, desponded, and retired: And because
I have mentioned Valerius Corvinus in this Chapter, I shall make use of his
words in the next, to show how a General should be qualified.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
How a Generalis to be qualified, that his Army may rely upon him.
AS we have said before, Valerius Corvinus was gone with his Army against the
Samnites, a new enemy, with whom the Romans had had no contest before. To
encourage his Soldiers, and acquaint them with the discipline of the Samnites,
he inured his men to them, by several small skirmishes, but lest that should
not do, he made a speech to them before the Battle, remonstrating with all
possible efficacy of words, how little they were to value the enemy; and how
much they might expect from their own valor, and his conduct: Livy brings him
in with these words in his mouth, which gives us an exact character of a
General in whom his Army may confide. Tum etiam intueri cujus ductu auspicioque
ineunda pugna sit; utrum qui audiendus, duntaxat magnificus adhortator sit,
verbis tantum ferox, operum militarium expers; aut qui and ipse tela tractare,
procedere ante signa, versari media in mole pugnae sciat. Facta m^a, non dicta
vos milites sequi volo, nec disciplinam modo, sed exemplum etiam ame petere,
qui hac dextra mihi tres Consulatus, summamque laudem peperi; Then you may see
under whose Conduct you fight; whether he that speaks to you be only a
magnificent boaster, valiant in words, but ignorant in whatever belongs to a
Soldier; or whether he be one that knows how to manage his Arms, lead up his
Men, charge in the head of them, and behave himself manfully in the very heat
of the Battle; I would not (fellow Soldiers) that you should follow my words
more than my deeds; or take only my precepts, and not my example, who with this
hand have gained three Consulships, and immortal reputation. Which words, if
well considered, are sufficient to instruct any man what course he is to take
to make himself reputed a great General; he who acts otherwise will find in
time that that command (however he came by it, whether by ambition or fortune)
will rather abstract than add to his honor, for it is not titles that make men
honorable, but men their titles: and it is to be observed likewise, that if
great Captains have been forced to such unusual language to confirm the hearts
of an old veteran Army, when it is to fight with a new enemy; how much more
care and art is to be used in a new inexperienced Army, that never saw an enemy
before. For if a strange enemy be terrible to an old Army, well may he be so to
an Army that is new raised, and was never engaged: nevertheless all these
difficulties have been overcome by the prudence of several Captains, as by
Gracchus the Roman, and Epaminondas the Theban, who with new raised men
defeated old veteran Troops, that had been long experienced in matters of war;
and their way was to prepare them for some months by continual exercise, and
counterfeit battles; by using them to their ranks, and holding them to strict
discipline and obedience; after which, they advanced against the enemy, engaged
with great confidence, and performed very well. Let no man therefore (that is
any thing of a Soldier) despair of making his Army good, if he has but men
enough; for that Prince who abounds with men, and wants Soldiers, is rather to
complain of his own laziness and imprudence, than of their incapacity and
dullness.

CHAP. XXXIX.
A General ought to know the Country, and how to take his advantage in the
ground.
AMong the many things that are necessary in a General of an Army, the knowledge
of Coasts and Countries is one, and that not only in a General, but in an
exquisite and more particular way, without which he shall not be able to do any
great thing: and because all knowledge requires use and exercise to bring it to
perfection, so is it in this knowledge of places; and if it be enquired what
use, and what exercise is required in this case, I answer, Hunting, and
Hawking, and such like recreations; and therefore it is that the Heroes which
anciently governed the World, were said to be brought up in woods and forests,
and accustomed to those kind of exercises; for hunting (besides the
acquaintance which it gives you of the Country) instructs you in many things
that are necessary in war; Xenophon in the Life of Cyrus tells us, that when
Cyrus went to invade the King of Armenia, assigning several offices and places
to the several parts of his Army, he told them that, Questa, non era altro
ch'una di quelle caccie le quali molte volte havenano fat seco; That this
expedition was no more than one of those Chaces which they had taken frequently
with him. Those whom he placed as Scouts upon the Mountains, he resembled to
them who set their nets upon the hills; and those who were to make excursions
upon the plain, were like them who were employed to rouse the Deer, and force
them into the Toyls. And this is said by Xenophon, to show the resemblance and
similitude betwixt hunting and war: for which cause those kind of exercises are
not only honorable, but necessary for great persons; and the rather, because
nothing gives a man so true a knowledge of the Country, or imprints it more
deeply and particularly in the memory: and when a man has acquainted himself
thoroughly with one Country, he may arrive more easily at the knowledge of other,
because all Countries and Coasts have some kind of proportion and conformity
betwixt them; so that the knowledge of the one contributes much to the
understanding of the other. But if before you have acquainted your self with
your own, you seek out new Regions, you will hardly without great labor, and
long time, come to the knowledge of either. Whereas he that is well versed and
practiced in one, shall at the first cast of his eye give you an account how
that plain lies; how that mountain rises; and how far that valley extends; and
all by his former knowledge in that kind. To confirm all this, Titus Livius
gives us an example in Publius Decius, who being a military Tribune in the Army
which the Consul Cornelius commanded against the Samnites, and finding the said
Consul and Army fallen by accident into a Vale where they might have been
encompassed by the enemy, and cut off, Vides tu Aule Corneli (said Decius to
the Consul) cacum^n illud supra hostem? Arx illa est spei salutisque nostrae;
si eam (quoniam caeci reliquere Samnites) impigre capimus; Do you see, Sir,
that hill which hangs over the enemies Camp; there lies our hope; the blind
Samnites have neglected it, and our safety depends upon the seizing of it
quickly. For, said Livy before, Publius Decius Tribunus militum, unum editum in
saltu Collem, imminentem hostium Castris, aditu arduum impedito agmini,
expeditis hand difficilem; Publius Decius the military Tribune observed a hill
over the enemies Camp not easily to be ascended by those who were completely
armed, but to those who were lightly armed, accessible enough. Whereupon being
commanded to possess it by the Consul with 3000 men, he obeyed his orders,
secured the Roman Army, and designing to march away in the night, and save both
himself and his party; Livy brings him in speaking these words to some of his
Comrades, Ite mecum, ut dum lucis aliquid superest, quibus locis hosts
praesidia ponant, qua pateat hinc exitus exploremus. Haec omnia sagulo militari
amictus, ne Ducem circuire hosts notarent, perlustravit; Come along with me,
that whilst we have yet light, we may explore where the enemy keeps his Guards,
and which way we may make our retreat: and this he did in the habit of a
private Soldier, that the enemy might not suspect him for an Officer. He then
who considers what has been said, will find how useful and necessary it is for
a General to be acquainted with the nature of the Country; for had not Decius
understood those things very well, he could not so suddenly have discerned the
advantage of that hill, and of what importance it would be to the preservation
of the Roman Army; neither could he have judged at that distance whether it was
accessible or not, and when he had possessed himself of it, and was to draw off
afterward, and follow the Consul, (being so environed by the Samnites) he
could never have found out the best way for his retreat, nor have guessed so
well where the enemy kept his Guards. So that it must necessarily be that
Decius had a perfect knowledge of the Country, which knowledge made him secure
that hill, and the securing of that hill was the security of the Army. After
which, by the same knowledge (though he was as it were besieged by the enemy) he
found a way to make his own retreat, and bring off his whole party.

CHAP. XL.
How fraud in the management of War is honorable and glorious.
THough fraud in all other actions is abominable, yet in matters of War it is
laudable and glorious; and he who overcomes his enemies by stratagem, is as
much to be praised as he who overcomes him by force. This is to be seen by the
judgment of those who write the Lives of great Persons, especially of great
Commanders; for they command and applaud Hanibal and the rest in all their
inventions of that nature. There are many examples in them to this purpose,
which I shall not repeat here; only this I must advertize, that I do not intend
that fraud which consists in betraying a trust, or breaking an agreement, to be
honorable; for though by them you may acquire Power, and it is possible a
Kingdom, (yet, as I said before) it cannot be with honor; but by fraud, I mean
that artifice which is shown in stratagems and circumventions, against an enemy
that is not only in hostility, but a state of defiance, (for where he reposes
any confidence in you, it alters the case) and such as I mean, was the artifice
of Hanibal when he pretended to fly, only to possess himself of some passes,
and so block up the Consul and his Army; as also when to clear himself of
Fabius Maximus, he found out the invention of binding firebrarnds and other
combustible matter about the horns of the Cattle, and turning them out upon the
enemy. And much of this nature was that of Pontius General for the Samnites;
which he used to circumvent the Roman Army ad Tureas Caudinas. Pontius having
disposed his Army privately upon the mountains; sent several of his Soldiers
habited like Shepherds with several herds of Cattle through the plain: being all
taken and examined by the Romans where the Army of the Samnites was, they
unanimously concurred in the story which Pontius had put into their mouths,
that it was gone to besiege Nocera; which being credited by the Consul, he
brake up from his post, and marching through the plain for the relief of Nocera,
he ran himself into the trap, and was no sooner entered, but he was blocked up
by the enemy. This exploit was fraudulently performed, yet it would have been
very honorable to Pontius, had he followed his Father's advice, who would have
had him either dismissed the Romans frankly, that they might have been obliged
by their usage, or else have put them all to the sword, that they might have
taken no revenge; but he took the middle way, Quae neque amicos parat, neque
inimicos tollit; Which neither multiplied his friends, nor lessened the number
of his foes. Which way has always been pernicious in matters of state, as has
been shown elsewhere.

CHAP. XLI.
That ones Country is to be defended by all means, and whether honorable or
dishonorable it imports not, it is well defended.
THe Roman Army and their Consul (as is said before) were blocked up by the
Samnites, who having proposed terms to them which were very dishonorable, as
that they should be dismissed sub jugum, and disarmed (in token of bondage,)
and then sent back again to Rome. The Consuls were amazed at the motion, and
the whole Army was in despair; when Lentulus the Roman Legate stood up, and
told them that in his judgment no conditions were to be scrupled at that time
when their Country was at stake: for the safety of Rome consisting in the
safety of that Army, the Army was to be preserved, and that Country which is
defended, is well defended, let the way be as it will, honorable or not
honorable, it matters not: for if that Army was preserved, in time Rome might
work off that disgrace; but if it were lost, (though it perished never so
bravely) Country, and Liberty and all would be lost with it: and so his Counsel
was followed. And this ought to be considered and observed by every man whose
office it is to advise for the good of his Country; for where the safety of
that is in question, no other consideration ought to be coincident, as whether
the way be just or unjust; merciful or cruel, honorable or dishonorable; but
postponing all other respects, you are to do that which shall procure the
safety of your Country, and preservation of its liberty. And this is
effectually imitated by the French both in their words, and deeds, whenever the
Majesty of their Prince, or the interest of their Country is at stake. For
there is nothing they bear with less patience, than to hear a man say such a
thing is dishonorable for their King; for they believe their King incapable of
dishonor, be his Counsels or his fortune what they will, because whether he
wins or loses, or whatever is done, all makes for the King.

CHAP. XLII.
That forced Promises are not binding.
THe Consuls being returning to Rome, with their Army disarmed, and a scandal
upon them for the dishonorable conditions to which they had submitted; the
first who spoke against the keeping them, was S. Postumius the Consul, who
persuaded the Senate that only himself, and those who accepted them, were
obliged thereby; and that they did not extend to the people of Rome; wherefore
if the people of Rome would be never so exact, the most that could be expected
from them, would be but to deliver up him, and all those who had engaged
themselves into the hands of the Samnites; and this he maintained with so much
obstinacy and zeal, that the Senate was ^onvinced, and sent him and the rest
back Prisoners to the Samnites, with a protestation against the Peace, as not
extending to them; and fortune was so favorable to Postumius in the business,
that the Samnites not retaining him, he returned to Rome, and was in greater
reputation there after his loss, than Pontius was among the Samnites after his
Victory. And here there are two things more particularly remarkable: One is,
That there is no action, but is capable of producing honor and renown; in
victory there is nothing more frequent: In loss, it is possible, by making it
appear that it came not by your fault; or else by doing some action presently
after, that may recompense and repair it. The other is, That it is not
scandalous to break such promises as are extorted by force. For in promises
relating to the public, if they be obtained by force, when the force ceases,
the promise cease with it, and may be neglected without any disgrace. Of
this, all History is full of examples, and there is not a day but presents us
with new: For as we see Princes make no Conscience of performing any thing that
they are obliged to by force, especially if the force be removed; so they are
as little tender of their promises in other things, when the cause which
pressed them to promise is taken away: which whether commendable or not in a
Prince, or binding or not binding, I shall not determine in this place, having
spoken of it so largely in my Treatise called The Prince.

CHAP. XLIII.
Those who are born in the same Country, retain almost the same Nature through
all the variety of times.
WIsemen were wont to say (and perhaps not unworthily) That he who would know
what will be, must consider what has been already, because there is nothing in
the world now, nor will be hereafter, but what has* and will have conformity
with the productions of former times; and the reason is, because proceeding
from men who have, and have had always the same passions, they must necessarily
have the same effects. It Is true indeed their actions are sometimes better and
more virtuous in this Province, than in that, and in that more than in another,
according to the difference of their Education, for from the manner of their
breeding, people take the first rudiments of their conversation; and it makes
it more easy to conjecture future events, by what is passed, when we see some
Nations retaining their humors and peculiarities a long time. So one Nation
has been always covetous, another fraudulent; and so on the other side, one has
been constantly famous for one virtue, and another for another. He who peruses
the passages of old in our very City of Florence, and compares them with our
modern, will find that it has been all along exposed to the avarice, pride,
cruelty, and falsehood of the Germans and French: Every one knows how
unfaithfully we have been dealt withal: How often Charles VIII. of France
received our Money, and promised to restore the Citadels at Pisa; but never
performed, which was a great instance of his infidelity, and avarice. But to
wave such recent examples, every one knows what happened in the War betwixt the
Florentines, and the Visconti Dukes of Milan. The Florentines being destitute
of other expedients, resolved to bring the Emperor into Italy, to fall upon
Lombardy with all his power and reputation. The Emperor engaged to bring a
great Army into Italy; to make War upon the Visconti, and to defend Florence
against them, upon condition the Florentines paid him 100000 Ducats by way of
advance, and as much more when they came into Italy. The Florentines agreed,
paid their first Money down, and the rest when they entered Italy; yet when he
had marched as far as Verona, he turned back without doing any thing,
complaining of the Florentines for want of performance: So that had not
Florence been under some extraordinary necessity, or passion, or had they ever
read and considered the ancient customs of those Nations, they would never have
been so often overreached, seeing they have been always alike, and used the
same practices in all places, with all people. Thus they served the Tuscans of
old, who having been many times overpowered and routed, and dispersed by the
Romans, and finding their own force unable to defend them; they articled with
the French on this side of the Alps to give them a Sum of Money, for which the
French were to join their forces with the Tuscaps, and march with them against
the Romans: But when the French had got their Money, they refused to perform
the conditions on their part, alleging that they received it not to make War
upon the Romans, but to forbear infesting them themselves: by which infidelity
and avarice in the French, the poor Tuscans were at once defeated both of their
Money and assistance. From whence we may conclude that the Tuscans were
formerly of the same nature as now, and especially the Florentines, and the
French and other foreign Nations had always the same inclination to deceive
them.

CHAP. XLIV.
Confidence and boldness does many times obtain that which would never be
compassed by ordinary means.
THe Samnites were invaded by the Romans, and their Army so weak, it durst not
meet them in the field: whereupon it was resolved, That all their Garrisons
should be reinforced, and with the rest of their Troops they should pass into
Tuscany (which was then at peace with the Romans) and try if they could tempt
them to take up Arms, and break their Peace; and in the Harangue which was made
by the Samnites to the Tuscans to remonstrate upon what occasion they had taken
up Arms themselves, they had this expression, Rebellasse quod pax servientibus
gravior, quam liberis bellum. They had rebelled, because Peace was more
insupportable in servitude, than War to men that are free. And so partly by
persuasions, and partly by the presence of their Army, they prevailed with them
to take Arms against the Romans, which they had refused to their Ambassadors
before. From whence it is to be observed, that when a Prince desires to obtain
any thing of another (if occasion permits) he ought not to give him time to
consider, but is to act so as he may see a necessity upon him of resolving
immediately; and this is done when the person to whom the demand is made sees
that in either denying it absolutely, or delaying his answer, he runs a
manifest danger. This way was used very handsomely in our days by Pope Julius
with the French; and Monsieur de Foix (the King of France's General) against
the Marquess of Mantoua. Pope Julius resolving to drive the Family of the
Bentivogli out of Bolonia; and judging that to do it, he should have need of
the assistance of the French, and that it would be convenient the Venetians
should stand Neuter; To this purpose he sent Ambassadors to them both, but
could get nothing but uncertain and ambiguous answers; wherefore to surprise
them, and bring them that way to his lure whether they would or no, he got what
Forces he could together, and marching directly to Bolonia, sent to the
Venetians to let them know he expected they should stand Neuter; and to the
French to send him Supplies: Both of them finding themselves under a necessity
of answering immediately, and that there was no time allowed to consider,
fearing the displeasure and indignation of his Holiness, they both of them
complied; the Venetian did not meddle; and the French sent him assistance.
Monsieur de Foix being another time with his Army in Bolonia, and understanding
the defection of Brescia, he resolved to go immediately and endeavor to reduce
it. There were but two ways that he could possibly pass; one was through the
Dominions of his Master, but that was tedious and about; the other was a
shorter cut, through the Territories of the Marquess of Mantoua; but then he was
not only to force his way through that Country, but, he was to pass certain
Sluices betwixt Fens and Lakes (with which that Country abounds) and that was
not to be done without great difficulty, in respect of several Forts which were
upon them, and all well guarded by the Marquess: However de Foiz resolved upon
the shortest, in spite of the difficulty; and that the Marquess might have no
time to deliberate, he marched with his Army, and at the same moment sent a
Messenger to the Marquess for the Keys of such Castles as stood in his passage;
and the Marquess surprised with the suddenness and confidence of the demand,
sent them immediately, which he would never have done had they been more
modestly desired; the Marquess being in League with the Venetian and Pope, in
whose hands he had likewise a Son at that time; all which, had he had time to
have considered, would have been very laudable reasons to have denied it: But
being pressed of a sudden, he sent them (as is said before:) Just so it was
betwixt the Tuscans, and the Samnites; the presence of the Samnian Army having
forced them to take Arms, which they had refused before, and had scarcely done
then, had they had liberty to have advised.

CHAP. XLV.
Whether in a Battle it is best to give or receive the Charge.
DEvius, and Fabius two Roman Consuls, were in the field with two Armies
against the Samnites, and Tuscans; and being come to a Battle, it is observable
that they took two several ways in the manner of their fighting, and it is
worth our enquiry which of them was the best. Decius charged the Enemy with all
imaginable fury, and engaged his whole Army at once: Fabius received the
charge, and (judging that way the most safe) reserved his effort till the last,
when (as we say) the Enemy had spent their fire, and the heat of their fury was
over. By the success of the Battle, it appeared that the design of Fabius was
better than that of Decius, who tired with the vehemence of his first charge,
and seeing his men engaged farther among the Enemy, than otherwise they would
have been, to gain that honor by his death, which he could not hope for by the
Victory, in imitation of his Father, he sacrificed himself for the Roman
Legions. Which when Fabius understood, that he might not gain less honor by
living, than his colleague should do by his death, he advanced with his
Reserves, and charged the Enemy so briskly, that he overthrew them, and gained
a happy and most memorable Victory. By which it appears that the way of Fabius
was more imitable and secure.

CHAP. XLVI.
How it comes to pass that in a City the same Family retains the same manners
and customs a long time.
IT appears that not only one City has its manners and institutions different;
and produces men more austere, or effeminate than the rest; but in the same
City Families are frequently found to have the same difference. Of this there
are multitude of Examples, and particularly in Rome. The Manlii were always
rigid and severe: The Publicoli benign, and lovers of the people: The Appii
ambitious and enemies to the people, and so in several other Families they had
their peculiar qualities that discriminated them from the rest; which cannot
proceed barely from their extraction and blood (for that must of necessity have
been altered by the variety of their Marriages) but rather from the diversity of
their Education, in the several Families; for it is a great matter when a man
is accustomed to hear well or ill of any thing from his infancy; and makes such
an impression in him, that from thence he many times regulates his conversation
as long as he lives; and if this were not so, it would have been impossible
that all the Appii should have been agitated by the same passion and ambition,
as Livy observed in most of them; and particularly in one of the last, who
being made Censor, and to deposite his Office at the expiration of 18 months
according to Law, refused it absolutely (though his Colleague resigned)
insisting upon an old Law made by the Censors to continue their Magistracy for
five years and though there were many meetings, and great contention and tumult
about this; yet in spite both of Senate and People he could not be brought to
deposite. And he who reads the Oration which he made against P. Sempronius the
Tribune of the people, will discern the insolence of that Family, and the
bounty and humanity of several other Citizens expressed by their obedience to
the Laws, and their affection to their Country.

CHAP. XLVII.
A good Citizen is to forget all private injury, when in competition with his
love to his Country.
MAnlius the Consul being employed in the Wars against the Samnites, received a
wound that disabled him for executing his charge; upon which the Senate thought
sit to send Papirius Cursor the Dictator to supply his place, and the Dictator
being by the Laws to be nominated by Fabius, who was then with his Army in
Tuscany, they were fearful (in respect of an old quarrel betwixt them) that
Fabius would not name him. Whereupon the Senate dispatched two Ambassadors
toward him, to entreat that (laying aside all private animosity) he would name
Cursor for Dictator, which Fabius did out of love to his Country; though by his
sullenness and silence, and several other signs he signified his reluctance,
and that that Election went against the hair: From hence therefore all good
Citizens are to take example, and learn to prefer the public good, before any
private quarrel of their own.

CHAP. XLVIII.
When an Enemy commits any grand fault, it is to be suspected for a fraud.
FUlnius being left Lieutenant of the Roman Army in Tuscany, upon the Consuls
going to Rome to be present at some Ceremony, the Tuscans to draw him into a
trap, laid an Ambuscade for him not far from his Camp; and having disguised
some of their Soldiers in the habit of Shepherds, they caused them to drive
certain Cattle within sight of the Romans; and the Shepherds were so exact in
their obedience, that they came up to their very Stoccadoes: The Lieutenant
wondered at their confidence; and the unreasonableness of the thing gave him
occasion to suspect; whereupon he found out a way to discover the fraud, and
frustrate the whole plot: From whence we may observe that a General is not to
presume upon any gross error that his enemy commits; because it is not rational
to believe he would be so sottish, and inconsiderate, were there not some
stratagem at the bottom; yet many times men are so blinded with desire of
Victory, that they see nothing but what makes for themselves. The French having
overthrown the Romans not far from the Allia, and pursuing them to Rome, found
the gates open, and without any guards to defend them: They apprehended it a
design, and stood drawn up all that day and the next night, without daring to
enter, not imagining the Romans could have been so abject and imprudent as to
have abandoned their Country. In the year 1508. when the Florentines besieged
Pisa, Alfonso del Mutolo a considerable Citizen of that Town, being Prisoner in
the Camp, promised that if they would give him his liberty, he would deliver
one of the Gates into their hands; the Florentines believed and discharged him;
but coming afterward to negotiate more particularly with certain Commissioners
deputed to that purpose, he was so far from coming privately, that he was
always accompanied with several of the Pisans, only when they came to treat, he
desired them to withdraw. Forasmuch therefore as he came publicly, and
attended by several Pisans, the Florentines had good reason to suspect the
performance of his promise: But the Florentines were so blinded with a desire
to have the City, that following the direction of Alfonso, they came up to the
Gate toward Lucca, expecting to be let in; but all things being prepared for
them, they received a great loss, and left many of their best Officers and
Soldiers behind them.

CHAP. XLIX.
A Commonwealth which desires to preserve it self free, has need of new
provisions every day; and upon what score Fabius was called Maximus.
IT falls out of necessity (as has been said before) that in a great City there
is not a day but some accidents occur that have need to be remedied; and as
they are of more or less importance, so their Physician ought to be more or
less expert. And if strange and unexpected accidents ever happened in any City,
it was in Rome: one of which sort, was the the general conspiracy of the Roman
Women against their Husbands: some had poisoned their Husbands already, and all
the rest had their materials ready to do as much by theirs. Of the same sort
was the conspiracy of the Bacchanals, discovered during the time of the
Macedonian War, in which many thousands of Men and Women were engaged; which
would have been very dangerous for that City, had it not been discovered; for
the Romans had not a custom of punishing whole multitudes when they offended.
And here we cannot but admire the fortitude, the severity, the magnanimity of
the Romans in punishing offenders; which (if there were nothing else to evince
it) would be a great testimony of their virtue and power. For so great was
their justice, they made no scruple to execute a whole Legion, or City at a
time: sometimes they banished 8 or 10000 men together with such conditions as
would have been insupportable to a single man: so it happened to those who
escaped from the Battle at Cannas, they banished them all into Sicily,
forbidding them to Quarter in any Town, or to commit any disorder. But the most
terrible of all their executions was the decimation of their Armies, in which
every tenth man was put to death by lot quite through their Army; nor for the
punishment of a multitude can any way be found more formidable; for where a
multitude transgresses, and no certain Author is known, to punish the whole
with death would be too severe; and to punish one part, and excuse another
would be injust to those who were punished, and encourage the other to commit
the same offense again: But where all are alike guilty, to execute every tenth
man by lots, gives him who is to be punished, occasion to complain only of his
fortune; and makes him who escapes afraid against the next time. The good Women
then who would have poisoned their Husbands; and the Priests of Bacchus were
punished as they deserved; and though these maladies in a Commonwealth have
many times very ill Symptoms, yet they are not mortal, because there is still
time enough for the cure. But where the State is concerned, it is otherwise,
and time may be wanting; and therefore if they be not seasonably and prudently
redressed, the whole Government may miscarry. And this may be cleared to us, by
what happened in Rome. The Romans having been very free in bestowing the freedom
and privileges of their City upon strangers, the strangers grew so numerous by
degrees, and to have so great a Vote in the Councils, that the whole Government
began to totter, and decline from its old, to its new Inhabitants; which being
observed by Qui^^us Fabius the Censor, he applied a remedy in time, by reducing
all the new Citizens into four Tribes; that being contracted into so narrow a
space, they might not have so malignant an influence upon the City; and this so
timely and so useful expedient, was taken so thankfully from him by the people,
that they gave him the addition of Maximus, and he was called Fabius Maximus
ever after.

THE ART OF WAR, IN SEVEN BOOKS.

By NICHOLAS MACHIAVEL.

Newly Translated into ENGLISH; and for the benefit of the Reader divided into
CHAPTERS.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, Charles Harper, and John Amery, in
Fleetstreet. 1680.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
Kind Reader,
IT may seem strange to you at first, that I have divided the Books of
Machiavel, and disposed them into Chapters* contrary to the order of his
Dialogues; but I am assured when you consider my intention, you will rather
applaud than condemn me. I was always sensible that no man could blame me, if I
kept exactly to my Author; nevertheless I thought this way more beneficial, the
length of a Discourse being commonly tiresome to any man who affects brevity;
besides that in all sorts of Books, these kind of breaches and sections are
very helpful to the memory. For this reason the Works of Aristotle, Vitruvius
and Pliny, which were originally in another method, have been reduced since
into this manner of division. I have presumed to do the same in this my
Translation, having had more regard to the ease and advantage of the Reader,
than to the exact order of the Author* whom I have not followed verbatim, by
reason of the diversity of the Languages, yet his sense I have observed as
strictly as would consist with the propriety of our own Language, assuring my
self that your bounty will dispense with some faults, seeing nothing can be
done so accurately, but will be subject to many.

THE PREFACE OF NICOLO MACHIAVELLI, TO Lorenzo the Son of Philippo Strozzi,
Gentleman of FLORENCE.
MAny have been, and are still of opinion, that in the whole world no two
things are more incongruous and dissimilar than a Civil, and a Military life;
insomuch that many times when a man designs himself for a Soldier, he not only
takes upon him a new habit, but he changes his Customs, his Company, his manner
of Discourse, and leaves off all ways of civil conversation; for he who would
be light and nimble, and ready for the execution of all sort of violence, looks
upon a civil habit as improper and cumbersome; civil customs are unsuitable to
him who thinks them soft and effeminate, and inconsistant with the life he
proposes; and indeed it would be undecent if a man whose business it is to look
big, and Hector, and fright the whole world with his Oaths and his Blasphemies,
should carry himself demurely, and behave himself with the usual gentleness and
complacency of other men; and this is it which in our days makes this opinion
true: But if we consider the condition and method of old times, we shall find
no two things more united, more conformable; nor more necessarily amicable than
they. For all the Arts which are contrived in a City for the common good; all
the courses invented to keep men in fear of God and the Laws would be useless
and vain, were not force provided for their defense; which force (if well
ordered) will be able to make them good, though perhaps the Laws are not so
exact in themselves; for this is most certain, good Orders without Military
coertion will quickly moulder to nothing, and run to decay like a Noble and
Princely Palace that is uncovered at the top, and has nothing but the splendour
and richness of its furniture to defend it from the weather. And if anciently
Kingdoms and States employed great industry to keep people in peace, and in the
faith and fear of God; certainly in the regulation of their Military Discipline
they employed much more; for where can ones Country repose greater confidence,
than in him who has promised to die for it? Where can there be greater
inclination to Peace, than in him who is not capable of molestation or injury,
but by War? Where can there be more fear of God, than in him who being
obnoxious to hourly dangers, has more need of his divine assistance. This
necessity being well considered by those who gave Laws to Kingdoms, and those
who had the Command of their Armies, was the cause that the life of a Soldier
was in great reputation with all people, and much imitated and followed. But
Military discipline being now totally depraved, and degenerated from the
practice of the ancients; that depravity has been the occasion of several ill
opinions, which have brought that Discipline into contempt, and made all people
hate and avoid the conversation of a Soldier. But considering with my self
both from what I have seen and read, that it is not impossible to revive the
discipline of our Ancestors; and reduce it to its primitive excellence, I
resolved (to keep my self from idleness) to write what I thought might be to
the satisfaction of such persons as were studious of the art of War, and lovers
of Antiquity; it is true, it is more than ordinary boldness to treat of this
Subject, where others have been so scrupulous and wary; yet I cannot think it
an error to write of what others have professed and exercised with much more
audacity and presumption; For my faults in writing, may be corrected without
prejudice to any body; but those faults which they commit in the execution,
cannot be repaired, but by the destruction and ruin of several people;
consider then (Sir) the quality of my labors, and according to your judgment
let them be approved or rejected, as you think they deserve: I send them to you
as a testimony of my gratitude, though my abilities are not in the least
commensurat with the greatness of your favors: besides it being the custom to
address things of this nature to persons that are Illustrious for their Birth,
wealth, parts, or generosity: I knew you had not many equals in your Nobility
and Fortune, fewer in your parts; but in Generosity and Liberality, none at all.

THE ART of WAR, IN SEVEN BOOKS.
LIBER I.
CHAP. I.
How the Seigneur Fabritio Colonna being refreshing himself one evening with
some other Gentlemen in a beautiful Garden, took occasion to enter upon this
discourse of War.
SEeing I am of opinion, that after a man is dead, it is lawful for any body to
commend him without danger of reproof, (because there can be no occasion nor
suspicion of flattery) I shall make no difficulty to speak something in praise
of our renowned and true friend Cosimo Rucellia, whose name I cannot remember
without tears in my eyes, having known in him all the good qualities, which one
good Friend or good Citizen would desire in another; for I know not any thing
so dear to him, that he would not have sacrificed for his friend; nor any thing
so dreadful, that he would not have undertaken for his Country: and I confess
freely among all with whom I have had any acquaintance and conversion, I do not
know any man whose heart was more disposed to great and magnificent things. At
his death nothing troubled him so much (as he complained often to his friends)
as that he should die young, and in his own house without honor, or the
satisfaction of having been serviceable to any man as he desired, for he was
sensible that no more could be said of him than that he died a good friend.
However it follows not but we who were acquainted with him, may bear testimony
of his virtues and good qualities, seeing their is nothing left of his works or
actions to recommend him to the World: and yet fortune was not so much his
enemy but she suffered him to leave a short monument of the dexterity of his
wit, which appears in certain Sonnets, and amorous Verses of his composition;
in which way (though he was not amorous) he entertained himself at idle times
in his youth, till his Stars had conducted him to higher thoughts, by which
Verses it may easily be discerned with what comeliness and felicity he could
have expressed his conceptions, and how honorable he would have made himself
by his Poetry, had he made it his business. But fortune having deprived us of
such a friend, it seems to me that no better remedy can be applied, than for us
(as far as is possible) to make as much of his memory as we can, and recollect
such of his sayings, or arguments, as were either witty or solid. And because
there is nothing of him more fresh than the discourse which he had lately with
Fabritio Colonna in his Garden, (where the said Fabritio gave a large account
of all the mysteries of War one the one side, and Cosimo proposed, and
objected, and argued with as much gravity one the other) being then present by
accident with other of our friends, I have thought fit to put in writing, that
by reading it, such of Cosimo's friends as were there may, renew the memory of
his Virtues; such as were not there, may be troubled for their absence, and
learn several things profitable not only for military, but civil conversation.

I say then Fabritio Colonna returning from Lombardy, where for a long time he
had done very honorable service for the King of Spain, passing by Florence to
repose himself some time in that City, visit the Duke, and enjoy the company of
certain Gentlemen with whom he had had a former acquaintance, Cosimo held
himself obliged to invite him to his Gardens* not so much to show his own
liberality and magnificence, as to have larger opportunity of discoursing with
him, and informing himself of such things as might be expected from a person of
his experience, and spending a whole day in discoursing of what might be to the
satisfaction of his mind. Fabritio accepted his invitation, came to his house,
and was entertained very nobly by Cosimo, with several other of his more
particular friends as Zanobi Buondelmonti, Battista dalla Palla, Luigi Alamanni
and others, all of them young Gentlemen, his intimate friends, and ardently
studious of the same things, of whose qualifications I shall say nothing in
this place, because being still living, their own actions do recommend them
every hour of the day.

Fabritio was regall'd with as much pomp and magnificence as were consistent
with the time and the place: but dinner being ended, the tables taken way, and
all the formalities of the Feast over, which among persons of great minds,
whose thoughts are employed upon more honorable things, are not so tedious as
with other people) the day being long, and heat excessive, Cosimo thought it
convenient for the better satisfaction of his designs, under pretense of
avoiding the heat, to carry Fabritio into a close and shady Arbor in the
Garden, where they might discourse with more leisure and privacy; and having
brought him and the rest of the Company to the place, some of them disposed
themselves upon the grass, (which was very pleasant and green) and others upon
seats under the shadow of those lofty trees; Fabritio began to applaud the
delightsomness of the place, and then looking particularly upon the trees, and
not knowing of some of them, he stood still, as it were in suspense, which
being observed by Cosimo, he told him, it is possible, Sir, you may not be
acquainted with those trees, but it is no wonder, for some of them were in more
request with our Forefathers than they are with us, and having told him their
names, and what delight Seignor Bernardo his Grandfather took in planting,
Fabritio replied, I thought they were as you say; but the pleasantness of this
place, and the innocence of that employment puts me in mind of some Princes in
the Kingdom of Naples who delighted themselves exceedingly in those kind of
diversions, and would plant, and make delicate Arbours to keep themselves from
the heat; and thereupon breaking off short in his discourse, he stood still for
a while, as in some serious suspense, but presently he told them if I thought I
should not misbehave my self, (which among my friends I suppose is not easy) I
would give you my opinion of it, not to traduce or calumniate them, but for
discourse sake, and to pass away the time; for doubtless those Princes (under
correction) had done much better to have imitated their Ancestors in great and
heroic, rather than in soft and effeminate things; to have followed their
examples in the heat of the Sun, rather than to have retired and withdrawn
themselves into the coolness of a shade; and rather to have personated their
Forefathers in what was solid and perfect, than in what was delicate, and
corrupt; for since these kind of entertainments have been pleasing to our
Countrymen, our Country has gone to ruin, and all things declined.

Cosimo. You have opened a way to a discourse which I desire exceedingly, and
therefore I beg of you that you would speak of it frankly, without respect to
any body, seeing I intend to interrogate you with the same freedom, and if in
my demands or replies I excuse, or accuse any man, it will not be barely to
excuse or accuse him, but to understand the truth.


Fabritio. I shall be well pleased to inform you of anything I know, and shall
leave it to your discretion to judge whether what I say be true or false,
expecting to learn as much from your demands, as you will do from my answers;
for a wise question makes a man consider many things which perhaps he regarded
not before; and understand others, which without interrogation he had never
understood.


Cosimo. I will return to what you said first, that my Grandfather, and your
Forefathers would have done more prudently to have imitated their Ancestors in
difficult and generous things, rather than in what was delicate and soft; and
in this I will excuse my part, and leave the other to be defended by you. I am
of opinion that there was not a man in his time who detested all kind of
effeminacy more than he, and who was a greater lover of that kind of activity
and vigor which you so much commend, nevertheless he found that he could not
make use of it either in his own person, or in the persons of his Children,
being born in so corrupt an age, that a man who should have deviated from the
common practice of those times, would have made himself contemptible to every
body. For if a man in the heat of Summer should have lien basking upon the
sands; or in the midst of Winter should have taken up his quarters in the snow,
(as Diogenes did) he would have been thought a fool, or a madman: should a man
have followed the Spartan way, brought up his children in some cottage, taught
them to sleep in the fields; to run about barefoot and bare-headed; wash in
cold water to inure them to hardship, and by making them less fond of life, to
make them less sensible of death, he would have been despised for his pains;
and have been thought rather a bruit than a man. Again should a man have been
observed to starve his own carcass, and to live only upon beans and pease, and
such kind of pulse, and have made as small account of money as Fabritius did of
what was offered him by the Samnites, it is possible he might have been
commended by some few, but he should have been followed by no body: being
discouraged therefore by the practice of the present age, he followed not the
example of his Ancestors exactly, but followed them as much as he could, with
as little notice and admiration to the World.


Fabritio. You have excused your Grandfather very handsomely on that
particular, and what you have said is doubtlesly true; but I did not speak so
much of that hard and rustic way of living, as of other ways that are more
soft and effeminate; have greater conformity and correspondence with our
present times, and are (in my judgment) easily to be introduced by any man who
has the government of affairs: and in my discourse of this matter I shall not
need to straggle into other Countries for examples, for the Romans (my own
Countrymen) will furnish me abundantly; whose Practices, and order of
Government, if well considered, will not be found so impossible to be
introduced in any other City where there is but the least spark of virtue and
goodness.


Cosimo. What are those things that you would introduce according to the
example of our Ancestors?


Fabritio. To honor and reward virtue; not to despise poverty; to value order
and discipline of war; to constrain Citizens to love one another; to live
without factions; to postpone all private interest to the public; and several
other things that may easily accommodate with our times; and these things are
not difficult to be introduced, provided it be done deliberately and by right
means, because in them the truth is so manifest and apparent, that the
commonest capacity may apprehend it. He therefore who orders his affairs in
this manner, plants himself trees which will afford him a happier and more
pleasant shelter and protection than these,


Cosimo. I will not reply to what you have said, but referring it to the
discretion of the company, (who can easily judge of it) I shall address my
discourse to you, who seems to find fault with all those who in their great and
weighty affairs do not follow the examples of our Ancestors, supposing thereby
I may be more easily satisfied in my intention. I would know therefore how it
comes to pass that, on one side you condemn all those who do not imitate the
practice of our Ancestors; and yet on the other, in your wars (which is your
profession, and excellence) it does not appear that you have made use of any
thing of the ancient method and discipline, or done any thing that resembled it.


Fabritio. You are now come to the point where I expected you, and indeed my
discourse deserved, and I my self desired no other demand. And though I might
save my self the labor, with a very plausible excuse, yet I will satisfy both
your desire and my own, and that the more largely, because both time and place
concurs to our convenience. Men who are desirous to do any great action, are
first to prepare themselves with all diligence and industry, that when occasion
is offered, they may be ready to execute and complete it. And because where
those preparations are made cautiously, they are not to be discovered; no man
is to be accused of negligence, unless occasion discovers him first, to which
if he be remiss, and makes not use of his time to execute his design, it gives
us to understand, that either he has not prepared as he ought to have been, or
that he had not thought of it at all: and therefore no occasion having
presented it self to me to discover the preparations which I had made to reduce
our Militia into the form of the ancients; if I have not yet reduced it, I
conceive I cannot justly be condemned, either by you, or any body else: and
this I think is a sufficient answer to your accusation.


Cosimo. It would be sufficient indeed, could I be assured that you never had
any occasion.


Fabritio. But because I find you may doubt whether ever such occasion were
offered or not, I am content to discourse more largely (upon condition you will
have the patience to hear me) what preparations are necessary to be made; what
occasion is necessary to be had; what difficulties obstruct our preparatives,
and hinder our occasion; and how this is easy and hard to fall out at the same
time, which seems a contradiction.


Cosimo. You cannot do me and the whole company a greater favor; and if it
will be no trouble to you to enlarge, it will be none to us to attend: but
because the discourse is like to be long, I desire I may have the assistance of
my friends, yet with your license and permission; wherefore they and I do make
it our request, that you would not take it a miss if we interrupt you sometimes
with some importunate demand.


Fabritio. I am very well contented, that you ( Cosimo) and these young
Gentlemen your friends, ask any thing of me, because I believe the heat of your
youth makes you inclinable to arms, and by consequence more apt to give credit
to what I shall say: and these other Gentlemen shall have the same liberty,
because their gray heads, and their cold blood, makes them commonly enemies to
warfare, and incorrigible, as people possessed with an opinion that it is the
times, not the ill customs which constrains men to live at that rate. Question
me then freely, as you please; it is the thing I desire, because I shall thereby
have some respit, and repose; and withal, the satisfaction of clearing your
doubts, and leaving nothing unanswered in your minds.


CHAP. II.
A person of honor and condition is not to make War his profession.
Fabritio. I Will begin my discourse with what you said, that in matter of War
(which is my profession) I never made use of any thing of the ancients, To
which I answer, that War being a profession by which men cannot live honorable
at all times, it is not to be taken up as a trade, unless it be by a
Commonwealth, or a Kingdom, and if they be well constituted, they will neither
of them suffer any of their Citizens or Subjects, or any other good man to make
it his business; for he will never be thought a good man who takes upon him an
employment, by which if he would reap any profit at any time, he is obliged to
be false, and rapacious, and cruel, and to entertain several other qualities
that are not consistent in a good man; nor can any man (great or small) who
makes war his profession, be otherwise than vicious; because that that trade
being not to be followed in time of peace, they are necessitated either to
prevent or obstruct peace; or in time of war to provide so for themselves, that
they may subsist in time of peace; and neither of those two ways are
practicable to an honest man; for from the desire of providing for themselves
against the evil day, when the wars should be ended, proceed the robberies, and
thefts, and murders which are committed daily by such kind of people, and that
upon their friends as well as enemies. And from the desire of obstructing the
peace, proceed all the frauds and juggling which the Officers use with those who
pay them, and all to continue the war; but if by accident peace be concluded
contrary to their endeavors and design, it is to be feared that the Officers
finding themselves destitute of pay, and their old liberty and licentiousness,
will get together such Soldiers of fortune as have nothing to subsist upon, and
falling into some Province, plunder and rifle it without any compassion. Do you
not remember that here in Italy we had several of these disbanded Soldiers,
which got together when the wars were done, called themselves the Companies,
and went up and down ransacking Towns, and pillaging the Country, and all
without remedy? Have you not read how after the first Carthaginian War,
disbanded Soldiers united under the command of Matho and Spendius, (two of
their Officers) and in a tumultuous manner made a more dangerous War upon the
Carthaginians than that which they had had with the Romans; In the days of our
Predecessors Francis Sforza not only betrayed the Milanois who had made him
their General, but usurped upon their liberty, and made himself their Prince,
and for what, but that he might live in the same splendour when the Peace was
concluded. And all the rest of the great Officers in Italy were like him,
(especially if War was their profession) and though de facto they did not all
make themselves Dukes of Milan by their treachery, they were the more to be
blamed, because without the temptation of so great advantage their lives and
exorbitances were as bad. The Father of Francis Sforza being in the service of
Queen Jane, constrained her to cast her self into the protection of the King of
Arragon, having deserted her on a sudden, and left her disarmed in the midst of
her enemies, and all to satiate his ambition, to satisfy his revenge, or to
have got her Kingdom for himself. Braccio with the same industry endeavored to
possess himself of the Kingdom of Naples, and had he not been defeated and
slain at Aquila, he had certainly effected it; and these confusions proceeded
from nothing else but from the employing of such men as were mercenary, and had
nothing to subsist upon but their pay? Have you not a Proverb which confirms
what I say, and tells us, that War makes Thieves, and Peace brings them to the
Gallows; the reason is, for that those persons who have no other way of
livelihood, nor so much temper and ingenuity as to take to any other course
that may honestly sustain them, are forced by necessity to rob upon the
highways, and then justice is forced to dispatch them,


Cosimo. You have represented this trade and profession of a Soldier so vile
and contemptible, that to me it seems now to be worse than none at all, whereas
before I thought it one of the most noble and excellent things in the World: so
that unless you satisfy me better, I shall never be contented; for if it be so
as you say, I cannot imagine how it should come to pass that Caesar, and Pompey,
and Scipio, and Marcellus, and so many other great Captains of the Romans
should become so famous as to be worshipped like Gods.


Fabritio. I have not yet thoroughly examined those two things which I proposed
in the beginning; one is, that a good man cannot take up that calling as his
profession: the other is, that no well constituted Government (whether
Commonwealth or Kingdom) will suffer its Subjects or Citizens to make War their
whole business. To the first I have spoke what I thought fit; it remains now
that I speak to the second, in which I shall have occasion to reply to your
last demand.


CHAP. III.
How a Commonwealth ought not (in prudence) to permit any of its Citizens to
make War their profession.
Fabritio. TOuching the Romans which you mentioned, it is true Pompey and
Caesar, and most of the great Captains who were at Rome after the last
Carthaginian War, arrived at great reputation, but it was rather as brave and
generous, than good and virtuous men; whereas those who were before them, were
famous as much for their virtue as conduct, and the reason was, because these
made not War their profession, and the others did.

Whilst the Roman Commonwealth was incorrupt and immaculate, there never was
any Citizen who presumed by means of this profession to make his own fortune or
party in time of Peace; by breaking the Laws, exacting upon the provinces,
usurping and tyrannizing over his Country, and using all means to make himself
rich. No man of inferior condition ever thought of violating his Oaths;
maintaining of Parties; disrespecting the Senate; or promoting of tumults or
any tyrannical sedition with design of making himself a fortune by the
profession of Arms. But those who had the command of their Armies, contented
with their triumphs, returned joyfully to their private affairs; and the
Officers who were under them laid down their Arms with more alacrity than they
had taken them up; every man returning to his former course of life, without
any hopes of advancing himself by plunder and rapine. And of this we have
strong and evident cause of conjecture from the example of Regulus Attilius,
who being General of the Roman Armies in Africa, and having in a manner
conquered the Carthaginians, desired leave of the Senate to return, that he
might look to a Farm of his in the Country which his servants had neglected.
From whence it is as clear as the day, that had he made War his profession, or
designed to have raised his own fortune out of the ruins of other people having
so many Provinces at his mercy, he would never have been so careful of the
improvement of a Cottage, when every day would have brought him in more than
his whole Patrimony was worth. But because good men, and such as are not
desirous to make a trade of War, are unwilling to reap any other fruit
therefrom but labor, and danger, and glory; when they are arrived at a
sufficient proportion of the later, it is their ambition to return quietly to
their houses, and live upon their old professions in Peace. As to the common
and private Soldiers, it is clear they were of the same humor, and declined any
such profession; for though when they were at home, they desired many of them
to be in the wars, yet when they were in the wars, they were as willing to be
dismissed. This is manifest by several arguments, but especially by the
privilege which the Romans granted to their Citizens, that none of them should
be constrained to the wars against his own inclination. So that Rome whilst it
was well governed (which was till the time of the Gracchi) had never any
Soldier who made it his profession to be so, by which means few of them were
dissolute, and those who were, were punished severely. A City then well
constituted and governed is to take care that this Art of War be used in time
of Peace only as an exercise, and in time of War only for necessity, and the
acquisition of glory; leaving the constant practice and profession of it to the
State, as the Romans did anciently to the Commonwealth of Rome. That Citizen
who has any other design in the profession of Arms, let him be what he will, is
no honest man; and that City which is governed any other way, is as much in the
wrong.


Cosimo. I am very well satisfied with what you have said hitherto, and do
acquiesce in your conclusion as far as it relates to a Commonwealth, but as to
Kings I am apt to dissent because I am apt to think it convenient a King should
have those about him who made Arms their profession.


CHAP. IV.
That a King ought not to permit his Subjects to make Arms their profession,
for the mischiefs which do frequently ensue.
Fabritio. A Kingdom well governed ought the more carefully avoid people of
that condition, because it is they who debauch their King by being the only
Ministers of his Tyranny. And do not object to me any of our present Kingdoms;
for I shall deny absolutely that they are as well governed as formerly, when
Kings had no Sovereignty, nor absolute power, but in the Armies, because there
(and no where else) there is a necessity of speedy resolutions; and that such a
power should be reposed in a single person; in other cases they ought to do
nothing without their Counsel, and it is to be the particular care of all that
are of Counsel to a Prince, to keep off such persons from about him as promote
War in time of Peace, because they cannot frame themselves to any other way of
subsistence. But I will discourse something more largely of this matter, not
standing so much upon a Kingdom that is perfectly good according to the model
of the Ancients, but supposing such a one as is like the Kingdoms of our days;
in which likewise a King ought to be fearful of such as live wholly by War,
because the Nerves and strength of all Armies lies certainly in the Infantry.

Wherefore if a King orders his matters so ill, that his foot be not content to
return to their several callings in time of Peace, and live as formerly by
their labor, he must necessarily be ruined; for of all the Soldiers in the
world none are so dangerous as those who make War their profession; and the
reason is, because you must be always at War, or keep them always in pay;
otherwise you will run a great hazard of being turned out of your Kingdom; and
because it is impossible either to maintain War perpetually, or keep them in
continual pay, you will be in great danger of being driven out of your Kingdom.
My Countrymen the Romans (as I said before) whilst they were wise, and honest,
never suffered their Citizens to make that exercise their calling, though in
respect of their perpetual Wars, they were able to have paid them perpetually:
But to avoid the inconveniences which might follow thereupon, seeing the
condition of their times did not alter, they altered their Men, ordering their
affairs in such manner, that every fifteen years their Legions were renewed,
and filled up again with young men in the flower of their age; that is to say,
betwixt eighteen and thirty five years of age; during which time their legs
their hands, and their eyes do correspond one with the other, and are in the
same disposition; for they did not keep them till their strength and vigor
decayed, and their frowardness, and insolence increased, as they did afterward
when the times were more corrupt.

For Octavian first, and afterward Tiberius (preferring their private power
before the profit of the public) began to disarm the people (that thereby they
might have them more easily at command) and to keep standing Armies upon the
Frontiers of their Empire. But because they thought them insufficient to curb
the people, and awe the Senate of Rome; they established another Army (which
they called the Pretorian) which was quartered always about the City, and
intended as a guard. But when afterward the Emperors permitted them who were
listed in those Bands, to lay aside all other professions, and devote
themselves to War, they grew insolent immediately, and became not only terrible
to the Senate, but pernicious to the Emperor, insomuch that many of them were
put to death by the fury and insolence of those Soldiers, who created, and
disposed their Emperors as they pleased; and sometimes it fell out that at the
same time several Emperors were created by the several Armies, which occasioned
the division first, and by degrees the destruction of the Empire. Those Kings
therefore who are desirous to live in safety and peace, ought to have their
Armies composed of such persons, as when there is a necessity of War, will take
up Arms freely for the defense of their Country; and when Peace is concluded,
will as readily acquiesce, and return to their old habitations and callings;
which may easily be done; if they make their Levies of such men as have
professions before: A King is likewise (upon the publication of Peace) to
command his Generals and great Officers to their respective charges and
governments elsewhere; the Reformades and Gentlemen to their own Houses and
Estates; and the common Soldiers to their Original Trades and Occupations. And
by the election of such men, they will fight stoutly to procure Peace, but
never disturb Peace to create a War.


Cosimo. I must confess your discourse to me seems very considerable; yet being
so contrary to what I fancied before, my mind is not so well satisfied but
there remains some doubt behind which is still to be cleared: for I observe
several Lords and Gentlemen who in time of Peace maintain themselves wholly by
the profession of Arms; as several great Commanders of your acquaintance and
quality, who are in pay under several Princes and States; besides most of the
men at Arms are continued in pay for the guard and security of such Cities and
Castles as are requisite to be kept; so that in my judgment there is employment
enough for them all in time of Peace.


Fabritio. I do not believe that you can think that in time of Peace there is
entertainment for them all; for if no other reason was to be alleged, the
smallness of the numbers required to the furnishing the Garrisons, would be
sufficient to refute it. What proportion is there betwixt the Bodies of foot
which are to be raised for carrying on a War, and those which are required for
supplying the Garrisons in time of Peace: for those Cities and Castles which in
time of Peace are kept with a few men, are reinforced with great numbers in
time of War; besides which, great Levies are made for the Field Armies, which
upon the conclusion of Peace are constantly disbanded. And as to such as are
retained in the nature of Guards to the State, Pope Julius and you, have
demonstrated how much those are to be apprehended who will not entertain any
other vocation but War; having turned them out of your Guards for their
insolence, and entertained Swizzers in their places, as people born and brought
up under Laws, and chosen by the Communalty by a more regular election; so that
tell me no more there is employment for them all in times of Peace. As to the
men at Arms, and their being continued in pay in times of peace, the answer I
confess is more difficult; yet upon closer examination it will not be found
impossible, because this custom of keeping men at Arms in pay is corrupt, and
inconvenient; the reason is, for that they are people who having no other
Vocations, are occasions of daily disorders in the State, especially where
their numbers are great; but where they are not so numerous as to make an Army
of themselves, the danger of them is so much the less. Yet many times they have
done mischief enough, as I have said before in the cases of Francis Sforza, his
Father and Braccio da Perug^a. So that I cannot approve this Custom of keeping
men at Arms in constant pay, having seen so much experience of their
corruptions, and the inconvenience which has followed thereupon.


Cosimo. Would you have no such Forces in pay at all? or if you would have
them; how would you have them entertained?


Fabritio. Not as the men at Arms in France, for they are as dangerous and
insolent as ours, but rather according to the method of the ancients, who
raised their Cavalry out of their own Subjects, whom they sent home again to
their houses when Peace was concluded to follow their old Callings, as shall be
shown more largely before we end our discourse; so that if these kind of
Soldiers do now (even in times of Peace) receive pay, and live under that
profession, it proceeds from corruption in their customs. And as to the
Pensions which I, and my fellow Officers receive, I say that that also is a
corrupt custom; for a wise, and well ordered Government ought not to entertain
any such Pensioners, but is rather to employ their own Citizens for Generals in
time of War, and when that is done, dismiss them to their own private affairs.
And with a wise King it is the same; he is either to give no such Pensions at
all, or if he does, it ought to be in recompense of some signal exploit, or to
oblige some excellent person in time of Peace as well as War. And because you
have instanced in me, I am content to stand for an example; and therefore I say
I never made War my profession. My business is to govern my subjects, to defend
them, to prefer Peace, but yet to know how to manage my self in War; and if I
have received honor or reward from the King, it is not for my understanding of
experience in War, so much as for my integrity and counsel in times of Peace. A
wise Prince ought not therefore to have any about him, but such as are so
constituted; for if they be too zealous either for Peace or for War, they will
draw him into inconvenience. This (according to my proposition at first) I
could not but say as to the first point; if it be insufficient, you must apply
your self elsewhere for farther satisfaction. But by what is said, you may
perceive the difficulty of reviving the customs of the Ancients in our present
Wars: What preparations are requisite to be made by any man that is wise, and
what opportunities are to be expected to bring them to perfection; But you will
understand them ^etter if your patience will give me leave to discourse them
from point to point, and compare all the customs of the ancients, with the
particular practices of our times.


Cosimo. If we desired at first to hear you discourse of these things,
certainly what you have discoursed already, has much increased our desire;
wherefore as we give you thanks for what you have done, so we do earnestly beg
of you that you would proceed to the remainder


CHAP. V.
In what Countries the best Soldiers are to be raised.
Fabritio. SEeing you are hitherto so well pleased, I will deduce my discourse
of this matter from the fountain, that thereby you may comprehend it the
better, and I be enabled to demonstrate it more copiously. When War is
resolved, every man's chief business is to put himself into a condition of
giving the Enemy Battle, and fighting him fairly in the field. To enable
himself for this, it is necessary to raise an Army; to raise an Army, there is
a necessity of men, of arming them, disciplining them, exercising them, (and
that in great as well as small bodies) of teaching them to encamp, and
acquainting them with the Enemy by degrees, either by frequent facing or
confronting him, or by encamping somewhere near his march, where they may have
the prospect of his Army as he passes by. In this the whole address and
industry of a Campania, or field War consists, which doubtless is more
necessary and honorable than any other; and he who understands well how to draw
up an Army, and present his Enemy Battle, may be excused for all his other
errors in the management of the War; but if he be ignorant or defective in
that, though in other things he be sufficient enough; yet he shall never bring
his War to any honorable conclusion. For win a Battle, and you cancel all your
former miscarriages; lose one, and all that ever you did well before
evaporates, and comes to nothing.

It being so necessary then to find men, the first thing to be done, is to know
how to make our choice (which the ancients called Delectus, and we Levies) of
which I shall give you some light.

They who have given us rules of the management of War, have recommended to us
to make our Levies in temperate regions, that our Soldiers may be both valiant,
and cunning For hot Countries are observed to produce wise and subtle people,
but not courageous; cold Countries on the other side do afford stout men, and
hardy, but then they are seldom discreet. This Rule was proper enough for a
Prince that was Monarch of the whole world, and might make his Levies where he
pleased: But to give a rule that all may follow, I must needs say that all
Commonwealths, or Kingdoms, are to make their Levies in their own Countries,
whether hot or cold, or temperate, it is the same thing; because by ancient
experience we find that in any Country, Exercise and Discipline makes good
Soldiers; for where Nature is defective, industry will supply; and in this case
it is the better of the two. And indeed to raise men in other Countries cannot
be called properly a delectus, for delectum habere is to pick and cull the best
men in a Province, and to have power to choose those who are unwilling as well
as those who are willing to the War; which kind of delectus cannot be made
exactly but in your own dominion; for in Countries belonging to another Prince,
you must be contented with such as are willing, it being not to be expected
that you should have liberty to choose as you please.


Cosimo. Yet among those who are willing, you may pick and choose, take and
leave what you think good, and therefore it is not so improper to call that a
delectus.


Fabritio. You are in the right as to one way; but if you consider the secret
defects of such an Election, you will find that in strictness it is not an
Election; and that for these following reasons. First, those who are not your
Subjects, but are willing to the Wars, are none of the best, but generally the
lewdest and most dissolute persons in the Province; for if any be scandalous,
idle, incorrigible, irreligious, disobedient to their Parents, Blasphemers,
Cheats, and altogether ill bred, they are those who are most likely to list
themselves for the War, and there is nothing so contrary to good and true
discipline, as such kind of humors: When of such kind of Cattle you have more
offer themselves, than the number you design to entertain, you may take your
choice indeed, but the whole mass being bad, your choice can never be good. But
many times it falls out, that there being not so many of them as you have
occasion to employ, you are glad to take all, and in that case you cannot not
be said habere delectum so properly, as milites conscribere: And of such kind
of disorderly people, the Armies of Italy and most other places do consist at
this day; only in Germany it is otherwise, because there, no man is pressed or
listed barely upon the Emperor's command, but as he stands willing and disposed
to the Wars himself; you may judge then what part of the ancient discipline of
the Romans can be introduced into an Army made up of such a medly of wickedness.


Cosimo. What way is to be taken?

Fabritio. That which I recommended before, which is to choose out of your own
Subjects, and to exercise your authority in your choice.


Cosimo. If your election be made in that manner, can any ancient form be
introduced?

Fabritio. You know it may, if it be in a Kingdom, and he who command be their
Prince, or lawful Sovereign; and if in a Commonwealth it is the same, so he be
a great Citizen, and made General for that time, otherwise it is no easy
matter to do any thing that shall succeed.


Cosimo. Why Sir?

Fabritio. I shall tell you that hereafter, at present this may suffice, that
no good is to be done any other way


Cosimo. Well then, these Levies being to be made in your own Territory, is it
best to make them in the Cities or Country?


CHAP. VI.
Whether it be best to choose you men out of the Cities, or Country.
Fabritio. THose Authors who have writ any thing of this Nature, do agree
unanimously that the best choice is in the Country where they are inured to
difficulty and labor; acquainted more with the Sun than the shade, accustomed
to the Spade and the Plough, and to carry burdens, without any shifting, or
mutiny. But Because our Armies do consist of Horse as well as Foot, my advice
is, that the Horse be raised in the Cities, and the Foot in the Country.


Cosimo. Of what age would you choose them?

Fabritio. Were I to raise a new Army, I would choose them betwixt seventeen,
and forty; were I only to recruit an old one, I would have them always of
seventeen.


Cosimo. I do not well understand your distinction.

Fabritio. I will tell you, were I to raise an Army, or settle a Militia where
there was none before, it would be necessary to make choice of the most apt and
experienced that I could find (provided their age was suitable to the War) to
instruct them as I shall direct. But if I were to raise men to recruit and
reinforce an Army that was grown weak, I would take none above seventeen,
because those who are there already will be able to teach them.


Cosimo. You would order your Militia then, as ours is ordered with us.

Fabritio. You say well but I would Arm, and Officer, and exercise, and Order
them in a way I know not whether you be acquainted with in your Country.


Cosimo. Then you are for Trained Soldiers.

Fabritio. Why would you have me blame them?

Cosimo. Because several wise men have always condemned them.

Fabritio. I think you are in a mistake to say a wise man can be against
training of Soldiers: a man may be thought wise, ('it is possible) and be no
such thing.


Cosimo. The ill success which those Trained-bands have always had, is a great
argument of the truth of that opinion.


Fabritio. Have a care the fault was not more in you, than in them; of which
perhaps you may be convinced before I have done my discourse.


Cosimo. You will do us a very great favor. But I will tell you first, in what
it is this Militia is condemned, that you may afterward justify it the better.


CHAP. VII.
Of the inconvenience, and convenience of Trained-Bands or a settled Militia.
Cosimo. IT is objected that either they are experienced and useless, and then
to rely upon them is to ruin the State. Or else they are ready and skilful,
and strong, and then, he who has the command of them may do what he pleases.
They instance in the Romans, who lost their liberty by these kind of men. They
instance likewise in the Venetian, and the King of France; the first of which
makes use only of foreign Arms, lest some time or other, they should fall under
the subjection of some of their Citizens: and the latter has disarmed his
Subjects, with the more ease to keep them under command. But those who are
against these Trained-Bands, are more fearful when they are raw, and
inexperienced than otherwise, and to this purpose they give two considerable
reasons. One is, because they are unskilful, the other is, because they are
unwilling, and they say, that people any thing in years, never learn any thing
well; and a man never does good when he is forced to the Wars.


Fabritio. The reasons which you have alleged, are produced only by persons
who understand things at a distance, as I shall demonstrate plainly. And first
as to their unserviceableness, I say, there are no Soldiers more useful than
ones own Subjects, and no Subjects can be ordered a better way. And this being
clear, and indisputable, I will not spend time in proving it farther, because I
have the concurrence of all ancient History to confirm it. As to the
inexperience and force wherewith they are charged, I say (and it is true) that,
inexperience makes a man cowardly, and force makes a man Mutinous; but courage
and experience both are infused into them by arming, and exercising, and
accommodating them well, as shall be shown in my following discourse. But as to
the point of force, you must know that such persons as are raised by the
command of a Prince, are neither to be altogether pressed, nor altogether
Volunteers; because to have them altogether Volunteers, would be to incur the
inconveniences which I have mentioned before; it would not be a fair election,
and there would be very few go a long with you, and wholly to force them, would
be as dangerous on the other side: therefore a middle way is to be taken,
neither too forcible on the one side, nor too frank on the other, but such a
one as may tempt them to the War out of their respect to their Prince, whose
displeasure they fear above all other punishments; such a course as this,
tempered so cunningly betwixt fair means and foul, cannot be dangerous, nor
produce that discontent and mutiny which occasions so much mischief. I do not
say that an army so chosen and exercised, is absolutely invincible, for the
Roman Armies were many times overcome; and Hannibal's Army was defeated;
wherefore an Army cannot be so ordered and disciplined, that one may promise
himself it shall never be broken. The wise men therefore of whom you speak, are
not to calculate the uselesness of an Army, from the loss of one Battle, but
are rather to believe that having miscarried once, they will be more cautious
afterward, and do something (as occasion offers) to expiate their disgrace:
and if the business should be thoroughly examined, it would not be found to be
the defect of the form so much, as want of perfection in their Order* And this
(as I said before) is to be provided against, not by blaming, or exploding the
way of trained men, but by improving and correcting it where it shall be found
amiss; and how that is done, I will show you particularly. As to your doubt
that such an order of Soldiers, meeting with an Officer equally disposed, may
usurp upon you, and turn you out of your Government; I answer, that Arms put
orderly and legally into the hands of Citizens or Subjects never did, nor will
do any harm. And Cities are kept longer innocent and incorrupt with those, than
any other forces, nay than they are commonly without them. Rome had its
Citizens in Arms four hundred years together, and yet kept its liberty entire;
Sparta preserved its liberty 800 years in the same posture; several Cities have
been disarmed, and kept their liberties: but how long? Not forty years any of
them, and the reason is, because great Cities have occasion for Soldiers, and
when they have none of their own, they are forced to entertain Strangers which
commonly do much more mischief than their own, for they are more easily
debauched, and a popular Citizen may more easily corrupt and employ them as
Instruments of Usurpation and Tyranny, when they have nothing but naked, and
unarmed people to destroy. Besides, a City ought in reason to be more fearful
of two Enemies than one. For in entertaining of Strangers, a City is to have an
eye over her Mercenaries and her Natives; and to prove that this jealousy is
natural and reasonable, remember what I said before of Francis Sforza; whereas
a City which employs only her own inhabitants, fears nobody else. But to use
one reason for all, let me tell you, no man ever established a Commonwealth, or
Kingdom, who did not believe that the inhabitants (if armed) would be willing
to defend it.

And had the Venetians been as wise in this, as other Counsels, they would have
set up a new Monarchy in the World; and they are the more inexcusable that have
not, because their first Legislators put arms into their hands, and gave them
ability to defend themselves. But their territory being little at land, they
employed their arms only at Sea, where they performed many great things, to the
enlargement of their Country. But in process of time, being forced to take arms
by land for the relief of vicenza, they entertained the Marquess of Mantoua
into their service, and made him their General, whereas they should rather have
committed that charge to one of their own Citizens, and sent him to have
engaged the enemy at land. This unhappy resolution was that which clipped the
wings of their success, and kept them from extending their Empire; if they did
it out of an opinion that their experience was not so great in Land as in Sea
affairs, their diffidence was imprudent; for a Sea Captain accustomed to the
conflicts of the Winds and the Water, and the elements, and the enemy, shall
sooner make a good Land-Officer, where he has nothing to fight with but men;
than a Land-Officer shall make a good Captain at Sea. My Countrymen the Romans
who were so knowing at Land, being at wars with the Carthaginian that was so
potent at Sea; never troubled themselves to entertain either Grecian or
Spaniard into their service, though they were both so good Soldiers at Sea,
but they committed that charge to their Land-Officers, who fought the
Carthaginians, and beat them. If the Venetians did it to prevent the usurpation
of any of their fellow Citizens, I think it was an unnecessary fear; for
(besides the reasons aforesaid) if a Citizen with his Sea-forces never made
himself Master of any Sea Town, he could have done it much less with any
Land-force. So that hence it may be seen that is is not putting the Citizens in
arms, that is the cause of tyranny; but ill order, and ill management in the
Government; for whilst good order is preserved, there is no danger of their
being armed, wherefore their resolution in that point being imprudent, has
robbed them of much reputation and happiness. And as to the King of France's
error in not keeping his subjects in discipline, and prepared for the Wars,
which is by you urged for an example, there is no body (laying aside his
private passion) but must conclude that single neglect to be a great weakness
to his Kingdom.

But my digression has been too great, and perhaps beyond my design, yet I have
done it the more willingly to demonstrate to you that foreign force is not to
be relied upon so much as ones own subjects; nor can ones own subjects be
prepared and adapted for the Wars any way so well, as by training and exercise.
Nor can there be any better way of forming an army, or establishing a Militia
in any place than that which I have prescribed. If you have read the orders of
the first Roman Kings, especially of Servius Tulli^s, you will find his orders
like ours, and driving at nothing more than putting the Citizens into such a
posture, that upon any emergence they might be brought suddenly together, and
formed into an army for the defense of the City.


CHAP. VIII.
Of what sort of people an army is to be composed.
Fabritio. BUt to return to our levies, I say again, that being to recruit and
old Army, I would choose my men of about seventeen; but to raise a new one that
might be made fit for service in a short time, I would take in any betwixt
seventeen and forty.


Cosimo Would you in your election make any difference of their trades?

Fabritio. Many Authors which have written on that subject, have made a
difference of their trades, and will not allow of Faulconers, Fowlers, Fishers,
Ruffians, or any persons who make sports their profession, or are in any manner
subservient to pleasure: those who they recommend to be chosen, are Laborers,
Husbandmen, Smiths, Farriers, Carpenters, Butchers, Huntsmen, and the like.
But for my own part, I should not so much consider the quality of the
profession, as the goodness of the man, and which way he may be employed with
most advantage. For this reason I think your Plough-men, and Day-labourers in
the Country are more useful Generally than any other; for they take more pains,
and do more service in an Army than all the rest. After them are your Smiths,
Farriers, Carpenters, Joyners, and such people to be chosen; of which sort it
is convenient to have good store, because their arts are useful in an Army
upon several occasions: and it is a good thing to have Soldiers who have two
strings to theri bow, and yield you double advantage.


Cosimo, How are those who are fit, or unfit for the Wars, to be distinguished
and known?


Fabritio I shall speak of the manner of choosing a Militia to form it
afterward into an Army, because we shall have occasion again of speaking of
the election to be made upon the recruiting of an old Army. I say therefore
that the fitness of a person to be chosen for the Wars, is to be known by
experience, (in some great atchievment) or by conjecture.

This proof and trial of their courage is not to be found among new raised men,
it is necessary therefore where this experience is not to be had, to have
recourse to conjecture, which is to be deduced from their age, arts, and
stature. Of the two first we have spoken before; it remains that we speak now
of the third, and tell you, that some persons (as Pyrrhus) have been altogether
for large and tall men. Others (as Caesar) would have them strong, well knit,
and vigorous, which is to be judged by the composition of their members, and
the quickness of their aspect. Wherefore those who treat of that subject, have
recommended a lively and quick eye, a nervous neck, a large breast, a musculous
arm, a long finger, a small belly, round and firm thighs, and thin feet, this
kind of contexture does always import activity and strength, which in a
Soldier are two things principally to be desired. But above all respect is to
be had to their manners and that they be endued with honesty, and modesty,
otherwise you choose an instrument of scandal, and a beginning of corruption;
for no body can expect, that with brutishness and dishonesty, any laudable
virtue should consist. Upon this occasion it seems to me not impertinent (for
your better understanding the importance of this way of election) to let you
know the manner in which the Roman Consuls in the beginning of their Magistracy
made their elections for the Roman Legions. In which levies (by reason of their
continual Wars) being mixed of new and Veteran Soldiers, they could proceed in
the Veterans by experience, and by conjecture in the new. You must know then,
these levies were made either for present service, or to exercise them first,
and employ them afterward as occasion was offered. And although I have spoken
already of what is to be observed in the election of such as are to be
disciplined and employed afterward, yet my intention being to show how an Army
may be ordered in a Country where there is no military discipline, and where
men are not to be raised for immediate service, I shall speak of it further.
But in those Countries where it is the custom to raise Forces by the Princes
command, there they may have them always ready for present service, as it was
anciently in Rome, and is among the Swizzars at this day. For if in these kind
of levies there be new Soldiers, there are many which are old and experienced,
which mingled with the new, will make a good Army. Notwithstanding this, the
Emperors (after they began to keep standing Forces and Garrisons upon the
Frontiers) appointed Masters for the training and instructing their new men
whom they called Tyrones, as may be seen in the life of Maximus the Emperor.
Which custom was not practiced in the Armies whilst Rome enjoyed her liberty,
but only in the City in which those military exercises being much used by the
youth, it came to pass, that being drawn out for the Wars, they were so well
versed and experienced in that counterfeit discipline, that when afterward
they came to it in earnest, they behaved themselves very well. But when by
degrees the Emperors disused or abolished that custom of training, they were
constrained to these ways which I have shown you before.


CHAP. IX
How the Romans raised their Legions.
TO proceed therefore to the manner of the election of the Roman Legions, I
say, that after the Roman Consuls (in whose hands the administration of the war
was wholly deposited) had taken upon them the Magistracy, being to raise an
Army according to custom, which gave to each Consul two Legions of the Best
men, (who were esteemed the strength and flower of their Army) they created
four and twenty military Tribunes, (six for each Legion) and invested them with
the same authority as we do our Captains. After this they assembled all the
Romans who were able to bear arms, and place the Tribunes of each Legion a
part; after which they drew lots in which Tribe they should begin their
election, and where the lot fell, out of that Tribe they chose four of the
best, and out of them four, and one was chosen by the Tribunes of the first
Legion; and out of the other three, one was chosen by the second Legion; and
out of the remaining two, another was chosen by the third Legion; and the
fourth person belonged to the fourth Legion: these four being disposed in this
manner, they proceeded to the election of four more, the first of which was
chosen by the Tribunes of the second Legion; the second by the Tribunes of the
third; the third by the fourth, and the fourth by the first Legion. After which
they had a third election; the first chose the third; the second the fourth;
the third the first; and the fourth the second: and in this manner they varied
their elections, till at length all the legions became perfect and equal, and
were then united. As we said before, the Romans had the convenience of making
this election for present service, because a good part of such as were chosen,
were old Soldiers, well experienced in their trade, and all of them well
disciplined and trained; so that their elections were made by experience, and
conjecture both; but where an Army is to be new raised, and chosen, not so much
for present as future service; the election in that case is to be made by
conjecture only, and that from the age and person of the man.

Cosimo. I believe what you have said to be true; but before you pass to
another discourse, I would be satisfied in a thing of which you put me in mind,
by saying that levies to be made of such persons as have not been trained up in
the wars, are to be made by conjecture; and of this I am the more curious,
because I have observed in many places our Militia's to be condemned, and
especially as to our numbers; for many are of opinion a less number were
better, in respect that the fewer there were, the better they would be taught,
and by consequence the elections would be better, the confusion less, and they
would be more capable of reward, (which is that which keeps them content) and
to be sure be under better command. I would know therefore your opinion,
whether you are for a great number or a small, and what measures you would take
in your elections both of the one and the other.


CHAP. X.
Whether it is best for a Militia to consist of a great number or a small.
Fabr. SEeing it is your desire to be satisfied, which is best, a great number
or a small; without doubt a great number is best, and not only more necessary,
but (to keep frankly) a complete and perfect Militia is not to be had in any
place where there is not great plenty of men; and as to your observation in
other places, it is easily refused. For first, the smalness of your number does
not better your soldiers, (where plenty is to be had, as in Tuscany) nor mend
your election; because men being to judge by experience, in that Country few
people would be found whose experience would recommend them; forasmuch as few
of them have been actually in the wars; and of those few, fewer have given such
testimony of themselves as to deserve to be chosen before the rest; so that he
who makes his election in such places, is to lay aside his experience, and to
choose by way of conjecture. Other people therefore being in this perplexity, I
would know, if twenty young persons of good aspects were brought before me, by
what rules or method I was to choose or reject. I do not doubt but every man
would confess the best way, to take, and arm, and exercise them all, (it being
impossible to judge till then which will be the best) and to reserve your
election, till having all had the same exercise, and instruction, it be easy
to discern which is most vigorous, and likely to do service: so that upon the
whole, to desire but few in this case, that your election may be better, is
without question an error. As to the objection of being less inconvenience to
the Country, and to the people, I answer that a Militia (be it as little or
imperfect as it may) is no prejudice to either. Because it takes away no man
from his employments; obliges no man from his business; for to appear only on
idle days to exercise, is rather a recreation to the People, and advantage to
the Country, than otherwise. Whereas if they had no such divertisement, and
young men would be apt on those days to run out into some debauchery, or
extravagance, which would be much worse than those innocent recreations, which
being a handsome spectacle, gives great entertainments to young people.

Whereas it is alleged that a less number is easier paid, and by consequence
kept in better order and obedience; I answer, That no Levies can be made of so
few, as that they will be paid always to their satisfaction. For example, a
Militia is to be established of five thousand foot: To pay them to their
content would require at least 10000 Ducats a month. First, 5000 Foot is not a
competent Army, and 10000 Ducats a month would be insupportable to a State, and
yet insufficient to satisfy them, or to oblige them to any extraordinary
enterprise. So that in so doing, your expense would be great, your force but
small, and unable to defend you, much less to make any vigorous attack. If you
increase their pay, or their number, it would be the more impossible to pay
them: if you gave them less, or listed less, they would be so much the more
dissatisfied, and unserviceable.

They therefore who talk of raising Soldiers, and paying them whilst they are
not in service, talk ridiculously, and of things either impossible or useless.
It Is true, when they are to be raised for immediate Service, they are always to
be paid; yet if in times of Peace they be the occasion of any disorder or
inconvenience, (which I cannot believe) the advantages of a well disciplined
and ready Militia does abundantly recompense it; for where there is no such
force, there is nothing secure.

I conclude then, That he who would have a small number, to pay them the
better, or for any other of your reasons, is mightily ignorant. for though it
agrees with my opinion, that let your number be what it will, it will lessen
upon your hands, (by the many accidents that are not possible to be avoided)
yet a small number would quickly dwindle to nothing: Besides, a great number is
of more real service and reputation. To this it may be added, That if in order
to the exercising, you select a few persons in Countries where plenty is to be
had; they are so remote, and at such distance from on another, that you cannot
bring them to a Rendezvous without great inconvenience; and without exercising,
Militia's are useless, as shall be shown in due place.


Cosimo. You have satisfied me as to my former demand, but I desire you would
resolve me another doubt? and that is whether such great numbers do not produce
more confusion and disorder in the Country.


Fabritio. That opinion is as idle as the other, and for the reasons I shall
give.


CHAP. XI.
How the inconveniences. which follow great Armies may be prevented.
Fabritio. THose who are designed for the Wars, may occasion disorder two ways,
either among themselves, or with other people; but the remedy is easy, though
their discipline should not prevent it (for as to quarrels and mutinies among
themselves, discipline will obviate them) If the Country where your Levies are
to be made, be so weak, that they have no Arms among them, or so unanimously
united among themselves, that they have no head, this Order and Militia will
make them more fierce and courageous against Strangers, without any impediment
to their unity, For men who are well disciplined, are as tender of breaking the
Laws when they are Armed, as much as when they are disarmed, nor can they be
any ways altered, unless the Officers which you set over them debauch them, and
which way that is to be done, I shall show you presently. But if the Country
where your Levies are to be made, are in Arms, and disunited, this way will be
sufficient to unite them; for though they had Arms and Officers of their own
before, yet they were such Arms as were useless in War, and such Officers as
rather bred and provoked mutinies, than prevented or suppressed them. And the
reason is because in those Countries as soon as a man is offended, he repairs
immediately to the head of his party, who to maintain his own reputation,
encourages him to revenge; whereas a public General proceeds quite contrary.
So then by this way Seditions are prevented, Unity established, Provinces
united (but weak) continue their union, and are freed of their weakness:
Provinces disunited and mutinous, are reconciled and composed, and their
ferocity which was employed formerly in disorders, is employed now to the
advantage of the public. As to the provision that is to be made that they
injure not other people, it is to be considered that that is not to be done,
but by the fault of their Officers; and to prevent the Officers from
oocasioning such disorders, it is necessary that care be taken that they do not
usurp too great an authority over their Soldiers, which authority is to be
gained two ways either by nature, or accident; the way by nature, is to be
prevented by providing that he who is born in a place, be never put to command
the Forces raised in the same place, but be put at the head of such Troops as
are raised in other Countries, with whom he has no natural converse. As to the
accidental way, things are to be so ordered, that the Commanders in chief be
changed every year; for the continuation of a command over the same men,
contracts such a friendship and intimacy betwixt them, as is many times
perverted to the prejudice of the Prince. Which changes, how useful they have
been to those who have used them, and how much the omission of them have been
prejudicial to other people, may be observed by the example of the Kingdom of
Assyria; and the Empire of the Romans; for that Kingdom continued a thousand
years without Tumult or civil War, which proceeded from the annual changing of
the Officers of the Army. And in the Roman Empire, after Julius Caesar was
killed, all the civil Wars; and Conspiracies which happened betwixt the Officers
and the Emperors, proceeded from nothing but holding the Officers continually
in command. And if any of the first Emperors, or those who ruled afterward
with any reputation (as Adrianus, Marcus, Severus and the like) had had the
providence to have introduced that custom into their Armies, without doubt
their Empire would have been more quiet and durable; for their Generals would
not have had so much opportunity to rebel, the Emperors would not have had so
much occasion to for, and the Senate (in default of succession) having more
authority in the election of a new Emperor, would undoubtedly have chosen
better. But ill customs (either through the ignorance, or inadvertancy of
mankind) are not to be eradicated by examples either good or bad.


Cosimo. I fear my demands have drawn you from your intended discourse, for
from speaking of Levies and Militia's, and such things, we are got clear upon
another Subject; so that had I not excused my self before, I should think I
deserved reprehension.


Fabritio. Let not that trouble you, all that we have said is pertinent enough,
for being to treat of the way of Militia's (which is condemned by many people)
and I to defend it, was convenient that we should begin with the way of
Election; and first as to the Cavalry.


CHAP. XII.
Of the Cavalry:
Fab. THe Cavalry anciently was raised out of the richest and most considerable
of the City, but with respect to the age, and quality of the person. Of these
there were only three hundred to a Legion; so that in each Consular Army, the
Romans had never above six hundred Horse.


Cosimo. Would you have a standing Militia of Horse to exercise them at home,
and employ them afterward in the War?


Fab. To do well* you cannot do otherwise, if you would have Soldiers of your
own and not rely wholly upon such as make War their profession.


Cosimo. How would you choose them?


Fab. I would imitate the Romans, choose them out of the wealthiest, give
Officers as they do at this day, and see them well armed, and well exercised.


Cosimo. Would it be well to allow them any pay?


Fab. Yes truly it would, yet it should be no more than would keep their Horse;
for otherwise lying continually upon them, they would become grievous to the
Subject, and give them occasion to complain of you.


Cosimo. What numbers would you have, and how would you Arm them?


Fab. You are too quick, and pass from one thing to another; I Will answer you to
that in another place, when I have told you how the Foot are to be Armed, and
prepared for a field Battle.


THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I.
What arms were most used by the Ancients in their Wars.
Fabr. WHen you have raised your men, the next thing is to furnish them with
Arms, and before you do that, I think it not amiss to examine what Arms were
most used by the Ancients, and choose the best. The Romans divided their
Infantry into those who were completely, and those who were slightly armed.
Those who were lightly armed, were called Velites, under which name all were
comprehended who carried Bows, and Slings, and Darts; the greatest part of them
had Casques upon their heads for their defense, and a kind of Buckler upon
their arm. They fought in no order, and at distance from those who were armed
completely; Their Arms consisted of a Headpiece or Morrion which came down to
the Shoulders, a Brigandine down to their knees, their legs and arms were
covered with Greeves, and Gauntlets, a Buckler covered with Iron, about two
yards long, and one broad, an Iron ring about it without to keep off the blows,
and another within to keep it from the dirt when it was laid upon the ground.
Their offensive Weapons were a Sword at their left thigh, about a yard and half
long, with a Dagger on their right side. They carried a Dart in their hand
which they called Pilum, which upon a a Charge they darted at the Enemy.

These were the Arms with which the Romans conquered the whole world. And
though some of their ancient Writers do give them a Spear in form of a Spit; I
do not see how such a Weapon could be handled by one that carried such a
Buckler, for it was too heavy to be managed with one hand; besides (unless it
were in the Front where they had room to make use of them) it was impossible to
use them in their ranks; for the nature of Battles is such (as I shall show
hereafter) that they do always contract and keep close, as being in much less
danger, than when they are drawn up looser and at a distance: So that in that
close order, all Arms that are above two yards long, are not to be used, for
having a Spear that is to be managed with both hands, if your Buckler were no
hinderance, it could not hurt your Enemy when he was near. If you take it in
one hand, and manage your Buckler with the other, you must take it in the
middle, and then there will be so much of it behind, that they who come after
you will hinder you from handling it: So that it is true, either the Romans had
no such Hastae, or if they had, they made but little use of them. For if you
read the History of Titus Livius, in the description of all his Battles, you
will scarce ever find he mentions those Hastae, but tells you all along that
having dar^ed their Pila, they fell to the Sword. My opinion therefore is, that
this Hasta be laid aside, and that in imitation of the Romans we make use of
their Sword and Buckler, and other Arms, without troubling our selves with that.

The Grecians for their defense did not arm so heavily as the Romans but for
offense, they relied more upon the Spear, than the Sword, especially the
Macedonian Phalanx, who carried of those Javelins which they called Sarissae,
with which they brake the Enemies Battles, and kept their own firm and entire.
And though some Writers say that they also had their Bucklers, (yet I know not
(for the reasons abovesaid) how they could consist. Besides, in the Battle
betwixt Paulus Emilius and Perseus King of Macedon, I do not remember that any
mention was made of any-Bucklers, but only of their Sarissae, and yet the
Romans had much ado to overcome them. So that my opinion is, the Macedonian
Phalanx was just such a Body as the Swizzers Battalion; whose whole force lies
in their (...). The Romans were likewise accustomed to adorn their Soldiers
with Plumes of Feathers in their Caps, which renders an Army beautiful to their
Friends, and terrible to their Enemies. In the first beginning of the Roman
Wars, their Horse used a round Shield, a Helmet upon their Heads, and all the
rest of their body naked; their offensive Arms were a Sword and Javelin with a
long thin spike at the end of it; and so being incumbered with Shield and
Javelin, they could use neither of them well, and being unarmed, they were more
exposed to the Enemy.

Afterward they came to arm themselves like their Foot, only their Shield was
a little shorter, and squarer, their Lance or Javelin thicker, with pikes at
each end, that if by accident one of them should miscarry, the other might be
serviceable. With these Arms both for Horse and Foot, my Countrymen the Romans
went through the whole world, and by the greatness of their successes, it is
likely they were as well accounted as any Army ever was. And Titus Livius in
many places of his History makes it credible where comparing the Armies of the
Enemies, says, But the Romans for courage, fashion of their Arms, and
discipline were before them all. And for that reason I have chosen to speak
particularly rather of the Conqueror's Arms, than the Arms of the Conquered. It
follows now that I say something of the way of Arming at present.


CHAP. II.
Of the Arms which are used at present, and of the invention of the Pike.
Fabritio. THe Soldiers of our times do wear for defensive Arms, Back and
Breast, and for offensive a Lance nine yards long, which they call a Pike,
with a Sword by their side rather round than sharp. These are generally the
Arms which they wear at this day, few wear Greaves and Gantlets, and none at
all Head-pieces. Those few who have no Pikes, do carry Halbards, the staff
three yards long, and the head like an Axe. They have among them Musketeers,
who with their Fire Arms do the same Service which was done formerly by the
Bows and Slings. This manner of arming with Pikes, was found out by the
Germans, and particularly by the Swizzers, who being poor, and desirous to
preserve their liberty, were and are still necessitated to contend against the
ambition of the Princes of Germany who are rich, and able to entertain Horse,
which the Swizzers are not able to do. So that their Force consisting
principally in Foot, being to defend themselves against the Enemies Horse, they
were obliged to revive the old way of drawing up, and find out Arms that might
defend them against them. This necessity put them upon continuing, or reviving
the old Orders, without which (as every wiseman knows) the Foot would be
useless; for which cause they make use of Pikes not only to resist and keep
off, but to attack and sometimes to disorder the Horse. And by virtue of these
Arms,, and these Orders, the Germans have assumed the confidence with 15 or
20000 of their Foot to attack a vast Body of Horse, of which it is not above 25
years since we had a most signal experiment; and so many great examples there
are of their courage (founded upon their Arms, and their Order) that after
Charles VIII's Expedition into Italy, all Nations made use of them, insomuch as
thereby the Spaniards grew into great reputation.


Cosimo. Which manner of arming do you prefer, the German, or the ancient Roman.


Fabritio. The Roman without doubt, and I will tell you the usefulness and
inconvenience of them both.


CHAP. III.
Whether the ancient, or modern is the best way of Arming.
THe German Foot are able not only to sustain, but to beat the Cavalry, they
are better for expedition, and can draw themselves up better, because not over
pestered with Arms. On the other side Foot are more exposed to wounds both at
hand and at a distance. They are not so useful likewise in Storming of Towns,
and are in great danger where there is vigorous resistance. But the Romans were
so well armed, they could encounter and baffle the Horse as well as the
Germans, and were secure against their blows by virtue of their Arms, could
manage themselves better in an engagement with their Swords, than the Germans
with their Pikes, and assault a Town better under the shelter of their Targets.
So that the only inconvenience was the weight of their Arms, and the trouble of
carrying them along, which they easily surmounted by accustoming themselves to
all kind of difficulties and hardships, and you know custom is a second Nature.
You must know likewise that Foot are many times to engage both against Horse
and Foot together, and consider also that these kind of Soldiers would be
altogether unserviceable, and could never stand against Horse; or if they could
bear up against them, yet they would still be afraid of the Foot, lest they
should be better armed, and better ordered than they. Now if you consider the
Romans and Germans together you will questionless discover that the Germans had
much the advantage in charging and breaking a body of Horse (as we said before)
but to engage a Body of Foot armed, and ordered like the Romans, they have much
the disadvantage. So that by this you see what advantage and disadvantage, the
one has of the other, the Romans were able to fight Foot and Horse both, and
the Germans are able to deal only with Horse.

Cosimo. I would desire you to give us an example, that we may understand it
the better.


Fabritio. I say you will find in many places of our History, the Roman Foot
have overcome great Bodies of Horse, and you shall never find that they were
overcome by Foot, by reason of any defect in their Arms, or any advantage which
the Enemy had in theirs. For had their way of arming been found inconvenient,
one of these two things would have followed, they would not have advanced with
their Conquests so far (their Enemy being better armed,) or else they would
have armed as the Enemy did, and left their own way; and because neither the
one nor the other was done, it follows probably that their way of arming was
the best. With the Germans it was otherwise as appears by the ill success which
they have had whenever they have been engaged with Foot that were well ordered,
and as valiant as they; which proceeded from the advantage the Enemy had of
them in their Arms. Philippo Visconte Duke of Milan being assaulted by 18000
Swizzers, sent against them the Count Carmignuola, who was his General at that
time. Carmignuola, with 6000 Horse, and a few Foot went to encounter them, and
coming to an engagement, was beaten for his pains. Carmignuola being a wise
man, quickly discovered the advantage which the Enemy had in their Foot over
his Horse, having rallyed and recruited his Army, he advanced against the
Swissers again, and when he came near them, he caused his Horse to dismount,
and engaging them smartly in that posture, he put them all to the rout, and
most of them to the Sword, only 3000 were left, who finding themselves past
remedy, threw down their Arms.


Cosimo. How comes that great disadvantage?


Fabritio. I told you before, but since you did not regard it, I will repeat it
again. The German Infantry have little or no defensive Arms, and for offensive
they have the Pike and the Sword, and with these weapons, and in that order
they attack the Enemy. But if the Enemy be well provided for his defense (as
the Cavalry were which Carmignuola caused to dismount) and receives them in any
good order, they may deal well enough with the Swizzers if they can but come to
the Sword; for when they once get within them, the length of their Pikes make
them useless, and falling then to their Sword, they have the disadvantage of
wanting defensive Arms, with which the Enemy is provided. So that considering
the advantage and disadvantage on both sides, it will appear that they who have
no defensive Arms are without remedy if the Enemy charges but home, and passes
their Pikes; for Battles do always advance (as I shall show, when I have told
you their manner of drawing up) and pressing on prepetually, they must of
necessity come so near as to reach one another with their Swords, and though
some few perhaps may be killed or tumbled down with their Pikes, yet those that
are behind pressing still on, are sufficient to carry the Victory, and this was
the reason why Carmignuola overcame with so great slaughter of the Swisses, and
so little of his own Army.


Cosimo. Considering that Carmignuola's Forces were men at Arms, and (though on
foot) yet armed completely, in my judgment it would be convenient upon any
great enterprise, to arm your Foot in that manner.


Fabritio. Had you remembered what I told you before about the way of the Romans
arming themselves, you would not have been of that opinion: For a Foot Soldier
with a Headpiece, Breast Plate, Shield, his arms and his legs covered with
Iron, is better able to defend himself against the Pikes, and break into them,
than one of the men at Arms dismounted.

I will give you a modern example Certain Companies of Spanish Foot were
transported out of Sicily, and landed in the Kingdom of Naples, being to supply
Gonsalvo, who was besieged in Barletta by the French. Monsieur d' Aubigny had
notice of their march, and went to meet them with his men at arms, and some
4000 German foot, who pressed upon them with their pikes, and opened the
Spanish body, but by the help of their bucklers, and the agility of their
bodies, having got under their pikes, and so near as that they could come at
them with their swords, the Spaniards had the day with the slaughter of most of
the Swisses. Everyone knows how many of the Swisses foot were cut off at the
battle of Ravenna, and all upon the same account, the Spanish foot having got
to them with their swords, and had cut them certainly in pieces, had they not
been rescued by the French horse: and yet the Spaniards drawing themselves into
a close Order, secured themselves. I conclude therefore, a good Infantry ought
to be able not only to sustain the horse, but to encounter the foot, which (as
I have said many times before) is to be done by being well armed and well
ordered.


Cosimo. Tell me therefore, I beseech you, how you would have them armed?


CHAP. IV.
How foot should be armed, and of the force and convenience of men at Arms.
Fabritio. I Would take both of the Roman and German arms, and half my men
should be armed with the one, and half with the other; for if in 6000 foot (as
I shall explain to you hereafter) I should have 3000 with bucklers like the
Romans, 2000 pikes, and 1000 muskets, like the Swiss; I think I should do well
enough; for I would place my pikes either in my front, or wherever I
suspected the Enemies horse might make any impression; my bucklers and swords
should second my pikes, and be very conducing to the Victory, as I shall
demonstrate. So that I think an Infantry thus ordered would be too hard for any
other.


Cosimo. What you have said about the Foot, is sufficient. I pray let us now
hear what you judge of the horse, and which way of equipping them is the best,
the ancient, or modern.


Fabr. I think the present way is the best, in respect of the great saddles and
stirrups, (which were not in use among the ancients) and make men sit stronger
and firmer upon their horse. I think our way of arming now is more secure, and
a body of our horse will make a greater impression than a body of the old. Yet
I am of opinion that Cavalry are not to be more esteemed now than of old,
because (as I have said) they have in our days been often worsted by the foot,
and so they always will be, if the foot be armed and ordered as abovesaid.
Tigranes King of Armenia came into the field against the Roman Army, under the
command of Lucullus, with 150000 horse, many of them armed like our men at
arms, (which they called Catafracti) the Romans consisting only of 6000 horse,
and 15000 foot. Whereupon, in contempt of their number, when Tigranes saw them,
he said, That they were liker the Train of an Ambassador than an Army.
Nevertheless when they came to fight, he was beaten, and he who writes the
story, blames the Catafracti, and declares them unserviceable; for (says he)
having Beavers over their faces, they cannot so well see how to offend the
Enemy, and being laden with arms, if by accident their horse be killed, or
throws them upon the ground, they cannot get up again, nor help themselves in
any manner. I say then, that Nation or Kingdom which prefers their horse to
their foot, shall always be weak, and in danger of ruin, as Italy has
experimented in our time, having been exposed to ruin and depredation by
strangers, for want of foot, which has been very much neglected, and all the
Soldiers set on horseback. Not but it is good to have horse too, yet not to
make them the strength of their Army, but sufficient to second the foot; for
they are of great use for scouting, making inroads into the Enemies Country,
raising Contributions, infesting the Enemy, and cutting off Convoys and
supplies of Provisions; nevertheless when they come to a Field-fight, which is
the main importance of a War, and the very end for which Armies are raised they
are not so serviceable as foot, though indeed in a rout they are better to
pursue.


Cosimo. I cannot concur with you in this for two reasons, one is, the
Parthians used nothing but horse, and yet they had their share of the World as
well as the Romans; and the other is, because I cannot see which way the
Cavalry can be sustained by the Foot, and from whence proceeds the strength of
the one, and the weakness of the other.


Fabr. I think I have told you, or else I will tell you now, that my discourse
of military affairs shall extend no farther than Europe. Being intended no
farther, I do not think my self obliged to give a reason for their customs in
Asia, yet this I may say, that the Parthian discipline was quite contrary to
the Roman; for the Parthians fought always on horseback in confusion and
disorder, which is a way of fighting very uncertain. The Romans fought
generally on foot, in close and firm order, and they overcame one another
variously, as the place where they fought was open, or straight: in straight
places the Romans had the better; in champian, the Parthians, who were able to
do great things in respect of the Country which they were to defend, it being
very large, a thousand miles from the Sea, not a River sometimes within two or
three days march, and Towns and Inhabitants very thin. So that an Army like the
Roman, pestered and encumbered with their arms, and their order, could not pass
through the Country without great loss, by reason the strength of the Enemy
consisted in horse which were nimble, here to day, and to morrow fifty miles
off. And this may be a reason why the Parthians prevailed with their horse,
ruined the Army of Crassus, and put Marc Anthony into so much danger. But as I
said before, my intention is not to speak any thing of the Armies out of
Europe, and therefore I shall insist only upon the Romans, the Grecians, and
the Germans.


CHAP. V.
The difference betwixt men at Arms and foot, and upon which we are most to
rely.
Fabr. WE come now to your other demand, in which you desire to understand what
order, or what natural virtue it is that makes the foot better than the horse.

I say in the first place, horse cannot march in all Countries as foot can;
they are not so ready to obey orders when there is any sudden occasion to
change them: for when they are upon their march, if there be occasion to wheel,
or face about, to advance, or stop, or retreat, they cannot do it with that
dexterity as the foot. Upon any rout or disorder, horse cannot rally so well,
(though perhaps they are not pursued) which is not so with the foot.

Again, it is frequently seen, a brave and a daring man may be upon a bad
horse, and a coward upon a good, and that inequality is the occasion of many
disorders. Nor let any one think strange that a body of foot can sustain the
fury of the horse, because an horse is a sensible creature, and being
apprehensive of danger, is not easily brought into it. And if it be considered
what forces them on, and what forces them off, it will be found that that which
keeps them off, is greater than that which pricks them on; for that which puts
them forward is but a spur, whilst that which keeps them off, is a pike or a
sword. So that it has been many times seen both by ancient and modern
experience, that a body of foot are secure, and insuperable by horse. If you
object, that coming on galloping to the charge, makes the horse rush furiously
upon the Enemy, and to be less careful of the pike than the spur. I answer,
that though a horse be in his career, when he sees the pikes, he will stop of
himself; and when he feels them prick, he will stop short; and when you press
him on, will turn either on the one side or the other: and if you have a mind
to make the experiment, try if you can to run a horse against a wall, and you
shall find very few that will do it. Caesar, when he was in France, being to
fight a battle with the Swizzers, caused all his horse to dismount, and send
their horses away, as being fitter to fly than to fight upon. But though horse
are naturally subject to these impediments, he who commands the foot is to
march such ways as are likely to be most difficult for horse, and he shall
scarce come into a Country but such ways are to be found. If you march over
mountainous and hilly places, the very situation will secure you against the
fury of the horse; if your march be in a plain, you will seldom march any where
but you will have plow'd-fields, or hedges, or woods to secure you: for every
ditch, every bank, how inconsiderable so ever, takes off from the fury of the
horse, and every plow'd-field or vineyards retards them. And if you come to a
battle, it will be the same as in a march; for every small accident that
happens to a horse, dismays him, and takes off his courage. However, I will not
omit to tell you one thing that the Romans trusted so much to their orders, and
arms, that had it been in their power to have chosen a place that had been
sleep, and covenient to secure them against horse, (though they had not been
able to draw themselves up) or an open place (more obnoxious to the horse)
where they might put themselves handsomely in Battalia, they chose always the
last, and rejected the first. But it being time to come now to their manner of
exercise, having armed our foot according to the ancient and modern way, let us
see what exercise the Romans gave them before they brought them to a Battle.


CHAP. VI.
How the Soldiers were exercised.
THough they be never so well chosen, and never so well armed, Soldiers are
carefully to be exercised, for without exercise they are good for nothing. And
this exercise ought to be threefold, one is to inure them to labor and
hardship, and make them dexterous and nimble; another to teach them how to
handle their arms; and the third to teach them to keep their ranks and orders
in their marches, battles, and encampments: which are three great things in an
Army. For if an Army marches, is drawn up well, and encamps regularly and
skilfully, the General shall gain reputation, let the success be as it will.
Wherefore all ancient Commonwealths provided particularly for these exercises
by their Customs and Laws, so that nothing of that nature was omitted. They
exercised their youth to learn them to be nimble in running, active to leap,
strong to throw the bar, and to wrestle, which are all necessary qualities in a
Soldier, for running and numbleness fits them for possessing a place before
the enemy; to fall upon them on a sudden in their quarters, and pursue with
more execution in a rout: activity makes them with more ease avoid their blows,
leap a ditch, or climb a bank; and strength makes them carry their arms better,
strike better, and endure the shock better: and above all to inure them to
labor, they accustomed their Soldiers to carry great weights, which custom is
very necessary; for in great expeditions it happens many times that the
Soldiers are forced to carry (besides their arms) several days provisions,
which without being accustomed to labor, would be more tedious to them, and by
this, great dangers are many times avoided, and great victories many times
obtained. As to their way of accustoming them to their arms, they did it in
this manner. They made their young men wear head-pieces twice as heavy as those
which they were to wear in the field, and instead of Swords, they gave Cudgels
with lead run into them, much heavier than their Swords. They caused each of
them to fix a pale into the ground three yards high, and fasten it so strong
that no blows might be able to batter or shake it: against which pale or stake
the youth were accustomed to exercise themselves with their cudgel or buckler,
as it had been an Enemy; striking it sometimes as it were on the head,
sometimes on the face, then on the sides, legs, before and behind; sometimes
retreating, and then advancing again: and by this way of exercise they made
themselves dexterous and skilful how to defend themselves, and offend an enemy.
And for the heaviness of their counterfeit arms, they did it to make the true
ones appear more light. The Romans taught their Soldiers rather to thrust than
to cut with their swords, because thrusts are more mortal, more hard to be
defended; and he that make^ it is not so easily discovered, and is readier to
double his thrust than his blow. Do not admire that the ancients concerned
themselves in such little things, for when people come to handy strokes, every
small advantage is of great importance; and this is not my own opinion only,
but is taught by many Authors. The ancients thought nothing more beneficial in
a Commonwealth, than to have store of men well exercised in arms; for it is not
the Splendour of their gemms, not their gold, that makes the enemy run, but the
fear of their arms.

The faults which one commits in other things may be repaired, but those which
are committed in war are never to be redressed; besides, experience in this
kind makes men more audacious and bold, for no man fears to do that which he
thinks he understands: the ancients therefore would have their Citizens
exercise themselves in all military actions, and made them cast darts (much
heavier than the true ones) against their pales: which besides that it taught
them dexterity, it was a great strengthener of their arm. They brought up their
youth likewise to the bow and the sling, in all which exercises there were
professed Masters; so that when afterward they were drawn out to the wars,
they were perfect Soldiers both in courage and discipline, nor were they
defective in any thing but keeping their ranks in their marches, and receiving
orders in their fights; which was quickly learned by mixing them with such as
had served a long time.

Cosimo. What exercises would you recommend at present?


Fabritio. Several of those which I have mentioned, as running, leaping,
throwing the bar, accustoming them to heavy arms, teaching them to shoot in the
cross, and long bow, and musket, which is a new engine, (as you know) but very
good. And to these exercises I would accustom all the youth in my Country, but
with more industry and solicitude those exercises which are useful in war, and
all their musters should be in idle days. I would have them learn to swim
likewise, which is a very useful thing, for they are not sure of bridges
wherever they come, and boats are not always to be had. So that your Army not
knowing how to swim, is deprived of several conveniences, and lose many fair
opportunities of action. The reason why the Romans, exercised their youth in
the Campus Martius, was, because of its nearness to the Tyber, where after they
had tired themselves at land, they might refresh, and learn to swim in the
water.

I would have also the Cavalry exercised as of old, which is most necessary,
for besides teaching them to ride, it teaches them to sit fast when they come
to a charge. To this end they had horses of wood upon which they exercised,
vaulting upon them sometimes with their arms, and sometimes without, very
neatly and exactly, without any assistance; so that upon a signal from their
Captain they were immediately on horseback, and upon another signal as soon
upon the ground. And as those exercises both for horse and foot were easy in
those times, they would be the same now to any Prince or Commonwealth that
would employ their youth that way, as is to be seen in several Cities in the
West, where they are continued. They divide their Inhabitants into several
parties, and every party is denominated by the arms which they wear; and
because they use pikes, halbards, bows, and harquebusses, they are called
Pike-men, Halbardiers, Bow-men, and Harquebussiers; every inhabitant is to
declare in what Company he will be listed; and because some for their age and
other impediments are not apt for the wars, there is a choice made out of every
order, of such persons as are called, the Giurati being sworn to see the rest
exercised in their several arms, according to their respective denominations,
and every one of them has a certain place appointed where their exercises are
to be made; and all that belong to that Order (besides the Giurati) repair
thither with such moneys as are necessary for their expense. What therefore is
done actually by them, we may do as well, but our imprudence will not suffer us
to imitate any thing that is good. By these exercises the ancients Infantry
were very good, and at this day the western foot are better than ours, because
the ancients exercised them at home, (as in the Commonwealths) or in the field
(as by the Emperors) for the reasons aforesaid. But we will not exercise them
at home, and in the field we cannot, they not being our subjects, are not to be
compelled but to what exercises they please: and this want of authority to
exercise them has caused our Armies to be first negligent and remiss, and
afterward our discipline; and has been the cause that so many Kingdoms and
Commonwealths (especially in Italy) are so weak and inconsiderable.

But to return to our order, and the business of exercising, I say, that it is
not sufficient to make an absolute Soldier, to in^ure a man to labor, to make
him strong, swift, and dexterous, but he must learn likewise to keep his ranks
well, to obey orders, and the directions of the trumpet and drum; to know how
to do right, standing still, retiring, advancing, fighting, and marching; for
without this discipline be observed with all accurate diligence, your Army will
never be good. And without doubt men who are furious and disorderly, are much
more unserviceable than cowards; for order drives away fear, and dissorder
lessens a man's courage.


CHAP. VII.
Of what number of men, and of what arms a battalion is to consist; and of
exercising in Companies to make them ready either to give a charge, or receive
it.
ANd that you may the better understand what is said before, you must know that
there is no Nation which, to put in order its men of war, has not constituted a
principal member, which member, or body, though they have altered it as to
their name, yet it is not much altered as to the number of their men; for in
all places they consist of betwixt six and eight thousand. This body among the
Romans was called a Legion, among the Grecians a Phalanx, among the French
Caterve; the same thing by the Swizzers (who are the only people which retain
any thing of the discipline of the ancients) is called that in their language,
which in ours is called Battalion. True it is, that afterward every one
divided it into companies, and ordered them as they pleased. My advice is, that
we found our discourse upon the name which is most known, and range it as well
as we may, according to the order both of the ancients and moderns. And because
the Romans divided their Legions which consisted of betwixt 5 and 6000 men,
into ten Cohorts, I think fit that we divide our Battalions into ten Companies,
and the whole consisting of 6000 men, allot to every company 450, of which 400
may be completely armed, and the remaining fifty slightly. The completely armed
may by 300 with swords and bucklers called Scudat^, and an hundred with pikes
called Pike-men. Those which are lightly armed may be fifty foot, carrying
Harquebusses, Cross-bows, Partisans and Halbards, which according to the old
name may be called Velites; so that all the ten Companies make 3000 bucklers,
1000 ordinary Pikes, and 500 ordinary Velites, which in all will amount to 4500
foot. But because we say that our Battalion is to contain 6000 men, 1500 more
are to be added, of which 1000 are pikes, which we will call Pikes in
extraordinary, and the other 500 are to be slightly armed, and called Velites
in extraordinary. So that my foot (as is said before) will be composed half of
Bucklers, and the other half of Pikes, and other Arms. I would have every
Battalion have a Commander in chief, four Centurions, and forty Capidieci or
Corporals, and over and above, a Commander in chief of the Velites in ordinary,
with five File-leaders. I would assign to the Velites in extraordinary two
Officers in chief, five Centurions, and fifty Corporals, then make a General of
the whole Battalion. I would have every Constable to have his Colors and
Drums, by which means the Battalion would consist of ten Companies, 300
Bucklers, 1000 Pikes in ordinary, 1000 extraordinary, 500 Velites in ordinary,
and 500 in extraordinary; so as they would amount in all to 6000 foot, among
which there would be 600 Corporals, 15 Constables, 15 Drums, 15 Colors, 55
Centurions, 10 Commanders of the Velites in ordinary, and one General of the
whole Battalion, with his Standard and Drum,

I have repeated this order the oftener, that afterward when I show you the way
of ordering a Battle or Army, you may not find your self confounded. I say
therefore, that a King or Commonwealth is to order his subjects, which he
designs for the wars, with these arms, and into these divisions, and raise as
many Battalions as his Country will afford. And when he has disposed them so,
being to exercise them in order, he is to exercise them in their several
divisions. And although the number of each of them cannot bear the form of a
just Army, yet thereby every man may learn what belongs to his own duty,
because in Armies there are two orders observed, one what men are to do in
every battle, or division distinctly; and the other what they are to do when
united with the rest; and those men who know the first well, will easily learn
the other; but without knowledge of the first, they will never arrive at the
discipline of the second.

Every one (then) of these Companies may learn by it self to keep the order of
their ranks in all motions and places, to open and close, and understand the
direction of their Drums, by which all things are commanded in a battle; for by
beating of that (as by the whistle in the Galleys) every man knows what he is
to do, whether to stand firm to his ground, to advance, or fall back, and which
way they are to turn their faces and arms. So that understanding the order of
their files in that exactness that no motion, nor no place can disorder them;
understanding the commands of their Officer, derived to them by his Drum, and
how to advance, and fall back into their places, these Companies (as I have
said before) as soon as joined, may easily be taught what an united body of all
the Battalions is obliged to do when they are drawn together into an Army. And
because this universal practice is of no slight importance, in time of peace it
would be convenient once or twice in a year to bring them to a general
Rendezvous, and give them the form of an Army, exercising them for some days as
if they were to fight a battle with an enemy, drawing them up, and disposing
them into front, flank, and reserve. And because a General orders his Army for
a battle, either upon the sight or apprehension of an enemy, he is to exercise
his Army accordingly, and teach them how to behave themselves upon a march, and
how in a battle, and how upon a charge, either upon one side or other. When
they are exercised as if an enemy was before them, they are to be taught how
they are to begin the fight how they are to retreat upon a repulse, who are to
succeed in their places; what Colors, what Drums, what words of commands they
are to obey, and so to train them up, and accustom them to these false alarms,
and counterfeit battles, that at length they become impatient to be at it in
earnest, For an Army is not made valiant and courageous for having brave and
valiant men in it, but for the good order which is observed; for if I be in the
forlorn, and know, being beaten, whither I am to retire, and who are to succeed
in my place, I shall fight boldly, because my relief is at hand. If I be of the
second body that is to engage, the distress, or repulse of the first will not
fright me, because I considered it might happen before, and perhaps desired it,
that I might have the honor of the Victory, and not they. Where an Army is
new, this way of exercising is absolutely necessary, and where it is old, it is
convenient; for we see the Roman Captains before they brought them to fight,
continually exercised their men after this manner, though they had been brought
up to their Arms. Josephus tells us in his History, that this continual
exercising in the Roman Army was the cause that all the multitude of idle
people which followed the Camp either for Traffic or gain, were made useful
and serviceable, because they understood their orders and ranks, and how to
preserve them in time of Battle. But if you have raised an Army of young men
never in the Wars before, whether you intend them for present Service, or to
establish them as Militia, and engage them afterward, without this way of
exercising by single Companies, and sometimes a conjunction of them all, you do
nothing. For order being perfectly necessary, it is convenient with double
industry and labor to teach such as are not skilful already, and practice such
as are; as we have seen several excellent Commanders, to practice and instruct
their Soldiers, take extraordinary pains without any respect to their dignities.

Cosimo. It seems to me that this discourse has a little transported you, for
before you have told us the way of exercising by Companies, you have treated of
entire Armies, and the managing of a Battle.


Fabritio. You say right, and the true reason is the affection I bear to those
orders, and the trouble I am under that they are no more used; yet do not think
but I will recollect my self and return. As I told you before, in the
exercising of a Company, the first thing of importance is to know how to keep
your ranks; to do this, it is necessary to exercise them in that order which
they call Chiocciole, or the Snail order. And because I have said that one of
these Battalias or Companies is to consist of four hundred Foot completely
armed, I will keep to that number.

These four hundred men (then) are to be reduced into 80 files, five in a file,
after which they are to be carried forward upon a quick march, or a slow,
wheeling, and doubling, charging or retreating, which indeed is more
demonstrable to the eye, than the understanding. But this Snail way of
exercising a Company is not so necessary, because every one that knows any
thing of an Army, knows how it is to be done; and indeed it is not considerable
in any respect, but to teach Soldiers how to move their files; but let us now
draw up one of these Companies and dispose them into their ranks.


CHAP. VIII.
Of three principal ways of drawing up a Company, and putting them into a
posture to fight.
I Say that there are three principal forms of drawing up men; the first and
most useful is to draw them up close, in the figure of two Squares. The second
is to draw them up in a square with two wings. The third is to draw them up
with a vacuity in the middle, which they call Piazza. To draw them up in the
first figure, there are two ways. One is to double their files, that is, the
second file entering into the first, the fourth into the third, the sixth into
the fifth, and so successively; so that whereas they were 80 files of five in a
file, they may become forty files of 10 ih a file. After this you are to double
them again in the same manner, thrusting one file into another, and then they
will be 20 files, and twenty men in a file. This makes two squares, or very
near; for though there be as many men on one side as the other, yet toward the
head they join together, so as one flank may touch the other; but on the other
side, their distance is at least two yards one from the other; so that the
square is longer from the Rear to the Front, than from one flank to another.
And because we are to speak often of the fore part, the hinder part, and the
sides, of this Battalia or Company, and of the whole Army when joined; you must
know that when I say the head or the front, I mean the fore part of the Battle;
when I say the shoulders, I mean the hinder part; and when I say the flanks, I
mean the sides. The fifty Velites in ordinary, do not mingle with the rest of
the files, but when the Battalia is formed, they are disposed by its flanks.
The other way of drawing up a Company is this, (and because it is better than
the first, I resolve to describe it so plain, that you shall understand it as
well as it were before your eyes) I suppose you remember of what number of men,
of what Officers it is composed, and what Arms it is to carry. The form
therefore of this Battalia is of twenty files, twenty men in a file, five files
of Pikes in the front, and fifteen files of Bucklers in the rear. Two
Centurions in the front, and two in the rear, which the ancients called
Tergiductores. The Constable or Captain with his Colors and Drum is to stand
in the space betwixt the five files of Pikes, and the fifteen files of
Bucklers, Corporals, upon the flank of every file one; so that each of them may
have his men by his side; those who are on the right hand, will have them on
their left, those on the left on their right; the fifty Velites are to be drawn
up on the flanks and rear. Now that your Soldiers may put themselves into this
posture in their ordinary march, it is to be done in this manner. You are first
to reduce your Battalia into 80 files, five men in a file, leaving your Velites
either in the front or the rear, but they must be sure to be placed without
this order. Every Centurion is to be at the head of twenty files, five of Pikes
are to be immediately behind him, and the rest Bucklers.

The Constable or Captain is to stand with his Drum, and Colors in the space
betwixt the Pikes and the rest of the Bucklers belonging to the second
Centurion, and may take up the place of three of the Bucklers. Of the Capidieci
or Corporals, twenty are to stand in the flank of the files of the first
Centurion, upon the left hand, and twenty upon the flank of the last Centurion
upon the right hand. And it is to be observed that every Corporal who leads the
Pikes, is to have a Pike in his hand: and they who lead the Scudi are to have
Bucklers in theirs.

Having put your files into this order, and being desirous upon their march to
reduce them into a Battalia to make head against an Enemy, you must cause the
first Centurion with his first twenty files to make a halt, and the second
Centurion to continue his march to the right all along by the sides of those
twenty files which stand firm, till he comes cheek by jole with the first
Centurion, where he also makes his stand, and then the third marching on
likewise on the right hand by the flank of the said files, advances till he be
even with the other two Centurions, and then he making his stop, and so the
rest; which being done, two of the Centurions only are to depart from the front
into the rear of the Battalia, which by this means is in the same order as I
said before. The Velites are to be drawn up by the side, as they are disposed
in the first way, which is called redoubling by a right line, for the second
way redoubles them in the flanks. The first way is more easy, this is more
orderly and useful, and may be better corrected and reformed to your mind, for
in the first you are obliged to conform to your number, for five doubled, make
ten, ten twenty, twenty forty; so that if you would double your files in a
right line, you cannot make a front of fifteen, five and twenty, thirty, nor
thirty five, but you must go where the number will carry you. And therefore it
happens every day upon particular rencounters, that it is necessary to make
head with 7 or 800 foot, and in so doing to double in a right line would undo
you. For these reasons this way pleases me best, and the difficulties therein,
are easily removed by exercise and practice. I say then that nothing is of
greater importance than to have Soldiers which can put themselves instantly
into their ranks, and to learn that it is necessary to exercise them in these
Companies at home, to teach them the quick and the slow march, to advance or
retreat, and to pass through streights, and difficult places without disturbing
their order: For Soldiers that can do that well, are good Soldiers, and may be
called old Soldiers, though they never looked an Enemy in the face; whereas on
the contrary, if a man has been in a thousand Battles, and understands not
that, he is but a Novice, and a fresh water Soldier. This is only as to closing
their ranks upon a march when they are in small files; but having closed their
files, and being afterward broken by some accident (either from the place, or
the Enemy) to rally, and recollect themselves then, there lies the difficulty
and importance which requires great exercise and practice, and by the ancients
was endeavored with much industry. In this case it is necessary therefore to
do two things.

CHAP. IX.
The manner of rallying Soldiers after a rout, and to make them face about a
whole Company at a time.
Fabr. WHen a Squadron is broken, to rally and bring them again suddenly into
order, two things are convenient; first, that several Colors or Countermarks
be assigned to every Battalia: and secondly to observe this rule, that the same
Foot stand still in the same Files. For example, if a Soldier's place was
formerly in the second File, let him continue in that File, and not only in
that File, but in the same place; and in order to that, as I said before,
several Countermarks are necessary. And first it is convenient that the Ensigns
and Colors of each Company be so handsomely distinguished, that being joined
with other Squadrons, they may know one another. Next, that the Captains and
Centurions have Plumes of Feathers of Scarfs, or something that may make them
conspicuous and remarkable; and last of all (as being of more importance) the
Capidieci or Corporals are to be so accoutred that they may be known; and of
this the ancients were so extraordinarily curious, that their numbers were
written upon their Helmets in great Characters, calling them the first, second,
third and fourth, etc. And not content with this, every Soldier had the number
of his File, and the number of his place in that File engraven upon his
Buckler. Your Companies being in this manner made distinguishable by their
Colors, and accustomed to their Ranks and Files by practice and experience, it
is no hard matter though they be disordered, to rally, and reduce them suddenly
again; for as soon as the Colors are stuck down in the ground they are
immediately visible, and the Captains and Officers knowing which are their own,
repair themselves, and dispose their Soldiers immediately to their places, and
when those on the left have placed themselves on the left hand, and those which
belong to the right hand on the right; the Soldiers directed by their rules,
and the difference of their Colors fall immediately into their Ranks, as
easily as we put together the Staffes of a Barrel when we have marked them
before. These things if learned with diligence and exercise at first, are
quickly attained, and hardly forgot; for your raw men are directed by the old,
and in time a Province by these exercises might be made very fit for the War.
It is necessary therefore to teach them how to turn all together, when to face
about in the Rear, or the Flanks, and make Rear and Flank of the first Ranks
when occasion is offered.

And this is no hard matter to do, seeing it is sufficient, that every man
faces to that side he is commanded, and where they turn their faces, that is
the Front. True it is, when they face to the Flank, their Ranks do not hold
their proportion, because the distance betwixt the Front and the Rear is
thereby much lessened, and the distance betwixt the extremity of the Flanks is
much increased, which is quite contrary to the genuine order of a Battalia, for
which cause great practice and discretion is required to rectify it, and yet
this may be remedied by themselves. But that which is of greater consequence,
and which requires more practice, is when an Officer would turn his whole
Company together, as if it were a single man, or a solid and massy body of it
self. And this requires longer experience than the other. For if you would have
it turn to the left, the left corner must stand still, and they who are next
them, march so leisurely, that they in the right may not be put to run; if they
be, it will breed confusion.

But because it always happens that when an Army marches from place to place,
that the Companies which are not in the Front, are forced to fight in the
Flanks, or Rear, so that one and the same Company is many times compelled to
face about to the Flanks and Rear at one and the same time, that these
Companies therefore may in this exigence hold their old proportion, according
to what is said before, it is necessary that they have Pikes in that Flank
which is most likely to be attacked, and Capidieci Captains, and other Officers
in their proper places.


CHAP. X.
To range a Company in such order that it may be ready to face the Enemy, on
which side soever he comes.
Fabr. WHen you have marshalled your fourscore Files, five in a File; you are
to put all your Pikes into the first twenty Files, and place five of your
Corporals in the head of them, and five in the Rear. The other 60 Files which
follow, are Bucklers all, and consist of 300 men. So then the first and last
File of every Company, are to be Corporals; The Captain with his Ensign and
Drum, is to stand in the midst of the first hundred of Bucklers, and every
Centurion at the head of his Division. When they are in this order if you
desire to have your Pikes on the left hand, you are to double them Company by
Company from the right Flank; if you would have them on the right, you are to
double from the left; and this is the way by which a Company turns with the
Pikes upon one Flank, with their Officers at the Head and the Rear of them, and
their Captain in the midst, and it is the form which is observed in a march.
But upon the approach of an Enemy, when they would make a Front of a Flank,
they have no more to do but to command that all of them face about to that
Flank where the Pikes are, and in so doing the whole Battalia turns with its
Files and Officers at the same time in the manner aforesaid; for (unless it be
the Centurions) they are all in their old places, and the Centurions can
quickly be there. But when a Battalia marches in the Front, and is in danger to
be engaged in the Rear; the Files are to be so ordered, that the Pikes may be
readily behind; and to do this there needs no more, but whereas usually in
every Battalia, every Century has five Files of Pikes in the Front, those five
Files may be placed in the Rear, and in all other places the same order to be
observed as before.


Cosimo. If my memory fails not, you said that this way of exercise is in order
to the uniting these Battalia's into an Army, and that this practice is
sufficient to direct them in that. But if it should happen this Squadron of 450
Foot should be to fight singly and by its self, how would you order it then?


Fabritio. He who commands them is to judge where his Pikes are to be disposed,
and place them as he thinks fit, which is not at all consistant with what I
have prescribed before; for though that be a way to be observed in Battle upon
an union or conjunction of several Squadrons, yet it may serve as a rule in
what ever condition you fall into. But in showing you the two other ways which
I recommended for the ordering of a Battalia, I will satisfy you farther.


CHAP. XI.
To draw up a Company with two horns, or another with a Piazza, or vacuity in
the middle.
TO come to the way of drawing up a Battalia or Squadron with two horns or
points, I say you must order your 80 Files, five in a File, after this manner.

In the midst you must place a Centurion with 25 Files, two of Pikes to the
left, and three of Bucklers to the right: when those five are disposed, bring
up the other twenty, with twenty Files and File-leaders, all of them to be
placed betwixt the Pikes and the Bucklers, only those who carry Pikes are to
stand with the Pikes. After these twenty five Files are so placed, draw up
another Centurion with fifteen Files of Bucklers; after which the Constable or
Captain is to draw into the middle with his Drum and his Colors, with other
fifteen Files of Bucklers. This being performed, the next to march up is the
third Centurion, who is to be at the head of 25 Files, of 5 in a File, three
Bucklers to the left, and two Pikes to the right; and after the 5 first Files,
let there be twenty File-leaders placed betwixt the Pikes and the Bucklers, and
after these the fourth Centurion: Having drawn your men into this order; to
make a Battalia consisting of two horns, the first Centurion is to make a stand
with his 25 Files at his heels; then is the second Centurion to advance with
his 15 Files of Bucklers, and place himself on the right hand of the 1st.
Centurion, and marching along by the side of the 25 Files, he is to advance
till he comes to the 15 File, and there he is to stop. The next that marches is
the Captain with his division of 15 Files of Bucklers behind him, and advancing
on the right hand by the flank of the other 15 Files, he is to march up to
their front. After him the third Centurion is to move with his 25 Files, and
the fourth Centurion after him, and passing along by the right flank of the
last 15 Files of Bucklers, they are not to stop at the front of the said Files,
but to advance till the last of the twenty five Files be parallel with the
Files which are behind them. As soon as this is done, the Centurion at the head
of the 1st. 15 Files of Bucklers, is to remove into the left angle in the rear,
and by this means you shall form a Battalia of five and twenty firm Files of
twenty men in a File with two horns, on each side of the front one, each of
them consisting of ten Files of 5 in a File, with a space betwixt the two
horns, sufficient to receive ten men a breast. Betwixt the two horns the
Captain is to be placed, and a Centurion at each point or angle; there are
likewise to be two Files of Pikes, and twenty Corporals on each Flank. These
horns or wings are useful to receive and secure Carriages or Artillery, when
they have any with them; The Velites are to be drawn up along the flanks under
the shelter of the Pikes. But to reduce this horned Squadron into another
Figure with a space in the middle, no more is to be done, than out of the 15
Files of twenty in a File, to take eight, and place them upon the point of the
two horns, which will make a good rear, and turn it into a Battalia Della
Piazza, or a Battalia with a space in the the midst; in this space or Area, the
Carriages are disposed, and the Captain and his Colors, but not the Artillery,
for they are placed either in the front, or along the flanks. These are the
forms to be observed in a Battalia or Squadron when it marches alone through
dangerous places. But the single Battalia without horns or vacuity is better,
though to secure such as are disarmed, the horned figure is convenient. The
Swisses have several forms of drawing up their Battalia's, one is the fashion
of a Cross, placing their Harquebussiers betwixt the Arms of the said Cross to
secure them from the Enemy. But because those figures are proper only when
Squadrons fight singly and by themselves, and my intention being to show they
may fight united and in conjunction, I shall not trouble my self with them.

Cosimo. I fancy I do sufficiently comprehend the way that is to be observed to
exercise men in these Battalia's; but (if I mistake not) you told us that to
the ten Battalia's, (which united, make a Battalion) you would add a thousand
extraordinary Pikes, and four hundred of the extraordinary Velites. And these
would you not advise should be exercised?


Fabritio. I would, and with very great diligence, exercising the Pikes with
the same care as the rest, because I would make more use of them than the rest
upon all private occasions, as in conducting convoys of provisions,
depredations, and such like. But my Velites I would exercise at home without
bringing them together; for it being their office to fight loose and confused,
it is not necessary that they should be always exercised as the rest; for it is
enough if they understand their own business well. They ought then (as I said
before) and I am not troubled to repeat it again) so to exercise their men in
these Battalia's, that they may know to keep their ranks, understand their
places, wheel readily, and shift handsomely either upon sight of an Enemy, or
inconvenience of the place. For when they can do this well, they will easily
learn which are their places, and what are their duties in a Battle. And if a
Prince or Commonwealth grudges not to take pains, and employ themselves in
seeing their Subjects thus exercised, they would have always good Soldiers, be
always too hard for their Neighbors, and would be in a condition rather to
give, than receive Laws from other people. But (as I have said before) the
disorder in which we live, is the cause that we do not only neglect, but
despise those things, and that is the true reason our Soldiers are no better;
and though there may be Officers and Soldiers too that perhaps are both valiant
and skilful; yet they have no occasion or encouragement to show themselves.


CHAP. XII.
Of the Baggage and Train belonging to a Company; How necessary it is that they
have several Officers, and of the usefulness of Drums.
Cosimo. I Would ask you now, what Carriages you would allot to each of these
Battalia's?


Fabritio. In the first place I would not allow that either Centurion or
Corporal should march on Horseback, and if the Captain must ride, I would allow
him only a Mule. I would allow him two Carriages, one to every Centurion, and
two betwixt every three Corporals, because we quarter them together in our
Camp, as shall be shown in its due place; so that to every Battalia there
should be 36 Carriages, which I would have carry the Tents, and Utensils for
their Cookery; their Hatchets, and other Iron Instruments to set up their Huts,
Tents, and Pavilions; and if there be afterward any place left, let them carry
what they please.


Cosimo. I am of opinion that the Officers which you have appointed in every of
these Battalia's are necessary, yet I should be afraid so many Commanders
should confound them.


Fabritio. What you say would be true, were they not subordinate to one; but
depending still upon one person, they proceed very regularly, nay without them,
they could not possibly be governed. For a wall that is tottering in all
places, requires that its Buttresses and Supporters be rather many than strong,
because the strength and goodness of one, will not hinder the ruin which will
follow. And therefore in all Armies, and among every ten men, it is convenient
to have one of more life, more courage, and more authority than the rest, who
with his alacrity, and language, and example, may encourage the rest, and
dispose them to fight. And to prove the necessity of these things in an Army, (
viz. Ensigns, Officers and Drums) it appears by our Armies, where there are of
them all, but none of them do their office, according to the intent of their
establishment. First your Capidieci or File-leaders, if they answer the end for
which they were established, are to have their men apart, lodge with them,
charge with them, and be always in the same file with them; for being kept to
their due places, the File-leaders are a rule and temper to the rest, keeping
them firm and straight in their files, so as it is impossible almost that they
be disordered, and if they be, they are quickly reduced. But in our days we
make no otherwise of them but to give them greater pay, and enable them to make
particular factions. It Is the same with our Ensigns; for they are used more for
pomp and parade, than any military service; whereas formerly the Captains
employed them as guides, and directions in case of disorder; for every man, as
soon as the Ensign was fixed, knew his place immediately, and immediately
returned to it. They knew likewise thereby how they were to move, or to halt:
it is necessary therefore in an Army that there be several of these small
Bodies; that every Body has its Colors, and Ensign, and Guide; for where there
are many Bodies, there ought to be many Arms, and many Officers. The Soldiers
(then) are to follow the motion of their Colors, and their Colors the
direction of their Drum, which (being well ordered) commands the Army, and
advertizes how they are to march with a motion suitable to the time which it
beats, which is a great preservation to their order. For this cause the
ancients had their flutes and pipes which made an excellent harmony: and as he
that dances, keeps himself exactly to the time of the music; and whilst he
does so, is not capable of erring: so an Army that in its motions observes the
beating and direction of its Drums, cannot be easily disordered. For this
reason they varied their sounds when they would excite, or assuage, or continue
the courage of their men. And as their ways of beating were various, so they
gave them several names. The Dorick way provoked to constancy and f^rmness; the
Phrygian inflamed the Soldiers into a martial fury and violence. It is
repo^^ed that Alexander being one day at dinner, and hearing a Drum beating
suddenly, the Phrygian way, was transported with so great a vehemence and
commotion, that he clapped his hand upon his Sword, and drew it, as if he had
been going to fight. So that in my judgment it would be very convenient to
revive the ancient dialects of the Drum, and practices of our Ancestors, and if
that should prove too difficult, yet those persons should not be despised and
laid aside, who would teach and instruct the Soldier how to obey them; yet
those ways may be changed and varied as every man pleases, provided he ensures
his Soldiers ears to understand the variety: but now adays the greatest use
of the Drum, is to make a great noise.


Cosimo. I would fain know of you (if you have ever considered it with your
self) how it comes to pass that such military exercises are in our times grown
so low and contemptible.


Fabr. I shall tell you freely what I think may be the cause.


CHAP. XIII.
A discourse of the Author about military Virtue; and how it is become so
despicable in our days.
Fabr. YOu know Europe (according to the testimony of several Authors) has
afforded many excellent Captains; Africa has had some* and Asia fewer: and the
reason (as I conceive) is, because those two quarters of the World have had but
one or two Monarchies among them, and very few Commonwealths; but Europe has
had several Kingdoms, and more Commonwealths; and men are industrious, and by
consequence excellent, as they are employed and preferred by their Prince, or
their State. Where therefore there are many Princes, there are many brave men;
where there are but few of the first, there are fewer of the other. We find in
Asia there was Ninus, Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Mithridates, and some few others of
that rank. In Africa (besides the Egyptian antiquity) there were Massinissa,
Iugurtha, and those great Captains which were trained up in the Carthaginian
Wars, which notwithstanding in respect of the numbers which have been produced
in Europe, were very few; for in Europe their brave Generals are innumerable in
History, or at least they would have been, had the Historians (with those they
have already recorded) made mention of such as are now forgotten by the
malignity of time. For there people are more virtuous, where there have been
frequent revolutions of State, and where the Governments have favored virtue
either out of necessity, or compassion.

As for Asia, it has not produced many extraordinary men, because that Province
was wholly under a Monarchy, which (by reason of its greatness, the greatest
part of it being always at peace) could not produce such excellent men, as
where there was action and war.

In Africa it was the same, yet there they were more numerous, by reason of the
Carthaginian Republic: for Commonwealths do furnish the World with more brave
men than Kingdoms; because in States, virtue is many times honored and
advanced; in Monarchies and Kingdoms it is suspected; from whence it proceeds
that in the one it is encouraged, in the other exploded. He then who shall
consider Europe, shall find it full of Commonwealths, and Principalities, which
in respect of the jealousies and animosities betwixt them, were constrained to
keep up the old military discipline, and advance those who in it were any ways
eminent; for in Greece, besides the Macedonians, there were manay Republics,
and in each of them, several excellent men.

The Romans, the Samnites, the Tuscans, Cisalpine Gauls, France and Germany
were full of Republics and Principalities, and Spain was the same. And though
in respect of the Romans, the numbers which are mentioned of them in History,
are but small; that proceeds from the emulation and partiality of the
Historians, who following fortune, content themselves with commending the
Conqueror; but 'its unreasonable to imagine that among the Samnites and Tuscans
(who waged war with the Romans 150 years together before they were totally
subdued) there were not many brave men; and so in France and in Spain; but the
virtue which Authors do not celebrate in particular men, they impute generally
to the whole people, whom they exalt to the skies for their constancy, and
adherence to their liberty.

It being true then, that where there are most Principalities and Governments
there are more excellent men; it follows, that when those Governments and
Principalities extinguish, their brave men and virtue extinguish with them,
there being loss occasion to exert it. After the Roman Empire had dilated in
self so strangely, and subverted all the Commonwealths and Principalities in
Europe, and Africa, and the greatest part of those in Asia; virtue declined in
all places but in Rome. Whereupon virtuous men began to grow thinner in Europe
and Asia, and by degrees came afterward to a total declination; for the virtue
of the whole World being as it were enclosed in the walls of Rome, when it grew
depraved and corrupted there, the whole World became corrupt, and the Scythians
were encouraged to make their inroads and depredations upon the Empire which
had been able to consume and extinguish the virtue of all other places, but was
not able to preserve it at home. And though afterward by the inundation of
those Barbarians it was divided into several Cantons; yet for two reasons their
virtue was never restored: one was because when Laws and Orders are once
neglected and disused, it is with no little pain that they are reassumed: the
other, our way of living in these times (in respect of the Christian Religion)
imposes not that necessity of defending our selves, as anciently it did: for
then those who were overcome in war, either killed themselves, or remained in
perpetual slavery, in which they lived afterward in continual misery. The
Towns that were taken were either totally demolished, or the Inhabitants
banished, their Goods plundered, their Estates sequestered, and themselves
dispersed all over the World; so that he who was overcome, suffered such
miseries as are not to be expressed. People being terrified by these
insupportable cruelties, kept up the reputation of military discipline, and
advanced all those who were excellent therein.

But at present we are under no such apprehensions: no man kills himself for
being conquered: no man is kept long a prisoner, because it is more easy to
set him at liberty. If a City rebels twenty times, it is not immediately razed
and demolished; the Citizens are continued in their Estates, and the greatest
punishment they fear, is a mulct or a tax: so that men will not now submit to
military orders, nor apply themselves to those labors to avoid a peril which
they do not apprehend. Besides, the Provinces of Europe are under few heads in
comparison of what they were anciently: for all France is under one King; all
Spain under another: Italy is divided into four parties, so that the weaker
Cities that are unable to maintain war of themselves, defend themselves by
alliances with the Conqueror; and those who are strong (for the reasons
abovesaid) are in no fear of ruin.


Cos. And yet within these five and twenty years several Cities have been
sacked, and several Kingdoms subverted which example should teach others to
reassume, and live according to the custom of our ancestors.


Fabr. It Is true as you say, yet if you observe what those Towns were which
have suffered in that nature, you will find that they were no capital Cities,
but subordinate, and depending: so we see though Tortona was demolished, Milan
was not, though Capua was destroyed, Naples was not: Brescia was sacked, but
Venice was not: Ravenna was pillaged, but Rome was not. These examples do not
make him who governs recede from his designs, but makes him rather more
refractory and obstinate, and pursue them with more vehemence, to recompense
himself with taxes and new impositions. This it is that makes men unwilling to
expose themselves to the trouble of military exercises, ^^oking upon it partly
as unnecessary, and partly as a thing which they do ^ot understand. Those who
are subjects, and ought to be affrighted with such example of servitu^e, ^^ve
not power to help themselves; and those who are Princes, having lost their
dominion, are unable, as having neither time nor convenience: Whilst those who
are able, either cannot, or will not; choosing rather to run along with
fortune, without any disquiet, than to trouble themselves to be virtuous; for
believing that all things are governed by fortune, they had rather follow her
swing, than contend with her for mastery. And that you may believe what I have
said to be really true, consider the Country of Germany, where, by reason of
their several Principalities and States, their discipline is good; and depends
upon the example of those people, who being jealous of their States and
Seigneuries, maintain themselves in honor and grandeur, as fearing to fall
into a servitude, out of which they could not so easily emerge.

This I suppose is sufficient to show the reason of the vileness and depravity
of our present discipline; I know not whether you may be of the same opinion,
or whether my discourse may not have raised some scruple in your mind.


Cosimo. Not at all, I am rather perfectly satisfied, only I desire (returning
to our first subject) to know of you how you would order your horse with these
Battalia's, in what numbers you would have them, how you would have them armed,
and how officer'd.


CHAP. IV.
What number of horse are to be put into a Battalion, and what proportion is to
be observed for their baggage.
Fabr. YOu may think perhaps I forgot it, but do not wonder, for I shall speak
of it but little for two reasons. One is, because the nerves and strength of an
Army (...) the Infantry; the other is, because the horse are not so much
debauched and degenerated as the foot; for the Cavalry is equal, if not better
at this day than in ancient times. Yet I have said something before of the way
how they are to be exercised, and as to the manner of arming them, I would arm
them according to our present fashion, both light horse, and men at arms. But
the light horse (if I might prescribe) should carry cross-bows, with some few
harquebusses among them, which (though in other affairs of war they are but of
little use) are here very necessary, to frighten the Country people, and force
them from their passes, which perhaps they have undertaken to defend: for one
harquebuss will scarre them more than an hundred other arms. But to come to
their number, having undertaken to imitate the Roman Militia, I would take but
300 good horse for every Battalion, of which 150 should be men at arms, and 150
light horse; and I would appoint a Captain to each of these squadrons, 15
Corporals to each, and a Trumpet and Ensign. I would allow every ten men at
arms five Carriages, and every ten light horse, two; which Carriages (as with
the foot) should carry the Tents, Utensils, Hatchets, and other Instruments and
Harness. Think not that what I say would be any disorder, seeing their men at
arms had each of them four horses in their equipage, which is a thing much
corrupted; for now in Germany you shall see men at arms with but one horse, and
themselves, and twenty of them are allowed but one Wagon to carry their
necessaries. The Roman horse were likewise alone, but the Triarii were lodged
always by them, who were obliged to assist them in the looking to their horses,
which may be easily imitated by us, as shall be shown in the distribution of
our lodgments: what there the Romans did of old, and what the Germans do at
this day, we may do likewise, and we do very ill if we do not.

These horse being listed and called over, may be mustered sometimes with the
Battalion, at a general Muster of all the Companies, and be appointed to make
charges, and counterfeit skirmishes with them, rather to bring them acquainted,
than for any thing else. What we have said already is sufficient for this part:
let us now come to marshal our Army, and draw it up in a posture to fight, and
with hopes of success, which is the great end of all kind of military
discipline, in which men employ so much study and diligence.


THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I.
The Order observed by the Roman Legions when a Battle was presented.
Cosimo. SEeing we change our subject, I shall yield my place of expostulating
to another man; for presumption being a thing which I condemn in other people,
I would not be too much guilty of it my self, therefore I dismiss my self of
that office, and will transfer it to which of our friends will vouchsafe to
accept it.


Zanobi. It would have been very grateful to us all, had you pleased to have
continued; but seeing it is not your pleasure, tell us at least which of us it
is you will depute to succeed you.


Cosimo. I shall leave that to the election of Signor Fabritio.


Fabr. I am content to undertake it, and do desire that we may follow the
Venetian custom, by which the youngest of the company has the liberty to speak
first, and in this case not without reason; for this being the proper exercise
of young men, I persuade my self young Gentlemen are the fittest to discourse
of it, as being most ready to follow it.


Cosimo. It Is then your province Luigi, and as I do much please my self in my
successor, so you may be as well satisfied with his interrogation. But that we
lose no time, let us return to our business.


Fabritio. I am certain, that to demonstrate how well an Army is to be
marshalled and prepared for a Battle; it would be necessary to declare how the
Greeks and Romans ordered The Troops in their Armies: but because these things
are sufficiently obvious in History, I shall pass by several particulars, and
address my self only to such as I think most useful for our imitation, and
fittest to give perfection to the discipline of our times, which will be the
occasion that at once I give you a prospect how an Army is to be ranged in
order to a Battle; how they are to confront and charge one another in a real
Engagement; and how they may be exercised in a counterfeit. The greatest
disorders committed in the drawing up an Army for a Battle, is to give it only
a front, because they leave them and their fortune to the success of one
charge: and this error proceeds from nothing but from having lost the old way
of closing their ranks, and thrusting one into another. Without that way there
is no relieving of the front, no defending them, nor no supplying their places
in the heat of their Engagement, which among the Romans was most accurately
observed. To the end therefore that you may comprehend this way, I say, that
the Romans divided each Legion into three Bodies.

The first were Hastati, the second Principes, the third Triarii. The Hastati
were in the front of the Army, in thick and firm ranks. The Principes behind
them, but their ranks not altogether so close: and after them the Triarii in so
loose an order, that they could receive both Principes and Hastati into their
body upon any distress. Besides these they had their Slingers, their Bow-men,
and their Velites; not drawn up in this order, but placed at the head of the
Army, betwixt the Cavalry and the Foot.

These light armed Soldiers began the Fight, and if they prevailed, (which was
very seldom) they followed the Victory; if they were repulsed, they fell back
by the ^^nks of the Army, or through certain spaces appointed on purpose, and
retired among those who had no arms. When they were retired, the Hastati
advanced against the enemy, and finding themselves overpowred, they retired
softly to the Principes, and fell into their ranks, and together with them
renewed the Fight; but if they also were too weak to sustain the fury of the
Battle, they retreated all into the spaces of the Triarii, and all together
being consolidated into a firm mass, they made another effort more impetuous
than before; if this miscarried, all was lost, for there was no farther
reserves. The Horse were placed at the corners of the Army, like two wings to a
body, and fought sometimes on Horseback, and sometimes on foot, as occasion was
offered. This way of reinforcing three times, is almost impossible to be
mastered, because fortune must fail you three times before you can be beaten,
and the Enemy must be so valiant as to conquer you as often.


CHAP. II.
The form observed in their Battles by the Macedonian Phalanx.
THe Grecians ordered not their Phalanx, as the Romans did their Legions, and
though they had many Officers among them, and several ranks, yet they made but
one body, or rather one front. The way which they observed to relieve one
another, was not to retire one rank into another, like the Romans, but to put
one man into the place of another, which was done in this manner. Their Phalanx
being reduced into Files (and let us suppose each File to consist of fifty men)
being afterward with the front toward the Enemy of all the Files, only the
six first could charge, because their Lances (which they called Sarissae) were
so long, that the sixth rank charged with the point of his Lance through the
first ranst: In the Fight therefore, if any of the first rank was either killed
or disabled, he who was behind in the second rank supplied his place; and the
vacuity in the second rank, was filled up out of the third, and so
successively, and on a sudden the ranks behind, supplied what was defective
before; so as their ranks remained always entire, and no place left void but
the last rank, which was not reinforced, because there was no body behind to
supply them: So that the loss in the first rank, exhausted the latter, and yet
it self was continued entire. So that these Phalanxes were sooner consumed and
annihilated than broken, because the closeness and grosseness of the body made
them impenetrable. The Romans at first used these Phalanxes, and instructed
their Legions in that way: Afterward they grew weary of that order, and parted
their Legions into several divisions, viz. into Cohortes and Manipuli, judging
(as I said before) that body to be most vigorous and fullest of life, that
consisted of most members, so constituted as that they could subsist and govern
themselves.

CHAP. III.
How the Swisses ordered their Battalions.
Fab. THe Swisses at present do use the same method with their Battalions, as
the Macedonians did anciently with their Phalanxes, both enranging them entire
and in gross, and in relieving one another. When they came to a Battle, they
disposed their Squadrons one in the Flank of another, and not behind. They have
not the way of receiving the first into the second upon a repulse, but to
relieve one another, they observe this order; they put their Battalions one in
the flank of another, but somewhat behind it, toward the right hand; so that
if the first be in any distress, the second advances to relieve it. The third
Battalion they place behind the other two, but at the distance of the shot of a
Harquebuss, that if the two Battalions should be worsted, the third might
advance in their rescue, and that which advances, and the other which retire
may have space to pass by one another without any clashing or collision; for
gross bodies cannot be received so commodiously as little; and therefore small
bodies, disposed at a distance (as they were in the Roman Legions) might better
receive, and relieve one another upon occasion. And that this order of the
Swisses is not so good as the ancient order of the Romans, is demonstrated by
many examples of their Legions when they were engaged with the Macedonian
Phalanxes; for these were still worsted by the other: The fashion of their
Arms, and their way of Reserves being more effectual, than the closeness and
solidity of a Phalanx.


CHAP. IV.
How the Author would make use of both Greek and Roman Arms for his Battalion,
and what was the ordinary Army of the Romans.
BEing therefore according to these Models to range and marshal an Army, I
think it best to retain something of the Arms, and Orders both of the Phalanx
and Legion. For this reason I have said in a Battalion I would have 2000 Pikes
(which were the Arms of the Macedonian Phalanx) and 3000 Scudi or Shields and
Swords, which are the Arms of the Romans. I have divided a Battalion into ten
Battalia's or Companies, as the Romans divided their Legions into ten Cohorts.
I have ordered the Velites or light-armed to begin the fight, as they did
formerly. And because as the Arms are mixed, they participate of the one Nation
and the other; that they may participate likewise in their orders, I have
appointed that every Company may have five files of Pikes in the front, and the
rest of Bucklers, that the front may be enabled to keep out the Horse, and
break more easily into the Foot, having Pikes in the first charge as well as
the Enemy, by which they may be fortified to sustain it bravely, till the
Bucklers come up, and perfect the Victory. And if you consider the strength and
virtue of this Order, you will find how all these Arms perform their office
exactly. For Pikes are very useful against Horse, and against Foot too, before
the Battles be joined, but after they are joined, they are utterly useless. For
this reason, behind every third rank of Pikes, the Swissers put a rank of
Halbards, which was to make room for their Pikes, though indeed it was not
enough. Placing therefore our Pikes before, and our Bucklers behind them, they
are enabled to sustain the Horse, and when they come to charge, they do open
and press hard upon the Foot; but when the fight is begun, and the Battles are
joined, the Bucklers succeed with their Swords, as being manageable more easily
in the crowd.

Luigi. We desire now to understand, how with these Arms and Orders you would
manage your Army to give the Enemy Battle.


Fabritio. I shall show you nothing at present but this: You must know that in
an ordinary Army of the Romans (which they called a Consular Army) there were
no more but two Legions of Citizens, consisting in all of 600 Horse, and about
11000 Foot. They had besides these as many more Horse and Foot sent them in by
their Friends and Confederates: These Auxiliaries were divided into two parts,
the right wing, and the left; for they would never suffer them to exceed the
number of the Foot of their Legions, though their Horse indeed they permitted
to be more. With this Army consisting of 22000 Foot, and about 2000 Horse, a
Roman Consul did all his business, and attempted any thing. Yet when they were
to oppose a greater power, they joined two Consuls together, and their two
Armies. You must know likewise that in the three great Actions of an Army
(their march, their encampment, and engagement) they placed the Legions in the
middle, because the force in which they reposed their greatest confidence they
thought fit should be more united and compact, as I shall show you more at
large when I come to treat of those things.

These Auxiliary Foot by virtue of their conversation with the Legionary Foot,
grew to be as Serviceable as they, because they were trained and disciplined
with them, and upon occasion of Battle, drawn up in the same figure and order.
He therefore who knows how the Romans marshalled one single Legion in the day
of Battle, knows how they disposed of them all: When I have told you therefore
how they divided a Legion into three Squadrons, and how one Squadron received
another; I shall have told you how a whole and entire Army is to be ordered,
when it is to be drawn up for Battle.


CHAP. V.
The way of drawing up a Battalion, according to the intention of the Author.
BEing to prepare for a Battle according to the method of the Romans, as they
had two Legions, so I would take two Battalions, and by the ordering of them,
you may guess how to order a complete Army: For to add more men, is only to
multiply their ranks. I think it unnecessary to repeat what foot there are in a
Legion, what Companies, what Officers, what Arms, what Velites in ordinary,
what in extraordinary, what Pikes, and what other things. For it is not long
since I told you distinctly, and pressed it upon your memories as a thing very
necessary for the understanding all other Orders; wherefore I shall pass on
without farther reflection.

It seems to me best that one of the ten Battalions, or Companies of a
Battalion be placed in the left flank, and the other ten of the other Battalion
on the right. Those on the left are to be ordered in this manner: Put five
Battalia's (one on the side of the other) in the front, so as there may remain
a space of four yards betwixt each, draw them up so as they may possess in
breadth 140 yards of ground, and in depth forty: behind these five Battalia's,
I would place three others, distant in a right line from the first about forty
yards; of these three, I would have two follow directly the Companies which are
upon the two extremities or corners of the five first, and the third should be
disposed in the midst; by which means these three Companies should take up as
much ground both in breadth and depth as the other five, which have only five
yards distance betwixt the one and the other, whereas the three last should
have thirty three. This being done, I would cause the two Companies remaining
to advance, and place themselves behind the three former in a right line, and
at the distance of forty yards; but it should be in such a sort, that each of
these two Companies should be ranged directly behind the extremity of the three
precedent Companies, and the space left betwixt them should be 91 yards: By
these means all the Companies thus disposed should extend themselves in front
161 yards, and in depth 20. After this I would extend the Pikes extraordinary
along the flanks of all the Companies on the left hand, at about twenty yards
distance; and I would make of them 140 ranks of seven in a rank, so that they
should secure all the left flank (in depth) of the ten Battalia's, drawn up as
I said before; and I would reserve forty files of them to guard the Baggage,
and the unarmed people in the rear, distributing their Corporals and other
Officers in their respective places. The three Constables or Captains I would
place one at the head of them, another in the midst, and a third in the rear,
who should execute the Office of a Tergiductor, who was always placed in the
rear of the Army. But to return to the front of the Army; I say, that after the
Pikes extraordinary, I would place the Velites extraordinary (which are 500)
and allow them a space of forty yards. By the side of these on the left hand I
would place my men at Arms, with a space of 150 yards; after them I would
advance my light Horse, at the same distance as I allowed to my men at Arms. As
to the Velites in ordinary, I would leave them about their Battalia's, which
should take up the space which I left betwixt each Company, unless I found it
more expedient to put them under the Pikes extraordinary, which I would do or
not do, as I found it more or less for my advantage. The Captain General of the
Battalion should be placed in the space betwixt the first and second orders of
Battalia's, or else at the head of them, or else in the space betwixt the last
of the first five Battalia's, and the Pikes extraordinary, as I found it most
convenient: he should have about him 30 or 40 select men, all brave and
experienced, and such as understood how to execute their Commission with
prudence, and how to receive and repel a charge; and I would have the Captain
General in the midst of the Drums and the Colors.

This is the order in which I would dispose my Battalion on the left wing,
which should contain half the Army, and take up in breadth 511 yards, and in
depth as much as I have said before (without reckoning the space that was
possessed by the Pikes extraordinary, which should be as a Shield to the people
without Arms, and take up a space of about a hundred yards;) The other
Battalion I would dispose on the right side, leaving betwixt the two Battalions
a distance of about 30 yards, having ordered it as the other: At the head of
that space I would place some pieces of Artillery, behind which should stand
the Captain General of the whole Army, with the Drums, the Standard or chief
Ensign, and two hundred choice men about him (most of them on foot) and amongst
them ten or more fit to execute any command. The General himself should be so
mounted, and so armed, that he might be on Horseback, and on foot as necessity
required. As to the Artillery, ten pieces of Cannon would be enough for the
taking of a Town. In the Field I would use them more for defense of my Camp,
than for any Service in Battle. My smaller pieces should be of 10 or 15 pound
carriage, and I would place them in the front of the whole Army, unless the
Country was such that I could dispose them securely in the flank, where the
Enemy could not come at them.

This form and manner of ranging an Army, and putting it in order, may do the
same things in a Battle as was done either in the Macedonian Phalanx, or the
Legion of the Romans; for the Pikes are in the front; and all the foot placed
in their ranks; so that upon any charge or engagement with the Enemy, they are
able not only to bear and sustain them, but (according to the custom of the
Phalanx) to recruit and reinforce their first rank, out of those which are
behind.

On the other side if they be overpowered, and attacked with such violence
that they are forced to give ground, they may fall back into the intervals of
the second Battalia behind them, and uniting with them, make up their body, and
charge them briskly again: And if the second Battalia is not strong enough to
relieve them, they may retire to the third, and fight all together in
conjunction; so that by this order (as to the business of a Battle) we may
supply and preserve our selves according to the Grecian and the Roman way both.

As to the strength of an Army, it cannot be ordered more strong, because the
two wings are exactly well fortified with Officers and Arms; nor is there any
thing weak but the rear, where the people which follow the Camp without Arms
are disposed, and they are guarded with the Pikes extraordinary; so that the
Enemy cannot assault them any where, but he will find them in very good order;
neither is the rear in any great danger, because an Enemy can be hardly so
strong as to assault you equally on all sides; if you found he was so strong*
you would never take the Field against him. But if he was three times as many,
and as well ordered as you, if he divides, and weakens himself to attack you in
several places, beat him in one, and his whole enterprise is lost. As to the
Enemies Cavalry, though they out-number you, you are safe enough; for the Pikes
which encompass you, will defend you from any impression from them, though your
own Horse be repulsed. The chief Officers are moreover placed in the flank, so
as they may commodiously command, and as readily obey; and the spaces which are
left betwixt one Battalia and the other, and betwixt one rank and another,
serve not only to receive those who are distressed, but gives room for such
persons as are sent forward and backward with orders from the Captain: Add as I
told you at first, as the Romans had in their Army about 24000 men, I would
have our Army consist of the same number; and as the Auxiliaries took their
method of Fighting, and their manner of drawing up, from the Legions; so those
Soldiers which you would join to your two Battalions, should take their form
and discipline from them. These things would be very easy to imitate, should
you have but one example, for by joining either two other Battalions to your
Army, or adding as many Auxiliaries, you are in no confusion, you have no more
to do but to double your ranks, and whereas before you put ten Battalia's in
the left wing, put twenty now; or else you may contract, or extend them as your
place and Enemy will give leave.

Luigi. In earnest, Sir, I am so well possessed of your Army, that I fancy I
see it drawn up before my eyes, which gives me an ardent desire to see it
engaged: I would not for any thing in the world that you should prove a Fabius
Maximus, and endeavor no more than to avoid Fighting, and keep the Enemy in
suspense; for I should blame you more, than the Romans did him.


CHAP. VI.
The description of a Battle.
Fabr. DO not question it, Hark, do not you hear the Artillery? Ours have fired
already, but done little execution upon the Enemy; the Velites extraordinary,
together with the light Horse advance to the charge in Troops, with the
greatest shout and fury imaginable; The Enemies Artillery has fired once, and
the shot passed over the head of our Foot, without any prejudice at all. That
it might not have time for a second Volley, our Velites, and our Cavalry have
marched up in great haste to possess it, and the Enemy advancing in its
defense, they are come so close, that neither the Artillery of one side or the
other can do any mischief. See with what courage and bravery our Soldiers
charge; with what discipline and dexterity they demean themselves, thanks to
the exercise to which they have been used, and the confidence that they have in
our Army: See our Battalions marching up, with their Drums beating, Colors
flying, and men at Arms in their wings in great order to the charge: Observe
our Artillery, which (to give place, and make room for our men) is drawn off by
that ground which was left by the Velites: See how the General encourages his
men, and assures them of Victory: See how our Velites and light Horse are
extended and returned to the flanks of our Army, to see if there they can find
any advantage to make an impression upon the Enemy; Now, now they are met, See
with what firmness our Battalions have received the charge without the least
noise or confusion: Observe the General how he commands his men at Arms to make
good their ground; not to advance upon the Enemy, nor desert the Foot upon any
occasion whatever. See our light Horse marching to charge a Body of the Enemies
Harquebussiers that was firing upon our flank; and how the Enemies Horse come
in to their rescue, so that being enclosed betwixt the Cavalry of one side and
the other, they cannot fire, but are forced to retreat behind their Battalia's:
See with what fury our Pikes addres^ themselves to the Fight, and our Foot
advanced already so near, that the Pikes are become unserviceable; so that
according to our Discipline the Pikes retire by little and little among the
Shields: See in the mean time how a Body of the Enemies men at Arms, has
disordered our men at Arms in the left wing; and how according to our
Discipline, retiring under the protection of our Pikes extraordinary, by their
assistance they have repulsed the pursuers, and killed most of them upon the
place. See the Pikes in ordinary of the first Battalia's, how they have
sheltred themselves under the Scudati, and left them to make good the fight:
See with what courage with what security, with what leisure they put the Enemy
to the Sword. Behold how they close their ranks in the Fight, and are come up
so near they have scarce room left to manage their Swords. See with what fury
the Enemy slyes, because being armed only with Pike and with Sword, both of
them are become unserviceable; one because of its length, the other because the
Enemy is too well armed. See how they throw down their Arms, how they are
wounded, killed or dispersed. See how they run in the right wing; see how they
fly in the left. So now we are safe, and the Victory our own.


CHAP. VII.
The Authors reasons for the occurrences in the Battle.
Fabr. WHat do you think now, have we not got the Victory very fortunately; but
we would have had it with more advantage, had I been permitted to have put all
things in execution. You see there is no necessity of making use either of the
second or third order; because our Van was sufficient to overcome the Enemy; so
that I am inclined to speak no farther upon this Subject, unless it be to
resolve any doubt that may arise in your mind.


Luigi. You have gained this Victory with so much courage and gallantry, that I
fear my transport will not give me leave to explain my self, whether I have any
scruple or not. Nevertheless presuming upon your quickness, I shall take the
boldness to tell you what I think. First, therefore let me desire you to inform
me, why you made use of your Artillery but once? why you caused them to be
drawn off into your Army, and made no mention of them afterward? It seems to me
that you placed the Enemies too high, and ordered them as you fancied; which
might possibly be true; but if their Cannon should be so placed (as I do not
question but many times they are) as that they should play among your Troops, I
would fain understand what remedy you would prescribe; and since I have begun
to speak of the Artillery, I shall propose all my scruples in this place, that
I may have no occasion to mention them hereafter. I have heard many persons
find fault with the Arms and orders of the ancients, as things of little or no
use in our days, in respect of the fury of our Cannon; because they break all
ranks, and pierce all Arms at such a rate, that it seems to them no less than
madness to oppose any ranks or orders of men against them, and to tire your
Soldiers with the carriage of Arms that will not be able to defend them.


Fabr. Your demand consisting of many heads, requires a large answer. It Is
true, I caused my Artillery to play but once, and I was in doubt whether they
should do that; and the reason is, because it concerns a man more to keep
himself from being hurt, than to mischief his Enemy. You must understand, that
to provide against the fury of great Guns, it is necessary to keep where they
cannot reach you, or to place your self behind some wall or bank that may
shelter you, for there is nothing else that can secure you; and then you must
be sure that either the one o^ the other are able to protect you. Those
Generals who put themselves into a posture to give battle, cannot place their
Armies behind a wall or a bank, or at a distance where the Enemies Cannon
cannot reach them; and therefore seeing they have no way to defend themselves
absolutely, the best course is to secure themselves as well as they can, and
that is by possessing their Cannon with as much speed as is possible.

The way to possess themselves of it, is to march up to it suddenly, and in as
wide an order as is convehient; suddenly, that they may fire but once; and
wide, that the execution may be the less. This is not to be done by a band of
Soldiers in order; for if they march any thing wide, they disorder themselves;
and if they run on in a huddle, it will be no hard matter for the Enemy to
break them. And therefore I ordered my Battle so, that it might do both the one
and the other; for having placed 1000 of the Velites in the wings, I commanded
that as soon as our Artillery had fired, they should advance with the light
Horse, to seize upon their Cannon; for which reason our Artillery was shot off
but once, and that the Enemy might not have time to charge the second time, and
fire upon us again; for we could not take so much time our selves, but they
would have had as much to do the same; wherefore the reason why I fired not my
Cannon the second time, was, that if the Enemy fired once, they might not have
leisure to fire any more. To render therefore the Enemies Artillery
unserviceable, the best remedy is to attack it with all possible speed; for if
the Enemy deserts it, it is your own; if he undertakes to defend it, he must
advance before it, and then being betwixt it and us. they cannot fire but upon
their own men. I should think these reasons sufficient without farther
examples; yet having plenty of them from the ancients, I will afford you some
of them. Ventidius being to fight the Parthians, (whose strength consisted
principally in their bows and arrows) was so subtle as to let them come up
close to his Camp before he would draw out his Army, which he did, that he
might charge them on a sudden, before they had leisure to shoot their arrows.
Caesar tells us, that when he was in France, being to engage with the enemy, he
was charged so briskly, and so suddenly by them, that his men had not time to
deliver their darts according to the custom of the Romans. You see therefore
that to frustrate a thing in the field which is to be discharged at a distance,
and to prevent its doing you any hurt, there is no better way than to march up
to it with all speed, and possess it if you can. Another reason moved me
likewise to fire my Artillery no more, which may seem trivial to you; yet to me
it is not so contemptible. There is nothing obstructs an Army, and puts it into
greater confusion than to take away, or hinder their sight; for several great
Armies have been broken and defeated by having their sight obstructed either
with the dust or the Sun: now there is nothing that causes greater obscurity,
or is a greater impediment to the sight, than the smoke of Artillery; and
therefore I think it more wisdom to let the Enemy be blind by himself, than for
you to be blind too, and endeavor to find him. These things considered, I
would either not fire my Artillery at all, or else (because that perhaps would
not be approved, in respect of the reputation which those great Guns have
obtained in the World) I would place them in the wings of my Army, that when
they fire, the smoke might not fly in the faces of my front, which is the
flower and hopes of my Army. And to prove that to trouble the sight of an
Enemy, is a thing of more than ordinary advantage; I need bring no more than
the example of Epaminondas, who to blind the eyes of his Enemy, before he
advanced to charge them, caused his light horse to gallop up and down before
their front to raise the dust, and hinder their sight; which was done so
effectually, that he got the Victory thereby. As to your opinion that I placed
the Enemies Cannon, and directed their bullets as I pleased, causing them to
pass over the heads of my Foot, I answer, that great Guns do without comparison
oftener miss the Infantry, than hit them, because the Foot are so low, and the
Artillery so hard to be pointed, that if they be placed never so little too
high, they shoot over; and never so little too low, they graze, and never come
near them. The inequality of the ground does likewise preserve the Foot very
much; for every little hill or bank betwixt the Artillery and them, shelters
them exceedingly. As to the Horse, especially the Men at arms, because their
order is closer than the order of the light horse, and they are to keep firmer
in a body, they are more obnoxious to the Cannon, and are therefore to be kept
in the rear of the Army, till the Enemy has fired (...) This is most certain,
your small Fieldpieces, and your small shot does more execution than your
great pieces, against which the best remedy is to come to (...)-blows as soon
as you can; and though in the first some men fell, (as be sure there always
will); yet a good General and a good Army are not to consider a particular
loss, so much as a General; but rather are to imitate the Swissers, who never
refused a Battle for fear of great Guns, but punished them with capital
punishment who for fear of them forsook their ranks, or gave any other sign or
expression of fear. I caused my Artillery to be drawn off as soon as I had
Fired them, that they might leave the Field clear for my Battalions to advance;
and I made no mention of them afterward, as being quite useless when the
Armies were joined. You have said likewise, that in respect of the violence and
impetuosity of those Guns, many do judge the arms and the orders of the
ancients to be altogether useless; and it seems by that, that the people of
late have found out arms and orders which are sufficient to secure them: if you
know any such thing, you will oblige me to impart it; for as yet I know none,
nor can I believe that there is any to be found: So that I would know of them
why the Infantry of our times do carry Corslets of Iron upon their breasts, and
the horse are armed Cap a pied; for seeing they condemn the ancient way of
arming as useless in respect of the Artillery, they may as well condemn what is
practiced nowadays. I would understand likewise why the Swizzers, according
to the custom of the ancients, make their Battalions to consist of six or eight
thousand foot; and why other Nations have imitated them, seeing that order is
exposed to the same danger (upon account of the Artillery) as others are. I
think it cannot easily be answered, yet if you should propose it to Soldiers
of any judgment and experience, they would tell you first, that they go so
armed, because though their arms will not defend them against great Guns, yet
they will secure them against small Shot, and Pikes, and Swords, and Stones,
and all such things. They would tell you likewise, that they keep that close
order like the Swisses, that they may more easily engage the Enemies Foot, that
they may better sustain their Horse, and put fairer to break them.

So that we see Soldiers are afraid of many things besides Artillery, against
which they are to provide by their arms, and their orders: from whence it
follows, that the better an Army is (...), and the closer and stronger it is
drawn up, the safer it is. So that who^^^ (...) opinion, is indiscreet, or
inconsiderate: for if we see that a small part of the (...) the ancients which
is used at this day, (as the Pike) and a small part of their or^^^ ((...) are
the Battalions of the Swissers) have been so serviceable, and contributed (...)
to our Armies, why may we not believe that the other Arms and orders which
(...), might have been as beneficial and useful? Again, had we no regard to the
(...) in placing our selves in that straight close order like the Swissers,
what other or^^^ ^^uld make us more fearful? No order certainly can make us
more fearful of the Artillery, than that which keeps men firm and close
together. Besides, if I be not frighted by the Artillery of the enemy when I
encamp before a Town, where they can fire upon me with more security, because I
cannot come at them by reason of the wall, nor hinder them, bu^^by my own
Cannon, which will be a business of time; if I be not afraid, (I say) whore
they can multiply their Shot upon me as they please, why should I fear them in
the Field where I can run upon them, and possess them immediately? So that I
conclude Artillery, in my opinion, is no sufficient impediment why we should
not use the methods of our ancestors, and practice their virtue and courage.
And had I not discoursed formerly with you about this subject, I should have
enlarged more; but I shall refer my self to what I said then.


Luigi. We have heard (or at least it is our own faults if we have not) what
you have discoursed about the Artillery; and that the best course that can be
taken against it, is to make our selves masters of it with as much expedition
as we can, if our Army be in the Field, and drawing up ready to engage. Upon
which I have one scruple, because to me it seems possible that the Enemy may
place his Artillery in the flanks of his Army, so as that it might offend you
more, and yet be more capable of being defended. You have made (if you
remember) in the ranging of your Army for a Battle, a space of four yards from
Company to Company, and another space of twenty yards from the Battalia's to
the Pikes extraordinary: if the Enemy should draw up his Army in your own way,
and place his Cannon in those intervals, I believe from those places they might
gaul you exceedingly, and with great difficulty, because you could not enter
into the Enemies body to possess them.


Fabr. Your scruple is rational, and I will endeavor to discuss it, or apply a
remedy. I have told you that those Battalia's are in continual motion, either
for a battle, or a march, and do naturally so straighten and close themselves,
that if you make your intervals narrower where you place your Artillery, they
will be closed up in a short time, so as they will not be able to do any
execution. If you make your distances large, to avoid one danger, you incur a
greater, by giving the Enemy opportunity not only to possess himself of your
Cannon, but to rout your whole Army. But you must understand it is impossible
to keep your Artillery among your Squadrons, especially those which are upon
Carriages, because being drawn one way, and their mouths lying the other, it is
necessary to turn them before you can fire upon the Enemy, and to turn them
takes up so much space, that fifty of those Carriages are enough to disorder a
whole Army. So that it is necessary the Artillery be placed without their
Squadrons; and being so, they may be attacked, as is said before. But let us
suppose it might be placed within the squadrons, and that a way might be found
out of retaining it in the middle, and that it should not hinder the closing of
their bodies, nor leave a way open to the Enemy. I say that even in that case
the remedy is easy, and that is by making spaces and intervals in your Army
for the bullets to pass; by which means the fury of their Artillery will become
vain: and it will be no hard matter to do this, because the Enemy being
desirous that it may be secure, will place it behind in the farthest part of
the intervals, so that to prevent their shot from doing mischief among their
own men, it is necessary that it pass always in a right line, so that by giving
place on your side, it is easily avoided. For this is a general rule, we must
give place to any thing that we are not able to resist, as the Ancients did to
the Elephants, and forked Chariots. I believe, and am assured that you think I
have ranged the Armies, and won the day; yet let me tell you, (if what I have
told you already be insufficient) it would be impossible for an Army so armed
and ordered, not to beat in the very first encounter any other Army that should
be armed and ordered according to the method of our times; which many times
affords but one front, without any bucklers, and so ill armed, that they are
not able to defend themselves against any Enemy that is near them.

And for their way of drawing up, they do it in such manner, that if they place
their Battalia's in the flank one of another, they make their Army too thin; if
they place them behind one another, not having the way of receiving them into
one another, they are all in confusion, and their ranks easily broken. And
though they give three names to their Armies, and divide them into three
Bodies, the Vanguard, Battle, and Rear-guard, yet they serve only upon a
march, and for distinction of quarters; but in a Fight they are all at the
mercy of fortune, and one small charge defeats the whole Army.


Luigi. I have observed by the description of the Battle, that your horse were
repulsed by the Enemies Horse, and retired to your Pikes extraordinary, by
whose assistance they not only sustained the enemy, but beat him back again. I
believe as you say, the Pikes may keep off the Horse in a close and gross body
like that of the Swizzers; but in your Army you have but five ranks of Pikes in
the front, and seven in the flank, so that I cannot see how your Foot should be
able to sustain them.


Fabr. Though I told you formerly that in the Macedonian Phalanx six ranks of
Pikes could charge at one time, yet you must understand, that if a Battalion of
Swizzers should consist of a thousand ranks, there could charge at once not
above four or five at the most; because their Pikes being nine yards long, a
yard and an half is taken up betwixt their hands; so that in the first ranks
they have free seven yards and an half. In the second rank (besides what is
taken up betwixt their hands) a yard and half is consumed betwixt one rank and
the other, so as there remains but six yards that can be used. In the third
rank for the same reasons there remains but four yards and an half; in the
fourth, three yards; and in the fifth but one and an half. The other ranks
therefore are not able to reach the Enemy, yet they serve to recruit the first
ranks, as we have said before, and are as a rampart and bulwark to the other
five. If then five of their ranks are sufficient to sustain the Enemies horse,
why may not five of ours do as much, having other ranks behind to reinforce
them, and give them the same support, though their Pikes be not so long? And if
the ranks of extraordinary Pikes which are placed in the flanks should be
thought too thin; they may be put into a square, and disposed in the flank by
the two Battalia's which I place in the last squadron of the Army, from whence
they may with ease relieve both the front or the rear, and give assistance to
the horse as occasion requires,


Luigi. Would you always use this order whenever you were to give the Enemy
Battle.


Fabr. No by no means; for the form of your Army is to be changed, according to
the situation of the place, and the strength or number of the Enemy, as I shall
show by example before I finish my discourse. But this form or model is
recommended to you not as the best, (though in effect it is so) but as a rule
from whence you may take your other orders, and by which you may understand the
other ways of drawing up an Army; for every Science has its Generalities upon
which it is most commonly founded. Only one thing I would press upon you to
remember, and that is, That you never draw your Army up so; as that your front
cannot be relieved by your rear; for whoever is guilty of that error, renders
the greatest part of his Army unserviceable, and can never overcome, if he
meets with the least opposition and courage.


Luigi. I have a new scruple that is risen in my mind. I have observed that in
the disposing of your Battalia's, you make your front of five Battalia's drawn
up by the sides one of another; your middle of three, and your rear of two; and
I should think it would have been better to have done quite contrary; because
in my opinion an Army is broken with more difficulty, when the Enemy which
charges it finds more firmness and resistance the further he enters it; whereas
it seems to me, that according to your order, the farther he enters it, the
weaker he finds it.


Fabr. If you remembered how the Triarii (which were the third order of the
Roman Legions) consisted only of 600 men, you would be better satisfied, when
you understood they were placed always in the rear: for you would see that I,
according to that example, have placed two Battalia's in the rear, which
consist of 900 men; so that I choose rather in my imitation of the Romans to
err in taking more men than fewer. And though this example might be sufficient
to content you, yet I shall give you the reason, and it is this: The front of
the Army is made thick and solid, because it is that which is to endure the
first shock and insult of the Enemy; and being not to receive any recruits from
elsewhere, it is convenient that it be well manned, for a few would leave it too
weak, and the ranks too thin. But the second Squadron, being to receive its
friends into it, before it is to engage with the Enemy; it is necessary that it
has two great intervals, and by consequence must consist of a less number than
the first: For should it consist of a greater number, or be but equal to the
first, either there must be no spaces or intervals at all, which would occasion
disorder; or by leaving of spaces, they would exceed the proportion of the
first Squadron, which would make your Army look very imperfect. As to what you
say touching the impression of the Enemy, That the farther he enters your Army,
the weaker he finds it, it is clearly a mistake; for the Enemy cannot engage
the second body, before the first is fallen into it; so that he finds the
middle Battalion rather stronger than weaker, being to fight both with the
first and second together. And it is the same thing when the Enemy advances to
the last Squadron; for there he has to encounter not only two fresh Battalia's,
but with all the Battalions united and entire: And because this last Battalion
is to receive more men, it is necessary the distances be greater, and by
consequence that their number be less.


Luigi. I am very well satisfied with what you have said; but pray answer me
this; If the five first Battalia's retire into the three Battalia's which are
in the middle, and then those eight into the two Battalia's in the rear, I
cannot conceive it possible that the eight Battalia's first, and afterward the
ten, can be comprehended (when eight or ten) in the same space as when they
were but five.


Fabr. The first thing I answer is this, That the space is not the same; for
the five Battalia's in the front were drawn up with four spaces in the middle,
which were closed up when they fell in with the three Battalia's in the midst,
or the two in the rear. Besides there remains the space betwixt the Battalions,
and that also which is betwixt the Battalia's and the Pikes extraordinary;
which space altogether, do give them room enough.

To this it may be added, That the Battalia's take up another place when they
are drawn up in order before their retreat, than they do after they are
pressed; for in their retreat, they either contract or extend their Orders.
They open their orders, when they fly: they contract them when they retreat; so
that in this case it would be best to contract. Besides the five ranks of Pikes
in the Van, having received the first charge, are to fall back through the
Battalia's into the rear of the Army, and give way to the Scudati or Shields to
advance; and those Pikes falling into the rear of the Army, may be ready for
any Service in which their Captain shall think fit to employ them; whereas, did
they not retire after the Battle was joined, they would be altogether useless.
And by this means the spaces which were left to that purpose, are made big
enough to receive all forces that are remaining. And yet if those spaces were
not sufficient, the flanks on both sides are men and not walls, which opening
and enlarging their ranks, can make such distances as will be able to receive
them.


Luigi. The ranks of Pikes extraordinary which you place in the flank of your
Army, when the Battalia's in the front fall back into the Battalia's in the
middle, would you have them stand firm, and continue, as two wings to the Army,
or would you have them retire with the Battalia's? If you were willing they
should, I do not see how it was possible, having no Battalia's (with intervals)
behind them to give them reception.


Fabr. If when the Enemy forces the Battalia's to retire, he does not press
them too hard, they may stand firm in their order, and flank the Enemy when the
Battalia's in the front are retired. But if they be charged (as may be
reasonably expected) and the Enemy be so strong as to force the other, they may
retire with them, and that without difficulty, though there be no Battalia's
behind with spaces to receive them; for the Body in the midst may double to the
right, and thrust one File into another, as we shall show more at large when we
speak of the manner of doubling of Files. It Is true, to double in a retreat you
must take another way than what I have described, for I told you the second
Rank was to enter into the first, the fourth into the third, and so on: But
here in this case we must not begin in the Front, but in the Rear, to the end
that by doubling our Ranks we may retreat, and not advance.


CHAP. VIII.
The Exercises of an Army in general.
Fabritio. TO answer now to whatever may be objected against my Battle, as I
have drawn it up before you, I must tell you again that I have ordered and
engaged it in that manner for two reasons; one to show you how it is to be
drawn up; the other to show you how it is to be exercised. As to the drawing up
of an Army, I doubt not but you understand it very well; and as to the
exercising, I must tell you, it ought to be done as often as is possible, that
the Captains may learn to keep their Companies in these orders; for it belongs
to every particular Soldier to keep the orders exact in every Battalia; and to
every Captain to keep his Company exact with the order of the whole Army, and
know how to obey the Command of the General. It is convenient likewise that
they understand how to join one Battalia with another, how to take their place
in a moment; and therefore it is convenient that the Colors of each Company
may have its number of Soldiers described in it; for the greater commodity of
commanding them, and that the Captain and Soldiers may understand one another
with the more ease; and as in the Battalia's, so it is convenient likewise in
the Battalions, that their numbers should be known, and described in the
Colonel's Ensign: That you should know the number of the Battalion in the left
or right wing; as also of the Battalia's in the front, or the middle, and so
consequently of the rest. It is convenient likewise that there be degrees of
Offices and Commands to raise men as it were by steps, to the great honors of
an Army. For example, The first degree should be File-leaders, or Corporals;
The second should have the command of fifty ordinary Velites; The third of a
hundred, with the title of Centurion: The fourth should command the first
Battalia; the first, the second; the sixth, the third; and so on to the tenth
Battalia, whose place should be next in honor to the Captain General of the
Battalion, to which command no person should be advanced, but he who has passed
all those degrees. And because besides these Officers, there are three
Constables or Commanders of the Pikes extraordinary, and two of the Velites
extraordinary, I did not much care if they were placed in the same quality with
the Captain of the first Battalia, nor would it trouble me if six men more were
preferred to the same degree, that each of them might put himself forward, and
do some extraordinary thing to be preferred to the second Battalia. If then
each of these Captains understands in what place his Battalia is to be ranged,
it must necessarily follow, that at the first sound of the Trumpet (the
Standard being erected) the whole Army will fall into its place. And this is
the first exercise to which an Army is to be accustomed, that is to say, to
close and fall in one with another, to do which, it is convenient to train them
often, and use them to it every day.


Luigi. What mark and difference would you appoint for the Standard of the
whole Army, besides the number described as aforesaid?


Fabritio. The Lieutenant General's Ensign should have the Arms of his General
or Prince, and all the rest should have the same Arms with some variation in
the Field or Colors, as the Prince shall think best, for it imports not much
what their Colors are, so they distinguish one Company from another. But let
us pass to the other exercise, in which an Army is to be trained; that is in
its motions, to be taught how to march, advance, or fall back with exact
distance and time, and to be sure that in their marches a just order be
observed. The third exercise is, Teaching them to manage their Arms, and
charge, in such a manner, as that afterward they may do both dexterously when
they come to fight; teaching them how to play their Artillery, and how to draw
them off when there is occasion; Teaching the Velites extraordinary to advance
out of their places, and after a counterfeit charge, to retreat to them again
Teaching the first Battalia's (as if they were overpowered) to fall back into
the intervals of the second; and all of them afterward into the third, and
having done so, to divide again, and return to their old posts; in short, they
are so to be accustomed in this exercise, that every thing may be known and
familiar to every Soldier, which with continual practice is easily obtained.
The fourth exercise instructs your Soldiers in the usefulness of the Drums, and
Trumpets, and Colors, informing them of the Commands of their Captain, by the
beating of the one, the sounding of the other, and the displaying and
flourishing of the third: for being well used to them, they will understand
what they are to do by them, as well as if they were directed by word of mouth:
And because the effects of these Commands depend altogether upon these kind of
sounds, I shall tell you what kind of Instruments the Ancients made use of in
their Wars. The Lacedaemonians (if we may believe Thucidides) in their Armies
made use of the Flute, conceiving that Harmony more apt to infuse gravity than
fury into their Soldiers. Induced by the same reason, the Carthaginians sounded
their charges upon the Harp; with which Instrument they began the Fight.
Aliatte King of Lydia, in his Wars made use of them both: But Alexander the
Great, and the Romans used Horns and Trumpets, supposing the clangor and noise
of those Instruments would inflame the courage of their men, and make them more
valiant in Fight. But as in the arming of our Army, we have followed the way
both of the Greek and the Roman; so in the choice of our Instruments of
Intelligence, I would follow the Customs both of the one Nation and the other.
I would have therefore the Trumpets placed by the Lieutenant General as
Instruments not only proper to excite and inflame your Army, but fitter to be
heard, and by consequence apter to derive your Commands than any of the other.
The rest of those kind of Instruments I would have placed about the Captains
and Colonels of the Battalions: I would have also a smaller sort of Drums and
Flutes, which should be beaten and played upon not as we do now in our fights,
but as our Tabours and Flagelets do in our Feasts: The General with his
Trumpets should signify when his Army is to make a stand, when to advance,
when to wheel, when to retire, when to make use of the Artillery, when the
Velites extraordinary are to move, and by the variation of the sounds, to
direct his Army in all the Marches and Counter-marches that are generally used;
and I would have the Trumpets followed afterward by the Drums. And because
this exercise is of great consequence in an Army, it imports very much that it
be frequently taught. As to the Horse, they should have Trumpets too, but of a
lesser and different sound from those about the Lieutenant General. And this is
all that has occurred to my memory in the ordering, and exercising of an Army.


Luigi. I beseech you Sir, let me not trouble you too much, if I desire to be
satisfied in one thing more; and that is, for what reason you caused your light
Horse and Velites extraordinary to advance against the Enemy with great shouts
and clamours, and cries; and when afterward the Body and remainder of the Army
came to charge, they did it with extraordinary silence? I confess I cannot
comprehend the reason, and therefore I beg your explanation.


Fabr. The opinions of the Ancient Generals have been different in that point,
whether an Enemy was to be charged silently and without noise, or with all the
clamor could be made: The silent* way is best to keep your men firm in their
orders, and to signify the Commands of the General: but the obstreperous way
is best to excite the courage of your Soldiers, and dismay the Enemy: and
because I thought in both cases there was something of advantage, I made use of
them both, and caused those to advance with clamor, and these with silence;
for I cannot think that an universal and perpetual noise can be any advantage,
because it hinders orders from being derived, which is a most pernicious thing:
nor is it likely that the Romans used those shouts after the first shock, for
History tells us, that many times by the exhortation and encouragement of their
Officers, the Soldiers which were flying, were stopped, and rallyed, and
disposed immediately into new Orders, which could not be, where the Officers
could not have been heard.


THE FOURTH BOOK.
CHAP. I.
The considerations and subtleties to be used in the drawing up an Army to
fight.
Luigi. SEeing the Victory has been so honorably obtained under my Conduct, I
think it discretion to tempt fortune no farther, knowing how much she is
variable, and inconstant. Wherefore my desire is to resign my Authority, and
that Zanobi may take it upon him according to the Order proposed of
transferring it to the youngest: and I know he will not refuse that honor, (or
rather trouble) both in complacency to me, and as being naturally the more
courageous of the two; for he fears not to engage in these kind of conflicts,
though there be as much likelihood of his miscarriage as conquest.


Zanobi. I shall refuse no Office into which you shall put me, though I must
needs say, I could more willingly have been an auditor; for your scruples and
demands have hitherto given me more satisfaction, than any thing I could have
objected my self. But I think, Seignor Fabritio, it would be better if you
proceed (provided your patience will serve, and that we do not tire you with
our Ceremonies.)


Fabritio. You rather oblige me Sir, for this variety of Interrogators, gives
me to understand the vanity of your judgments and appetites. But is there any
thing behind that you would have added to what has been spoken before?


Zanobi. There are two things of which I would willingly be satisfied before we
pass any farther. One is, whether you have any other way of drawing up an Army:
The other is, what reflections or considerations a General is to have, before
he comes to a Battle; and when any accident intervenes, how it is to be avoided.


Fabr. I shall endeavor to satisfy you, but not by answering distinctly to
your demands; for whilst I answer to one, it happens many times that I seem to
answer to the other; I have told you how I would have my Army drawn up, that
according to that model, any other figure may be taken, as the number of the
Enemy, and the nature of your ground does require; for in that case, one is to
act according to the condition both of the one and the other.

But take notice of this, That there is no way more dangerous, than to extend
the front of your Army too much, unless it be very numerous and strong:
Otherwise you are to draw it up close and thick, rather than wide and thin. For
when your Forces are few in respect of the Enemy, you must look out for other
remedies: as by drawing your Army up, so as it may be fortified by some River,
or Fen, that may secure you behind; or fortified in the flanks by some Ditch or
Entrenchment, as Caesar's was in France; and this ought to be a general rule to
you, that you extend or contract your front according both to your own number,
and the number of your Enemy. If the Enemy be not so numerous, and your men as
well disciplined as they, you are to make choice of an open place, where you
may not only encompass the Enemy, but distend your own ranks: For in straight
and narrow places, not being able to make use of your orders, you cannot make
use of your advantage. For this reason the Romans did most commonly make choice
of open and clear places, and avoided such as were difficult and close. But if
your Army be small, or your men inexperienced, you must do quite contrary (as I
said before) and must find out some place where your few men may defend
themselves, or where their inexperience may do you no hurt: In that case you
are to choose some hill or eminence from whence you may come down upon the
Enemy with more force; yet must you have this caution not to draw up your Army
upon any Strand or Seacoast, nor under the command of any Hill, of which the
Enemy may possess himself, because you will be exposed thereby to the Enemies
Cannon without remedy, and be unable to do them mischief with any convenience.
In the drawing up an Army for Battle, great regard is likewise to be had to the
Sun and the Wind, that neither the one nor the other be in your face, for they
are great impediments to your sight, one with its beams, and the other by
raising the dust, and carrying the powder into your eyes; besides, the wind
being contrary, is a great disadvantage in rendering the blows which they give
the Enemy more languid and weak; and as to the Sun, your must not only take
care that it be not in your face, nor does you no prejudice in the beginning of
the Fight, but that it does you no injury when it gets up: wherefore the best
way is when you draw up your men, to have it if possible on their backs, that
many hours may pass before it can come about into their faces.

Hanibal knew this advantage very well, and made use of it in the Battle of
Cannas, and Marius did the same against the Cimbrians. If you be weaker in
Horse, it is your best way to draw up among the Vines or the Woods, and such
other impediments, as in our times the Spaniards did when they beat the French
in the Kingdom of Naples near Cirignuola. And it has been many times seen that
the same Soldiers which have been worsted and bastled before; by only changing
their order, and shifting their ground, have recovered the Victory; Thus it was
with the Cartbaginians, who having been many times worsted by Marcus Regulus,
were afterward Victorious by the Conduct of Kantippus the Lacedemonian, who
caused them to come down into the plain, where they might have room for their
Horse, and their Elephants, and by so doing they were too hard for the Romans.

According to the practice of the Ancients, I have observed, That all great
Generals when they have known which quarter of the Enemy was the strongest, and
where they have fortified most; they have not opposed the strongest part of
their Army against it; but have chose rather to confront it with the weakest of
their divisions, and with their strongest attack the weakest of the Enemies.
When afterward they came to engage, they commanded the strongest of their
Squadrons that they should not only stand firm, and receive the charge without
making any advance, whilst the weaker parts had orders to suffer themselves to
be overcome, and by giving ground gradually, to fall behind the rear of the
Army. The Artifice procures two great disorders to the Enemy. The first is,
that the strongest part of his Army is environed insensibly; the other is, that
imagining their Victory certain by the retreat of their Enemy, they fall
frequently into disorder, which many times robs them of that Victory of which
they thought themselves so certain. Cornelius Scipio being in Spain against the
Carthaginians, under the command of Asdrubal; and knowing that Asdrubal
understood very well that in the drawing up his Army, he put the Roman Legions
(which were the strength and flower of his Army) in the midst, and that
Asdrubal in probability would do the like. When they came afterward to Fight,
he changed his order, put his Legions in the Wings, and his light armed men in
the Body; When the Battle was joined, he commanded his Body to slacken their
march on a sudden, and the Wings to double their pace; so that only the Wings
on both sides engaged, and the Bodies on both sides being at a distance one
from the other, came not up to one another, and the strongest part of Scipio's
Army, fighting better than the weakest of Asdrubal's, he overcame them. In
those days that stratagem was well enough; but in our days by reason of our
Artillery, it is unpracticable; for the space which would be left betwixt the
two Bodies would give opportunity to the Artillery to play, which as we said
before, would be very dangerous: So then that way is to be laid aside; and the
way which I recommended before is to be used, which is to charge with your
whole Army, and let your weakest Squadrons retire. When a General finds his
Army stronger than his Enemies, if he would encompass it insensibly, and that
the Enemy may not prevent him, let him draw up his Army to an equal front with
the Adversary: afterward in the heat of the Fight let him order by little and
little to retire in the front, and let the Wings advance as gradually, and it
will always happen that the Enemy shall be encompassed before he is aware.

When a General would fight, and be sure not to be routed, let him draw up his
Army near some place of retreat or security, as either Fens, Mountains, or some
strong inexpugnable Town; for in that case he may pursue the Enemy, but the
Enemy cannot pursue him. Hanibal made use of this cunning when his fortune
began to decline, and he began to apprehend the Conduct of Marcellus. Some
Generals to disturb the orders of the Enemy, have commanded their light armed
men to begin the Battle, and when it is once joined, to retire among the ranks.
When afterward it grows hotter, and both sides are thoroughly engaged, they have
had orders to draw forth out of the flanks of the Army, and having flanked the
Enemy unexpectedly, they have disordered and broke him. If any one finds
himself weaker in Horse, besides the ways proposed before, he may place a
Battalia of Pikes behind them, and draw them up in such manner, that in the
heat of the Battle they may open, and give way for the Pikes to pass through
them, and by so doing, he shall be sure to prevail. Several have accustomed
their light armed men to fight among their Horse, and they have been found to
give the Horse very good assistance.

Of all those who are famous for drawing up Battles, Hanibal and Scipio are the
most renowned for the great skill that both of them expressed in their conflict
in Africa; but because Hanibals Army was composed of Carthaginians, and
Auxiliaries of several Nations, he placed 80 Elephants in his front; behind
them he placed his Auxiliaries, next them his Carthaginians, and last of all
his Italians, in whom he could not safely conside: and the reason why he
ordered them so, was because the Auxiliaries having the Enemy in their faces,
and finding themselves closed up with Carthaginians at their backs, should not
think of flying, but being under a necessity to fight, he did hope they might
either overcome, or so harrass the Enemy, that when he came up with his fresh
men, he might the more easily overthrow them. Against this order Scipio placed
his Hastati, Principes, and Triarii in his accustomed manner, so as upon
occasion they might be received one into the other.

The front of his Army he made up with great spaces, but that it might appear
close and united to the Enemy, he filled them up with his Velites, with order
that as soon as the Elephants come upon them, they should retire, and entering
among the Legions by the ordinary spaces, leave a way open for the Elephants to
pass, by which means the fury and execution of the Elephants being evaded, they
came presently to handy-blows, and the Carthaginians were overcome.


Zanobi. In your description of the Fight, you have caused me to remember how
Scipio in the Engagement caused not his Hastati to retire into the ranks of the
Principes, but divided them, and caused them to retire into the Wings of the
Army to give place to the Principes when they were to advance against the
Enemy: I would know therefore for what reason he differed from the ordinary
custom.


Fabritio. I will tell you: Hanibal had placed the strength of his Army in the
second division; so that Scipio to oppose them with equal courage, united the
Principes and the Triarii together, insomuch as the intervals of the Principes
being filled up by the Triarii, there was no spaces left for the reception of
the Hastati; wherefore he caused the Hastati to open to the right and left, and
fall in with the Wings of the Army. But you must observe that this way of
dividing the first Squadron, is not to be used but when the other is Superior;
for then you may do it conveniently, as Scipio did; but being inferior or under
any repulse, it is not to be done without manifest danger, and therefore it is
necessary that you have spaces behind in your other Squadrons that may be ready
to receive you.

But to return to our discourse. The ancient Asians among other contrivances to
mischief their Enemy, made use of certain Chariots with Sythes fastened to the
Sides of them, which served not only to open the Squadrons of the Enemy with
their force, but to cut and kill them with their Sythes. Against these
Chariots, they had three ways to defend themselves; either by the closeness of
their ranks, or by receiving them into their ranks (as they did the Elephants)
or by some other vigorous resistance, as Silla the Roman did against Archelaus,
who had store of those Chariots; to repel them Silla caused several stakes to
be pitched into the ground before his first Squadron, which putting a stop to
the carreer of the said Chariots, prevented the execution which they would
otherwise have done. And it is observable the new method that Silla used in
ranging his Army; for placing his Velites and light Horse behind; and all his
complete armed Soldiers before, he left intervals sufficient to receive them
which were behind when they had occasion to march up; so that the Fight being
begun, by the assistance of the Horse (who had room to pass through the first
Squadron to the charge) he obtained the Victory.


CHAP. II.
The Arts which are to be used during the Fight.
Fabr. TO disturb the Army of the enemy when the Battle is joined, it is
necessary to invent some way or other to affright them, either by spreading a
report of supplies that are hard by, or counterfeiting some representation of
them that may dismay the enemy, and facilitate their defeat.

Minutius Ruffus, and Acillus Glabrio two of the Roman Consuls were skilful in
this art. Caius Sulpitius caused all the boys and refuse of his Army to mount
upon mules and other beasts that were unserviceable in fight, and placed them
at a distance upon a hill, and drawn up in such order that they appeared like a
complete body of horse, when he was engaged with the French, and the enemies
apprehension of that body got Sulpitius the Victory. Marius made use of the
same stratagem when he fought against the Germans: if then these false alarms
and representations are of such use and advantage in time of Battle, true ones
must needs be more efficacious, especially if they fall upon the enemies flank
or rear whilst the battle is joined: which indeed is not easy to be done,
unless the nature of the Country contributes; for if it be open and plain, you
cannot conceal any part of your Forces, as is necessary to be done in those
cases; but in woody or mountainous Countries you may conceal some of your
Troops in such manner as they may fall suddenly and unexpectedly upon the
enemy, which will give you a certain Victory. It is many times of great
importance to spread a rumor abroad during the Fight, that the enemies General
is slain, or that he is beaten in another part of the Army, which (as the
other) has many times been the cause of a Victory. The enemies horse are often
disordered by the representation of strange figures, or the making of some
unusual noise, as Croesus did, who opposed camels against horse; and Pyrrhus
when he confronted their Cavalry with his Elephants; the strangeness of which
sight affrighted them so, that nothing was strong enough to keep them from
disorder. In our days the Turk defeated the Sophi of Persia, and the Sultan of
Syria only with the noise of this Guns, which being unusual to their horse,
disordered them in such manner, that the Turk got the Victory, without any
great trouble. The Spaniards to distract the Army of Amilcar, placed in the
front of their Army certain Chariots filled with flax, and drawn by oxen, to
which flax (when the enemy came up to charge) they put fire, and the oxen
running from the fire, rushed furiously into the Army of Arailcar, and put it
to the rout. It is an unusual practice (as we have said before) to surprise and
disturb the enemy with ambuscades where the Country is convenient: but where it
is open and large, many have made great holes in the ground, and covered them
with straw and earth lightly, leaving certain spaces solid and firm for their
own retreat; over which having retired cunningly in the heat of the fight, the
enemy pursuing, has fallen in, and been ruined. If during the fight any ill
accident happens that may discourage your Soldiers, it is prudence to dissemble
it, and turn it to advantage, as Tullus Hostilius did, and Lucius Sylla who
observing in the heat of the Battle a party of his Troops go over to the enemy,
to the great disheartening of the rest, caused it to be published quite through
his Army that it was done by his order, which not only dispelled the
apprehension that was among them, but encouraged them in such manner that it
got him the Victory. Sylla having commanded out a party upon some enterprise,
and all of them being killed in fight of his Army, that the rest might not be
terrified, told them he sent them on purpose, because he had found them
unfaithful. Sertorius fighting a battle in Spain, flew one of his own men, who
brought him news that one of his great Officers was killed, and the reason was,
lest telling it to the rest, it might possibly have discouraged them. It is no
easy matter to detain and Army, (if it be once tottering and inclining to run)
and to bring it to fight again: but you must consider it with this distinction,
either it is wholly disordered, and then it is impossible to recover it; or
else it is disordered but in part, and there is some remedy. Many of the Roman
Generals have stopped the flight of their Armies, by putting themselves at the
head of them, and as it were upbraiding them by their cowardice. Lucius Sylla
seeing part of his Troops routed, and pursued by the forces of Mithridates,
rode up to the head of them with his sword in his hand, and cried out to them,
If any body ask you where you have left your General, tell him you left him
fighting in Boetia. Attilius the Consul opposed those who fought bravely
against those who ran away; telling them that if they did not face about, they
should be killed by their friends as well as their enemies. Philip King of
Macedon understanding that his Soldiers were afraid of the Scythians, placed
behind his Army certain of the faithfullest of his horse, with commission to
kill any man that fled; so that his men choosing to die rather fighting than
flying, overcame their adversaries. Several of the Roman Generals have wrested
an Ensign out of the hands of their Soldiers, and throwing it among the enemy,
promised a reward to him who should recover it; and this they did not so much
to hinder the flight of their own men, as to give them occasion of doing some
greater exploit upon the enemy.


CHAP. III.
Stratagems after the Fight.
Fabr. I Do not think it impertinent to add to this discourse such things as
happen after the Fight, especially seeing they are but short, and not to be
omitted because they are conformable to the matter which we have in hand. But
since one of these two things must happen, either that we gain the Victory, or
lose it; I say, that when we gain it, we are to pursue it with the greatest
diligence we can, and rather imitate Caesar in this case than Hanibal, who for
not following his Victory, and pushing it on after he had defeated the Romans
at Cannas, lost the whole Empire of the Romans, which fortune had almost thrust
into his hands. Caesar on the other side never rested after a Victory, but
followed the enemy with greater fury than he attacked them at first. But when
the day is lost, a wise General is to consider the best that he can make of it,
especially if there be any thing of his Army remaining.

The advantage that may arise, is from the inadvertency of the enemy, who many
times transported with his success, grows negligent and remiss, and gives
opportunity to the enemy to revenge himself, as Martius the Roman did upon the
Carthaginian Army, who having slain the two Scipio's, and routed their forces,
not valuing those which remained, were suddenly assaulted and broken; for it is
frequently seen, nothing is perpetrable so easily, as what the enemy fancies
you can never attempt; for commonly men suffer most, where they are most
secure. A General therefore, when he cannot carry the Victory, is to endeavor
with all possible industry that his loss may be as little as may be; and to do
this, it is necessary to order things so that the enemy may not easily pursue,
or be in a capacity to retard you.

As to the way of hindering the pursuit of the Conqueror; several Generals, as
soon as they found their condition, and that it was not possible to continue
the Fight, have ordered their inferior Commanders to separate, and fly in
several parties, and meet again at a place which he assigned; and the enemy not
daring to divide his Army for fear of a design, has let all, or the greatest
part of the conquered escape. Others have thrown the best of their goods in the
way, that the enemy following might be delayed by the prize, and suffer them to
get off. Titus Dimius used no small art to conceal the loss which he had
sustained in the fight; for having endured the burnt of the Battle from morning
till night with the loss of many of his men; when night came, he caused most of
them to be buried privately: the next morning the enemy finding so many of
their own men dead, and so few of the Romans, concluded themselves beaten, and
fled. And now I suppose (though confusedly) I have in some measure satisfied
your demands.


CHAP. IV.
Two other ways of ranging an Army to fight.
Fabr. It Is true, as to the form and model of drawing up an Army to fight, it
remains that I let you know that sometimes some Generals have drawn them up in
the figure of a wedge pointing in the front, supposing it the properest way to
pierce, and make an impression upon the enemy. In opposition to this, the way
was for the adversary to draw up in the figure of a pair of shears, which being
opened, were to receive the point of the wedge, enclose it, and charge it on
all sides. And about this, let me recommend to you this General rule, that the
best remedy to be used against the design of an enemy, is to do that bravely of
your self, to which you perceive he would endeavor to force you: for doing it
voluntarily you do it orderly, and to your own profit and advantage; whereas if
you do it by constraint, you do it to your ruin. I will not repeat any thing
that I have said before, to confirm my discourse. But this is most certain, if
your adversary thinks to open, and as it were cleave your Army with his wedge,
if you keep your Army open in the figure of the shears, and receive them in the
middle, you cut them to pieces, and they can do you no hurt.

Hanibal placed his Elephants in the front of his Army, thinking thereby to
have pierced the Army of Scipio with more ease; but Scipio ranging his men in
the form of a pair of shears, and receiving him in an open posture, gained the
Victory, and Hanibal was lost.

Asdrubal placed the best and strongest of his men in the front of his Army to
make the better charge upon the Enemy; Scipio commanding his middle men in the
front to retreat insensibly, and give place, was so cunningly obeyed, that the
Enemy was drawn in, and defeated: so that you see those designs are many times
the occasion of his Victory against whom they are designed.


CHAP. V.
Of the constraint and advantage a man may have to Fight.
Fabr. IF my memory does not fail, it remains yet that I say something touching
the things which a wise General is to consider before he comes to an
engagement. And the first thing I shall say upon this subject is, that a
General is never to come to a Field-fight unless he be constrained, or has some
more than ordinary advantage. His advantage may lie in the nature of the Place,
in the discipline of his Army, or the number or excellence of his Men. And his
necessity consists in finding his condition such, that without fighting he must
be certainly destroyed: as where money is wanting, where victuals are
defective, and where the Enemy is in expectation of supplies: in these cases a
General is always to venture, though he fights upon disadvantage; for it is
better fighting where fortune may favor you, than not to try her at all, and
be certainly ruined; and in this case it would be as great a fault in a General
not to fight, as it would be if he had an opportunity of defeating his
adversary, and was either too ignorant to know it, or too cowardly or delatory
to make use of it. The advantages which occur in the conduct of war do many
times proceed from the Enemy, and sometimes from your prudence. Many have been
surprised and routed in their passage over Rivers, by the dexterity of the
Enemy, who having forborne them till half of them were over; have fallen
suddenly upon them, and put them to the rout, as Caesar served the Swizzers
when he cut off a fourth part of their Army, by reason that they were separated
by a River. Sometimes it happens that your Enemy is tired, and weary, having
followed you with too much haste and inconsideration; and in that case finding
your own Army vigorous and strong, you are not to lose your opportunity.
Besides, if your Enemy presents you Battle in the morning betimes, you are not
immediately to draw out your Army and fight him, but are rather to protract and
spin out the time for some hours, (still offering and pretending to come forth)
that their impatience of delay, or standing so long to their Arms, may rebate
the fury with which they came; and as soon as you find them cool, and off of
their first ardor, then you may come forth, and charge them as smartly as you
can. Scipio and Metellus made use of this way in Spain, the one against
Asdrubal; the other against Sertorius. If the Enemy has lessened his power by
dividing his Army, (as Scipio did in Spain) or by any other occasion, then also
a good General may try his fortune with credit.

The greatest part of the gravest Generals have chosen rather to receive than
give the charge, because the fury of an Enemy is easily sustained by those who
stand firm and close in their station; and being once checked, it turns into
cowardice. Fabius being sent against the Samnites and the Gauls, received their
fury with that indiscomposedness and tranquillity, that he conquered them both,
but Decius his Colleague not following his example, miscarried, and was slain.
Some who have been possessed too much of the courage of their Enemy, have chose
to begin the Fight in the Evening toward night, that their Army being worsted,
might get off, or defend themselves by the benefit of the darkness. Others
understanding the superstition of the Enemy, and that on certain days they
devote themselves wholly to Religion, and will not endeavor to fight, have
chosen that time to attack them, and have carried the Victory. Caesar made use
of this way against Ariovistus in France, and Vespasian did the same in Syria
against the Jews, who upon their Sabbath would not so much as defend themselves
against the Romans.


CHAP. VI.
Directions for a General.
Fab. THere is nothing of more importance to the General of an Army, than to
have about him persons that are faithful, experienced in war, and prudent in
Counsel, with whom he may constantly advise, and confer both about his own Men,
and the Enemy; as which is the most numerous, which the best armed, which the
best mounted, which the best exercised, which the most patient of labor and
distress, and whether the Horse or the Foot are to be relied upon most.

The next thing to be considered is the place where he is, whether it be more
advantageous for the Enemy than for him; which is most easily supplied with
provisions; whether it be best to fight presently, or protract; and what he may
gain or suffer thereby: for many times the Soldiers disgusted at the
tediousness of the war, grow lazy and remiss, and coming at length to be weary,
they either grow mutinous, or run away. But above all things, I would advise a
General to inform himself of the nature and qualification of his adversary the
Enemies General, whether he be rash, or wary, and what counsel he has about
him. The next thing he is to consider, is, whether he can confide in his
Auxiliaries or not: and be sure never to bring his Army to a Battle, if he
finds them under any apprehension, or with the least distrust of the Victory;
for the greatest sign of miscarriage, is despair, and when they think it
impossible to prevail. In this case therefore you are to avoid fighting either
by following the example of Fabius Maximus, (who encamped his Army in places of
such advantage, that Hanibal durst not attack him) or else if you suspect the
Enemy will venture upon you in your entrenchments, and that you shall not be
able to defend them, your best way will be to remove, divide your Army, and
dispose them in parties into several Towns, that the tediousness of a siege,
and length of time, which will be required, may discourage the Enemy.


Zanobi. Is there no other way of avoiding a Battle, but to divide your Troops,
and to dispose them into several Towns?


CHAP. VII.
Which way a Battle is to be avoided, though pressed never so earnestly by the
Enemy.
Fabr. IF I be not mistaken I have discoursed to some of you before, how he
that is in the field cannot avoid fighting when pressed by an Enemy who will
fight upon any terms; and that the best way he can take, is to keep himself at
fifty miles distance, that he may have time to remove when he hears of his
advance. Fabius Maximus did not refuse fighting with Hanibal, but would fight
at his own time, and advantage; and Hanibal was too wise to attack him, where
he was sure he could do no good; for had he believed he could have conquered
him, Fabius would have been constrained to have fought him, or fled. Philip
King of Macedon, Father of Perseus, being at war with the Romans, posted his
Army upon an high mountain, that he might not be compelled to fight; but the
Romans assaulted, and defeated him. Cingentorix General of the Gauls to avoid
fighting with Caesar who had passed a river contrary to his expectation,
quitted the Country, and marched away with his Army. The Venetians in our
times, if they had had no mind to have fought the French King, they should not
have staid till his Army had passed the Adda, but have removed farther off, as
Cingentorix did before them; but they staid so long that they had time neither
to draw up handsomely to fight, nor to make their retreat; for the French were
so near before the Venetians dislodged, that the French fell upon them, and put
them to the rout. So then by what I have said, it is manifest that a Battle
cannot be avoided, when the Enemy presses it upon any disadvantage; and let not
any body tell me of Fabius, for Hanibal refused to fight in that case as much
as he.


CHAP. VIII.
How Soldiers are to be encouraged to fight; and how they are to be cooled and
assuaged when their courage is too high.
Fabr. IT many times happens that your Soldiers are impatient to be fighting,
but if you do not find it convenient in respect of the number of your Army, the
disadvantage of the place, or some other consideration, you would do well to
turn them from that inclination. It happens again that necessity or occasion
constrains you to fight when your Soldiers are diffident or adverse: in one
case it is necessary that you affright them, in the other that you excite them.
In the first case, when remonstrances and exhortations will do not good, the
best way is to suffer some of them to be cut off by the enemy, that those who
have fought, and those who have not, may believe you another time. What Fabius
Maximus did by accident, may be done on purpose, and by art. You know the Army
of Fabius was very fierce to be fighting with Hanibal, and his Master of the
Horse was of the same mind with the Army: Fabius was of another opinion, and
thought it better to protract; and this diversity of opinions occasioned the
dividing of the Army: Fabius kept his division in his trenches, the Master of
the Horse went out, fought, was worsted, and had certainly been cut off, had
not Fabius relieved him; by which example the Master of the Horse, and the
whole Army were convinced that their wisest way was to have obeyed the orders
of Fabius. As to the other point of animating your Soldiers, and raising their
courages to a pitch, it is good to incense them by possessing them of the
contumacy and insolence of the enemy: by pretending intelligence among them,
and that you have corrupted a considerable party; by posting your Army so near
them, that they may see one another, and skirmish with them slightly every day,
(for things which are done daily, we easily despise) by counterfeiting your
self angry, and in a solemn and grave oration reprehending and upbraiding their
backwardness, and telling them, that if they leave you, you will charge the
enemy alone. But to make your Soldiers bold and courageous, you are by no
means to permit any of them to send any thing to their own houses (or to
deposit it any where else) till the war be done, that they may know that though
in running home they may save their lives, yet it must be with the loss of
their prize; the love of which renders people commonly as valiant as the love
of their lives.


Zanobi. You say that Soldiers may be encouraged, and disposed to fight, by a
speech or oration: do you intend it should be delivered to the whole Army, or
only to the Officers?


CHAP. IX.
A General ought to be skilful and eloquent to persuade or dissuade as he sees
occasion.
Fabr. IT is an easy matter to persuade or dissuade any thing with a small
number of persons, because if words will not do, you have force and authority
to back them: but the difficulty is to remove an opinion out of the heads of
the multitude when it is contrary to your own judgment, or the interest of the
public; for there you can use nothing but words, which must be heard and
understood by every body, if you would have every body convinced. For this
reason it is requisite an excellent General should be a good Orator, to inflame
or assuage the courage of his Soldiers as he has occasion; for unless they can
tell how to speak to a whole Army, there is little good to be expected; and yet
in our times this way of haranguing them is quite laid aside. Look over the
Life of Alexander the Great, and see how often he was put to it to speak in
public to his Army; and had he not done it, he would never have been able to
have conducted it (when laden with so much riches and prey) through the deserts
of Arabia, and in India, where it endured so much misery and distress; for
there is scarce a day but something or other happens that causes confusion and
ruin to an Army where the General is either ignorant or careless of speaking
to them. The way of making speeches to them takes away their fear, quickens
their courage, augments their confidence, discovers their cheats, secures their
rewards, remonstrates their dangers, and the ways to avoid them. In short, by
those kind of Orations a General reprehends, entreats, threatens, encourages,
comm^nds, reproaches, and does every thing that may either enhance, or depress
the passions of his men; wherefore that Prince, or that Commonwealth that
should design to establish a new Militia, and give it a reputation, is to
accustom his Soldiers to the harangues of their chief Officers, and to choose
such Officers as know how to accost them.


CHAP. X.
Certain considerations which encourage Soldiers, and make them as virtuous as
valiant.
Fabritio. THe worship which the ancients paid to their Gods (though they were
false) Religion, and the Oath which was taken before they were listed in the
Army, was in those days sufficient to keep their Soldiers to their duty; for
upon every misdemeanor they were threatened not only with such punishments as
they were to expect from their Officers, but such as could be inflicted (as
they thought) by nothing but their Gods; which opinion being tempered with
other religious ceremonies and superstitions, made all enterprises easy to the
Generals of those times, and would do so still, were we as careful and
observant of our Religion as they were of theirs. Sertorious knew how to make
his advantage that way, pretending conference with a white Heart, which (as he
gave out among his Soldiers) came from Heaven to assure him of Victory. Sylla
to make his designs the more credible, pretended to discourse with an Image
that he had taken out of the Temple of Apollo, which directed him how he was to
steer. Others have pretended dreams and visions that have commanded them to
fight: in the days of our Fathers, Charles the Seventh of France during his
wars with the English, pretended to be advised by a maid that was sent from
Heaven to give him instructions, which maid was called the Pucelle d' Orleans,
and gained him many a Victory. There are other ways of making an Enemy
contemptible; Agesilaus the Spartan having taken several Persians, stripped them
naked, and showed them to his men, to the end that seeing the delicacy and
tenderness of their contexture, they might have less occasion to fear them.
Some have by design brought their men into extremity, that they might be
necessitated to fight, as having taken from them all hopes of preservation, but
in Victory; which indeed is the surest and best way to make your Soldiers
fight, and to infuse courage into them, and then this courage and obstinacy is
highly increased by their confidence in their General, and their love to their
Country. Their love to their Country is natural; their confidence in their
Captain is more from his experience and conduct, than from any thing else.
There may be many other obligations, but none so strong as that which binds you
either to conquer, or dye.


THE FIFTH BOOK.
CHAP. I.
How the Romans marched in an Enemies Country, and in what manner they are to
be imitated.
Fabr. I Have shown you how an Army is drawn up and marshalled in order to a
Battle; I have told you how an Enemy is overcome, and several circumstances
which occur therein. So that it is time now to inform you how an Army is to be
ordered, which has not an Enemy in view, but is in continual probability of an
assault: This may happen when an Army marches in an Enemies Country, or at
least a Country that is suspected. And first you must understand the Roman
Armies had always some Troops of Horse which were scouting abroad in order to
the discovery of the Roads. After which followed the right Wing, and after them
the Carriages which belonged to that Squadron: Then followed a Legion, and
after them their Carriages. Then another Legion and their Carriages; and after
them the left Wing, and the remainder of the Cavalry after them. This in short
was the manner in which the Romans marched most commonly; and if it happened in
their march that their Army was assaulted either in the front or the rear, they
caused all their Carriages to withdraw to the right wing or the left, as they
found it convenient, and most agreeable with the nature of the place; and then
when they were cleared of their Baggage, and disincumber'd, all of them
unanimously make head against the Enemy. If they were assaulted in the flank,
they drew their Carriages on that side where they were like to be most safe,
and then addressed themselves against the Enemy.

This way being good and well governed, ought in my judgment to be imitated, by
sending your light Horse to scout about the Country, and having four Battalions
of Foot, they are to follow one the other successively, each of them with its
Carriages in the rear: And because Carriages are of two sorts, one belonging to
particular persons, and others for the common use of the Camp, I would divide
the public Carriages into four parts, and assign one to every Battalion; I
would likewise divide the Artillery, and the followers of the Camp into four
parts, that each Battalion should have equal share in their impediments and
Carriages. Bnt because it happens many times that you march through a Country
not only suspected, but so openly your Enemy, that you expect every hour to be
assaulted; it will be necessary, that to secure your self, you change the form
of your march, and put your self into such a posture, as that neither the
Paisants, nor the Enemies Army may be able to offend you, though they come upon
you never so suddenly. In these cases your Generals of old, were wont to march
in a square order, which they called a square; not that it was exactly of that
figure, but because it was ordered so, as it was able to fight in four places
at once, and by that means they were always ready either to march or to fight.
I shall follow this model for ordering my two Battalions which I have chosen to
that purpose in stead of a complete Army.


CHAP. II
How an Army is to be Marshalled to march in an Enemies Country.
Fabr. TO march (therefore) securely in an Enemies Country, and to be able to
make good every part when surprised, and assaulted by the Enemy, I am to reduce
my Army into a square according to the model of the ancients; I would have a
square whose area, or vacuity within, should consist of 212 yards, in this
manner; I would first place my flanks distant one from the other 212 yards; I
would have five Battalia's in each flank marching length ways in files, and at
three yards distance the one Battalia from the other; so that each Company
taking up forty yards, all of them together (with the spaces betwixt them)
shall take up 212 yards. Between the front and the rear of these two flanks, I
would dispose the other ten Companies, in each of them five; ordering them so,
that four of them should be placed in the front of the right flank, and four in
the rear of the left flank, leaving a space of four yards betwixt each Company,
and of the two Companies that are left, I would have one placed at the head of
the left flank, and the other in the rear of the right. And because the space
betwixt one flank and the other consists of 212 yards, and these Battalia's
drawn sideways in breadth rather than length, will take up (intervals and all)
134 yards, there will remain a space of 78 yards betwixt the four Companies in
the front of the right flank, and the same space will be possessed by the four
Companies in the rear; nor will there be any difference but that one space will
be behind toward the right wing, and the other before toward the left. In the
space of 78 yards before, I would put my ordinary Velites in the space behind,
my Velites extraordinary, which would not amount to a thousand for each space.
But to contrive it so, that the great space within should consist of 212 yards
square, it would be convenient that the five Companies which are placed in the
front, and the five Companies in the rear should take up none of that space
which belongs to the flanks; wherefore it is necessary that the five Companies
behind should with their front touch the rear of the flanks, and those five
Companies in the Van, with their rear should touch the front of the flanks; so
that there should remain on each side of the Army, a distance sufficient to
receive another Company. And because there are four spaces, I would take four
Ensigns of the Pikes extraordinary, and place one in each of them, and the two
Ensigns which would remain, I would place in the midst of the space of my whole
Army in a square Battalion; at the head of which, the General of the Army
should stand with his Officers about him: But because these Battalia's thus
ordered, do march all of them one way at once, but do not so when they fight;
when they are drawn up, those sides are to be put into a fighting posture,
which are not guarded by other Battalia's: And therefore it is to be considered
that the five Battalions in the front are defended on all sides, but just in
the front; so that they are to be drawn up in great order with the Pikes before
them. The five Companies behind are guarded on all sides but behind, so as they
are likewise to be ordered with Pikes in their rear, as we shall show in its
place.

The five Companies in the right flank are guarded on every side but only on
the right flank. The five in the left flank are the same, only on the left
flank they are open; and therefore in the managing your Army, you must observe
to place your Pikes so as they may turn about to that flank which is naked and
exposed; and your Corporals are to be in the front, and in the rear, that
(being to fight) the whole Army, and every Member of it may be in their proper
places, and the manner of doing it, we have declared before, when we discoursed
of putting the Companies in order; I would divide my Artillery, and place part
of it without my right flank; and the other without my left. My light Horse I
would send before to scour the Country; my men at Arms I would dispose part
behind my right wing, and part behind my left, at about forty yards distance,
from the Battalia's. And this general rule you are to observe by all means in
the drawing up your Army, that your Horse are to be placed either in the rear,
or upon the flanks, for to place them before, at the head of the Army, would
occasion one of these two things, either they must be placed at such distance,
that upon a repulse they may have space and time enough to wheel of without
falling foul upon the foot; or else draw up the foot with such intervals, that
the Horse may pass through without putting them into disorder: Certainly no body
ought to look upon this as a thing of small importance; for many have been
ruined and routed by their own men, for want of timely consideration.

But to return to our business, the Carriages, and the people unarmed are
placed in the void place of the Army, and so disposed, that there is passage
left for any to pass from one part of the Army to another. These Companies
(without the Horse and Artillery) do take up a space of 282 yards: And because
this square consists of two Battalions, it is convenient to let you know what
part of them makes one Battalion, and what the other. Now because Battalions
are denominated from the number, and each of them (as you know) consists of ten
Battalia's (or Companies) and a Colonel, I would have the first Battalion place
five of first Companies in the front, the other five in the left flank, and the
Colonel in the left angle of the front. The second Battalion should place its
five first Battalia's upon the right flank, and the other five in the rear,
with the Colonel in the right corner to secure the rear, and perform the office
of him whom the Romans called by the name of Tergiductor.


CHAP. III.
How to put an Army presently into order, and draw it up, so as if upon a march
it should be attacked, it may defend it self on all sides.
Fabr. HAving put your Army into this posture, you are to cause it to march,
and in its march observe the same order, for without doubt it is safe enough
against the tumults and incursions of the Peasants, against which, it is
sufficient if the Colonel commands out parties of Horse, or certain Companies
of his Velites to repel them. Nor is there any danger that those kind of people
will ever come to handy strokes with you; for men without order, are always
fearful of men in order, and 'its the practice of such people to alarm you with
great shouts and cries, but never to come near; like little Curs that bark at a
Mastiff, but keep far enough off. When Hanibal invaded Italy with so much
detriment to the Romans, he passed through France; was frequently infested by
the Bores, but he valued them not. But it is not sufficient to have your Army
in this order, but if you intend to march, you must have Pioneers. and such
kind of people to plain the ways, make your intrenchments, etc. and these
Pioneers are to be secured by the Horse which you send up and down the Country.
In this order an Army may march ten miles a day, and be time enough at their
journeys end to Sup, and take up their Quarters by daylight; for many times an
Army will march in one day twenty miles. But if it happens to be attacked by a
formed Army, it cannot be so sudden, but you will have time to put your self
into a posture of defense, because an orderly Army marches slowly, and you will
have leisure to draw your self up in Battalia, and put your Army either into
the same figures I have prescribed, or into such another. If you be assaulted
in the Van, you have no more to do but to bring your Artillery thither out of
the flanks, and bringing your Horse out of the rear into the Van, to put them
into the same place and distance as I have directed. The 1000 Velites which are
before, may advance, divide themselves into two parties of five hundred a
piece, and enter into their own place betwixt the Horse and the wings of the
Army; and then into their place are to succeed the two Companies of Pikes
extraordinary which I placed before in the great vacuity of the Army. The 1000
Velites in the rear are to remove from their post, and dividing themselves,
repair to the two flanks and fortify them, and by the space and chasm which
they leave at their departure, the Carriages may march out, and all those who
are unarmed, and put themselves behind in the rear: The space in the middle
being now void, and every man in his place, the five Battalia's which I ordered
behind the Army may advance by the void space betwixt the two flanks, and march
toward those in the Van. Three of them may march up within 40 yards (with
equal intervals betwixt the one and the other) and the other two may remain
behind at the same distance of forty yards. This is a form that may be ordered
on a sudden, and has some resemblance with the first model of an Army which we
recommended before; for thought it be streighter in the front, it is firmer in
the flanks, and by consequence stronger. But because the five Battalia's in the
rear have Pikes with them for the reasons abovesaid, it is necessary to cause
them to advance to fortify the front of the Army, and therefore either you
must cause your Companies to turn Company by Company as they were solid bodies;
or else pass them into the front through the files of the Bucklers, which way is
a better way, and less disorderly, than to cause them to wheel in whole
Companies like a solid body: and the same thing is to be done with those in the
rear upon any assault, as I have shown before. If the Enemy presents himself in
the rear; you have no more to do but to face about with your whole Army, and
immediately the figure is altered, the rear becomes the front, and the front
the rear; after which you are to observe all the ways of fortifying your front,
as I have directed before. If the Enemy appears upon your flank, your Army is
to face about to that side, and do the same things to strengthen your front: so
that your Horse, your Velites, your Artillery may be in such places as are
convenient for the making up that front; and if there be any difference in this
variation of fronts, it is only this, that some of those who are to remove,
have farther to advance than others. Nevertheless, in making a front of your
right flank, your Velites are to enter into the intervals betwixt the wings of
the Army* and the horse should approach to the left flank, into whose place the
two Companies of Pikes extraordinary (which were placed in the middle) should
succeed: but the carriages should remove, and the unarmed people, (by the great
space and overture that is made) and retire behind the left flank, which is now
become the rear of the whole Army: and the other Velites who were placed in the
rear at first are not to budge in this case, because that place should not
remain open, being of the rear become the flanks: all other things are to be
done as in my first directions for the making of a front.

What is said before of making a front of the right flank, will serve for
making a front of the left flank, for the same order is to be used: if the
Enemy comes upon you so strong that he is able to attack you on both sides, you
must fortify the places where you suspect he will charge, by doubling your
ranks from the place where he does not appear to fall on; by dividing your
Artillery, your Velites, and your Horse, and distributing them equally in both
places. If he assaults you in three or four sides at once, you or he must be
very imprudent; for had you been wise, you would never have put your self into
a place where an enemy could have come at you on so many sides, especially with
a formed and well ordered Army. For to ruin you securely, it is necessary the
Enemy be strong enough to attack you on all sides and with as many men in every
place almost, as in your whole Army: and if you be so indiscreet to march into
his Country, or put your self into the power of an enemy whose men are three
times as many, and as well experienced as yours, if you miscarry, you can blame
no body but your self: but if misfortune happens not by your fault, but by
accident of war, no body will condemn you, and it will fair with you as it did
with Scipio in Spain, and Asdrubal in Italy. But if the Enemy be not much
stronger than you, and yet ventures to assault you in several places, the
rashness will be on his side, and the success in all probability on yours; for
of necessity he must so weaken himself, that you may receive him in one place,
and charge him briskly in another, and then you will easily ruin him. This way
of ordering an Army against an enemy that is not in sight, but is hourly
expected, is very necessary: and it is very useful to accustom your Soldiers
to close, and change, and march in this order, and in their march to show them
how to fight according to my first front, and then falling into their march
again, upon a new alarm in the rear, to turn that into a front; and then each
of the flanks, and so in their first posture again: and these exercises are
very necessary, if you would have your Army ready and well disciplined For
which cause I would recommend it to all Princes and great Captains to restore
these practices of the ancients; for what is military discipline, but to know
how to command and execute these things well? what is a well disciplined Army,
but an Army trained up well in these kind of exercises? and he who in our times
would but frame his discipline to this, I am confident could never be worsted.
But to continue our discourse; if this square figure be difficult, it is not to
be laid aside for that, for that difficulty is necessary: nevertheless exercise
will make it easy; for having learned how to draw your self up, and preserve
your figure, you will easily understand afterward how to maintain other
figures in which there is not so much difficulty.


Zanobi. I am of your mind, that those orders are necessary, and cannot tell
(as to my self) what can be added or subtracted. Yet I would willingly be
satisfied in two things. One is when you would make a front of your rear, or
one of your flanks, and would have your men face about, how you do signify your
commands, whether by word of mouth, or sound of trumpet? The other is, whether
those you send before to plain the ways, and make them passable for your Army,
are to be Soldiers drawn out of your Battalia's, or other Country people
designed on purpose for that work.


CHAP. IV.
Of Commands derived by word of mouth, by Drums, and Trumpets, and of the
nature of Pioneers.
Fabr. YOur first demand is of very great importance, for many Armies have been
ruined when the Captain's orders have been mistaken, or not heard: for which
reason the words of Command in such great dangers ought to be clear and
intelligible: and if you would signify your commands by the sound of your
Trumpets or Drums, great care is to be taken, that the sounds be so different
and distinguishable one from the other, that they cannot be mistaken. If your
commands are by word of mouth you must use particular, and be sure to avoid
general terms, and in your particular words you must be cautious to use none
that may be liable to an ill interpretation. Many times the crying back, back,
has been the loss of an Army: wherefore that word is to be avoided, and instead
of it you are to say retreat. If you would change your front, and make it
either in the flank or the rear, you must not say turn, but face about to the
right or the left, to the front or the rear: and in like manner all the words
of command are to be plain and intelligible, as march on, stand firm, advance,
retreat: and what ever may be done by word of mouth clearly and distinctly, is
to be signified that way: what cannot be done that way, is to be done by the
Trumpet and Drum. As to the Pioneers, which is your second demand, I would have
that office performed by my own Soldiers, as well because it was the practice
of ancient times, as because thereby I should have fewer idle persons in my
Army, and by consequence fewer impediments. I would command out of every
Battalia what number I thought necessary; I would furnish them with Pickaxes,
and Spades, and cause them to leave their arms with their next ranks, who
should carry them for them; so that when the enemy appeared, they should have
no more to do but to fall back to their ranks, and take them again.


Zanobi. But who should carry their Pickaxes and Spades?


Fabr. There should be Wagons on purpose.


Zanobi. I fear you would never prevail with your Soldiers to work.


Fabr. We will talk of that in its proper place: at present I shall lay it
aside, and discourse of the way how they are to be supplied with provisions;
for having tired them thus long, it is but reasonable to refresh them with
victuals.


CHAP. V.
Of the Provisions that are necessary for an Army.
Fabr, YOU must know, a Prince is to keep his Army as free, and as fit for
expedition as possible, and to rid it of all encumbrances that may make his
enterprises difficult. The first difficulty to be removed, is want of
provisions, and therefore he is to take particular care that they be furnished
with bread and wine. The ancients did not think of providing of wine, for when
they wanted wine, they made use of water with a little vinegar to give it a
taste, so that among the provisions for the Army, vinegar was provided, but not
wine. Their bread was not baked ready to their hands, as in the Towns, but
every Soldier had his proportion of meal, which he ordered as he pleased, with
a certain quantity of Bacon, and Seam, which gave their bread a gust, and
rendered them strong. So that the provision for the Soldiers was meal, vinegar,
bacon, and suet or seam, and barley for the horses. They had commonly herds of
Cattle great and small which followed the Armies, which being driven, and not
carried, were no great encumbrance. By reason of this order, of old, an Army
marched many days journey through difficult and solitary places without want of
provisions, because they lived upon such things as might easily be carried with
them. But in our Armies now adays we find it quite contrary; for the Soldiers
cannot subsist without wine and biscuit, as when they are at home, of which,
provision cannot be made for any considerable time, insomuch as they are many
times famished; or if provision be made, it is with much trouble, and vast
expense. I would endeavor therefore that my Army might not be supplied at that
rate; nor would I have them have any bread but what they make themselves. As to
wine, I would not hinder their drinking it, nor prohibit that any should come
into the Army; but I would take no pains, nor use no industry to supply them:
and for other provisions, I would follow exactly the model of the ancients:
which way, if rightly considered, will show what difficulties are removed, what
wants and distresses are prevented to an Army and General,, and what
convenience is added to any enterprise that shall be undertaken.


Zanob. Since we have routed the enemy, and marched afterward into his
Country, it is but reasonable to believe that we have made our depredations,
taxed his Towns, taken several Prisoners: I would know therefore how the
ancients proceeded in these cases.


CHAP. VI.
How the ancients divided the spoil, and of the pay which they gave to their
Soldiers.
Fabr. I Will satisfy you as to that: I do not question but you have considered
(because I have discoursed it formerly with some of you) how our present wars
do impoverish not only those Princes which are overcome, but those two are
Conquerors; for as one looses his Country, so the other looses his Money: which
was otherwise in ancient times, be, cause the Conqueror enriched himself by the
war. The reason of this difference is, because in our times no public account
is taken of the prizes, (as formerly) but all is left to the discretion of the
Soldier, which occasions two very great disorders; the first is, as before;
the other, it renders the Soldier more desirous of plunder, and less observant
of order and military discipline. And we have heard of many instances, where
their impatience to be pillaging has wrested the Victory out of their hands who
had almost perfectly obtained it. Whilst the Romans had the command of their
own Armies, they provided very well against both these inconveniences,
appointing all the prizes to be delivered in, and appropriated to the public,
and that afterward the public should distribute as it pleased. To this
purpose they had their Questores, (which were like our Chamberlains) in whose
hands all their prizes and taxes deposited, of which the Consul or General of
their Army disposed as he thought good, for the payment of his Soldiers, the
curing of the wounded, or sick, and discharging the other necessities of the
Army.

It Is true, the Consul had power to give the plunder of a Town to his
Soldiers, and he frequently did it, but that liberty never bred any disorder;
for when a Town was taken, or an Army defeated, all the prize was brought into
a public place, and distributed man by man; according to every ones merit.

This custom made the Soldiers more intent upon victory than plunder: the
practice of the Roman Legions was, to break and disorder an enemy, but not to
pursue; for they never went out of their ranks upon any occasion whatever. Only
the horse, the light armed men, and what other Soldiers were not of the
Legions, followed the chase: whereas if the plunder of the field had belonged
to any man that could catch it, it would have been neither reasonable, nor
possible, to have kept the Legions to their ranks, or to have exposed them to
so many dangers. Hence it was, that upon a Victory the public was always
enriched; for when a Consul entered in triumph, he brought with him great riches
into the Treasury of Rome, and they consisted of Taxes, Contributions, Ransoms,
and Plunder. The ancients had likewise another custom that was very well
contrived, and that was, out of every Soldiers pay, to cause a third part to
be deposited with the Ensign of their respective Companies, who never restored
it before the War was ended. This they did for two reasons; first, that every
Soldier might have a stock of his own; for most of them being young, and
profuse, the more they had, the more they would have squandred. The other
reason was, that knowing their stocks were in their Ensigns hands, they should
have the more care of him, and defend him with the more courage; and this
custom contributed much to their valor, and is necessary to be observed by any
man who would reduce his Soldiers to the discipline of the Romans.


Zanobi. I believe it impossible for an Army not to meet with several ill
accidents whilst it marches from one place to another; and that it requires
great industry in the General, and great courage in the Soldiers to prevent or
avert them: you would oblige me much if you would tell me what has occurred to
your knowledge in the case.


CHAP. VII.
To know the surprises which are contriving against you upon your march.
Fabr. I Shall satisfy you willingly, as being particularly necessary to any
man who is desirous to give a perfect scheme of this discipline.

Whilst an Army is matching, the Generals are above all things to be vigilant
that they fall not into any ambushments, which may be done two ways; one when
you fall into it bluntly of your self: the other when you are drilled and
wheedled into it by the enemy before you perceive it. To prevent the first way,
it is convenient to send out strong parties to discover the Country, who are to
be the more diligent, by how much the Country is more apt and proper for such
things, as where it is woody or mountainous; for ambuscades are commonly laid
behind some hill, or under the shelter of some wood, and, as if you do not
discover them in time, they are very pernicious; so, if your care be
sufficient, they are as easily prevented. The birds and the dust have many
times discovered the enemy; for when ever the enemy approaches in any great
number, he will be sure to raise the dust, which will give you the alarm.
Several Generals observing the Pigeons to rise in some place where they were to
pass, (or other birds that fly together in flocks) and to hover over their
heads without falling again, have thereby discovered the ambushments of the
enemy, and either prevented or defeated them.

As to the second way of being drawn in by the artifices of the enemy, you must
be cautious of believing any thing easily, that is not reasonable to be
supposed: as it would be, if an enemy should leave something for you to pillage
on purpose, you must suspect there is some design at the bottom, and be careful
it does not succeed. If a great number of the enemy be beaten, and pursued by a
few of your men, if a few of the enemy attacks a greater party of yours, if the
enemy runs unexpectedly, and without any visible occasion, in those cases you
must always suspect; and never fancy your enemy so weak as not to understand
his own business: on the contrary, if you would be less exposed to his
stratagems, and run your self less into danger, the weaker and more careless
you observe him to be, the more you are to apprehend him. In this case you are
to comport your self in two different manners, you are to fear him in your own
thoughts, and order your affaris accordingly; but in your words and outward
behavior you are to seem to despise him; this last way makes your Soldiers
more confident of Victory, the other makes you more cautious, and less apt to
be circumvented. And you must know, that to march through an enemies Country is
more dangerous than to fight a field Battle.


CHAP. VII.
One is to know the Country perfectly well through which he is to pass, and keep
his enterprises secret.
Fabr. THe marching through an Enemies Country being so extraordinarily
dangerous, it is necessary that a General doubles his diligence; and the first
thing he is to do, he is to have a Cart made of all the Country by which he is
to pass, that he may know the Towns, their number, and distance, the roads, and
mountains, the rivers, the fens, and the nature and qualities of them all: and
to better his knowledge, it is convenient that he discourses and interrogates
some body who understands the places, objecting, and asking them several
questions, and observing their answers. He is likewise to send some parties of
his light Horse before, under the command of prudent Officers, not so much to
face the enemy, as to speculate the Country, and see whether it agrees with his
Map, and the description which he has received. He is also to send out spies
and guides with good guards, promising them rewards if they tell true, and
threatening them with punishment, if false. But above all he is to have a care
that his Army knows nothing of his design; for in the whole Art of War there is
nothing so useful, as to conceal the enterprises that you are about.


CHAP. IX.
Of certain things which are requisite upon a march.
Fabr. THat no sudden attack may be able to disorder your Soldiers, you must
command them to stand ready with their arms, for things that are foreseen and
expected, are less terrible and hurtful. Many persons to avoid confusion in
their march have disposed their Carriages, and unarmed people near the Colors,
with command to follow them close, that upon a halt, or retreat, (if there
should be occasion) they might do it more easily, which is a good way, and I
like it well. A General is likewise to have a great care that his men do not
straggle in their march, or march unequally, some too fast, others too slow,
which would weaken his Army, and expose it to great disorder. It is convenient
therefore to place their Officers in the flanks, that they may keep them
uniform in their motion, restraining those who are too hasty, and soliciting
those who are too slow, and that cannot be done better than by the Trumpets and
Drums. The ways are likewise to be enlarged and repaired, so as one Company at
least may always march in order. Besides this, the custom, quality and humor
of your enemy is to be considered, whether he be like to assault you in the
morning, at noon, or at night. Whether he be strongest in horse or in foot, and
as you are informed of that, you order your men, and provide every thing
necessary. But to come to some particular accident.


CHAP. X.
How to avoid fighting near a River, though pressed by the enemy; and in what
manner you may pass it.
Fabr. IT falls out sometimes that you are forced to decline the enemy, as
thinking your self too weak, and are therefore unwilling to engage him: the
enemy follows you what he can to stop you, or cut you off in your passage over
the river, to which you are marching to that purpose; and your passage will
take up so much time, that in probability the enemy will reach you. Some who
have been in that dangerous condition, have drawn a trench round the rear of
their Army; filled it with faggots, and other combustibles, and set them on
fire, whilst in the mean time their Army passed over without any impediment
from the enemy, by reason the fire that was betwixt them hindered their designs.


Zanobi. I cannot easily believe that such a fire as that could hinder them,
because I remember I have heard how Hanno the Carthaginian being besieged by an
enemy; on that side where he designed to escape, caused store of wood and
faggots to be laid, and then set them on fire: so that the enemy not observing
him so strictly on that side, he passed his Troops through the flames, only by
ordering them to hold their Targets before their faces.


Fabr. You say well, but consider a little what I told you, and what Hanno did;
I told you that the Generals I mentioned caused a trench to be dug, and
filled with combustible matter; so that when the enemy was to pass, he was to
encounter with two great difficulties, the trench and the fire. Hanno made his
fires without any ditch, and because he designed to pass over them, he
commanded that they should not be made too violent; for without a trench, that
would have stopped him. Do you not know the story of Nabis the Spartan, who
being besieged in Sparta by the Romans, he set part of the Town on fire to
hinder the advance of the Romans, who had already entered in some places; and by
that fire he not only hindered their advance, but repulsed them.

But to return to our business. Quintus Lutatius the Roman, having the Cimbri
upon his heels, and being arrived at a river; that the enemy might give him
time to pass, he pretended a resolution to fight them, pitched his Camp,
entrenched himself, set up his Standard, and sent out parties of horse to
provide forage. The Cimbrians conceiving he would encamp there, came and
encamped by him, and divided themselves into several parties, to supply them
with provisions; of which Lutatius having notice, slipped over the river before
they could have time to disturb him. Some have turned the course of a river,
and by a cut carrying the water on the backside of the Army, have made the
river fordable, and passed it with ease. When the waters are rapid and the
stream strong, to facilitate the passage of the Foot, they put the strongest of
their Horse betwixt the stream and the Foot, to keep of the torrent; and
another party below to bear up the Foot, if the water should be too strong for
any of them. Rivers that are unfordable, are likewise to be passed with Bridges
and Boats; so that it is good to carry in your Army materials for all these
things. It happens sometimes that when you would pass a River, the Enemy is got
on the other side, and opposes. To remove this difficulty, I know nothing you
can do better, than to follow the example of Caesar, who having brought his
Army to the side of a River in France, with design to have passed it, but
finding Vercingetrix with his Army on the other side ready to obstruct him, he
marched down the River several days journey on one side, whilst Vercingetrix
did the like on the other.

But Caesar having made a place in a Wood convenient for the concealing of some
of his men, drew out three Companies out of each Legion, caused them to stay
behind there, and when he was gone, commanded that they should set up a Bridge
over the River, and fortify it; and in the mean time he followed his march.
Vercingetrix observing the same number of Legions, not suspecting that any part
of them were left behind, followed him on the other side; but Caesar when he
judged the Bridge finished, faced about on a sudden, and finding every thing as
he expected, he passed the River without any difficulty.


Zanob. Have you any rules whereby you may discover a ford?


Fabr. Yes we have: wherever in a River you see the water tremble, and carry
certain streaks betwixt the place where it stagnats, and the current, you may
be sure the bottom is good, and the place fordable, because the gravel and sand
which the River does commonly carry along with it, is more fixed there, as has
been often seen by experience.


Zanobi. Suppose the flood should have loosened the earth at the bottom of the
ford, so as the horse should sink in; what remedy then?


Fabr. You must make grills or lettices of wood, sink them into the River, and
let them pass over them. But to follow our discourse.


CHAP. XI.
How to make your passage through a straight though you be pressed by an Enemy.
Fabr. IF a General by accident be conducted with his Army betwixt two
Mountains, and that he has but two passages, one before, and the other behind,
and the Enemy has got possession of both, he can have no better remedy than to
do as has been done before; that is, to dig a deep Trench behind him, and make
it as unpassable as he can, that the Enemy may believe he intended to stop him
there in the rear, that with his whole force he might make his way through the
passage in the Van: Which being observed by the Enemy, he concluded according
to appearance; sent what strength he could make to the other end of the pass;
and abandoned the Trench, whereupon the other clapped a wooden bridge over the
Trench immediately (which he had prepared on purpose) and passed back again
without any obstruction. Lucius Minutius a Roman Consul was in Liguria with an
Army, and was shut up by the Enemy betwixt the Mountains, so as he could not
disingage himself: being sensible of his condition, he sent certain Numidians
which he had in his Army upon small scrannel Horses toward the places where
the Enemy had their Guards, At first sight the Enemy put themselves into a
posture to defend the Passes, but when they observed the Numidians in ill
order, and ill mounted in respect of themselves, they began to despise them,
and to be more remiss in their Guards; which was no sooner perceived by the
Numidians, but they clapped spurs to their Horses, and charging suddenly upon
them, they passed on in spite of all their opposition; and being passed the
mischief and devastation that they made in the Country, constrained the Enemy
to give free passage to the whole Army. A certain General being infested by a
numerous Enemy, drew up his Army so close, that the Enemy was able to encompass
him round, and afterward he fell so smartly upon that Quarter where the Enemy
was weakest, that he not only worsted them, but disintangled himself. Marcus
Antonius in the retreat from the Parthians observed that every morning by break
of day they were upon his back as soon as he moved, and continued skirmishing
and molesting him quite through his march; whereupon he resolved not to remove
before noon. The Parthians observing, concluded he would not stir that day, and
returned to their Posts, insomuch that Marcus Antonius had opportunity to march
all the rest of that day without interruption. The same person to avoid the
Darts of the Parthians, commanded his Men that when the Parthians came near
them, the first rank should fall down upon their knees, and the second rank
clap their Bucklers over the heads of the first rank, the third over the
second, the fourth over the third, and so on; so as the whole Army lay as it
were under a Shield, and was defended from their Arrows. And this is all I can
remember about the accidents to which an Army is subject upon a march. I shall
pass now to another thing, unless you have something else to demand.


THE SIXTH BOOK.
CHAP. I.
What kind of places the Greeks and the Romans chose out for their Camps, with
a short recapitulation of what has been said before.
Zano. I Think it very convenient that Battista takes upon him the Office of
demanding, and that I lay it down; by doing so we shall seem to imitate the
good Generals of old, who (as I have been taught by Seignor Fabritio) did
usually place the valiantest of their Soldiers, in the front, and in the rear
of the Army; conceiving it necessary to have those in the Van who would begin
the fight bravely, and such in the rear as would bravely maintain it. And as
Cosimo began this discourse with a great deal of prudence, so Battista may
finish it with the same; Luigi and I having born the brunt in the middle as
well as we could; and seeing hitherto every man has taken his part willingly, I
do not think Battista will refuse.


Battista. Hitherto I have suffered my self to be governed, and am resolved to
do so for the future; let me desire you therefore Seignor Fabritio to pursue
your discourse, and hold us excused if we interrupt you with these kind of
demands.


Fabr. As I told you before, you do me a very great kindness, for this
interruption, and changing of persons, rather refreshes than troubles my fancy:
But to follow our business, I say, that it is now high time that we dispose our
Army into its quarters, for you know every thing desires rest, and security;
for to repose without security, is not properly to repose. I do fancy you would
rather have had me lodged my Army first, and marched and fought them
afterward, but we have done quite contrary, and indeed not without necessity;
for being to show how an Army in a march was to quit that form, and put it self
into a posture to fight, it was necessary first to show how they were to be
drawn up for a Battle. But to return, I say, that if you would have your Camp
safe, you must have it strong, and well ordered: The discretion of the General
puts it in good order, but it is art or situation that makes it defensible and
strong. The Grecians were so curious in this point, that they would never
encamp but where there was some River, or Wood, or Bank or other natural
rampart to defend them: But the Romans stood not so much upon the strength of
the situation, as their own ways of fortification, nor would they ever encamp,
but where according to their own Discipline they could draw up their Army. For
this reason the Romans observed one constant form in their encampments; for
they would rather make the situation of the place comply with their methods,
than permit their customs, to comply with the situation; but with the Grecians
it was otherwise, because following the condition and form of the place, it was
necessary that they varied the manner of their encampment, and the form of
their Camp. The Romans therefore where the situation was weak, supplied it by
art and industry: And because in this discourse I have proposed the Romans for
a President, I shall not leave them in my manner of encampment, nevertheless I
shall not follow their practice in every thing, but picking and selecting such
parts as I think most agreeable with our times. I have told you often how the
Romans in their Consular Armies had two Legious of Romans, consisting of about
11000 Foot, and 600 Horse; they had moreover about 11000 more Foot, sent in by
their Friends and Allies to their assistance: but this was a rule, their
Auxilaries never exceeded the number of the Legions, unless it were in Horse,
and in them they were not so curious. I have told you likewise how in all their
battles their Legions were placed in the middle, and their Auxiliaries in the
flanks, and it was the same in their encampments, as you may read in such
Authors as make any mention of their History: I will not therefore be so exact
in my relation, I shall content my self only to tell you in what order I would
lodge my Army at present, and you will understand by that what I have borrowed
from the Romans. You know that in imitation of their Legions I have taken two
Battalions consisting of 6000 Foot, and 300 Horse of service for the Battalion:
you know into what Companies, into what Arms, and into what names I divided
them. You know how in ordering my Army to march and to fight, I have said
nothing of more men, only what was to be done, was to be done by doubling their
ranks, not by any reinforcement of men. But being now to show you the manner of
encamping, I think it not convenient to stick to my two Battalions, but to
unite our whole Army, composed according to the model of the Romans of two
Battalions, and as many Auxiliaries, which I do the rather, that the form of
our Camp may be the more complete, by the reception of a complete Army; which
in my other demonstrations I have not thought altogether so necessary. Being
therefore to lodge a complete Army of 24000 Foot, and two thousand Horses of
service, to be divided into four Battalions, (two of Natives, and two of
Strangers) I would take this way.


CHAP. II.
The form of a Camp.
Fabr. HAving found a place convenient for my Camp, I would set up my Standard
in the midst of a square of fifty yards deep. The four sides of that square
should respect the four quarters of the World, and look East, West, North, and
South. In this square I would set up the Generals Pavilion: and because I think
it discreet, and in part the practice of the Ancients, I would divide my men
which carry arms, from them who have none; and those who are free, from those
who are encumbered. All or the greatest part of my armed men I would lodge
toward the East; my men that were disarmed and encumbered, I would lodge
toward the West, making my front toward the East, and my rear toward the
West; and the North and South should be my flanks. To distinguish the quarters
of those which bore arms, I would take this course, I would draw a line from
the Standard toward the East of 680 yards long. Then I would draw two other
lines, (with the first in the middle) of the same length, but each of them at a
distance of fifteen yards from the first; at the end of these lines I would
have my Eastern Port, and the space betwixt the two outward lines should make a
Street which should go from that Gate to the General's quarters, and take up a
space of thirty yards in breadth, and 630 in length, (for the General's quarter
would take up fifty) and this should be called the General's street. Then I
would cause another street to be drawn out from North to South, and it should
pass by the end of the General's street, not far from the General's quarter
toward the East, which should contain in length 1250 yards, (for it should
take up all the breadth of the Camp) and be called the Cross-street. Having
designed the General's quarters, and these two Streets, I would mark out
quarters for the two Battalions that were my own Subjects, and one of them I
would dispose on the right hand of the General's street, and the other on the
left. And then passing over the Cross-street, I would assign 32 lodgments on
the left hand of the General's street, and as many on the right, leaving
betwixt the sixteenth and seventeenth lodgment a space of thirty yards wide, as
a traverse way to pass through all the lodgments of the Battalions. I would
lodge the Captains of the men at Arms at the front of those two orders of
lodgments which join to the Cross-street, and their men at Arms in the fifteen
lodgments that are next them; so as every lodgment should contain ten men at
Arms, the whole number that I have allotted to each Battalion, being an hundred
and fifty. The Captains lodgments should ^^orty yards wide, and ten in lenght;
and you must take notice that when I say wide, I mean from North to South; and
when long, from East to West. The lodgment for the private men at arms should
be fifteen yards long, and thirty wide. In the other fifteen lodgments which
follow on both sides of the street, (which begin at the traverse way, and
should have the same allowance of ground as I have given to the other) I would
dispose my light horse. And because there are likewise of them belonging to
each Battalion 150, I would put ten of them into each of the fifteen lodgments,
and the sixteenth I would reserve for the Captain with the same space of ground
as is allowed to the Captain of the men at arms; and so the lodgments of the
horse of the two Battalions should come down to the middle of the General's
Street, and be a direction to the quartering of the foot, as I shall show. You
have seen how I have lodged the 300 horse of both Battalions, with their
Officers in 32 lodgments set up near the General's Street, and beginning at the
Cross-street; and how betwixt the sixteenth and the seventeenth there was
res^rved a space of thirty yards to make a cross-way. Being therefore to lodge
the twenty Battalia's or Companies in the two ordinary Battalions, I would
appoint lodgments for every two Battalia's behind the lodgments of the horse,
and they should each of them contain in length 15 yards, and in breadth thirty,
according to the dimensions of the horse-lodgment, and they should be so close
that they should touch one another.

In the first lodgment on each side butting upon the Cross-street, I would
lodge the Captain of each Company over against the lodgment of the Captain of
the men at Arms: and this lodgment alone should be twenty yards wide, and ten
long. In the other fifteen lodgments which succeed on both sides as far as the
traverse way, I would quarter a Company of foot, which being 450, should be
disposed 30 to a lodgment. The other 15 lodgments should be set up on each side
by the lodgments of the light horse, with the same dimensions of ground; and on
each side I would place a Battalia of foot.

In the last lodgment on each side I would place the Captain of the Company
(right over against the Captain of the light horse) with a space of ten yards
in length, and twenty in breadth: and so these two first ranks of lodgments
would be half horse, and half foot: but because (as I said before) these horses
are all horses of service, which have no proper persons either to dress or to
feed them, I would have the foot which are quartered behind, obliged to look to
them, and for so doing they should be exempt from other duties in the Camp; and
this was the method of the Romans. After this I would leave a space of thirty
yards on each side, which should make streets, and be called, one of them, the
first Street on the left hand, and the other the first Street on the right. I
would then on each side set up another row of 32 lodgments, with their backs
one to the other, with the same spaces as I assigned to the other; and having
separated sixteen of them, (as with the rest) to make a traverse way, I would
dispose in each side four Companies with their Captains at the head of them,
and other Officers in the rear. After I had left on both sides a distance of
thirty yards for a way, which on one side should be called the second Street on
the right hand, and on the other side the second Street on the left hand; I
would set up another rank of 32 lodgments with the same distances and
separations, where I would lodge on each side four Companies with their
Officers: and by doing this, all the Cavalry, and the Companies of both the
Battalions would be lodged in three rows of lodgments, and the General's
quarter in the middle. The two Battalions of Auxiliaries (having made them to
consist of the same number of men) I would quarter on both sides of the two
ordinary Battalions, with the same number of rows, and in the same order as
they, placing first one order of lodgments consisting half of horse, and half
of foot, distant from the next order thirty foot, which distance should make a
Street, and be called on one side, the third Street on the right hand; and on
the other side the third Street on the left hand. And then I would make on each
side two more rows of lodgments with the same distances and distinctions as in
the lodgments of the other Battalions, which should make two other Streets, and
be called according to their number, and the hand on which they are placed; so
that this whole Army will be lodged in twelve double rows of lodgments, and
there will be thirteen Streets, reckoning the General's Street, and the
Cross-street: when I have designed my circumference, and appointed my lodgments
for my four Battalions, I would leave a space betwixt the lodgments and the
trenches of an hundred yards broad, which should go round my Camp: and if you
compute all the spaces, you will find that from the middle of the General's
lodgment, to the East Gate, are 680 yards. There are two other spaces, one from
the General's quarter to the South Gate, and the other from the same place to
the North Gate, each of them 635 yards commencing at the Center. Substracting
afterward from each of these spaces fifty yards for the General's quarter, and
five and forty more on each side for a Piazza, and thirty yards for a Street
that divides each of the said spaces in the middle; and an hundred yards round
betwixt the lodgments and the trenches; there remains on all sides for
lodgments a space of four hundred yards wide, and an hundred long, measuring
the lenght with the space which is taken up by the General's quarter; then
dividing the said length in the middle, there will be on each side of the
General forty lodgments, in length fifty yards, and twenty wide, which in all
will be 80, in which the general Officers of the Battalions should be
quartered; the Tr^^surers, the Mastres de Camp, and all such as have any
Office in the Army, leaving some spaces empty for strangers, or such Volunteers
as follow the Wars merely out of affection to the General: on the backside of
the General's quarters I would make a Street from South to North thirty yards
broad, and it should be called Front-street, and run along all the 80 lodgments
abovesaid. From this Front-street, by the General's quarter I would have
another Street that should go from thence to the West Gate, thirty yards wide,
answering both for situation and length to the General's Street, and it should
be called the Piazza-Street. Having settled these two Streets, I would order a
Piazza or Marketplace, and it should be at the end of the Piazza-street over
against the General's lodging, and not far from the Front-street. I would have
it square, and every square to contain 121 yards: on the right and left hand of
this Marketplace I would have two rows of lodgments, each of them double, and
consisting of eight lodgments, in length twelve yards, and in breadth thirty: so
that on each side of the Piazza I would have sixteen lodgments, with that in
the middle, so that in all they would be 32; in which I would place those horse
which remain undisposed of, that belong to the Auxiliary squadrons: if these
would not be sufficient to receive them, I would consign them some of the
lodgments about the General's quarters, especially those which look toward the
trenches. It remains now that we lodge the Pikes, and the Velites extraordinary
which I have assigned to each Battalion, which as you know consisted (besides
the ten Companies) of a thousand Pikes extraordinary, and five hundred Velites.
So that the two Battalions had 2000 Pikes extraordinary, and 1000 Velites
extraordinary, and the Auxiliaries had the same, so that we have still 6000
foot to lodge, which I would dispose in that part toward the West, and along
the ditch. From the end of the Front-street toward the North, leaving a space
of 100 yards betwixt that and the ditch, I would have a row of five double
lodgments, which should contain in length all of them 75 yards, and 60 in
breadth: so as when the breadth is divided, there shall belong to each lodgment
15 yards in length, and thirty in breadth; and because there will be but ten
lodgments in this rank, there shall be lodged 300 foot, 30 in a lodgment. After
that, leaving a space of 31 yards; I would set up in the same manner, and with
the same distances another row of five double lodgments, and after that
another, till they came to be five rows of five double lodgments, in all fifty,
placed in a right line from the North, all of them ten yards from the fosse, and
should entertain 1500 foot. Turning then toward the West Gate, in all that
space from them to the said Gate, I would have five other double orders, in the
same manner, and with the same spaces, (but with a distance of but 15 yards
from one row to another) where I would lodge 1500 foot more. And so all the
Velites, and Pikes extraordinary of both the proper Battalions should be lodged
from the North Gate to the West Gate, according to the turning of the trenches,
and should be distributed into 100 lodgments in ten rows, ten lodgments in a
row. The Pikes and the Velites extraordinary of the two Auxiliary Battalions
should be lodged in the same manner betwixt the West Gate and the South, as the
trenches incline in ten rows, ten lodgments in a row, as I said of the other:
the Captains or their Lieutenants may take such quarters as they think most
convenient on that side toward the trenches. The Artillery I would dispose
every where upon the banks of the trenches, and in all the other space which
remains toward the West I would bestow all the baggage, and servants, and
impediments of the Army. By impediments you must understand (and you know it
very well) the ancients intended all their train, and whatever else was
necessary for an Army, besides the Soldiers, as Carpenters, Smiths,
Shoomakers, Engineers, and Cannoneers, (though these indeed might be numbered
among the Soldiers) Butchers with their Beefs and their Muttons, Cooks,
Pastry-men, and all that prepared meat for the Army; and in short, all other
professions which followed the Camp for subsistence: they reckoned likewise
among them all the carriages for public provisions, and arms. I would not make
any particular distinction of lodgments, only I would order the Streets so as
that they might not be taken up by them. As to the other spaces betwixt the
Streets, which would be four in all, I would consign them in general to all the
said impediments, that is, one to the Butchers, another to the Artificers and
Masters of several Professions; a third to the carriages for Provisions; a
fourth for the carriages for Arms. The Streets that I would have left free,
should be the Street to the Piazza; the Front-Street, and another Street called
the middle Street, which should begin in the North, and pass through the middle
of the Market-street (or Street to the Piazza) toward the South, which on the
West side should do the same service as the Traverse-street does on the East.
And besides this, I would have another back-street along by the lodgments of
the Pikes and the Velites extraordinary, and I would have all these Streets
thirty spaces wide. The Artillery I would place afterward upon the trenches on
the hinder part of the Camp.


Battista. I do acknowledge my ignorance, nor do I think it reproachful where
it is not my profession to be otherwise: nevertheless I am very well pleased
with your order, only I would desire you to resolve me two doubts: one is, why
you make the Streets and the spaces about the lodgments so large; the other
(which troubles me most) is, how you would employ the spaces which you design
for the lodgments.


Fabr. You must understand I assign 30 yards to the breadth of the Streets,
that a Battalia of foot may march together a breast; for (if you remember) I
told you often that each Company took up in breadth betwixt 25 and 30 yards.
That the space betwixt the trench and the lodgments should be 100 yards broad,
is very necessary for drawing up the Battalia's, managing the Artillery,
conveying and disposing of the booty, besides the convenience of retiring upon
occasion, and making new Ramparts, and new Intrenchments within. Moreover, the
lodgments are better at that distance from the trenches, as being farther from
fireworks and other things which an enemy might cast in among them: as to your
second demand, I do not intend that every space that I have designed for a
lodgment should be covered with one Tent, or one Pavilion only, but that it
should be employed as is most commodious for those who are to lodge there with
more or fewer Tents as they please, provided they do not exceed their allowance
of ground.

To make a just distribution of these lodgments, you must have persons that are
well versed and experienced in that affair, and good Architects, who as soon as
the General has made choice of his place, can immediately put it into form,
distribute the lodgments by dividing the Streets, and distinguishing the places
for the several lodgments with a cord and pikes thrust into the ground, with so
much dexterity, that all things shall be presently in order. And if you would
prevent confusion, you must turn your Camp always one way, that every man may
know in what Street, and in what quarter he may find his Tent. This must be
observable in all times and places, and in such manner that it may seem a
moving City, which, wherever it moves, carries with it the same Gates, the
same Streets, the same Houses, and the same Figure; which is a thing that
cannot be practiced by those who make choice of places of natural strength, for
they must frame their Camp according to the variety of the situation. But the
Romans fortified their Camps with Trenches, and Ramparts, and Mounts; for they
left a good space round about their Camp, and before it they made a ditch
commonly six yards wide, and three yards deep. They made these spaces greater
or less, according to the time which they designed to stay there, or according
to their apprehension of the Enemy: for my own part I would not enclose my Camp
with Stoccado's, unless I intend to winter in it: I would have my Trench and my
Parapet not less than theirs, but bigger upon occasion. Upon every corner and
side of the Camp I would raise a kind of half moon, from whence my Artillery
might play, and flank any Enemy that should attempt the ditch. In this
exercise, to understand how to mark out a Camp, your men are to be trained
frequently, and your other Officers are by practice to be made ready in
designing, and your Soldiers as dexterous in knowing their own quarters, nor is
there any great difficulty in it, as I shall show elsewhere, for at present I
shall pass to the Guards of the Camp, because without them all the other pains
and punctilio's would be vain.


Battista. Before you proceed to the Guards, I would be informed when you would
pitch your Camp near your Enemy, what method you would use; for I cannot
imagine that you should have time enough to do it without manifest danger.


Fabr. You must know no man incamps near an Enemy, but he who is desirous to
fight when ever the Enemy will give him opportunity; and when the Enemy is
disposed to it as well as he, the danger is no more than ordinary; for two
parts of the Army are drawn out to fight, and the third orders the Camp. In
this case the Romans committed the fortification and ordering of their Camp to
the Triarii; whilst the Principes and Hasta^i stood to their Arms. And this
they did, because the Triarii being to fight last, had time (if the Enemy
advanced) to leave their work, stand to their Arms, and fall every man into his
place.

You, if you would imitate the Romans, must cause your Camp to be made by the
Battalia's in your Rear, which are instead of the Triarii; but now to the
Guards of the Camp.


CHAP. III.
Of the several Watches and Guards about the Camp.
Fabr. I Do not remember in History to have found that the Ancients for the
security of the Camp in the night, did ever make use of out Guards or Sentinels
without the Ditches, as we do now. The reason, as I take it, was because they
thought the Army thereby might be easily surprised, by the difficulty of
discerning their Sentinels, and Scouts; besides their Sentinels might be
over-powred or corrupted by the Enemy, so that to rely upon them either in part
or in whole, they concluded would be dangerous: wherefore all their Guards were
within their Trenches, placed with such diligence and exactness, that it was no
less than death for any man to desert his post. How these Guards were disposed
by them, I think it unnecessary to relate, because if you have not seen it
already, you may do it when you please; only this I shall tell you in short
what I would do in the Case. I would have every night one third of the Army in
Arms, and of them a fourth part upon the Guard, distributed all along the
works, and in all convenient places quite through the Camp: with a main Guard in
each of the four quarters of your Camp, of which a party should remain
constantly upon the Guard, and another party should Petrole from one quarter to
the other. And this order I would use likewise in the day time, if my Enemy was
near. As for giving the word, and changing it every night, and other things
which are observable in the like cases, I shall pass them by as notorious and
known. One thing only I shall mention, as being of importance, and that which
brings much advantage to any man that uses it, and as much disadvantage where
it is neglected.


CHAP. IV.
To observe who goes and comes to the Camp.
Fabr. HE who would be secure in his Camp, is to require notice with great
exactness of all strangers that lodge in his Camp, and to have a strict account
of all goers and comers; and this no hard matter to do, if the Tents be but
viewed all along as they stand in their orders; because every lodgment had its
precise and definitive number, and when you find them more or less than their
proportion, let them be examined and punished. He who observes this course
exactly, shall keep the Enemy from practicing your Officers (at least without
great difficulty) or from having knowledge of your affairs. Had not the Romans
been very exact observers of this course, Claudius Nero (when Hanibal lay so
near him) could never have stole so privately from his Camp in Lucania, and
have marched into la Marca, and back again, before Hanibal had missed him.


CHAP. V.
Of Military Justice, and the methods used by the Ancients in the punishment of
Offenders.
Fabr. BUt it is not enough to contrive good orders, unless they be strictly
observed, for severity is no where so requisite as in an Army: wherefore to
keep your Soldiers to their duty, strict and severe Laws are to be made, and
they are to be executed as strictly: The Romans punished it with death to be
absent from the Guard, when it was a man's duty to be there. It was no less
capital to abandon the place assigned him in Battle. To carry any thing
privately out of his Quarters. To boast and appropriate to himself some great
exploit, which he never did. To fight without the General's order. To throw
away ones Arms in fear. If at any time it happened a whole Troop or Company had
offended in that nature, they were all put to death, but an imbursation was
made of their names, and drawing them out by lotts, every tenth man was
executed. And this way of Decimation was used, that though all were not
actually sensible, yet all might be affrighted. But because where the
punishments are great, the rewards ought to be proportionable, that men may be
as well encouraged as deterred, they ordained recompenses for every remarkable
exploit. As to him who in the fight, saved the life of a Citizen. He who first
scaled the Walls of an Enemies Town. He who first entered into the Enemies Camp.
He who wounded or killed the Enemies General, or dismounted him from his Horse.
By this means no signal act was performed, but it was recompensed by the
Consul, and applauded publicly by the rest: and those who received any of
these prizes for any generous act, (besides the glory and fame which they
acquired among their fellow Soldiers) when they returned home into their
Country, they exhibited them to the view of their Relations and Friends, and
were received with great acclamation. It is not then to be admired if that
people extended its Empire so far, being so far in their discipline, and in the
observation of their punishments and rewards, toward such as by the generosity
of their actions had merited the one, or by their offenses the other; of which
things I am of opinion the greatest part should be observed now. I think it not
amiss to mention one of their punishments, and it was this; The Criminal being
convict before the Tribune or Consul, was by him struck gently over the
shoulders with a rod, after which the Malefactor had liberty to run, but as he
had liberty to run, so the rest of the Soldiers had liberty to kill him if they
could; so that immediately some threw stones at him, some darts, some stroke
him with their Swords, some with one thing, some with another, so that his life
was but short, for seldom any escaped, and those who did escape could not
return to their houses, but with so much ignominy and scandal, that they had
much better have died. This sort of punishment is in some measure used still by
the Swissers who cause those who are condemned, to pass through the Pikes, which
is a punishment well contrived, and most commonly well executed; for he who
would order things so that a man should not side, or defend a Malefactor,
cannot do better, than to make him an instrument of his punishment; because
with another respect he favors, and with another appetite he desires his
punishment, when he is Executioner himself, than when the execution is
committed to another. To the end then that a Malefactor may not be favored by
the people, nor upheld in his offense, the best remedy is to refer him to their
judgment. To confirm this, the example of Manlius Capitolinus may be brought,
who being accused by the Senate, was defended by the people, till they were
made his Judges; but when his case fell once into their Cognizance, and they
were made Arbitrators in the business, they condemned him to death. This then
is the true way of punishing, to prevent Seditions, and execute Justice. But
because neither fear of the Laws, nor reverence to men was sufficient to keep
Soldiers to their duties, and to a just observation of their discipline, the
Ancients added the fear and authority of God. For this cause they made their
Soldiers to swear with great Ceremony and Solemnity to preserve their
discipline, that if they transgressed they might be in danger not only of
humane Laws, but divine Justice, endeavoring by all industry to possess them
with principles of Religion, however they were false.


Battist. I pray satisfy me whether the Romans permitted any Women in their
Armies, and whether they suffered their Soldiers to game, as we do now adays in
ours.


CHAP. VI.
The Ancients had neither Women, nor Gaming in their Armies; and of the manner
how they discamp'd.
Fabr. THe Romans allowed neither the one nor the other, and indeed it required
no great difficulty to prevent them; for to speak truth, the exercises to which
they kept the Soldier constantly, either in parties, or together were so many
that they had no time either for dalliance or play, nor for any thing else that
could make them mutinous or unserviceable.


Battista. What you say pleases me very well: But pray tell me when your Army
Discamps, what orders do you observe?


Fabritio. The General's Trumpet sounds three times: The first sound they take
down the Tents, and the Pavillions, and pack them up: The second sound they
load their Sumpters; and the third they march in the same order as I said
before, with their Baggage and Train behind every Battalia, and the Legions in
the midst. Then the Auxiliary Battalion moves, and it is Baggage and Train after
it, and a fourth part of the common Baggage and Train, which should consist of
all those who were lodged in either of the quarters, which I have shown before
in the description of my Camp. Wherefore it was convenient that each of the
said quarters should be assigned to a Battalion, that upon the motion of the
Army every man might know in what place he was to march. So that every
Battalion was to march with its own Baggage, and a fourth part of the common
Baggage behind it, and this was the manner which the Roman Army observed in its
march, as you may understand by what we have said.


Battista. Tell us I beseech you, in the placing of their Camps, did the Romans
use any other customs besides what you have related?


CHAP. VII.
The safety and health of a Camp is to be regarded, and it is by no means to be
besieged.
Fabr. I Must tell you again that the Romans in their Encampments, were so
constant to their old method, that to retain that they applied themselves with
incredible diligence, not regarding what pains, or what trouble it required:
But two things they observed with a curiosity more than ordinary; one was to
place their Camp in an Air that was healthful and fresh. And the other was to
place it where the Enemy might not easily besiege them, or cut off their
provisions. To avoid the unhealthfulness of the place they avoided all fenny
and boggish places, or where the wind was cold and unwholsom, which
unwholsomness they did not so much compute from the situation of the place, as
from the complexion of the Inhabitants, and when they found them swarthy or
blowsy, they never encamped there. As to the other thing, never to be besieged
or straightened by an Enemy: you must consider the nature of the place both
where your Friends are placed; and where your Enemies; and then to make your
conjecture whether you can be besieged or no. It is necessary therefore a
General be very skilful in the situation of the Country, and that he have those
about him who understand it as well as he. Besides this, there is another way
of preventing diseases, and that is by providing that no disorder be used in
your Army: for to keep it sound and in health, the way is that your Army sleep
in Tents, That they be lodged as often as may be under Trees that are shady,
(where they may have firring to dress their meat) that they may not be obliged
to march in the heat. So that in the Summer time you must dislodge them before
day, and have a care in the Winter that they march not in the snow, nor upon
the ice, without the convenience of fires. That they want not necessary cloths,
nor be constrained to drink ill water; you must command the Physicians of the
Army to have a particular care of those who are sick, for a General will find
himself overlaid, when he is at once to contend with an Enemy and a Disease.
But of all remedies, nothing is so powerful as exercise, and therefore it was a
custom among the Ancients to exercise them continually. Think then of what
importance exercise is, when in the Camp it keeps you sound, and in the Field
it makes you Victorious.


CHAP. VIII.
Directions as to Provisions.
Fabr. AS to Famine, you must not only have a care that the Enemy cannot cut
off your Provisions; but you must consider from what place you may be supplied,
and see that what you have already be not imbezled. It is convenient therefore
that you have with you always a months Provision before hand, and then you are
to oblige your Neighbors and Friends to furnish you daily with more. You must
likewise have a good Magazine for Ammunition, in a strong place, which is to be
distributed with great care, giving every man a reasonable proportion every
day, and keep such an eye over it, that want of it may occasion no disorder:
for in matters of War every thing else may be repaired in time, but hunger the
longer it lasts, will the more certainly destroy you. Nor will any Enemy that
can master you with Famine, ever seek to attach you with his Arms; because
though the Victory be not so honorable, it is more easy and secure.

That Army therefore in which Justice is not observed: That Army which
squanders and consumes lavishly as it pleases, cannot so well barricado, or
fortify its Camp, but that Famine will find the way in; for where Justice is
neglected, Victuals is not constantly supplied; and where Soldiers are lavish
and profuse, though they have plenty, it is quickly consumed: For this cause
among the Ancients it was commanded that the Soldiers should eat what was given
them, and at a prefixed time, for no Soldier durst eat but when the General
went to dinner; but every body knows how little this is observed in our days,
and if then the Soldiers might be justly termed sober and orderly, they may now
with as much justice be said to be licentious and debauched.


Battista. When you began first to order your Camp, you told us you would not
confine your self to two Battalions, but take four, that you might show us how
a just and complete Army was to be lodged: I desire therefore that you would
satisfy me in two things: One is, when I have either more or less than four
Battalions, how I am to dispose of them. The other is, what number of Soldiers
would suffice you, to expect, and engage any Enemy whatever.


CHAP. IX.
How to lodge more or less than four Battalions, and what number of men is
sufficient to make head against an Enemy, be he as numerous as he may.
Fabr. TO your first demand I answer, that be your Army composed of more or
less than four or six thousand men you may increase or lessen their lodgments
as you please, and in the same manner, you may proceed to less or more in
infinitum: Nevertheless when the Romans joined two Consular Armies together,
they made two Camps, and turned the place of the unarmed men one against the
other.

To your second demand I reply, That the ordinary Roman Army consisted of about
24000 men, but when by accident they were over-pressed with numbers, they never
exceeded 50000, with this number they opposed 200000 Gauls which assaulted them
after their first War with the Carthaginians; with this number they opposed
themselves against Hanibal: and you must observe that the Romans and the Greeks
always carried on their Wars with a few men, fortifying themselves with their
good order, and the excellence of their discipline; whereas the Eastern and
Western Nations did all by their multitudes, but the Western people performed
all by their natural fury, and the Eastern by their submission and obedience to
their King. In Greece and in Italy where their natural fury, and their natural
reverence to their King was not so great, it was necessary to apply themselves
to discipline, which was of such efficacy, that it has made a small Army
prevail against the fury and natural obstinacy of a greater. I say therefore
that if you would imitate the Romans and the Greeks, you are not to exceed the
number of 50000 men, but rather to be fewer, because more do but breed
confusion, and hinder the order and discipline that you have learned. Pyrrhus
used ordinarily to say, that with 15000 men he would go through the world.

But let us pass now to another part of our discipline.


CHAP. X.
Certain Artifices, and Advertisements of War.
Fabritio. WE have gained a Battle with our Army, and shown most of the
accidents which may happen in it: We have caused it to march, and discoursed
with what impediments it might be incumbered in its march, and at length we
have brought it into its Camp, where it is to take not only a little repose
after its travel and fatigues, but consider and deliberate how it is to finish
the War. For in the Camp many things are transacted, especially there being an
Enemy in the Field, and Towns to be suspected, of which it is good to secure
your self, and to reduce such as are in hostility. It is necessary therefore to
come to some demonstrations, and pass these difficulties with the same glory
and honor with which we have proceeded thus far. To descend therefore to
particulars, I say, that if many people or persons have any thing in
controversy betwixt them to your advantage, and their own detriment, (as if
they should beat down the walls of their City, or send several of their
Citizens into banishment) you must cajole them in such manner that none of them
may think it has any relation to them, to the end that neither of them
relieving one another, they may all of them be oppressed without remedy; or
else you must command all of them what they are to do the same day, that each
of them believing himself particularly commanded, may think rather of obeying
than looking out for a remedy; and by that means your commands be executed
without sedition or disorder. If you suspect the fidelity of a people, and
would assure your self of them, and surprise them unawares, you cannot do
better than to communicate some design with them, desire their assistance, and
pretend to some farther enterprise, without the least ombrage or suspicion of
them: and by doing so, (not imagining you have any jealousy of him) he will
neglect his own defense, and give you opportunity of effecting your designs.

If you suspect that there is any body in your Army that gives advice of your
designs to the enemy; the best way to make your advantage of his treachery, is,
to impart some things to him which you never intend to do; and to conceal what
you intend; to pretend doubts where you are perfectly resolved; and to conceal
other things that you have absolutely determined: by this means you will put
the Enemy upon some enterprise (upon presumption that he knows your designs) in
which you may easily circumvent and defeat him.

If you resolve (as Claudius Nero did) to lessen your Army, and send relief to
your friend so privately that the Enemy should not perceive it; you must not
take down your Tents, nor diminish the number of your Hutts; but keep up your
Ensigns and preserve your ranks entire, with the same fires and guards as
before. If any supplies come up suddenly to your Army, and you would not have
your Enemy perceive you are reinforced, you must not augment the number of your
Tents; for nothing is more useful than to keep such accidents secret. Metellus
being in Spain with his Army; one took the confidence to demand of him what he
intended to do the next day: He replied, That if he thought his shirt knew, he
would burn it. Marcus Croesus being asked by one when he would discamp,
answered him, Are you the only man think you that will not hear the Trumpets?

If you design to understand the secrets of your Enemy, and to know his order
and condition; you must do as others have done, send Ambassadors to him, with
wise and experienced Soldiers in their Train, who may take their opportunity to
view his Army, and consider his strength and weakness so, as may give occasion
to overcome him. Some have pretended to banish some one of their Confidents,
and by that means had information of his Enemies designs. They are discovered
likewise sometimes by the taking of prisoners: Marius whilst he was at War with
the Cimbrians, to feel the fidelity of the Ga^ls, (who at that time inhabited
Lombardy, and were in League with the Romans) sent to them two sorts of
Letters, one open, the other sealed. In the Letters that were open, he writ
that they should not open those which were sealed till such a time as he
directed, before which time he sent for them again, and finding them open, he
found he was to repose no confidence there.


CHAP. XI.
How to rid ones self of an Army that is pressing upon ones heels.
Fabr. SEveral Generals have been invaded, and not marched their Army
immediately against the Enemy, but made an inroad into his Country, and
constrained him to return to defend it; and this way has many times succeeded,
because yours are fleshed with victory, and laden with plunder, whilst the
Enemy is terrified, and instead of a hopeful victory, like to go by the loss:
so that they who have used this kind of diversion, have many times prospered.
But this is practicable only to those whose Country is stronger than the
Enemies Country; for if it be otherwise, that diversion is pernicious. If a
General be blocked up in his Camp by the Enemy, he cannot do better than to
propose an accord, or at least a truce with him for some days, for that makes
your Enemy the more negligent in every thing; of which negligence you may take
your advantage, and give him the slip. By this way Silla disintangled himself
twice, and cleared himself of his Enemies: by the same Artifice Asdrubal
extricated himself in Spain from the forces of Claudius Nero who had blocked
him up; it would likewise contribute much to the freeing a man from the power
of the Enemy, to do something (besides what has been said already) that may
keep him in suspense. And this is to be done two ways, by assaulting him with
part of your forces, that whilst he is employed upon them, the rest may have
time to preserve themselves. There is another way likewise, and that is by
contriving some new thing or other that may amuse or astonish the Enemy, and
render him uncertain which way he is to stear: so Hanibal served Fabius Maximus
when he had shut him up on the mountains; for causing little wisps of
brush-wood to be tied to the horns of several Oxen, he set them on fire; and
Fabius not understanding the depth of the stratagem, supposing it worse than it
was, kept upon his guard within his Camp, and suffered him to pass.


CHAP. XII.
How a man may make a Princes Favorite suspected, and divide his Forces.
A General above all things is to endeavor to divide the Enemies Forces,
either by rendering his Confidents suspicious; or by giving him occasion to
separate his Troops, and by consequence weaken himself. The first is done by
preserving the Estates or Goods of those he has about him; as in time of War,
to spare their Houses, or Possessions; and returning their Children or
Relations safe, and without ransom. You know when Hanibal burned all about
Rome, he exempted what belonged to Fabius Maximus. You know how Coriolanus
coming with a strong Army to besiege Rome, preserved the Possessions of the
Nobility. Metellus being at the head of an Army againts Iugurtha, moved it to
the Ambassadors which the Enemy sent to him, to deliver up Iugurtha Prisoner,
and writing Letters to them afterward to the same purpose, he continued his
Correspondence till Iugurtha got the alarm, suspected his whole Counsel, and
made them away after several manners.

When Hanibal was fled to Antiochus, the Roman Ambassadors practiced so
cunningly, that Antiochus grew jealous, and trusted him no farther.

As to the way of dividing the Enemy, there is not any more certain than to
cause an incursion to be made upon his Country, that he may be constrained to
leave the War, and go back to defend himself. This was the way which Fabius
used when he had an Army against him of French and Tuscans, Umbrians and
Samnites. Titus Didius having a small Army in respect of the Enemy, expecting
another Legion from Rome, which the Enemy was desirous to intercept; he gave
out in his Army that the next day he would give the Enemy Battle, and ordered
it so, that certain Prisoners which he had in his Camp at that time, took their
opportunity to escape, and gave intelligence to the Enemy that the Consul had
given orders to fight; upon which news, that they might not lessen their
Forces, they did not march against the other Legion, and by that means it was
preserved; some there have been who to divide or weaken the force of their
Enemy, have suffered him to enter into their Country, and possess himself of
several Towns, that by putting Garrisons into them, he may lessen his Army, and
give them occasion to attack and defeat him. Others designing against one
Province, have pretended to invade another, and used such industry in the
business, that being entered unexpectedly into that Country, they have conquered
it before the Enemy had time to relieve it: for the Enemy being uncertain
whether you will return back and invade the Country which you threatened before,
is constrained to keep his Post, and not to leave one place to secure another,
and it falls out many times that he is unable to defend either the one or the
other.

CHAP. XIII.
In what manner seditions and mutinies in an Army are to be appeased.
Fabr. BEsides what has been said already, it is of great use and reputation to
a General, if he knows how to compose mutinies and dissentions in his Army. The
best way is by punishing the Ringleaders, but then it is to be done so neatly,
that they may have their reward before they have news that it is intended. The
way to do that is, if they be at any distance, to summon both nocent and
innocent together, that they thinking themselves safe, and not in danger of any
punishment, may not be refractory, and stand upon their guard, but put
themselves quietly into your hands to be punished. If they be present, and at
hand, the General is to make himself as strong as he can with those who are
innocent, and others in whom he can confide, and then punish as he thinks fit.
When the quarrel is private, and among themselves, the best way is to expose
them to danger, and let them fight if they think good; for the fear of that
does many times reconcile them. But above all things, there is nothing that
keeps as Army so unanimous as the reputation of the General, which proceeds
principally from his courage; for it is neither birth nor authority can do it
without that.

The chief thing incumbent upon a General is to pay well, and punish well; for
whenever the Soldiers want pay, it is but reasonable that they should want
punishment; for you cannot in justice chastise any exorbitance in a Soldier,
when you disappoint him of his pay; nor can he forbear stealing, unless he be
willing to starve: but if you pay, and do not punish them, they are insolent
again; and you will become despicable in holding a Command that you are not
able to manage, and by not maintaining your dignity and authority, of necessity
tumults and disorders must follow, which will be the utter ruin of your Army.


CHAP. XIV.
How the Ancients relied much upon their auguries, and other accidents.
Fabr. THe Generals of old were subject to one molestation, from which in our
days we are exempt: and that is how to pervert an ill augury, and interpret it
to their advantage: for if an Arrow fell down in an Army: if the Sun or the
Moon was Eclipsed: if there happened an Earthquake, or it was the General's
fortune to fall down, either as he got up on horseback, or dismounted, it was
looked upon by the Soldiers as an ill omen, and was the occasion of such fear
in them, that coming afterward to a Battle they were easily beaten: and
therefore the Generals in times past when such an accident happened,
immediately gave some reason for it, and referred it to some natural cause, or
else wrested and perverted it to their own profit and advantage.


Caesar passing over into Africa, tumbling down upon the ground as he came out
of the Ship, grasping the grass in his hands, he cried out, Teneo te O Africa;
Africa you are mine, for I have you in my hands. And several others have given
reasons (according to their own interest) for the Earthquakes and Eclipses of
the Moon: but in our days these artifices cannot pass, because our men are not
now so superstitious, and our Religion explodes such opinions as heathenish and
vain: but whenever we should be so blind as to reassume those superstitions, we
must revive the custom of the Ancients.


CHAP. XV.
That we are not to fight with an Enemy reduced to despair; and several arts
that may be used to surprise him.
Fabr. WHen famine, natural necessity, or human passion has brought your Enemy
to such despair, that impelled by that, he marches furiously to fight with you,
you must keep within your Camp, and decline fighting as much as possibly you
can. The Lacedaemonians acted in that manner against the Messeni; Caesar did the
same against Afranius and Petreius. When Fulvius was Consul against the
Cimbrians, he caused his horse to attack the Enemy for several days together;
and observing in what numbers they came forth to engage them, he placed an
ambush one day behind their Camp, caused them again to be assaulted; and the
Cimbrians issuing forth in their old numbers to encounter them; Fulvius fell in
the mean time upon their Camp, entered it, and sacked it. Some Generals have
made great advantage (when they lie near the Enemies Army) to send out parties
with the Enemies Colors to plunder their own Country; for the Enemy supposing
them supplies sent to relieve them, have issued forth to meet them, and assist
them to plunder, whereby they have been put to disorder, and given opportunity
to the adversary to overthrow them. Alexander of Epirus did the same against
the Sclavonians: and Leptene the Syracusan against the Carthaginians, and both
with success: many have been too hard for their Enemies by giving them
opportunity of eating and drinking too much, making a show of being afraid, and
leaving their Camp full of wine and provisions; with which the Enemy having
gorged himself without measure, the others have fallen upon them with
advantage, and put them to the sword. Tomyris provided such an entertainment
for Cyrus; and Tiberius Gracchus regall'd the Spaniards in the same manner:
others have poisoned their meat and their drink, to ruin the Enemy that way
the more easily. I said before, that I did not find it in any History that the
Romans did ever in the night place any Sentinels without their Camp, supposing
they omitted it to prevent the mischiefs that might ensue; for it has been
often seen that the Sentinels which are placed abroad in the day time to hear
and descry the Enemy, have been the destruction of those who have sent them;
for being often times surprised by the Enemy, they have been forced to give the
signal with which they were to call their own men, and they coming immediately
according to the sign, have been all killed, or taken prisoners.

To overreach and circumvent an Enemy, it is good sometimes to vary your
custom, that the Enemy depending upon it, may be disappointed and ruined. Thus
it happened with a General, who being accustomed to give the signal of the
approach of the Enemy in the night by fire, and in the day time by smoke;
commanded that they should make smoke and fire together without intermission,
and that when the Enemy came, they should put them both out; the Enemy
supposing he was not perceived, (because he saw no signal given) marched on in
disorder, and gave his Adversary the victory.

Memnon the Rhodian desiring to draw his Enemy out of his strong hold, sent one
by the way of a fugitive into their Army, with news that Memnon's Army was in a
mutiny, and that the greatest part of them were gone from him; and to confirm
it the more, he caused disorders and tumults to be pretended in his Camp;
whereupon the Enemy taking encouragement, advanced out of his hold to attack
Memnon, but was cut off himself.

Besides the things abovementioned, great care is to be had never to bring
your Enemy to despair. Caesar was very cautious of this in his War with the
Germans, and opened a way for them, when he saw that not being able to fly,
they must of necessity fight, and that more courageously than otherwise;
wherefore he chose rather the trouble of pursuing them when they fled, than the
danger of fighting them when they were forced to defend themselves. Lucullus
observing a party of his horse going over to the Enemy, caused a Charge to be
founded immediately, and commanded other parties to follow them; whereupon the
Enemy believing Lucullus intended to fight, sent out a party to charge those
Macedonians who were running away; and they did it so effectually, that the
Macedonians were glad to stand upon their guard, by which means of fugitives
intended, they became good Subjects in spite of their teeths.


CHAP. XVI.
How a suspected Town or Country is to be secured, and how the Peoples hearts
are to be gained.
Fabr. IT is a great thing in a General to know how to secure a Town that you
suspect, either after a Victory or before; as several ancient examples do
demonstrate. Pompey being jealous of the Catinenses, begged of them that they
would give entertainment to some of his sick men, and under the disguise of
sick, sending stout and valiant men, they surprised the Town, and kept it for
Pompey. Publius Valerius was diffident of the Epidauni, and caused a General
indulgence to be given in one of the Churches without the Town, the people
thronging thither for pardon, he shut the Gates upon them, and received none
back again but such as he could trust. Alexander the great being to march into
Asia, and by the way secure himself of Thrace; carried along with him all the
principal persons of that Province, giving them commands in his Army, and
leaving the people to be governed by those of their own condition; by which
means he satisfied all parties; the Nobility by paying them, and the Populace,
by leaving no Governor that would oppress them. But among all the ways
wherewith the people are to be cajoled, nothing goes so far as examples of
chastity and justice, as that of Scipio in Spain, when he returned a beautiful
young Lady to her Parents, and Husband untouched, a passage that contributed
more than his Arms to the subduction of that Country. Caesar only for paying
for the wood which he caused to be cut down to make Stoccadoes about his Camp
in France, got such a name for his justice, that it facilitated the Conquest of
that Province. I know not now that there remains any thing to say further about
these accidents; or that there is any thing which we have not already examined.
If there be any thing, it is the way of taking and defending of Towns, which I
am willing to show, were I sure I should not be tedious.


Battista. Your civility is so great, that it makes us pursue our desires
without the least fear of presumption; for you have offered us that frankly,
which we should have been ashamed to have requested. We do assure you therefore
you cannot do us a greater favor than to finish this Discourse; but before you
proceed, let me entreat you to resolve me, whether it be better to continue a
War all VVinter long (as they do now adays) or carry it on only in the Summer,
and in the VVinter go to their Quarters.


CHAP. XVII.
War is not to be continued in the Winter.
Fabr. OBserve Gentlemen, had it not been for the prudence of Battista, a very
considerable part of our Discourse had been omitted: I tell you again that the
Ancients did every thing with more prudence and discretion than we, who if we
be defective in any thing, are much more in matters of War.

Nothing is more imprudent and dangerous for a General than to begin a War in
the Winter, and he who is the aggressor is more liable to miscarry, than he
that is invaded. The reason is this, all the industry employed in Military
Discipline, consists in preparing your men and putting them into order for a
Battle. That is it, at which a General is principally to aim, because a Battle
does commonly decide the business, whether it be lost or won. He therefore who
knows best how to put his Army in order, and he who knows best how to prepare
and equip them, has doubtless the advantage, and is in most hopes to overcome.
On the other side, nothing is more inconsistent with good order than steep
places, or cold rainy weather; for steep places will not suffer you to open or
extend your ranks according to discipline; cold and wet weather will not permit
you to keep your men together, nor present them in close order before the
Enemy, but constrains you of necessity to lodge them up and down, asunder
without order, at the mercy of all the Castles, and Towns, and Villages that
receive you; so that all the pains you have taken to discipline your Army, is
(for that time) utterly useless.

Do not admire, If now adays we make War in the Winter, for our Armies being
without discipline, it is not to be imagined what inconveniences they suffer by
not being quartered together; for it troubles them not, that they cannot keep
those orders, and observe that discipline which they never had. Yet it ought
seriously to be considered what prejudice has followed upon encampments in the
Winter: and it ought likewise to be remembered that the French in the year 1503.
were broken and ruined near Garigliano, rather by the extremity of the weather,
than the magnanimity of the Spaniards. For as I told you before, the Invador is
under greatest incommodity, as being more exposed to the weather in an Enemies
Country, than at home: for to keep his men together he is necessitated to
endure the cold and the rain; or to avoid it, to divide his men, which is
mightily to expose them. But he who is upon the defensive part can choose his
place and his way, attend him with fresh men, which he can join in a moment,
and fall upon some party of the Enemies with such fury, as they will not be
able to endure the shock. It was the weather therefore which disordered the
French, and it is the weather that will always ruin any man that begins War in
Winter, if his adversary have any share of discretion. He therefore who would
have his force, his order, his discipline, and his courage of no use or
advantage to him, let him keep the Field, and carry on his War in the Winter:
For the Romans (who desired all those things in which they employed their
industry and diligence should be useful to them) avoided the incommodities of
Winter, as much, as the asperities of the Alps, the difficulty of places, and
whatever else might hinder them from showing their dexterity and courage. And
thus much as to your demand, we will discourse now of taking and defending of
Towns, and of their Natural, and Artificial strength.


THE SEVENTH BOOK.
CHAP. I.
How Towns, or Castles are to be fortified.
Fabr. YOU must understand that Towns and Castles are strong two ways, by
Nature or by Art. They are strong by Nature which are encompassed by Rivers or
Fens, (as Mantua, and Ferrara) or seated upon some Rock, or craggy Mountain (as
Monaco, and Sanleo) for other places seated upon Mountains, if not difficult of
access, are in our days rather weaker than otherwise, in respect of our
Artillery and Mines: and therefore at present being to build a City, or erect a
Fort that may be strong, we choose to do it in a Plain, and fortify it
artificially with Ramparts and Bastions, and our first care is to make the
Walls crooked and retort, with several Vaults and places of receipt, that if
the Enemy attempts to approach, he may be opposed and repulsed as well in the
flank as the front: If your Walls be made too high, they are too obnoxious to
the Cannon; if they be too low, they are easily scaled; if you make a Ditch
before the Wall, to make the Scalado more difficult, the Enemy fills it up
(which with a great Army is no hard matter) and makes himself Master
immediately. My opinion therefore is this, (but with submission to better
judgments) that to provide against both inconveniences the best way will be to
make your Wall high, and a Ditch on the inside rather than without; and this
is the strongest way that you can build, because it keeps you both from their
Artillery and assaults, and gives the Enemy no capacity of filling up the
Ditch. Your Wall then is to be of the best height you can contrive; three
yards thick at the least to resist their Batteries; it is to have Towers and
Bulwarks at the distance of every 200 yards. The Ditch within is to be thirty
yards broad at least, and twelve in depth; and all the earth which is taken out
of the Ditch is to be thrown toward the Town, against a Wall which is to be
brought for that purpose from the bottom of the Ditch, and carried up a man's
height above the ground, which will make the Ditch more deep and secure.
Toward the bottom of the Ditch every two hundred yards, I would have a Casemat
from whence the Artillery may scour, and play upon any body that shall descend.
The great Guns which are used for the defense of a Town, are to be planted
behind the Wall on the inside of the Ditch; for to defend the first wall,
Falcons and such small Pieces are easier managed, and do as good Execution. If
the Enemy comes to scale you, the height of the first Wall defends you easily:
If he comes with his Artillery, he must batter down the first Wall, and when he
has done that, it being Natural in all Batteries for the Wall and rubbish to
fall outward, there being no Ditch without to swallow and receive it, the
ruins of the Wall will increase the Depth of the Ditch, in such manner as that
you cannot get forward, being obstructed by the Ruins, hindered by the Ditch,
and interrupted by the Enemies great Guns within the Walls that do great
slaughter upon you. The only remedy in this case is to fill up the Ditch, which
is very hard in respect of its dimensions, and the danger in coming to it, the
Wall being crooked, and Vaulted, and full of Angles, among which there is no
coming without manifest hazard, for the reasons abovesaid; and to think to
march with Faggots over the ruins, and to fill it up that way is a chimerical
thing; so that I conclude a City so fortified is not to be taken.


Battista. If one should make a Ditch without, besides that within the Wall,
would not your Town be the stronger?


Fabr. Yes, without doubt; but my meaning is, if one Ditch only be to be made,
it is better within than without.


Battista. Would you have Water in your Ditch, or would you rather have it dry?


Fabr. Opinions are divided in that point; for Ditches with water are more
secure against Mines, and Ditches without are harder to be filled up: But upon
consideration of the whole, I would have them without water, because they are
more secure; for it has been seen, that the freezing of the Ditch in the Winter
has been the taking of many a Town, as it happened at Mirandola when Pope Julius
besieged it: And to prevent Mines, I would carry my Ditch so low, that whoever
would think to work under it, should come to the water. Castles I would build
(as to my Ditches and Walls) in the same manner, that they might have as much
trouble who stormed them. But let me give one caution to any man who defends a
City, and it is this, that he makes no redoubts without, at any distance from
the Wall, and another to him that builds and fortifies a Castle, and that is,
that he makes no works within for retreats in case the first Wall be taken.

The reason that makes me give this Counsel is, because no man ought to do that
which may lessen his reputation at first; for the dimunition of that makes all
his other orders contemptible, and discourages those who have undertaken his
defense. And this that I say will always happen when you make Bastions without,
and oblige your self to defend them, they will certainly be lost, for such
small things being now adays to contend with the fury of Artillery, it is
impossible they should hold out, and the loss of them being a lessening to your
reputation, the lessening of your reputation will be the loss of the place.
When Genoa rebelled against Lewis King of France, he caused certain Bastions to
be erected upon the Hills which were about the Walls, which Bastions were no
sooner lost (and they were lost presently) but the City was taken.

As to my second advice, I do affirm that there is nothing so pernicious to a
Castle as to have those works of retreat; for the hopes that men have of
preserving themselves by deserting their Posts, makes them abandon them often,
and the loss of their Posts, is afterward the loss of the Fort. We have a
fresh example of this in the taking of the Castle at Furli, when the Countess
Catharina defended it against Caesar Borgia, the Son of Alexander VI. who had
brought the French Army before it. This Castle was full of those retreats; for
first there was a Citadel, then a Fortress, and betwixt both a good Ditch with
a draw bridge. The Castle within was divided into three parts, and each part
strongly separated from the other with Ditches and Water, and Draw-bridges by
which they communicated. As soon as the Duke had made his approaches, he with
his great Guns battered one part of the Castle, and laid open a good part of
the Wall; whereupon Giovanni da Casale who had the command of that quarter,
never stood to make good the breach, but left it to retire into another part,
so that the Enemy having entered the first quarter with little difficulty, it
was not long before they made themselves Masters of all, by securing the
Draw-bridges (in the hurry) which conveyed them one to another: This Castle
therefore which was thought inexpugnable was lost by two faults; one was for
having so many Redoubts, the other was because none of them commanded the
Bridges; the ill contrivance therefore of the Fortress, and the imprudence of
him that defended it, was a shame and disappointment of the magnanimous
enterprise of the Countess, who had the courage to expect an Army which neither
the King of Naples, nor the Duke of Milan had the confidence to attend. Yet
though she miscarried in her designs, she reaped the honor which her
magnanimity deserved, as appeared by many Epigrams composed in those times in
her praise. If then I were to erect a Fort, I would do it with as strong Walls,
and with as good Ditches as I have prescribed; and within it, I would build
only houses for habitation, and those low and weak, and such as should not
hinder the prospect of all the Walls, from those who were in the Piazza; that
the Commander might have the advantage to discern with his eye from the main
guard, whither he was to direct his supplies, and that every man might
understand when the Wall and the Ditch was lost, the Castle was not to be kept.
And when I made any redoubts and retrenchments within, I would do it in such
manner that they should each of them command the Bridges which should be raised
upon Pillars in the middle of the Ditch.


Battista. You have said that small places are not to be defended in our days,
and I suppose I have heard quite contrary; that is to say, the lesser a place
is, the better it is defensible.


Fabritio. You were then misinformed, for no place can be now adays strong,
where the defenders have not room for new Ramparts and Retrenchments to retire
to; for such is the fury of the Artillery, that he who presumes upon the
protection of one Wall or one Rampart, will find himself deceived. And because
Bastions or Forts (provided they do not exceed their just measure, for in that
case they will be rather Castles and Towns) are not made in such manner that
there is space to retreat, they must presently be lost. It is wisdom therefore
to place these Bastions without, and to fortify within, especially the entries
into the Towns, and to secure the Gates with Ravelins, so as that no body may
come in or go out in a direct line, and that from the Ravelin to the Gate there
may be a Ditch with a Drawbridge. The Gates are to be fortified with
Portcullisses, to receive their men back again into the Town when they have
gone out to engage the Enemy, and when it happens that they are repulsed, and
the Enemy pursues, that they may distinguish betwixt their own men and the
Enemy, and prevent their entering Pell-mell amongst them. To this purpose
Portcullisses (which the Ancients called Cateratte or Pigion-holes) were
invented, which being let down excluded the Enemy, and preserved their Friends,
whereas without them, neither Bridges nor Gates would be of any use, being
possessed by the multitude.


Battista. I have seen these Portcullisses of which you speak in Germany; and
they were made of bars of wood in the fashion of Iron Gates, whereas ours are
made of massy Rafters or Girders all of a piece, now I would willingly be
informed from whence this difference proceeded, and which is most effectual.


Fabr. I tell you again, that the ways, and customs and orders of War are laid
aside all the world over, in respect of what was used among the Ancients, but
in Italy they are utterly forgot, and if there be any thing better than other,
we have it from the Ultramontani, or Northern Nations. You may have heard, and
perhaps some of these Gentlemen may remember how weakly we fortified before the
coming of Charles 8. into Italy, in the year 1494. The battlements of our Walls
were made but half a yard thick; the Port-holes for our great Guns, and
Muskets or small Shot were made narrow without, wide within, with many other
defects which I shall forbear to mention, lest I should become tedious; for
those thin battlements were quickly beaten down, and our Guns were as easily
dismounted.

But now adays we have learned of the French to make our Battlements large and
thick, and our Port-holes large within, close again in the middle, and wide
again without; by which means our Artillery are not so easily dismounted, nor
our Soldiers beaten from their Works. Besides these the French have several
other good ways, which our Soldiers have not seen, and so have not so much as
considered; and among the rest those open Portcullisses like grates is one, and
they are much better than ours, for if to defend and fortify your Gate, you
have a close Portcullis, when you let it down to keep out the Enemy, you shut
up your selves, and cannot afterward do him any hurt, so that with Pick-axes,
Hatchets, Petards, or Fire, he may do what he please without any interruption.
But if your Portcullis be made Lettice-wise and transparent, when it is let
down thorough the holes and intervals you may defend it with your Pikes, small
Shot, or any other kind of Arms.


Battista. I have observed in Italy another Northern invention, and that is to
make the wheels of your Carriages for your great Guns with spokes crooked or
bending toward the Axel-tree, Now I would gladly know the reason of that way,
because to me the straight spokes seem stronger.


Fabr. Do not imagine that things which deviate from common use, are done by
accident; or if you fancy they were made in that fashion for beauty, you are
mistaken; for where force and strength is required, they never stand upon
beauty; but the reason why they were changed, was because these kind of spokes
are much more secure and strong; and the reason they are stronger is this; when
a Carriage is laden, it is either equally poised, or hanged too much on one
side. When it is equally poised, the wheels bear equally, and the weight being
equally distributed, does not burden them much: But when it inclines to one
side, the weight lies all upon one of the wheels: If the spokes be made
straight, they are easily broken, for when ever the wheel bends, the spokes
bend with it, as being unable to keep up the weight, so that when the weight is
well poised, or is otherwise but moderate, your straight spokes are strong
enough, but when your Carriage goes awry, and enclines to one side, they are
too weak to support it. On the contrary, the spokes of your French Carriages
that are made bending, are made so with great reason, for when a Carriage
enclines to one side, the spokes on that side being made bending, will come to
be straight, and will be able to sustain the whole weight better, than when it
hangs equal, and (being crooked) bears but half. But to return to our Towns and
our Castles. The French, besides what we have mentioned, have another way of
securing their Gates, and for the sallying and retiring of their Soldiers
during a Siege, than I have yet seen practiced in Italy: and it is this, On the
outward point of the Drawbridge they set up two Pillars, and upon each of them
they fasten a beam in such manner that one half of it hangs over the Bridge,
and the other half without. Then that part which is without the Bridge, they
join together with Cross bars like a grate, and to the end of each of the beams
that hang over the Bridge, they fasten a chain: when therefore they would shut
up the Bridge, so as no body should come in from without, they loosen the
chains, and let down that part of it that is made with cross bars, which shuts
up the Bridge; when they would open the Bridge, they draw the chains, and that
part comes up again, and it is to be raised gradually, so as to receive a man
on Foot, and no Horse, or a Horseman as they please, and it is raised or let
down with unimaginable dexterity. This way is better than your Portcullisses,
because they can hardly be hindered by the Enemy from being let down, not
falling in a direct line as your Percullisses do, which are easily stopped by
putting any thing under them. They then who would make a Town strong, are to do
it in the same manner as I have prescribed.

Moreover they are to prohibit Cultivation or building within a Mile round; all
should be a plain without any Hills, Houses, Banks or Trees to hinder the
prospect of the besieged, or give any shelter to the Enemy in his approaches.
And you must know that where the Ditch is without the Walls, and there are
eminencies above the level of the Country, that Town is but weak; for those
eminencies are blinds to the Enemy in their approaches, and when they are
possessed, they are convenient for their Batteries: But let us pass on and come
into the Town.


CHAP. II.
What order is to be observed by him who shuts himself up in a Town, with
resolution to defend it.
Fabr. I Will not lose so much time as to show you how convenient it is
(besides what has been said before) to have your Stores of Ammunition and
Victuals, because they are things that every body knows cannot be wanted, and
without them all other Provisions are vain. Two things then are generally to be
observed, you are to secure what you can possibly to your self, and to prevent
the Enemy of any Commodity, especially in your own Precincts. Wherefore if
there be any Straw, or Corn, or Cattle that you cannot carry off into the Town,
you must be sure to destroy it. He who undertakes the defense of a Town is
likewise to observe this order, not to suffer any thing to be done tumultuously
and disorderly, and to provide that upon every accident, every man may know
what he is to do, and the way is by causing the Women, Children, old, lame and
infirm to keep within their Houses, and leave the Town to be defended by those
who are vigorous and strong, who being armed as is requisite, are to be
distributed into all places, some upon the Walls, some at the Gates, some in
the principal places of the City, to relieve their Companions upon any
distress; another party there should be likewise, not obliged to any particular
place, but always ready to succor where necessity is required; and things
being thus ordered, scarce any Sedition can happen to disorder you. Again,
there is one thing I will recommend to your memories, both in the besieging and
defending of a Town: And that is, that there is nothing animates an Enemy so
much, or gives him such hopes of carrying a Town, as when he knows his
adversary has not been used to the sight of an Enemy; for many times fear only
without any experiment of their strength, has caused a Town to be surrendered:
He therefore who comes before a City so qualified is to make all the shows and
ostentations of terror that he can; and on the other side, he who is assaulted,
is to oppose men of resolution and courage, and such as are not to be terrified
with shows, nor any thing but force and violence of Arms; for if the first
brunt be sustained, the besieged are encouraged, and the besiegers will have no
hopes left but in their reputation and valor.

The Ancients had several instruments of War with which they defended their
Towns, as Rams, Scorpions, Bows, Slings, Clubs, etc. Again, they had several
Engines which they used in their Leaguers, as Rams, Towers of wood, Vineae;
They had also their Falx, their Pluteus, Testudo, and others; instead of which,
we now make use of Artillery which is useful both for him that is besieged, as
well as him that besieges. But to return.


CHAP. III.
Advertisements for such as are distressed for Provisions within a Town, and
for such as besiege them, and would reduce them to that necessity.
Fabr. HE who takes upon him the defense of a Town, is to see such provision
made both of Victuals and Ammunition, that he may be in no danger of losing it,
either by Starving or Storm. As to Starving (as is said before) it is necessary
before the siege be laid, that you furnish your self well with Victuals; but
because such provision cannot be made, but a long siege may exhaust it, you
must betake to extraordinary ways, and look out for friends that may relieve
you, especially if you have a River running through the Town. Thus the Romans
did when their friends were besieged by Hanibal in the Castle of Catalino, for
not being able to relieve them otherwise, they flung great quantities of Nuts
into the River which were carried down by the stream in despite of the Enemy,
and gave the Garrison very good relief. Some who have been besieged, to make
their Enemy believe that they had plenty of Corn, and render them desperate of
carrying them by starving, have thrown bread over their Walls; or else given
Corn to some of their Cows, and suffered her afterward to be taken by the
Enemy, that when they killed her, they might find Corn in her paunch, and
conclude that Corn was as plentiful in the Town as in the Camp. On the other
side, wise Generals have used as much Art and Stratagem for the reduction of
Towns: Fabius permitted the Campani to sow their ground, that presuming upon
it, they might make no other provision, and he came afterward and utterly
destroyed it.

Dionysius having besieged Rhegium, pretended a Treaty, and whilst things were
in transaction, he provided himself with Victuals with all possible diligence,
but when he had effectually supplied himself, he brake off the Treaty, blocked
them up again, and constrained them to surrender.

Alexander the great being desirous to reduce Lucadia, he took, plundered, and
destroyed all the Castles about it, but gave the Garrisons safe Conduct to
Lucadia, by which Policy he so thronged them with men, that their numbers
quickly distressed them, and they were forced to surrender.


CHAP. IV.
Other Advertisements both for the Besiegers and the Besieged.
Fabr. IN matters of assault, I say, the first thing to be provided against, is
the Enemies first Effort; for by that way the Romans gained many a Town,
assaulting it suddenly, and in all places at once, and this they called Aggredi
urbem Corona, or to make a general assault, as Scipio did when he took new
Carthage in Spain. But if the Besieged can stand the first shock, it gives him
such courage, he will hardly be taken afterward. And if things should go so
far, that a breach should be made, and the enemy enter; yet the Citizens have
their remedy if they will stand to one another: for many Armies have been
repelled and defeated after they have entered a Town. The remedy is this, that
the Inhabitants make good the highest places of the City; and fire upon them
from the windows and tops of their houses. But against this the Assailers have
made use of two inventions, one was to open the Gates of the City, and give the
Inhabitants opportunity to escape; The other is, to make Proclamation, that
whoever throws down his Arms, shall have quarter, and none put to the Sword but
such as are taken in Arms; and this artifice has been the taking of many a
Town. Moreover a Town is taken with more ease, when it is so suddenly attacked,
as when an Army keeps at such a distance, as that the Town believes either you
will not at all, or cannot attempt it before they shall have the alarm of your
motion, because it is at present so far off. Wherefore if you can come upon
them suddenly and secretly, not once in twenty times but you will succeed in
your design.

I speak very unwillingly of the occurrences of our times, because it must be
done with reflection upon me and my friends; and if I should discourse of other
people, I should not know what to say. Nevertheless I cannot pass by the
example of Caesar Borgia (called Duke Valentino) who being with his Army at
Nocera, under pretense of making an inroad into the Duchy of Camerin, turned
suddenly upon the State of Urbin, and mastered it without any trouble in one
day, which another man would not have been able to have effected in a much
longer time.


CHAP. V.
A man is not to depend upon the Countenance of the Enemy, but is rather to
suspect what even he sees with his eyes.
Fabr. THose who are besieged, are to be very careful of the tricks and
surprises of the Enemy, and therefore they are not to rely upon the
countenance that he carries, but are rather to suspect there is some fraud or
deceit that will fall heavily upon them, if they suffer themselves to be
deluded.

Domitius Calvinus besieging a Town, made it his custom every day to march
round about the Walls with a good part of his Army; The Garrison fancying by
degrees that it was only for his recreation, began to slacken their Guards, of
which Domitius having notice, fell suddenly upon them, and carried the Town.

Other Generals have had intelligence of relief that was expected in the Town,
and having habited a certain number of their Soldisrs, and disposed them under
counterfeit Ensigns, like those which the besieged expected, they were received
into the Gates, and possessed themselves of the Town. Cimon an Athenian General
having a design to surprise a Town, in the night set fire on a Temple that was
without it, and the Inhabitants flocking out to extinguish the fire, they fell
into an Ambuscado, and lost their Town. Others having taken some of the
Servants, and such people as came forth for forage, put them to the Sword, and
disguising their own Soldiers in their Cloths, have entered the Gates, and made
themselves Masters of the Town.


CHAP. VI.
How to disfurnish a Garrison of its men, and to bring a terror upon a Town.
Fabr. THe Ancients have (besides these) made use of several Stratagems and
Artifices to unfurnish the Enemies Garrisons of their men: When Scipio was in
Africa, being desirous to possess himself of some of the Garrisons, which the
Carthaginians had in their custody, he made many offers to besiege them, but
pretending fear, he not only drew off on a sudden, but marched away with his
Army to a great distance. Hanibal supposing our apprehension real, to follow
him with a greater force, drew out his Garrisons, which Scipio understanding
sent Massinissa to surprise them, and he did it with success. Pyrrhus making
War in Sclavonia; advanced against the chief Town in that Province, in the
defense of which Town, several people having got together; he pretended to
despair of carrying it by force, and turning his Arms against other Towns which
were not visibly so strong, he prospered so well in his design, that the said
Town drawing out a good part of its Garrison in relief to their Neighbors,
left it self so weak, as it became a prey to the Enemy. Many have corrupted and
defiled the waters, and turned Rivers out of their Channels, to make themselves
Masters of a Town, and have miscarried when they have done. It is a way
likewise that contributes much to the taking of a Town to affright them with
reports, as of some great Victory that you have obtained, some great supplies
that you have received, and an obstinate resolution if they do not surrender
quickly to put them all to the Sword.


CHAP. VII.
To corrupt a Garrison, and take it by Treachery.
Fabr. SOme Generals of old have endeavored to take Towns by treachery, by
corrupting some of the Garrison, and they have done it several ways: Some have
sent of their own men as fugitives into the Town, thereby to put them into
credit and Authority with the Enemy, and give them opportunity to betray them.
Some by this means have discovered the strength of the Garrison, and by that
discovery have taken the Town. Some under feigned pretenses have stopped up the
Gates of a Town from shutting, with a Cart, or beam, or such kind of thing, and
given their party the convenience of entering. Hanibal besieging the Town of
Tarentum in Calabria, which was defended by the Romans under the Conduct of
Levius, corrupted a person in the Garrison called Eoneus, and ordered him that
he should go out a hunting in the night, and pretend he durst not do it in the
day for fear of the Enemy. Eoneus observed his directions, went out and in
several nights together, and the Guards had not the least suspicion; at length
Hanibal disguizing some of his men in the habit of Huntsmen, sent them in after
him, who killed the Guards, possessed themselves of the Gates, and let Hanibal
into the Town. A Garrison is likewise to be cheated by drilling them a good
distance out of Town, and pretending to fly when they come to charge you. Many
(and Hanibal among the rest) have suffered their Camps to be possessed by the
Enemy, that they might have opportunity to clap between with their Army, and
get into the Town. Again, they are sometimes deluded by pretending to raise the
Siege as Formio the Athenian did, who having plundered and harrassed the
Country of Calcidon, received their Ambassadors afterward with propositions of
Peace: He gave them very good words, and sent them back full of security and
fair promises, upon which the poor people presuming too much, Formio fell
suddenly upon them, and overcame them. Those who are shut up in a Town, are to
keep a strict eye upon such as they have any reason to suspect, but they are
sometimes to be secured and obliged to you by preferment as well as by
punishment. Marcellus knew that Lucius Baucius the Nolan was a great favourer
of Hanibal, yet he carried himself to him with so much kindness and generosity,
that of an Enemy, he made him his intimate Friend.


CHAP. VIII.
Good Guard is to be kept in all places and times.
Fabr. THose who are in any fear of being besieged, are to keep diligent guard
as well when the Enemy is at a distance, as at hand: and they are to have most
care of those places where they think themselves most secure; for many Towns
have been lost by being assaulted on that side where they thought themselves
impregnable; and this miscarriage arises from two causes; either because the
place is really strong and believed inaccessible; or else because of the policy
of the Enemy, who with great clamor and noise pretend to storm it on one side,
whilst on the other he does it as vigorously, but with all the silence
imaginable. And therefore it concerns the besieged to be very careful, and keep
good Guards upon the Walls, especially in the night, and that as well with Dogs
as with Men, for if they be fierce and watchful, they will give an alarm (if
the Enemy approaches) as soon as any thing: And not only Dogs, but Birds have
been known to have preserved a Town, as it happened to the Romans, when the
French besieged the Capitol: when the Spartans lay before Athens, Alcibiades to
discover how his watches were kept, commanded that in the night when ever he
held up a light, each of the Guards should hold up another, and great
punishment was to be inflicted upon any that neglected it. Is^crates killed a
Centinal that he found a-sleep, with this expression, I leave him as I found
him.


CHAP. IX.
Ways to write privately to ones Friends.
Fabr. THose who have been besieged have contrived several ways of conveying
intelligence to their friends; not daring to trust their affairs to the tongue
of a messenger, they write in ciphers many times, and conceal them several
ways. The ciphers are made according to every man's fancy, and the ways of
concealing them are diverse: some have writ on the inside of a scabard of a
Sword; others have put their Letters up in Paste, baked it, and then given it
for sustenance to the messenger that is to carry it: some have hid them in
their privities; some in the collar of the messenger's dog.

There is another very useful and ingenious way, and that is by writing an
ordinary Letter about your private affairs, and afterward betwixt every two
lines to write your intrigues with a certain kind of water that will never be
discovered but by dipping it into other water, or by holding it to the fire;
and by so doing the Letters will be visible. And this trick has been very
subtly practiced in our times, in which a certain person having a desire to
signify a secret to some of his friends, and not daring to trust it to a
messenger, he sent out Letters of Excommunication written very formerly, but
interlined as abovesaid, and caused them to be fixed to the doors of the
Churches, which being known to his friends by some private marks, they
understood the whole business: and this is a very good way, for he who carries
it may be deceived, and he that writes it is in no great danger.

There are a thousand other ways invented according to every man's fancy and
wit. But it is much easier to write to those who are blocked up in a Town, than
for those who are besieged to write to their friends abroad, because these
Letters cannot be conveyed but by somebody who must pretend to run away out of
the Town, which is a hard and a dangerous thing, if the enemy be any thing
careful. But it is otherwise with Letters to be sent into a Town, for a man has
a thousand occasions to come into a Leaguer, where he may watch his
opportunity, and slip into the Town.


CHAP. X.
How to repair a breach, and the way to defend it.
Fabr. BUt let us come now to the present way of beleaguering of Towns: I say,
that if you be assaulted in a Town that is not fortified with ditches on the
inside, (as I have mentioned before) that your enemy may not enter at the
breaches which the Artillery make, (for against other breaches there is no
remedy) it is necessary whilst the Artillery is playing, to cut a new ditch
behind the breach of at least thirty yards wide, and to throw all the earth
that comes out of it toward the Town, that it may make a good Rampart, and add
to the depth of the ditch; and this work is to be carried on with such
diligence, that when the wall falls, the ditch may be at least five or six
yards deep; and whilst they are at work to make this ditch, it is necessary
that they be secured with two Caseniats, that may flank the Enemy in case he
should endeavor to disturb them: and if the wall be so strong as to give you
time to make your ditch and your casemats; that part which is battered will be
the strongest part about the Town; for that Rampart will be of the same form
and model which we proposed for the ditch within: But where the wall is so weak
as to allow you no time, then you must show your courage, and present yourself
bravely at the breach, your Soldiers well armed, and with as much cheerfulness
as is possible. This way of throwing up new works was observed by the Pisans
when you besieged it, and they might do it well enough; for their walls were
strong, which gave them time, and the earth good and proper for Ramparts;
whereas had they wanted either of those conveniences, they must of necessity
have been lost. It is wisdom therefore to make these ditches round about the
Town before there be any necessity, as we said before; for in that case you may
expect the enemy without fear.


CHAP. XI.
Of Mines.
Fabr. THe ancients took several Towns by mining under ground, and that two
ways, either by carrying their mines under ground into the Town, and entering
thereby, (as the Romans did when they took the City of Vejentum) or by
undermining only the walls, and so tumbling them down. At present this latter
way is more used than the other, and renders those Towns which stand high,
weaker then the rest, because more subject to be min'd, and then adding but a
good quantity of powder, which takes fire in an instant, you do not only ruin
the wall, but you open the very mountain, and cleave the works into pieces. The
way to prevent this, is to fortify in a flat Country, and make the ditch which
encompasses your Town so deep, that the enemy may not dig under it without
coming to the water, which is the best defense against mines. But if you be to
defend a Town upon an eminence, your best way will be to make several deep
holes in the wall, that may give vent to the powder when the enemy sets in on
fire.

There is another way likewise to prevent them, and that is by countermining,
if you find where the enemy mines, but it is a hard matter to discover them,
especially if you be besieged by a cautious enemy.


CHAP. XII.
Good guards are always to be kept, and your Soldiers not to be divided.
Fabr. HE who is besieged is to take extraordinary care that he be not
surprised in time of repose, as after a storm; after the Guards are set, (which
is either at break of day, or at the shutting in of the evening) or especially
whilst you are at dinner, in which time many Towns have been taken, and many
sallies have been made to the destruction of the besiegers. Wherefore it is
necessary to be upon the Guard in all quarters, and your men generally armed:
and here I cannot omit to tell you that nothing makes a Town or Camp harder to
be defended, than the dividing of your forces; for the enemy being able to
attack you when he pleases with all his power at once, you must be ready on all
sides, and having parted your Forces, you will be forced to defend your self
with a part, and to keep the same guards with the remainder when ever the enemy
assails you, as you should have done when your whole Garrison was together;
which is a great disadvantage, for he can attack you with his whole power, when
you have but a part of yours to defend your self.


CHAP. XIII.
That when ones sees himself blocked up on every side, it is good to expose
ones self now and then, and of the advantages which have ensued.
Fabr. IF he who is besieged be beaten considerately, he is certainly lost; but
the Besieger can only be repulsed: for which reason many who have been besieged
(either in Camp or Town,) though they have been inferior in number, have
nevertheless sallied with their whole force at a time, and been two hard for
the enemy. Thus Marcellus did at Nola; thus Caesar did in France, when his Camp
was encompassed with a vast number of Gauls, for finding he was not able to
defend it, because he must divide his men into partles, and distribute them
round; and finding also that standing within his stoccado's he could not do so
much execution upon the enemy as he desired, he opened his Camp on one side,
and issuing out of it with his whole force, charged the enemy with such fury
and courage that he put them to the rout. Besides, the obstinacy and resolution
of the besieged does many times astonish and terrify the enemy. Pompey being
encamped against Caesar, and Caesar's Army in great distress for provisions,
Pompey had presented him a piece of Caesar's bread which was made of herbs, and
looked upon as a very strange thing; Pompey having viewed it, commanded that it
should not be shown in his Army, lest it should discourage them to consider the
obstinacy of their Enemy. Nothing was more honorable to the Romans in their
War with Hanibal than their constancy, because in the greatest of their
distress, and in the worst of their fortune, they never demanded peace, nor
discovered any token of fear: on the contrary, when Hanibal was under their
Walls, they sold the ground in which he was encamped, at an higher rate than it
would have been sold at another time: and they were so true and firm in their
enterprises, that they would not draw off from Capua to defend their own City,
though they had an Army before that, when Hanibal appeared before Rome.

I am sensible that I have told you several things that you understood, and
perhaps considered already; yet I have done it (as I said before) by that means
to give you a better comprehension of the quality of this Army; and to satisfy
such (if there be any such here) as have not had the opportunity to understand
it so well as you. I suppose now there remains nothing but that I give you some
general rules which are very obvious and common.


CHAP. XV.
General Rules to be observed in Military Discipline.
Fabr. THat which is beneficial to you, is prejudicial to your Enemy, and that
which is beneficial to him, is prejudicial to you.

He who in War is most vigilant to observe the designs and enterprises of the
Enemy, and takes most pains in exercising and disciplining his Army, shall
expose himself to less danger, and have greater probability of victory.

Never bring your men to fight till you have some just confidence in their
courage, till you have seen them well armed, and well ordered; and never let
them engage but when you find them cheerly, and hopeful of success.

It is better to conquer an Enemy by hunger than fighting, in which last
victory, fortune has more share than virtue or courage.

No resolution is so likely to succeed, as that which is concealed from the
Enemy till it comes to be executed.

Nothing is of more importance in the whole art of War, than to know how to
take advantage when it is offered.

Nature produces few persons strong; but industry and exercise makes many.

Order and discipline is more available in War, than valor or force.

When any come over to your service from the Enemy, they are of great advantage
to you, provided they be faithful; for it is more diminution to the Enemies
strength to have Soldiers revolt, than to have so many slain, though the name
of a fugitive is suspicious to new friends, and abominable to old.

It is better in the drawing up your Battalions for a Battle, to draw them up
with reserves, and place such behind the front as may supply it upon occasion;
than to enlarge your front, and make as it were but one rank of your whole Army.

He who understands his own Forces and the Enemies too, can hardly miscarry.

The courage of Soldiers is better than their number.

The situation of the place is sometimes more effectual than the courage of
your men.

New and unexpected things are an astonishment to some Armies.

Your Soldiers despise things that are common, and are weary of any thing that
is tedious, I would advise therefore that by pickeering and little skirmishes
you acquaint your men with your Enemy before you bring them to a Battle.

He who pursues an Enemy that is disordered, in disorder himself; shall lose
the victory he had gained, and perhaps give it to the Enemy.

He who makes not provision of Victuals, will be beaten without a blow.

He who relies more upon his Horse than his Foot, or his Foot than his Horse,
must accommodate himself to the place.

If you would know at any time whether you have any spies in your Army, you
have no more to do but to command every man to his Tent.

If you find the Enemy has any knowledge of your designs, you must change them.

What you are to do, you may advise with many; what you are resolved to do,
communicate with few.

When Soldiers are in their quarters, they are to be kept in order by fear and
by punishment; when in the field, with hopes and reward.

A good General never comes to a Battle but when necessary requires, or some
great advantage invites him.

You must endeavor that your Enemy may not know how you intend to draw up your
Army when you come to fight; and let your figure be what it will, be sure your
first Companies be so ordered as that they may fall back into the second, and
both into the third.

When you are engaged, never employ any of your Battalia's about any thing but
that to which you deputed them at first; if you would avoid putting things into
disorder.

Sudden accidents are not easily prevented; but those which are foreseen are
prevented without difficulty.

Men, Arms, Money and Provisions are the nerves of War; but the first two are
most necessary, because Men and Arms will find Money and Victuals; but Money
and Victuals can never find Men.

The Rich Man unarmed, is but a prey to the Soldier.

Use your Soldiers to abominate luxury either in diet or cloths.

This is as much as I can think fit to speak of in general, though I am
sensible other things would have fallen in well enough with my Discourse. As
how and in what manner the ancients ordered their Squadrons; how they were
habited, and how they exercised them in several other things, and I could have
added several particulars, which I have not thought necessary at this time,
because you may know it your self, and likewise because it was not my intention
at first to show you exactly how the ancient Malitia was constituted, but how
it was to be done in our times.

For this reason I have thought unnecessary to speak any farther of those kind
of antiquities, than what might be serviceable to this introduction. I know
likewise I might have enlarged myself more about the exercising of Horse; and
come afterward to discourse of Sea Fights, for to distinguish Militia's, their
Armies at Sea, and Armies at Land; Armies of Foot, and Armies of Horse: but of
Sea discipline I shall not presume to say any thing, because I know nothing of
it: I shall leave that to be treated of by Genoueses or Venetians, who by their
experience in that kind, have done very great things formerly. Nor shall I
speak any farther of Horse than what I have said before, because they are not
so corrupt and disorderly. For if your Foot (which is the strength of an Army)
are well disciplined, and in good order, your Cavalry must be good of necessity.


CHAP. XV.
The way to have many Horse in your Country.
Fabr. I Would however remember him who is desirous to settle and establish a
good Militia in his Country, that to furnish it handsomely with Horse, he should
do two things; one is, that he should distribute a certain number of good
Stalions up and down, that the Countrymen may breed, and drive a Trade with
Foles and Colts, as you do in this Country with Calves and young Mules. The
other is, that there might not want Chapmen for the Colts, I would oblige every
man that keeps a Mule, to keep an Horse; and he that would keep but one thing
for his Saddle, should be enjoined to have it an Horse; besides, I would
constrain every man that wore Cloth-clothes, to keep an Horse in his Stable.

This order was taken not long since by a Prince of our times, and succeeded so
well, that in a short time he had a most excellent Cavalry. As to other things
relating to Horses, I refer you to what has been said this day, and what has
been practiced of old.


CHAP. XVI.
A General is to invent of himself, and not follow altogether the practiecs of
his Predecessors.
Fabr. BUt perhaps you would desire to know what parts and qualifications there
ought to be in a General; and I will satisfy you in short, for I cannot make
choice of a properer man, than he who understands all those things which I have
recommended this day; and yet that would not be sufficient, unless he had
abilities to invent some thing of his own; for never any man was Master of a
Trade, who had no invention of his own; and if invention be honorable in any
thing, it is most certainly in this: This is manifest in all Authors who have
constantly applauded all sorts of inventions, how slight and inconsiderable
soever, as appears by the great Character they bestowed on Alexander the great,
for his wisdom in appointing a Cap to be put upon the top of a Lance as a
signal for the dislodging of his Army, rather than to do it by sound of Trumpet
as formerly, because it imported him much that they should remove privately. He
was commended likewise for ordering his Soldiers upon a charge to fall down
upon their left knee, as an expedient that would make them receive the charge
with the more strength and firmness, which invention got him the Victory, and
occasioned him so much honor, that all Statues erected afterward in his
honor, were erected in that posture. But because it is time to conclude our
discourse, I will leave where I began, to avoid the reproach which is incident
to such persons as when once straggled know not how to return.


CHAP. XVII.
The Author returns, and with a short Discourse concludes his Book.
Fabr. IF you remember (Cosimo) you told me, that you could not imagine the
reason why in one place I should commend Antiquity, and blame those which would
not imitate it in great things; and yet I have not imitated it my self in my
Martial affairs, in which I have taken much pains, and spent a great deal of my
time.

To which I answer, That men who are to execute any thing, are first to learn
which way it is to be done, that they may be afterward the more able, when it
comes to operation. Now whether or no I understand how to establish a Militia
according to the method of the Ancients, I leave you to judge, who have heard
me discourse of it so long; from whence you may imagine how much time has been
spent in those thoughts by me; what great desire I have had to bring them to
effect, and whether I have already, or ever may have occasion to do it. But to
satisfy you farther, and justify my self, I will give you the reasons, and
thereby observe my promise in some measure, by showing you the conveniences
and inconveniences in such imitations. I say then that no action this day
among men is more easily executed according to the method of the Ancients, than
Military discipline; but it must be among such Princes as are able to bring
together 15 or 20000 of their own Subjects, against an Enemy. On the other
side, there is nothing more difficult to such Princes as have not that
convenience: And that you may comprehend it the better, you must understand
that Generals are commended upon two several accounts some are famous for that
with an Army ordered and prepared by their own natural discipline, they have
performed great things; so it was with most of the Roman Citizens, and others
who had the command of Armies; whose only task was to keep their Soldiers good,
and Conduct them securely. Others have been not only to contend with and
conquer the Enemy, but they were first to instruct and exercise their Army; and
these doubtless were worthy of more praise than they who with their old and
well experienced Soldiers performed such Exploits: Of this sort was Pelopidas,
Epaminondas, Tullus, Hostilius, Philip of Macedon, Cyrus King of Persia, and
Gracchus the Roman: All those were forced to model and discipline their Armies
before they ventured them to sight; and all these were able to do it in respect
of their own experience, and that they had other persons which were able to
exercise their Soldiers as they desired. Nor would it ever have been possible
that any of those Generals, how good and excellent soever, could ever have done
any great thing in another Province full of corrupt men, unless it had been
accustomed to some honest obedience. It is not sufficient then in Italy to
understand how to manage a Veteran Army; but you must first know how to make
and prepare it, and then how to govern and conduct it. Again, those who do
this, must be such Princes as have great revenues, and many Subjects, in which
number I am not to be reckoned, as one who never commanded, nor never can,
unless it be foreign Forces under some other Prince, into which foreigners,
whether it be possible or not to insuse any of these things of which I have
discoursed, I leave you to judge. How could I persuade a Soldier of our days to
carry more Arms than he was accustomed, and besides his Arms, two or three
days Provision at his back, and a Spade or Pickaxe at his girdle? How could I
prevail with him to work or digg all day; to stand all day to his Arms in
counterfeit exercises, that I might rely the more confidently upon him when he
came to it in good earnest? How could I work upon him to abstain from play,
lasciviousness, blasphemy, and insolence, which is their practice every day?
How long would it be before I could reduce them into such order, such
discipline, and awe, that if an Apple tree was never so full, and stood in the
middle of their Camp, none of them should venture to touch it? as is many times
read of the Roman Armies. What is it that I can promise them that may make them
either fear me, or love me, when the War being ended, I shall have no farther
to do with them? How can I make them sensible of shame who have been born and
bread without any? How should they pay me a respect whom they do not know? By
what God, by what Saint shall I conjure them? By the Gods which they adore, or
by the Gods which they blaspheme? Which it is that they adore I cannot tell,
but am sure they blaspheme them all. How can I expect they should keep their
promise, which they do hourly despise? How can they who pay no honor to God,
express any to men? What good discipline then are we like to imprint upon so
depraved a Mass? If you object that the Swizzers and Spaniards are good
Soldiers, I confess them much better than the Italians; but if you consider
what I have said, and the manner of proceeding of both those Nations, you will
find them come short in many things of the perfection of the Ancients. The
Swizzers are become good Soldiers by natural practice of those things which I
have recommended; and the Spaniards by necessity; for their Wars lying in
Foreign Provinces, where they are constrained either to overcome or dye
(because they can never hope to get off by flying) are grown good, and yet
their goodness is in many things defective; for their excellence is only to
stand and receive the Enemy at push of Pike, and the Swords point; besides,
their is not any man among them fit to instruct another in what is necessary,
much less if he be not of their own Country. But to return to our Italians, who
having wanted wise Princes, have not been capable of good orders; and having
wanted that necessity which was incumbent upon the Spaniards, they have not
taken it up of themselves, so that now they are the very scorn and contempt of
the world, not for any fault in the people, but in their Princes, who thereby
have been chastised for their ignorance, and justly punished for losing their
Territories so ignominiously, without any considerable resistance. Will you see
that what I say is true? Consider what Wars we have had in Italy since the
Expedition of Charles 8th. to this day: and although other Wars rendered
Soldiers formidable and martial; these Wars by how much they were more great,
and more furious, by so much both Officers and Soldiers became more dissolute
and cowardly: And this must necessarily proceed from ill orders which are not
much better at this day, and the misery is, there was nor is none able to
reform them: Do not think that there is any way to recover reputation to the
Arms of the Italians, but by this way that I have proposed, and by means of
such Princes as have great Territories there; for this form may be imprinted in
men that are simple, and plain, and ones own Subjects, much sooner, than in
such as are lewd, and disorderly, and strangers. A good Sculptor never expects
to make a good Statue out of a piece of Marble that is mangled and has been ill
handled; but he will do well enough if it has never been touched. Our Princes
in Italy before they were sensible of their Wars with the Northern Nations,
believed it was enough for a Prince to know how to write a civil answer; how to
direct a Letter with all its Punctilio's; how to show himself witty and quick
in his reparties; how to juggle, and dissemble; how to dress himself handsomely,
and dispose of his Jewels to the best advantage; how to eat, and sleep in more
state and magnificence than other people; to have a thousand dalliances and
pleasures about him; to behave himself haughtily and extort from his Subjects;
to live in idleness and ease; to dispose of Military commands to their
Parasites; to despise those who proposed any thing of Virtue; to require that
their words should be like Oracles, and of as much authority, as if spoken by
God himself; to employ such as had no knowledge in affairs; to commit great
things to those who durst attempt nothing; to believe every thing immediately
without pondering and debating either their words or arguments that spoke them;
and several other imperfections which hindered them from seeing that at last
they must become a prey to any that would attack them. These things in the year
1494. were the occasion of those flights, and fears, and depredations by which
three of the most potent States in Italy were frequently destroyed. But the
worst is, they which remain, continue in the same errors, and live in the same
disorder, without any consideration that those who formerly desired to preserve
their Dominions, did all that I have prescribed this day; and that their whole
study was to accustom themselves both minds and bodies to labor, to trouble,
and dispising of danger, And this was the cause that Caesar, and Alexander and
all the valiant and brave Princes were always at the head of their Armies,
completely armed and on foot, and rather than lose their states they would lose
their lives; so as they lived and dyed with a great deal of honor: And though
perhaps some of them might be condemned for their ambition, and exorbitant
desire to Reign; yet they could never be accused of effeminacy, or doing any
thing that might render them delicate and unmanly. Which passages if they were
read and believed by the Princes of our times, it would be impossible but they
must alter their course of life, and their Provinces their fortune. But because
in the beginning of our discourse you complained of your Militia, I tell you
that if you have ordered it according to my abovesaid direction, and it has not
answered your expectation, you have reason to complain; but if it be not
ordered and exercised according to my rules, the complaint lies more properly
against you, who has made it rather an abortion, than a perfect production. The
Venetians, and the Duke of Ferrara began very well, but they did not persevere,
and it was imputable rather to themselves, than their Soldiers. And let me
affirm this to you for a truth, and among all the present Princes of Italy, he
who takes his way first, and observes these rules and these orders, shall make
himself greater than any Prince in that Country, and it shall happen to his
Subjects as to the Kingdom of Macedon, which falling under the Dominion of King
Philip, was improved to that height by this order and exercise (whilst the rest
of Greece were idle, and if employed at all, it was in following Plays and
Balls, and such effeminat entertainments) that in a few years time he was able
to conquer the whole Country, and leave a foundation to his Son to make himself
Monarch of the whole world. He then who despises this Doctrine, if he be a
Prince despises his own Principality, and if a Citizen, his own City. And in
this I cannot but complain of Nature, who should either have not suffered me to
have known these things; or have given me power to have executed them, which is
a thing I can never hope for now, as growing old, and toward the end of my
days. For this reason I have discoursed the more frankly with you who are
young, and so qualified that you may be able (if you be satisfied with what is
said) to give the same Council to your own Princes when occasion shall be
offered, and I hope with success; and of this I beg you would not dispond; for
this Province seems to have a peculiar faculty of reviving things that are
dead, as it has done Poetry, and Painting, and Sculpture, though for my own
part I cannot expect to see it, as having one foot already in the grave.
Certainly had fortune indulged me in my young days, so far as to have afforded
so much Territory as such an enterprise required, I believe in a short time I
would have demonstrated to the world the power and efficacy of the orders of
the Ancients, by means of which I should have enlarged my Dominions with
honor, or lost them without shame.


THE MARRIAGE OF BELPHEGOR. BY Nicholas Machiavel.
IT is recorded in the ancient Chronicles of Florence, that a certain holy
Person, whose life was the admiration of that age, falling one day into a
Trance, had a very strange apparition: it seemed to him, that the souls of
married men that came trooping in great numbers to Hell, cried out all of them
as they passed, that their Marriage was the cause of their misery, and their
Wives the occasion of their coming thither: Minos Radamanth, and the whole
infernal Privy Council were amazed at the clamor; at first they could not
believe there was any thing in the business, but at last observing the same
complaints continually multiplied, they thought it fit to make Pluto
acquainted: Pluto understanding the report, without imparting any thing to his
wife, (who had taken Physic that week, and kept her Chamber) resolved the
matter should be accurately examined, and such course be taken, as was
likeliest to make the speediest discovery of the truth: he issued out his Writs
immediately, and assembled his Courts; his Princes, Dukes, Counts and Barons
were all present; never was Senate so full, nor never was affair of that
importance before it: the holy Father that beheld all, affirms positively, that
Pluto delivered himself in this manner.

Right Trusty and well-Beloved,

Though our Kingdom was assigned us from Heaven, and the fatal decree has
anciently determined our Dominion: though that sentence be irrevocable, and
above the cognizance of any humane Power; yet seeing his prudence is most safe,
that is dictated by Laws; and his judgment most solid, that is fortified with
others; we are resolved to take your counsels along with us, which way we are
to steer in an affair, that otherwise may prove (in time) of great dishonor to
our Government. The souls of married men, that are continually flocking into
our Dominions, do unanimously exclaim against their Wives, as the only persons
that send them tumbling hither; to us it seems impossible: yet forasmuch as a
peremptory and determinate sentence upon their bare allegations, would not
suite with our Satanical mercy; so a careless pretermission on the other side
could not be without reflection on our Justice: that matters of such importance
therefore may have their due disquisition, and our administration be defended
from obloquy or scandal, that no inconveniency may follow for want of
deliberation, and that some better expedient may be found out, than ourselves
have happily thought on, we have thought good to call you together, being
confident, and assured by the assistance of your counsels, the honor and
reputation of our Empire will be continued as unquestionable for the future, as
it has been preserved hitherto, by our own proper care and solicitude.

There was not one present, but acknowledged it a business of importance, and
well worthy an exact consideration: it was the opinion of the whole Board, that
all imaginable means ^as ^p be used to find out the truth, but what means that
was, could not be agreed on; some were of opinion, a single person* was to be
dispatched into this World, and no more; others judged it better to send
several, and that the discovery would be more certain from the experience of
many, than of one; a third sort, more brisk and severe in their counsels,
thought that clutter unnecessary, and that clapping good store of them together
upon the rack, would be enough doubtless to extort a confession. However it was
at last carried by the plurality of voices, that a single person only should be
sent, and in this resolution the whole company acquiesced, nevertheless there
being no body found that would voluntarily undertake the employment, it was
concluded the election should be by lot; and that the same time, having made
their billets, and shuffled them, the lot fell upon Belphegor.

One may say, and say true, that fortune never decided any thing so justly; for
Belphegor was no ordinary Devil; and Pluto having made him formerly
Generalissimo of his Armies it is to be presumed he was no novice; for all this
he had a months mind to be quit of his embassy; but the order being
unalterable, he was forced to submit, and accept these conditions that were
solemnly decreed, That an hundred thousand Ducats should be paid him
immediately, to defray the expenses of his journey; that he should assume the
shape of a man; that he should take a woman to his wedded Wife, and live with
her (if possible) ten years; that at the end of the term, (pretending to die)
he should give her the slip, repair immediately to his old quarters, and make
affidavit upon his own experience of all the pleasures and calamities of
Matrimony. It was declared to him also, that during this metamorphosis, he was
to be subject to the pains and misfortunes of humanity, as sickness,
imprisonment, and poverty: but that if by his cunning or dexterity he could
disintangle himself, it should be allowed him and not imputed as any scandal or
reproach, Belphegor accepts the conditions, receives his Ducats, and having
drawn a spruce party of horse out of his Guards, and furnished himself with
Pages and Footmen good store, he set out immediately for this World, and
arrived at Florence in a very fair equipage: he chose that place above all
other, for the convenience of improving his moneys, and putting it to interest
with greater advantage. He called himself Don Roderick of Castile; he took a
very noble House in the Fauxburg of All Saints; and that his quality might be
undiscovered, he gave out that he was a Spaniard, that being young he took a
Voyage into Syria, that he had dwelt some time in Aleppo, where he had got most
part of his Estate: but being weary there, he was come into Italy, as a Country
more agreeable with his humor, with intention (if any fair opportunity was
offered) to marry: Don Roderick seemed to be a very handsome man, about thirty
years of age; and in short time after his arrival, he made it evident enough
that he was rich, and by his liberality, that he knew how to make the best use
of them; insomuch as several Gentlemen of Florence, that had more Daughters
than money; took all possible pains to insinuate how welcome he should be into
their alliance. Don Roderick, that had choice of Mistresses, preferred one that
was transcendently handsome before them all, the story says, she was called
Honesta, and was the Daughter of Americ Donati, who had three more also to
marry, and three Sons between twenty or twenty five years of age: but though
Seigneur Americ was of one of the noblest Families of Florence, yet he was
looked upon as down the wind, and one that was overlaid with too many
childeren, and the unavoidable charges of his Nobility: but Don Roderick took
an order for that, defraying the whole expense of his Wedding; out of his own
purse managing all things with that splendour and magnificence, that there was
nothing omitted that was desirable upon such an occasion. It was mentioned
before, as one of the conditions proposed to Belphegor, that as soon as he was
out of the Infernal dominions, he should be subject to all the passions of
mankind; and accordingly he began immediately to take delight in the honors
and gallantry of the World; and as cunning a Devil as he was, to be wheedled
with the flatteries and applauses of men: but that which delighted him so much,
cost him dear; besides that he had not been long with Honesta, but he fell
stark mad in love with her, and finding something or other extraordinary in
her, that I cannot think of, he was so far inamoured, he never thought himself
happy before; insomuch as when she was melancholy, or out of humor, he would
curse his Commission, and take his corporal Oath his very life was tedious. On
the other side it was not to be forgot, that Honesta marrying Roderick, and
bringing him Beauty and Nobility instead of a Portion, she thought it not fit
to leave her pride and untractableness behind her; these two good qualities
were so eminently in her, that Roderick who had been used to Lucifers, and had
more than once had experience of it, swore point blank his Wives insolence was
beyond it: for when she once found the fondness and passion her Husband had for
her, believing she could manage him with a switch, and order him as she
pleased, she carried her self like his Sovereign, and handled him without pity
or respect; and if it happened he denied her any thing, she gave him
immediately to understand, that she was also as ^loquent in scoulding, as
others of her quality. By this you may Judge what a cooler this was to Don
Roderick: nevertheless the consideration of his Father-in-Law, his Wives
Brothers, the Kindred he had by that blessed Marriage, but above all the
passion and tenderness he had for her, made him endure all patiently. I shall
not mention the expense of his clothes, which though never so rich, he was
forced to change every week, according to the ordinary vanity of the Ladies in
Florence. Besides these, there were other things were of no less inconvenience;
he was forced (to preserve the peace) to assist his Father-in-Law in the
Marriage of his other Daughters, which cost him a good round sum: moreover that
all things might go well, and his correspondency continue with his Consort, he
was glad to send one of her Brothers into the Levant with woollen Stuffs,
another into France and Spain with Silks, and to furnish the third with
wherewithal to set up a Goldsmith's-shop in Florence: all which afflictions
together were sufficient to discompose any Devil of a thousand, yet he had
other thrown into the bargain: there is not any Town in all Italy more
extravagant in their expenses, in their Carnivals and Feasts of St. John, than
Florence; and Honesta upon that occasion must needs have her Roderick outdo
all people of his Rank, in the sumptuousness of his Entertainments, in the
magnificence of his Balls, and other divertisements that are usual at those
times: he suffered all these calamities for the same reasons he endured the
rest; and though perhaps these difficulties were very hard and unpleasant, he
would have thought them supportable, could he have been satisfied, his patience
would have procured any quietness in his Family, and that he might have
peaceably attended the hour of his destruction. But Don Roderick found the
clear contrary; besides the expense your have heard she occasioned, her
insolence was accompanied with a thousand other, inconveniences, insomuch as
he could keep neither officer nor servant in his house above three days
together. This was severe trouble to him to find it was impossible for him to
keep any body about him, though never so well experienced or affected to his
affairs: nor indeed could any body blame them for taking their leaves, when the
Devils themselves that he brought along with him, did chose rather to return,
and toast the bottoms of their feet against the fire of Hell, than live in this
World under the dominion of so super-devillish a woman. Roderick's life being
thus miserably uncomfortable, and his stock that he had reserved, exhausted by
her extravagant expenses, he was reduced to that pass, he subsisted only upon
the hopes of the advantage he should make by the return of some Vessels he had
sent into the East and West. And whereas before he had very good credit in that
Town, to continue it, and keep up his Port, he borrowed money of such as are
used in that place to put it out; but those kind of people being such, as are
not usually sleepy or negligent in their affairs, they took notice immediately
he was not over-punctual to his day: his purse being already empty, and he
reduced to the highest extremity, at one dash he receives news of two as
disasterous accidents as could possibly befall him. The first was, that one of
Honestas Brothers had lost at Hazard all that Roderick had entrusted in his
hands; and the other was no more welcome, which was, that his other
Brother-in-Law returning into Italy, was himself cast away, and all his goods.
The business was no sooner known in Florence, but his Creditors had a meeting,
where giving him over for one that was irrecoverably lost, and not daring to
discover themselves, because the time of payment was not yet come, they
concluded he was to be watched very close, least he should chouse them, and
show them a light pair of heels. Don Roderick of Castile on the other side,
considering with himself his affairs were past remedy, and also the term he was
obliged to by the infernal Law, resolves to take horse and be gone without more
ado, which he performed without much difficulty, living conveniently for that
by the Port del Prato: yet he was no sooner marched off, but his alarm was
taken by his Creditors; they repair immediately to the Magistrates, and pursue
him not only with Post and Officers, but lest a certain number of Ducats should
debauch that kind of Cattle, who are no better in Italy than other places, and
prevail with them for an abatement of their speed, they follow him themselves
in a full body, with impatience of hearing some tidings of him. Roderick in the
mean time was no fool, but considered very well what he had to do; as soon as
he was galloped about half a league from the Town, he leaves the highway, and
his horse with it, (the Country being enclosed, and full of ditches on both
sides) and was forced to make the rest of his journey on foot, which he did
very succesfully; for wandering up and down under the shelter of the Vines and
Reeds that abound much in those parts, he arrived at last at Peretola, at the
house of Iean Matteo del Bricca, Baily to Iean del Been.

By very good fortune he meets Matteo carrying fodder to his Cattle; he accosts
him immediately, and promises him as he was a Gentleman, that if he would
deliver him from the Catchpoles that were in pursuit of him, with design to
clap him up, and starve him in Prison, he had an invention in his pate would
make him rich out of hand, and of this he would give such evidence before he
departed, as should assure him of his truth and fidelity; and if I do not, says
he, with a damned imprecation, I will be content to be delivered up into their
clutches that persecute me. Now you must understand, that though Matteo was an
Hind and a Peasant, yet the fellow had cunning enough, and knew on which side
his bread was buttered; he considered, if he undertook him, and miscarried, he
had nothing to lose; and that if he succeeded, he should be made for ever;
without any more ado therefore he promises him protection, and clapping him
close upon a dunghill that was before the gate, he covered him over with
brush-faggots and reeds, and such other fuel as lay there in readiness for the
fire: and indeed he was no sooner in his retirements, but in came the Creditors
with full cry; they swaggered and laid about them like Lords, but all to no
purpose, Matteo could not be persuaded to confess so much as that he saw him;
insomuch as marching on still in the pursuit, but with as little success as
they came thither, they gave Roderick and their Money over for lost, and
returned to Florence every jot as wise as they were before: The Coast being
clear in this manner, and the alarm over, Matteo steals to the closet where he
had left Roderick, gives him a little fresh air, and conjures him to be as good
as his word: Roderick was very honest in that point, and I dare say never any
Devil, as to matters of gratitude, had more of a Gentleman; he gave him thanks
for the great obligation he had received: he swore over and over again, he
would do what ever lay in his power to discharge himself of his promise, and in
the heat and height of his compliments, to convince him that he meant as he
said, he gives him the whole story as you have had it, and at last told him the
very way that he had pitched upon to make him a Prince: know then, says he,
that whenever you hear of any Lady that is possessed, it is no other Devil but I
that have possessed her; and be sure I will never leave her, till you come your
self and force me from my quarters, after which you have with enough to make
your own terms for your payment. They had very few words more, he only gave him
the Summerset once or twice, and showed him two or three juggling tricks, and
vanished.

A while after there was a great noise about the Town, that Mes. Ambrosio
Amidei's Daughter, that was Married to Bonaculo Thebalducci's Son, was
possessed; her Father and Mother did not fail to use all the remedies are usual
in so deplorable a case; they brought before her St. Zanobes Head, and St. I.
Galbert's Cloak, which was nuts to Belphegor, and made him nothing but laugh:
There was no body in her but Don Roderick de Castile, who was as ingenious a
Gentleman-devil as one would wish, and that the world might take notice that
this was no fantastic imagination, nor fit of the Nightmare, nor any such
trifle, but that she was really possessed, she spoke Latin better than Tully
ever Writ, disputed in Philosophy, and discovered the secrets and sins of
several people that were there, who were very much surprised to find the Devil
concern himself with those kind of affairs.

Amongst the rest there was one holy Father he did a great discourtesie to, in
blurting out before the whole company, as if he had kept a young Lass four
years together in his Cell, in the habit of a young Monk; and after all this,
let any body judge whether the profession was not like to be true; Ambrosio in
the mean time was in great affliction for his Daughter; he had tried all the
ways that Physic or Religion could propose, but to no purpose; so as he was
brought to the highest point of despair, when Matteo came to him, and undertook
the cure of his Daughter, if he would give him five hundred Florins, which he
designed to lay out in Land at Peretola: In short, Matteo was an honest fellow,
and would have done the miracle gratis, and like a Gentleman, but his pockets
were hollow, and he had great occasion for Money at that time; Seignior
Ambrosio accepts the conditions, and Matteo falls to work; he began very
civilly with certain Masses and other Ceremonies, that he might appear the more
formal in the business; at length he stole to the Ladies ear, calls Roderick,
and tells him he was come thither to him, and did require him to be as good as
his word. Content says Roderick, and that you may see I shall deal with you
like a person of quality, take notice, that because this expedition is not
enough to enrich you, and do your business, I will befriend you more than once,
for which reason as soon as I am departed from hence, away I Will march into the
Daughter of Charles the King of Naples, and don't fear but I Will stick to her,
till you come to exorcise me, so as there you may make up your markets at a
blow, and become considerable for ever, but be sure after that I be troubled
with you no more; and as soon as he had said so, whip says he out of the Lady,
and was gone to the great joy and astonishment of whole Town.

Belphegor in the mean time was as good as his word, as he promised Matteo;
away he goes, and in two or three days time it was all over Italy, that the
Daughter of Charles King of Naples, was in the same condition; which was good
news for Matteo, who was at this bout to gain the Philosophers-stone: In short,
he tried all means possible; the Monks went to work with their prayers, and
their crosses, but to no purpose; The Devil would not budge till Matteo came
himself, who had formerly obliged him. The King had news of what had happened
at Florence, and sends away immediately for Matteo to his Court, who came
accordingly, and after some few ceremonious formalities, counterfeited for
concealment of the mystery, he cures his Daughter. However Roderick before his
departure, as is reported in the Chronicle, accosted him in this manner. You
see, Matteo, I have been as good as my word; you see you are become rich in a
trice, and may take your case for the future; so as if I be not mistaken, I
have discharged my self as to you very honestly, hereafter have a care how you
come near me; for as hitherto I have done you knights-service, henceforward I
will do you as much mischief as I can. Matteo being returned to Fl^rence very
wealthy, (for the King of Naples had given him above five thousand Ducats) he
thought of nothing now but enjoying that peaceably he had got, never imagining
Roderick would do him any harm; but his designs were much frustrated by a
report out of France, that Lewis the seventh's Daughter was possessed as the
former: Matteo was in great trouble, on the one side he was not ignorant of the
power of that Prince, on the other he remembered Roderick's last words; the King
used all means possible, but without any success, he was told what feats Matteo
had done, and dispatched a Post to him immediately, to desire his Company at
Paris; but Matteo pretending I know not what indispositions, that rendered him
incapable of serving his Majesty, the King was forced to write to the
Magistrates, who sent away Matteo immediately.

Being arrived at Paris, he was in great affliction, because he knew not which
way for his life to perform what was expected from him. At last he goes to the
King, and tells him, that true it was indeed, he had formerly wrought some
cures in that kind, but that it was not in reason to be expected he could
dispossess all people he met with, seeing there were some Devils so refractory
and cross-grained, neither threats nor enchantments, nor devotion it self would
do no good on: That he said not this out of any repugnancy or unwillingness to
do as he was desired, but that in case his endeavors were ineffectual, he
might have his Majesty's pardon. The King was stark mad at the story, and told
him in plain terms, if if he did not rout the Devil out of his Daughter, as he
had done out of others, he would hang him forthwith; for he saw no reason why
Miracles were not as seasible at Paris, as at Florence and Naples: These words
touched Matteo to the quick, he thought there was no pleasure to be taken in
being hanged in that manner, and that what the King had said, was without any
equivocation: However he recollected himself a little, or at least pretended
so, and calling for the Princess that was possessed, he makes his approaches,
and whispering her in the ear, told Roderick he was his very humble servant,
and put him in mind of the good office he had done him, when he delivered him
out of the talons of the Law; adding withal, that if he left him in the lurch,
in the extremity of danger he was then in, the whole World would cry out on his
ingratitude; Roderick heard him with no more patience than needs must, he
swaggers, swears, storms, and lays about like a Devil in good earnest, gives
him a thousand and a thousand ill words, but they could distinguish only these
few at the last: How now, you Rascally Traitor, have you the impudence to come
near me again? have you forgot it was I that made you your fortune? but I Will
make all the World see, and you too, with a pox to you, that I can take away as
well as give; besides which, you shall not fail (...) hanged before you get
away from Paris: Poor Matteo seeing no other remedy for his misfortunes,
he(...) a thinking of some other way, and having sent back the Lady to her
Chamber, he made this speech to the King. Sir, I have told you before, that
their are certain ill-natured capricious Spirits, one knows not which way to
deal withal, and of this sort is that which possesses your Daughter; if what we
shall administer might be sufficient, your Majesty should be happy in your
desires, and mine also; but if things prove otherwise, and your Majesty be not
satisfied with my endeavors, I shall submit, and your Majesty may deal with me
as I deserve: in the mean time, I desire your Majesty would give order a
Theater be erected in the Churchyard of Nostre Dame, big enough to receive all
the Nobility and Clergy in the Town: Let this Theater, if your Majesty think
good, be hung with Cloth of Gold, and other rich Stuffs, and an Altar set up
in the middle on Sunday next; I would desire your Majesty to be there, with all
the Princes and Nobility in Paris, and after a grand Mass is sung, let the
Princess be brought also: Besides this, it is necessary there should be twenty
persons at least, with Trumpets, Horns, Drums, Hoboys and Symbals, ready in
some by-place, when I throw up my Cap into the air, to advance toward the
Theater with all the noise they can make; which Music, with some other
ingredients that I have, will I hope send the Devil packing from the Princess:
the King gave order all things should be done as Matteo requested; and Sunday
being come, and the Theater thronged with a multitude of persons of quality,
and the Churchyard of Nostre Dame full of people, the Princess was led in by
two Bishops, and followed by several Lords of the Court; Roderick was in a
terrible amaze, to behold so magnificent a preparation, and pondering with
himself, was overheard to pronounce these words: I would fain know what this
rascally Peasant means to do; I have seen many places, I have more than once
seen the whole pomp of Heaven, nor am I ignorant of what is most formidable in
Hell, yet can I not tell what to make of this* but I Will handle him like a
Rogue, as he is, and if I fall, Pluto requite me; Matteo came up close to him,
and desired him very civilly to depart; but Roderick cried out, Oh the
wondrous cunning that is in you! do you think by this whimsey to save yourself
from my power, and the indignation of the King? but think what you will, you
scoundrel, I am resolved you shall hang for it, or else let me pass for the most
miserable poor-spirited Devil in the World; Matteo persisted in his request,
but Belphegor gave him worse Language than before; but all that frighted not
Matteo, for without losing more time, he threw his hat up into the air, and at
an instant the Trumpets, Horns, and all the rest of the Music struck up, and
advanced toward the Theater; Roderick was startled at the noise, and made it
manifest that there are some Devils as fearful as men, and not able to imagine
the reason, he called out to Matteo, and asked what was the matter? Matteo
being a cunning Rogue every inch of him, as if he had been terribly frighted,
informs him thus: Alas! poor Roderick, says he, it is your Wife Honesta is come
to seek you at Paris; he said no more, but it is not to be imagined what
disorder these four or five words put the Devil into; they took away his wit
and judgment, so as without any consideration, whether the news was possible or
not, without speaking one word, away he stole from the Princess; choosing
rather to go back into Hell, and give up his accounts there, than to return
again into the thraldom of Matrimony, that had already cost him so many sorrows
and dangers. As soon as he arrived, he demanded audience, and in the presence
of Pluto, Aeacus, Minos, and Radamanthus, all of them Counselors of State, he
declared that the Souls of Men were in the right on it, and that 'twas their
Wives that sent them to Hell, Matteo that had been too crafty for the Devil,
returns to Florence in great triumph; the Chronicle mentions not any great
matter the King gave him, but it says, that having gained sufficiently by the
two former, he esteemed himself very happy that he had escaped hanging at Paris.

FINIS.

