A DEFENSE OF THE ANSWER and ARGUMENTS OF THE SYNOD Met at BOSTON in the Year
1662.

Concerning The SVBIECT OF BAPTISM, AND CONSOCIATION OF CHVRCHES.


Against the REPLY made thereto, by the Reverend Mr. JOHN DAVENPORT, Pastor of
the Church at New Haven, in his Treatise Entitled, Another ESSAY for
Investigation of the Truth, etc.

Together with AN ANSWER TO THE APOLOGETICAL PREFACE Set before that ESSAY*

By some of the ELDERS who were Members of the SYNOD abovementioned.

1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things; held fast that which is good.

1 Chronicles. 28.8. Keep and seek for all the Commandments of the Lord ye^^ God,
that ^^ may possess this good Land, and leave it for ^n Inheritance for your
Children after you for ever.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by S. Green and M. Johnson for Hezekiah Usher of Boston.
1664.

(...) never yet been admitted to the Lords Table. Forms ^^ Ratio Ecclesiast.
Minist. in Peregrinor. Ecclesia instituta Lendini, etc. Page 117 -- 123, 135.
with Page 86, 104, 105, 106.

Holy Baynes accounts, that Children are a part of the Church, Dioces. Trial,
page 84. And the Principles pointed to in his Christian Letters; Letter 15.
page 125, 126. and Letter 24. page 199, 202. Edit. 1637. Also in his Exposition
of the Epistle to the Ephesians, on Chap. 1.1. Doct. 5. and on Chap. 2.12. Page
276, 277. and other places, may easily be improved unto a Confirmation of the
Doctrine of the Synod.

Dr. Ames (whom the Preface calls for-ever Famous, Judicious, etc. and that
very deservedly) how large his Judgment is as to the Subject of Baptism, may
be seen by any that have his Cases of Conscience, Lib. 4. Cap. 27. He requires
no more unto the most proper right of a Child to Baptism, but that the Parents
o^ one of them be intra Ecclesiam, within the Church; though he thinks that
others also may be baptized, if any godly persons will undertake for their
Education. And how plainly he holds forth the Doctrine of the Synod in his
Medulla, Lib. 1. Cap. 32. These. 12, 13. and Cap. 40. These. 11, 12, 13. is easy
to be Collected.

We may well here take up the words of worthy Mr. Cotton, in his Preface before
Mr. Nertons Answer to Apollonius, where having named Cartwright, Partus,
Baynes, and Ames, those Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, and Leaders in the
Cause of Reformation, he adds, Ab borum sive vestigiis, sive principiis si
novitatis studio cessimus, jure merito deseremur ut desertores. Quod si in via
illorum ambulamus nec ultra pregredimur (quod ad summam rei attine^) quam ab
illorum Lumine Divinitus collustrati, cert^ non nos illi sumus, qui causam
Reformationis deseruimus, sed illi potius (quos lubens nollem dicere) qui nos
ut Desertores deserunt and de^estantur. So here: If we out of any changeable
Inclinations, or Spirit of Innovation, have departed from the footsteps or
principles of those Blessed Patrons of Reformation (such as were now named, and
others of The good Old Non-Conformists, who both with Prayers, Tears and
Sufferings, and with as much judicious Learning and Piety as the World has yet
seen, have handed down to us the Work and way of Reformation) then let us be,
and well might we be deserted and censured as Desertors or Apostates (as we are
by too many) But if we adhere to the Principles, and tread in the steps of
those Worthies, and go no further then they, or then the Light which God has
communicated by them does lead us, surely we have not deserted nor departed
from the Cause of Reformation; But they rather (though unwillingly we speak it)
who desert and dislike us as Desertors.

The Elders and Messengers of the Congregational Churches in England, in the
Preface to the Result of their meeting at the Savoy, do profess a full
concurrence throughout in all the substantial parts of Church Government with
their Reverend Brethren the Old Puritan Non-Confermists, citing in the Margin
Fox, Dearing, Greenbam, Cartwright, Fenner, Fulk, Whitaker, Reynolds, Perkins,
etc. Now let the Judgment of these (such of them as have left any thing
written about this Question, by which we may judge of the minds of the rest)
be considered; and see if they do not abundantly confirm such ^ Latitude of
Baptism as we plead for. What if our Congregational Brethren in England have
not yet, by reason of the Infancy of their Churches, had so much occasion to
look into this question (as our selves for a long time had not) nor yet so much
need to trouble themselves about the full extent of Baptism, in a place where
there were enough that would baptize those whom themselves left unbaptized? yet
when the Lord shall incline any of those Able and Worthy Persons to set
themselves to the study of this point: why should we think that they will not
be willing to receive Light from, or that they will be willing easily to go
against the Judgments of those Old Non-Conformists, whom they professedly
concurre-with in other parts of Discipline? So much for the Discourse upon the
first Objection.

In Answer to to the Second Objection, The Apologist gives this warning, Let us
not for fear of Anabaptism, do worse, even defile our selves with
Antichristianism. And makes this Profession, We are willing to profess that we
look upon it as great a sin to Baptize all Children, as to baptize to Children.

Ans. 1. We should not choose to put Anabaptism as contradistinct to
Antichristianism. Take Antichristianism for all that which is against Christ
his Mind, Rules and Kingdom, so surely Anabaptism is a part of it. Take it for
the corruptions of the Papacy, how near akin the Doctrines and Principles of
the Papists and Anabaptists are, is showed in a late Preface to Mr. Shepard's
Letter. The Anabaptists are indeed ready enough to call every thing that they
mislike, Antichristian; as if none were Enemies to Antichristianism so much as
they. But if to oppose, obstruct, and undermine the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ, be an Antichristian thing, let Scripture, Reason, and Experience speak,
whether their Tenants and Ways be not highly Antichristian. Does not their
cutting off so great a part of the Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, as the
Children of the Faithful are ( Mat. 19.14.) their changing the Frame of the
Covenant, whereby his vi^^ble Kingdom in his Church is constituted and
continued, etc. give (though secretly, and under plausible pretenses) a most
deep and dangerous Wound to the Interest and Progress of Christ's Kingdom? And
has not Experience showed Anabaptism (with its wonted concomitant Errors) to
be the Vexation and Clog of Reformation ever since the beginning of it.

2. To speak here of baptizing the children of Infidells and Pagans, as if any
did incline to that, would be a strange absurdity: but if by [ All Children] be
meant the Children of All that are named Christians, though we think it too
great a L^xness to baptize all such, yet we are past doubt, that so to do is
far nearer the Rule and Mind of Christ, when he says [ Dis^ple (...)
Nations, baptizing them] then to baptize no Children. Let us be far from
making Bucan, Zanchy, Calvin, Perkins, and many other Eminent and Worthy
Divines, who are for such a Latitude of baptizing, to be equally erroneous with
the Anabaptists. Let no one make it a Temptation to himself or others, to run
to Antip^^d^baptism, because he hears the Assertors of Infant Baptism plead for
a greater Latitude of Baptism then he thinks is (or perhaps then indeed is)
meet. Error in particular Applications of the Rule, is far less then error
in a Principle. Anabaptism erres in a Principle, and principal Rule of
Church-constitution. And he that narrowly observes the frame of Christ's Rules
and Dispensations about this matter, will find much of that Maxim in them,
Faveres sunt ampliandi. We see the Lord takes in the Children as Holy, if but
one of the Parents be a Believer; he appoints us to Recei^e the weak, as well
as the strong. We find not that the Apostles refused any that were willing to
come in, and to be Subjects of Christ's visible Kingdom: neither are persons or
people utterly Broken off from a portion in the visible Church, till after all
means and long patience used, etc. As if Christ studied the Enlargement of his
visible Kingdom among men ( i. e. as much as may be with the honor or his
Holiness and Government) rather then the straitning thereof. Many Pious-minded
persons among us are very fearful of Enlarging, and of Corruption that way: But
why should we not also be afraid of grieving the heart of Christ ( Mark 10.14)
by too much straitning, and by keeping or putting out those whom Christ takes
in? For we may not take away or diminish from the Word of God, no more then we
may add thereto, Deuteronomy. 12.32. The Lord keep us from extremes on either hand,
and guide us in the right middle way that is according to his will. But the
Preface goes on;

Neither can we plead Guilty unto that Charge, That we deny all
Church Membership unto any In^ants; we only deny that they are Personal and
Immediate Members. Indeed as personal Membership is taken subjectiv^ly, It is
no very good sign of truth, when there are many curious, nice, and dark
distinctions used to defend a thing (...) Enerv. Tom. 2. l. 6. cap. 5 quest
ult. And his Fresh Suit, par. 1. page 63, 83, 134 -- 138.
so we say it is in Infants, i. e. their persons are Recipients of the Ad^unct
of Church membership: But as personal Membership is taken formally, i. e. for
such as have by them, ^^tes in their own persons entered into Covenant with God
and his People, so Infants are not capable of personal Church Membership.

Ans. it is pity to clog and cloud the plain things of Car^^^ with intricate
distinctions, which do rather bemist and puzzle the Readers understanding, then
enlighten it. One would think it should suffice men to know that their Children
are (by the Lordsrich grace and appointment) in their own persons within the
Covenant, and so Members of the Church, without disputing whether they be so
subjectively or f^rmally, etc. And should such distinctions pass for current,
what other use they would be of, we know not; but sure we are, they would do
great service to the Anabaptists, though we believe that is not the Intendment
of our Brethren, to comply with, or build up Anabaptism. But we are not now
speaking to Intentions or Persons, but to Arguments and Distinctions in
themselves; considered. For, suppose one give this Argument for Infant Baptism
(and indeed we know not a better) Members of the visible Church are to be
baptized: Infants of Confederate Parents are Members of the visible Church:
Ergo. How readily may it be answered, that Personal and Immediate Members (or
they that have personal Membership formally) are to be baptized; but not
Mediate and Not-personal Members, or they that have it (not formally, but)
subjectively only. We have known an Antipoedebaptist fly to this as his
Sheat-Anchor [ Infants are Members; ^ut how? Why, not personal Members, but
Members in their parents; and so let them be baptized (mediately) in their
parents, and not in their own persons.] And indeed, why should the Seal of
Membership be immediately and formally applied to their own persons, if they be
not in their own persons Immediate and formal (or formally) Members?

But let us search a little into this Distinction between Personal Membership
as taken subjectively, and the same as taken formally, and see what there is in
it, with reference to the matter in hand. For, that Children are personal and
immediate Members, is asserted and proved by the Synod, but denied by our
Brethren: And this Distinction is here brought to bear up that Denial, or to
tell us in what sense they deny personal Membership to Infants. It was
sometimes roundly denied, that Infants are personal Members; now it is denied
with a Distinction: They are personal Members (say they) subjectively, but not
formally.

Answ. 1. If Infants be Members, they are formally so: for, Forma est per quam
res est id quod est. If we say, Such an one is a Man, a Father, a Master, etc.
we must mean that he is formally a man, or has the form of a man, etc. He is
not a Member, that has not the form of a Member. To say he is a Member, and to
deny him the form of a Member, is to say and unsay.

2. It is here said, that, As personal Membership is taken subjectively, so it
is in Infants, i. e. their persons are Recipients of the Adjunct of
Church Membership. We demand, whether this does not fully yield the Cause, and
give us as much as we need to the matter in hand? For, if the person of the
Infant be Recipient of the Adjunct of Church Membership, then of formal
Church Membership (it is not Church Membership, if it want the form) then
formal (or proper) Church Membership, does cleave to the person of the Infant;
then the person of this Infant is formally a Churchmember, or, He is a
personal formal Member. He needs no more to render him a personal formal Member
(or formally a personal Member) then to have the Adjunct of Church Membership
upon him, or cleaving to his person. For Membership (as all such (...)
relations, Fatherhood, Sonship, etc.) is but an Adjunct; it enters not into the
Essence of any man, but cleaves to him as an Adjunct. And so no man is more
then subjectively a Member (the most formally personal Member that is, is but
subjectively a Member in this sense) i. e. He is a subject Recipient of
Membership, or one that has the Adjunct of Membership cleaving to him. If
therefore the person of the Infant be Recipient of the Adjunct of
Church Membership, then he is a personal formal Member, or formally a personal
Member, for his person has the form of Membership upon it, or cleaving to it.

3. When it is said, [ But as personal Membership is taken form^lly, i. e. for
such as have by themselves in their own persons entered into Covenant with God
and his People, so Infants are not capable of personal Membership] What Logic
is this, to put the Efficient for the Form, or to make it a part thereof? It is
wont to be said, Efficiens non ingreditur Essentiam. The act of Covenanting on
our part, whereby we are brought into the Church, is but an Efficient (yea, but
an instrumental Efficient: the Book calls it a Precrean: cause, page 37. that
is still but an Efficient: yet consider it in contradistinction to Divine
Institution, it can but instrumentally procreate) But the form, or formalis
Ratio of Membership, is to be within the Covenant, or within the Church, 1 Cor.
5.12. Whatever causality our Act in pro^essing and Covenanting do contribute to
bring us in, it can be but an Efficient. And hence it does not denominate or
constitute the formality of our Membership.

Object. But [Formally] here is referred to personal, not to membership.

Ans. If so it be, yet still the same Answers hold, unless it mean no more then
every one grants, and so be nothing to the purpose. If the meaning only be
that Infants do not enter into Covenant by an act of their own proper persons;
who ever said or thought they did? what need we labor in finding out
distinctions to deny them that which no body ever challenged for them? or to
what purpose is that? But the Question is, Whether Infants be not personal
members (or personally and formally members) although they never yet put forth
an Act of covenanting in their own persons? we affirm it, because they have the
form of Membership (or the adjunct of formal membership) cleaving to their own
persons by Divine Institution. And so we say they are personally, and formally
Members, though they have not yet acted any thing in their own proper persons.
You seem to deny it, and bring a distinction to clear your meaning: the former
Branch of which distinction, as your selves explain it, grants the thing that
we plead for; the latter Branch, as you also explain it, denies no more then we
deny, viz. That they enter by their own proper personal Act. But the mistake
lies in making this [viz. Entering by ones own proper Act] to be formally
personal membership: whereas that is formally personal membership, that does
formally and properly constitute the person a member; and so, [ Being within
the Covenant] does the Infants in question, though they never yet acted in
their own persons. The distinction should rather stand thus; As personal
membership is taken properly and formally, so it agrees to Infants; i. e. their
persons are Recipients of the adjunct of proper formal Church Membership, but
as personal membership is taken improperly (and very improperly indeed) i. e.
for the membership of such as have by themselves or by their own personal
profession entered into Covenant, so Infants are not capable of personal
membership. Thus it might be granted. But why should we use personal membership
in so improper a sense, or insist on a sense that touches not the cause in
question? The sum is, that if by [ Personal membership taken formally] be meant
only, entering by their own proper personal act, then the distinction is
needless and not ad Rem. But if it be meant so as to deny what we affirm, then
it is overthrown by your selves in the former Branch. Grant them to be personal
Members subjectively, you therein grant them to be so formally: deny them
personal membership formally, you deny it subjectively. These do mutuo so
ponere and tollere, being used in any sense that is proper and pertinent to the
present Dispute. But consider whether it would sound rationally to say, that
Paul was not formally a personal Roman (or not formally a Roman freeman in his
own person) because he did not buy his freedom with his own money; or that a
Child who has an Inheritance left him, is not formally a personal owner
thereof, because himself did not purchase it: or, that Infants are personal
Subjects in such a Kingdom, Members of such a Family, subjectively only, not
formally, because they did not become such by their own previous personal act.
These and such like show how improper and incongruous it is, to make ones own
personal act to be that which constitutes the formality of personal membership.

Preface. It Is strange to us to conceive, that they should have this personal
formal membership, and yet that they should not be Subjects capable of formal
personal Censures.

Ans. They are capable in regard of their Relation and state in the Church,
though not in regard of natural Capacity, nor in regard of demerit; for an
Infant cannot Ecclesiastically deserve public Censure. It is not strange to
conceive Infants to be Subjects of such a Prince, though at present incapable
of civil Trials and punishments. It suffices that Infant-members are in a state
of subjection to Church Discipline, and engaged thereto for afterward, though
at present naturally incapable of the exercise thereof. The new born Infant is
not capable of Domestical Discipline (either Rod or Rebuke) but that hinders
not his being a formal personal Member of the Family.

Preface. We neither do, nor ever did deny, that, the persons of Infants of
believing confederate Parents, are brought under the Covenant, only we
conceive that their membership is conjunct with, and dependent upon the
Membership and Covenant of their Parents, so as to live and dye therewith --
Hence when the Parents are Excommunicated, the membership of the Infant-childe
is cut off* because Excommunication puts an end to the outward Covenant (which
Death it self does not do) and if the Root be destroyed, the Branches cannot
live.

Ans. That the childs membership depends upon the membership of the Parent, as
the Instrumental Cause or Condition of the childs first Entrance into the
Church, or becoming a Member, we readily grant (because Divine Institution
admits only the Children of Members to be Members) and so much Mr. Cottons
words here all^dged in the Preface do truly teach. But that the childs
membership is so wrapped up in the membership of the Parent, as to live and dye
therewith, as if it had no proper and distinct membership of its own, is surely
a deep mistake, and will (if followed) overthrow that subjective personal
membership before granted unto Infants, and that which is here also owned, viz.
that their persons are brought under the Covenant: If the persons of the
Infants be brought under the Covenant, then their persons are within the
Covenant, or their persons are Confederate, then not only the person of the
Parent, but the person of the child has the formality of membership upon it.
And as the person of the child in regard of its natural being, though for the
first existence thereof it depended under God upon the Parent, yet when once it
is born into the World, it is not so conjunct with, and dependent upon the
person of the Parent, as to live and dye therewith; so why should the
membership of the child be thus dependent? seeing the Book (to which this
Preface is prefixed) affirms, p 37. that the Parent is a procreant Cause, as
of the Childe^ natural Being by his generating him, so also of his
Church Membership by his confederating for him, and this by Gods Institution.
And seeing the person of the Child has a membership of its own affixed to it
(as the foresaid grants import) and that from God (from Gods Covenant and
Institution) as well as the person of the Parent; why should we say, that the
membership of the Child does after this, depend upon the Membership or
Covenant of the Parent, and not rather upon Gods Covenant and Institution, so
as to live and dye according to the Order and appointment thereof, and not
otherwise? hence the Membership wherewith the person of the Child is clothed
by Gods Institution, dies not till either the person of the Child dye, or till
by some Institution and Appointment of God he be cut off from his Membership
for his own sin. Neither must it be yielded, that the Excommunication of the
Parent, does properly and formally cut off the Infant-childe that was born
before such Excommunication. We say, properly and formally, for Consequentially
and Eventually it may bring the Child to be cut off also; as in case the
Parent desperately go away from the Church among Heretics and Infidels, and
bring up the Child to serve other Gods: But so it may be with a wife carried
away by such an Husband, yet that does not hinder her from having a personal,
distinct, proper and immediate Membership, nor make his cutting off to be hers
also. But suppose a Parent and Children that live and continue among us; the
Parent having a company of Children, all in their minority, is for his
wickedness cast out, and continuing impenitent, dies in that estate: to say
that all these Children (who were Born and Baptized in the Church) are cut off
from Membership hereby, is a strange Assertion.

For 1. This would make an Infant-childe to be a subject of Excommunication,
which was before (and in regard of natural capacity and demerit, rightly)
denied.

2. If a Parent in Israel was for his sin cut off from his people, were the
Children that he left behind him therefore excluded from the Commonwealth of
Israel? to be sure, in Crimes, capitally punished (of which cutting off from
their People is sometimes plainly meant, Exodus 31.14, 15. Levit. 17.4. and
18.29. and 20.18.) the Child was not to dye for the Fathers sin, Deuteronomy. 24.16.
2 Chronicles. 25.4. Ier. 31.30. Ezekiel. 18.20. and is there not the like reason of
other punishments, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil? yea, that cutting off from
their People appointed in the Law, is conceived by judicious Interpreters to be
in some places most properly meant of an Ecclesiastical Death, Vid. Rivet. in
Genes. 17.14.
or cutting off from the People and Church of God by Excommunication; But
however, it held a proportion with Excommunication now under the Gospel. The
Child may be barred from a Right or Privilegde that he never had, by the sin
or condition of the Parent: so H^athen Children are unclean and without,
because their Parents are so. (Hence Children born after the Parents
Excommunication are not of the Church:) But to be deprived of a Right or
Privilege which ^e once ^ad, and was possessed of (which is the case of
Children formerly born in the Church, and owned as Members by the seal of
Baptism) this has in it the nature of a proper formal Punishment or Censure,
and this is inflicted upon none but for his own sin. A Parent Civilly or
Naturally dead, cannot after that bring forth Children to the Commonwealth; nor
can a Parent Ecclesiastically dead (he so continuing) bring forth Children to
the Church. But the Children that are already Members of the one Society or of
the other, are not to be cut off therefrom for their Parents sin.

3. That, If the Root be destroyed, the Branches cannot live, is a truth in
nature of Branches growing on the same Tree: But if these Branches be taken and
set upon a St^ck and Root of their own, (though but as in a Nursery) then they
do not die when the old Tree dies, or is cut up by the Roots. And so is the
Case in hand. These Children are inserted and implanted into the Church, the
Body of Christ, in their own persons (as was but now granted, when it was said,
The persons of these Infants do. receive the Adjunct of of Church Membership,
and that their persons are ^rought under the Covenant) and have so far taken
root therein, as to receive (not from their Parents, but from the Church, and
from the Soil and Fa^ness thereof) the Sap and Nourishment of Baptism, which is
also a Seal of the establishment or rooting of their Membership. Branches
included and contained in the Root (as Children yet unborn, or not born till
after Excommunication) are broken off (or rather left without) together with
their Parents: But not such Branches as are already severed from the Root, and
planted in the House of God, in the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, as through
the grace of the Covenant our Children are, Isa. 5.7.

4. That Death does not put an end to the outward Covenant, which
Excommunication does, is a Notion that we understand not: We should have
thought that outward Membership (or Membership in the visible instituted
Church) as well as the use of all outward Ordinances, Ames. Medul. Lib. 1. cap.
41. These. 7.
or instituted Wor^hip, had everlastingly ceased at Death. The Ends, Duties and
Enjoyments of outward Membership, do then cease, and so the Membership it self.
The Lord knows how many may from outward Membership in the visible Church, drop
to Hell; and does not their Death put an end to their Membership? And if Death
put an end to outward Membership, it puts an end to outward Covenant in the
sense of the Question, i. e. as to the person that dies. Indeed it does not
hinder the continuance of the Covenant to others that are in Covenant, and are
surviving: And neither does Excommunication so do. But the person of the Parent
loses his Membership in the visible Church when he dies, as well as when he is
Excommunicated. And hence if the Membership of the Child did live and die with
the Membership of the Parent, there would be a Cessation of it in the one case,
as well as in the other. A Parents Faith, Prayers, and Covenant may live,
though hi^ self be dead: But how? i. e. Virtually, in the virtue and effect of
them: And how is that? why, the promise made by God to the Faith, Prayers, and
Profession (or Covenanting) of a godly Parent, that lives, and abides, and
takes effect. So then it is neither the Parent, nor his Membership, but Gods
Covenant that lives, taking in the Children that are begotten or born of
Confederate Parents, to be Members of his visible Church, and so continuing
them, till by some Rule or Appointment of his they be cut off. In like manner,
though the Parent by his sin and wickedness have deprived himself of a portion
in Israel, and be cut off by the Censure of Excommunication; yet the Covenant
of God lives, and stands to the Children whom he had before taken into
Covenant, and planted in his House. To call it The Covenant of their Parents,
and to say that Childrens Membership is dependent upon that, is too crude a
p^r^se, and too much abused by many, ascribing that to the Parents, and to
their Profession (or Act in Covenanting) which belongs most properly to God,
and his Grace. It Is Gods Covenant that takes in both Parents and Children.
Alas, what are Parents! and what could all their Profession, and Faith, and
Actings do, if God did not vouchsafe to take them into Covenant? Now God takes
the Child into his Covenant, as well as the Parent: And it is Gods Covenant and
Institution that the Membership of the Chide depends upon, and with which alone
it l^ves and dies. But it follows in the Preface:

True it is, that we have made much use of that Distinction of Immediate and
Mediate Members* which seems to us to carry a mighty and constraining Evidence
of Scripture Light along with it, etc.

Ans. We must needs say this seems strange to us, when as there is not so much
as one Scripture brought (either here, or in the Book following) to make good
or hold forth such a Distinction. In stead of Scriptures, here are some Authors
straight named, not to Attest the Distinction of Immediate and Mediate. (it
see^s that cannot be found, no not so much as in Authors) but of Complete and
Incomplete. To which the Answer is ready:

1. If some Authors have so distinguished Members, yet where is such a
distinction of Membership? at least purposely so intended, as to mak^ several
sorts or kinds of Membership specifically differing, as is expressly said of
the Distinction here pleaded for in the Book, page 37. Dr* Ames, in the place
here cited* does not say of Infants. Non sunt (...) Membra, but Perfecta
Membra: Neither does he say, Non sunt perfecta, but Non sunt adeo perfecta
Membra: They are not so perfect Members (says he) of the Church, as that they
can exercise acts of Communion, or be admitted to partake of all the
Privileges thereof: Plainly referring the Imperfection or Incompleatness, not
to the Essence of their Membership, but to the Degree of their Communion and
Privileges. Hence,

2. Their Distinction of Members into Complete and Incomplete, is (being
heartily taken) as much as our Distinction of Members into such as are in ^ull
(or complete) Communion, and such as are not yet in full Communion; which
Distinction we have (and we hope justly) made great use of. And for such a
distinction Re^^ipsa loquitur. All that are within (of, or belonging to) such a
Society, whether Family, Commonwealth, or Church, are truly and properly said
to be Members of that Society; but all are not equal in participation of
Privileges therein: Some have a more full (or complete) (...) and portion
therein, and some have less. All Christ's Scholars (or Disciples) are not of the
Highest Form; nor are all his Subjects betrusted with the Keys of his
Kingdom; nor all his Children past their Nonage, etc. But yet they are all
Disciples in his School, Subjects of his Kingdom, Children of his Family, i.
e. Members o^ the visible Church. But such a Distinction as makes several
sorts of Membership specifically different, we have not yet seen cleared and
confirmed, either from Scripture, or Authors, or from sound Reason. Sundry
distinctions or sorts of Members, might easily be given; as, Some Members are
in Office in the Church, some out of Office; some partake of the Lords Supper,
but not of the power of Voting, (as Women) some of both; some have only
Initial Privileges, some All. ( Ames Medul. Lib 1. Cap 32. These. ^ 3.) But
these are but distributions ex Adjunctis, and do not touch or vary the Essence
of Membership, nor make several sorts thereof. Nor do these Distinctions and
Degrees of Members in the Church, arise simply from the nature of Membership,
or from any difference therein, but from something superadded unto Membership:
As an Officer is not more a Member then another; but his dignity and place in
the Church arises from somewhat superadded unto Membership, viz. His Office. A
man is not more a Member then a woman, though he has a power and privilege in
the Church (besides and above bare Membership) which the woman has not. So men
and women that partake of the Lords Table, are not more (or more truly,
properly, immediately and personally) Members of the Church, then Children are;
but they having attained to more and further qualifications, (or to a greater
degree of growth in the Church) are by Rule admitted to mor Privileges then
they Thus in a Kingdom or Commonwealth, there are many sorts of Subjects: some
bear Office, some not; some admitted to Election of Officers, some not; some
capable of Pleading and answering for themselves in Law, some are not: But yet
they all agree in the relation of a Subject. And who ever made a specifical
distinction of that, so as to say (in that sense) some are Mediate Subjects,
and some Immediate? The same may be said of a Family, where the youngest Child
is as truly, properly, personally and immediately a Member of the Family, as
the most grown person, though as to power and privileges therein there be a
vast difference. So in the Natural Body: All the parts are not an Eye, an Hand,
etc. but all are Members; and the meanest part is as well a Member, as the most
noble, 1 Cer. 12. 12 -- 25. Now there is the like reason, as to the general
nature of Membership, in ^ Church-Society, which is set forth by that of a
Kingdom. Fa^^ly, and of the Natural body, in the holy Scriptures. And so much
for the Discourse upon the second Objection.

In the third place, our Brethren set down this Position or Opinion, as that
which is objected against them, That a person who is a Churchmember may become
no Member by an act or defect of his own, without any Church-act in Censuring
of him: and to (...) is they say, most true it is that we do maintain this. And
for Proo^ ther^ ^f* they suppo^e (...) of an English Fugitive, of one turned
Turk, who was never Censured by any Church.

Ans. The Position objected against them, if it be pertinent to the matter in
hand, must run thus; That a person who is a Churchmember may become no Member
by an a^^ or defect of his own, without any Church-act in Censuri^g of hi^ and
without (...) Censure on his part; or though he do not so much as deserve any
Church-censure, and be not censurable by any Rule of Gods Word. For so the
words ^f the Synod ^ in defense of the Controverted fifth Proposition) do
expressly speak, putting that as an (...) that A person admitted Member, and
Sealed by Baptism, not cast out, nor deserving so to be, may (the Church
whereof he was, still remaining) become a Non-member, and out of the Church,
and of the unclean world, page 26. Now put but this into the Objection here
mentioned [ Without desert of Church-censure] which is manifestly the case of
the persons described in the Synods fifth Proposition; and then all the
discourse in Answer to this Objection (wherein not a little confidence and
spirit is expressed) falls to the ground as not reaching the case in hand;
though besides there are sundry mistakes in it as may after appear. For,
suppose it should be granted, that in Churches where Discipline is not in use,
and in a case notorious, wherein a person does apparently lose the Essentials
of Christianity (as by turning Turk or the like) a man may be cut off from
Membership by his own Apostacy and Wickedness, though the Church did not
(through her sinful neglect) formally censure him. Yet this on the other hand
is also a sure and clear Truth, that no act of a man's own, will or can cut him
off from Membership, but that which deserves a cutting off by censure, and for
which the Church should cut him off by censure if she did her Duty. This is
plain, because when a man is once in the Church, he cannot be outed, till God
out him: God does not out him, till some Rule or appointment of his in his word
does out him: but there is no Rule that appoints any man to be put out of the
visible Church, or made as an Heathen and Publican, but for and upon such
wickedness of his as is Censurable by the Church; and in that case the Rule
does appoint and enjoin the Church to Censure him, or to put him away from
among them by censure, Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.5, 13. When some Divines do so
speak as if persons might be broken off from the Church without a formal
Censure in some extraordinary cases; the meaning is, not that a man does by his
own wickedness, be it never so notorious, immediately so become Felo de se, or
Vn-member himself, as that the Church has nothing to do with him to Censure
him; yes, she may and ought to censure him for his wickedness and Apostasy; and
so if a Churchmember turn Turk or Papist, the Church to which he belongs ought
to lay him under Censure for it. And for such a one to be a Member till
Censured, i. e. A rotten Member fit to be cut off, is no contradiction nor
absurdity. See Mr. Cottons Holiness of Church Members, page 15. His words are
these: Any such notorious offender (having named Athiests, Mockers of Religion,
Witches, Idolaters, Papists) may have the essence and being of a member of the
Church, as visit ^e, to wit, in this sense, a corrupt and rotten member, fit to
be cut off. A member of the visible Church (though formerly an in offensive
professor of the faith) may afterward fall away into any of these notorious
scandals, and yet for a while still retain the essence and being of a member of
the Church as visi^le, to wit, till the Church have orderly proceeded against
him; otherwi^e the Church should want power to proceed to the excommunication
of such a notorious delinquent. For what has the Church to do to judge men
without? 1 Cor. 5.12. But such within the Church are to be cast out, 1 Cor.
5.11.
And did all Churches in the world do their duty, there should no man living,
that ever was a Member of a Church yet in Being, be looked upon as a
Non-member, but he that is so Censured on Excommunicated, at least unless some
extraordinary and rare circumstances of a case do render the Churches
cognizance thereof impossible. But the meaning only is, that where men have
palpably and notoriously lost the Essentials of Christianity, And a Church,
through the sinful want or neglect of Discipline, never looks after them (only
by her Doctrine declares against such) but happily continues in that neglect from
age to age, there the Notoriousness of the Case, and the Evidence of the Rule,
does supply the defect of a Judicial Sentence, and the Churches Doctrinal
Declaration may be looked at as an implicit Excommunication. And hence other
Churches may justly carry toward such as Non-members: And hence also in the day
of the Reformation of such Churches, after deep and long-continued Corruptions,
such persons may be set by without a formal Censure. But what is all this to
the Children of our Churches? who being admitted in minority, in stead of
notorious Wickedness and Apostasy, when grown up, do in some measure own the
God and Covenant of their fathers, and are neither cast out, nor deserve so to
be; whom no Rule in all the Scripture appoints to be put out of the visible
Church: And hence they stand and continue Regular (i. e. according to the
Appointment and Allowance of the Rule) Members of it, being neither
Excommunicate, nor by Rule to be Excommunicated. Where shall we find either
Scripture or sound Reason to tell us, that these have cut themselves off from
Membership, or are n^w become Non-members?

But to come to a plain and distinct close in this matter, we assert this
Position:

That in Churches wa^^ing in the Order of the Gospel, and Exercising Discipline
according to the Rules thereon, no person can (while he lives among them)*
cease to be a Member of the visible Church but by Excommunication, or, without
a Church-act in Censuring him with the Censure of Excommunication. The sum of
the Proof of this, is, Because we find this way of cessation of Membership (
viz. By Excommunication) plainly prescribed and appointed by the Lord in
Scripture: And we find not any other, while the Church and the person
continues in Being [See a more particular Proof of it in the Preface to Mr.
Shepard's Treatise of Chur^h-membership of Children, lately Published] But if
any do affirm there is another way, it lies on them to show and prove it. Let
us now consider whether that be done by all that is here further said.

Preface. When Whitgift said, That Papists and Atheists might still remain
Members of the visible Church, Mr. Parker tells him, That even a Veritius would
condemn him. And it is no new Doctrine in the S^hools, to say, that, An
Heretical Apostate is no more a Member of the Church of Christ, then a Wound, a
S^re, a Brand, is a member of a man; as every one knows that is mediocriter
doctus in Scholasii^al Divinity. Therefore we conclude, That Church Members may
become no Members by their own defection.

Ans. Surely he that is but medi^criter doctus in Sch^lastical or ^^emical
Divinity, may easily know that here is the show of an Argument, or of Authority
of Writers, wit^ out the substan^e of either. For, when our Divines against the
Papists do so often over say, that Wicked or Unregenerate persons are but
equivocally or improperly Members of the Church, as Nails, Ha^r, Sores, and
superflu^us Hu ^urs, or as a wooden Leg. a glass Eye, etc. are members of the
living Body of a man; they mean it properly, with reference to the invisible
mystical Church, or to the visible Church considered in its internal spiritual
living state Eadem Eeclesia and pies habet secum^^^ forma ^ interat^^ ad se
pertinentes, and impies atque hypocritas se undum extenam adnascentes. Jun.
Animad. in Bellarm. p. 1113.
, not with reference to men's external standing (or Membership) in the visible
Church: Nor did they ever dream that men are by the want of internal gracious
qualifications cut off from Membership in the visible Church, without any
Church-censure. It is well known, that they reckon Hypocrites and secretly
unregenerate persons (as well as ^eretical Apostates, or the openly-wicked) to
be but equivocaliy of the Church ( viz. in ^omparison and contradistinction to
the true and living members of the Body of Christ; and as ^aul di^tinguishes
between Israel, and them that are of Israel, Romans 9.6. and says, He is not a
Jew, i. e. not a Jew indeed, and accepted in the sight of God, who is ^ut
outwar^ly ^n^, Romans 2.28, 29.) But would you therefore say, that a close
Hypocrite un^e^bers hims^l^, and f^lls out of the visible Church without any
Church-censure? In the place here cited out of Parker de Pelit. Eccles. lib. 3.
cap. 16. page 169. Verstius condemns Bellarmine, because he affirmed such -- (
ad Ecclesias Christi propri^ dic^am reuera pertinere) to be indeed of the true
Church. How strangely is this misapplied to the matter in hand It might afford
Parker an Argument as to ( manifestarii peccatores) the notoriously wicked that
they should not be tolerated in the Church, but (as excrementiti^us things) be
purged out by the vigorous, use of Discipline, as he there discourses: but it
touches not our question.
? as if one should say, that all that want true saving. Faith have lo^t their
Church Membership without any Censure, and then allege for the Proof of it the
Protestants Doctrine, that the true mystical or Catholic Church consists only
of Elect Believers: how evident is it that this is not at Rem?

For, as for an External Membership in the Church (which is the matter that we
have in hand) what is more known, then that all our Divines do unanimously
acknowledge it to be the portion of multitudes that have not s^ving Gra^e? and
that even such as have been born and brought up in the Church, if they fall
into manifest incorrigible wickedness, they should be removed out of the Church
by Excommunication; but otherwise they are still within; although many of them
be destitute of those inward qualifications that should render them living and
true Members of the Church mystical. Falsum est (says Dr. Ames, Bell. Enerv.
Tom 2. Lib 2. Cap. 1.) Internas vir^utes requir^ (i. e. absolute requiri) a
nobis ut aliquis sit in ecclesia quoad visiblem ejus statum. And see Ames Med.
L^b. 1. Cap. 32. These. 11. They that are Christians by proffession only (says
Iunius) are truly of the Church, according to the external consideration
thereof, though not according to the internal, wherein ^es the truth of
Christianity. Animad. in Bellar. de Eccles. Cap. 10. Art. 28. And in Cap. 9.
Art 1. he says, We acknowledge there be griev^^ sinners in this ( viz the
visible) Church, in which if they were not* we should in vain trouble our
selves about their Correcti^n and Excommunication; vid. Calvin. institut. Lib.
4. Cap. 1. Sect. 7, 9, 13. Polan. (...). Lib. 7. Cap. 8. But it were a needless
labor to cite many Testimonies in so manifest a case. When Whitgift had said,
that the Church is full of wicked persons Drunkards, Idolaters, Papists,
Atheists etc Cartwr^ght Answers him (as Pa^ker in the very place here quoted
notes) that, that was because the Discipline of Christ was not (...); ^^ewing
that he would have even such not to be left to their own self-felony (if, being
Church Members they fall to such evils) but to be cut off by Christ's appointed
Discipline. And Cartwright in his second Reply, Part. 1. p. 246. upon that in 1
Cor. 5.11. among other passages has these words, It is one case of him that
has given his name to the Gospel, and afterward slideth from that profession
to Idolatry; and another of him that never gave it, but has been from his
Infancy an Idolater; for the first cannot be severed from the Church without
solemn Sentence of Excommunication, see also Page 242, 247, 248. But the
Preface adds:

And we humbly conceive that thus much is held forth by these Scriptures, Heb.
10.25. 1 John 2.19. Jud. 19.

Ans. That the sin of those who forsake Church Assemblies, separate themselves
from them, wander into ways of Heresy and Apostasy, is grievous (and
consequently calls for Church-admonition, and incorrigibleness therein for
excommunication) this may be gathered from those Scriptures; but to gather
thence, that such forsakers, separatisie and wanderers, do thereby become
Non-members, so as that the Church should not, need not, or may not follow them
with any Censure, is a strange Collection; and would (if granted) at once
overthrow all Discipline. For what is more easy then for an offender to
forsake the Assembly, to separate himself, etc? and then the Church shall have
no more to do with him; so the process of Discipline appointed in Mat. 18.
should never take place. What though there be no mention of Church-censure in
the Texts alleged? must we bind the Holy Ghost to mention all Truths and
Rules together in one Text or Context? what the sin of such persons is, those
Texts show; but what Discipline is to be used to Church-sinners, this is held
forth in other Scriptures. If the Apostle in 1 Job. 2.19. have reference to
Ebion and Cerinthus, and such like Heretics (as is commonly conceived: vid.
Magdeburg. Centur. 1. Lib. 2. p. 485) surely he was not without care to have
due Testimony by Church-censure born against them, yea when as he does so
strictly enjoin all Christians absolutely to avoid them, 2 John ver. 7 -- 10.
does not that import an injunction to the Churches unto which they did belong,
to Excommunicate them, if they had not already done it? as when Paul forbids
them to eat with such an one, 1 Cor. 5.11. he means it, as a consequent upon
(and so implying an injunction of) Church-censure. vid. Dickson in a These 3.14.
and in Romans 16.17. and in 2 Timothy 3 5.

Preface. Again, how came Esau to lose his Membership? We read not that he was
excommunicate, therefore it remains that he discovenanted, and so dis-Membered
himself. And how came the Children of Abraham by Keturah to lose their
Membership? It was not by Censure.

Ans. 1. Should We thus Reason, you would call for Gospel-Rules and Proofs;
which we may with more reason do in this case, because proper Excommunication
is plainly and expressly ordained under the Gospel: Concerning the use of which,
there is not so much clearness in the Old Testament. 2. The particular
extraordinary Revelation of Gods mind concerning Esau, together with his being
denied the Patriarchal Blessing, of which the Apostle says [ He was rejected]
Heb. 12.17. may well be looked at as equivalent to an ordinary Excommunication
under the Gospel. 3. The Posterity of Abraham by Keturah, did in process of
time lose their Membership, by losing the Essentials of true Religion; and to
expect personal Excommunication, when a whole People falls away to Idolatry,
and so becomes Lo-am^^, is a vain thing. But it is a great mistake to think
that the particular persons mentioned in Genes. 25.2, 3, 4. yea or their next
generations did cease to be Members of the visible Church. They were
Providentially removed out of the Land of Canaan, which was reserved for
Israel, and were permitted by degrees to lose Religion, which was by Promise to
be continued and established in the line of Isaac and Jacob, so as that in the
time of Moses (the Nations being by that time generally fallen to Idolatry)
Religion and Worship was so fixed in the Nation and Church of Israel, as that
all that would serve God aright must become Proselytes to it, which before that
time was not necessary. But Religion and Salvation, and consequently
Church Membership, according to the Domestic way of administration then used,
did for a considerable time continue among the Children of Abraham by Keturah,
as the story of Job intimates; he and his Friends being justly conceived to
have been partly of that Stock. And concerning Iethro, who was of Midian, and
so of Keturah, see Rivet on Exodus 2. and on Exodus 18.12.

Preface. In like sort when persons under the Gospel do not come up to the
terms of the Covenant, to show themselves to be Abraham's Children, by holding
forth his Faith, and walking before the Lord in simplicity and Goaly sincerity,
we suppose that they are justly deemed breakers of the Covenant, and have
justly put themselves out of that Covenant which their Parents made for them.

Ans. 1. The persons in question (i. e. the persons described in the Synods
fifth Proposition) do in some degree hold forth their Faith and godly walking,
while they are professed Christians, or professed Believers and followers of
the Truth and Ways of God, wherein they have been educated from their Inf^ncy;
do constantly attend the Ordinances and Worship of God; live under, and do not
cast off the Government of Christ in his Cour^^, and when called thereto do
readily profess their Assent to the Doctrine of Fai^^, and Consent to the
Covenant: Do these (putting all this together) in no sort show themselves to be
Abraham's Children, by holding forth the Faith of Abraham and walking in his
steps, i. e. in Charitable and Ecclesiastical Reputation? Surely Mr. Cotton
accounts such as these (yea all the Children of the Faithful that do not grow
up to Apostasy and open Scandal, or that are not excommunicable) to continue in
a visible profession of the Covenant, Faith and Religion of their Fathers; as
in those passages of his that are pointed to in the Preface the l^^e Synod may
be seen. And where shall we find ground in all the Scripture to exclude such
as these from being within the compass of the visible Church, or the Covenants
thereof?

2. If the meaning be, that they do not yet hold forth such an Experimental
work of Faith, or lively discerning and exercise thereof, and so much of the
Power of Godliness in their life, as may fit them for a comfortable approach to
the Lords Supper: Let it be showed from the Scripture, that the bare defect or
want hereof is such a Violation of the terms of the Covenant, as puts men out
of it. We know that every Transgression, or falling stort of Duty required in
the Covenant, is not accounted in Scripture an absolute Breach of the Covenant
(or a forsaking and rejecting thereof) such as for which God gives unto persons
or people a bill of Divorce. Do but compare these persons in question, whom the
hasty and rigid Severity of Man here pronounces to be justly deemed Breakers of
the Covenant, and to have put themselves out of it, with those whom the Holy,
but Merciful and Gracious God does in Scripture call and account such Breakers
of the Covenant: see Ier. 11.9, 10. Ezekiel. 16.8 -- 59. Deuteronomy. 29.25, 26.2 Chron
7.22. 2 King. 17.15 -- 20. and he that would not cut down (no not the Barren)
Fig ^ree, till further patience and means were used: he that wai^ed on the Jews
(whose entrance into the Church was by a Membership received in Infancy) in the
Ministry of Christ and the Apostles, with as clear light of the Gospel as ever
shone, till utter incorrigible rejection thereof appeared, before he accounted
them broken off, Romans 11.16 -- 20. with Act 13.45, 46. and 18.5, 6. and 19.8,
9. 1 These. 2.15, 16. he that followed Jerusalem with means and dispensations of
Grace, till they S^oned him away, Mat. 23.27, etc. can we imagine that he will
reckon our poor Children to be broken off as soon as they are adult, if then
presently they do not bold forth fitness ^^r the Lords Table? yea, when many of
them are it may be secretly following after God, though happily they have not yet
attained so much as to make their approach to that Ordinance comfortable; or
have not yet the confidence to put forth themselves thereunto? surely the Lord
does not make so light a matter of his holy Covenant and se^l (whatever men
through mis-guided apprehensions may do) as to enter into a solemn Covenant
with Children, take them into his Church, and seal up their taking in before
Men and Angels, and then let them go out so easily, or drop off one knows not
how.

3. If they have justly, i. e. meritoriously put themselves out of the
Covenant, or so violated the Covenant on their part, as to deserve a putting
out, yet still one might ask, how they come to be Actually put out, seeing the
Church has not proceeded, nor seen cause to proceed to any Censure? But if it
be indeed so, that they do deserve (i. e. in fo^o Ecclesia; we speak not of
desert in the sight of God) to be put out; if they may be justly ^^e^ed
Breakers of the Covenant, and are guilty of that which justly puts them out,
then it is the Churches duty actually to put them out, or cut them off: for
Ecclesiastical justice, as well as Civil, re^dreth unto all their due and just
deserts: and those that are (Ecclesiastically) Breakers of the Covenant ought
to be cut off, Genesis 17.14. Hence it will follow upon these Principles, that we
ought to cast out and cut off all the adult Children of our Churches that are
not come up to full Communion; which thing, how horrid it is to think of, let
the Reader judge: or be it that we forbear any formal Censure, and Content our
selves only Doctrinaly to declare, that all such Children are put out and
broken off, (which Doctrine, Declaration is indeed contained in the Assertions
of our Brethren) yet the harshness and horrid Severity of such a Declaration,
is li^^le inferior to the other, and very contrary to the Patience and Grace
of Jesus Christ expre^^d in the Scriptures.

Preface. Wherefore that all may know, that there is neither Danger nor
Singularity in this our Assertion, That a Church member may possibly become no
Member, without any Act of the Church in formal Censuring of him, give us lea^e
to pro^uce some Testimonies to prove it. Judicious and blessed Dr. Ames ^a^th,
That in case of pertina^ious separati^n such persons, though they may be of the
Invisible, yet they are not to be accounted Members of the v^si^le Church.

Ans. 1. Suppose you should prove that a Churchmember may [ Possibly] become
no Member without a Censure; yet we are still utterly to seek of Proof that ^^e
Children in question do so. 2. How can a Separation be properly pertinacious
and incurable, or appear so to be, till the means of Church discipline have
been used? 3. Ames his meaning may be, that such are not to be accounted lawful
and approved Members, as in the close of that Chapter ( De Consc. Lib. 5. Cap.
12.) he says, ^ Sch^smatical Church is not to be accounted for a lawful and
approved Church. 4. We shall not deny but that some good Divines do seem to
hold, that in some cases of notorious Wickedness, and Apostasy, and so in case
of absolute and universal Schism (of which Ames there spe^ks) especially in
places and Churches where Discipline is not used; men may be looked at as
Non-members, though the Church did neglect to pass a formal Censure: wherein we
shall not trouble our selves with being their Opponents. It suffices us, that
in Churches regularly using Discipline, there is no ordinary way whereby
offenders lose Church Membership, but by Excommunication: And that none can
lose it while they live, that are not guilty of such evil as is censureable, or
is matter of Excommunication; which the persons in question are not.

Another Testimony here alleged, is from Mr. Cotton in his Way of the
Churches, p. 9. where he says, that Many in Churches have cut themselves off.

Ans. Had the whole sentence been set down, every Reader would have seen the
impertinency of the Allegation, as to the Persons and Case in question. Mr.
Cot^^ns word^ are these: Many in other Churches have ^ut themselves off from
the Covenant by their notorious wickedness and profaneness. And withal in the
same place he adds, that Arelapsed Church, with all the Members of it, are
bound to renew their Covenant in order to Reformation: which shows, that they
were not wholly cut off before, though their Membership was but by being born
in the Church, and baptized, for of that he there speaks. We doubt not, but
among the Members of such Relapsed Churches might be found many much more
degenerate; then those described in the Synods Fifth Preposition; much less
therefore are those Discovenanted, but being in Covenant, are bound to renew it
in order to full Communion.

The next Testimony here produced, is from those words in the Discourse of
Church Covenant, page 17. viz. That if men had not promised, and also performed
in some measure of truth, the duties of Faith and Obedience unto God, they had
not taken hold of the Covenant, but had Discovenanted themselves,
notwithstanding all the Promises of God unto their Fathers and others. Thus
though God promised Abraham to be a God to him, and to his seed in their
generations, Genes. 17 7. yet the Ishmaelites and Edomites descending from
Abraham, were Discovenanted by not promising nor performing those duties of
Faith and Obedience which God required on the peoples part. Now if this (says
the Apologist) were Truth in the Year 1639. (as it then had the Approbation of
the Elde^s hereabouts) we see no reason why it should not be Truth in the Year
1662. For, Veritas in omnem partem sui semper eadem e^t. Either this was a
Mistake then, or else it is a Truth at this day.

Ans. Let the words here cited, be c^ndidly interpreted, and they contain
nothing repugnant to the present Doctrine of the Synod. For, it is true, that
if men do not promise, or do not perform in some measure (yea in some measure
of truth, i. e. visibly, and in Charitable and Ecclesiastical reputation) the
duties of Faith* and Obedien^e into God, they do Discovendat themselves, i. e.
they do it meritoriously, and do what lies in them ^n th^^ part to destroy
their Membership: And ^hey so do it, as will infer the absolute loss of their
Membership, viz. either by formal Excommunication, if you speak of particular
persons, and if the Church do her duty; or by the Lor^s giving them a Bill of
Divorce, if you speak of whole Bodies of People, as here the Ish^^cel^^s (...)
a E^ountes are spoken of. But what is all this to the Children of our Churches,
de^^rib^d in the Synod^ Fifth Proposition, who do promise, and do in some
^easure though not in so full, a measure as were to be desired) perform the
duties of Faith and Obedience. This might be true in 1639. and in 1662. also.
And yet our Assertion may be true, and yours false notwithstanding. Let our
Children appear to be such as the Edo^ates and Ishmaelites were; or let them
appear to be such as do in no measure (yea, i.^ no meas^re of truth, i. e. as
to Church-visibility, or charitable hope; for the Church ^^ng^ no further)
perf^rm the duties of Faith and Obedience, and we will with you plead, to have
them put out of the Church. But till then, i. e. as long as they do in some
measure (though yet but in a small and initiall measure) perform the Duties,
and retain the Essentials of Christianity, or of Faith and Obedience; they
continue (yea regularly continue) in the Church, for ought that has yet
appeared, either in 1639. or in 1662. We are loath to take notice of the
insulting Expressions that are here used, which are too-too uncomely;
especially there where th^^^fth Commandment requires Special Honor: But the
intelligent Reader will easily see the vanity of this Con^^dence, to bring a
Testimony concerning the Discovenanting of the Ishmaelites and Edomites, (for
they are expre^ly instanced in, as the Explication of the not-promising, nor
performing the duties of Fa^^rand Obedience intended by the Author) and then to
triumph in it, as if that proved the Discovenanting of our Hopeful and
Non-excommunicable Children, or thwarted the Doctrine of the Synod.

When it is here added, [ This is the main thing wherein we Dissent from the
major part of the Synod] If by [ This] be meant the Assertion which is before
expressed; viz. that A churchmember may possibly become no Member, without any
act of the Church in formal Censuring of him: then it is a great and ^trang^
mi^re^resentation to say, that this is the main Po^ut of your Dissent. For,
there be them that do ^eartily consent to all the Concl^sions of the Synod, and
yet d^ hold, and did in the Synod express as much, That in some notorious
cases, and where the Church neglects her duty (as has been before said)
persons may be broken off, and looked at as Non-members, though not formally
Censured; or that a Churchmember may possibly, in some cases, become no
Member, without a formal Censure: the Reader therefore is greatly misled, and
misinformed, when he is told that This is the main Point of our Dissent. But
when you a^^ert, that the Children in question are become no Members, or that
persons, who were before Members, do become no Members as soon as ever they are
adult, merely by want of fitness for full Communion, though they neither have
not deser^e to have any Church-censure pa^led upon them: This we confess is a
main Point wherein you Dissent from the Synod, and (we suppose) from Scri^ture,
and sound Reason too.

Preface. Here let us add the words of Mr. Cotton, in his Excellent Treatise
of The Holiness of Church members, which are these following: [Such as are born
and baptized Mem^ers of the Church, are not cruelty continued and confirmed
Members, unless when they grow up to years, they do before the Lord and his
People prays their Repentance and Faith in Ie^us Chr^st]

Answ. It is manifest, that by Confirmed Members, all along in that Book, Mr.
Cotton ^eane^ such as are admitted to ^u^ Communi^n, or to the Lords Supper,
and Voting, (and so he does expressly explain himself page 9.) and for that, it
is well known, we stand ^ully for the same qualifications that Mr Cotton
intends according to H^^^erm of Di^cipli^e, Cap. ^2 Sect. 7. The word [
Continued] is indeed added in page 19. (though not so in page (...) that Book;
but it is added in a Copulative way [ Continued and Confirmed] w^ere all the
parts must be taken together, to make up the truth of such an Axiom. Besides
that the p^r^ons in question do make so^e profession of Faith and Repentance, i
e. in an Initial and Educational way, so as suffices to their continuance in
the visible Church, though it may not at present suffice to full Communion. Mr.
Cotton was far from conceiving that such non-scandalous persons as are the
Subject of our Question are to be cut off, or looked upon as cut off from
continuance in the Church; as (besides what is cited of his in the Synods
Preface) may appear plainly out of this very Treatise (which is well called by
our Brethren An Excellent Treatise) of the Holiness of Church Members; for page
3. men* ^oning a distinction of Mr. Ruther^urds, That a Church may be termed no
Church, no Spouse jure and merito, and quoad vocationem passivam, in respect of
bad deserving, and their not answering to the Call of God, on their parts; and
yet the same Church remain de (...), ^or aliter, and quoad vocationem Det
activam, the Spouse and Bride of Christ: He sai^^, This Distinction I can
admit, if it be understood of a Church hat has formerly answered the Call of
God, and submitted to the Ministry of the Gospel, at least in outward
propession of the fundamentals of sound Doctrine, and pure Worship: for such a
Church, though they or their children may afterward degenerate, and go a
wher^ng from God in Doctrine and Worship, yet God in his patience and bounty is
not wont so ^con to cast off them, as they cast off him The next generation
after (...) ^e^, a ^horing from Go^, and f^rs^ck the Lord God of their fathers,
and served Baalim, yet still the Lord accounted them his People, and sent them
Judges and Prophets to restore and recover them. And page 19, 20. he mentions
distinctly by way of Consectary from the Proposition here cited by our
Brethren, two or three sorts of persons w^o are not to be continued in the
Church^ though born and baptized in it; viz. 1. The grossly Ignorant of the
first Principles and Foundations of Religion -- 3. Persons notoriously
Scandalous for any gross crime, as I^latry, Adultery, etc. but not a word of
such an intere^ce as our Brethren s^em to make, viz. the discontinuance or
unchurching of such a sort of persons as are the Subject of our Question. And
it is observable all along in that Book, that he pleads not for the
un-membering of any that are once in the Church, yea though they came in but by
a Membership received in Infancy (for of such he often expressly speaks, and
such were the Members of those Churches he disputes upon in Answer to his
Opponents) but only such as are scandalous and wicked, and deserve
Excommunication, and he would have them also un-membered by Excommunication,
and not by a Self-felony only: See page 8, 15, 28, 32, 56, 57, 60.

Preface. Renowned Parker, steaking of the interpretation of those words
[Laying on of Hands] in Heb 6.2. cites many judicious Writers, whose judgment
he expresses in words to this purpose; That they who were baptize in minority,
when they are grown up, after that the Church had approved their faith by the
Symbol of Imposition of Hands they were admitted Members of the Church: this
was according to sound Doctrine in the Primitive times ( as Parker says.) Now
we demand, how they can be admitted as Members* who are already as complete,
and perfect Members as any in the Church? But the Ancient Doctrine was, That
Children who were baptized in minority, after they shall come to pro^ess their
faith so as to be accepted of the Church, may be admitted as Members: Therefore
according to the Ancient Doctrine, such Children are not as complete and
perfect Members as any in the Church.

Answ. Whether the words [ Tanquam membra Admittehantur] be Parkers own words
or Calvin's (for he speaks as if he cited only Calvin's words; yet we ^inde not
those expressions used by Calvin either on Heb. 6.2. or in his Institutions, De
Confirmatione, though in both places is the substance of the thing which Parker
alleges from him) the matter is not great. It is manifest from the whole
discourse, that Parker is there speaking of such as are admitted to full
communion* as we call it. If he there used the term [ Members] for Persons
admitted to the Lords Table, and to all Church Priviledges, it is no harder
phrase, then has been used in this Country for many years, yet that argues not
that we do, or that Parker did think Children to be no members before. It is
observed of the Ancients. that they sp^ke more securely before the Rise of
Pelagius; men are less curious in Expression, when they speak about Points of
which no Controversy is moved, and wherein their judgments are otherwise
sufficiently known. As what is more abudantly and univers^lly agreed on among
all our Divines, then this, that The Children of Believers are Members of the
Church, or a part of it? Parker, within six Lines of the place cited, calls
them [in Ecclesia nati] Born in the Church; and opposes them to [ Extranei] i.
e. to such as are without* Dr. Ames gives it as the Doctrine of the
Protestants, The Infants of the faithful, ^oll. Enerv. tom. 2. lib. 2. cap. 1.
unless they were to be accounted Members of the Church, they cu^^ not to be
bapti^ed, Vrsin and Pareus say. Omnes iique soli etc. All and only th^^e are
to be baptized by Christ's Command, who are his Disciples (Mat. 28.19.) i. e.
those that are, and one to be accounted Members of the visible Church, whether
they be adult persons professing Faith and Repentance, or Infants born in the
Church. Again, The Infants of Christians do as well as the adult belong to the
Covenant and Church of God, and are therefore to be baptized, because the whole
Church ought to be baptized. C. techet. Explicat. page 367. This truth is
jointly (...) Protestant and Reformed Churches, as appears in the Harmony of
their Confessions; The Children of the faithful are Gods peculiar people and in
the Church of God, ((...), page 397.) Reckoned in the number of Gods people,
(Bohemian (...), page 399.) God does together with the Parents account their
posterity also to be of the Church, (F^^nc C. ^^mon, p^g 401.) They condemn the
Anabaptists, who hold tha^ (...) ^e no^ (...) the Church ^f God, (Confession of
Auspurg, page 404.) Infants belong to the Covenant an^ Church of God, as well
as the adult, says the Pal^tinate Catechism, Que^^. ^4.

Now ^^is being so, that it is the manifest Doctrine of all our Divines, that
Children are Members ^f the Church; and neither did they imagine, that when
^d^lt they drop ^ff by a Self ^^lony, or we know not how: For when Erasmus had
said, that Ch^l^ren being grown (...) they being asked, would not stand to what
had been promised in their behalf, they ^ere to be le^t to themselves: Calvin
(...) it as the saying of a man not well exercised in Ch^rch-government Calvin
Opuscul page 346.
. See also Chemnit. Exam. Conc. Trid. par. 2. de Baptis. Can. 14. and de
Confirmat. sub Can. 3. whose words in the former of these places, the Rea^er
may find Engli^^ed in the beginning of Mr Shepards Treatise about the Church^
membership of Children ^ ^ely Printed. And Cartwright to ^^at Question, What
are the Duties of the rest of the Church that are present at a C^i^des
Baptism? Cartwright Catech. page 185.
Answers, 1. To Rejoice and be glad at ^he increase of Gods Church -- 3 When
the Child come^h to age to do such duties as one Member ^w^^h to another: he
did not think its Memb^rship ceased with Infancy, but (says he) when it comes
to age, such duties are to be do^e to it as one Member owes to another. Hence
we say, is it rational so to und^r^t^nd Parker or Calvin, as if they did think
(or approved it as sound Doctrine in others to think) that they who were
Baptized in minority, when after they are grown up, they have approved their
Faith, they are then first admitted Members, as if they were no Members of the
Church before? as the Reader would think that that were the scope and sense of
the Testimony here cited. But to cite shreds ^f passages in Authers in a sense
contrary to those Auth^rs known and declared judgment, is very injurious both
to them and to the Reader. He that reads what this Preface here says, would
think that it is the Judgment of many judicious Writers cited by Parker, that
Children do then first enter into Church-members^ip when their Faith is
approved by the Church, after they are grown up, and that they are not Members
at all before that: when as it is most certain, and evident, that neither
Parker, nor any judicious Writer cited by him, nor any one heretofore approved
for a judi^ious Writer, eit^er Ancient or M^dern, did indeed so judge, but the
contrary. And Parkers words are clearly intended in another sense, viz. with
reference in full Communion. And so speaking of the very same matter in the
first book of his Ecclesiast. ^elit. Cap. 10. he says, That in the Reformed
Churches the adult are ex^mined by the Presbytery, approved by the consent of
the People, and received by the wh^le Church as Members of the^r Communion in a
special manner, and so are as it were confirmed before they be admitted to the
L^rds Supper; where [ Members of their Communion in a special manner] is the
same with [ Members in full Communion] in our Language: and so ^is words,
together with the known practice of the Reformed Churches, do plainly confirm
our distinction between Initiated Members and Member, in f^^. Communion; but
they are far from int^nding or holding forth either a denial of Childrens
membership, or a cessation thereof as soon as they become adult.

As for the Inference that is here made from Parkers Te^^imony; Therefore
according to the Ancient Doctrine such Children are not as complete and perfect
Members as any in the Church

An^ If his words do ^old in the s^nse in which they are here alleged, then
Children are not only not as complete and perfect Members ^s any in the
Church, but they are not Members at all, or Non-me^bers, seeing they are not
(it seers) admitted Membe^s, till when adult they have made their Pr^fe^^^on.
As for their being complete and perfect Members* its well known we say and hold
that they are not complete or perfect in point of Communion, or Privilege, but
only in regard of the Essence or Relation of Membership, i. e. they are
properly and completely within the Church, and not half in, and half out. To be
(according to divine Institution) within the Church, is to be a Member of the
Church, as the Book (before which this Pref^ce is set) well owns, page 41 (...)
any man ^^ew us one Or^h^dox Divine, or Judicious Writer, before or i^ Parkers
days, that ever said that the Children of the Fai^^ful are (either w^ile
Infants, or when ^dult, suppo^ing them not excommunicate nor deserving so to
be) not within the Church. But with^l we hold, and so did Parker, and the
Reformed Churches, that ^^ere are many within the Church, who may not ^ave
co^pleat or ju^^ Communion in all the Privileges ^^ereof, and so are not
complete or perfect Members in that ^ense, and ^word Medu^. Lib. 1. Cap. 32.
These. 13. It is not we but you, that will have Children ((...) l^ast all adult
C^^ldren) to be as complete, and perfect Members (in this sense) a^ any in the
Church, or else to be no Members at all, seeing you ac^nowl^dge none that are
adult to be Members unless they be in full Communion.

It is ^ur^^er added; That when they are adult, in case they do not join unto
the Church, then they do not retain their Members^ip which ^hey (...) Minority
N^w to join to the Church is the act of one that is not j^yned, or is not a
Member; so that unless, they (...) themselves to be not Members (or unless they
own themselves to ^^ve lost their Membership) they do not retain their
Member^^ip; this we confess we do not understand. But so much for the discour^e
upon the third Objection.

In the Answer to the fourth Objection, there is an high Profession of much
zeal for Church care and Watch to be extend^d tow^rd Children, and much
cle^rness therein (even as the light at Noon, and as if it were written with
the beams of the Sun) so as that the Reader would expect to find very ample
^^tisf^ction in that matter; but when it comes to, it ^^lls flat to no more but
this; That the watch over them is to be mediate according to the state of their
Membership: the Church is to see that the Parents ^^ their duty toward their
^h^ld^en

Now we demand whether this be any more then the Church should extend to a
Negro, or Indian living in the Family of one of their brethren, for should they
not see that he do his duty toward him, and that in reference to the things of
Religion? yea, we might further ask whether this mediate watch ( viz. by seeing
that the Parents do their duty) does not belong as much to Children when they
are rejected and dis^^rne^ by the Church, as our Brethren would have them? And
what shall become of Children when their Parents are dead (as how many
F^therle^s and Motherless Children are among us?) or far removed, and when
Children are sui juris, and not under the wings of their Parents? and why also
should not Baptism and Catechizing (as well as other Church-benefits) be
dispensed only mediately and not immediately unto Children? The Reader may
here see that the difference about (...) and immediate Membership is more then
a notion, it contains under it a thing of great moment. This mediate Membership
is made a medium to put our poor Children from under the Govern^e^t of Christ,
and to set them (in their own persons) as Lamos in a large place. For by this
the Church has nothing to do with them, nor can put forth any act (e^^er of
Watch or Censure) immed^ately upon them, but upon their Parents only. But that
Church-watch* Government, no Discipline is to be extended and administered to
our Children person^lly and immedi^a^ly (i. e. according as in regard of age,
and understanding they are capable there f; viz. Instruction and Inspection,
and that in an official way, even in younger years, and formal Censures when
adult, if they f^ll into such offenses as do need and deserve the same) the
Reader may find confirmed in the Sy^^ds Arguments, and in the following
Defense thereof Disciplina subjacent omn^s in Vnitate Frae trum (...),
oblajante us^^al senem. Rat. Discipline. page 71.
. Happily the A^sertion (...) mediate Church-care, is ^^eltered u^d^r that clause
[ Those Ch^ldren that are in Minority.] B^^. 1. Much help (by Instructions*
Counsels, Warnings Repro^fs, Exhortations, etc.) and that in an Authoritative
way, and upon the account of their Memberly Relation, may be administered unto
Children themselves immediately in their own persons (besides looking to
Parents that they do their du^ies to them) even while they are in their
Minori^y, though not yet capable of public Censures. 2. They are in the same
state and Relation to the Church (though not of the same capacity) when in
minority and when adult: If therefore (not because of their natural incapacity,
but) because of the nature of their Membership, only mediate, and no Immediate
Church-care, Watch and Government belong to them, while in minority, neither
does it belong to them when adult: and therefore this notion excludes all our
Children, both younger and elder from being under any Church Government
immediately in their own persons. So that let them run on in never such vile
courses, the Church cannot deal with them but with their Parents only; and yet
the case may often so be, that the Parents are neither blameable for their
misc^rriages, nor able to reform the same.

But as mediate as their Member^^ip is, here is somewhat added, that shall
touch these adult Children themselves; and what is that? Why, I^ when they
(...) be adult they do not bring forth fruits of Repentance, and Faith, then
the Church is to dis^wn them, at having no part in the Lord.

Ans. 1. Is this according to the Spirit of Christ, or like the Lords
proceeding with his Vovenant People in the Scripture, presently to disown them,
and cast them off, if some evil fruits, nay if want of g^od fruits be (...) in
them, then at first step to call them Loam^i, and tell them they have no part
in the Lord? Has the Lord vouchs^fed to take these persons into his g^orious
Cove^^nt, and ^o real it to them in Baptism before Men and Angels; and does it
come but to this? that if poor Children, as soon as the day of ripe
understanding d^wns upon them, do not bring (...) the fruits of Faith and
Repentance, yea such fruits as may sit them for fel^ Communion, they are then
presently declared to be Discovenanted, and to be turned d^ift as those who
have no part in the Lord? It is true, the most hopeful Child, yea the best of
us all, might justly be Discovenanted by the Lord, should he strictly mark what
is amis^* and deal acc^rding to our deserts* but he is graciously pleased not
to proceed with (...) severity, but with much patience and long suffering
toward those whom he once take, into Covenant. And who or what is man, that he
should be more holy then the Lord! Let but that one Scripture be looked upon
(among many other*) touching the barren Fig Tree, which is here cited, as if it
gave some countenance to this present Disowning, in case of barrenness. The
Lord comes in the time and season of fruit, and finds none, and yet he waits
another year after that, and a third after that (i. e. a long time, and with
great demonstration of patience) before he speaks of cutting it down; and then
the Vine-dresser (acted therein by the Spirit of God) cries (not Cut it down
presently, but) Lord, let it alone one year more (i. e. till it appear utterly
hopeless, and incureable) that I may dig about it, and dung it: He chooses
rather to make it a subject of Labor and Culture, then to case himself by
rid^^ng his hands of it. Also that Parable points to the People of the Jews, to
and among whom Christ preached: Now the following story of the New Testament
tells us, that Christ and his Apostles w^ited on them, till they appeared
altogether incureable and inc^rrig^^e, and till their incureable Barre^ness
discovered it self by p^sitive fruits of wicked opposing and rejecting the
Gos^el before they were cut down, or broken off: And the Ap^^tles when they
preached to the Adult, and yet impenitent Jews, did not tell them they had no
part in the Lord, but on the contrary expressly told them, they had a part in
the Lord, and in his Covenant-dispensations, and urged that as an Argument to
^raw them to repent and believe, though they had not yet done it, Acts
13.19.25, 26. Acts 3.26, 26. They were far from being an occasion of making
them cease from fearing the Lord, by telling them they had no part in him.

2. Suppose any of these Children when adult do bring forth some fruits of
Faith and Repentance* (as those, des^ribed in the Synods fifth Proposition, can
hardly be denied in charitable reputation to do) though not so full and ripe
fruits as were to be desired, and happily not such, as themselves do find
encourage^ent to approach to the Lords Table; what shall be done to these?
shall they be Owned* or Disowned? are they In the Church, or Out? If In, why is
Baptism denied to their Children? If Out, how come they so to be? or where does
God in his Word say, or allow us to say to such hopeful young men and women, as
through grace many of our Children are (though not yet in full Communion) That
they have no part in the Lord?

3. What is t^is Disow^ing? and where shall we have Scripture-warrant for such
a Church-disowning as is not Excommuni^ation? for That, our Bret^ren see not
warrant to proc^ed unto; but (...) down this Rule [ The Church is to disown
them, or having no part in the Lord] If any man speak (especi^lly if he speak
Rules according to w^ic^ the Church is to practice) let him speak as the
Oracles of God. It were needful that this disowning (contradistinguished to
Excommunication) should be cleared from thence. Admonition and Excommunication
we hear plainly of in the Scripture, and in Orthodox Divinity; but a Disowning,
that is a kind of public Church-censure, and yet is neither Admonition, nor
Excommunication, this seems to be a new invented piece of Discipline. We
demand, whether this Disowning be not a putting one out of the Church, that was
before in it? If so, what is it but Excommunication, which the Apostle
expresses by that [ Put away from among you, 1 Cor. 5.13.] if not, is it not a
vain thing? The person whom you are about to Disown is either within the
Church, or without; a Member, or not a Member Contradictio caret simpliciter
omni medio. Keck. Log. page 281. Hookers Survey, page 17.
If he be within, why may you not judge and censure him with the Censure of
cutting off, or casting out, i. e. Excommunication (1 Cor. 5.12, 13.) there
being cause for it? If he be without, why should you disown him, any more then
you do Non-members, or such as were never joined to the Church? Would it not
seem a strange and vain thing, if the Church should put forth a solemn public
Act to disown a company of Non-members that are without the Church? to what
purpose should this be? How Acts 8.21. here cited in the Margin, should make
for this disowning, we understand not. Peter there tells Simon Magus, that he
was far from having any part or lot in the matter of conferring the
extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, which he never had, but ambitiously
aspired after; but does not declare that he had Discovenanted himself, or had
lost his Membership which he once had. And whatever became of Simon Magus
afterward (of which the Scripture is silent, and stories uncertain) there is no
ground to think, that he was then put out of the Church, or lost his
Membership. But rather the Apostle (by grave Apostolical Rebuke and Counsel)
applies himself to him, as to one in the Church, to bring him to Repentance,
and to that sincerity of grace, which he yet wanted, Vers^ 22, 13.

As for the Reason here rendered, why Excommunication agrees not to the Children
in question, viz. because It is applicable to none but those who have been in
full Communion. Catabaptistae decent non posse Excommunicationem in Ecclesiam
reduci, nisi ij baptizentur qui Scientes jugo Christi Collum submittant. Bucer
in Joh. fol ^5.

See Mr. Cotton expressly holding forth Excommunication to be applicable to such
as the Children in question, in Holiness of Church Members. page 57.


This is but a begging of the Question, and carries not Evidence of Truth with
it. (...) Excommunication (i. e. the utmost Censure, so called) does not
properly or nextly debar or exclude from full Communion, but it cutteth off
from Membership (renders a person as an Heathen and Publican, Mat. 18.17.) and
so from that Communion that belongs to a Member as such. When a person that
has stood for some time Admonished, is afterward, for his contumacy,
excommunicated, it is not Excommunication that does immediately and properly
put him out of full Communion, for that was done by Admonition; whereby, being
Ecclesiastically unclean, he was justly suspended from eating of the Holy
things: but Excommunication cuts him off from Membership, which Admonition did
not. Hence it is not full Communion, but Membership that does properly, and
formally render a person a subject capable of Excommunication: Hence it agrees
to all that are Members though they have not been in full Communion; and every
Member has some Communion though not full Communion, and therefore may be
excommunicated. Paul when he is speaking of the Churches judicial proceeding,
and that unto Excommunication, makes it applicable to all that are within, 1
Cor. 5.12. if in full Communion, yet Church-judgement f^lls upon them not as in
full Communion, but as within. The casting out of Cain and Ishmael, the cutting
off of the born Members of the Church of Israel from their People (an
expression often used) the casting out of the children of the Kingdom, Matthew.
8.12. do at least by consequence, and by proportion, and parity of Reason, show
that the Children in question may be cast out, and cut off from the Church by
the Censure of Excommunication.

As for that term of [ Formal] Excommunication, we know not that we are limited
to this or that precise form of words, in Excommunicating one sort or other;
but the formal nature of the thing (viz. a putting of one out of the Church
that was before in it) This well agrees to the persons in question.

We pass by the fifth and last Objection (which charge our Dissenting
Brethren with Weakness, Ignorance, etc.) as containing nothing that is
Argumentative to the matter in hand. Neither do we own the Objection, unless it
be against our selves, who are (as we have acknowledged in our Preface to the
Synods conclusions) poor, feeble, frail men, desiring not to trust unto, or
boast of any strength of our own (which is none at all) but only to the
strength and grace of Jesus Christ, withal acknowledging that grace of his,
whereby he does vouchsafe sometimes to reveal his Truth unto Babes. We tender
only Scriptures and Scripture-arguments, for that which we maintan, desiring
that they may be impartially considered, without challenging to our selves, or
pleading for the Reputation of Strength or Wisdom. In Disputes of this nature,
it is impossible but that e^ch part should look upon the Arguments on either
hand, as strong or weak, according as they are persuaded. But can we not deal
with Arguments, without being supposed to reflect upon the Persons each of
other? We suppose you do not see sufficient strength in our Arguments (for then
you would judge as we do) and in that sense you do impute weakness to them. In
the like sense do we unto yours, but desire to do it without any harsh
reflections upon the Persons of our Brethren, and without liftings up in our
selves, who have cause enough to lie in the dust before God and man.

But here our Brethren take occasion to set down the Reasons of their Dissent
from the Synod: which make up a second main Part of this Preface. The
Consideration whereof we shall now address our selves unto.

Reason 1. The Synod did acknowledge, That there ought to be true saving Faith
in the Parent, according to the judgment of rational Charity, or else the
Ch^l^e ought not to be baptized. But they would not let this (which themselves
acknowledged) be set down, though our Unity lay at the stake for it.

Answ. The regular receiver of the Truth, is one that divides the Hoof, as well
as chews the Cud; one that does not take all in a Lump, but distinguishes, and
rightly divides between things that differ. We are to distinguish here,

1. Between Faith in the being or first beginning of it, whereby one is, or is
reputed to be in the state of a Believer, the Charitable, judgment whereof
runs upon a great Latitude; and Faith in the special exercise of it, whereby
one is fit for that special Communion with, and active Fruition of Christ,
which is the scope of the Lords Supper: unto the visible discovery whereof,
more lively Fruits, and more experienced Operations of Faith are requisite.

2. Distinguish between the internal Grace it self, which is required of them
that partake of Sacraments in the sight of God; and those external signs of
that Grace which the Church is to proceed upon in her Admission of persons unto
Sacraments. These two Distinctions being attended, and rightly applied, will
help to clear both the Truth it self in this matter from mistakes, and the
Proceedings of the Synod from those uncomfortable Reflections that are here cast
upon them.

The former of these Distinctions, and the application thereof to the matter in
hand, we have in Dr. Ames; Medul. Lib. 1. Cap. 32. These. 13. And see Cap. 40.
These. 6, 10, 11, 12, 16, 18. And M. Shepards late Printed Letter, page 16, 17.
Children (says he) are not to be admitted to partake of all
Church Priviledges, until first increase of Faith do appear, but from those
which belong to the beginning of Faith, and entrance into the Church, they are
not to be excluded. Where the Doctor distinguishes between (Initium Fidei) The
beginning of Faith; and (Incrementum Fidei) The increase or growth of Faith,
and makes the former to suffice unto Baptism, but the latter to be requisite to
full Communion, or to the Lords Supper. An initial Faith entitleth to the Seal
of Initiation, but a grown Faith (i. e. a Faith of some growth, though yet
far short of Perfection, and needing to grow still) a Faith growing up unto
some sensible and lively exercise, is requisite unto the Sacrament of growth
and fruition. They were Believers, yet but initial Believers that John
baptized, in the first dawning or beginning of the Gospel, Mark 1.1 -- 4. The
Apostles constantly baptized persons upon the first beginning of their
Christianity, but the Lords Supper followed after, as annexed to some progress
in Christianity.

The latter Distinction also is obvious and necessary. Who ought to come, and,
Who ought to be admitted, are two distinct Questions, say Vrsin, and Catech.
Explic. in ^uast. 81. page 426.
Parem. We grant that true saving Faith and Repentance is required by God of
those that partake of Sacraments for themselves, or for their Children: But the
Question is, what are the external signs and tokens of that Grace, which an
Ecclesiastical charitable Reputation may proceed upon; for we can go no further
then the judgment of rational Charity (as here our Brethren acknowledge) and
that proceeds upon outward probable signs, leaving the infallible knowledge of
the heart to God only. The distinction between a Jew outwardly, or a visible
Jew that has praise of (or approbation among) men, and ^ Jew inwar^ly ^^at
has praise of God, is a Scripture-distinction, Romans 2.28, 29. and is necessary
to be attended h^re; for, De ^ecultis non judicat Ecclesia, 1 Cor. 4.5. And
here also we conceive, that the same strictness, as to outward signs, is not
necessary unto a charitable probable jud^ement or hope of the being of Faith,
or of that initial Faith that entitleth to Bap^ism, as is unto the like
judgment of the spe^ial exer^ise of Faith that is requisite to the Lords
Supper; there be many things that do both really, and in the just reputation of
men, hinder the exercise of Grace, and so hinder from the Lords Supper, which
yet do not take away ^ charitable hope of the Being of Grace, or the state of a
Believer. If a man be under Offense in the Church, he is suspended from the
Lords Supper (till a renewing or exercise of Repentance do appear) yet we still
repute him to be in the state of a Believer, or to have the Being of Grace.

Now then to apply this to the Synods proceedings, for Answer to what is here
s^id, viz. [ That the Synod did acknowledge there ought to be true saving Faith
in the Parent to the judgment o^ rational Charity, or else the Child ought
not to be Baptized; yet could not be prevailed with to set this down ^^r a
Conclusion.]

1. We did and do acknowledge, that in Ecclesiastical Charitable Reputation,
there must be Faith, (yea true saving Faith; those words hurt us not, provided
they be not* so strained, as to turn Charity into R^gid Se^erity) i. e. the
being of Faith whereby a person is accounted to be in the state of a Believer
(Baptism being, as was in the Synod alleged, annexed properly to the state of
a Believer, or to the Covenant-state of a person, and not to the present act or
exercise of Faith; and hence though there be no Parent alive to act for the
Child, and the Child cannot at present act for it self, yet that hinders not
its Baptism:) but we did not acknowledge, it was necessary there should be
Faith in the lively and special exercise of it, such as we justly require an
appearance of unto rational Charity, in order unto full Communion, which is
that our Brethren aim at, and stand for, in all whose Children they will have
Baptized. And to set down a conclusion in general terms, when the nature of the
case calls for distinct^ess, is not rational.

2 Our main Work was to consider of, and pitch upon such external Signs and
Characters, as the Churches Charity might and should proceed upon in this case.
We all own, that only visible Believers, or visible Saints, are to have their
Children Baptized; but the Question is, Who are to be accounted visible
Believers; and we say that those described in the f^^^h Proposition are of that
nu^b^r. To have put it in such a general term, as [ Those that profe^s, or hold
forth Faith and Repentance unto the satisfaction of rational Charity] had been
to leave the matter as obscure as we found it, and in stead of giving light to
the Churches (which is the end of Synods) to leave the^ in the dark without any
help to discover their way: for still they are to seek, who those are that are
to be accounted Professors of Faith and Repentance, and what Profession that
is, that Charity may accept in order to their Childrens Baptism. Besides, it is
well known, that those expressions [ Of holding forth Faith and Repentance,
etc.] have been constantly so taken in this Country, as to hold forth the
qualifications required for full Communion: and that was it which our Brethren
strove for, so to screw up the Expre^sions for Bap^ism, as that all that have
their Children Baptized must unavoidably be brought to the Lords Table, and to
a power of Voting in our Churches, wherein we cannot consent to them: and
however we are charged with corrupting the Churches, yet we believe time will
show that that Principle that over inlargeth full Communion, or that will have
all of whom we can have any hope that they have any good in the^, to come to
the Lords Table; this (we say) will prove a Church-corrupting Principle, and
those that have labored to keep up the p^rtition here* will be found to have
been s^riously Studious of the Parity and safety of the Churches.

3. But when it is (...) that the Synod could not be brought to express what
themselves acknowledge (...) that the Parent whose Child i^ baptized must have
Faith to the judg^ent of Charity, or which is all one must be a visible
believer: we desire it may be considered with what Truth this can be (...) for
it was offered ^gain and again to express it (...) plai^ly, and particularly,
if that would have satisfied as th^se that were present in those agitations
(too long here to be inserted) may re^e^ber, and the Proposition made ^as
refused by some of themselves that dissented; but it is competently expressed
in the Synods Result, as now Printed; for when we limit the Baptizable to
confederate visible Believers, and their Infant Seed, in Propos. 1. and 2. and
then say, that those described in Propos. 5, 6, and 7. are to have their
Children Baptized, does it not imply, that the Parents, there described are
Confederate visible believers, unless you will make us to speak
inconsistencies? Again, it is (...) made one Argument to prove the fifth
Proposition, that The Parents there described are Confederate visible
believers. And do we not then express this, that the Parent whose Child^ is to
be Baptized must be a Confederate visible Believer? and is not that all one, as
to have true Faith in the judgment o^ Charity? How then is it here said, that
the Synod would not let this which themselves acknowledged, be expressed,
though our Unity lay at the stake for it? surely such misrepresentation of
things with so much injurious reflection should be forborne by Godly Brethren. If
that would have United us, to own that the Parent must be a visible Believer,
it was owned, and granted toties quo^ies, and is contained in the Propositions
and Arguments, as any Intelligent Reader will easily see But the disagreement
lay here, that your selves would not consent to any such acceptance, or to any
such Characters or Expressions of a visible Be^^ever, but such as should
unavoidably bring Him into full Communion. And we di^^ered about this, Who are
visible Believers? Not whether the Parents that have Baptism for their Children
must be such. In sum, the Reason of our disagreement, was not because we would
not own our own Principle (as is here strangely represented) but because we
could not Consent to yours, and because you refused to have a common Principle
any way expressed but so as might suit with your own Nation, though our Unity
lay at the stake for it.

Reason 2. The second Reason which our Brethren here give of their dissent from
the Synod, stands thus;

There is no warrant in all Scripture, to apply the Seal of Baptism unto those
Children, whose Parents are in a state of unfi^ness for the Lords Supper. But
the Parents in question are in a state of unfitness for the Lords Supper;
therefore there is no warrant in all the Scripture to Baptize their Children:
this we suppose is the Assumption, and Conclusion that is understood, if this
second Reason be intended as a Reason of their dissent from the Synods fifth
Proposition. Unless it be intended only as a dissent from that which is
^^uched and contained in the Synods Discourse, viz. that Some may have their
Children Baptized, who yet are short of actual fitness for the Lords Supper:
But the Answer to it will take in both. And the Answer will easily be given, if
once we understand distinctly what is meant by [ A state of unfitness] for the
Lords ^upper: now by a state of unfitness, must be meant either Non-membership,
and that is indeed a state of unfitness for the Lords Supper, which belongs
only to the Church, (though not to all in the Church, yet only to it) and in
this sense the Assumption above mentioned is denied; for the Parents in
question are Members of the Church, and in that respect in a state of fitness
for the Lords supper: i. e. being in the Church (or Members thereof) to them
belong all Church Priviledges, according as they shall be capable thereof, and
appear duly qualified for the same; they have jus ad rem, though not jus in
re, as a Child has a right to all his Fathers Estate, though he may not
(ought not to) have the actual use and fruition of it, till he become to years,
and be qualified with abilities to manage it. A Free ^an is in a state of
fitness to be a Mag^stra^e or Deputy; (or in some other office proper to
Freemen) though for want of Particul^r qu^lifications or orderly admission by
Election, he may happily never be one In such a sense every Churchmember is in a
state of fitness for the Lords Supper.

Or else by [ A state of unfitness for the Lords Supper] is (...) [ Want of
actual qualifications fitting] for it, whereby a person either is in himself
short of actual fitness for the Lords Table, or wants Church appro^ation of
his fitness, and ^o wants an orderly admission thereunto. Now in this sense
we deny the Major (or Proposition) of the Argument above mentioned, and do
conceive that there i^ warrant to be ^^und in Scripture for the applying of
Baptism to Children, (...) Parents do want actual qualifications fitting them
for the Lords Supper Among sundry other Scripture evidences of it, one is from
the Analogy of the Passover, and Circumcision in the Church of I^rael, where
the Par^nt might want actual fitness for the Passover, by manifold Ceremonial
uncleanness, and yet that hindered not the Circumcising of the Child.

Now a liberty of arguing from thence to the Gospel passover, and
Gospel-circumcision (i. e. to the Lords Supper and Baptism) is here granted and
allowed: but it is Answered, that Unless the Father were in a state of fitness
for the Passover, he was not fit to have his Child Circumcised.

Reply. Wh^t state of fitness was the unclean Jewish Parent in, but only a
state of membership? He was a Member of the Church, and so (...) the Parents in
question; and they need not, do not enter into a new Membership when they are
admitted to the Lords Table, no more then the Jewish Parent after his cleansing
did. But in two things the case of the Ceremonially-unclean Jewish Parent,
holds proportion with the case in hand.

1. He must have other, and better qualifications then he has at present,
before he eat of the Passover; he is at present in a state of Legal impurity
(and so, in regard of actual qualifications, in a state of unfitness) but he
must be in a state of Legal purity and cleanness, before he partake of the holy
things.

2. He must (especially after some uncleanness of a more remarkable nature)
be judged and Pronounced by the Priest to be clean, and so free to partake of
the holy things, Levit. 13.6. So the Parents in question must have their
fitness for the Lords Table judged of, and approved by those in the Church, to
whom the power of such judgment and approbation does belong: And having these
two things ( Personal qualifications, and Church-approbation) then (and not
before) they are to come to the Lords Table; and those two are all they need:
they do not need a new admittance into Membership (as if they were before not
of the Church) no more then the Israelitish Parent did. If any one object, that
this Legal uncleanness was but an accidental and ceremonial thing, and did not
import the want of any Moral or Essential fitness for the Passover: Let him
consider, That as the Discipline then was mostly Ceremonial Ames Medul. Lib. 1.
cap. 38. These. 41.
, and hence Legal purity was then an essential qualification unto a regular
fitness for the Passover, and other holy things, and the want of it a real
bar; so those Ceremonies pointed unto Moral and Spiritual things to be
attended by us now. Their Legal cleansings, washings, etc. did import, and
signify a special exercise of Faith and Repentance; which therefore we may
well require in those whom we admit unto full Communion in the holy things of
the Gospel; yet the present defect hereof does not put the Parent out of the
Church, nor exclude his Children from Membership, or from the Initiatory Seal
of it, no more then a-like defect did then. We might also mind the case of one
that has been in full Communion, but falling into Offense is under public
Admonition for it; Is not he in a state of unfitness (taking it for want of
actual fitting qualifications) for the Lords Supper? yet this will not debar
his Child from Baptism, because he is not yet cut off from Membership. Neither
does his having once been in full Communion alter the case, or render him more
[ in a state of fitness] then the Parent in question is; for the one, is a
Member as well and as truly as the other: and to be declined, and fallen off
from Supper-qualifications, and debarred from the Lords Table for open Offense,
is worse then for a young man simply not to have attained thereunto (it is, at
least, Ecclesiastical^y worse. We speak not of what the inward state before God
may be; but that it is worse in foro Ecclesiae, appears, Because the Church
has had and seen cause to dispense a public Censure in the one case, but not
in the other) Now if a person may retain his Membership, and so derive
Baptism-right to his Children, notwithstanding his personal unfitness for the
Lords Supper in the former case, why not as well, nay much more in the latter?

But let it seriously be considered whether there be any warrant in all the
Scripture to make the baptizing of the Child to depend upon the Parents actual
fitness for, or admission to the Lords Supper The Scripture order is to ^ake
the circumcising of the child part of the Parents fitness for (...) Passover,
and for admission ^ereunto [ Let all his Males be ^^^cumcised, and then let him
come (...) and keep it] Exodus 12.48. ra^^er then to make his admission to (...)
Passover a pre-requisite to (...) childs Circumcision.
. What fitness for the Lords Supper had those that were baptized by John
Baptist, and by Christ's Disciples at his appointment in the beginning of his
public Ministry? What fitness had the Iaylor, when himself and all his were
baptized after an hours Instinction; wherein (probably) he had not so much as
heard any thing of the Lords Supper? The teaching of which followed after
Discipling and Baptizing, as is hinted by that order in Matthew. 28.19, 20 and by
the ancient practice of not teaching the Catechumeni any thing about the Lords
Supper till after they were baptized, as is witnessed by Hanmer of
Confirmation, page 13, 14. Albaspinans apud Baxter of Confirmation, page 132.

We constantly read in the story of the Acts that persons were Baptized
immediately upon their first entrance into Membership, but we never read that
they did immediately upon their first Membership receive the Lords Supper,
which strongly argues that Membership, and Baptism the Seal thereof, is
separable even in the adult from full Communion. And that a man may have his
Children baptized (as the Iaylor, and others had) and yet not presently come
(but need further instruction and preparation before he come) to the Lords
Supper. So far is Baptism from being inseparable from immediate admission to
the Lords Supper, that we read of no one, (no not of the ^dult) in all the New
Testament tha^ was admitted to the Lords Supper immediately upon his Baptism,
from the first Baptism of John, to the end of the Acts of the Apostles. There
is but one place that sounds as if it were quickly after, viz. Acts 2.41, 42.
which is here alleged by our Brethren: But to that; 1. There is no word about
the Lords Supper in Peter's Sermon, the Heads whereof are in that Chapter set
down, though t^ere is somewhat of the other Sacrament of Baptism, ver. 38. and
upon glad receiving (...) is word they were baptized immediately, ver. 41. 2.
Hence there must be some time afterward for instructing them in the doctrine
and use of the Lords Supper (as Paul and some time for that a^ Corinth, 1 Cor.
11.23. with Acts 18.11.) before their admission t^ereunto, or participation
thereof; and so much is ^^^imated in the Text, when its said, They (after their
being added, and baptized) continued in (or gave sedulous attendance to) the
Apostles [ Doctrine] first, and then [ Breaking of Bread] There was some time
of gaining further acquaintance with Christ, and with his Ways and Ordinances
(and with this in special) by the Apostles Doctrine and Instruction, between
their baptizing, and their participation of the Supper: some time (we say) more
or less, and that that was attained in a very little time then under those
plentiful pourings forth of the Spirit, requires usually a much longer time now
in ordinary Dispensation.

The Preface proceeds to strengthen their second Reason by Testimonies; and the
Assertion which they seem to intend the Proof of by these Testimonies, is a
very strange one; viz. this: [ Neither do we read that in the Primitive times
Baptism was of a greater Latitude, as to the Subject thereof, then the Lords
Supper, but the contrary] These words, as they are here set down, do speak as
if in the Primitive times Baptism was not extended unto Infants; or at least no
more, nor sooner then the Lords Supper was given unto them (which is here
presently well acknowledged to have been a grievous Error) Well might the
Anabaptist triumph if this could be proved, which indeed never was, nor can be:
But we are willing to believe that our Brethrens meaning is (though it be not
so expressed) that the Subject of Baptism in Ancient times was not of a greater
Latitude [ as to the Adult] then the Lords Supper, i. e. that no adult persons
might have Baptism for themselves or for their Children, but such as were also
admitted to the Lords Supper. But of this also we must say, That we find not
any thing that proves it, but much to the contrary. And though we have not met
with any that have purposely handled this Point touching the different extent
of these two Sacraments, yet we find enough to show us, That the Churches of
Christ in all, especially in the best Ages, and the choicest Lights therein,
both Ancient and Modern, have concurred and met in this Principle (as a granted
and undoubted Truth) that baptism is of larger extent then the Lords Supper: so
as that many that are within the visible Church may have Baptism for
themselves, or at least for their Chil^ren, who yet ought not presently to
partake of the Lords Supper, or who do at present want actual fitness for it.
The Witnesses above cited, tell us that in Ancient times they did not so much
as impart any thing to the Ca^echumeni about the Lords Supper, till after their
Baptism: And, if Hanmer have rightly observed, even the Adult, after their
Baptism, must have Confirmation before they partaked of the Lords Supper.
Hanmer of Confirmation, page 15 -- 22. And vid. page 59. (...) or Perfectus
among the Ancients, is as much as (with us) one in full Communion; but none
were by them rec^oned to be (...) (in the Rank of perfect Christians) that had
not received the holy Ghost either in extraordinary Gifts, or in special
confirming Grace. See Hanmer of Confirmat. page 17. Now it is evident, that even
in the Apostles times sundry were baptized that had not so received the holy
Ghost, Acts 8*15; 16, 17. and 19:2 -- 6.

But there are sundry further Evidences at hand (were there room here to insort
them) which show that in those first Ages of the Church, there were many within
the Church, (...) were debarred from the Lords Supper: wh^ yet had their
Children baptized. In after (...) how large Baptism was, may easily be
gathered: But that there was (though t^o much l^xness) some more restraint in
the Lords Supper, appears by the Canonists old Verse, Gerhard. de Sacra C^na,
p. 184.
Ebrius, infami^, erroneus, atque Furentes,
Cum pueris, Domin. non debent sumere corpus.
As for the times since the Reformation, it is most evident that Godly
Reforming Divines have in their Doctrine unanimously taught, and in their
Practice (many (...) then.) endeavored a strict Selection of those that should
be admitted to the Lords Supper, when yet they have been (...) large in poi^^
of Baptism; and they still ^o upon this Principle, that Not all Christians, nor
a^ baptized and genera^^y-professing Christians, but only such as are able (or
may be reputed able and careful) to examine themselves, and discern the Lords
Body, are to be admitted to the Lords Supper. But they reckon that All
Christians (a^ that are, in their account, within the visible Church) are to
have their Children baptized. Be it that in Practice they were, many of them,
too lax and large in both the Sacraments, chiefly through want of a due and
effectual use of Discipline (by defect whereof many were sinfully tolerated in
the Church, who should have been cast out and cut off, and many suffered to
come to the Lords Table, who should have been debarred and suspended) of which
themselves do (...) sadly complain See Ratio Disciplina Fratrum Bobem. in Hist.
praemissa, p. 3 -- 3^. and 39 -- ^3, 52, 53.
. Yet it shows thus much (which is that we aim at) that they held a different
Latitude of the two Sacraments, as to the Subjects thereof (even in the very
sense of our Question) denying the Lords Supper to many Parents, whose Children
yet they scrupled not to baptize: This goes for current among all our great
Divines as a granted Principle, whereof many large and full Testimonies might
easily be produced.

Opuscul. page 37.
Calvin in his Geneva-cate^hism, to that Question, Whether Pasters may give the
Sacraments to all? Answers, ^uod ad Baptis^um pertinet, quia non nisi
Insantibus (...) confertur, d^scre^^o ^^cu^^non habet: in Can^^ero tavere dehet
Minister ne cui ipsam porrigat, quem indignum esse palam constet. If Calvin
would Baptize all Children born among them without difference (looking upon
them as born within the visible Church) and yet not give the Lords Supper to
all, then he would Baptize some Children whose Parents he would not ad^it to
the Lords Supper.

Syntag. Theolog. page 1149. with page, 1167, 1168.
Lu^o^* Cr^^ius describing the Subjects of Baptism, says, Infantes vero omnes,
etc. All such ^nfants as are either born of Christian Parents, or brought into
the society of Christians are to be Baptized. But of the Lords ^upper, S^lt
quidem Christians, etc. Only Christians are to be admitted to the Holy Supper.
yet not promis^u^usty all Christians; but only those who both can and will
examine themselves, rightly discern the Lords Body, and celebrate this
Sacrament unto a Commemoration of the Death of Chirst -- but there are many in
the Christian Church that either cannot or will not ^o those things and these
are not to be admitted.

(...), touching the Lords Supper* says, Est Sacramentum, etc. It is a
Sacrament appointed for such in the Christian Church as are already baptized
and Adult, and do examine themselves Lec. Com. de Can^ Dom. quaest. 2. page 631.
. And in another place (...) 137. p^g. 7^ and vid. Quaest. 142. page 743.
unto this Question, To whom is the Lords Supper to be given? He answers, To
all the Faithful Members of the Church, who can examine themselves, and are
instructed in the Ministry of Faith, and can (...) forth the Lords Death. For
unto this Mystery there is required examination of ones self, and Annunciation
of the Lords Death. And therefore it is not to be given to Unbelievers not to
Infants, not to distracted persons, not to those that are ignorant of the
mysteries, not to the impenitent, not to those that are by the orderly
judgment of the Church excommunicate not to such as are polluted either with
^anifest errors, or with any notorious wickedness, until they have first
satisfied the Church, and g^ve* Testimony of their Repentance. Compare herewith
his Latitude for Baptism, exoresly granti^g that so sundry of thos^ sorts, to
whom he denies the Lords Supper De Baptismo Quaest. 33 and 34. page 624, 625.
See the Leyden Divines, Synops. Dis^ut. 45. These. 14. and Disput. 48. These. 35,
36. Co^p^red with D^sput. 44. These. 50.
.

^ez^, concerning the Question who are to be Baptized? says* All that are
comprehended within the Tables of the Covenant, etc. Quaest. and Resp. ^^
Sa^ramentis, Quaest. 120, 122.
. But to that Question, Would you admit all sorts to the Lor^s Supper? He
An^wereth with great ze^l for (...) and care therein, and among other
expre^^^ons, Th^se (says he) whose (...) age shows them not to be of ability
to examine themselves (...) not as unworthy, but as not yet fit. ^ut of the
adult no one is to be (...). except he have one may or other so given account
of his Faith at that the Paster may probably gather (not only that he was born
in the Church but also) that he is indeed a Christian Ibid. Quaest. ^45.
.

Pelanius, touching the Subjects of the Lords Supper, says, Unto the Lords
Supper maybe admitted only Christians (...) Baptized and adult, Syntag. Lib.
6. cap. 36. with cap. 55.
and such as can examine their (...), with thank (...) remember Christ and show
forth Vid. Dutch Annot. on 1 Cor. 11.26.
his death. But of Baptism, All that are in Covenant with God -- Infants born
of Christian Parents are to be baptized.

Ge^k^r. in his C^^mon Places a^^erts that Soli Christiani, etc. Only
Christians (i. e. such as embrace the Doctrine of Christ, as have received the
Sacrament of baptism, and are implanted into the Christian Church) yet not
(...) Christians are to be admi^^ed to the holy Supper; but according to Paul^s
Rule these only (...) examine themselves, (...) the Lor^s Body, a^^ show ^^rib
the Lords (...), 1 Cor 11.26, 28, 29. All (...) therefore are excluded, who
either will not (...) examine themselves De Sacra (...), page 18^.
. Bu^ he extends Baptism to all Children born of (one or both) Christian
Parents, o^ that come into the power of such De Baptism^ page 581, 582.
.

The like may be observed in the Confessions of the Reformed Churches, when as
they declare for a special selection of those whom they admit to the Lords
Supper^ see the Confe^^^^^ of Bohemia. Harmony of confess. Page 421. of Belgia,
Page 432. of Aus^^ge, Page 438, 440. or Saxony, p. 447, 44^. and the confession
of Scotland in the end of that Harmony, Page 24. comparing this with the deep
silence of them ^ll touching any such Selectio^ in point of Baptism^ as to the
Children that are born among them: and it is kno^n to be their ordinary
practice to Baptize many Children, whose Parents they would not admit to the
Lords Supper.

All which, with many more Testimonies that might be alleged, do abundantly
show it to have been the concurrent judgment of Protestant Divines, that
Baptism is of greater Latitude then the Lords Supper: and that all that do
bring their Children to partake of the former, (...) not therefore themselves
presently partake of the latter; but that many may have their Ch^ldren
Baptized, and yet regularly be debarred from the Lords Supper.

We might also mention the Concurrence of Divines with us in particular Reasons
Explications, and Assertions relating to ^^is matter: ^^, That Baptism is
annexed to the ^eing or beginning of Faith, the Lords Supper to the special
exercise of it* That Baptism belongs to all Members, but the Lords Supper to
so^e only that are so and so qualified: that all visible Believers, (who in a
latitude of Expression, and Ecclesiastical reputation are such, as are all that
are within the Church) are not to be admitted to the Lords Supper.

Vrsin and Pareus, answering that Objection against the Baptism of Infants,
that Then they must be admitted to the Lords Supper; have these words: Magnum
discrimen, etc. There is a great difference between Baptism and the Supper.
For, 1. Baptism is a Sacrament of Entrance and R^ception into the Church: But
(...) Supper is a Sacrament of Continuance in the Church (...) Confirmation of
the Reception (...) made -- 2. Regeneration by (...) Explicat. catech. in
quaest. 74. page 372,
and not to them presently, but after that they have held forth a confession of
Faith and Repentance In quaest. 75. page 380.
.

Also it may be minded, that it is the current and constant expression of our
Divines, that they call, and count all that are within the compass of the
visible Church (whether Infants, or adult) Fideles, V^cati, (Faithful, called
etc.) And they will tell you that they are for Baptizing no Infants but such as
are ( Infantes fidelium) the Infants of the Faithful or of Believers, Infantes
non omnes, sed duntaxat fidelium, i. e. Baptizatorum, sunt Baptizandi. Chamier.
Tom. 4. page 130. So Daneus, Infantes ex fidelibus, i. e. Baptiza^^s nati,
possunt Baptizari in Ecclesia. Lib. 5. De Sacram. page 538.

And yet they do not look at all these (no not at all the adult that come under
this denomination, and whose Children they Baptize) to be regularly admittable
to the Lords Supper, which plainly shows their judgment to be that all adult
Persons who are in a Latitude of expression to be accounted visible Believers
(or in Ecclesiastical Reputation to be looked at as Fideles) are not therefore
to partake of the Lords Supper.

Dr. Ames, accounts that a person may be a Believer on Christ and yet be unfit
for the Lords Supper, being not sufficiently instructed thereunto. Bellar.
Enerv. Tom. 3. Lib. 4. Cap. 1. and he expressly says that Church-children are
to be numbered among the Faithful, and reckons them to have the beginning of
Faith, yet not to be admitted to all Ordinances till increase of Faith appear,
Medul. Lib. 1. Cap. 32. These. 12, 13.

Mr. Hooker takes it for granted as a clear case, That one may be a Convert
soundly brought home to Christ, and yet through his weakness not able to
discern the Lords Body aright, nor fit to partake of the Supper. Survey. part.
3. page 16.

And in his Sermons on Genesis 17.23. Page 21. He has these words, Baptism is the
entrance into Christ's Family; there is much more to be looked at to make a
person capable of the Supper of the Lord, a man must be able to Examine
himself, he must not only have Grace, but growth of Grace; he must have so
much perfection in Grace as to search his own heart, and he must be able to
discern the Lords Body, or else he is guilty of the Body and blood of Christ;
so as there is more required in this, for there must be a growth. But Baptism
is our entrance, and the lowest degree of Grace will serve here in the
judgment of Charity.

Worthy Hildersam on Psalm. 51.5. page 257. says, The Infants of the Faithful
are said to be Holy, not because they are without sin, but because (in the
judgment of the Church) they are to be esteemed not Infidels as other Children
of Pagans, but Christians and Believers, and holy and true Members of the
Church of God. And Hence 1. So soon as they are born they have title to the
Seal of Gods Covenant, and the Church may not deny it unto then. -- And why may
not the Church deny Baptism to any child of a believing Parent? surely because
the Church is bound to esteem every such child not an Infidel, but rather a
Believer and a true Christian. 2. When they dye we are in Christian Charity to
judge that they dye in Gods favor, and in the state of Salvation. And all this
because of the Covenant, Genesis 17. as he there adds. Yet the same Hildersam
would not admit such as these (who were born and grew up in the visible Church)
to the Lords Table, without a strict Examination not only of their Knowledge
and Lives, but of their Spiritual Estate. Doct. of Lords Supper, page 8 -- 14.

All which we produce, not as if the Testimony and concurrence of Authors were
the Basis that our judgment in this matter stands upon, but because this
Preface does, both in this place and in other parts of it, insinuate to the
Reader as if Authority of Writers were for the Dissenters, and against the
Doctrine of the Synod, which is far from being so: the contrary being
abundantly, and undeniably evident. And as we bottom our Faith in this point,
wholly and only upon the Scriptures, and do refer the decision of this and
of all other Theological controversies to the Law and to the Testimony: so we
acknowledge it to be no small confirmation to us, to find that we have the
Concurrence of the Godly-learned. The substance of the Congregational-Way may
be gathered from the Doctrine and Principles of our best and ablest Reforming
Divines So much Parkers learned Labors among others show, and our
Congregational Brethren in England met at the Savoy, in their Preface do well
express: And see Beverly Examen Hoornb. page 43.
: which does not a little confirm us in it, and delivers it from the Imputation
of Novelty or Singularity. But should we limit Baptism to so narrow a scantling
as our Brethren strive for, we should therein go against the whole stream of
Divines, even of those that have been most eminent in their generations for
Learning, Holiness, and Studiousness of Reformation; yea, of those from whom
our Congregational Leaders have professed to receive their Principles, as was
abovesaid. And we confess our selves conscious to so much of our own weakness,
that unless we have very clear Light, and undeniable Argument constraining us,
we are slow and fearful to go alone, or to go contrary to the concurrent
Judgment of our best Divines, who (if we may use our Brethrens phrase) have
been Stars of the first Magnitude, incomparable Champions for the Truth, and
have been raised up by Christ to light the Path of Reformation in these later
Ages.

Now as for what is here alleged by our Brethren as favoring their Cause; To
say, That the Catechumeni were not (in the Primitive times) to be baptized,
before they were fit for the Lords Supper. Consider how it can consist with the
above mentioned practice of Antiquity, in not so much as teaching the
Catechumeni any thing about the Lords Supper, till after they were baptized.
Indeed, as the Darkness and Corruption of the times increased, Baptism was not
only deferred till Easter (as is here said) but till death, which is justly
taxed as an abuse by Cartwright in his Catechism, page 182. and we suppose will
not be approved by any. The Arausiacan Councils, 19 Canon; does not concern the
matter of Baptism, as it is set down by the Magdeburg Centurists ( Cent. 5.
page 907.) But however it be, it is of small moment. The overlong holding off
of adult Converts from Baptism, that we sometimes read of in the Fourth and
Fifth Centuries, was a manifest devi^tion from the Apostolical practice. We
find also that in Austin's time, and some ages after, they gave the Lords
Supper to Infants, yet then we suppose they would give both Sacraments to some
Infants, whose Parents they debarred from the Lords Supper. But if it was
indeed a grievous error to administer the Lords Supper to Infants (as is here
rightly said by our Brethren) how then is Baptism of no greater Latitude, as to
the Subject thereof, then the Lords Supper? Yea, let any man show a reason why
Baptism should be regularly extendible to Infants, and not the Lords Supper, if
the very sa^e qualifications be absolutely requisite to the one as to the
other; we say, absolutely requisite* for no man doubts but that the better
qualifications a person who receives Baptism for himself, or for his Children,
is endued with, the better and the more comfortable it is.

As for that of Iuel, That Baptism is as much to be reverenced, ^s the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ. And that which follows, That former
Ages have been far from looking upon the Lords Supper as being of a more
sacred nature then the other Ordinance of Baptism.

Answ. To assert that Scripture Rules make the Subject of Baptism larger then
the Subject of the Lords Supper, this does not detract from the Reverence of
Baptism, nor render it an Ordinance of a less sacred nature, as is here
insinuated. The Word and Prayer are Ordinances of a very sacred nature, and to
be highly reverenced, and yet many may be admitted unto them, that may not be
admitted unto Sacraments. The Sacredness of every Ordinance, lies in the holy
and religious application of it to its proper ends and uses by Divine
Institution: But the proper ends and uses of one Ordinance may, by Divine
Institution, be such as may admit more to partake of it then of another, and
yet the sacred nature thereof be no whit impaired Consider whether it be not a
greater detracting from the sacredness of Baptism, when we make but a light
matter of that Membership and Covenant that was sealed therein. If men have
been once admitted to the Lords Supper, they count their Membership stands firm
and good (through all decays and degeneracies) until excommunicate. But the
Solemn Covenant and Engagement between God and the Baptized, that was ratified
in holy Baptism, wears away, and is a kind of forgotten thing by that time
they become adult. To be difficult in admissions unto Baptism, and yet easy in
letting go the benefit of Baptism (or the Membership thereby sealed) and to
allege the Sacredness of the Ordinance for the former, and forget in the
latter, seem not well to cohere.
.

But the Preface adds: Indeed of late there have been those who have made
Baptism of a far larger extent then the Lords Supper: This has been one
Practical Difference between Congregational-men and Presbyterians.

Answ. Whether it have been only a late or novell Notion, to make Baptism
larger then the Lords Supper, let the Reader judge, when he has considered the
Testimonies before alleged, with many more that might have been added
thereunto: But we are so far from looking upon a different Latitude of these
two Sacraments to be a Presbyterian Principle, or Anti-Congregational as that
we persuade our selves, the Congregational way cannot long stand without it.
For, if we deny this, and administer Baptism to none but those whose Parents do
partake of the Lords Supper, and so are in full Communion* then we must either
make full Communion very large, which in the Congregational-way, where Brethren
have so great an interest in Church-transactions, will soon ruin all: or else
make Baptism, and consequently the Compass of the visible Church so strait, as
will never stand before Rational and Scriptural men; yea, we shall put
multitudes out of the visible Church, that are in a visible state of Salvation,
which is absurd: for to deny persons Baptism for themselves or Children, is to
deny them to be within the Compass of the visible Church, seeing Baptism ought
to run parallel with Church Membership. But how shall we deny them a room in
the visible Church, who were once in, and are by no Rule to be put out, nay
whom God (as we may charitably hope) takes into Heaven when they die, and that
as a fruit of his Covenant-grace? which is the case of many of our Children who
are not yet come up to full Communion. But so much for the second Reason of our
Brethrens Dissent. The third follows.

3. The Parents of the Children in question, are not Members of any Instituted
Church, according to Gospel rules ^ because they were never under any explicit
and personal Covenant. Which is former proved; Because if they be Members, then
they would be a true* Church though all their Parents were dead, and then they
must have power of Voting in Church Affairs, which is denied to them by the
Synod.

Ans..1. It seems, by what is here said, that our Children were never under any
explicit and personal Covenant, and that all that never were so, are not
members of any Instituted Church according to Gospel-rules. If this be so, then
what is become of Childrens Membership, which the Apologist before, in Answer
to Objection Second, took it as an injury to be charged with the denial of? It
seems our Children neither are nor ever were Members of any instituted Church
according to Gospel-rules, because they were never under any explicit and
personal Covenant. Is it come to this, that Children are not Members of any
Instituted Church? How then? are they Members of the Catholic visible Church?
or are they no Members at all? the former our Brethren fancy not, as it seems
by their Anti-Synodalia, page 19. the latter then remains to be the conclusion.
Neither will it salve it to say, they were Members in Minority, though they be
not Members now when they are Adult; for if all those that were never under any
explicit and personal Covenant, be no Members of any Instituted Church, and if
Children were never under any explicit and personal Covenant (both which are
here said) then no Children (no not while in Minority) are Members of any
Instituted Church. For our parts we doubt not to affirm with Dr. Ames in his
Chapter de Ecclesia instituta, (...) Lib. 1.^. p. ^2.
that Children are Members of an Instituted Church according to Gospel-rules,
and that they are under personal Covenant, i. e. personally (...) into Covenant
by God, according to his Gospel-rules, though they have not performed the act
of Covenanting in their own persons. Yea, under explicit Covenant also, if the
Parents Covenanting was explicit, Deuteronomy. 29. So Ames, They are partakers of the
same Covenant, and also of the same profession with their Parents. Though we
take it for a Principle granted by Congregational men, with one consent, that
Implicit Covenant preserves the being of a true Church, and so of true
Church Membership.

2. The Consequent of our assertion here urged as absurd, viz. [ That then, in
ease all the pro-parents were dead, this second Generation would be a true*
Church of Christ without any further act or covenanting] is no absurdity but a
manifest Truth, i. e. taking that Phrase [ Further act, or covenanting] to be
meant of a particular formal act of Explicit Verbal covenanting. For
otherwise, there is a further act, yea an act of (implicit) covenanting in
their constant and public profession of the Religion of their Fathers. But we
say this second Generation, continuing (to use Mr. Cottons Phrase in Grounds of
Baptism, page 106.) in a visible profession of the Covenant, Faith, and
Religion of their Fathers, are a true Church of Christ, though they have not
yet made any explicit personal expression of their engagement, as their
Fathers did* Even as the Israelites that were numbered in the Plains of Moab
were a true Church, and under the Covenant of God made with them in Horeb,
though their Parents with whom it was first made in Horeb, were all dead, and
that before the solemn renewing of the Covenant with them in the plains of
Moab, Deuteronomy. 29. see Deuteronomy. 5.2, 3. with Numb. 26.63, 64, 65. and so Mr. Hooker
roundly and expressly affirms this which is here by our Brethren denied, Survey.
Part. 1. page 48.

3. As for our denial of the liberty of Voting in Church Affairs to the persons
in question, till they be fitted for, and admitted to the Lords Supper, it
stands good and rational without any prejudice to their being a true Church in
the case supposed. For there is no difficulty in it, to conceive that the case
of a true Church may be such (by degeneracy, or loss of their best Members,
etc.) as that they may be at present unfit to put forth or exercise a power of
acting in Church Affairs (though it be radically in them) till by the use of
needful means they, or a select qualified number among them, be brought up unto
a better and fitter capacity for it. And examples hereof are not far to seek:
let that way of reforming corrupt and degenerate Churches be attended which is
partly suggested in Mr. Allin's, and Mr. Shepard's Preface, before their
Defense of the Nine Positions (which Preface Beverly says is Instar omnium)
Page 10, 18, 19, 20. viz. Examen H^ornb. page 20.
that they be acknowledged true Churches, and called by the powerful Preaching
of the word to Humiliation, Repentance, and agreement unto Reformation: and
then that such as do so agree, and submit to Discipline, being owned to be of
the Church; among them a select number who are found upon trial able to examine
themselves, and discern the Lords body, and do walk according to Christ, do
solemnly renew or enter into Covenant, and so electing officers, etc. enjoy
full communion, and carry on all Church Affairs in the Congregational way. This
shows that a Church may be out of case for the present exercise of a proper
Church power, and may need much preparation, and reducement into order before
it come up thereunto: and yet this does not hinder it from being a true Church,
nor from having that power radically in it, and which in a way of due order it
may come to the exercise of. Have not the late times had experience of many
Congregations unto which it was fain to be a public care to sent Ministers,
and they to preach to them many years before they found a number fit for full
Communion and management of Church Affairs? and yet they retained the being of
true Churches, and Church Members all this while. See also Mr. Shepards
late-printed Letter about the Church Membership of Children, page 18. We might
also ask whether such a member of reasoning as is here used would prove Women
to be no Members of an Instituted Church? Because if all the Men were dead,
they could not then be a Church, nor Vote in Church Affairs, choose Officers,
etc.

But that which is said may suffice: only let us add, that as the case that
is supposed, viz. of all the Parents (or all that were in full Communion) being
dead, at once, is rarely, if ever heard of; so also the case we added, viz. for
the whole body to be fallen into an unfitness for full Communion, by corruption
and degeneracy, would be (we may hope) as rare, if Discipline and other
Ordinances be kept up, in their use and vigor. God will so bless his own
Ordinances, if duly attended, as that a considerable number shall from time to
time have such Grace given them as to be fit for full Communion, and to carry
on all the things of his House with competent Strength, Beauty, and Edification.

The fourth Reason of our Brethrens Dissent, is this: It is not mere Membership
(as the Synod speaks) but qualified Membership that gives right unto Baptism:
for John 's Baptism might not be applied unto the standing Members of the
visible Church, till they were qualified with Repentance. This (say they) seems
to us to cut the sinews of the strongest Arguments of the Synod for
englargeme^^ ^f Baptism: for neither does the Scripture acknowledge any such
mere Membership as they speak of; nor is it mere Membership, but qualified
Membership that gives right unto this divine and sacred Ordinance.

Answ. This term or distinction of [ Mere Membership] is here, as also in the
Book to which this Preface is prefixed, much exagitated, and harshly censured:
but let the plain meaning of the Synod therein be attended, and there will
appear no cause for such exagitation. When the Synod said, that persons are not
therefore to be admitted to full Communion merely because they are and continue
Members; and that Mere Membership (or Membership alone) does not suffice to
render men Subjects of the Lords Supper, Propos. 4. p. 17, 18. the meaning is,
That full Communion does not belong to a Member as such, or to a person merely
because he is a Member, for then it would belong to all Members, which it does
not. A person may be a Member (or in memberly Relation) and yet not bein full
Communion. Now to say that mere Membership (in this sense) the Scripture
acknowledges not, is as if one should say, that the Scripture acknowledges
not Logical Distinctions between things in their Abstract and general Nature,
and the same things as clothed with various Adjuncts and Accessions; which to
say, were strangely to forget our selves. But when it is hence inferred and put
upon us, That we set up a mere Membership, and a sort of mere Members in the
Church; this is an unnecessary Reflection. As, if we should say that Riches do
not belong to men merely as men, or merely because they are men; would it be a
good inference to say, that we set up a sort of mere men (or a mere Humanity
existing alone) or that we distinguish men into Mere men, and Rich men? There
is no individual man in the world that is a mere man, i. e. that has a naked
Humanity without Adjuncts; yet Logic distinguishes between Humanity and its
Adjuncts, and between what belongs to a man as such, and what accreweth to
him other ways,. So in the Church; Membership, or memberly Relation, is not
existent in particular persons, without some Communion flowing from it, nor yet
without some Qualifications (unto Charity) under it, more or less, at least
ordinarily; though it may, and often does exist without those special and
peculiar qualifications that fit men for the Lords Table. But surely we may
well distinguish, especially between the memberly Rel^tion and those special
superadded Qualifications, and between what belongs to persons in the one
respect and in the other. For some Privileges in the Church belong to persons
by virtue of their memberly Relation, or merely because they are Members; they
belong to a Member as such: so does Baptism, Matthew. 28.19. the Benefit of
Church-watch and Discipline ( viz. according to Natural capacity in regard of
age, there is no other Moral capacity but that of Membership requisite to a
Subject thereof) Acts 20.28. 1 Cor. 5.12 and a share in the common Legacies of
the Covenant, Romans 3.1, 2. and 9.4. Acts 3.25, 26. Mere Membership, or
Membership alone, gives right to these things. But there be other Privileges
in the Church that do not belong to Members as such (or to persons merely
because they are Members) but to Members as clothed with such and such special
qualifications. So the Passover and other holy things of old, and so the Lords
Supper now, 1 Cor. 11.28.

Now thus to distinguish, does not distribute Members into mere Members and
others, but it distributes Privileges unto their proper Subjects, and states
the immediate Right unto each sort of Privileges upon its proper Basis. If we
say that Government of a Family does not belong to persons merely because they
are Members of the Family; do we thereby set up a sort of mere Members thereof,
that have no Family-benefit, but only a Titulary Relation to it, etc? Indeed
such a saying would impor^, that in a Family there are some that are
Governors, and some that are not Governors of it; as also that one may be a
Member of a Family, and yet have no hand in the Government thereof. So the
distinction in hand implies, That in the Church some are in full Communion, and
some are not; and that one may be in Memberly Relation, and yet not be in full
Communion: and surely the truth of this cannot be doubted of. If Children in
minority be Members (as our Brethren acknowledge them to be) then there are
some Members that are not in (nor yet fit for) full Communion. And for the
Adult, when a man is by Admonition debarred from the Lords Table, and yet not
Excommunicated; does he not continue a Member (yea, a personal Member in our
Brethrens account) and yet is not in full Communion? This demonstrates that
Membership and full Communion are distinct and separable things. It is clear
enough, that our Non excommunicable Children do continue Members of the Church;
yet many of them are not in full Communi^^ (...) will our Brethren say that
they are fit for it. So then, neither the Logical distinction between what
belongs to persons simply as Members (or by their mere Membership) and what
belongs to them as further endued with such and such special qualifications;
nor yet the Assertion flowing from it, viz. [ That some may be and continue
Members, and yet not be in full Communion] can ju^tly be objected against. The
sum is; The persons in question have by virtue of their memberly Relation (or
merely by their Membership) a proper right unto the Privileges that are
desired for them; yet withal, they have some qualifications, and some
Communion (and so are not mere Members in contradistinction hereunto) though
they have not yet such full qualifications as to come into full Communion.

But thus much being s^id concerning that distinction which the Synod uses,
and the meaning of it: Proceed we to the Assertion here laid down by our
Brethren, and their Proof thereof. Their Assertion is, That it is not mere
Membership, but qualified Membership that gives right to Baptism.

Remember here, that our ^^^pute properly is of Membership de jure, or regular
Membership, (i. e. wherein the Rule appoints or allows one to be, or to be
continued a member of the visible Church) not of Membership de facto only. Now
Membership de jure, or regular Membership, implies some qualification, as* viz.
that a person being a Churchmember is not under such gross, and incorrigible
Ignorance, Heresy, Scandal or Apostasy, as renders him an immediate Subject of
Excommunication; hence mere Membership is not so to be opposed to qualified
Membership, as if it were destitute of all qualifications. Those whom the Lord
does, and whom the Church, acting regularly, may own, and continue as Members,
they are so far qualified as that the Rule has accepted them into Covenant,
and does not appoint us to put them out. Now then, understanding mere
Membership f^r [ Merely this, that a man is regularly a Member] and qualified
Membership for [ Superadded qualifications, over and above what is essentially
requisite to regular Membership] the (...) said Ass^rtion is thus much; It is
not sufficient to give a person right to baptism, that he be regularly a Member
of the visible Church, but he must have some further qualification then so, or
else he has not right thereunto. This Assertion (or to say, in this sense)
that it is not mere Membership, but qualified Membership that gives right to
Baptism, is indeed an Antisynodalian Assertion, and we doubt not to affirm it
is Antiscriptural.

1. It is Antisynodalian, or directly opposite to the Doctrine of the Synod,
and we will readily grant that if this could be proved, it cuts asunder the
^inews of the Synods strongest Arguments; for this is that which the Synod
stand and build upon, That it is Covenant Interest, or Federal holiness, or
visible Church Membership (which are but several expressions of the same thing)
that properly gives Right to Baptism, or, that Baptism belongs to a
Churchmember as such, and so to all Church Members. And hence by the way, let
it be minded that the Synod in their fifth Proposition have comprised both the
Right to Baptism, and the manner of administration: the distinstion between
which two, was often-over mentioned in the Synod; though they put both together
in the Proposition for better concurrence sake, and that they might at once
familiarly set down what is to be attended in such a case. The [ Right] stands
upon [ Membership] whereby the parent, and so the Child is regularly within
the visible Church; so as no more qualification in the Parent is simply
necessary to give the Child right to Baptism, but what is essentially
requisite unto regular Membership. As for other and further qualifications
pointed to in the Proposition (as, Giving account of their assent to the
Doctrine of Faith, Solemn owning of the Covenant, etc.) they properly belong to
the manner of Administration. Yet these are not therefore needless things, nor
may they be disregarded, or boldly slighted and refused by any ( because
Membership alone gives Right) for God has made it one Commandment of four, to
provide for the manner of his Worship, requiring that all his holy Ordinances
be attended in a Solemn, Humble, Reverent and Profitable manner: and it cannot
be denied to be meet and needful, that persons should both know and own the
Covenant-state they are in, and the state of subjection to Christ's Government,
which the Covenant places them in, especially when they partake of such a
fruit of the Covenant as Baptism for their Children is: that they should do
Covenant-duties, when they come for Covenant privileges; that they should both
seek and attend the Lords holy Ordinance (though it be their Right never so
much) in Humility and Fear: and it being one Branch of the Covenant, that they
give up their Children to the Lord, and do promise to take care for their
Christian Education, it must needs be suitable that they be minded of it when
they present them to Baptism, and the more explicitly they do so promise, it
is the better. Hence all Reformed Churches do in their Directories, and
Practices, require Professions, and Promises of Parents, or those that present
the Child to Baptism, and appoint a solemn manner of Administration, and stand
upon it as a needful duty. Though they unanimously own and grant, that the
Child has a full and clear Right to Baptism by its being born within the
visible Church. See English Leiturgie of the administration of Baptism.
Directory, page 31. Late Petition for Peace, page 61, etc. Zepperi Polit.
Ecces. page 128. and page 147 -- 150. Alasco, page 121 -- 137. Ratio Discipl.
Bohem. page 43. Hence also no man will doubt but that it is a comfortable and
desirable thing, that the Parent do address himself in the most solemn,
serious, and spiritual manner to draw nig^ to God upon such an occasion as the
Baptizing of a Child, by humbling himself before God for all neglects and
Breaches of his Covenant, by taking hold of the encouraging promises of Grace
in Christ, in reference unto the Children of the Covenant; and by pouring out
earnest Prayer to God for his Child, and for an heart to do the duty of a
Christian Parent toward his Child, as does become him, etc. And such things as
these, Parents may and ought to be stirred up unto in the Ministry of the Word,
as their duty. But still we must distinguish between what belongs to the manner
of Administration, or to the better and more comfortable attendance thereof,
and between what is essentially requisite to give right and title to the
Ordinance before the Church. This latter, mere Membership (or Membership alone)
does. A state of Membership in the visible Church, is that unto which the right
of Baptism is annexed It is not the qualifications of one in full Communion,
but his Membership that gives his Child right to Baptism; for suppose he decay
in qualification, and grow formal and loose, yet while he continues a Member
uncensured, he has his Child baptized as well as the best in the Church.
, as not only the Synod, but the Scripture teaches. And so,

2. The Assertion beforementioned ( viz. That it is not mere Membership, but
qualified Membership that gives right to Baptism: in the sense above given) is
also Antiscriptural; 1. Because it directly overthrows Infant Baptism, which
the Scripture establishes: for what have Infants more then Membership (or
Federal holiness, or Covenant Interest) to give them right to Baptism? i. e.
What have they more then this, that they are regularly (by the Rules of Gods
Word, and his Institution therein) within the visible Church? If this will not
suffice, but there must be some other qualifications besides, and superadded
unto this, what shall become of them? For our parts, we know no stronger
Argument for Infants Baptism then that; Church members, or Foederati, are to be
baptized: the Infants of the Faithful are Church Members, or Foederati: Ergo.
But if the foresaid Assertion hold, this Argument fails, and falls short: for
now Church Membership, or to be in Covenant, or Federal holiness, will not
serve the turn, but there must be more then this to give right to Baptism. How
the sinews of the strongest Arguments of the Synod for Enlargement of Baptism
will fare, we know not; but sure we are, that this cuts in sunder the sinews of
the strongest Arguments for Infant Baptism, which must fall if this stand. But
fall it never will (through Grace) while the Lords Appointment in the Covenant
of Abraham stands, viz. to have the Initiating Seal run parallel with the
Covenant, Genesis 17. or Christ's Commission, Matthew. 28.19. viz. to Baptize all
Disciples, or all Members of the visible Church under the New Testament. Let
this Assertion therefore fall, which makes the extent of the Initiatory Seal
shorter then the Covenant, and denies Baptism to run parallel with
Church Membership under the Gospel. Hence, 2. It contradicts that which the
Harmony of Scripture, and all Orthodox Divines acknowledge for a Principle,
viz. That the whole visible Church (i. e. now under the New Testament) ought to
be baptized; or that all Church members are Subjects of Baptism: for, if not
mere Membership (or Membership alone) but qualified Membership gives right to
Baptism; then not all Members, but some only, viz. those that be so and so
qualified, are to be baptized. If Baptism do not belong to mere Membership, or
to a Member as such, then not to all Members: as a quatenus ad omne, so a non
quatenus ad non omne valet consequentiae. This denies not only in the Fifth,
but the First Proposition of the late Synod (which yet the Antisynodalia, page
17. seem to consent unto.) But let the Arguments that are given from Scripture
to confirm that First Proposition, be duly weighed, and they will be found to
be of greater weight then to be shaken by this Assertion.

Now for the Proof of this Assertion; viz. Because John 's Baptism, which was
Christian Baptism, might not be applied to some who were standing Members of
the visible Church, because they were not qualified with Repentance, Luke 3.8.
and 7.30. Therefore Christian Baptism is not to be applied unto such as stand
Members in the visible Church, if they be not qualified with fruits of
Repentance.

Answ. Let this be answered with reference to Infant Baptism, which lies upon
our Brethren to do, as well as on us, seeing they above declared
Antipoedobaptism to be a sinful Opinion, and do profess to hold and maintain
the baptizing of Infants: though indeed the Reader could not gather so much
from these words [ Christian Baptism is not to be applied unto such (...) stand
Members in the visible Church, if they be not qualified with fruits of
Repentance.] This seems directly to gainsay Infant Baptism; for Infants do
indeed stand Members of the visible Church, but how do they or can they show
that they are qualified with fruits of Repentance? for it seems that neither is
Repentance it self sufficient without [ Fruits] of Repentance. But we are to
suppose our Brethren do not intend to oppose Infant Baptism, and therefore that
their meaning is not to require these fruits of Repentance (or qualifications
superadded to Membership) of the Children or person^ to be baptized, but of
their Parents; though it be not so expressed. But, let this Argument from
John's requiring of qualifications over and above Membership, be answered, with
reference to Infant Baptism, and that will answer it as to the case in hand. We
remember in Debates between the Elders and an Antipoed^baptist many years
since, this very Argument was urged by him, and the same Answer that was given
then, we shall give here; Viz.

1. That merely to be a Member of the Old Testament Jewish Church, or simply to
be in Covenant (or Confederate) under the Old Testament manner of
Administration, suffices not to Baptism: but to be in the Church and Covenant
of the New Testament, to be a Member of a Gospel Church, stated and settled
under the Gospel manner of Administration, this is that which Right to Baptism
stands upon, and here Membership alone suffices thereunto. When we say, that
Members of the visible Church, Confederates etc. are to be Baptized, we must
needs be understood to speak of the visible Church (or of Covenant Interest)
under the New Testament, and Gospel-administration, which is founded upon
Christ already come. And it were most absurd and irrational to understand us
otherwise; we having now no other Church or Covenant to speak of, but that. Old
Testament-Church-membership gave right to Circumcision; New Testament
Church Membership gives right to Baptism. But at the transition from Old to
New, or at the first setting up of the Gospel-administration (o^ Kingdom of
Heaven, as it is called) and of Baptism, the entering seal thereof in John
Baptists's and Christ's time, well might more be required then bare Membership
in the Jewish Church (which was then also under great corruption, and
degeneracy) Hence all the Members of the Church of the Jews were not Baptized,
but only those that in some degree embraced the new and reformed
Administration: in order to which, a special Repentance was then necessary,
Mat. 3.2. But to infer from hence, a necessity of qualifications superadded
unto Membership in stated Christian or Gospel-Churches* in order to
Baptism-right, will not hold; there is a wide difference between the case of
Ecclesia Christiana Constituenda, and Constituta. In those first beginnings of
the Gospel, Acts 8.27, 28, 36, 37. and 10.^, 22, 47, 48.
even Pious persons, and men fearing God, such as the Eunuch, and Cornelius,
must have further Instruction, and preparation, before they could be Baptized:
may a man thence infer, that now in the Christian Church Constituted, a
Christian or Churchmember that fears God, is not Baptizable without further
qualifications?

2. Much of what was required by John Baptist of the Members of the Jewish
Church before he Baptized them, may be referred to the manner of
Administration, and was upon that account attended in a case so circumstanced,
as that was; for that by reason of their Church State (though so degenerate as
they were) they were in a far other and nearer capacity then Non-members; and
that thereby they had a Right to the ministrations of John and Christ among
them, is plain from many Scriptures, Luke 1.16. John 1.11. Mat. 10.6. and
15.24, 26. Romans 15.8. But those that were then to be Baptized (at that first
Institution of Baptism, and beginning of the Gospel-administration) being adult
persons, and they defiled with Scandal, and Degeneracy, yea having much lost
the Truth of Doctrine in many poinst* hence they could not be brought to
entertain that beginning of the Gospel (as it is called, Mark 1.1, 2.) and
Baptism the Sign and Seal thereof, without previous convictions, and
penitential preparations by the powerful Ministry of the Baptist. But it does
not appear that more was pre-required of them, then what was necessary to an
humble submitting to the Ordinance, and to that new and reforming
Administration then on foot, which was betokened and sealed thereby. And he
that shall consider the multitudes that were Baptized by John. Mat. 3.5, 6.
Luke 3.7, 21. in the short time of his Ministry, and in those glimmerings of
Gospel Light that they then had, together with the great weakness, and rawness
of some that he Baptized, John 3.25, 26. Act. 19.1 -- 5. will not think that
the persons Baptized by John did excel those whom the Synod describes in
their fifth Proposition, of which our Brethren were so sensible in their
Anti-synodalia, page 18. that there they chose rather to wave John's Practice,
and to seek for stricter presidents, though here they plead, (and that rightly
and truly) that John's Baptism was Christian Baptism, and holds forth a Rule
unto us. As for that Confession of sins in Mat. 3.6. when our Children do in
their Assens to the Doctrine of Faith, and Consent to the Covenant, acknowledge
their sin, and misery by nature, their perishing condition without Christ, etc.
are willing to submit to Instruction, and Government, for the Reformation of
their sins (as those that were Baptized by John showed their penitential frame
by that, viz. a submission to his Instructions and Counsels, Luke 3.10 -- 14.)
they cannot be denied to have somewhat of that confession of sin. So Chemnit.
on the place, They acknowledged themselves to be sinners, Chemnit. in Mat. 3.6.
and both in words, and by their action in desiring to be baptized, they
professed their fear of the wrath of God, and desire to escape it. But if any
do stand guilty of Open Scandals, we know not why they should not make
particular Confession of their sin therein, when they come to present
themselves before God, and desire Baptism for their Children, if they have not
done it before (so says the same Chemnitius in the same place of them;
Moreover, such as stood guilty of more grievous falls, did also confess them in
particular.) To be sure, they should by the Discipline of the Church be brought
to that, whether they had Children to be baptized or no, but then may be a
fitting season for it.

Thus there may be cause and call for a special Repentance in special cases
(when persons have so carried it, as to shake their standing in the visible
Church) and although the Rule owns the Child to be a Member of the Church, and
so a Subject of Baptism, while it allows the Parent to be a Member not cut off;
yet it is a Covenant-duty of the Parent to confess his sin in such a case: and
so shall Baptism be administered with greater honor to God, and comfort to all
that are concerned. But otherwise, while the Parent that was born in the
Church, regularly continues in it, without Scandal, he is Ecclesiastically
accounted to have the being of Repentance, and so to have the thing which John
required of them, though not the same modus of Manifestation, and discovery
thereof.

Now follows the fifth Reason of our Brethrens Dissent, which is this; That
which will not make a man capable of receiving Baptism himself, in case he were
unbaptized, does not make him capable of transmitting right of Baptism unto his
Child: but all that the Synod has said will not give a man Right to Baptism
himself in case he were unbaptized; therefore all that the Synod has said is
not enough to make a man capable of transmitting right of Baptism unto his
Child. Whereunto is added somewhat out of Bucer, Parker and Mr. Cotton, as
concurring with the judgment of our Brethren.

Ans. Taking [ Capable of receiving Baptism himself, or Right to Baptism
himself] for a state of Baptism-right, or Capacity, we may grant the Major, but
the Minor in manifestly to be denied. But taking it for a frame of actual
fitness to receive Baptism, we cannot say that we may grant the Minor, but
surely the Major will not hold.

It is true, that That which does not put a man into a state of right to
Baptism for himself in case he were unbaptized (i. e. into a state of
Church Membership) will not enable him to give Baptism-right to his Child. If
the Parent be not a Member, or not in a state of Covenant interest, none of us
plead for the Childs Baptism. And if he be a (...) surely he is in the state
of a Subject of Baptism, or in a state of right to it (as all the Members of
the visible Church are) whatever may de facto hinder it. But it is possible for
an adult person, being in the state of a Member, and so of right to Baptism, to
have something fall in which may hinder the actual application of Baptism to
himself (in case he were unbaptized) or his actual fitness for it: And yet the
same thing may not hinder a person already baptized, and standing in a
Covenant-state, from conveying Baptism-right to his Child. The reason is,
because the right of the Child depends upon the state of the Parent (that he
be in a state of Membership: for if so, then Divine Institution carries or
transmitteth Membership, and so Baptism-right to the Child) but the Parents
regular partaking of this or that Ordinance for himself, depends much upon his
own actual fitness for it. As suppose an unbaptized adult person admitted into
the Church, who before he is baptized falls into some great Offense (though
such a case could hardly fall out, if Baptism were administered according to the
Rule, and Apostolical Practice, i. e. immediately upon first Admission, Matthew.
28.19. Acts 16.33. much more is it an harsh and strange supposition for a
Parent that ought to have been, and was baptized in his Infancy, to be supposed
to be yet unbaptized* but allowing the supposition, that a person (...) in
adult age falls into Offense before he is baptized) he may be called to give
satisfaction for it, and to show himself in a more serious and penitent frame
before himself receive Baptism; but suppose he die before he do that, and leave
Children behind him, shall not they be baptized? In like manner, if a person
already baptized, yea or already in full Communion, should fall into offense,
you would say that would put a stop to his own Baptism, in case (upon an
impossible supposition) he were yet unbaptized; but what Rule or Reason is
there for it, to make a particular offense in the Parent, to cut o^ the Childs
right to Baptism, when as the Parent is (notwithstanding that offense) still a
Member, and within the Church, and does not show any such incorrigibleness, as
that (...) is by Rule to be put out? when as the offense does not cut off the
Parents Membership, is there any reason it should cut off the Membership of the
Child? and if it cut not of the Childs Membership, it does not cut off his
right to Baptism* Whatever may be said for requiring the Parent to confess his
sin before his Childs Baptism, in reference to the more expedient and
comfortable manner of Administration (therein we oppose not) yet where does the
Scripture allows us to disannull the Childs right to Baptism upon a particular
offense in the Parent, especially when it is not such as does touch upon the
Essentials of Christianity, and notwithstanding which, the Parent is regularly
and orderly continued a Member of the Church? It remains therefore that there
may be obstructions to a Parents receiving Baptism for himself, in case he were
unbaptized, which do not incapacitate a baptized Parent to transmit (if we may
attribute transmitting to a Parent, which is properly the act of Gods
Institution and Covenant) right of Baptism unto his Child.

But for the Minor or Assumption of the Argument in hand, it will not hold in
either of the senses of the Proposition above given. For,

1. We will readily grant, that if the Parent be not in a state of
Baptism-right himself, i. e. in a state of Membership, he cannot convey
Baptism-right to his Child; but how manifest is it, that that which the Synod
has said in their fifth Proposition, does render the persons there described
in a state of right to Baptism for themselves, in case they were unbaptized,
viz. In a state of Membership in the visible Church; for the Proposition speaks
of Church Members, such as were admitted Members in minority, and do orderly
and regularly so continue: and that a state of Membership is a state of
Baptism-right, or that all Church Members are in the state of Subjects of
Baptism, is an evident Truth that cannot be denied by any that grant the Synods
first Proposition; for which there is Sun-light in Scripture, and never was
Orthodox Divine heard of that questioned it. Hence according to that Ruled Case
here mentioned, the Parents in question having themselves a title to Baptism,
may entitle others; they have not only a title to it, but regular and actual
Possession of it, for they are baptized, and in case they were yet unbaptized,
they would, being Church Members, have a title of right unto it (they would
stand possessed of an interest in a title to it, as Mr. Hooker in the place
here alleged speaks) whatever might de facto hinder their enjoyment of it. And
as a non habente potestatem, acts are invalid; so ab habente potestatem they
are valid and good: but God has full power to give forth what Grants he
pleases, and he has in the order of his Covenant in the visible Church,
granted a Membership, and so Baptism-right unto Children born of Parents that
are Members, and so the Parent that stands Member of the Church, has as an
instrument under God, and from his Grant, power to (...) such a right unto his
Child. Children are within the Covenant, because they come from Parents within
the Covenant, in which they were included, and so received also by God, says
Mr. Hooker in the place that is here cited. Survey, part. 3. page 18.

2. It is not to be yielded, that the Parents described by the Synod in their
fifth Proposition, would not have right to Baptism themselv^s in case they were
unbaptized, though you take [ Right to Baptism] for actual and immediate
fitness for the same in fero Ecclesia. Surely he will have an hard talk, who
shall undertake out of Scripture, or Orthodox Divines, to show, that Adult
persons understanding and believing the Doctrine of Faith, and publicly
professing the same, not scandalous in life, and solemnly taking h^ld of the
Covenant, wherein they give up themselves and theirs to the Lord in his Church,
and subject themselves to Christ's Government therein; That these (we say) may
be denied or debarred from Church Membership or Baptism upon their desire
thereof. It is not easy to believe, that the multitudes baptized by John
Baptist and by Christ (i. e. by his Disciples at his Order) in the time of
their Ministry; or the many thousands of the Jews that were counted Believers,
and baptized after Christ's Ascension (too much addicted unto Judaism, Acts
21.20. and 15.1.) or the Numbers baptized by Philip in Samaria, and by the
Apostles in other places, upon a short time of Instruction, and when they were
moved and taken (...), and of whom many proved corrupt and degenerate afterward
(as the Epistles to the Galatians, Corinthians, and other places show) That
they did (we say) (at least many of them) excel the persons described in the
Synods fifth Proposition, taking all things together: or that they had more to
render them visible Believers upon a just account then those have.

But it is a strange Reason that is here rendered by our Brethren, why that
which is set down by the Synod would not render a person a Subject of Baptism,
viz. Because [ a man may be an unbelie^er, and yet come up to all that the
Synod has said in their fifth Proposition] We suppose (...) Magus, A^^ni^ and
Sapphira, and many others, not only might be, but were unbelievers, and yet
were regularly baptized. We marvel what outward signs and professions of Faith
which the Church may proceed upon, can be given, but a man [ may ^e] an
unbeliever, and yet come up unto them? If it be said, that a man may come up to
all that the Synod has said, and yet ^e Ecclesiastically judged a visible
unbeliever, show us any ground for such a judgment.

Touching the Opinion of Bucer and Parker, here cited out of Park. de Polit.
^cel. lib. 3. p. 181, 182.

1. In the first passage the word [ Apparent.] is here added, the words in
Parker are only [ Signs of Regeneration] and the other passage in page 182.
runs thus; A confession of Faith, though public and solemn, may not be
received in Churches, quando nulla necessaria Fidei signs apparent, when as no
necessary Signs of Faith do appear: where by necessary Signs of Faith, are not
mean such signs as have a necessary Connection with Faith, or do necessarily
(i. e. infallibly, and certainly) Argue that there is* Truth of saving Faith in
the heart; such Signs men cannot see or judge of, but when there is such an
appearance, as that if that be in reality which does appear to be (on which
seems to be in outward appearance) then there is true Faith; this is that
appearance of necessary Signs of Faith which he means; hence within seven
lines of the place cited, the same thing is thus expressed; qua^diu nullo
probabili Argumento, etc. when as we are by no probable Argument given to
believe that it is in the Heart.

2. The thing there specially blamed by Bucer and Parker, is, when a bare
Verbal Profession is accepted, though accompanied with a Scandalous life; and
when there is not regard had to the conversation, as well as to the Oral
Confession, as the Discourse in the place cited at large shows.

3. But that which we would chiefly insist on for Answer, is, That Bucer and
Parker do there plainly speak of such a Confirmation (or owning men as
confirmed Members) as does import their Admission to the Lords Table, or into
full Communion (as we Phrase it) and hence do blame the Prelatical way for so
much slightness therein: so Mr. Cotton cites this place of Bucer Holin. of
Church Members, page 41.
. And so Parker a little before this his citation of Bucer complains, That
although by the English order ( if I mistake not, says he) he that is
confirmed, is capable of the Lords Supper; yet notwithstanding* such are
confirmed, if they can but say the Catec^ism, who cannot examine themselves,
nor rightly prepare themselves for the Table of the Lord. Now it is well known,
that in our Admissions unto full Communion, we are not behind in any thing that
Bucer and Parker do require, but do expect positive comfortable Signs of
Regeneration already wrought, and some experienced fruits thereof; whereby
persons may be in some measure fit for that special and comfortable Exercise of
Grace that is required in preparation for, and participation of the Lords
Table. But suppose that persons born in the Church, and baptized, be not yet
come up to this, is there any word to be found in Bucer or Parker, or in any
Judicious Orthodox Divine, that they lose their Membership, and are put out of
the Church merely because they are not come up to this, B^ne aute^ (...) nos in
genere, de ii^ omnibus qui ex fidelibus noscuntur, and f^e deris formula
indefinita jub^^, and cha^ita^ monet Bez quast. de Sacram. ^^. 123.
when as no censurable wickedness is found in them? And while the Parent stands
in the Church, his Infant-childe is in the Church also, and therefore
Baptizable. Yet withal we say, with the consent of Judicious Divines, that
while persons have a regular standing in the Church, they are in Ecclesiastical
account to be looked upon as having the Being of Regeneration, or as Fidele^,
vocati, and so regenerati, i. e. by reason of their federal Holiness, though
not by part^cular, present, evident Signs of a work of Grace already wrought in
them: in this case we take their Covenant-estate, Christian Education, Hopeful
Carriage, general Profession, etc. for Signs of Regeneration in this sense, i.
e. such as show that there may be Grace, there is nothing inconsistent with
Grace, and none knows but ^ seed of Grace (which in the first infusion, and
beginnings of it, is mavelous secret and small) may lie at bottom: and hence
the Church is to carry toward them as Heirs of Grace. But it is a further
thing for Grace to appear above-ground in such Exercise and sensible Signs,
Evidences and Experiences, as may fit them for comfortable Communion with
Christ in the Supper.

But Fourthly, if the judgment of Bucer and Parker may be taken in this
Controversy, it will (...): for, notwithstanding all that is here, or can be
cited of theirs, it is evident enough that Famous Martin Bucer, and Renowned
Parker, (as the Preface styleth them, and that deservedly) do fully concur
with the Synod in extending Baptism to such as the Synod describes, or to more
then so. Vid. Bucer de regno Christi, Lib. 1. Cap. 2. page 14. And in his
Commentary upon John, in an excellent discourse concerning Infant Baptism,
among many other useful Passages, he has these following. Sunt quidem sa^e
inter pueros Reprobi, etc. There are indeed often among Children some that be
Reprobates, but while that does not appear to us, we ought nevertheless to
reckon them among the People of God; and we shall time enough cast them out,
when by their evil fruits they shall openly show us what they are: Bucer in
Joh. fol. 43. And in another place, Quantum equidem assequi possum, etc. As far
as I can gather (says he) the Anabaptist's only reason why they dislike
Infant baptism, is, Because they fancy to themselves that the Church would be
more pure, if we baptized none but the adult, and such as hold forth evidences
of the Spirit: and so they think but a few would have place in Churches. But by
this means doubtless it would come to pass, that many of Christ's Sheep would be
neglected as Goats: neither would all Parents be so careful as they think, in
educating their Children unto piety. And yet this humane thought (which savours
of too much esteem of our own works) does so possess them, that they bring all
to this, and turn off all that can be said, and hereby they run themselves into
very great errors. I called it an humane thought, for no Scripture does
command such a curious circumspection, lest any Goats should be received into
the Church. The Apostles often baptized persons with whom they had scarce had
an hours speech concerning Christ; because, according to the Parable of the
Gospel, they would bring in all they met with to the Marriage (Mat. 22.10.) For
by Baptism they only took them into the School of Piety, and Trained-hand of
Christians; and they were wont then to cast them out again, when it was
evidently enough perceived that to labor in teaching them was in vain. Ibid.
fol. 53.

As for Parker, his speaking mainly against the admitting or tolerating of [
Manifestarii peccatores] The notoriously wicked, and pleading to have them
debarred from the Lords Table, or cast out by the use of Discipline De Polit.
Eccles. Lib. 3. page 168, 169.
: His frequent approbation of the Principles of the Reformed Churches De Polit.
Eccl. Lib. 1. cap. 29. and Lib. 3. page 167. Protestat. before Treat. of the
Cross.
; And in special his approving of their admitting Members (not before of their
Body) upon such like qualifications as are contained in the Synods fifth
Proposition De Polit. Lib. 3. page 171.
. Also his earnest and peremptory rejecting the Opinions and Principles of the
Anabaptists and Separatists, and declaring himself and the Non-Conformists,
whose Cause he acted, to be far from them Ibid. Lib. 1. cap. 13. and 14. and
Lib. 3. page 166. And of the Cross, Cap. 9. sect. 2.
. These and such like do clearly show that Worthy man to be no Opponent of such
an extent of Baptism as is contained in the Conclusions of the Synod.

But here our Brethren will needs take notice, that the judgment of that worthy
and for ever famous Mr. Cotton was as theirs is, because he has these words,
(in Holiness of Church Members, page 93) I conceive (under favor) more
positive fruits of Regeneration are required in the Church Members of the New
Testament then of the Old.

Ans. The Reader will take notice of what has been before said, and cited to
show Mr. Cottons judgment in the Points controverted between our Brethren and
the Synod, and will easily thereby judge whether Mr. Cottons judgment was as
theirs is: but It is strange they should make such a Collection from what is
here set down. Mr. Cotton might say those words that are here expressed, and
yet his judgment be far enough from being as theirs is in any of the Points
that are controverted: for we shall not gainsay this Conception of Mr. Cottons
[That more positive fruits of Regeneration are required in the Church members
of the New Testament, then of the Old] but concur with it in two respects, or
for two causes: 1. Because the Light now is greater and clearer then it was
then, and where more is given, more is required, Luke 12.48. 2. Because the
Discipline appointed under the Old Testament was mostly Ceremonial ( Ames
Medul. lib. 1. c. 38. These. 41.) And whether Excommunication for Moral evils,
was then used, at least out of the National Church, is by some doubted: As also
whether persons were debarred from the holy things simply for Moral evils, if
they were ceremonially clean; as Mr. Cotton in the place here alleged says,
It is true, that it is a question whether sins very scandalous did keep men
ceremonially clean from the Temple and Sacrifices: But under the New Testament
we have a plain and undoubted Rule, for the Censure of Excommunication for
Moral evils persisted in: hence persons might happily run further into Moral
evils (and so further off from the fruits of Regeneration) then, and yet not be
put out of the Church (yea happily not be debarred from the holy things) then
they can do now. But what is all this to the matter in hand? for still it is
not secret irregeneration, nor the bare want of such and such positive fruits
of Regeneration, without positive and palpable ^ruits of Irregeneration, that
will (according to any Rule God has given us) put any man out of the Church,
when he is once in. Nay, Mr. Cotton in the very place here cited, expressly
says, that Irregeneration alone will not keep a man out: Holiness of
Church Members, page 92.
His words are these [ Neither amongst us does Irregeneration alone keep any
from Church Fellowship with us: not Irregeneration alone (I say) unles it be
accompanied with such fruits as are openly scandalous, and do convincingly
manifest Irregeneration.] Moreover, still the parallel between the Church of
the Old and of the New Testament; stands and holds in this, that when a person
is once by Gods appointment taken into the visible Church (whether in adult age
or in infancy, it comes all to one for that) he continues in it, and does not
lose his Membership, till by some Rule or Appointment of God in his Word he be
cut off or cast out. What the particular Rules and ways of cutting off were in
the Old Testament, we need not here dispute, but to be sure the plain Rule in
the New Testament for the cutting off of particular persons, is by the Censure
of Excommunication for Moral evils.

But while we grant that in some respects more positive fruits in regard of
degree might be required in the Old Testament, let none so understand it, as if
Regeneration was not required as all unto the Constitution and Continuation of
the visible Church in the Old Testament, but that a mere carnal succession was
then allowed of without regard to Regeneration. For they sto^d by Faith, and
were br^ken off by Unbelief as well as we, Romans 11. Circumcision was a Seal of
the Righte^usness of faith, as well as Baptism. Faith and Repentance do not now
more constitute the Covenant of God, then it did in the time of Abraham, who
was the Father of the Faithful, says Dr. Ames Medul. Lib. 1. cap. 40. These. 13
. Yea, our brethren do in their Antisynodalia, page 17. expressly say, That the
Covenant made with Abraham, and the Circumcision of his seed, was appointed
upon the same terms that Baptism was, i. e. that he should walk with God by
Faith and Obedience. And it is observeable, that no where is Regeneration, and
the fruits thereof, required of Gods Covenant people in stricter and fuller
terms then in the Old Testament, Genesis 17.1. Deuteronomy. 10.12. and 26.16, 17. 1 Kings
8.23. Psalm. 103.17, 18. Isa. 56.4, 6. And yet the Lord, who is the best
interpreter of his own Rules, continued them in the Church, and accounted them
among the number of his holy people, till palpall^, and incorrigible fruits of
Irregeneration were found with them: and so he does now.

In the sixth Place: The Application (says the Preface) of the Seal of Baptism
unto those who are not true Believers ( we mean visibly, for de occultis non
judicat Ecclesia) is a profanation thereof, and as dreadful a sin as if a man
should administer the Lords Supper unto unworthy receivers -- We marvel that
any should think that the Blood of Christ is not as much profaned and vilified
by undue Administration of Baptism, as by undue administration of the Lords
Supper.

Ans It will be hard for the Redder to gather out of all that is here said, a
Reason of dissent from the Synod: for we readily grant and say, that Baptism is
not to be applied to any but visible Believers (taking visible Believers* as a
term equivalent to [ Federally Holy] as the term Believer or Faithful is
sometimes in Scripture so taken, Isa^. 1.21. 2 Cor. 6.15. and often in Authors)
but that the persons in question, both Parents and Children, are visible
Believers, is also by the Synod asserted and proved; and here is nothing said
to disprove it. But when as our Brethren here say, that the Application of the
Seal of Baptism unto those who are not visibly true Believers, is a profanation
thereof (in which, being rightly explained, we gainsay them not) and yet in
their (...), page 20. do hold forth, That Infants neither have nor can have
Faith; it will lie upon them to show how they apply the seal of Baptism to
Infants without a profanation thereof. It is pity that so many passages are
dropped here and there, that do (though we hope not in their Intention) clas^
with the baptizing of I^fants. Here is also expressed a marvel, that any should
think, etc. But we may Answer with a m^rvel that any should speak as if any of
us did think that the Blood of Christ is not profaned by undue administration
of Baptism, as well as by undue administration of the Lords Supper: whether as
much or no in point of degree, we will not trouble our selves to dispute;
though we suppose the degree of sinful, pollution or profanation of the Lords
Name in any Ordinance, will be intended by the degree of special Communion that
we have with Christ in that Ordinance, and by the danger that such pollution
infers to the whole Church, as well as to the particular partaker, which will
hardly be denied to be more in the Lords Supper then in Baptism. But whether
the profanation be as great or no, to be sure it is very great* and so great as
that every Pious Conscientious person should fear to have any hand in the undue
administration of Baptism. But where is there any thing to show that the
administration of Baptism, pointed to by the Synod, is undue? or that it is an
undue Administration of B^ptism to extend it further then the Lords Supper? or
to administer Baptism to some unto whom we do not administer the Lords Supper?
If the Rule and Institution concerning these two Sacraments do extend the one
further then the other, as it plainly does, when it appoints Baptism to all
Disciples, or to run parallel with federal Holiness, Mat. 28.19. but the Lords
Supper only to Self-examining Disciples, 1 Cor. 11.28. then the one may be
extended further then the other, and yet the administration of the one no more
undue, or irregular, and polluting then the Administration of the other. Surely
he that holds, That Baptism may, and the Lords Supper may not be administered
unto Infants (as we suppose our Brethren do) he grants that Baptism may be
extended further then the Lords Supper, without any such sacrilegio^^ impiety,
dreadful prof^rtation or prostitution of the Blood of Christ, as is here
(harshly enough) expressed. Neither did judicious Calvin (part of whose zealous
expression against the promiscuous Administration of the Lords Supper, is here
cited in the Preface) ever imagine or conceive that it was any such profanation
to extend Baptism further then the Lords Supper, yea and further then the Synod
does, when as he set down that Answer in his Catec^ism that is above alleged,
and practiced accordingly. It is well known the Synod does not ple^d for that
largeness in either of the Sacraments that Calvin allowed: But to extend the
one further then the other, was never accounted sacrilegious impiety in
Orthodox Divinity.

It is here added; that Austin pleads for strictness in the Administration of
Baptism, and Tertullian before him. But did either of them ple^d for greater
strictness then the Synod does? unless where Tertullian erroneously and weakly
pleads for the delaying of Baptism, which is noted Magdeb. Cent. 3. page 83.
for one of his navi. Certainly men will say when they look upon what is
published by the Synod, and their wary qualifying of the fifth Proposition
(about which the controversy is) that they were for much strictness in the
administration of Baptism, and many will think us too strict. We doubt not but
we may safely say, that no man can show any thing out of Austin that will speak
him to be against the baptizing of such as the Synod pleads for: yea, he
requires not more of adult Converts from Heathenism, for their own Baptism,
then is in the Parents who are described by the Synod. That Book of his de Fide
and Operibus, is against the baptizing of notorious scandalous livers, whom he
would not have baptized (though seemingly turned from Heathenism) till they
seriously promised reformation. But that Austin (in stead of being for more
strictness) holds for a larger extent of Baptism then the Synod does, might
easily be evinced Sicut ergo tempere illius Sacramenti, de C^^cumciso^ qui
nasceretur circumcide^dus ^ait; sic nune de Baptizato qui n^tus fuerit,
baptizandus est. August. tom. 7. cont. Pelag. Lib. 2. cap. 25. See also Tom. 2.
Epist. 23. ad Bonifacium; and Epist. 75. ad Auxilium. And De Great. and Lib.
Arbitr. cap. 22.
.

How strange is it to see their Authority still alleged against us, who are
not only fully with us in this matter, but go further then we!

The seventh Reason of our Brethrens dissent, is this; It has in it a natural
tendency to the ^ardning of unregenerate Creatures, in their sinful natural
condition, when Life is not only promised, but sealed to them by the precious
Blood of Jesus Christ. Baptism is a Seal of the whole Co^enant of Grace, Ame^
Medul. lib. 1. cap. 40. ^hes. ^.
as well as the Lords Supper and therefore those that are not interested in
this Covenant by Faith, ought not to have the Seal thereof applied to them.

Ans. 1. The Lords Truth and Grace, however it may be abused by the corruption
of man's perverse and ^inful nature, has not in it self any natural tendency to
harden any, but the contrary. And how can the Doctrine in hand have any such
natural tendency? when as men are told over and over, that only outward
advantages and dispensations are sealed to them in Baptism more absolutely
(Romans 3.1, 2. ^ 9.4.) but the saving benefits of the Covenant (or Life Eternal)
conditionally (see Mr. Shepards late Printed Letter, page 3 -- 6.) so that if
they fail of the condition (viz. eff^ctual and unfeigned faith) they miss of
Salvation, notwithstanding their Baptism, and external Covenant-estate: And
hence, that there is no certa^n, but only a probable connection between federal
Holiness (as applied to particular persons) and Salvation; that Thousands are
in the vi^^ble Church that shall never see Heaven; That outward Privileges are
not to be rested in, but improved ^s helps and encouragements to the obtaining
of internal and special Grace: that the Church is to accept of probable signs,
but no man for (...) is to rest without certain S^gns of Grace: Hence the
indefinite promise, and other general indefinite tokens of a good estate, (...)
such as decypher that sort of persons that are gracious, and many of whom are
so* though many are not, (^s Ch^ldren of the Covenant, Professors of the Faith
etc.) These are grounds for the Church to proceed upon in the dispensation of
outward (...), especi^lly that of Baptism, that is annexed to the first being
of Grace; but they are not grounds for any to rest o^ acquie^ce in, as to the
Salvation of their own souls. In sum, while we keep a due distinction between
the outw^rd and inward dispensation of the Covenant, and between the respective
cond^ti^ns and gr^unds of each, there is no tendency unto hardening therein: but
inde^d* (...), and do tie visible Church-interest unto such conditions and
qualifications, as are reputed enough to Salvation, this may tend to harden
men, and to make them conceit, that if once they be got into the Church, they
are sure of Heaven, when (...) it may be they are far from it.

2. The Scriptures give us a contrary Assertion to this of our Brethren here;
for they tell us, that to deny the Children of the Church, to have any part in
the Lord, has a strong tendency in it, to make them cease from fearing the
Lord, or to harden their hearts from his fear, Josh. 22.24, 25, 27. and that on
the other hand, the encouragements and awful obligations of Covenant Interest
do greatly tend to soft^^ and break the heart, and to draw it home unto God.
Hence the Lord often begins with this, that He is their God (viz. in outward
Covenant) and they his People, when he would most powerfully win and draw them
to Faith and Obedience, Psalm. 81.8, 10. Levit. 19.3, 4. Deuteronomy. 14.1, 2. Hosea
14.1. Act. 2.38, 39. and the Experiences of many can through Grace witness unto
this, of what use the consideration of the Lords preventing Grace in his sealed
Covenant, and their engagement to him thereby has been in the day of their
turning unto God, so Ier. 31.18. and 3.22. Gal. 1.15.

3. There is a natural tendency in man's corrupt heart (not in this, or any
other Truth or Ordinance of God) that leads him to turn Grace into wantonness,
and to abuse outward Privileges and Ordinances, unto a self-hardning security
and carnal confidence, Ier. 7.4. Mat. 3.9. Romans 2.17. Phil. 3.4, 5, 6, 7. but
is this any Argument against the Lord's or the Churches giving men a portion in
his Temple and Ordinances, because they are prone so to abuse them? Confidence
in outward visible qualifications for full communion, is but a vain and carnal
thing; yet men are prone enough to it, and had need by the Ministry be taken
off from it. But shall we therefore deny or scruple their Admission thereunto?

4. If one should bring such an Argument as this against the baptizing of
Infants, viz. That it will harden them, and bolster them up in their sinful
natural condition; we suppose it would be counted a poor Argument, and of no
validity; and yet it holds as well against the baptizing of any Infants, as of
these in question. If it be said, that the baptizing of these in question
hardens the Parent? Ans. Not at all (in the way we go) any more with reference
to his Childs Baptism, then in reference to his own Baptism which he received
in Infancy. For it does not necessarily affirm that he has any more then
federal Holiness, and that he had, when he was an Infant, on that ground was he
Baptized then, and on the same ground is his Child Baptized now. If he have
any more, he may have the more comfort in it; but simply to have his Child
Baptized, on the grounds we go upon, affirms no more but this, because we
ground all upon federal Holiness, or Membership in the visible Church.

It is true, that Baptism is a Seal of the whole Covenant of Grace, as well as
the Lords Supper: But it is as true, 1. That it is a Seal of the Covenant of
Grace, as dispensed in the visible Church, or it is a Seal of the Covenant of
Grace, as clothed with the external dispensation or administration thereof, and
so it does nextly and immediately Seal the external dispensation, or the
Promises and Privileges that belong thereto (which are a part of the whole
Covenant of Grace) and then it seals the inward and saving benefits of the
Covenant as included in that dispensation, and upon the Conditions therein
propounded. Baptism seals the whole Covenant, and whole dispensation thereof,
i. e. 1. The dispensation of it Outwardly, to all that have an external
standing in the Church. 2. The dispensation and communication of it Inwardly,
Effectually and Savingly to all that truly do believe.

2. That Baptism is a Seal of Entrance into the Covenant thus considered. It
seals the whole Covenant, but by way of Initiation; so Dr. Ames in the place
that is here quoted, Medul. Lib. 1. Cap. 40. These. 5, 6. Baptism is the
Sacrament of Initiation, or Regeneration, for although it do at once seal the
whole Covenant of Grace to the Faithful, yet by a singular appropriation it
represents and confirms our very ingrafting into Christ, Romans 6.3, 5. 1 Cor.
12.13. And Thesis 10. Those Benefits are sealed by way of Initiation, in
Baptism: And from thence the judicious Doctor makes that Inference that suits
and clears the matter in hand, These. 11. Hence Baptism ought to be administered
to all those, unto whom the Covenant of Grace belongs, because it is the first
Seal of the Covenant now first entered into. Baptism is the Seal of Entrance
into Covenant, sealing up unto the party baptized, all the good of the Covenant
to be in season communicated and enjoyed, from step to step, through the whole
progress of Christianity, from this first beginning thereof, according to the
Tenor and Order of the Covenant. Hence it belongs to all that are within the
Covenant, or that have but a first entrance thereinto, Children as well as
others, though they have not yet such faith and growth, as imports that
progress in the Covenant, and fruition of the Comfort and ^ruits thereof that
is sealed up in the Lords Supper.

We readily grant, and say [ That ^^ne ought to have the Seal of Baptism
applied in th^^, (...) those that are interested in the Covenant] and that by
Faith, unless you can show us any other way of Interest in the Covenant, but by
Faith. But withal, we aff^^m and prove, That the Children in question have
interest in the Covenant, according to the known tenor thereof, Genesis 17.7. and
therefore that the Seal of Baptism is to be applied to them. In all this
therefore we see no sufficient Ground or Reason to necessitate a Dissent from
the Synod.

Our Brethren have one thing more yet to add; viz. That there is Danger of
great Corruption and Pollution creeping into the Churches, by the Enlargement
of the Subject of Baptism.

Answ. 1. And is there no danger of Corruption by Over-straitning the Subject
of Baptism? Certainly it is a Corruption to take from the Rule, as well as to
add to it; and a Corruption that our weakness is in danger of. And it is a
dangerous thing to be guilty of breaking Gods Covenant, by not applying the
Initiating Seal unto those it is appointed for, even unto all that are in
Covenant, Genesis 17.9, 10, 14. Moses found danger in it, Exodus 4.24. Is there no
danger of putting those: out of the visible Church, whom Christ would have kept
in? and depriving them of those Church- advantages (Romans 3.1, 2.) that might
help them toward Heaven? Even Christ's own Disciples may be in danger of
incurring His displeasure, by keeping poor little one^ away from him, Mark
10.13, 14. To go pluck up all the Tares was a ^ealous motion, and had a good
intention, but the Householder concludes, there is danger in it of plucking up
the Wheat also.

2. If the enlargement be beyond the bounds of the Rule, it will bring in
corruption, else not; our work is therefore to study the Rule and keep close to
that, as the only true way to the Churches Purity and Glory. To go aside from
that to the Right hand wlll bring corruption as well as to go to the left: The
way of Anabaptists, viz. to admit none to Membership and Baptism but adult
Professors, is the straitest way, and one would think it should be a way of
great Purity, but Experience has abundantly showed the contrary; that it has
been an Inl^t to great corruption, and looseness both in Doctrine and Practice,
and a troublesome dangerous underminer of Reformation. It is the Lords own way,
and his Institutions only, which he will bless, and not man's Inventions,
though never so plausible: neither has God (in his wisdom) so instituted the
frame of his Covenant, and the constitution of the Church thereby, as to make a
perfect separation between good and bad, or to make the work of Conversion, and
initial Instruction needless in the Churches. Conversion (...) to the Children
of the Covenant a fruit of the Covenant, says Mr Co^ton Grounds and Ends of
Infant Baptism, p. 28, 29.
. If we do not keep in the way of a Converting Grace-giving Covenant, and keep
persons under those Church-dispensations wherein Grace is given, the Church
will dye of a Lingering, though not of a Violent death. The Lord has not set up
Churches only that a few old Christians may keep one another warm while they
live, and then carry away the Church into the cold grave with them when they
dye: no, but that they might, with all the care, and with all the Obligations,
and Advantages to that care that may be, (...) up still successively another
Generation of Subjects to Christ that may stand up in his Kingdom when they
are gone, that so he might have a People and Kingdom successively continued to
him from one Generation to another. We may be very injurious to Christ as well
as to the Souls of men, by too much straitning, and narrowing the bounds of his
Kingdom or visible Church here on Earth. Certainly enlargement, so it be a
regular enlargement thereof, is a very desirable thing: it is a great honor to
Christ to have many willing Subjects (as these are willing and desirous to be
under the Government of Christ that we plead for) and very suitable to the
Spirit and Grace of Christ in the Gospel. Prove. 14, 28. Psa. 110.3.
In Church-reformation, it is an observable Truth (says ^areus on the Parable
of the Tares) That those that are for too much strictness, do more bu^t then
profit the Church. See Dioda^e on Matt. 13.29. Cyprian Epist. 51.

3. There is apparently a greater* ^anger of Corruption to the Churches by
enlarging the Subjects of full Communion, and admitting unqualified, or meanly
qualified persons to the Lords Table and Voting in the Church, whereby the
interest of the power of Godliness will soon be prejudiced, and Elections,
Admissions, Censures, so carried, as will be hazardous thereunto. Now it is
ev^dent, that this is, and will be the Temptation, viz. to ever-enlarge full
Communion, it Baptism be limited to the Children of such as are admitted
thereunto. And it is easy to observe, that many of the Reasonings of our
Brethren, and others* are more against the Non-admission of the Parents in
question to full Communion, then against the Admission of their Children to
Baptism. How unreasonable is it then to object against us ^s Corrupters of the
Churches, when we stand for a greater strictness then they in that wherein the
main danger of Church-corrupting lies? We doubt not to affirm, That that
Principle which has been held forth by our Brethren, viz. [ That if the Church
can have any hope of persons, that they have any thing of Faith and Grace i^
them, though never so little, they ought, being adult, to be admitted to full
Communion] this we say will, if followed, bring corruptions and impurities into
Churches: for he must abandon all the Rules of Charity, that cannot hope this
of multitudes of young persons that grow up among us, who yet if they were
presently admitted to full Communion, we should soon feel a change in the
management of Church^affairs; and the Interest of Formality and common
Profession, would soon be advanced above the Interest of the power of
Godliness. Whether we be in the right in this matter of strictness as to full
Communion, Scripture and Reason must determine (and were this the place of that
dispute, we have much to say in it, and to be sure, the Practice of these
Churches hitherto has been for it, as also their Profession in the Synod in
1648. Platform of Discipline, Cap. 12. Sect. 7. Hence to depart from that,
would be a real departure from our former Practice and Profession: Whereas to
Enlarge Baptism to the Children of all that stand in the Church, is but a
progress to that Practice that suits with our Profession) But certain it is
that we are, and stand for the Purity of the Churches, when as we stand for
such qualifications as we do, in those we would admit to full Communion; and do
withstand those Notions and Reasonings that would infer a Laxness therein,
which has apparent peril in it. But we can hardly imagine what hurt it would
do, or what danger of spoiling the Churches there is in it, for poor Children
to be taken within the verge of the Church, under the wings of Christ in his
Ordinances, and to be under Church-care, and Discipline and Government for
their Souls good; to be in a state of Initiation and Education in the Church of
God, and consequently to have Baptism, which is the Seal of Initiation; when as
they shall not come to the Lords Table, nor have any hand in the Management of
Church Affairs (as Elections of Officers, Admissions, and Censures of Members)
until as a fruit of the foresaid help and means, they attain to such
qualifications as may render their admission into full Communion safe and
comfortable, both to their own Souls, and to the Churches.

In sum, we make account, that if we keep Baptism within the compass of the
Non-excommunicable, and the Lords Supper within the compass of those that have
(unto Charity) somewhat of the Power of Godliness (or Grace in exercise) we
shall be near about the right Middle-way of Church-Reformation. And as for the
Preservation of due Purity in the Church, it is the due Exercise of Discipline
that must do that, as our Divines unanimously acknowledge, for that is Gods own
appointed way (and the Lord make and keep us all careful and faithul therein)
not the Curtailing of the Covenant, which may be man's way; but is not the way
of God wherein alone we may expect his Blessing.

The good Lord pardon the Imperfections and Failings that attend us in these
Debates; accept of what is according to his Will, and establish it; save us
from corrupting Extremes on either hand, and give unto his People one Heart and
one Way to fear Him for ever, for the good of them and of their Children after
them.

ERRATA in the Book following.
PAge 12. Line 18. their Infancy, read from Infancy. page 22. lin. 16. he
added r. here added. page 49. lin. 4. there r. here. page 53. lin. 35. his r.
this. page 60. lin. 7. of that r. of the page 66. lin. 1. do run r. do not run.
page 98. lin. 11. do administer r. so administer.

In Answ. to the Preface. Page 11. lin. 33. mor r. more. page 16. lin. ult.
into r. unto.

A DEFENSE OF THE ANSWER and ARGVMENTS of the SYNOD, Met at Boston in the Year
1662. Concerning The Subject of Baptism, and Consociation of Churches: Against
the REPLY made thereto, by the Reverend Mr. John D^venpor^, in his Treatise,
Entitled, Another ESSAY for Investigation of the Truth, etc.
THE Reverend Author in this his Essay, before he come to speak to that which
the Synod delivered, does premise Eleven or Twelve Positions, by which (he
says) the determinations of the Synod are to be Examined, and so far, and no
further to be approved and received, as a consent and harmony of them with
th^se may be cleared, etc. page 8.

Concerning which Positions we will not say much, because the Intendment in
this Def^nce, is only to clear what is said by the Synod, against what this
Reverend Author says against the same in his (...); and therefore until he
speak to what the Synod delivered, we think it not needful to insist long upon
these premised Positions. Only this we may say concerning them, That though
sundry things in them be sound and good, yet the Posi^ions themselves being not
Scripture, but his own private Collections, therefore we do not see that we are
bound to take these Positions* as the Standard and Rule, by which to judge of
what the Synod says: But if the Synods Doctrine be agreeable to Scripture, we
think that may be sufficient for defense thereof, whether it agree with the
premised Positions, or not. And when himself, page 1. does commend it as a good
Profession in the Synod, that, To the Law and to the Testimony they do wholly
refer themselves; had it not been also commendable in him to have done the
like, rather then to lay down Positions (though he conceives them rightly
deduced from Scripture) and then to say, Nothing is to be approved further then
it consents with those Positions? Himself may please to consider of this.

But to leave this of the premised Positions, and to come to the main Business;
Concerning The Subject of Baptism, the first Proposition of the Synod is this,
viz. They that according to Scripture are Members of the visible Church, are
the Subjects of Baptism:

The second is this: viz. The Members of the visible Church according to
Scripture, are Confederate visible Believers, in particular Churches, and their
Infant Seed, i. e. Children in (...)* whose next Parents, one or both, are in
Covenant.

Now what says the Reverend Author to these? That which he says, is this: I
cannot approve the two first Propositions, without some change of the terms: In
the first, thus; They that according to Christ's Ordinance, are regular and
actual Members, etc. The second, thus; The actual and regular Members of the
visible Church, according to Christ's Ordinance, etc. page 9.

Answ. So that the Alteration required, is, That in stead of [ Scripture] it be
said [ Christ's Ordinance] and in stead of [ Members] [ Actual and regular
Members.] But a necessity of this Alteration does not appear: for, as for the
one particular, can we think that th^re i^ any such difference between the
Scripture, and the Ordinance of Christ, that (...) may be Members of the
visible Church, and so Subjects of Baptism, according to the f^^er, and yet not
according to the la^ter^* If it be according to the Scripture, may it not ^e
said to be according to Christ's Ordinance? Sure, when Christ himself bids us
Search the Scripture, Job. 5.39. and when the Bereans are commended for
searching the Scripture, whether those things were so, which were Preached by
Paul, Acts 17.11. and when all the Scripture is for our learning, Romans 15.4.
and does contain a perfect Rule in all things that concern Gods Worship,
whether Natural, or Instituted, as this Reverend Author says, in the first of
his premised Positions; upon these grounds it may seem, that what is according
to Scripture, needs not to want our approbation, for fear left it agree not
with the Ordinance of Christ. And indeed, how can that be taken for an
Ordinance of Christ, which is not according to Scripture? that being considered
also, which is said by the Reverend Author in his second Position, That
whatsoever Christ did institute in the Christian Churches, he did it by Gods
appointment, as Moses by Gods appointment, gave out what he delivered in the
Church of Israel. Now if all that is instituted by Christ, be according to Gods
appointment, and that the Scripture contains a perfect Rule concerning all
Instituted Worship, and so concerning all Gods appointments; it may seem a
needless thing to withhold our approbation from that which is according to
Scripture, as if it might be so, and yet not be according to the Ordinance of
Christ. Besides, how shall we know a thing to be an Ordinance of Christ, if it
be not according to the Scripture?

And for the other Alteration desired, that in stead of [ Members] it be [
Regular and actual Members] may we think that men may, or can be Members
according to Scripture, and not Regular, nor actual Members? If the Scripture
be the Rule, and ^ perfect Rule, then they that are Members according to
Scripture, are Members according to Rule, and so are Regular members. And if
Actual be contradistinct from Potentiall; then they that are Members according
to Scripture, are Actual members, and not only Potentiall, or potentially
such: for, such potential Members the Scripture approves not. Upon these
grounds, we see no necessity of the Alteration forementioned.

Propos. 3. The Infant Seed, etc. when grown up are personally under the Watch,
Discipline, and Government of the Church.

Arg. 1. Children were under Patriarchall and Mosaical discipline of old, etc.

Reply. The Text alleged (viz. Genesis 18.19. and 21.9, 10.12. and Gal. 5.3.) do
not prove the Antecedent, viz. That children were under Patriarchal and
Mosaical discipline, p. 10.

Ans. And yet for the one of these, the Reverend Author confesses, in Answer
to this Argument, page 11.12. That the members of the Church in the Patriarchs
Families, were to continue in communion with the Church from their being
circumcised, all the days of their life, until they were cast out, as Ishmael
-- or voluntarily departed from it, as Esau. And does not this sufficiently
imply, That children in those Churches, when adult, were under Discipline in
those Churches? For, can we think that those Churches had no Church Discipline
in them? or that the Members of them were not under that Discipline? or the
children, when grown up, were not Members? Sure, if they continued in communion
with the Church from their being circumcised, all the days of their life,
until they were cast out, or did voluntarily go away; then it was not mere
growing up to be adult, that caused their Church-relation, or communion with
the Church, to cease. And if their communion with the Church did not cease, but
continue, how can it be avoided but they were under Church Discipline? Where
shall we find ground from Scripture or good Reason, that these children, when
adult, did still continue in communion with the Church, and yet were not under
the Church Discipline that then was? It seems to us, that the one of these,
which the Reverend Author does expressly affirm, does unavoidably imply the
other, which is affirmed by the Synod. There might be many children in those
Families of the Patriarchs, who when they were adult, were neither cast out, as
Ishmael, nor departed, as Esau; and these continuing in communion with the
Church all the days of their life, from their being circumcised, as the
Reverend Author says they did, they were therefore under the Church Discipline
that then was. And if they might be cast out, as Ishmael was, Genesis 21. as the
Reverend Author confesses; it cannot be denied but that there was Discipline
in those Churches, and that children, when grown up, were subject thereto: For,
as for that which the Reverend Author suggesteth, page 11. That Ishmael being
thirteen years old when he was circumcised, was then admitted into
Church Fellowship and full communion by his personal Covenanting, being at
years of discretion. The Answer is, That it is very unusual that children at
thirteen years of age should be fit for full communion. And as for Ishmael,
there is no such thing testified of him in the Scripture; but on the contrary,
when the Lord says, He should be a wild man, and his hand against every man,
and every man's hand against him, Genesis 16. and when as he soon after became such
a Mocker and Persecutor, Genesis 21. Gal. 4. as that for it he was cast out, Genesis
21. it is therefore not very probable that he at thirteen years of age had so
much goodness in him, as that upon the profession thereof he should then be
admitted to full communion. It seems to us more probable, considering the
things mentioned, that he was admitted as a child in minori^y, by vi^tue of
the Covenant with Abraham and his seed* and yet when grown up, he was so under
Discipline, as to be cast out for his wickedness.

And for that other of Mosaicall Discipline, the Reverend Author confesses, p.
11, 12. That all the grown members of the Church of Israel were brought under
such Discipline, as was established in that Church by a solemn Covenant,
whereof all adult persons were to take hold personally. And if all the grown
members of that Church were brought under such discipline as was then
established, then the other particular in the Antecedent, That children were
under Mosaicall discipline, is here also confessed by the Author. Indeed, he
conceives they were brought under Discipline by Covenanting personally; but
that is not clear: but for the thing it self, That they were under Discipline,
this we see is by him confessed; which is that which the Synod affirmed. And
why may not that Text, Gal. 5.3. be a sufficient proof thereof? If they that
were circumcised, were bound to all the duties of the Law, as the Text
affirms; then they were bound to that Ecclesiastical Discipline that the Law
of Moses appointed: and therefore children being circumcised, were so bound,
even when they were adult, for then they remained circumcised. There are good
Expositors who upon that Text do teach, That Circumcision was an obligation to
the keeping of all the Commandments of the Law in the Old Testament, and that
Baptism is the like for all the Commandments of the Gospel: See Paraeus, and
Perkins in loc. Whereby it appears; That what Discipline was under the Old
Testament, children circumcised in Infancy were subject thereto, when adult, as
being bound by their Circumcision to all the Commandments of the Law.

So much for Defense of the Antecedent in this Argument.

But, says the Reverend Author, though the Antecedent were more manifestly
true, yet the Consequent is not good; for there is not par ratio, the like
reason of those Patriarchal and Mosaical Churches, and of Congregational
Churches under the Gospel, page 11.

Ans. And yet the Reverend Author confesses in Position the fifth and sixth,
That the Covenant of Abraham was the same in substance under the Law, and under
the Gospel: and, that the Kingdom of God, is the same in substance which is
taken from the Jews, and given to the Gentiles; yea, and that Baptism is come
in the place of Circumcision, and therefore Infants of Confederates are now to
be Baptized, as then they were to be circumcised, they being both outward
seals of the same Covenant in substance. So that here seems to be a plain
acknowledgment that there is par ratio, though in the place in hand it be
denied. For, if the Covenant be for Substance the same now as it was then, and
that therefore Baptism may be now dispensed to Infants, as circumcision was
then, those ordinances being both seals of the same covenant for Substance; is
not this an acknowledgment of a par ratio between them? and if so, what should
hinder but that Children, when grown up, may as well be under Church Discipline
now, as under the Old Testament? for, may they be now Baptized in their
infancy, as then they were Circumcised, because there is in both par ratio? and
might they be then under Church Discipline, and yet now not so, because here
there is not par ratio? Is Poedobaptisme in the new Testament, rightly inferred
from the Circumcision of Infants in the old Testament, because here there is
par ratio between them? and is not their subjection to Church Discipline, when
adult, in the new Testament, rightly inferred from the like subjection in the
Old? It does not appear that there is any want of par ratio in the one case,
any more then in the other.

As for that which is here immediately brought in page 11. to prove that there
is not, par ratio; viz. Because the members of the Church, in the Patriarchs
families, were to continue in Communion with the Church all the days of their
life, until they were cast out, as Ishmael or voluntarily departed from it, as
Esau. We conceive this is no proof at all of the disparity alleged; and the
reason is, because we say the very same concerning the Children of
Church Members in these days, viz. that they still continue in the Church all
the days of their life, if they be not cast out in a Gospel way, which he does
not disprove. And therefore in this there is no want of par ratio.

And for the proof of disparity between the Church of Israel, and our Churches,
viz. 1. That we do not read of any Ordinance given them, for casting out
Members for sins against the Moral Law. And 2. That the grown Members of that
Church were brought under such discipline as was established in that Church, by
a solemn Covenant, whereof all adult persons were to take hold personally.

The Answer is; Touching the former of these, that sundry things may be said to
show, that it is very probable that in Israel there was appointed of God an
Ordinance of Church-censure or d^scipline, not only for sins against the
Ceremonial Law, but also against the Moral; For, the Lord does so often, and
earnestly command Holiness and purity to that People, and so often and severely
reproves the contrary, and that not only in the offenders themselves, but also
in them that suffered it, and this not only in Ceremonial matters, but also in
sins against the Moral Law, that it is not very probable that he would have no
Church Discipline used for such matters as these, but only for Ceremonial. Is
it likely, that if a man should eat Leavened bread in the time of the
Passover, that for this he must be cut off from the Congregation, as Exodus
12.15, 19. or if a man should touch a dead body, or a bone of a Man, or a
grave, etc. that this were such uncleanness, as that he must not then enter
into the Tabernacle or Temple, but, if he did, it would be a defiling of the
Sanctuary of the Lord, and therefore such offenders must be cut off from their
People? and yet nevertheless, if a man had killed another man, or had committed
the sin of Whoredom, or Drunkeness, or other abomination, that yet there was
no such uncleanness in these as to defile the Sanctuary, or to cause a man to
be kept out, or cut off, or cast out for the same? This seems to us not very
probable.

And yet if it were certain and clear, that so it was in those times, the
purpose for which this is alleged is not gained thereby, but the Consequence
questioned may be sound and good for all this. The Consequence is, That if
children were under Mosaical Discipline of old, then they are under
Congregational Discipline now: This is the Synods argument. But, says the
Answer, This Consequence is not good, because Mosaical Discipline was not to
cast men out for sins against the Moral Law: But, say we, The Argument and
Consequence may be good for all this; for, Suppose there were this difference
between the Mosaical Discipline that was then, and the Congregational
Discipline that is now, that the former were only for Ceremonial uncleanness,
and the lat^er for Moral; yet, if children were under the Discipline that was
then, we conceive they are therefore under the Church Discipline that is now:
and we think this arguing to be better, and more strong, then to say, That
because they are not under such Discipline as was then, that therefore now they
are under none at all. And plain it is, that the Apostle a^gueth for the
maintenance of the Ministry now under the Gospel, from the maintenance of the
Ministry that was under Moses, 1 Cor. 9.13. and shows the danger of unworthy
receiving our Sacraments, from the evil that b^fell many who were partakers of
the Baptism, and the spiritual meat and drink that was then, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2,
etc. and if he argue from the Ministry and Sacraments that we^e under Moses;
why i^ not the Argument also good from the Mosaicall Discipline? We cannot
think the Apostle*s Consequence might be denied, because we have now no such
holy things; no such Temple and Altar as was then; no such Baptism in the
Cloud, and in the Sea; no such Mann^, and Water out of the Rock, as they had:
To deny the Consequence of the Apostle's Argument upon any such ground, we
think were very insufficient; and therefore why may not the Consequence be
good, from the subjection of children to Mosaical Discipline, to prove their
subjection to New-Testament-discipline; although it were granted, that their
Discipline were only for Ceremonial matters, and that we have none such, but
only for sins against the moral Law? For ought we see, the Argument and
Consequence is good in this case, as well as in the other.

The other particular alleged by the Reverend Author, to show a difference
between the Church of Israel, and our Churches, and that therefore children,
when adult, might be under Mosaical Discipline, but not under Congregational*
is this: Because in that Church grown members were brought under such
Discipline as was established in that Church by a solemn Covenant, whereof all
adult persons were to take hold personally. p. 12.

Ans. It is not clear, nor at all said in the place alleged, viz. D^ut. 26.16,
17, 18. that by the Entering into covenant there mentioned, they were brought
under the Church Discipline in that Church, but they might be under
Church Discipline otherwise, even by the Commandment and Ordinance of God, and
not merely by that Covenant, or by means of it. For, if that Covenant were
entered into in the day of their bringing the Tithes of the third year, which is
spoken of in the Verses immediately preceding, viz. ver. 12, 13, 14, 15. then
it could not be that Covenant that brought all adult persons under Discipline:
for, a man might be adult, and yet not have any Tithes to bring; as not having
yet any personal estate or possession of his own, as we see it often is with
us; yea, a man might be adult, and have estate and Tithes two years before this,
for this that is here spoken of was the Tithes of the third year. Now if a man
were adult and had personal estate before this time, or adult and had yet no
estate, and that this Covenant was only entered into at that third year of
Tything, then ^ cannot be that by this Covenant they were brought under
Discipline, for they were adult, and so under Discipline before. Or if the
Covenant here mentioned, were not entered into at the third year of Tything;
then why might it not be of all the people jointly together, and not of any
particular persons severally by themselves? there is nothing in the Text
contrary to this, but rather for it, in that the Covenancer here spoken of, is
avouched that day to be the Lords peculiar people, ver. 18, 19. which title of
[ People] is not suitable to any particular person. And sure it is, that
Covenant Deuteronomy 29.10, 11, etc. was of all the people jointly together, for it
was a Covenant not only with Men, but with Women, yea with Little children,
and with such as were not there that day, but with posterity that should be
afterward born; and therefore this was not only a Covenant of the adult, to
bring them under Church Discipline as if else they had not been under it, but
being also with little ones, that were then in minority, it might suffice to
bring them under Discipline when they should be grown up. So that nothing does
yet appear, to prove that ^^ult persons in Israel were not under Discipline in
that Church, but by their taking hold of the Covenant personally; but for ought
that does yet appear, they might be under Discipline before they had thus done.
Therefore we yet see not any such disparity between the Patriarchall and
Mosaicall Churches formerly, and the Congregationall Churches under the. New
Testament, but that from the subjection of children, when adult, unto
Church Discipline in the former, may be justly inferred their subjection
thereto in the latter.

So much for Defense of the Synods first Argument, to prove That children of
Church Members, when adult, are under the Watch, Discipline, and Government of
the Church.

To the second Argument, to prove Children when adult subject to
Church Discipline; viz.

Because they are within the Church, or Members thereof, and therefore subject
to Church-judicature, 1 Cor. 5.12.

The Answer that is given, is, That the Argument is to be denied, and the Text
alleged does not prove it.

Ans. The words of the Text are express and plain, What have I to do to judge
them also that are without? Do ye not judge them that are within? but them that
are without God judges. By which it is plain, and undeniable, That though
those that are without be not subject to Church-judicature, or
Church Discipline, yet for those that are within it is otherwise: and
therefore, if these children be within, to deny them to be subject to
Church-judicature, is to deny the words of the Holy Ghost.

As for that which is here said, that By [them within] is meant Members in full
communion, such as are in full membership, as well of all other Ordinances, as
of Censures:

Our Answer is, That this should be Proved, as well as Affirmed, for,
affirmanti incumbit probatio. It was wont to be said, Non est distinguendum ubi
lex non distinguit: Distinctions should be warranted by the Word; therefore
when the Word says, Such as are within, are subject to Church-judicature, to
restrain this being within, to those that are in full communion in all
Ordinances, and to exempt many others, though adult persons, and within the
Church, only because they are not so with^n, as to be in full communion; we
say, to exempt them upon this ground from Church-judicature, is more then we
see any sufficient proof for.

As for the Reason here rendered, That Excommunication is a casting out from
communion, and therefore how can any be formally Excommunicated, who were never
in communion, and so within the Church?

The Answer is, That the Synod does not here expressly speak of Excommunica^^o^,
and that the children are subject to that Ordinance; but only says, They are
under the Watch, Discipline and Government of the Church, and therefore there
was no need here to answer, That they cannot be Excommunicated: for, if that
were so, (which we are far from granting) yet what the Synod here says, may
be true f^r all this.

And th^ugh ^t be true, that such as were never in Church Communion at all,
cannot properly be Excommunicated; yet the Reverend Author, we suppose, does
not, nor will deny, but that many who have never yet been p^rtakers of all
Ordinances, or of the Lord Supper as children in minority, yet may be counted
Church-member^, and so have much Church Communion, and enjoy much benefit
thereby; as the Covenant, and Baptism the Seal thereof; the Prayers, and
Blessing of the Church; Church-watchfulness, to excite them, and encourage them
to, and in good, and to reclaim them from evil: Such Church Communion as this,
they may be partakers of, who y^^ have not been admitted to full communion; and
therefore what impossibility is there in it, but that men may be
Excommunicated, viz. from such communion as they had, though they never had
such full communion as others. If a Parent in full communion be justly, for
some delinquency, Excommunicated, we suppose the Reverend Author See Essay
first, page 13* 4. in ^xam. of Prop. 4.
Will say, that his children in minority are cut off from their membership with
him, and so are Excommunicated with the Pa^ent. And if so, then there may be
Excommunication, where there never was the enjoyment of full communion. And so
for all that is here said, [ That persons not in full communion cannot be
Excommun^ca^ed] yet what the Synod says may be true, That persons not in full
communion may be under the Watch, and Discipline, and Government of the Church:
and how much more if even such persons may be cut off from their
Church Membership, and so from what Church Communion they had?

To the third Argument, to prove Children of Church Members, when adult, to be
under the Watch, Discipline, and Government of the Church; viz.

Because they are Disciples, and therefore under Discipline in Christ's School.

The Reverend Author's Answer has in it a Concession, and an Exception: The
Concession is, That all Church Members are Disciples, Infants foeder^lly, etc.
and therefore both are under the Discipline of the Church suitably to their
membership. Now if all Church Members be Disciples, and therefore under
D^scipline, and even Infants so in their way; it is strange, that these that
their infancy are now become adult, should now be n^ Disciples, nor
Church Members, and so not under Church Discipline, which before they were
under; when as they have neither been cut off from their Membership and
Discipleship, nor deserving any such matter: One would think it were more
rational to say, That as they were in Church-relation when Infants, so they
continue therein, though adult; except in some way of God they be cut off
therefrom, and do so deserve.

But though the Reverend Author yield, as is said, yet he puts in this
Exception; That he finds not any where in Scripture, that such adult persons
are styled Disciples, or accounted Members.

Ans. Suppose such Term or Title were not found applied to the Persons spoken
of, yet since for the thing it is confessed that they were Disciples and Members
when Infants, is it not more rational to confess they are so still (except the
Scripture said the contrary) and that they so continue (though the Term and
Title be not found) until they be upon desert cut off, or cast ou^, rather
then to say, that now being adult, they have lost the Relation and Privilege
which they had when they were Infants, though they have not been cut off from
it, nor ever so deserved before men? For, if they incur such loss by becoming
adult, it may seem it were good for Members Children to dye in their Infancy,
and never live to be adult; since in their Infancy they had Church-relation, and
Covenant-state, which now they have lost, though without their desert.

The adult Disciples, in Mat. 28 20. must observe, and do all Christ's
Commandments, therefore the Disciples there intended, with reference to adult
persons, are Members in full Communion, page 13.

Ans. This Arguing is but too lik^ to that of the Antipoedobaptists: for it is
well known how they would exclude infants by this Text, from being partakers of
Bap^ism, because they are not D^sciples so, made by Teaching, or by being
taught to observe all Christ's Commandments; because Infants cannot do this,
therefore, say they, they are not Disciples to be Baptized. But the Reverend
Author confesses, that I^fants are Disciples; and, as such, are to be
Baptized. Why then should he say that now, when they are become adult, they are
Disciples no longer, as not observing all Christ's Commandments, not being in
full communion? The Arguing of the Antipoedopaptists from this Text is to this
purpose, viz. All Disciples that are to be Baptized, ^^e taught to observe all
Christ's commandments; but this does not agree to Infants: therefore Infants are
no^ Disciples that are to be Baptized. And is not the Arguing of the Reverend
Author much like it? viz. All adult persons that are Disciples, do observe all
Ch^ists Commandments: but this does not agree to such adult persons as are not
in full communion: therefore adult persons that are not in full communion are
not Disciples. The Conclusion in the former arguing, the Reverend Author we are
confident will not own; and therefore the Conclusion in the latter, being so
l^ke unto it, one answer may serve for both the Arguments; which is this, That
the major Propositions in both do not universally and absolutely hold but only
so far as the persons are capable; so far all Disciples that are to be
Baptized, and all adult persons that are Disciples, are to observe all Christ's
Commandments: but as this does not exclude Infants from being Disciples, and
from being Baptized; so neither are the adult person* spoken of excluded from
being Disciples, though neither the one nor the other be yet fit for observing
all Christ's Commandments, in full communion, in all the Ordinances.

To the fourth Argument; They are in Church Covenant, therefore subject to
Church Power, Genesis 17.7. and 18.19.

The Answer is, That they are not in covenant dejure, being adult, and not
admitted into Church Communion in all Ordinances.

Ans. And yet the Text says, the Covenant of Abraham is with him, and his seed
in their generations, Genesis 17.7. and this Reverend Author will not deny, but
that Those that are in the covenant in their Infancy, are thereby left under
engagement to service and subjection to Christ in his Church, when they shall
be grown up, and that this engagement upon them is strong -- To know the God of
their Parents, and to serve him with a perfect heart and a willng mind p. 44.
so that if they do it not, but live in neglect or contempt of the Ordnances, or
unsuitable conversation, they hereby live in the breach of that covenant,
whereby they were left under engagement in their Infancy, page 43.^4 45. Now if
this be so, it plainly appears hereby, that as they were in the Covenant in
^h^^ I^fancy, they are likewise so when adult; for else, how could their sins
of Omission or Commission be breach of that Covenant? can a man be guilty of
breaking covenant, when he is not (...) but the sins of these adult persons are
breach of covenant, therefore they are in the covenant: therefore that cannot
stand which is here said, That these adult persons, that were in covenant in
their Infancy, are not now in covenant when adult, until they be admitted into
Church Communion in all Ordinances.

To the fifth Argument, viz. They are Subjects of the Kingdom of Christ, and
therefore under the Laws and Government of his Kingdom^, Ezekiel. 37.25, 26.

The Answer is, That this Argument may be retorted against themselves, and the
proofs of it, thus: The Subjects of Christ's Kingdom have full communion in all
the privileges of Christ's Kingdom, but these adult persons have not so,
ex-confesso, therefore they are not Subjects ^f Christ's Kingdom, and so are
not under the Laws and Government of it.

Ans. The sum is, The Subjects of Christ's Kingdom have full communion in all
the Privileges of Christ's Kingdom: But the adult persons spoken of have not
such communion: E^go. But is this true, that a^^ the Subjects of Christ's
Kingdom have full communion in all the Privileges of it, even in all, and not
in some only, i. e. in all Ordinances? What shall be said then of little
children? must they have communion in all Church Priviledges, and all
Ordinances, as the Lords Supper, Voting in Elections, etc. or else be no
Subjects of Christ's Kingdom? It is plain, that such communion they cannot
have; and yet it is as plain, that Of such is the Kingdom of Go^, and of
Christ, and therefore he would have them to be brought unto him, and rebuked
those that would have kept them from him, Mark 10 and therefore persons may be
Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, and yet not have communion in all the Ordinances,
or Privileges of that Kingdom. And therefore the adult persons spoken of, may
be Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, though not yet fit for all Ordinances; and yet
being ^ubjects, must be subject to such Laws of that Kingdom as are suitable
to their state, as Infants and little children to such as are suitable to
theirs. Exclude these adult persons from being under the Laws and Government of
Christ's Kingdom, because they have not communion in all the Privileges of it,
and by the same reason we may exclude Infants: allow Infants to be Subjects of
Christ's Kingdom, and partakers of some Privileges of it, viz. such as they
are capable of, though not of all; and then why may not the like be yielded
concerning the adult persons spoken of?

To the sixth Argument, the Answer returned, is, That this is the same with the
third, and therefore the same Answer may serve for this also.

Ans. If this were so, then our Defense of the third, may be a Defense of this
also: Nevertheless, it seems this Argument is not the same with the third,
but distinct from it, the Mediums in them not being the same, but distinct: for
in the one, the Argument is from their being disciples, or Scholars, and
therefore under discipline in Christ's School; but this here is from their being
Baptized, and that therefore they are in a state of subjection to the
authoritative teaching of Christ's Ministers, and to the observation of all his
commandment^, and that therefore they are in a state of subjection to
discipline: for thus the Argument stands; They that are Baptized, are thereby
left in a state of subject on to the authoritative teaching of Christ's
Ministers, and to the observation of all his Commandments, and therefore in a
state of subjection to Discipline: But the adult persons spoken of are persons
Baptized: Therefore, etc. The P^op^si^ion is grounded on the Text, Mat. 28.19,
20. where Christ's Ministers are required to Bap^ize, and to teach the Baptized
to observe all his commandments. The Assumption is plain of it self.

To the seventh Argument, viz. That Elders must seed, i. e. both Teach and Rule
all the Flock; and that children are part of the Flock.

The Reverend Author answers, That this concerns not such grown persons as
are not in full communion, for without this they are not to be accounted of the
Flock or Church.

Ans. If this that is here said were sufficiently and clearly proved, it would
be very acceptable to many Elders in this Country, as clearing them from a
great part of the burden which they suppose themselves to be under. And when
the Holy Ghost says, that they must take heed to themselves and to all the
flock, Act. 20 28. and that they must watch for their Souls, as they that must
give account, Heb. 13.17. to say, that these Souls, and this flock, are only
such as are in full communi^n, and Infants or Children in minority; and that
these last mentioned* who then were of the flock, do now cease to be of it,
when they become ^aul; and that now the Elders are not charged to watch over
them any longer, nor to give account of their Souls, we fear this would be an
undue straitning and limiting of the Texts alleged, and would be no good plea
before the Lord; and therefore without b^t^er proof, we dare not assent unto it.

For what the Synod alleges, "That the Apostle writing to the F^ock or Church
at Ephesus, does also write to children, Ephesians. 6.1. as counting them part of the
flock: We do not see that this is sufficiently taken off, by what the Reverend
Author answers, viz. That those Children were either Children in their
Minority, or if adult, they were personally joined to the Church, and so in
full Communion. For, let the words and scope of the Text be considered, and we
conceive it will appear, that this exposition of the place is too narrow; for
the Children there spoken of, are such as were bound to obey their Parents in
the Lord, this being right, and such as were under the fifth Commandment; the
words whereof the Apostle does there allege, Honor thy Father and Mother,
etc. Now how shall it appear, that though Children in minority, and children
when admitted into full communion in the Church, are bound to obey their
Parents, and to Honor Father and Mother, yet other children are not so bound?
Is there any ground for it, that children now adult, if not in full communion
in the Church, are exempted from this Commandment of Obedience to their
Parents, and of Ho^ouring of them? we conceive there is none: and if there be
not, then the children there spoken of, are children adult as well as others,
w^ether in full communion or not. And if so, then these children, as well as
others, are part of the Flock and Church of Ephesus, to whom that Epistle is
written, and then the whole Flock being under the charge of Elders to feed them
(i. e. both to Teach and k^l^ them) it appears thereby, that what the Synod
here says, That these children are under the Watch, and Discipline, and
Government of the Church, is sound and good, and so stands, for all that is
here alleged to the contrary.

In Answer to the Eighth Argument, From the danger of Irreligion and Apostasy
breaking into Churches, and the want of any Church Way to prevent and heal the
same, if these children of Church Members be not under Church Government and
Discipline, and that through want hereof, many Church Members would be brought
under that dreadful judgment of being let-alone in their wickedness. Hos.
4.16, 17.

The Reverend Author names sundry other means for preventing these evils; as,
That no adult person^ be received into personal membership, till fit for all
Church Communion; and that the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, which Christ
has left to bind and loose, be rightly managed toward Delinquent-members that
are orderly admitted into Church Communion; and for others that are not thus
joined to the Church, that authority in Families and Commonwealth be wisely
and faithfully managed toward such, page 15, 16.

Ans. All these we acknowledge may, by the blessing of God, be much available
in their way for ^he pu^pose ^lledged: and, Oh that there were due care and
wa^ch^^^lnes^ in Churche^* Families, and Commonwealth, for the faithful and
due exercise hereof! Nevertheless, we conceive all these are not ^^fficien^ for
the purpose desired;

1. Because some of them are not Church-wayes at all* of which the Synods
Argument speaks; though it is not so expressed by the Reverend Author: and
therefore t^ough government in Families and Commonwealth were carefully used
in the manner expressed, yet Church Way may be wanting for all this.

2. Those Church-wayes that are mentioned, viz. Care in admitting into the
Church, and due managing the Keys of Discipline to them that are so admitted,
these are not sufficient to prevent the evils spoken of; and the reason is,
Because there is a great multitude of persons who were either born in the
Church, or were admitted thereinto in their infancy or minority, who if they be
not under Church Discipline when adult, are let alone in their wickedness, in
respect of any Church Way to heal them; and by want of this Church Discipline
toward these persons, I^religion and Apostasy may break into the Churches,
notwithstanding all Church-wayes toward others, and all other ways in
Commonwealth and Families toward these: for, Church Way for the good of these
there is none, if they be not under Church Government and Discipline.

As for that which is here said by the Reverend Author, That the Churches
censuring of adult persons, admitted before they be qualified for communion in
all Ordinances, will not prevent or heal those evils, seeing the Lord blesses
only his own Institutions, not men's Devices; and that Humane Inventions
usually cause the evils which they pretend to cure, page 15.

This Reason may have in it self a truth; viz. that Gods Institutions, and not
men's Inventions, are the way wherein men may expect a Blessing. But, if such a
thing be affirmed of Church Discipline toward the persons spoken of, that such
Church Discipline is an Humane Invention, why should this be affirmed and not
proved? for, as for the persons spoken of, they were not first admitted when
adult, but before they were adult, even in their infancy or minority; and now
being adult, and yet never cut off, or cast out from their Church-relation, if
by sin they deserve Church-censure, and yet it be not applied to them, but
that, in respect thereof, they be let alone, are they not then under that
judgment, Hos. 4 of being ^e^ alone in their wickedness? And does not this
Neglect make way for I^religion and Apostasy in Churches, no Church Way being
used toward these for prevent^ng thereof? for we do not see any ground to
think, that the use of Church disc^pline toward such is an Humane Invention.
For these particulars to us do seem plain:

1. That Church Discipline should be used toward all that are within the
Church, as there may be occasion and need of it, and as in respect of
understanding and age they are capable.

2. It is plain also, that the persons spoken of were once within the Church,
and, as such, were baptized in their infancy; this cannot be denied, but by
joining with the Antipoedobaptists, in denying the Ba^^^sm and
Church-memb^rship of little children.

And lastly, it is plain also, that the persons spoken of, though now they be
adult, were never yet, in any way of God, cast out, or cut off from the Church,
and the relation to it which they formerly had; and many of them are far from
deserving any such matter. Now though Church Government and Church Discipline
toward such as were never in the Church, might be counted an Humane D^vic^, yet
for such as were once according to Order and Divine Institution within it, as
Members thereof, and never were since st^out of (...), or cut off from that
relation (which is the case of the persons spoken of) to say, That
Church Government and Church Discipline toward such, is an Humane Inven^io^, we
see no sufficient Reason either so to say or think; but do rather conceive,
that this Church Discipline is so far from being an Humane Invention, that the
neglect thereof, is a neglect of a Divine Institution; and that a^ sowning of
(...) personspunc; and declaring of them to be Non-members, which some speak
for) if this be not a Church-censure, what is it other then an Humane invention
and Device?

So much for Defense of what is said by the Synod in their third Proposition,
to prove, That the children of Church Members, when grown up, are under the
Watch, Discipline, and Government of the Church.

Propose 4. The fourth Proposition of the Synod, is, That these adult Persons
are not therefore to be admitted to full communion, merely because they are and
continue Members, without such further qualifications as the word of God
requires thereunto.

By which Proposition of the Synod, there is a preventing of an usual objection
from the danger of polluting the Ordinances by unworthy partakers, if the
children of Church Members be counted members, and to be (as such) under
Church-watchfulness and government when adult; for some may think, that if this
their relation to the Church be granted, there will then be danger that they
will also come to the Lords Supper before they be duly qualified for that
Ordinance: now the scope of this fourth Proposition is to prevent this evil;
and therefore it is the more to be admired, that the Proposition should not be
granted by the Reverend Author, and by all that desire the Lords Supper may be
preserved from unworthy partakers, as we do not doubt but he does. But why then
is this Proposition stuck at? if it may not be granted, that these adult
persons are not to be admitted to f^ll communion without such qualifications as
the word of God requires thereunto, which is what the Synod says; must the
contrary to this be granted, that they may be admitted thereunto without such
qualifications at all? we suppose the Reverend Author would not grant this: and
yet he does not consent to the other, but excepts against the proofs of it.

For, says he, Though this Proposition seems to them plain, yet it seems not
sufficiently cleared by their Proofs: 1. From 1 Cor. 11.28, 29. where it is
required, that such as come to the Lords Supper, be able to examine themselves,
and discern the Lords body, else they will eat and drink unworthily, and eat
and drink judgment to themselves, when they partake of this Ordinance: But
this ability is too of^^n seen to be wanting in the c^ildren of the covenant
that grow up to years, page 16, 17.

To this Argument the reply of the Reverend Author is by way of Concession, and
of Exception.

His Concessions are two: 1. That the want of such abilities in the children of
the covenant, is indeed too often seen, through the too frequent neglect of
Parents in their Education, and of Ministers and Churches in their Institution,
(or Instruction) and Catechizing, and watching over them, page 17.

Ans. It seems then that the children of Church Members, even when they are
grown up to years (for it is of such that the Synods Argument here speaks,
and so the Reverend Author does express it) are not only under the Education of
Parents, but also under the Institution, Catechizing and watch of the Ministry,
and of the Church; how then will that stand which was said before, page 10.
That when they are grown up, they are not under the watch, discipline and
government of the Church? for here it is granted, that they are under the watch
of the Church (and if under Church-watch properly as such, then under
Discipline) and that the neglect of Ministers and Churches herein, is one cause
of their want of ability to examine themselves, and to discern the Lords body.
Now can the neglect of Church-watchfulness be a cause of this evil, if the Lord
have not appointed them to be under the same? these things seem not well to
agree. Again, if the want of such abilities be too often seen in the children
of the covenant when grown up, as is here acknowledged; then what the Synod
here says seems to be true, and stand good, that such grown persons, though
children of the covenant, or Church Members, are not therefore to be admitted
to full communion: the reason is, because notwithstanding this, they may want
that ability that is requisite to such full communion.

2. The second Concession here is, That Membership is separable from, yea
destitute of such-ability in the Infant Seed or children of the covenant, in
their minority, and therefore they are not to be admitted to the Lords Supper;
and that Text ( viz. 1 Cor. 1^.28, 29.) proves it.

Ans. Does that Text prove that Infants, and children in minority, though
members of the Church, are not yet to be admitted to the Lords Supper, because
they are not able to examine themselves and to discern the Lords body; and
does it not also prove the same concerning children when adult, if this
disability be found in them also? Sure Infants and Children in minority, are
not expressly mentioned in the Text, no more then Children when adult or grown
up; and if the Logicians rule be good which says a quatenus ad omne valet
conj^quenti^, then if infants and children in minority must not be admitted to
full communion, because of their want of the ability spoken of; it will follow,
if the like inability be found in the adult, that these also must not be
admitted, and that for the like Reason. And ^f that Text 1 Cor. 11. be
sufficient to prove the one, it is sufficient for proof of the other also; and
so this Argument of the Synod stands good.

The Exception he added, is, That yet it may not be granted, that when they are
grown up to years, they are, and continue Members regularly, being through want
of that ability not fit for Church Communion, ( i. e. for full communion.)

Ans. If it may not be granted that they continue Members, why should not
something be produced to prove the contrary? Why should such a thing be barely
affirmed, and not proved? It is sure they were once Members, and, as such, were
Baptized; and it is clear, that though now they be adult, or grown up, yet they
were never, in any way of God, cut off, or cast out from their Membership: and
therefore we think it more rational to say, that they st^ll c^ntinue to be
Members, then to say that they do not; and this without alleging any proof at
all.

As for that which here follows, That if persons being unbaptized should
desire to have the Covenant and their Church Membership sealed by Baptism, they
must hold f^rth faith in Christ wrought in their hearts, before they may be
baptized, as Philip required the Eunuch, Acts 8. So, by parity of Reason, from
baptized in infancy, being grown up to years, desires to be joined to the
Church, he must hold forth his personal faith in the Son (...) God, etc

The Answer is, That there is not, as is said, parity of Reason between the
cases alleged, but great disparity: for, in the one case the persons spoken of
are unbaptized; in the other, baptized already: in the one case, the persons
desire to have the Covenant and their Church Membership sealed by Baptism; and
in the other case there is no such d^si^e, the persons having had the Covenant,
and their Membership sealed by Bapt^sm already, even in their infancy or
minority long since: in the one case, the persons seem as yet to be
Non-members, though they do (...) that Privilege; but in the other case, the
persons were Church Members long ago. For, as for that term that is used
concerning these (...) d^^ring to be joined to the Church by their own
personal (...) c^^ve this word of [ joyning] to the Church if it be meant of
their first joining thereto, is very improper, because the^^ persons are not
now to be so joined, but were joined to the Church long since: Nor is the
Church now to admit them to Church Membership, for they were admitted thereto
long since.

The second Argument of the Synod for proof of this fourth Proposition, is From
the Old Testament, where though men did continue Members of the Church, yet for
ceremonial uncleanness they were to be kept from full communion in the holy
things; yea, and the Priests and Porters had special charge that men should
not partake in all the holy things, unless duly qualified for the same,
notwi^hstanding their Membership, etc.

To this the Reverend Author Answers, 1. That the invalidity of Proofs from
the Old Testament, being applied to Gospel Ordinances, and so this of Baptism
under the New Testament, in things whereof there is not the like reason, has
been declared in the fourth, sixth, and eighth Positions, with which this proof
does not agree.

Ans. To this we Answer, 1. That there is validity, and much weight in proofs
from the Old Testament, for confirming and clearing things under the New: for
even those Scriptures were written for our learning, Romans 15.4. and Christ
himself bids us search them, as those which did Testify of Him, Joh. 5.39. and
brings many Proofs out of those Scriptures for confirming and clearing things
under the Gospel, Luke 24.44, 45, 46. and 16.29, 31. and so do the Apostles
likewise, even in main and fundamental matters, Act. 17.2, 3. and 28.23. and so
from the maintenance of the Ministry that was under the Old Testament, to the
maintenance of the Ministry now, 1 Cor. 9.13. from their Sacraments to ours;
and from the danger of unworthy receiving those, to the danger of unworthy
receiving ours, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. etc. By which, and much more that might be
added, it is plain, that the Scriptures of the Old Testament have much validity
in them, for confirming and clearing Truths in New Testament-times.

2. The Reverend Author does acknowledge, as was noted before, That the
covenant of Abraham is the same for substance, now under the Gospel, as it was
under the Law; and that the Kingdom of God is the same to the Jews formerly,
and to the Gentiles now; and that Baptism of Infants, under the New Testament,
may be rightly proved from the Circumcision of Inf^nts under the Old. Which
passages do sufficiently witness, that in his judgment there is validity in
Proofs from the Old Testament, for things under the New.

3. It is a great weakness and mistake in sundry of the Antipoedobaptists, that
they would limit the Proofs for Infant Baptism, and for the Covenant Interest
of children, unto the Scriptures of the New Testament, as if the Covenant of
Abraham, and the Circumcision of Infants in the Old Testament, were of no
validity for the purpose mentioned. And it is not comfortable that the Reverend
Author should so often harp upon this string, and so often mention this matter
of the invalidity of Old Testament-Scriptures for proof of matters in Gospel
times; as if he did concur with them, in their Tenet against ^oedobaptism,
which he frequently professes against, albeit in this, his language seems but
too like theirs, which we could wish were otherwise.

4. For that expression of [ Things whereof there is not the like reason] being
a limitation, or explanation of the invalidity spoken of, let this be applied
to the case in question, and we conceive it will not weaken the Argument in
hand, nor show any Invalidity therein, but rather the contrary; for if
Ceremonial uncleanness did hinder men from full communion in the Ordinances in
the Old Testament, notwithstanding their Membership; is there not the like
reason, or rather much more, that Membership alone should not suffice for full
communion in these days, if Moral fitness and Spiritual qualifications be
wanting? It seems in this case there is the like reason, or rather much more:
and therefore the Synods Argument in the present case, and their proof from the
Old Testament, cannot be laid aside, or refused, for any invalidity therein,
through want of the like Reason

2. The Reverend Author says, If the Texts alleged by the Synod were
applicable to Church Members in Gospel Times, yet they suit not the case in
question. And why not? the reason rendered, is, "Because all men that were
members of the Jewish Church, had full communion in all Legal Ordinances, even
they that were ceremonially unclean had so before their uncleanness, and after
they were healed of their uncleanness, as well as others. So then the
unsuitableness is, that ceremonial uncleannes, did debar men from full
communion, though they had been partakers of it before, and might be again after
their cleansing: whereas the case in question is of such as yet never bad such
full communion. But what weight is there in this, to weaken the Synods
Argument? If ceremonial uncleanness did then hinder men from full communion,
who had formerly had it is there not as much reason that want of spiritual
qualifications should now binder men from such full communion, who yet have
never had it? one would think such a matter as would suffice for the debarring
of one from full communion, who had formerly enjoyed it, might suffice for
hindering one from such communion who never yet was partaker thereof. And if the
Priests and Porters in Israel had charge, that men should not partake of all
the holy things, unless duly qualified for the same, notwithstanding their
membership in f^ll communion with the Church (for so the Reverend Author, ^.19.
understands that place in 2 Chronicles. 23 19.) does it not much more follow, that
such as yet never had such full communion may justly be kept theref^om, until
duly quali^ica, notwithstanding their Membership? For ought we see, this
Consequence is strong and undeniable, and so the Synods Argument in this place
from the Old Testamen^ is not at all overthrown, but rather more strengthened.

As for what the Reverend Author says, page 18, 9. to the particular Texts
here alleged, viz. Levit. 7.20, 21. Numb. 9.6, 7. and 19.13, 20. Ezekiel. 44.7,
8, 9. which he understands to signify and teach, That in Gospel Times men
should be removed ou^ of Church Communion by Excommunication, if they were
scandalous and impenitent sinners; and that such scandalous persons, such as
were visibly uncircumcised in heart, and spiritually unclean, should not be
admitted into the Church: We shall not insist upon these particulars, for it is
our desire that no unworthy persons may be admitted into the Church, nor
suffered to continue therein.

Only before we leave this second Argument, it may be observed, That whereas
the Synod had said, More was required to adult persons eating the Passover,
then mere membership; therefore so there is now to the Lords Supper.

The Reverend Author answers, It is true, more then that membership which
they had in infancy or minority, was required in adult persons to eat the
Passover: For first, when they became adult, they were to covenant solemnly
with the Lord and his People in their own persons, whereunto Heart-fitness was
necessary, that their persons and services might be accepted of God --
Secondly, This Heart-fitness was also to be exercised when they were to eat the
Passover, p. 19, 20.

Wherein there is a consent to what the Synod had said, about more then
membership to be requisite to the eating of the Passover. And if this ground of
the Synod be true and good, is not their inference from it good also, viz. That
more then membership is also requisite to the receiving of the Lords Supper?

The third Argument of the Synod for confirming this fourth Proposition, is
taken From the different nature of Baptism and the Lords Supper; the former
firstly and properly sealing Covenant-holiness, Church Membership, and planting
into Christ, and so Members as such are the subjects of that Ordinance: But the
Lords Supper is a Sacrament of growth in Christ, and of special communion with
him, and so supposes a special renewing of Faith and Repentance in them that
partake of that Ordinance.

The Reverend Author making answer to this, faith nothing at all touching the
different nature of these two Ordinances, on which this Argument of the Synod
is built; and so Baptism may be for all Church Members as such, and the Lords
Supper not for all, but only for some, for any thing that the Reverend Author
says to the contrary. For, as for the different nature of these two
Ordinances, he says nothing thereto at all: But his Answer is about the
communion that is inferred from Church Membership, viz. That the membership of
children in minority infers church communion, so far as they are capable -- and
so they are to be baptized; but the Church Membership of adult persons infers
communion in all Ordinances, and particularly in the Lords Supper.

Which Answer, as it medleth not with the different nature of Baptism, and the
Lords Supper, from which the Synod argues; so it is an Answer which being
considered in it self, is nothing but a petitio principii, or a begging of the
question, affirming that which is the thing to be proved: For, the Synods
Proposition is, that these ad^lt persons are not therefore to be admitted to
full communion, merely because they are and continue Members -- and they give
three Arguments for this. Now the Reverend Author in Answer to the third of
those Arguments, says, as here we see, that the Membership of adult persons,
infers communion in all Ordinances, the Lords Supper, etc. The Synod says in
effect, This Membership alone does not infer full communion; and the Answer
here given, is an affirming of the contrary, viz. that it does infer it; which
Answer cannot go for a sufficient overthrow of the Synods Proposition, unless
we shall say, that a mere affirming of the contrary, is sufficient for that
purpose. But if a contrary affirmation, be a sufficient confutation, it were
easy in that way to confute the things that are most strongly proved.

For a conclusion of this fourth Proposition, and the Arguments for it, the
Synod does infer, That if Persons when adult may be, and continue Members, and
yet be debarred from the Lords Supper, until meet qualifications for the same
be found in them, then may they also (until like qualifications) be debarred
from that power of voting in the Church, which pertaines to males in full
communion: -- for how can they who are not able to examine and judge themselves,
be thought able and fit to discern and judge in the weighty affairs of the
House of God?

Now what says the Reverend Author to this? one thing he says, is this, That
Church Membership in adult Persons, infers communion in all Ordinances, in the
Lords Supper, and in Voting, and in Censures; Which is nothing but an
affirmation of the contrary to the Synods Proposition, which they had confirmed
by Arguments, and of their Inference therefrom: but until their Arguments be
taken away, their Proposition, and their Inference from it, stands good: and
therefore this affirmation of the contrary may not be admitted.

Another thing the Reverend Author here says, is this, That no adult person
may be received into mere Membership regularly, until he be qualified fitly for
other Ordinances, and for Voting, and judging in Church Affairs.

Where, if by receiving such into Membership be meant, that they were not
members before now, when they are adult, but are now first received into that
estate; Then the Answer is, That the adult persons spoken of are not now first
received into Membership, but have been in that estate long since, even from
their Infancy or minority, and therefore they cannot properly be said to be Now
received into Membership: but if hereby be meant, That they cannot regularly be
acknowledged to be Members, until they be fitly qualified for all Ordinances;
for Voting, and for judging in Censures, then this is but the same which we had
before, even an affirmation contrary to what the Synod had said. But till the
Synods Proposition, with their Arguments for^^, and their Inference from i^, be
removed, the Reader may judge what is to be thought of a mere affirmation to
the contrary.

So much for Defense of the Synods fourth Proposition.

Propos. 5. For the fifth Proposition, viz. Church Members who were admitted in
minority, understanding the Doctrine of Faith, and publicly professing their
assent thereto; not scandalous in life, and solemnly owning the Covenant before
the Church, wherein they give up themselves and their children to the Lord, and
subject themselves to the Government of Christ in the Church, their children
are to be Baptized.

The first Argument of the Synod for confirming this Proposition, is; Because
the children here spoken of are partakers of that which is the main ground of
baptizing any children whatsoever, and neither the Parents nor the children do
put in any bar to binder it. Of which the former Branch is proved; Because
interest in the Covenant is the main ground of Title to Baptism, and this these
children have; and that Interest in the Covenant is the ground of baptizing
an^, the Synod proves; Because in the Old Testament this was the ground of
Title to Circumcision, Genesis 17.7, 9, 10, 11. to which Baptism now answer, Col.
2.11, 12 and because in Acts 2.38 39. they are (...) ground exhorted to be
baptized, because the Promise ((...) Covenant) was to them and to their
children.

Now what says the Reverend Author to these Proofs? truly nothing at all that
does appear; and therefore the Argument and Proofs of it, stand good for ought
that is here said to the contrary. And indeed, how can it be otherwise? since
nothing is more plain, then that the Covenant was the ground of Circumcision;
and that they in Acts. 2. are therefore exhorted to be baptized: I will
establish my Covenant, says God, Genesis 17. between me and thee, and thy seed
after thee -- Ye shall therefore keep my Covenant: and this is my Covenant
which you shall keep, Every male among you shall be circumcised: and* says
Peter, Repent, and ^e baptized wherefore, or on what g^ou^d must they be so?
Because (says he) the Promise (...) to your children: whereby it is undeniably
plain, that the Covenant was the ground of Title to Circumcision, and is now of
Title to Baptism. Nor can this be denied by the Reverend Author, because he
plainly yields in Position fifth and sixth premised, That the Covenant of
Abraham was the same in substance under the Law, and (...) the Gospel; and that
Baptism ^^come in the place of Circumcision, and therefore Infants of
Confederates are now to be baptized, as thou they were circumcised, they both
being outward Seals of the same Covenant in substance, page 3, 4. So that in
his judgment, Title to Circumcision then was, and to Baptism now is, rightly
inferred from interest in the Covenant: which [the very thing here: affirmed by
the Synod. What then does the Reverend Author here say? why, that which he
says, is this, That men must be duly qualified before they may be admired to
covenant with the Lord and his Church for themselves and their children -- and,
that the Primitive Churches looked for this qualification in the (...) admitted
into Church Membership -- which does not at all enervate what the Synod here
says. For, suppose men must be duly qualified before they be admitted to
Covenant and Membership, does this prove, that interest in the Covenant is not
the ground of Title to the Seal? it seems not to prove it at all; and the
reason is, Because this speaks not to the thing in question, but to another
point. For, whether interest in the Covenant do prove right to the Seal, is one
thing; and how men should be qualified before they be admitted to Covenant, is
another; and the former being that which is here affirmed by the Synod, it
cannot be overthrown by what the Reverend Author affirms concerning the
latter, except we shall say, that a thing may be sufficiently confuted by
speaking to another point, when one does not speak ad idem. Whether the Parents
of the children here spoken of, be duly qualified for Covenant, and unto
Membership, is not the thing here in question, nor spoken of by the Synod; but
here is the thing they affirm, that Interest in the Covenant gives Title to
Baptism -- Besides, suppose the qualifications here mentioned by the Reverend
Author, of being "S^ints, Sanctified, and Faithful in Christ Jesus, and the
rest, suppose these be requisite in men that are to be admitted to Covenant and
Membership, yet this concerns not the Parents of the children here spoken of,
because they are not now to be admitted into the Covenant and Church
membership, but are therein already, and have been long before now, even from
their minority o^ birth; and therefore this also is another Reason, why that
which is here spoken by the Reverend Author is beside the question.

Further, whereas the Synod here adds, That a Member, or one in Covenant as
such, is the Subject of Baptism, was further cleared in Propos. 1.

The Reverend Author answers, That the light which that Proposition holds
forth for clearing this, is in one clause, which is here omitted, viz.
[According to Scripture] They that according to Scripture are Members of the
visible Church, are the Subjects of Baptism.

Ans. Then let that clause be here added, which was there expressed by the
Synod in that first Proposition: if then the Reverend Author do consent
thereto, as it may seem by his manner of alleging it, that he does; then what
the Synod here affirms, is gained, viz. That interest in the Covenant is the
ground of Title to Baptism: and indeed the Synod gave five Arguments for
clearing of that first Proposition, which the Reverend Author does not there
meddle withal, much less remove; and therefore they still stand in force.

Only it may be observed, that whereas here he seems to consent to the
Proposition, if that term [ according to Scripture] be added, yet when he spoke
to that first Proposition, he consented not thereto, unless this term [
according to Scripture] might be changed into this [ according to Christ's
Ordinance] otherwise he could not then concur with that Proposition, and this
term in it, though now it seems he does: But whether it be expressed the one
way or the other, with the term of [ Members [ according to Scripture] or [
according to Christ's Ordinance,] if it be granted that such Members are the
subjects of Baptism, then the Doctrine of the Synod in this point is granted.
As for what is here said to that Proposition, if this term [ according to
Scripture] be not omitted, but taken in, viz. That according to Scripture, the
Covenant was differently administered in diff^rent times of the Church; which
different manner of administration is here, page 22. and in the tenth Position,
which is here cited, said to be this in sum, That the Church was once in
Families, or domestical; under Moses, National; and under Christ,
Congregational.

Ans. What if all this were granted? Is there any thing in this (for we would
willingly keep to the Question) to overthrow the Synods f^^st Proposition, or
their saying that is here under debate, viz. That Interest in the Covenant is
the main ground of title to Baptism? It seems nothing at all. For, if according
to Scripture there have been different administrations of the Covenant in
different times, and that the Church was heretofore Domestical, afterward
National, and now Congregational; all this may be granted, and yet it may be a
Truth that is here said, That Interest in the Covenant is the main ground of
Title to Baptism.

That these Children are in Covenant, the Synod says, appears;

1. Because if the Parent be in Covenant, the Child is so also: but the Parents
in question are in Covenant.

To this the Reverend Author Answers, That if this being in Covenant, be
understood of being in it according to G^spel-rules, and that the Childrens
being in Covenant, be understood of Infant Children, or Children in minority,
then the Proposition is true, or else it must be denied.

Ans. Concerning the one of these Particulars, viz. of being in Covenant
according to Gospel-rules, it may be granted that it is so to be understood,
and that it is not to be imagined, that the Synod meant it any otherwise. But
for the other particular, that the Children in Covenant are only Infants or
Children in minority, this is a limitation that needs further consideration,
and will be spoken to afterward.

Whereas the Synod, to prove the Parents in question to be in Covenant,
alleges, That they were once in Covenant, and never since discovenanted; the
former, because else they had not warrantably been Baptized; and the latter,
because they have not in any way of God been discovenanted, cast out, or cut
off from their Covenant Relation.

The Reverend Author in his Answer hereunto, says, That they are
discovenanted, by not performing that whereunto they were engaged by the
Covenant, -- for which he alleges Romans 2.25.

Ans. 1. It seems then the Covenant does not only reach unto Children during
their minority, but also when they are become adult; for else how could they
when adult, be faulty in not performing that whereunto the Covenant engages?
can men be faulty for not performing Covenant-engagements, when they are not
comprehended in the Covenant? this seems not possible: therefore here seems to
be a conc^ssion that the Covenant reaches further then to Infancy or minority,
and that they who were in Covenant in their Infancy by means of their Parents
covenanting for them, are also in that Covenant when they are become adult.

2. Nor is it clear, that m^ns not performing what the Covenant requires of
them, does forthwith discovenant them, if by being discovenanted, be meant
their not being in that Church-relation in which they were before, for God is
wont to be patient, and long-suffering toward them that are in Covenant with
him, and to bear with them long before be give them a bill of Divorce, as it is
said in Nehem. 9.30. Many years did thou forbear them; and therefore it may
seem more rigor then the Word allows, to think or say, that such as were in
covenant with God in their infancy or minority, are forthwith fallen out of
that estate, if they do not, as soon as ever they become adult, perform what
that Covenant requires. The long-suffering of God will not allow us so to
judge, unless we had more clear warrant for such judgment: Nor does the Text
alleged, viz. Romans 2 25. prove any such thing; but when it is there said, Thy
circumcision is made uncircumcision, the meaning is it shall not profit thee at
all in such a state, as to eternal benefit: and so Baptism may be said in such
case to be no Baptism; and Covenant, and Church-relation, to be no Covenant, no
Church-relation, i. e. not to yield any such profit in that estate: But yet if
such should afterward be brought to Repentance and New-obedience, would any
say, that now such persons must be circumcised again, or baptized again, as if
the former, in respect of the external act, were become null? We suppose this
could not be said justly, though in respect of any profit to their Souls, their
Circumcision and Baptism in their former estate was as none: and so we may say
their Covenant and Church relation is as none, in respect of any Spiritual
saving benefit to their Souls, if they perform not what the Covenant binds
them unto; and yet it can no more be said, that in respect of their
Church-relation, and external visible state, they are not in the Church, or not
in the Covenant, then in the other particulars it can be said, that they are
not circumcised, or not baptized. It is one thing to be in the Covenant, and in
the Church, in respect of external state, and another thing to enjoy all the
spiritual and eternal benefits of such a relation; and though this latter be
the portion of none but such as come to be truly regenerate, yet the other is,
and so continues, the right of all that have once had it, until in some way of
God they be cut off from it, and so deprived thereof.

The Synod having said, That persons once in Covenant are not broken off from
it, according to Scripture, sare for notorious sins, and incorrigibleness
therein, which is not the case of these Parents.

The Reverend Author answers, That if they break off themselves, by breaking
the Covenant which was sealed by Baptism in their infancy or minority, they
thereby deprive themselves of the benefits and Privileges of the Covenant, and
in such case are to be looked at like those in 1 John 2.19.

Ans. If by Breaking off themselves, were meant no more, but that they do this
meritoriously, i. e. that by their sin they deserve to be broken off, then it
may be granted, that in this sense persons may (though not that these do) break
off themselves from their Covenant Relation; and so also may persons that have
been in full communion, even these by their sins may thus break off themselves,
in which sense it is said, Hos. 13.9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self,
i. e. that their sins were the procuring or meritorious cause of their
destruction. But if hereby be meant, that the persons spoken of do break off
themselves from their Church-relation not only meritoriously, but actually and
really, then it may be justly questioned, whether Church Members can thus break
off themselves. Sure Israel did not thus destroy themselves, because all
judgment and punishment is from the Lord, whose work it is to kill, and make
alive, to wound, and to heal, to create peace and evil; so that there is no
evil in the city, but the Lord does it, even the Lord does all these things,
Deuteronomy. 32.39. Isa. 45.7. Amos 3.6. And therefore, if breaking off from
Church Estate, be an evil of Punishment, men cannot in this sense break off
themselves without God. Besides, men cannot of themselves alone bring in
themselves into the Church, but there is requisite the Consent of the Church
thereto; and therefore if they cannot, of themselves alone, bring in themselves
into the Church, how is it credible that of themselves alone they should break
themselves off from the Church? One would think, that such as cannot of
themselves alone open the door for their Entrance into the Church, should no
more be able to open it for their going out. And further, it seems not
rational, that Delinquents in the Church should have it in their power, whether
they will be censured with Church-censure, or no; and yet it must be so, if men
that have been Church Members may un-Member themselves at their pleasure: for
sure it is, Church censures cannot be dispensed to any, but to such as are
within the Church, 1 Cor. 5.12. If therefore a Churchmember, suppose one that
has been in full communion, shall commit the most enormous and scandalous
wickedness that can be named; yet if men may break off themselves from
Church-relation at their pleasure, such an one may have it in his choice
whether he will be censured, or no: for, if he can but say, I am no Member of
your Church, nor will be, but do fors^ke the Church-relation in which I was, it
shall then be in the power of such a notorious Delinquent to bind the Churches
hands from censuring him, and so make the Rule of Christ to be of none effect,
which says, D^liver such a man to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. which makes it very
improbable, that men can of themselves break off themselves from the Covenant
and Church-relation. As for them in 1 Ioh. 2.19. of whom it is said, They went
out from us, but they were not of us, etc. why may not this going o^t be
understood of a local departure, or of a departing from the company, and
communion of the Saints, and such Duties and acts of Love as that
Church-relation requires, rather then of a going out from the relation it
self? It is plain, men may of themselves (if they have no more grace) neglect
the duties which their nearest relations require, and depart from them in
respect of place and duties; as David and Job were thus forsaken by their
kindred, brethren, and mothers children, etc. Psalm. 38.11. and 69.8. Job 19.13,
14. but does this prove, that those brethren and mothers children, who thus
neglected the duties which their relation required, were now no longer in the
relation at all? were these brethren and mothers children, now become mothers
children no longer, nor brethren any longer, because now they were gone from
the duties which they should have performed? This does not follow at all: How
then does it follow, that those who wen^ out from the Saints in respect of
place and performance of duties, were thereby gone out from their
Church-relation? they might by this departure of theirs deserve to be cut off
by Church-censure from their Church Estate; but that by this their departing
they did cut off, or break off themselves from their Church Estate, any
otherwise then meritoriously, does not appear.

The Synod having said, That the Parents in Question are in Covenant, because
the Tenor of the Covenant is to the Faithful and their seed after them in their
Generations, Genesis 17.7.

The Reverend Author in his Answer hereto, page 24. says, That the sea^ing of
this covenant to the posterity of Isaac and Jacob by circumcision, was to
continue throughout their Generations, till the coming of Christ; and that the
Covenant is for the substance the same to us as it was to them, it being
^stablished by the Blood of Christ, Luke 1.69, 72.73 Heb. 13.20.

Ans. Here is then a consent to the Synods Argument, and the Proof of it: for,
if the Covenant be for substance the same to us as it was to them, and was then
to the Faithful and their seed in their Generations; does it not then follow,
that these Parents being the Seed of the Faithful, are hereby proved to be in
the covenant? this seems a plain granting of the Synods saying, and of their
Proof of it.

Whereas the Synod said, That the Parents in Q^estion are keepers of the
Covenant, because they are not fors^ker^, and rejecters of the God, and
Covenant of their Fathers; and alleged for this Deuteronomy. 29.25, 26. 2 King. 17.15
-- 20. 2 Chronicles. 7.22. Deu. 7.10.

The Reverend Author Answers, That keepers of the covenant, the Parents in
Question are not; for though they are not such forsakers, and rejecters of it,
as they who are spoken of in the Texts alleged; yet besides that gross
Idolatry, there is a spiritual Idolatry in scandalous covetousness, Col. 3.5.
Worldly-mindedness, whereby men forsake and reject God and his Covenant to
serve the World -- and such may they be who answer all the terms of their fifth
Proposition, externally and visibly.

Ans. Now herein is a mavelous thing, and not easy to be understood; for the
Proposition says expressly, that the persons spoken of are not scandalous in
life; and the Answer is, That men may Answer that, and all the other terms of
the Proposition externally, and visibly, and yet be guilty of Scandalous
covetousness; and Worldly-mindedness. Now that men may be not Scandalous in
life, and yet guilty of Scandalous covetousness; guilty of Scandalous
covetousness and worldly-mindedness, and yet not Scandalous in life; these
things seem contradictory and inconsistent, C^piat qui capere porest. It seems
to us more rational to think and say, That though it be possible for men to be
not Scandalous in life, and yet to be guilty of Worldly-mindedness, and other
secret sins, and heart-wickednes^; yet if they answer this and all the terms of
the Proposition, it seems not improbable but they may be truly godly, and
sincere, since they are not only not Scandalous in life, but do give up
themselves and their children to the Lord, and subject themselves to the
Government of Christ in his Church; and all this not Ignorantly, but with
understanding; not sl^ghtly, but Solemnly and Publicly before the Church: for,
does not all this make their sincerity hopeful? we conceive it may. But that
they should do all this, and in such manner as is said, and yet for all this to
be so far from probability of grace, as to be Forsakers and Rej^cters of God
and his covenant, to serve the World, and this not only secretly, and in
heart, but so outwardly, and visibly, as to be scandalous therein; how this can
be, we must confess we do not understand.

To that of the Synod, where they say, That the Parents in question do not put
in any bar to hinder their children from Baptism: and that this is plain from
the words of the Proposition, where they are described to be such as understand
the Doctrine of Faith, etc. The Reverend Author in his Answer, says That
notwithstanding this, the Parents may put in a bar to hinder their children
from Bap^^sm, because a man may do and be all that is required in that
Proposition, and yet have no faith in Christ, but be an unregenerate person --

Ans. It is one thing what a man may do, and yet be an unregenerate person
really and in the sight of God, who knows the heart; and another thing to be
visibly so in the view of men, and in their rational judgment: for* it is
granted, that a man may be and do outwardly and visibly all that the
Proposition mentions, yea and all that can be named further, and yet be
really, and in the sight of God, an unregenerate person; but yet this needs not
to hinder his child from Baptism before the Church: for such was the case of
Judas, Ananias and Sapphira, Simon Magus, and others, who had a name to live,
and yet were dead, Rev. 3.1. and yet for all this deadness and unregeneracy of
theirs, the Church did warrantably admit them and theirs to Baptism, because
visibly, and for ought that the Church could discern, they were regenerate,
since De occultis non judicat Ecclesia. But that a man may do, and be all that
the Proposition mentions, and yet be unregenerate, and without Faith, not
only in the sight of God, but also visibly, and to the Churches judgment;
this seems not very probable. Even one of the particulars which the Proposition
mentions, viz. that of [ Giving up themselves to the Lord] is spoken of by
the Apostle, as a token of the grace of God bestowed on the Churches of
Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8.1, 5. And when the Synod mentions not only this
particular* but five or six others in the Proposition, must we for all this
say, That men may do this, and all that is mentioned in that Proposition, and
yet have no grace of God bestowed on them, but be, even quoad nos, without all
faith in Christ, and in an unregenerate estate, and so put in a bar to hinder
the Baptism of their children? we cannot but fear such judgment is more
rigorous then Charity will allow; for the Scripture tells us, that the tree is
known by its fruit, Mat. 12. and 7. and, that even a child is known by his
doings, whether his work be pure, and whether it be right, Prove. 20.11. and
therefore when there are so many things for the Parents in question, as are
mentioned in the Proposition, and nothing appearing to the contrary, we think
such Parents, having been Members of the Church in their minority, may justly
be looked at as those who do not put in any bar to hinder their children from
Baptism.

The Reverend Author further says, page 25. Though these Parents are not
Scandalous in life, but Solemnly own the covenant before the Church, wherein
they give up themselves and their children to the Lord, and subject themselves
to the Government of Christ in the Church, yet all these may be affirmed of
many who have a form of Godliness, and deny the power thereof: from such Paul
warned Timothy to Turn away, 2 Timothy 3.5.

Ans. But is it credible, that those in 2 Timothy 3. could answer all that is said
in this Proposition? were they not Scandalous in life, but did give up
themselves to the Lord, and subject themselves to the Government of Christ in
his Church? what then means the many Scandalous sins mentioned ver. 2, 3, 4.
and what was this denying the Power of Godliness that is charged upon them? it
is most like it was such a denying as that in Tit. 1.16. where they are said to
profess to know God, but by works to deny him, being abominable, disobedient,
and to every good work reprobate; and if so, then they were far from answering
what is said of these Parents: for, these Parents are not Scandalous in life;
but those the Apostle speaks of are Scandalous, and abominable for wickedness:
these Parents are commendable for sundry good things in them, and good duties
done by them; whereas those the Apostle speaks of are not so, but disobedient,
and to every good work reprobate. And when the Apostle bids Timothy, turn away
from such; does not this simply that they were Scandalous persons, and
apparently wicked? it is not likely that the Apostle would else have commanded
to turn from them, since he himself did so lovingly converse with so many sorts
of men, that he might gain them to the Lord, 1 Cor. 9.19, 20, etc. and gives
Commandment to receive the weak, Romans 14.1. and to instruct with meekness such
as oppose themselves, if God peradventure may give them Repentance, etc. 2 Timothy
2.25. which things do strongly argue, that those whom he Commands in 2 Timothy 3.
to turn away from, were not such as are described in the Proposition, but far
worse, being apparently and grossly wicked. For otherwise, how could the Apostle
in commanding to Turn away from them, be cleared from direct contradicting both
his own Doctrine and his own Practice? But let those in 2 Timothy 3. whom he
commands to Turn away from, be understood of persons grossly vicious and
Scandalous, and then the appearance of contradiction is easily cleared, and so
the Parents in question cleared from being such persons, as must be Turned away
from.

So much for Defense of the first Argument.

But before the Reverend Author proceed to the next, he is something large in
suggesting, that the Elders do admit persons into Membership, who are not
qualified according to what is said in this Proposition, so that if their
Doctrine in this matter were right, yet it is here page 25, 26. frequently
intimated that their Practice is otherwise. For, says he, they cannot prove
that all adult persons whom they admit into personal and immediate Membership,
are such as the Proposition describes: For, I demand, do they all understand
the Doctrine of Faith? what course do they take to know it? Are all the adult
persons, whom they admit into Membership, such as the Proposition describes? do
they take a right course to know they are such? that they are not Scandalous in
life, etc.

Ans. The Proposition speaks of such as were admitted in minority, and
therefore what is done toward these when they are adult, is not fitly called
admitting into Membership. For, as Mr. Cotton says, It is one thing to enter
into the Church, (for that agrees to such as were sometime without) another
thing to speak of the Infants of Believers, who were never out of the Church,
and so cannot be said to enter into it. Grounds and Ends, etc. page 132, 133.
and therefore it is a mistake to say or think of such Elders, as concurred with
the Synod, That what is done by them toward the children of Church Members,
being now adult, is an admitting of them into Membership, for this those
children had before they were adult, and therefore they are not now admitted
into it.

But to leave this: Why should the Reverend Author suggest such a thing into
the minds of his Readers, That the Elders in their Practice do differ from
their Doctrine, and teach one thing in the Synod, and in their Practice do
contrary? Were it not more suitable to Love (which thinks not evil, 1 Cor.
13. nor receives a reproach against ones Neighbor, Psalm. 15.) to endeavor to
bring such Elders, as are thus faulty (if indeed there be any) to Repentance
for their sailing therein, rather then to give occasion of mis-apprehensions
against them, by writing thus of them? It may well be called misapprehension;
for there are few of the Elders, in comparison, that have yet put the children
of Church Members to a public owning of the covenant, before the time of their
admission to full communion: and for those few that have done it, as this was
not an admitting of them into Membership, for that they had before; so it would
be hard to prove, that when this was done, that their Infants might be
Baptized, which is the case the Synod speaks of; it would be hard (we say) to
prove that the parents, who so did, were not qualified according as the fifth
Proposition describes. And therefore to give occasion of other thoughts, not
only against some few of the Elders, but even of all, for what is here
intimated, is not of some only, but of all alike without difference; what may
be thought of this, we leave to the further consideration of the Reverend
Author.

To the second Argument of the Synod, That the children of the Parents in
question, are either children of the Covenant, or strangers from the Covenant;
either holy, or unclean; either within the Church, or without; either such as
have God for their God, or are without God in the world: but he that considers
the Proposition, will not affirm the latter concerning these children; and the
former being granted, infers their right to Baptism.

To this the Reverend Author answers, That the more he considers the
Proposition, the less he finds in it to evince the former, and the more to
conclude the latter.

Ans. Now the latter is, that the children of the Parents in question, are
strangers from the Covenant, not holy, but unclean, and without the Church, and
such as are without God in the world: And if the Reverend Author find so much
to conclude thus of the children of Church Members, which Members understand
the Doctrine of Faith, and publicly assent thereto; are not scandalous in
life, but thus and further qualified, as in the Proposition is expressed: if he
find much to conclude thus of these children, if he be had expressed any part
thereof, it might have been taken into consideration; but nothing being
expressed, how can it? A mere contrary Affirmation, how can it go for a
sufficient Confutation?

As for that which he adds, That if a man have no more then the Proposition
holds forth, he may be a stranger from the Covenant, unclean, and without the
Church, etc. Is not this spoken of grown persons, and therefore how is the
Synods Argument hereby touched, which speaks of little children? Nor is it
easily proved, that a grown person, who was admitted in minority, and is now
qualified as the Proposition expresses, that such a grown person is now a
stranger from the Covenant, and without the Church, and without God in t^^
world, and this is respect of his external state, or being in the
Church-visible; we see not that this is proved at all. For, as for Romans 9.6, 7,
8. which is here alleged, They are not all Israel, which are of Israel, etc.
the Text may prove, that they are not all elected of God, or sincere Believers,
who in regard of external relation are Members of the visible Church; and this
will be easily granted: but for Membership in the Church-visible, of which is
our question, that text has nothing in it at all to prove, That men who were
members of this Church in their minority, being now qualified as the Synod
expresses, that these are now without such Membership and external state;
this is not proved at all by this Text. For, if we shall so say, we shall make
the Apostle to contradict himself; for, of these very persons and people, of
whom ^e says, They are not all Israel, not all children, not all the children
of God, etc. of these very persons and people he said, ver. 4. that they are
Israelites, to whom pertains the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants,
and the giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and the Promises; that is,
they were Gods adopted children in regard of external Covenant, and were
Members of the Church-visible, and yet these were not all Israel, that is, they
were not all Gods Israel by election and spiritual regeneration. Thus the
Apostles words are easily reconciled. But how shall they be reconciled, if the
latter, as well as the former, be meant of the Church-visible? Can they be
Israelites, and not Israel, in the same respect? Can they in respect of
external state be partakers of Adoption, Gods Covenant and Promises, etc. and
so be Church Members, and yet in regard of the same estate, be no
Church Members at all, nor in the Church Covenant at all? It is not easy to
conceive how this can be; and therefore the words in Romans 9.6, 7, 8. are not
fitly applied to prove that men, who were Church Members in their minority, may
be qualified as the fifth Proposition expresses, and yet now be strangers from
the Covenant, and without the Church, in respect of their visible and external
state.

Whereas the Synod for a third Argument, says, That to deny this Proposition,
would be 1. To stratten the grace of Christ in the Gospel Dispensation, and to
make the Church in New-Testament-times, in worse case, relating to their
children successively, then were the Jews of old. 2. To render the Jews, when
they shall be called, in a worse condition then under the Legal administration:
contrary to Jer. 30.20. Ezekiel 37.25, 26. 3. To deny the application of the
initiatory Seal to such as regularly stand in the Church and Covenant, to whom
the Mosaical dispensation, nay the first Institution appointed it to be
applied, Genesis 17.9, 10. Joh. 7.22, 23. 4. To break the Covenant, by denying the
initiatory Seal to those that are in covenant, Genesis 17.9, 10, 14.

To this the Reverend Author answers, That the contrary to all and every one
of these is true: for, 1. It enlarges the grace of Christ in the
Gospel Dispensation, by showing that Christian Churches are in a more spiritual
and gracious frame then the Jews of old were, under Legal dispensation, etc.

Ans. Suppose that Christian Churches be in a more spiritual and gracious frame
then were the Jews under the Legal dispensation, yet if then such Parents as
the Proposition describes, might have the initiatory Seal applied to their
Infants, and now may not; how can it be denied but that now the Christian
Churches are in a worse case, relating to their children successively, then the
Church of the Jews was? For then such Parents might have their children
circumcised, but now they may not have them baptized, if this Proposition be
denied. And though the grace of Christ may be now enlarged in other respects,
yet in respect of children it is not enlarged, but str^^t^ed, by denying this
Proposition: except we shall say, that for Parents to have the Seal of the
Covenant applied to them and their children, is no testimony of Gospel Grace at
all, which cannot be said truly; and therefore the Synods Argument in this
particular stands good.

2. Says the Reverend Author, It declares that the state of the Jews, when
they shall be called, will be far better then it was under Legal dispensations
-- for under the Law their light and holiness was defective -- but when they
shall be called, they shall have a far greater measure of light and holiness
then was to be found in former ages --

Ans. Suppose this be granted, the question is not about their Holiness and
(...), but about their children, of whom it is evident, that if the Parents
were qualified as this Proposition expresses, those children might then be
circumcised: and the Texts alleged, viz. (...) 30.20. Ezekiel. 37 25, 26. do
show, that when they shall be called, their children shall be in as good estate
as formerly: but how can this be, if the Parents may be qualified as is
expressed, and yet may not have their children baptized? Is not this a rendering
of them, in respect of their children, in a worse condition then formerly?

For the third Particular, the Reverend Author answers, That the dent^ll of
the Proposition does not deny (in sum) what the Synod says it does, but the
contrary.

Ans. In what the Synod here says, there are three Particulars contained or
included: 1. That the Mosaicall dispensation, and first Institution of the
initiatory Seal, did appoint that Seal to be applied to such as stood regularly
in the Church and Covenant. 2. That the children in question d^ regularly stand
in the Church and Covenant. 3. That the denial of the Proposition, does deny
the application of the Sea^ to such as the Mosaicall dispensation appointed it
to be applied unto. Of these Particulars, the first cannot be denied; for it is
undeniably proved by the Texts alleged, viz. Genesis 17.9, 10. Joh 7.22, 23. and
the third Particular is plain of it self: all the doubt therefore must be about
the second, viz. Whether the children in question do regularly stand in the
Church and Covenant: But for this the Synod has given diverse Proofs in their
first and second Arguments; which Proofs we do not see taken off by what the
Reverend Author has said thereto.

The fourth Particular is answered by a plain denial of what there the Synod
affirms, viz. That to deny the Proposition, does not break Gods Covenant, by
denying the initiatory Seal to those that are in Covenant.

Ans. Yet nothing can be more plain, then that denying Circumcision to them
that were in the Covenant, was a breaking of Gods Covenant; for it is expressly
so called, Genesis 17.9. 10, 14. If therefore the children spoken of be in the
Covenant, how can the denial of Baptism to them be any other then is said? and
that they are in the Covenant, the Synod gave sundry Proofs in their first and
second Arguments.

So much for Defense of the third Argument.

The fourth Argument of the Synod for confirming this fifth Proposition, is
this: C^nfederate visible Believers, though but in the lowest degree such, are
to have their children baptized: But the Parents in question are such, at least
in some degree. For, 1. Charity may observe in them sundry positive arguments
for it, witness the terms of the Proposition, and nothing evident against it.

To this the Reverend Author answers, by denying the minor in the Argument,
and affirming the contrary to the first Reason here mentioned; viz. That all
that is said in the Proposition, is no sufficient ground for Charity to account
these Parents to be Believers in the least degree.

Ans. But if there be sundry positive arguments for Charity thus to judge of
them, and nothing evident to the contrary, as the Synod argues; why then
should we judge otherwise of them? When such Church Members, as were admitted
in their minority, do understand the Doctrine of Faith, and publicly assent
thereto, are not scandalous in life, but do solemnly own the Covenant, wherein
they give up themselves to the Lord, etc. is all this nothing for Charity to go
upon in accounting them Believers? no, not in the least degree? we conceive
Charity wants sufficient ground to judge otherwise. See more in Defense of the
first Argument.

But, says the Reverend Author, Let them show how faith was w^ough^, and how
it work^ in them, and then the Church will have ground for their charitable
judgment concerning their fitness, etc.

Ans. What proof is there, that except this be done, there can be no ground for
the charitable judgment that is mentioned? Sure it is, there is no mention
that such a thing was performed by the Eunuch, nor required of him by Philip,
Acts 8. and yet he was baptized upon Profession of his Faith in Christ, though
there is no mention, that to show how his Faith was wrought in him, was either
done by him, or required of him: and therefore we see no reason to the
contrary, but that when that is done which is mentioned in the Proposition,
there may be ground for Charity to account them Believers, though they come not
up to what the Reverend Author requires, of declaring how their Faith was
wrought in them.

2. The Synod says, The children of the godly, though qualified but as the
persons in the Proposition, are said to be Faithful, Tit. 1.6.

The Reverend Author answers, Nor are the children of the godly, qualified
but as in the Proposition, said to be Faithful in Tit. 1. So his Answer is an
express denial of what the Synod here says. But to say the children in Tit.
1. are not called Faithful, is directly to gainsay the Text, which does
exp^esly so call them: and that these Children that are called Faithful in Tit.
1. were qualified above what the Proposition requires, is not proved at all.
For the Text that calls them Faithful, says no more of them, but that they are
not accused of Riot, or unruly. And if this be sufficient for accounting them
Faithful* those whom the Proposition describes may much more be so accounted;
because they are not only free from Vnruliness and Riot, but partakers of
sundry other good qualifications, which do amount further.

3. Whereas the Synod says, Children of the covenant, as the Parents in
Question are, have frequently the beginnings of grace wrought in them in
younger years, at Scripture and experience show. Instance Joseph, Samuel, etc.
hence this sort of Persons showing nothing to the contrary, are in charity, or
to ecclesiastical reputation, visible Believers.

The Reverend Author answers, That the Parents in question were indeed
children of the Covenant in their infancy or minority, but if when they are
adult, they do not covenant for themselves and their seed, being fitly
qualified, they cannot then be fi^ly called Children of the Covenant, but
Transgressors of the Covenant, and breakers of it.

Ans. 1. If they be breakers of it, then sure they are comprehended in it: for,
how can men break the Covenant, which they are not in? therefore, as it is here
expressly confessed, that they were children of the Covenant in their minori^y,
so the same is by Consequence confessed of them being adult; for otherwise, how
could they be then said to break the Covenant?

2. If the Parents in question were Children of the Covenant in their Infancy
and minority, as the Reverend Author acknowledges they were, this suits well
enough with the purpose and scope of the Synod in this place, which is expressly
said to be this, that such children have frequently the beginnings of grace
wrought in them in their younger years; and such as had grace begun in them in
their younger years, why should not charity think it is there still, when
nothing appears to the contrary? for he that once begins that good work of
grace, is not wont to forsake that work of his own hands, but to perfect it
until the day of Christ, Psalm. 138.8. Phil. 1.6.

Further, says the Reverend Author, This Argument is fall^cious, because it
argues from some particulars, to infer a general affirmatively. Some children
of the Covenant have had the beginnings of grace wrought in them in their
younger years, therefore all persons of this sort, etc. If the Reverend Author
had expressed the Synods Argument as they expressed it, it would not then have
appeared so fallacious, as the alteration of their words may make it.

For, whereas they said, Children of the Covenant have frequently the
beginnings of grace wrought in them in their younger years, for which they
produced eight or nine Instances from Scripture: all these Instances, and that
frequency, for Proof of which they were alleged; are now all left out, and in
stead thereof it is rendered some Children of the Covenant, etc. and whereas the
inference which the Synod makes is thus expressed, viz. hence this sort of
Persons etc. now the term All, which was not in before, is expressly put in
thus, All Persons of this sort, etc. which alteration may indeed obscure the
strength of the Argument. But let it be reduced to what it first was, and then
let the judicious Reader consider whether it be fall^cious, or firm, whether
there be weakness or weight in it. Thus it was; If Children of the Covenant
have frequently the beginnings of grace wrought in them in their younger years,
then this sort of Persons showing nothing to the contrary, are in charity, or
to ecclesiastical reputation, visible Believers: But so it is. Ergo. The
Assumption here is manifestly proved by those many Instances in Scripture
alleged and by Experience; and the Consequence we hope is not fall^cious, but
found and good: for if it be frequently thus, why should not charity believe it
is thus in this sort of persons, where nothing appears to the contrary.

4. The Synod having said, That they that are regularly in the Church, (as the
Parents in question be) are visible Saints in the account of Scripture: for the
Church is in Scripture* account (...) company of Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33. and 1.2.

The Reverend Author Answers, That both the Assertion and the Proof of it are
to be denied. The Assertion is not true, that the Parents in question are
regularly in the Church: Infants, and Children in minority of confederate
believers, are in the Church by their Parents Covenanting for them, 1 Cor.
7.14. But Parents are not so, till etc.

Ans. It is here again confessed, that Infants and Children in minority, are
regularly in the Church, but not so when they are adult and come to be Parents:
but of their continuing in the Church, notwithstanding their coming to be
adult, something has been said before, and more may in the sixth Argument,
Partic. 3.

But whereas it is said, " The Proof is to be denied, and is not apposite: we
conceive, it cannot be denied to be very apposite for the purpose for which the
Synod does allege it, which is to p^ove, that they that are Regularly in the
Church, are in Scripture account visible Saints; and the words of the Texts
alleged, are so plain and apposi^e for this purpose, as we conceive nothing
can be more. Whether the Parents in question be such, or no; regularly in the
Church, and so Saints, or not, is another thing, for which we conceive much
has and may be said: but the Texts alleged were not produced by the Synod for
that purpose, and therefore though they be not plain for Proof of that* yet if
they be plain and apt enough for the purpose for which they were produced by
the Synod, that may s^ffice, though they prove not this other, to which the
Reverend Author does apply them.

5. Says the Synod, Being in Covenant and baptized, they have Faith and
Repentance indefinitely given to them in the Promise, and sealed up in Baptism,
Deuteronomy. 30.6. which continues valid, and so a valid Testimony for them, while
they do not rej^ct it.

To this the Reverend Author in his Answer makes mention of a distinction
Between the grace of the Covenant, and the Covenant of Grace, in regard of
external means; between the Elect, in whom God works the Grace promised in the
Covenant so powerfully, that they shall not reject it, and the rest who have
the outward means of grace till they reject them, as did Esau -- and concludes,
that Such as reject the offers of grace, and living under the means of grace,
do remain unbelievers, cannot be said to have Faith and Repentance undefinitely
given to them in the Promise.

Ans. But is there any Proof of the contrary to what the Synod affirms? It
seems none at all. For, when the Synod says, The Covenant which promises
Faith and Repentance is a valid Testimony for them, while they do not reject
it; and the Reverend Author says, That such as do reject the offers of grace,
have not Faith and Repentance given to them in the Promise: These are not
contrary, nor at all inconsistent. For the Synod never said nor meant, that the
grace of Faith and Repentance are given by the Covenant to them that are
breakers of the Covenant, and reject the offers of grace, and living under the
means of grace, do still remain unbelievers: the Synod never said, that the
grace of Faith and Repentance are given to these by the Promise; but by that
word, (...) they do not reject it, do plainly imply the contrary. And therefore
what the Synod here says, may be sound and good, for all that the Reverend
Author alleges. If their Doctrine here be not right, then it must be said,
that the Covenant, in which God promises to circumcise the hearts of his
people, and of their seed, Deuteronomy. 30.6. is no Promise that God will give them
Faith and Repentance, nor any valid Testimony for them that he will do it,
though they for their parts do not reject it. And we suppose none will say
this. What may be said of them, who when adult, are Breakers of the Covenant,
and do reject the offers of grace, is one thing; and what may be hoped and said
of them who do not so reject, is another. The Synod speaks of these latter, and
the Reverend Author of the former; and therefore the one cannot overthrow the
other.

The Synod concludes this fourth Argument, by adding as follows; viz. Yet it
does not necessarily follow, that these persons are immediately fit for the
Lords Supper; the Reason rendered, is, Because though in a latitude of
expression they are to be accounted Believers, or in numero fidelium, as even
Infants in covenant are; yet they may want that ability to examine themselves,
and that special exercise of faith, which is requisite to that Ordinance, as
was said upon Propos. 4.

To this the Reverend Author says, 1. If any man speak, let him speak as the
Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. The New Testament no where allows that latitude
of expression, to call men Believers, who, etc.

Ans. Though it be the duty of all, if they speak, to speak as the Oracles of
God, yet it does not follow from thence, that none may have the term Believers
applied to them, except the term be found so applied in the New Testament: for
then the name Trinity, Sacrament, and many other, would be unlawful, as not
being found in the New Testament, no nor in the Old; yet we suppose the
Reverend Author would not count the use of these terms unlawful. How often does
himself use the terms of Par ratio, Personal membership, Mediate, and
Immediate members, and others, and yet they are terms not found in all the
Scripture: and therefore if the term Believers be not found applied in the New
Testament to the persons spoken of, yet if the thing it self be found, and the
matter be so delivered as becomes the Oracles of God, that is, with such
reverence, purity, etc. as is meet, we suppose that Rule of speaking as the
Oracles of God, is not violated, though the term it self were not so used in
the New Testament, nor yet in the Old. And for the thing it self, the Synod
has given four or five Arguments to prove, that the persons spoken of are
visible Believers; which Arguments we do not see satisfied by what the Reverend
Author says thereto.

2. The Synod having said, That the persons spoken of may be counted in numero
fidelium, as even Infants in Covenant are.

The Reverend Author answers, They cannot be so accounted, because Infants
are looked at only in the Parents covenant, being not capable of covenanting
for themselves, as men are: so that there is not par ratio between them.

Ans. Though Infants be not capable of covenanting for themselves, as men are,
yet their covenanting, or being in Covenant, is not the thing here intended by
the Synod, but their being Be^^evers, or in numero fi^^lium; of which the
Reverend Author says nothing. But the thing the Synod here intimates, is
this, that as even Infa^ts in Covenan^ are counted Believers, or in numero
fi^elium, so may the Parents spoken of.

3. Whereas the Synod says, They may want that ability to examine themselves,
and that special exercise of faith which is requisite to that Ordinance.

The Reverend Author answers, That visible want of this ability, and of this
exercise of faith, does argue a visible want of that faith which is to be
examined and exercised, and is a just bar to the admi^tance of such into
immediate and personal Church Membership, as well as to the Lords Supper.

Ans. Admittance into Membership is not here spoken of at all by the Synod: for
the persons spoken of, are counted by the Synod to have been in the state of
Membership long before now, even in their infancy or minority; and therefore if
the want of the ability mentioned, were a just bar to such admittance, yet
this concerns not the persons spoken of. But is this which is here affirmed
certain and clear, that want of the ability and exercise spoken of, does argue
want of the very being of Faith? May there not be the being and truth of that
grace, even there where the exercise of it is much wanting? Plain it is, that
our Savior blames his Disciples, and Peter, for the want of the exercise of
faith, Mat. 8. and 14. Mark 4. Luke 8.25. and yet it were hard to say, that the
being of faith was now wanting in them: for then we must say, either that faith
once had, may afterward be lost and gone, or else that these Disciples before
this time never had faith; neither of which, we conceive, can be said truly.
How plain is it, that some for their weakness and small ability in grace, and
the exercise of it, are compared to a bruised R^ed, and to smoking Flax, Mat.
12 20. and yet when it is said, Christ will not break^ such Reed^, nor quench
such Flax, it appears thereby, that notwithstanding all this weakness, there
may be the ^e^ng and truth of the thing in such Souls. And for ability to
examine themselves, cannot this be wanting* but the want of the being of faith
must be inferred thence? What shall we then say to Souls in such a case as
Heman's, Psalm. 88. who complains, that Gods w^^th lay hard upon him, and that
he was shut up, and could not come forth; that God seemed to cast off his Soul,
and to hide his face from him; that Gods fierce w^ath went over him; that Gods
terrors had cut him off; and that hereby he was as distracted, and this even
from his youth up* No^ can we think that in such case he was able to examine
himself? Can distracted persons do so? it seems not: and yet this Heman was not
without the gra^e of fa^^^ for all this. And therefore we cannot say that wan^
of ability to examine one's self, or of the ^^eciall exercise of faith, does
always argue the want of that faith which is to be examined and ^xerci^ed: and
therefore what the Synod here says may still stand, That ^he persons spoken ^f
may be Believers, and yet want that abi^ity to examine themselves, and that
special exercise of faith which is requisite to that Ordinance of the Lords
Supper.

So much for D^fence of the fourth Argument for confirming the fifth
Proposition.

The fifth Argument of the Synod for confirming this fifth Proposition* is
this: That the denial of Baptism to the children in question, has a dangerous
tendency in it to Irreligion and Apostasy; because to deny them to have any
part in the Lord, is the way to cause them to cease from fearing the Lord;
witness Josh. 22.24, 25, 27. But to deny them, and so their children
successively, to be in the Church, or Members of i^, and so to have right to
Baptism, is to deny them to have any part in the Lord; and therefore it tends
to cause a ceasing from fearing the Lord, and so tends to Irreligion and
Apostasy.

Now what says the Reverend Author to this in his Reply? that which he says,
is 1. The children in question, being children of Parents who are not in full
communion with the Church, if such be denied to have any part in the Lord, it
is the degenerate Parents fault, and not the Churches. 2. The children in
question are not children of the Church, for the Parents have cut off the
entail of the Covenant from themselves and their seed, by not confederating for
themselves and theirs regularly.

Ans. 1. Here then is an acknowledgement, that the children in question, when
Baptism and Church Membership is denied them, ^re thereby acknowledged to have
no part in the Lord, and so to be (...) a way of ceasing from fearing the Lord:
and is not this the very ^^ing affirmed by the Synod?

2. Whereas the Reverend Author says, That these children are now in such a
state, through the fault of the degenerate Parents, who do not regularly enter
into f^ll communion: It has been showed before, That these Parents, though not
yet in fall communion, (...) in any b^rr^ (...) the (...) Baptism of their
children: and indeed, when the Parents are such as the Prop^sition describes,
viz. Not (...), but understanding and (...) to the Doctrine of Faith, and
solemnly owning the Covenant, and therein giving up themselves and h^^r
children to the Lord, etc. how, for all this, these Parents should be the cause
that their children have n^ part in the Lord, but do ce^s^ from f^aring him;
how this can be, we confess we do not understand. Can Parents, by giving up
themselves and their children to the Lord, be notwithstanding the cause that
their children have no part in the Lord, though they be Parents that (...), and
be qualif^^^ for it, as in the Proposition is expressed? Is their giving up
themselves and ^h^^r children to the Lord, a cause to cut off their children
from having any part in the Lord? or is their present unfitness for f^ll (...),
a cause of such loss and misery though they be and do what is mentioned and all
that the Prop^s^^ion expresses? we see no sufficient ground to apprehend so:
but when the Parents are and d^ a^ is mentioned, we f^ar it is not they that
are the cause of their childrens loss and misery expressed, but they rather,
who deny their Baptism and Church Membership.

3. Says the Reverend Author, That this denial has a dangerous Tendency to
Irreligion and Apostasy, is not proved by them, nor can be.

Ans. But if this denial do deny them to have any part in the Lord, and so make
them cease from fea^ing the Lord, how can it be but as is said? can men cease
from fearing the Lord, and from having any part in h^^, and yet this not tend
to Apostasy and Irreligion? Now the Reverend Author confesses, that these
children have no part in the Lord, though he say it is through the Parents
faith; though if the Parents be so qualified as is said, it will be hard to
prove that this comes to pass through their fault; and then whence is it, but
from them that causlesly deny their Baptism and Church Membership? and if his
deni^l do cause that they have no part in the Lord, does it not also cause
their Irreligion and ^postacy?

That Text Josh. 22.24, 25. says the Reverend Author, speaks nothing for their
advantage in this case.

Ans. Let it be considered for what purpose the Synod alleges that Text, and
then it will appear that it speaks for them. Now the purpose of the Synod in
producing that text, is plainly this, that to deny such Children to have a part
in the Lord, is the way to make them cease from fearing the Lord: and what can
be more plainly spoken, then this is spoken in that Text? But why does this
Text speak nothing for the advantage of the Synod? The Reason that is given for
this, is, Because the men there spoken of, were Members in ful^ Communion; and
their children, when they were grown up, were joined in Covenant by a solemn
Covenant every third year, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. so that they had a part in the Lord
successively, from which if they had been excluded causlesly, it might have
caused their Children to cease from fearing the Lord.

Ans. Suppose all this be so, this seems not to weaken the intent of the Synod
in producing this Text, but to strengthen it: For, if denying them that have
been in full Communion to have any part in the Lord, may cause even such to
cease from fearing the Lord, how much more may this be caused in them that have
not yet had this full Communion? may not one think, that such as have enjoyed
Communion with God in all his Ordinances, will not be so easily drawn away from
fearing the Lord, as those that never had such full Communion? and yet the
Reverend Author does acknowledge this might have befallen the former, and
therefore how much more may this be found in the other, of whom the Synod
speaks? which things considered, it seems plain that when it is said, that
Text Josh. 22. speaks nothing for the Synods advantage in this case, that this
saying will not hold.

The Synod having said, That the owning of the Children of those that
successively continue in Covenant to be a part of the Church, is far from being
destructive to the purity and prosperity of the Church, and Religion therein,
as some conceive.

The Reverend Author Answers, That they who so conceive, have such grounds of
that persuasion, as will not easily be removed, nor are so much as shaken by
any thing said by the Synod.

Ans. If such a persuasion, That the children of those who continue in
Covenant, are no part of the Church, be a Persuasion upon grounds that cannot
be removed nor shaken; then it must follow, that the Church and the Covenant,
which is the formalis ratio of the Church, comprehends not Children, but
Parents only, or grown persons: and then the Antipoedobaptists have won the
day; for by what right can Children be Baptized, if they be not in the
Covenant, nor any part of the Church, though their Parents be? Sure to us it
seems a well-grounded persuasion, that if the Parents be and continue in
Covenant, the Children of such are part of the Church, and ought to be so
owned,, and that this is no ways destructive to the Purity and Prosperity of
the Church, and Religion therein. If the Parents did not continue in the
Covenant, then there might be some question, whether the Children be part of
the Church: but it is plain, that the Synod speaks of the Children of those
that continue in the Covenant; and if any think it to be a well-grounded
persuasion, that the Parents may continue in the Covenant, and yet the Children
of such Parents are no part of the Church, we confess we see no sufficient
grounds for such a persuasion. For, the Reverend Author does here confess, That
it is true, that the frame of the Covenant runs to us, and to our Seed after us
in their Generations, page 32. And if this be true, is it not then true, that
if the Parents continue in the Covenant, the Seed of such Parents are also part
of the Church? for how can they be said to be in the Covenant, which is the
constituting Form of the Church, and yet be no part of the Church, which is
constituted thereby.

But, says the Reverend Author, This must be understood and applied suita^ly
to the different constitution of Churches, under different administrations of
the Covenant, under the Old Testament, and under the Gospel.

Ans. Let this be granted, yet as long as the thing it self is not denied,
which must not be denied, for he confesses it to be true, viz. That the
covenant runs to us, and to our Seed after us in their Generations: So long as
this is not denied, the d^fference in other things between the Old Testament
and the New, will not weaken our Cause at all. For, though for constitution of
Churches, the Church was then National, and now Congregational; and though the
administration of the Covenant was then under many Types and Ceremonies, which
are now removed: and notwithstanding any other difference that can be named,
yet if there be not this difference also, that the Covenant did run to them,
and their Seed in their Generations, but not to us, and our Seed in like sort;
if this difference also be not asserted, we see not how it can be avoided, but
even now as well as then, if the Parents continue in covenant, the Children do
so also, and so are part of the Church: and so what the Synod affirms is
gained. For it cannot be said, that though it was so then, yet it is not so
now, except we shall deny what the Reverend Author confesses to be true, that
the frame of the covenant (did not only run to them and to their Seed, but
also) run^ to us, and our Seed in their Generations. And if this be true, then
what the Synod gathers from it is true also, that God has so framed his
covenant, and the constitution of his Church thereby, as to design a
continuation and propagation of his Kingdom therein, from one Generation to
another. For it must needs be so, if the Covenant runs to us, and to our Seed
after us in their Generations.

Whereas the Synod says, That to keep in the line, and under the influence and
efficacy of this covenant of God, in the true way to the Churches glory.

The Answer of the Reverend Author, in sum, is this, That it is so indeed, when
there is a succession of Faith made visible to the Churches charitable
judgment; but not so, when such a Membership is set u^ in Christian Churches,
whereby Infants shall be Baptized by right from such Parents as are not in f^ll
communion: for what influence and efficacy h^th the covenant upon such Parents?

Whereto the answer is, That if the Parents be qualified as this Proposition
expresses, there is manifest influence of the Covenant upon them, though yet
they be not come so far as to be fit for full communion. For, when they being
admitted in minority, are now, when adult, not only free from scandal in life,
but also endowed with a competency of knowledge in the Doctrine of faith, and
solemnly assent thereto, and own the Covenant, and therein give up themselves
and their children to the Lord; we conceive all this does import some influence
and efficacy of the Covenant upon them: but if for all this, they shall be
disowned from having any part in the Church and Covenant of God, how then can
that be denied which the Synod here says, That by this cutting off, and
disavowing the Covenant, Sion is hindered from being an Eternal Excellency, and
the joy of many generations? For, whatever joy it may be to the first
generation, yet if all that follow, though qualified as the Proposition
expresses, be nevertheless denied to have any part in the Covenant and Church
of God, till fit for full communion, we do not see how such following
generations can be any great excellency or joy at all.

The Synod having said, That this progress of the Covenant establishes the
Church, Deuteronomy. 29.13. Jer. 30.20. and that therefore the contrary does
disestablish it.

The Reverend Author answers, That the Argument is to be denied; for it will
not follow, that if God did establish the Church of the Jews by such a
successive progress of the Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.13. therefore he does so now,
page 33.

A. Why does it not follow, that if God did establish the Church of the Jews by
a progress of the Covenant, that therefore he does so now? Is not that true,
which the Reverend Author confesses to be true, That the frame of the Covenant
runs to us, and our seed after us in their generations? and is not that true
also which the Synod here says, (though the Reverend Author says nothing to
it) That God was an holy God, and loved the purity and glory of the Church in
the Old Testament, when he went in this way of a successive progress of the
Covenant? we suppose this cannot be denied; and therefore if a progress of the
Covenant did establish the Church then, why not so now? Shall we think that the
holy God did not so regard the purity of his Church in those times, and
therefore did then establish the Church in this way, which now he will not do,
as being now more careful of the purity of his Church? we fear that to say
this, would be to the dishonor of Gods Holiness and Glory. And plain it is,
that it is the same Kingdom of God, that is, the same Church Estate for
substance and kind^, which is taken from the Jews, and given to the Gentiles,
Mat. 21.43. and therefore the Gentiles are said to be fellow-he^rs, and of the
same Body with them, Ephesians. 3.6. And therefore what should hinder, but that if
a progress of the Covenant was a means to establish the Church, then, it may be
the same in ^hese (...) also?

The Synod having said in the conclusion of their fifth Argument for confirming
this fifth Proposition, That the more holy, reforming, and glorious that the
^^m^s are or shall be, the more eminently is a successive continuation, and
propagation of the Church therein designed, promised, and intended. And having
for this alleged these Scriptures, Isa. 60.15. and 59.21. Ezekiel. 37.25 -- 28.
Psalm. 102.16 -- 28. Ier. 32*39.

The Reverend Author applies all these very Texts to the Church of the Jews
under the New Jerusalem; which Church, he says, must consist, for the matter
of it, of elect and sincere Believers only, both they and their children
successively to the end of the world: for which he alleges the Texts
aforementioned, page 33.

Ans. It is freely granted, that the Church of the Jews, when they shall be
called and converted, shall be very holy and glorious; and yet it may be
questioned, whether that Church shall have none in it, but only elect and
sincere Believers, both they and their children to the end of the world. For,
when Christ shall come, the Kingdom of Heaven, that is to say, the Church,
though it be compared to Virgins, in respect of much Ecclesiastical Purity, yet
those Virgins are some of them foolish Virgins, that had no oil in their
vessels with their lamps, and so must have the door of the Marriage-Chamber
shut against them, Matthew. 25. therefore they were not all sincere Believers and
elect: and therefore it may be a question, whether the Church of the Jews at
that time will be so free from Hypocrites, as is said.

2. If these Scriptures, Isa. 60.15. and 59.21. and the rest, do prove, that
when the Jews shall be called, it shall be with them as is said; then what the
Synod here says is gained, and stands good, viz. That in holy, reforming, and
most glorious times, there shall be a continuation and propagation of the
Church from parents to children, from generation to generation; which is the
very thing which is here affirmed by the Synod.

3. Though the Reverend Author do here suggest this difference between that
Church of the Jews under the New Jerusalem, and the Gentile Churches; that
these latter shall have Close Hypocrites creeping into them, and the children
of Believers, by their degeneracy when adult, stopping the successive progress
of the Covenant, which in the Church of the Jews shall be otherwise: yet since
the Scripture says, that the Nations of them that are saved, shall walk in the
light of that New Jerusalem, Rev. 21. and that then the Lord shall be King in
all the earth; and that there shall be one Lord, and his Name one, Zech. 14.
and that the Name of the New Jerusalem shall be written upon Philadelphia, a
Church of the Gentiles, Rev. 3. it may seem upon these considerations and the
like, that there will at that time be good conformity between the Church of the
Jews, and Gentile Churches, and no such disproportion or difference, that in
the one there should be a continuation and propagation of the Church and
Covenant from Parents and children successively, but in the other not so. We
see no ground for believing such a difference, but for ought that does yet
appear, if there shall be such a glory in the one, as that there shall be a
successive p^ogress of the Covenant therein, there shall or may be the like in
the Gentile Churches also. And to conceive any essential difference between
either Jews or Gentiles then, and Gentiles now, as to the frame of the Covenant
it self (whatever difference there may be as to the measures of grace, etc. as
is said in the Synods Result, p. 9.) is a conception that we see no ground for
in Scripture.

Whereas the Reverend Author says, page 34. That the children of
Church Members in this Country are commonly known to be Prof^n^, Va^^,
Licentious, Vicious, Stubborn, Proud, etc. and complains, That yet these are
accepted into immediate Personal Membership.

The Answer is, 1. As before, That we think there is no accepting of Members
children, when adult, into Membership, but an accepting of them unto full
Communion, when they are fit for it; and an acknowled^ing of such and others to
be Members already, as having had it from their birth or minority, and having
not since been regularly, in any way of God, cut off from the same. To call
this an accepting of them into Membership, we think is very improper.

2. If the children of Church Members generally were commonly known to be so
Vicious and Profane, as is said; this were matter of great humiliation and
grief to us all: but we hope it is too much to say so of the generality, or
greatest part of them, there being better things appearing in many.

3. Be it that they are so V^cious, or not, we think there is great reason that
they should be carefully watched over by Elders of Churches, and all
Superiors, that so their corruptions and sins might be mortified, and they
furthered to the attainment of that saving grace of God in Christ Jesus.

And whereas the Reverend Author makes an Objection, That if they be so
Vicious, they have the more need to be under the Watch, Discipline, and
Government of the Church. And in Answer thereto, says, That it cannot
rationally be expected that they will submit themselves thereto, but will
disregard and slight the same; and that acceptance with God, or blessing on
such means cannot be expected, because God limits his Blessing to his own
Appointments, p. 34, 35.

The Answer is, That it has been proved before by seven or eight Arguments in
Propos. 3. That these children are by Gods appointment under the Watch,
Discipline, and Government of the Church; which Arguments have been formerly
vindicated and cleared from what the Reverend Author has said against the
same: and therefore for what is here said, That the exercise of
Church Discipline toward such, cannot be expected to be accepted of God, or
blessed by him, because it wants his Appointment; we know not how to entertain
this saying, except there were some better proof for it, which here is but
nakedly delivered, without any proof at all: and therefore the exercise of
Church Discipline toward the children spoken of, may be appointed of God,
accepted of him, and blessed by him, for ought that is here said to the
contrary.

And whereas it is said, That it cannot rationally be expected, that such
persons will submit themselves to Church Discipline.

Though we know but little of the exercise of Church Discipline toward such,
yet experience does testify, that to some it has, by the blessing of God, been
profitable, and that they have submitted to it, and been bettered by it.

Lastly, The Reverend Author did a little before in this same Page, page 34.
mention the Vigilance and Faithful Care and Endeavor of Church-Elders toward
the Children mentioned, as a way or means for conveying Religion down to
after-Generations, which we for our parts conceive to be sound and good. But
then how can this stand which is there said, that such persons are not under
the Watch, Discipline and Government of the Church? For, does not the Vigilance
of Church-Elders, import some kind of Church-watchfulness? Can there be such
Vigilance, Care and Endeavors toward such as are no^ under the watch of the
Church at all? or can such Vigilance, Care and Endeavor of Church-Elders, be a
means to convey Religion down to after-generations, and yet Church-watchfulness
toward such be without acceptance with God, and without any blessed fruit,
either to the Church or to the persons spoken of? It seems t^ese things do not
well cohere:

So much for Defense of the fifth Argument, for confirming this fifth
Proposition.

The sixth Argument which the Synod here uses, is, Because the Parents in
question are personal, immediate, and yet-continuing Members of the Church. 1.
That they are personal Members, or Members in their own persons, they say
appears, 1. Because they are personally holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. 2. Are Baptized in
their own persons. 3. Are personally under Discipline. 4. Are personally, by
means of the Covenant, in a visible state of Salvation. 5. When they commit
iniquity, they personally break the covenant, Jer. 11.2, 10. Ezekiel. 16.
therefore they are personally in it.

To this the Reverend Author answers, That three of these Proofs belong only
to infants, and the other two to adult Persons regularly admitted into
Church Membership: which therefore do not concern the Parents in question:
which two he says are, 1. That they are personally under Discipline, and
liable to Church Censures in their own persons. 2. That when they commit
iniquity, they personally break the Covenant.

Ans. Let us then consider the Particulars. For the first, that they are
personally Holy, according to 1 Cor. 7.14. though this be meant, as the
Reverend Author says, that they are thus Holy federally and relatively, yet it
is, as he acknowledges, in their own persons; and if so, does it not then
follow, that they are Church Members in their own persons? Can persons be truly
called Holy, as in the Text alleged, or an Holy seed, as Ezra 9. and yet not
be Members of the visible Church? whether this holiness be inherent, or only
federal and relative, yet since they are thus Holy in their own persons, we
conceive they must therefore be granted to be Church Members in their own
persons. And though they first received this holiness in their minority, yet
for ought we see their persons are still partakers of it, until in some way of
God they be cut off from the same: which the Parents in question have not been,
but being qualified as the Proposition expresses, are far from deserving any
such matter.

For the Second, That they are Baptized in their own Persons; though this be,
as the Reverend Author says, By and for their Parents Covenanting for them,
they being incapable of Covenanting for themselves; yet this being regularly
done, how can it be avoided, but, as the Synod says, It is a divine Testimony
that they are in their own persons Members of the Church. For, we conceive, the
Lord has not appointed Baptism, the Seal of Membership, to be applied to such
as are not Members: And to say, They are not Members in their own persons, but
in their Parents, would infer, That they should not have been baptized in their
own persons, but in their Parents, their Parents receiving Baptism for them;
which the Reverend Author, we are persuaded, is far from affirming. And
therefore they being regularly baptized in their own persons, how can it be
avoided but that they are Church Members in their own persons, until they be
regularly cut off from the same?

For that other Particular, That by means of the Covenant they are personally
in a visible state of Salvation; The Reverend Author says nothing hereto, but
only repeats it with this addition or explanation, " While nothing appears to
the contrary: which clause may be added, and yet the purpose of the Synod in
this Particular not at all hindered thereby. For if the persons spoken of be in
their own persons in a visible state of Salvation, whi^^ nothing appears to the
contrary; does it not then follow, that so long they are visible Church Members
in their own persons: will any body say that they are saved in their Parents,
and not in their own persons? The Synod conceived that none would so say: and
that therefore it could not be said, that they are not Members in their own
persons but in their Parents: whereto the Reverend Author says nothing. As for
that Clause, " While nothing appears to the contrary, let the terms of the
Proposition be considered, and we conceive it cannot rationally and charitably
be denied, but that the persons spoken of, as they were in a state of Salvation
when Infant, so they are so still for ought appears to the contrary. For the
contrary cannot be evinced and evidenced against them, either by Ignorance, or
Scandal, or forsaking the Covenant, or any such thing, they being such as
understand the Doctrine of Faith, and publicly assent thereto, not Scandalous
in life, but commendably further qualified, as is there expressed; so that for
ought that appears to the contrary, they are in a visible state of Salvation,
and consequently they are personally Church Members, and so herein the purpose
of the Synod is gained.

For the other two Particulars, which the Reverend Author says, Do belong to
adult persons regularly admitted into Church Membership, and so do not concern
the Parents in question; the one is, That they are personally under Discipline,
and liable to Church Censures in their own persons. For Answer to this, he
refers to his Examination of Propos. 3. and we refer the Reader to our defense
of that Proposition against what he there said.

The other Particular, which is the last here mentioned, viz. That when they
commit Iniquity, they personally break the Covenant; his answer to it is, That
this is not proved concerning Infants, nor can be.

Ans. Suppose it cannot, yet if that be proved for which the Synod brings it,
why may not that suffice, though this other be not proved, to which the
Reverend Author applies it? Plain it is that the Synod neither spoke nor meant
this of Infants, but of such as are now Parents, and therefore past their
Infancy: and therefore if these Parents, when they commit iniquity, do break
the covenant, then the purpose of the Synod is gained, though such a thing
could not be affirmed of Infants. But if proofs for this or that may not be
accepted, because they are not sufficient for confirming some other things
whereto they were neither alleged nor intended, let the judicious and
impartial Reader consider whether this be equal and fair, and whether Arguments
in such a way be sufficiently answered.

For the Particular in hand the Synod argues, That the Parents in question are
personally in the covenant, because when they commit iniquity, they personally
break the covenant; alleging for this, Ier. 11.2, 10. Ezekiel. 16. where breaking
of covenant is expressly charged upon the persons there spoken of. Now does not
this prove the thing intended? sure, if their committing iniquity be breaking
of covenant, either such persons were in the covenant, or else we must say a
man may be guilty of breach of covenant, when he was not in it. And that the
committing iniquity by the persons spoken of, is a breaking of Covenant, the
Reverend Author does more then once acknowledge and testify, page 23, 28, 33,
43, 45. It were too long to transcribe all the words that are to this purpose
in the Pages quoted, but, in sum, there is thus much there affirmed and taught,
That the covenant in which Children are comprehended in their minority, leaves
them under engagement to duty and obedience, when they become adult, which if
they do not accordingly perform, they are then transgressors of the Covenant,
and breakers of it. Now if they be breakers of it, is it not thereby clear that
they are comprehended in it? and so what is here said by the Synod stands good.

Thus of the first Particular, That the Parents in question are personal
Members.

The second is, That they are immediate Members, as to the Essence of
Membership, (i. e. that they themselves in their own persons are the immediate
Subjects of this Adjunct of Church Membership) though they come to it by means
of their Parents covenanting. For Proof whereof, one thing alleged by the
Synod, is that John. 22.25, 27. where the children are said to have a part in
the Lord, (to which Church Membership is equivalent) as well as the Parents;
and nothing coming between this Subject (The Children) so as to sever it from
the Adjunct (A part in the Lord) therefore they conclude, That the children are
immediate Subjects of Church Membership, or immediate Members.

Now what says the Reverend Author unto this? why, that which he says, is,
That though nothing come between to sever that Adjunct from the Subject, yet
something comes between to bring that Subject and Adjunct together, viz. The
Parents covenanting for the child: which if it did not come between, they
would be severed, as they are in other children.

Ans. But what is there in this to overthrow the Synods Assertion? Do not they
expressly grant, in terms as plain as can be spoken, and that more then once,
That the children come to this Adj^nct of Church Membership by means of their
Parents covenanting? See their words in their page 23. and therefore this can
be no removing of what they have said, being nothing but the very same with
that which they have said before. The question is not about the way or mean^ of
childrens Membership, for it is freely yielded that in this respect it is
Mediate, that is, they come unto it by means of the Parents covenanting; but
the question is about the Ess^^^^, Nature or K^m^e of their Membership: whether
in this respect it be not the same with the Parents, and they as well as the
Parents the immediate Subjects of it; and the granting of the former, is no
denial of this other. If a Parent have room or place in such or such an house,
and his child be there also, though he come thither in the Parents arms, yet
may it not be said that this child has a place and being in the house, as
truly and as properly as the Parent, although he came unto it by the Parents
means? Even so it is in the case in hand; the child comes to be in Covenant,
and so in the Church, by the Parents covenanting, yet now he is in the Church,
and in the Covenant, and has a room and place therein, as truly and as
properly as the Parent.

Again, the Synod having said, That their visible ingraffing into Christ the
Head, and so into the Church his Body, is sealed in Baptism: and that in
ingraffing, nothing comes between the graft and the stock; their union is
immediate.

The Reverend Author answers, That yet it will not follow that they are
immediate Members of the visible Church.

Ans. And why will not this follow? If their union with the Church be
ingraffing, and that in ingraffing, nothing comes between the g^^ft and the
stock, does it not then follow, that their union with the Church is immediate,
and they immediate Members of it?

For, as for that which is here said, That this union is not properly, but
metaphorically called ingraffing, because there is some similitude here, but
Similitudes do run on four feet: it suffices that they agree in the main point.

Ans. But how do they agree therein, if for all this in graffing there be
something between the stock and them? Is it not a main point in ingraffing,
that the union between the branch and the stock be immediate, and that nothing
lie between them? Who knows not that if it be not so, but that some stock or
stone, or something else be between them, so that their union be not immedi^te;
who knows not that in such case the ingr^ffing is spoiled, and the benefit of
the branch interrupted, because its union with the stock is not immediate? If
then the union of Members with the Church be ^^graffing, how can it be avoided
but it must be immediate, and so they be immediate Members?

As for that which is here subjoyned, That infants and children in minority do
partake of Baptism and other Privileges, by means of their Parents covenanting
for them, but adult persons by their personal covenanting for themselves and
their seed. This is nothing to the Essence of their Membership, but only
speaks to the way and mean^ how they come to it, which is not the thing in
question: for it may be granted, That children come to be Members by their
Parents covenanting for them, and the Parents by their own covenanting, and yet
their Membership, notwithstanding this different way of attaining it, may be
one and the same for Essence and Kind, and both have immediate conjunction
with the Church.

For that where the Synod says, " That in Deuteronomy. 29.11. the children were
personally and immediately part of the People of God, or Members of the Church
of Israel, as well as the Parents.

The Answer of the Reverend Author is, That the Text does not prove it.

Ans. And yet the words are express and plain, that they did all stand before
the Lord, to enter into covenant with him, that he might establish them a
people to himself; and the persons of whom this is said, are not only the men
of Israel, but also their wives, and their little ones: So that if the men of
Israel, and their wives, were personally and immediately Members of that
Church, their little ones, for ought that appears, were so also: for they are
all alike spoken of without difference.

Whereas the Synod said, That to be in Covenant, or to be a Covenantee, is the
formalis ratio of a Churchmember; and the children being in the Covenant, are
therefore the immediate Subjects of the formalis ratio of Membership, and so
immediate Members.

The Answer of the Reverend Author is, That though to be in Covenant be the
formalis ratio of a Churchmember, yet it will not follow, that every
Covenantee does immediately covenant for himself, nor that every Member of the
Church is an immediate Member, page 39.

Ans. For the one of these, viz. of Covenanting immediately for themselves, the
Synod never said nor meant that little children did so covenant, nor inferred
any such thing from their being in covenant, and so being partakers of the
formalis ratio of Church Membership; but a little before, and also in this very
place do acknowledge, that one may come to be in covenant one way, and another
in another: and therefore though children do not covenant immediately for
themselves, yet what the Synod infers from their being partakers of the
formalis ratio of Church Membership, is not at all infringed by this Branch of
the Reply.

But for the other, of being Immediate Members, why does not this follow from
their being partakers of the Covenant, the formalis ratio of Membership? Can
one be partaker of the Form, or formalis ratio of this or that, and yet not be
immediately partaker of the Effect, or thing formed, but something must first
intervene and come between? If the reasonable Soul, and its conjunction with
the Body, be the formalis ratio of a man; can there be this, and yet no man
immediately, but something more must come between to make a man? we suppose it
cannot be denied but here is a man immediately, as being partaker of the
formalis ratio of a man. And even so it may be said in the present case, That
children being partakers of the Covenant, the formalis ratio of Church Members,
they are therefore immediate Members.

The Synod having said, That to act in covenant, is but the isntrumental means
of Membership, and yet children are not without this neither: for the act of
the Parent (their public person) is accounted theirs --

The Reverend Author answers, That the Parents acting in ^^v^n^n^ing for
their infant-(...), has been before proved to be the procreant cause of (...),
page 39.

Ans. It was indeed before said, viz. page 37. that He looked at believing
confederating (...), not as the isntrumental, but as the procreant caus^; as
of the c^hil^^ B^m^, by his generating of him, so also of his
Church Membership, by his confederating for him. This was s^ia indeed in the
Page mentioned, but that it was so proved, we cannot say; if this word [
Procreating] be taken as it is expressed, not only as contrad^sti^ct from the
isntrumental cause, but as a denial thereof, for so his expression runs. viz.
Not as the isntrumental, but as the procreant cause, etc. Now that it has
been proved, that the Parents act in covenanting is not the isntrumental
cause, but the procreant of the childs Membership, this indeed has been said
once and again but we do not see ^t proved at all. And indeed how can it? for
this procreant cause, since it is not an isntrumental, must then be the
principall-cause: and is this proved, That the Parents act in covenanting is
not the instrumen^^ll, but the principal cause of the childs Membership? what
shall then become of Gods institution in this matter? If the Parents act herein
be such a procreant cause as is not isntrumental, then it must be the
principal; and then what place is there left for Gods institution? and how
does the Reverend Author agree with himself, who says, Th^s is the procreant
cause, and that by Gods Institution, and yet is not the cause isntrumental? if
the Parents act be the cause of the child's membership by Gods institution, how
can it be avoided but it must be isntrumental, as the Synod said: but if it be
so procreant, as not to be isntrumental, how then can it be by Gods
Institution, as he says it is. These things need reconciling. For our parts,
we see no reason to the contrary, but that* that of Logicians is right, who
place the procreant cause under the head of the ^ffi^i^n, and this act of the
Parents that is here spoken of, being not the principal effi^ent of the child's
membership, must needs be the isntrumental, as the Synod has said; and
therefore such a procreant as is not isntrumental, nor yet principal, we
confess we know not where to place it.

Besides, when the Reverend Author in page 37. makes this Covenant-act of the
Parent to be the procreant cause of the child's membership, even as the Paren^
is the cause of the ch^l^^^em, by his generation of him; does not this plainly
infer that which yet he denies, that such a Parent is the instrumental cause
of the child's membership? For, is any Parent such a procreant cause of his
child's Being by gen^raci^n, as not to be instrumental under God therein? how
then are children said to be by the gift and blessing of God, Psa. ^ 27. 3.
^en^s. 29.31. and 30.22. and 33.5. and the want of children even in married
persons to be by Gods restraining hand, and sh^tting up the W^^b? Genesis 16.2.
and 20.18. and 30.2. does not this plainly show, that Parents are but
Instrumental under God in the begetting of Children? and therefore if the
Parent be the cause of the child's membership in like sort, as of the child's
natural Being by his generating of him, then it must be granted, that in this
of his Church Membership* he is no otherwise a procreant cause of it, but as
instrumental; for in that of the child's natural being it is certainly so: and
that of membe^ship being, as the Reverend Author says, l^ke unto this other,
therefore in this of the child's membership it is so also. Moreover, i^ this
well hold, that the Parent is such a procreant cause of the child's membership
by confederating for him, as he is of the child's na^ur^l ^en^ by (...); then
look as the child which the Parent generates, is personally, immediately
formally and actually a man for one of mankind as well as the Parent; so by the
membership which the Parents confederating procreates for him, he is a
personal, immediate, formal and actual Churchmember.

The Synod, to show that Children are actual, complea^, and immediate members,
asks, what do they want hereunto? Is it covenan^-interest, which is the
formalis ratio of membership? No, they are in covenant. Is it divine gran^, and
institution, which is the principal efficient? No, God has clearly declared
that he gra^ts them a portion in his Church, and appoints them to be Members
thereof. Is it an act of covenanting, which is the instrumental means? No, they
have this also reputatively by divine appointment, making the Parent a public
person, and accounting them to covenant in his covenanting. The sum is, they
want nothing that is requisite to complea^ and immediate membership.

Now what says the Reverend Author to this? That which he says, is this, That
all that is here expressed, does not supply what is wanting to invest little
children with such membership. For, though they are in covenant, which is the
formalis ratio of their membership, yet it is mediante parentum foedere, and so
their membership is mediate.

Ans. But this speaks nothing to the nature and kind of their membership, but
only to the way and means of attaining it, which may be different from that of
adult persons, and yet the thing be the same. If the chief Captain obtain by a
great sum to be a freeman of Rome, and Paul be free born, Act. 22.28. yet Paul's
freedom is either better then the other, or at least no worse; and so it may
be said of the Church Membership of little children.

There is wanting unto children in minority to make them such members, a
personal fitness to act in covenant for themselves.

Ans. But this is nothing to the nature of their membership, but only speaks
of the way of attaining it by their own act. But shall we say that Paul wanted
something to make him a free Roman, because he had no personal fitness nor
ability to procure that freedom to himself by his own act, but only was so
born? or shall we say that David and others mentioned in Psalm. 22.10. Isai.
46.4. wanted something of complete, proper and immediate interest in God,
because they had their interest from their mothers womb, and did not attain it
by their own personal act? for our parts we dare not so say, and by like reason
dare not deny, but that the interest of little children in the visible Church,
may be proper, complete and immediate, though they have not come to it by their
own act, but have had it from their minority or birth. For, to have God for
their God is as great a blessing, as to be an actual and immediate member of
the visible Church; and yet we see want of personal fitness to act for
themselves, did not hinder from the one, and why then should it hinder from the
other?

Synod. A different manner and means of conveying the covenant to us, or of
making us members, does not make a different sort of members; we are as truly,
personally and immediately members of the body of fallen mankind, and by nature
heirs of the condemnation pertaining thereto, as Adam was, though he came to ^e
so by his own pers^n^l act, and we by the act of our public person, Page 24.25.

The Reverend Author in his Answer hereto grants, That in the case of Adam it
is so, as is said; but, says he, this does not suit the the case of I^fan^s in
question. For, 1. Adam stood as a public person for all mankind; no Parent is
so for all his posterity, but for his infants and children in minority. 2.
Adams covenant was only with the Lord, and not with any Church, as the
covenant of confederate Parents is. 3. The Parents breaking the covenant does
not make his children heirs of condemnation, as Adams did all mankind, page
40.41.

For Answer whereto, we may remember what himself did formerly express, that
Similitudes do not run on four feet; if they agree in the main point that may
suff^^, though in other things they d^ffer. If therefore there were these three
differences, and as many more, between the cases alleged, yet where is there
any difference in the main point? Are not we as truly, personally, and
immediately Members of the Body of fallen Mankind, as Adam was? This the
Reverend Author does not deny, but in plain words does grant it: And is not
then the purpose of the Synod, in alleging this instance, clearly gained? Does
it not plainly appear thereby, that a different way and means of being in
Covenant, does not make a different sort of Membership? Adam was a Member of
fallen Mankind, and so are we, though he came to be so by his own personal
act, and we by him, or by his act for us? which does clearly show what the
Synod says, That a different way and means of being Members, does not alter
the nature and kind of Membership; which we see does hold as touching being a
Member of fallen Mankind, and we see no reason but it may also hold as
touching being a Member of a visible Church.

There is not any to be accounted a public person, as Adam was, but only
Jesus Christ for all that are in him, Romans 5.14, to 20. page 41.

Ans. Yet it is evident, though Jesus Christ was a Public Person for all that
are in him, as Adam was, yet in the number of persons there is difference; Adam
standing for all mankind, and Christ standing only for his Redeemed, the
Elect. Now if Christ may be truly called a Public Person for all his, as Adam
was, though Adam was for them that were far more in number; why may not then
a consederating Parent be counted a Public Person for his children though they
be far less in number then the other? But herein the cases seem parallel;
Adam for all in him, Christ Jesus for all in him, and the confederating Parent
for all in him. We see not how this can justly be denied by the Reverend
Author, si^h he calls these Parents " V^dertakers for their children, page 40.
And again, page 41. And such undertakers, that the children are bound by their
Parents acting to perform that Covenant, when they shall become capable: which
seems to us to be the same, or as much as is meant, when they are called
Public persons for their children.

Another Similitude used by the Synod to illustrate the thing in question, is,
from A Prince giving Lands to a man and his heirs successively while they
continue loyal; in which case the following heir is a true and immediate Owner
of that Land, and may be personally disinherited, if d^sloyall, as well as his
father before him.

To this the Answer is, That this Similitude does not sort the case in
question; f^r, as for infants, they cannot be visibly disl^yall, and adult
persons not regularly joined to the Church, have cut off the entail of the
Covenant from themselves and their posterity by their personal disloyalty.

Ans. But for all this, the Similitude may suit the case in question, though
the Reverend Author say it does not. For, as the following heir is an immediate
Owner of that Land, till for disloyalty he be disinherited; so the following
children are immediate Church Members, till some of them for their sin be cut
off from their Membership. Is not here plain suitableness in the Similitude? we
conceive it is apparent and manifest. For, if infants cannot be disl^yal, and
if adult persons be cut off for disloyalty, is it not manifest, that both are
immediate owners till they be cut off? which is the thing the Synod affirms.
Concerning infants, it seems they are such true and immediate owners of
Church Membership, as that they cannot be cut off therefrom, because they
cannot be so disloyal as to deserve such a thing: and for the adult persons, if
the entaile of the covenant be cut off from them and their posterity by their
personal disloyalty; does not this clearly show, that they were truly and
immediately in the Covenant, till their disloyalty cut them off? And so the
Similitude stands suitable and good for the purpose for which the Synod brings
it.

But as for this " cutting off the entail of the Covenant, which is here spoken
of; we must confess we do not see how such a thing can justly be charged upon
the persons spoken of in this Proposition: For, they understand the Doctrine of
Faith, and give their Assent thereto; ^hey are not scandalous in life, they
solemnly own the Covenant, and therein give up themselves and their children to
the Lord: and is this such disloyalty, as to be a cutting off the Covenant and
enta^l of it? we think it were hard to prove such a thing, and do fear that
Charity will not allow to affirm it. Nor that which is here said in this page
41. That nothing is given to them and theirs by the Covenant, wh^^h ^hey
presume to usurp without warrant from God. For,

1. By the Covenant God gives himself to be a God to his People, and to their
seed in their generations, Genesis 17. and shall we say this is nothing? God is
Almighty, and All-sufficient, and is it nothing to have such a God to be a God
to us, and to our seed?

2. And when the persons in question are such as were Regularly in Covenant in
their infan^^, by means of their Parents covenanting for them, as the Reverend
Author does acknowledge, how can their owning this Covenant, when they become
adult, be justly counted a presuming to usurp the Covenant without warrant from
God? We read of them that are blamed, and that justly, for forsak^ng the
Covenant which God made with their fathers, Deuteronomy. 29.25. Judge. 2.20. but that
owning this Covenant should be a forsaking of it, and an usurping of it without
warrant from God, and a presuming* we do not see how this can be proved. To
some indeed the Lord says, What have thou to do to take my covenant in thy
mo^th? Psalm 50 16. but does the Lord say this to such as were qualified as in
this fifth Proposition? The contrary is most clear: for these in this Psalm. 50.
are expressly called Wicked, such as did hate to be instructed and reformed,
were culpable for consenting with Thieves, partaking with Adulterers,
slandering, and all evil speaking, etc. whereas the persons in question are not
culpable for any such thing, being expressly said to be Not scandalous in life;
but on the contrary furnished with many good and commendable qualifications,
and were regularly admitted into the Covenant in their minority: and therefore
being so unl^ke the persons that are blamed for tak^ng G^ds Covenant into their
mouth, we see no ground to say they have (...) off the entail of the Covenant
by their disloyalty, and that nothing is given to them and theirs by it, but
that they presume to usurp it without warrant from God: we see no warrant from
God so to say or think of such persons.

A Member (says the Synod) is one that according to Rule, or Divine
Institution, is within the visible Church.

They say true, says the Reverend Author: but that refutes nothing that I have
said concerning Mediate and Immediate Members, for both are within the Church,
though both have not full communion with the Church in all Ordinances.

Ans. The Synod never said, that all that are within the Church have such full
communion, and therefore this is nothing against them: but if all Members be
within the Church according to Divine Institution, how can it be avoided but
they are all immediate Members of the Church? For, if they be all within the
Church, then there is nothing as a Medium between the Church and them, or any
of them, and so they are all immediate Members, as the Synod says. Whether all
have full communion, is one thing, and whether all be immediate Members, is
another; and the denying of the former, is no infringing of the latter.

The Synod having mentioned an Objection, That if children be complete and
immediate Members as their Parents, they shall then immediately have all
Church Priviledges as their Parents have: And making this Answer, That it
follows not; all privileges that belong to Members as such, do belong to the
children as well as the Parents: but all privileges do not so. A Member as
such (or all Members) may not partake of all privileges, but they are to make
progress both in memberly duties and privileges, as their age, capacity, and
qualifications do fit them for the same.

To this the Reverend Author auswereth, That their Answer to the Objection is
insufficient; for the best Members have need to make pro^gress in memberly
duties and qualifications, yet all have that communion that suits their
membership: Infants in Baptism, etc. and adult persons in the Seals, Voting,
etc. page 41, 42.

Ans. By this it seems the difference lies here, that whereas some
Church Members have communion in all Church Priviledges, and others not in all,
but only in some; the Synod apprehends the reason of this difference to be,
because some are yet defective in qualifications, and fitness for such full
communion, though not wanting complete and immediate Membership: But the
Reverend Author makes the reason of the difference to be from the different
kind of Membership, the one sort being only Mediate Members, and the other
Immediate. All have that communion for which they are qualified, says the
Synod: All have that communion which suits their Membership, says the Reverend
Author. For clearing of which Point, it may not be a miss to consider of other
Societies, and how it is in them; as that of the Family, and of the Civil
State: in both which it is clear, that all have not like communion in
Privileges; but who can say that this arises from their different Membership
in the Societies of which they are? or how can it be denied, but that this
arises from their different qualifications? An Infant, an Idiot, one
Distracted, or Distempered with Frenzy, etc. such cannot enjoy all privileges
in the Family, or Civil State, as others may; and the reason is, Because they
are not fitly qualified: but who can say they are not complete, and proper, and
immediate Members of the Family or State, as well as others? He that does
injury to such an one, does injury to one that is as truly and properly a
member of the Society, as those that are better qualified; and such injuries
are punishable with Death, or otherwise, as the nature of the offense does
require, as being injuries to one that is truly and properly a personal and
immediate Subject and Member of the Commonwealth, though there might be many
other Subjects better qualified? In like sort in Church-society, some may enjoy
more full com^union then others, and yet not as being more truly partakers of
proper personal, and immediate Membership, but because they are better
qualified.

Thus of the second Particular, That the Parents in question are Immediate
Members.

The third is, That their Membership still continues in adult age, and cease
not with their infancy; 1. Because in Scripture persons are broken off only
for notorious sin, or incorrigible in penitency and unbelief, not for growing
up to adult age, Romans 11.20.

The Reverend Author answers, That this Reason does not prove, that the
membership of all baptized in infancy continues in adult age.

Ans. Nor did the Synod so say, nor produce that Reason and Scripture for such
purpose; but their purpose therein was this, viz. To prove that the Parents in
question do still continue members: which may be true, though all (...) are
baptized in infancy do not. For thus their Argument lies: If persons be not
broken off but for notorious sin, or incorrigible in penitency and unbelief;
then the Parents in question are not broken off, but do still continue members:
for any such notorious sin* etc. cannot justly be charged upon them, witness
the terms of the Proposition. To this purpose is this Reason alleged by the
Synod; and therefore though the membership of ^ll baptized in infancy do not
continue in adult age, the Synod loses nothing thereby, a^ having never
affirmed any such thing.

But why does not this Reason and Text prove the thing intended by the Synod?
The Reverend Author gives this Reason; because that Text Romans 11.20. spe^k
only of such as have been received into membership by their personal faith,
and covenanting with the Church visibly.

A. The text clearly speaks of the people or nation of the Jews, of whom it is
said, that they were a disobedient and gainsaying people, Romans 10.2^. that
they, as concerning the Gospel, were enemies, Romans 11.28. that they killed the
Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and persecuted the Ap^stles, pleased not
God, and were contrary to all men, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16. and shall we say,
that notwithstanding all this, they were received into complete and immediate
membership by their personal faith, etc? Besides, it is not very credible, that
all the members of the Jewish Church were received into complete and immediate
membership by their personal faith, if that be true which the Reverend Author
said, page 6. that That Church was to be propagated and continued by natu^^^
generation in a lineall descent from Abraham, by Isaac and Jacob, t^ll the
coming of Christ; and that there was no Ordinance for casting out their members
for sins against the Moral Law, as there is under the Gospel, page 12. Which
things (if true) do import, that visible faith was not the thing looked for in
receiving the members of that Church, nor in continuing of them, but their
natural generation, and lineal d^sc^n^,, might suffice: How then can that stand
which is here said, that the persons sp^k^n of in R^m. 11.20. were such as were
received into membership (...), when as that Text speaks of the members of the
Church of the Jews, who (if the Reverend Authors apprehension be right) were
not so received, but by lineal succession, by natural generation; Christian
Churches differing from that Church, and being of another sort, as being to be
propagated and continued by regeneration, made visible by a right Confession,
and Profession of Faith, page 6. The sum is this, in the one place he makes it
peculiar to Christian Churches to be propagated by Regeneration, and (...)
^^sibly prof^^^ed; and that in the Church of the Jews it was othe^wise: and in
the other place, which certainly speaks of the Church of the Jews, he says it
speaks of emb^^^ received by ^her personal faith* wherein there seems to be a
rep^gnancy.

Our (...) of adult persons that break off themselves from the covenant by
pr^^h^ne neglect or contempt of the Ordinances, or uns^table conve^s^a^^, page
43.

Ans. Then the Parents in question are not broken off at all, but their
membersh^p (...) continues, as the Synod says; for the terms of the
Proposition will not suffer such profaneness and ^n empt of O^^^nances, and
(...) Conversation, to be justly charged upon them; and if there be the causes
for which men are (...) off, is not then this reason of the Synod plainly
confirmed and made good? for they argue, that the persons in question do still
continue members, because (...) notorious sin, impenitency, incorrigibleness,
and the like; and here it is said, that men are broken off by pro^h^^eness,
contempt of the Ordinances, and unsuitable conversation; which sayings are in
effect the same, or little different, and both of them do witness that the
persons spoken of are not broken off, as not being guilty of any such
wickedness or misdemeanors.

Who ever said that any were broken off for growing up to adult age?

Ans. If the persons described in the Proposition be said to be broken off,
what is this l^ss then the thing that is so disowned? It cannot be denied but
they were once within the Church, and it cannot be said that they are broken
off for any Scandal in their conversation; but coming up to the terms in the
Proposition are far from such evil, and on the contrary are furnished with many
good and commendable qualifications, as Knowledge, Profession, S^^jection to
Christ's Government, owning the Covenant, and the like. Now if notwithstanding
all this, they be declared to be no Members of the Church, but broken off from
it, though they were once in it; what is this less then to say, they are broken
off by growing up to adult age? And see Reply of the Reverend Author to this
Argument, p. 42.

2. Says the Synod, The Jews Children circumcised did not cease to be Members
by growing up, but continued in the Church, and were by virtue of their
membership received in Infancy, bound unto various duties, and in special to
those solemn personal professions that pertained to adult Members, not as then
entering into a new membership, but as making a progress in memberly duties,
Deuteronomy. 26.2 -- 10. and 16.16, 17. Gal. 5.3.

To this the Answer is, 1. That the Jews children circumcised were bound to
various duties, and to those solemn professions mentioned, is clear enough by
the Texts alleged, and sundry other: whereunto I willingly add, that Baptism
also binds the infant seed of confederates to various Gospel-duties, and
especially this of using all mean, etc.

Ans. And do not both these show that which the Synod expresses, That children
do not cease to be Members by growing up, but do still continue in the Church?
for if it was so with the Jews children, is it not also so with ours, according
to the Synods arguing? and if by virtue of that membership received in infancy,
the circumcised then did, and the Baptized now do stand bound to various duties
when adult, how can it be avoided, but that membership received in infancy then
did, and now does continue in adult age? for, when and as long as one stands
bound by a covenant, then and so long that covenant must needs remain in being,
for otherwise how could one stand bound by it? can one be bound by that which
is not in being? one would think this were not possible. Therefore by this
being bound by the covenant and membership received in infancy, to various
duties when adult, it appears, that the covenant and membership received in
infancy does still continue in adult age, and so the purpose of the Synod is
gained.

But 2. says the Reverend Author, It is not proved by those texts, that w^^n
they were adult they did not enter into a new membership; rather the contrary
appears by Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18.

Ans. If so, then they did every third Year enter into a new membership: for
the Reverend Author conceives that what is said to be done in Deuteronomy. 26 17, 18.
was done every third Year, as before ^.31. but who knows not that the same
persons or people may many a time enter into covenant, or renew their covenant
with God, and yet not thereby enter into so many new memberships? It seems by
Psalm. 50.5. where it is said, They have made a covenant with me by sacrifice,
that so often as sacrifice was offered, so often there was a covenant made between
God and them; and yet it will not follow, that at every time of sacrificing
there was an entering into a new membership: it may suffice to say, as the Synod
does, that at all such times there was a prog^^s^ in memberly duties.

But why should we think that the Covenant in Deuteronomy. 26. was entering into a new
Membership? The Reason rendered, is this; Because they entered into the Covenant
personally and immediately, not in and by their Parents, as they did in
infancy, Genesis 17.7. And if Covenanting be the Form of Church Membership, then a
different Form of Covenanting, makes a different kind of Membership; Mediate
and Immediate Covenanting, makes Mediate and Immediate Members.

Ans. But is this certain, that a different way of covenanting, makes a
different kind of membership? In Genesis 15. there is covenanting by divi^ing the
he^fe^, the go^, etc. in the midst, and passing between the pieces or parts*
and so in Jer. 34. In Genesis 17. there is covenanting by silence, and falling
upon the face: in Nehem. 9.38. there is covenanting by Writing and Sealing of
it; in 2 Chronicles. 15. by Swearing with a loud voice, and by engaging, that
^hosoever should not do as is there promised, should be put to death. Here we
see are various ways of covenanting; but shall we say that these do infer
diverse kinds of membership? then it would follow, that if the same persons or
people should diverse times enter into Covenant, or renew their Covenant, and
this sometimes in one of these ways, and sometimes in another, if a different
form of covenanting do make a different kind of membership, it would follow,
that the same persons and people might many times over, again and again enter
into a new kin^ of membership; which we suppose none will affirm, and therefore
this that is here said will not hold: the thing for essence and Kind may be the
same, when the way and manner of doing may be various. Moreover, covenanting
taken for our act in making or renewing the covenant, is not the form of
membership (this is but the instrumental efficient) but covenant interest, or
to be in covenant, is the formalis ratio of membership (that is it which the
Synod affirms page 24.) and that is the immediate, actual, and proper portion
of the children, as well as of the Parents.

The third Argument of the Synod, is, From the Relation of born Servants and
Subjects, by which the Scripture s^^s forth the state of children in the
Church, Levit. 25 41, 42. Ezekiel. 37.25. which relations (as all men know) do no^
^eas^ with infancy, but do continue in adult age: and ^ince it also follows,
that one special end of membership received in infancy, is to leave persons
under engagement to service and subjection to Christ in his Church when grow^
up, etc. page 25, 26.

The Answer to this, is, That the one of these Texts is typical, figuring the
t^^e of grace, whereby now Christ has freed us from the servitude of Sin and
Satan, etc. the other Text is a Prophecy of the calling of the Elect nation of
the Jews, and of the state of the Church under the New Jerusalem: and therefore
these do neither of them suit the thing in question.

Ans. But for the present nothing appears to the contrary, but they may be
suitable; yet, if the thing it self for which those Texts are alleged, be
sound and good, the Inference which the Synod makes is so also, though the
Texts were not so apt. For, if the children in the Church be in state as born
Servants and Subjects to Christ, then this state and relation, and so their
membership, does not cease with infancy, but continues in adult age. And we
hope the Reverend Author will not deny, but for state they are as born
Servants, and Subjects to Christ, though he thinks the Texts quoted are not apt
Proofs for it; but if the thing be not denied, the Argument of the Synod stands
good for the continuance of their membership. Grant them to be in the state of
born Servants and Subjects in their infancy, and then it must be granted, that
this state continues when they are adult, and so their membership does not
cease with their infancy: deny that their membership continues when adult, and
then it must be said, either that their state in infancy is not as born
Servants and Subjects, or that such relations do cease with infancy. But for
the Reverend Author, he expressly grants, That one special end of membership
received in infancy, is to leave persons under engagement to service and
subjection to Christ in his Church when grown up, when they are fittest for it,
and have most need of it, page 43. which is the very same that is here affirmed
by the Synod: and does not that hence follow which the Synod infers, That
therefore their membership did not cease with infancy, but does still continue?
It seems to follow unavoidably: for how can they when adult, or grown up, be
under engagement to service and subjection, as the end of membership received
in infancy, if that membership do not still continue, but together with their
infancy be now past and gone? If they be still under engagement, then their
Covenant does still continue, and consequently their Membership.

Yet, when all this is done, neither can the Parents nor the Church give grace
unto the children, that when they become adult they may be spiritually fit for
personal and immediate membership: and to bring them into it without such
fitness visibly, is to profane the Ordinances, and to pollute the Lords
Sanctuary, page 44.

Ans. It is true, none can give grace but God, who is the God of all grace: but
for bringing the adult persons spoken of into membership, we conceive there is
no such thing here intended by the Synod, nor can be spoken of in any propriety
of speech concerning the persons in question; they being such as were Members
from their infancy, and are accounted by the Synod still to continue members
now when adult, and therefore there is no bringing of them into membership.
That which is here spoken of, were more aptly called an acknowledging of them
to be members: and how the acknowledging of such persons, as the Proposition
describes, to be and continue members, can be judged a profanation of the
Ordinances, or a polluting of the Lords Sanctuary, we confess we do not
understand: for we know they were brought into membership by Gods own
Institution and Appointment, and we do not know that they have in any way of
God been put from it; nor, considering the term in the Proposition, can be
justly judged to deserve any such matter, but the contrary: and therefore the
acknowledging of them to be members, can be no such profaning and polluting,
as is spoken of.

The fourth Argument of the Synod, to show that the persons spoken of do still
continue members, is this: Because there is no ordinary way of cessation of
membership, but by Death, Dismission, Excommunication, or Dissolution of the
Society; none of which is the case of the persons in question.

Whereto the Reverend Author answers, That the ennumeration is insufficient;
there is another ordinary way, i. e. Desertion. Thus Esau's membership ceased;
and so many theirs, who being adult, regard not to join with the Church by
their personal and immediate confederation, etc. And if forsaking the Church
may suffice to deprive those of Church Priviledges, who were before in personal
and immediate Church-fell^wship, 1 John 2.19. how much more those who never had
such membership? etc. What can the mediate membership which such had in
infancy, advantage them for continuing in membership, when being adult they
live in the breach of that Covenant, whereby they were left under engagement in
their infancy unto service and subjection to Christ in the Church?

Ans. If the Ennumeration were not sufficient, but that that of Desertion* were
needful to be added, yet this would not avail to prove the contrary to what the
Synod here says, but the membership of the persons in question may still
continue for all this: for, being qualified as the Proposition expresses, they
are far from being guilty of such Desertion, or forsaking of the Church of
God; and therefore it is not this, though it were added to the Particulars in
the Argument, that can hinder their still continuing to be Members. Nor can
they be justly charged as guilty of such things as are here expressed, viz. Not
regarding to join with the Church by their personal and immediate
confederation, nor to fit themselves for it, but to despise the Church of God,
not desiring nor endeavoring after spiritual fitness, but living in the breach
of that Covenant, etc. These things we cannot see how they can justly be
imputed to the persons qualified as the Proposition expresses, but they may
still continue to be members, as not being culpable of any such things, as
these here mentioned, to un-Member them.

Here also it may be observed, how the Reverend Author does again acknowledge,
That the sins of adult persons, who were admitted in infancy, are a breach of
that Covenant in which they were then comprehended, and which left them under
engagement unto service and subjection to Christ in the Church: which shows
that they are still in the Covenant, though now they be adult; for otherwise,
how could their sins be breach of covenant? and if they be still in Covenant,
then they still continue members, and their membership did not cease with their
infancy, which is the thing here affirmed by the Synod.

For that of Esau, whose membership is said to cease by Desertion the Reverend
Author may remember, that he has more then one told us of invalidity of Proofs
from the Old Testaments for things (...) Gospel Times: which Proofs, though we
cannot say but they may b^ valid, yet why should himself use them against us,
(for this of Esau is from the Old Testament) if his apprehension be right, that
such Proofs are not valid? But for the thing it self, of the cessation of
membership by a man's own act, this has been spoken unto before, page 34.35. in
Defense of the first Argument for this fifth Proposition: Where also was
considered that Text 1 Ioh. 2.19. which is here alleged again: To which former
place we refer the Reader; only adding thus much, that the cessation of
membersip which the Synod here speaks of, is such cessation as is ordinary, but
if Esau'* were by his own act alone, why may we not say that there was
something in it extraordinary? Though it is not any where said that it was by
his own act: if any afffirm that it was, it stands upon them to prove it, for
affirmanti incumbit probatie. And though it be not said that the Church had any
hand in it, yet negative Arguments in matter of Fact are not cogent, though in
matters of Faith they be: but for matter of Fact, we know many things were done
that are not written, Ioh. 20.30. and 21.25. and therefore though this be not
written, that there was any Church-proceedings against Esau for his departing
from the Church, and therefore we do not say there was; yet they that say there
was not, must prove there was not, because the mere not mentioning that there
was, is no sufficient Proof that there was not: And for any further Proof, that
Esau's falling off from his Church Membership was by his own act alone; any
further Proof for this, then merely the not expressing of any
Church-proceedings against him, we find none.

The fifth Argument of the Synod for confirming this Particular, That the
persons spoken of do still continue Members, is this: Because otherwise a
person admitted a member, and sealed by Baptism, not cast out, nor deserving so
to be, may (the Church whereof he was, still remaining) become a Non-member,
out of the Church, and of the unclean world; which the Scripture acknowledges
not.

Whereto the answer in sum is this, That as a Freemans child of some
Corporation is freeborn, and may in his minority trade under his father; yet
being grown up, must personally enter into the common Engagement of Freemen, or
else may not trade for himself, but is a Non-freeman by his own default, and
has lost his Freedom by not entering in his own person into the common
Engagement, etc. So, and much more justly, an adult person makes himself to
become a Non-member by not covenanting personally as his father did.

Ans. It may be justly questioned, whether this Comparison do suit the case in
hand. For, 1. All the privilege of this Freemans child that is mentioned, is
this, that he may in his minority trade under his Father; which privilege does
not at all arise from his being the child of a Freeman; and the reason is,
because one that is not a child, but only a servant of such a Freeman, may
trade under the Freeman* as his Master. This being the privilege of such
Freemen, that their Servants, and others belonging to them, though they are not
free, yet may trade for them, and in their names: which is upon then atter no
privilege at all to the child or servant, but only to the Freeman himself
under whom they trade. But will any say, that to be a child of a Churchmember
is no privilege at all to a child, but only to the Father? or will any say,
that the child has no more privilege then the servant, since in the cafe
alleged, the servant may trade under the Freeman, as well as the child may?
we suppose none will say this; and therefore in this the Comparison does not
suit the case in hand. The Orders and Privileges of Corporations are various,
according to the tenor of their several Charters; but what the Charter of the
Church is, we know, viz. That in Genesis 17. it takes in children into the Church
with their Parents, and does not allow them to be put out, till censureable
iniquity do appear.

2. If in some Corporations one that is freeborn do lose his Privilege when
he becomes adult, if he do not then enter personally into the Engagement, yet
it is not certain that it is so in all. Sure no such thing is said of Paul, who
yet pleads his Privilege of being a Freeman of Rome, because he was so born,
without mention of any personal act of his own for attaining that Privilege,
Acts 22. And if Paul, being freeborn, did retain his Freedom when adult,
without any personal act of his own for that end, why may it not be so in
respect of Church Membership, though in all Civil Corporations it be not so? It
is evident, that the Scripture speaks of the children of bond-servants, as
bound also, and of the children of the f^er, as free also, without mention of
any act of the children to procure that relation or state, in the one case or
in the other, ^eu^. 25.46, 54. And we see no reason but it may be so also in
the visible Church, that if the Parent be a member, the child is so also, and
so continues, (...) i. e be cut off, not losing his membership by the mere not
performin^ of what might fit him for full Communion.

3. If it were so in all Corporations, that a Freemans child does lose his
Freedom when adult, if he do not then in his own person enter into the common
Engagement; and if it were also so in the Church, that a Members child should
lose his Membership when adult, if he do not then personally Covenant, (though
this is more then we see proved) yet if it were so, we see not how this can be
prejudicial to the persons spoken of in this fifth Proposition. For of them it
is expressly said, that they do solemnly own the Covenant before the Church, and
therein give up themselves and their children to the Lord, etc. and therefore
though Freedom in a Corporation, and Membership in the Church, might be lost
by not entering personally into the Common Engagement, and Covenant; yet, except
we shall say it may be lost, though this Personal Engagement and Entering be
performed and done, except we shall say this, we cannot say that the membership
of the persons in question is lost at all, but does still continue, since they
are such as do thus personally engage and covenant.

As for that Text, Romans 2.25. If thou be a breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision
is made no circumcision, which is here alleged again: we refer the Reader to
what has been said touching this Text before in page 33.

Lastly, whereas the Reverend Author says, Those Texts in Romans 11.16. 1 Cor.
7.14. Genesis 17.7. are not applicable to the adult persons in question, but only
to infants and children in minority.

The Answer is, that the Synod does not at all apply them to the adult persons
in question, and therefore it is a great mistake so to think: but having said,
that these persons are personal, immediate, and yet-continuing Members, they
do thence infer, that their children are therefore also Members, in covenant,
and holy, and consequently are the Subjects of Baptism; which Inference and
Consequence the Reverend Author we are persuaded will not deny, if the ground
thereof be good, That the Parents in question are Members of the Church, as the
Synod apprehends that they are. And therefore although the Texts alleged be
not applicable to the adult persons in question, yet if they be applicable to
such infants and little children whose Parents are personal, immediate, and
yet-continuing Members, they do then sufficiently serve the purpose for which
they are here alleged by the Synod.

So much for Defense of the sixth and last Argument for confirming this fifth
Proposition.

Propos. 6. The sixth Proposition of the Synod, is this, Such Church Members
who either by death, or some extraordinary Providence, have been inevitably
hindered from public acting as aforesaid, yet having given the Church cause in
judgment of charity to look at them as so qualified, and such, as had they
been called thereunto, would have so acted, their children are to be Baptized.

To this the Reverend Author Answers, That this Proposition may not be
granted, for it grants the privilege of Church Membership to such as are not
actually and regularly Church Members.

Ans. And yet the Proposition, in the very first words of it, does expressly
declare, that what Church-priviledge is here mentioned, is not granted to such
as are not Church Members, but to such as are: Such Church Members, says the
Synod, who, etc. their Children are to be Baptized. So that though
Church Priviledges may not be granted to such who are not Church Members, yet
to the persons here spoken of, the Baptism of their Children may be granted,
without any such undue granting of Church privileges, since the Synod does not
say these persons are not Church Members* but does expressly say they are. All
that can be said against these persons, is, that they have not acted according
to the fifth Proposition: and yet it is said, they have been inevitably hindered
therein, and have given the Church cause in judgment of charity to look at
them as willing to have so acted, and therefore having been Church Members from
their birth or minority, how can the applying of Baptism to their children, be
the granting of a Church-priviledge to such as are not Church Members? If they
had not been hindered from acting as in the fifth Proposition, but had indeed so
done, yet this is not the thing that would have made them members, they having
been members before* and though they be now adult, yet it has been proved before
in the fifth Proposition, Arg. 6. Part. 3. That their membership does still
continue; and therefore the granting of Church Priviledges to such as are not
Church Members, may be yielded to be unwarrantable, without any prejudice to
the persons here spoken of, or to what the Synod here says concerning them.

And whereas the Reverend Author does here lay down two Inferences: 1. That an
ordinary Minister cannot orderly do an act of Office to such as are not regular
and actual Members of the visible Church; but, if he do, it will be usurpation.
2. That the Church may not receive into any privilege of Church Communion,
such as are not actually in public Church Order.

These may both be granted, and yet what the Synod here says not be at all
infringed thereby. For, considering that the persons spoken of were
Church Members long ago, and have never since been cut off or cast out from
that Relation, nor deserve any such matter, but do still continue therein, as
was showed in the fifth Proposition, therefore we cannot see how it can be any
usurpation in the Minister to do acts of his office toward them, nor unlawful
in the Church to receive them to such a privilege of Church Communion as is
spoken of; nay rather the persons being and still continuing Members, the
performance of the thing in question may seem to be so far from being
usurpation, as that the neglect thereof may be counted an unwarrantable
omission or transgression.

The first Reason of the Synod for confirming this Proposition, is, Because the
main foundation of the right of the child to privilege remains, viz. Gods
Institution, and the force of his covenant carrying it to the Generations of
such as are keepers of the covenant, i. e. not visibly breakers of it, etc.

Whereunto the Answer of the Reverend Author is, That the Parents of the
children in question are visibly breakers of the covenant, which was sealed to
them by Baptism in their Infancy, which obliged them to covenant personally for
themselves and theirs, etc. p. 47, 48.

Ans. But is this certain, that the Parents in question are visibly breakers of
the covenant? sure this, if it be affirmed, had need to be soundly cleared. For
either they be such as do personally own the covenant, being qualified with
knowledge and blameless life, etc. as in the fifth Proposition, or else if they
have not so acted, they have been inevitably hindered therein, as is said in the
sixth Proposition: and is it reasonable, that for all this they must be counted
visibly breakers of the Covenant? Are they such breakers of it, who do
publicly own it, and therein give up themselves and their children to the
Lord, being not culpable for any contrary practice in their conversation? or
are they such breakers of it, who if they have not publicly acted as
aforesaid, the reason has been, because they have been inevitably hindered? we
cannot see that Rule or Reason will allow or give warrant for such
apprehensions. Put case a person who was born a Churchmember, and has been
sound in judgment, and unblameable and commendable in his conversation all his
days, but has been, like Joseph, sold for a slave, and kept in bondage,
suppose to the Turks, or others for many a year: suppose also that after a time
he be restored to his liberty, and thereupon do return homeward with his child
or children born to him in his exile and bondage, intending to present himself
and his children to the Lord in the Church where he was born, but before he
reach home, he dies by the way; this man is inevitably hindered from entering
into Covenant personally, though willing to have done it, and fit for it: But
will any Reason or Charity permit to count this man a visible breaker of the
Covenant, because he did not personally enter thereinto? we suppose this cannot
be said, he being inevitably hindered from so acting. Why then should the
Parents in question be judged to be visibly Covenant-breakers for not entering
into Covenant personally, when it is expressly said they have herein been
inevitably hindered, though willing to have done it, if there had been
opportunity? For our parts, we dare not judge them to be visibly
Covenant-breakers, as not seeing any ground or warrant so to do.

The second Reason of the Synod for confirming this sixth Proposition, is,
Because the Parents not doing what is required in the fifth Proposition, is
through want of opportunity, which is not to be imputed as their guilt, so as
to be a bar to the childs Privilege.

Now what says the Reverend Author unto this? Does he deny that it is want of
opportunity that hinders the Parents from doing what is required in the fifth
Proposition? No we do not see that he denies this at all? Does he then say,
that though want of opportunity hindered, yet for all this want of opportunity,
the not doing, though through that want of opportunity, is nevertheless a bar
to the childs Privilege? Not so neither; we do not find that he so says,
any more then the former: And therefore what was said in the former Reason
about being inevitably hindered, may be applied to this particular for want of
opportunity, viz. That such not doing what is mentioned in the fifth
Proposition, can be no bar to the childs Privilege.

But if the Reverend Author says nothing touching this want of opportunity,
which is the main thing which is mentioned by the Synod in this their second
Reason, what then does he say in his Answer to this Reason?

That which he first says, is, That it has been already proved in his
Examining the fifth Proposition, That more is required to fit one that is adult
for Church Membership, then is there expressed, viz. Faith in Christ made
visible to the Church, without which they are not regularly Church Members.

Ans. But the Question here is not, Whether more be required to Membership then
is expressd in that Proposition; but, Whether want of opportunity in Parents to
do what is there expressed, be a just bar to the childs Privilege. It is
evident that this is the question here in hand, whereto the Answer of the Synod
is Negative, That this want of opportunity is not a just bar. But whether it
be ^ just bar, or be not, the Reverend Author says nothing at all to that,
but speaks to another thing, That more is required to Church Membership then
that Proposition does express: so that the thing in question seems not to be
touched. Yet let us a little consider of this other whereto he leads us, and
return back with him to the fifth Proposition.

Concerning which, first, here seems to be a manifest mistake concerning the
scope of that fifth Proposition, which is not at all as is here intimated,
whether what is there expressed be enough to fit one that is adult for
Church Membership; but the scope of it is plainly this, to show, That such
Church Members as were admitted in minority, if they be qualified as is there
expressed, may have their children Baptized: but for fitness for Membership,
that Proposition does not discuss that Point at all, but expressly speaks of
such as are Members already, and were admitted long ago, even in their
minority. As for that which is here said concerning his Examining that fifth
Proposition, we refer the Reader to what has been formerly there said in
Defense of that Proposition.

Further, the Reverend Author says, That Baptism administered by ordinary
Officers to such as are out of Church Order, is profaned; as Circumcision was
by the Shechemites, and would have been by the Ishmaelites and Edomites, if it
had been administered to their children, when their Parents were not j^yned to
the Church, or abode not in it in the Families of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

Ans. Still this makes nothing against administering Baptism to the children
spoken of in this fifth and sixth Propos. except it could be proved that their
Parents are not in Church Order. For the Synod thinks, that as they were
admitted into Church Membership in their minority, so they still continue
therein; and the contrary we have not yet seen proved. As for the Shechemites,
etc. Circumcision might be profaned when administered to them, and yet Baptism
not so, when administered to the children in question. For, if the former were
not in the Church, yet these are: and whereas the former were vile and vicious
in their lives, these other are far from any such thing; and therefore there
is no comparison between the former, and these spoken of, but a vast
difference. And we may add further, That as there is difference between those
Shechemites and the rest, and the persons spoken of, both in respect of
Church-relation and Conversation; so in respect of this latter, these are far
better then sundry that abode in the Family of Jacob, to whom he will not deny
but Circumcision was lawfully administered. We may instance in Simeon and Levi,
who committed that odious Cruelty and Bloodshedding, for which their Father
laid such a Curse upon them a little before his death, Genesis 49. And if
Circumcision was lawfully administered to the children of these, they abiding in
the Family of Jacob, how can Baptism lawfully be denied to the children in
question, or be said to be profaned when administered to them, since they are
children of Parents who were once in the Church of God, and were never cast
out, nor deserving any such thing, but do still continue therein, and for life
and conversation are far from any such Scandal and Crime as was found in the
Sons of Jacob aforesaid.

One end of Baptism now (as it was of Circumcision then) is, to seal
Church Communion, 1 Cor. 12.13. and is a testimony of the admission of the
party baptized into the Family of God, The Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, etc.

Ans. This is no just ground of denying Baptism to the children in question,
except it could be proved that neither they nor their Parents are in the Church
of God, nor of his Family, which yet we have not seen proved.

The regular and lawful use of Baptism now (as of Circumcision of old)
presupposes both Gods Promise, and his Faith ( viz. Faith for Justification
with Abraham) who is to use it, either upon himself, or upon his infant. To use
it, being not so qualified visibly, is it not a treacherous usurping of the
Great Seal of the King of Heaven and Earth?

Ans. Neither does this make against the Baptism of the children in question;
forasmuch as their Parents and they are under the Promise of God, I will be a
God to thee, and to thy seed in their generations: and the Parents being
qualified as in the fifth Proposition, cannot be denied to have Faith visibly,
as was showed by the Synod in their Arguments for Confirming that Proposition,
and in this Defense formerly. Sure it is, these Parents may as well be thought
to have Faith visibly, as the Sons of Jacob aforementioned, and as many in the
Church at Corinth, of whom it is said, that they were culpable for carnal
Dissentions, going to Law, Fornication, Uncleannesses, and not repenting
thereof, 1 Cor. 1. and 3. and 6. and 2 Cor. 12. and yet being in the Church,
and professing Christianity, we suppose the Reverend Author will not deny but
their children might be baptized, and the children of Jacobs Sons circumcised,
and that this in them was no treacherous usurping of the Seal of the King of
Heaven and Earth; and therefore much less can such a thing be imputed to the
persons qualified as in the fifth Proposition, though the Seal of Baptism be
administered to their children. For it is evident, these persons are far from
such offensiveness as was in those Corinthians, and in Reuben, Simeon and Levi,
but are much more innocent, yea commendable.

So much for Defense of the second Reason of the Synod for confirming this
sixth Proposition, against what the Reverend Author, in his Answer thereto,
says in his Digression, and turning back to the Proposition foregoing.

The third Reason of the Synod for this sixth Proposition, is, Because God
accepts that as done in his service, to which there was a manifest desire and
endeavor, albeit the acting of it were hindered; as in David to build the
Temple, 1 Kings 8. in Abraham to sacrifice his Son, Heb. 11.17. and in that of
Alms, 2 Cor. 8.12. As in such as are said to be Martyrs in voto, and Baptized
in voto, because there was no want of desire that way, though their desire was
not actually accomplished.

To which the Answer of the Reverend Author is, That this may hold in private
service, so that there God accepts the will for the deed, when the acting of it
is hindered; but in public service, he does not accept of that as done, which
is not done, so far as to bring them into public state and order, whatever
their desires and endeavors have been. And he instanceth in one that desires
to be a Minister, and yet may not do the acts of that Office, before he be in
Office; and in such as desire to join to the Church, but may not be received to
the Seals before they be so joined.

Whereto the answer is, That what is here said is insufficient, as being not
suitable to the case in hand, which is not concerning such as are out of
Church State and order, as if desires after that state were enough to bring
them into it, though their actual entering were hindered. For it is evident, that
the Synod speaks not of such, but of such as are Church Members already, only
have been inevitably hindered from such actings as are mentioned in the fifth
Proposition; which actings are not at all spoken of for attaining
Church Membership, for that state the Synod accounts that they have attained
already: but the actings mentioned are clearly spoken of for another purpose,
viz. for the more orderly, clear, and edifying manner of administration of
baptism to their children; themselves, though being in the state and order of
Church Members, having not yet been received to the Lords Supper. It is
evident, that the Synod speaks of such persons, and of actings for such an end,
viz. of persons already in Church Estate, and acting for the end aforesaid; and
here in this sixth Proposition of obtaining that end, though their actings, as
aforesaid, have been inevitably hindered. Whereas the Reverend Author speaks of
such as are not in Church State and order at all, though they do desire it; and
of them he says, that these desires are not sufficient for their admission
unto Church Priviledges, when their actual entering into Church State is
hindered: between which, and those spoken of by the Synod, there is great
difference; so that if what he faith were granted, yet what is delivered by the
Synod is nothing hindered thereby: but though desire of office, or of
Church Estate, be not sufficient for doing the duties of the one, or obtaining
the privileges of the other, when actual entering into that office and state is
hindered; yet when such as are in Church Estate already, do desire to act as in
the fifth Proposition, but are inevitably hindered from so acting, what should
hinder but they may have their children Baptized, as if they had so acted
indeed? And why may not the instances of Gods accepting of Abraham's offering
his Son, of David's building the Temple, and the other mentioned by the Synod,
be sufficient Proofs hereof? we see nothing to the contrary but they may.
Whereto may be added that in 2 Chronicles. 30. where the people that prepared their
hearts to seek God, are accepted of God in the Passover, though they were not
cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary: yet whatever it was
that hindered their cleansing, their preparing their hearts did imply that they
did desire it, and hereupon at the Prayer of Hezekiah they are accepted. And in
1 Samuel 30. when two hundred of David's men were by faintness hindered that they
could not go over the brook Besor, as he and others did, yet he will not yield
but that they shall have part of the spoil, as well as others that went down to
the Battle; considering that it was not want of will, but want of ability that
hindered their acting as others did: and He, as he was in other things, a man
after Gods own heart, even so he was in this; and they that would not have had
the will of these two hundred accepted, when their deed was so inevitably
hindered, are called wicked men, and men of Belial. By all which the Argument of
the Synod is further confirmed and cleared, when they say in this their third
Reason, that God accepts that as done in his service, to which there was a
manifest desire and endeavor, albeit the acting of it were hindered. And, if
God accept those as Martyrs who are such only in voto, as the Reverend Author
seems to acknowledge, page 49 why may not the like be said of those who are
only Baptized in voto? we see no reason but that if in the one case God accept
them as Martyrs, he does also in the other as persons Baptize^.

And whereas he says, To be Baptized in voto, will nothing advantage any, as
to Church Fellowship, because de occultis non judicat Ecclesia, and things are
not manifested to the Church otherwise then by congruous actings.

The Answer is, 1. That the thing here spoken of by the Synod, is not at all of
receiving into Church Fellowship, as the Reverend Author carries it, but of
Baptizing the Children of such as are in Church Estate already, and have been
so even from their minority.

2. Nor is the desire they speak of so hidden and unknown, that the Church
cannot judge of it, but so manifest, that they have given the Church cause in
the judgment of charity to look at them as so qualified, as is said, and that
had they been called thereto, they would have so acted. So that if it were
true, that men could not be received into Church Fellowship by mere desire of
such state, when that desire is secret, and not manifest to the Church; yet men
that are in Church Estate already may have their Children Baptized when their
desires to act, as is mentioned, are sufficiently known to the Church, though
their acting has been inevi^ably hindered. For these cases do apparently
differ; so that what the Synod says in the one, is not overthrown by what the
Reverend Author says in the other.

3. It is conceived by some, that those who of the Ancients are said to be
Baptized in voto, were so spoken of, because they were Martyred before they
could actually receive Baptism, and yet that their children were after the
death of the Parents actually Baptized and accounted of the Church: which if
so, does testify, That they counted it a great matter to be Baptized in voto,
since in such case they would actually apply Baptism to the children, when the
Parents had not received it actually, but only in voto, or in desire. And how
much more may Baptism be applied to the children in question, whose Parents are
not only Baptized actually, and not in desire only, but have been actually
members of the Church even from their birth or minority? only they have not
acted as in the fifth Proposition, but have been inevitably hindered therein,
though they have been known to the Church to desire so to have acted.

Fourthly, Says the Synod, The terms of the Proposition import that in
charity, that is here done interpretatively, which is mentioned to be done in
the fifth Proposition expressly.

The Reverend Author Answers, Its an unwarrantable charity that makes such an
interpretation, for it is without warrant of any Rule in Scripture, or in good
Reason.

Ans. But is this certain, that neither Rule in Scripture, nor good Reason,
will give warrant for such charity as is mentioned? If men have been by death,
or some extraordinary providence, inevitably hindered from so acting as in the
fifth Proposition, and yet have given the Church cause to look at them as such
as would have so acted, if they had been thereunto called, and not inevitably
hindered, is there yet for all this no warrant in Scripture or good Reason for
such charity as is spoken of? For our parts, when God Almighty accepts the will
for the deed, when the parties inability hinders from doing so much as he
would, 2 Cor. 8.12. and when Scripture tells us, that Charity thinks not
evil, but believes all things, hops all things, etc. 1 Cor. 13.5, 7. we
cannot but think it better to retain and exercise such charity as is here
spoken of, then to be driven or depart from it, as if no Rule of Scripture or
good Reason would warrant it.

If that which is mentioned to be done in the fifth Proposition expressly, is
here done interpretatively, both being put together, will not avail to put the
Parent regularly into Church Fellowship in any sense, and to give the infant a
right to Baptism thereby.

Ans. For putting into Church Fellowship, the things here mentioned by the
Synod are not by them alleged for that end; and therefore if this that is said
by the Reverend Author were granted, the Doctrine of the Synod is not at all
weakened thereby: But if the things mentioned be sufficient for the Baptizing of
the children of Parents who are in Church Fellowship already, the purpose of
the Synod is sufficiently gained.

But why do not the things mentioned avail to put the Parent into
Church Fellowship? The Reason rendered, is, Because by Christ's Ordinance only
adult persons, who have true Faith and Holiness, are adult Members of the
invisible Church; and the same persons making profession thereof outwardly in
the Order by him appointed, may be Members of the visible Church, and they
only can give their infant seed a right unto Baptism.

Ans. And is this certain and clear, that only they who have true Faith and
Holiness, and so are Members of the invisible Church, may be Members of the
visible Church, and so their infant seed have right to Baptism? If this were
so, we may question whether it can be lawful for Ministers, or any men, to
dispense Baptism to any persons at all: and the reason is, Because they cannot
certainly know who have such true Faith and Holiness, and so are
Church Members. For what the Reverend Author said a little before in page 49.
That though God search and know the heart, yet the Church does not, de occultis
non judicat Ecclesia; this we believe to be very true: and therefore if this
hold, that none may be Members of the visible Church, and give right to their
seed unto Baptism, but only they who have true Faith and Holiness, and so are
Members of the Church invisible; we say, if this hold, how can we know who are
to the Baptized, since none can certainly know but God only, whether men have
this true Faith and Holiness in their hearts and souls? Therefore we think it
more safe to say, that where there is a profession of true Faith and Holiness,
and nothing contrary thereto appearing, whereby that profession can be
disproved, such persons may be Members of the visible Church, and so have
Baptism for their children, whether they be of the invisible Church, or no. And
if the persons described in the fifth Proposition be tried by this Rule, we
cannot see but as they were in Church Fellowship from their minority, so they
still continue therein, and so may have their Children baptized, in as much as
now they make a good profession before many witnesses, even the whole Church,
and do no way contradict their profession by any Scandalous practice in their
lives. And therefore, though that be true which the Reverend Author here says,
page 50. That without Faith it is impossible to please God, and that therefore
there must be true Faith in them whom he priviledgeth to baptize their Infants:
that is, as we understand him, whom he priviledgeth to present their Infants to
Baptism; yet for all this it may be lawful enough to administer Baptism to the
Children of Parents qualified as in the fifth and sixth Propos. and they that
do administer, may have Faith to please God therein, because of the
Church-relation and good profession of the Parents, though the Parents cannot
please God in presenting their children to that ordinance, if themselves be
destitute of the grace of Faith: yet this we must still say, that for any that
are so qualified as is said, we see no Scripture-Rule or Reason that will
warrant us to judge them so destitute.

So much for Defense of the sixth Proposition.

Propos. 7. The Members of Orthodox Churches, being sound in the Faith, and not
Scandalous in life, and presenting due testimony thereof, these occasionally
coming from one Church to another, may have their children baptized in the
Church whither they come, by virtue of communion of Churches; But if they
remove their habitation, they ought orderly to covenant and subject themselves
to the government of Christ in his Church where they settle their abode, and so
their Children to be baptized. In being the Churches duly to receive such unto
communion, so far as they are regularly fit for the same.

For confirming of this Proposition in both the Parts or Branches of it, the
Synod gives sundry reasons, whereto the Reverend Author says nothing in the
particulars, but in general, That he locketh at the regular communion of
approved Churches as an Ordinance of Christ: But further then so he says
nothing, either by objection against the Proposition, or by consent unto it?
But all he says is by way of propounding Quaeri^s, to the number of half a
score, or more; and then concludes, That when these and the like Questions are
clearly Answered, he shall then understand the true and full sense of this
Proposition, and what to say to it. But when the Synod shall come together to
Answer these Questions, whether ever or never, we do not know, nor do see any
great probability of such a thing; and therefore no more being here said
against this Proposition, we may conclude that it yet stands firm and good.
And, as he concludes, that Thus much may suffice, for the present, for Reply to
the Synods Answer to the first Question; So may we conclude, That thus much may
suffice, for the present, for Defense of the Synods Answer against what he
says to the contrary in his Reply.

COncerning the Reverend Author's Discourse upon the second Question touching
Consociation of Churches, we shall not trouble the Reader with any large Reply:
and we hope it needs nor, because there appeared no Dissent or
Dissatisfaction in the Synod about that matter. Our Brethren that Dissented in
the former Question, readily and fully Concurred in this, as themselves declare
in Antisynod^li^, page 12. Besides, part of the Reverend Author's Exceptions
referring to the Platform of Discipline, concluded on with great Unanimity in
the Synod held at Cambridge, Anno 1648. (sundry Principal Members whereof, as
Mr. Cotton, Shepard, Rogers, Norton, etc. are now at rest with God) we shall
not now after so many years, wherein we heard of no Opposition, make that a
subject of Debate.

But if the Reader please to take along with him these three or four
Considerations, they may serve to take off what is here Objected against us by
the Reverend Author.

1. That we never said nor thought, that there should be a Withdrawing from
other Churches upon Differences, Errors or Offenses of an inferior and
dubious nature, yea though continued in. We are far enough from Hastiness or
Harshness in that matter, being professed Adversaries to a Spirit of Sinful
and Rigid Separation: we hope there is no word in the Synods Conclusions that
savoureth thereof, if heartily interpreted. And for Withdrawing from Brethren
because of Dissent from what is here held forth by this Synod, both our
Practice and our Profession in the Preface to that Book, do sufficiently show
us to be far from it. This may answer what is said this way in Page 54, 55,
57, 63.

2. That we account not Consociation of Churches to be another thing th^n
Communion of Churches, but only an Agreement to Practice that Communion, as is
expressly said in Propos. 5th and 6th. And therefore we understand not why the
Reverend Author should so often praise Communion of Churches, as page 58* 59,
60, 61. and yet dispraise and disl^ke Consociation. Is Regular Communion so
good and excellent, and can it be hurtful for Churches to agree and consent to
Practice it? Neither do we mean by that Agreement, a Vow (as is suggested page
56, 57.) or a formal Covenant in a strict sense (though Mr. Cotton does not
refuse to call it a Covenant, in Keys, p. 54.59.) but only a declared Consent
(as is expressed Propos. 7.) of each Church to walk in Regular Communion with
their Neighbour-Churches. And if the Reverend Author does approve of the Acts
of Communion here set down for the substance of them, as it seems he does by
what he says page 52. why should it be thought a dangerous matter to agree
thereunto for the Substance thereof?

We have indeed found in our Experience much good and benefit by Communion of
Churches, as the Reverend Author acknowledges, page 58, 61. and his
acknowledgement thereof we gladly accept; but we have also found, that the want
of ready Agreement timously to attend and exert the Acts of Communion, has
hazarded the Peace and Well-being of sundry Churches, and exposed them to great
Troubles. We do not desire by our proposed Consociation, to add any thing to
the Communion of Churches, but only a vigorous and timous exercise thereof.

3. That we expressly disclaim the subjecting of a Church unto any other
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction whatsoever, Propos. 1. and therefore it is strange
that the Reverend Author should put that upon the Consociation by us intended,
That it is a subjecting of Churches under Classical Jurisdiction, page 59. It
is not the bare Consent, or mutual Agreement of Churches, but the nature of the
thing consented to, as, viz. The Power they agree to be stated under, that
makes it a Classical Combination, or puts those Churches under a Classical
Jurisdiction. What though the voluntary Combination, mentioned by by Mr.
Rutherfurd, in his sense does infer a Classical Membership and Jurisdiction?
Surely it does not follow that ours does so, when as we expressly disclaim it.
But is it true, that wherever there is a voluntary Combination of Churches,
they become a Classical or Presbyterian Church, and the Members by conse^ting
thereto, become Members of a Classical Church, and under the Power of it, so as
to be Excommunicated by it, etc. as is said page 59? what then shall be thought
of that known Position of Dr. Ames, Medal. Lib. 1. cap. 39. These. 27. which is
expressly cited and approved by the Reverend Author in his Reply to Paget, page
224, 225?

Surely it is no new thing with Congregational-men, but their professed
Doctrine, with one consent to own some kind of Combination and Consociation of
Churches; but withal we constantly afirm with Dr. Ames in the same place, that
This Combination does neither constitute any new Form of a Church, nor ought it
to take away, or in any measure to diminish that Liberty and Power which Christ
has left to his Churches, but only it serves to direct and promote the same.

4. Let the Reader please to peruse and consider the Reverend Author's Eleventh
and Twelfth premised Position, page 6, 7, 8. and compare them with what the
Synod has published touching Consociation of Churches, and we suppose he will
find such an agreement between them, as that he will wonder (as we do) to see
the Reverend Author appearing as an Antagonist in this matter. It seems
strange, that Brethren should be willing to contend both where they do differ,
and where they do not. Also it may be considered, how many Reflections here are
upon us, (as if we would cast a Snare upon Churches, by straitning them in the
use and exercise of their Church Power within themselves in re propria; as if
we would absolutely bind Churches not to administer Censures within
themselves, etc.) for which nothing published by the Synod did give any just
occasion.

And whereas Mr. Cotton is represented as being against our Consociation, page
60.61. Let his Printed words be viewed in the Keys, page 54 -- 59. his Solemn
Speeches of it to sundry be remembered, and his Draught of it a little before
his death be considered, and the Reader will see whether he can join in belief
with the Reverend Author about that matter. The Lord guide us by his Spirit
into all Truth, and help us to follow the Truth in Love.

FINIS.

