A DISCUSSION Of the Lawfulness of a Pastor's Acting as an OFFICER In Other
Churches Besides that which he is specially Called to take the Oversight of.

By the late Reverend Mr. Nathanael Mather.

LONDON: Printed for Nath. Hiller at the Princes Arms in Leaden Hall Street,
over against St. Mary Ax, MDCXCVIII.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.

bookplate

TO THE READER.
THat a Particular Congregational Church is an Institution of Christ, is clear
in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament: Which being granted, there must
needs be something proper and peculiar unto every such Church, which is not
common to another: For although every Church has Ministerial Officers and
Ordinances, which are all of the same kind, yet they are not the same
individual Ministry and Ordinances, nor in common; any more than the distinct
Families of two Men, each of whom has a Wife, Children and Servants: One is not
the Husband of the other's Wife, nor the Father of the other's Children, nor
the Master of the other's Servants. And why should we speak or act less
rationally about a Spiritual Corporation or Society than about a Civil one?
Will we allow that the Master and Wardens, and Privileges belonging to one
Company, may be challenged or borrowed by another? May the Father, Husband,
Master of one Family he challenged or borrowed by another? As this Husband,
Father, Master is the proper and peculiar Right of this Family in a
correlation; and this Magistrate, Warden, Governor is the peculiar Right by
correlation to this Company or Corporation: So it is in Spiritual Fellowships;
this Pastor, Elder or Deacon, with all his Office-power in Administrations,
belongs to this Church, and to no other; so that he is their Officer, and
related to them, and has no right to administer or exercise his Office in any
other Church, God being the God of Order, and not of Confusion, as in all the
Churches of the Saints; for if God has not confounded natural and civil
relations, neither has he those which are spiritual.

Since Antichristianism has blinded the eyes of the Professing World, the
plainest Doctrines of Faith and Order have met with great Contradictions and
Opposition; Yea, the minds of some who were greatly enlightened in matters of
Faith, have been left under much darkness about the matters of God's House; the
Church being still, in a great measure, fed in a mystical and hidden State, and
not yet come forth to a fullness of separation from Antichristian entanglements
and pollutions, as she will when the Mystery of God shall be finished.

And many who seem to have gone farther than others in the acknowledgment of
Truths appertaining to the Churches of Christ, and the Forms and Ordinances
instituted by Him; yet for want of fuller Illumination, or being biased too
much by Worldly Interest, and men-pleasing compliance, have practiced not only
short of the Rule, but also very ungroundedly and irregularly in these sacred
things: Not to mention more Instances than the particular Point which is
learnedly and nervously discussed in this Treatise; Some even of the
Congregational Persuasion having extended the Communion of Churches beyond the
Bounds which Christ has set, by making it reach to Office-Power; have thereby
fallen into a Mistake, which is in it self, destructive to the nature of a
Spiritual Corporation: For if Ministerial Power be communicable, why not the
Privilege of Church Membership much more? And so he that Votes to admit a
Member in one Church, may also by virtue thereof, Vote in the admission or
rejection of Members, or in the Election of Ministerial Officers all the World
over, and then what becomes of particular Churches and their Privileges?

It is true, there is such a thing as Communion of Churches in a Sisterly
converse and Entertainment of one another, whereby they allow of each others
Church State, without imposing upon one another, or parting with any thing
which is proper to themselves alone, as Church Membership and Office-power.

It is one thing to partake of the benefit of Power, where it is duly and
lawfully exercised; and another thing to exercise Power: A Man who is a Member
of one Corporation, may come and sue for his Right in another, or have any
Friendly Entertainment there; But the Mayor of one Corporation cannot come and
sit and act as a Magistrate in another Corporation: So the Pastor of a Church
may partake of the Lord's Supper in a place where he has no power to
administer it.

Christ's Commission to a Pastor reaches no farther than the Charge undertaken
by him and committed to him (feed the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made
thee Overseer,) any more than that of the Riding Elder or Deacon.

Again, He that administers, does it as an ordinary Brother, or as a Pastor. If
as a Brother, then what becomes of the Pastoral Office? Churches may do without
it; And this will justify the Irregular Practices of those who call ordinary
Brethren to administer the Seals as they have occasion. If he administer as
Pastor; it must be as Pastor of the Church whereto he belongs: and then one
Church has power to make a Church Officer for another, and to choose and set a
Pastor over it: Then also, where is co-ordination of Churches? Then likewise,
every particular Church has power to choose a Catholic Pastor, which is
absurd: And if the Choice of the Foreign Church do give power, then a Member of
their own might be a fitter Person for this Work, having power in the Church as
a Member already, which the other has not. If he administer as a Pastor in
standing Office to one Church, and occasional only to another; then there is
more required to make an occasional Officer than a standing Pastor: For there is
but one Church required to the choosing a standing Pastor, but two are
requisite to choose an occasional Pastor; there needing the Choice of that
Church only to which he is primarily related, to make him a standing Pastor;
but besides that, there must be the Choice of another Church to make him an
occasional Officer pro hic and nunc.

But I shall not enlarge upon this, nor need I, it being the Subject of the
ensuing Discourse, where it is strenuously, yet modestly and calmly argued and
cleared, which I recommend to the Consideration of the Vnprejudiced and
Impartial Inquirer after Truth. It was Wrote long since, and Corrected and
fitted for the Press by the late Reverend and Pious Author, whose Name it
bears; Occasioned by the irregular Practice of some Church or Churches who
called in Neighboring Pastors to administer the Lords Supper to them when they
had none of their own. Upon the like Practices here of late, and at the desire
of some Friends who had seen it, He intended to have Printed it had he lived;
Which Intention of his is Warrant sufficient to Publish it since his Death; and
indeed, neither it, nor the Author need any Epistle Recommendatory: This Tract
is able to speak for it self; and as for Him, his Name and Memory are savoury
and precious in more Nations than One.

A Discussion, etc. Or, A DISPUTE Upon these Two Questions: Question I. WHether
a Pastor of the Church at Corinth may Administer the Lord's Supper in the
Church at Cenchrea? Question II. Whether may a Member of the Church at Cenchrea
partake of the Lord's Supper administered there, by a Pastor of the Church at
Corinth; himself not being clear whether this act of the Pastor of the Church
at Corinth be not unwarrantable?

Answer:

I conceive neither the one nor the other to be according to the Rule; but both
the administration of the Pastor of Corinth in the Church of Cenchrea, and the
communicating of such a Member of the Church of Cenchrea in the Supper, so
administered there, to be sinful.

I shall first enquire into the lawfulness of the Pastor of Corinth's
Administration of the Supper in the Church of Cenchrea.

There are Three Points, the Consideration whereof will not be impertinent for
the clearing of the presert Case, viz.

I. Concerning Office and Office-Power in the Church. II. Concerning Communion
of Churches. III. Concerning the strict invariableness of the Rule given by
Christ to his Churches, about all the affairs and walking thereof; and the
indispensible obligation that lies upon them in no Case to swerve therefrom.
POINT I. Touching Church-Office and Power.
To be an Officer in the Church is to be Christ's Substitute, and in his Stead,
not only by the Dispensation and Disposal of Providence, but by a special
Constitution and Commission from Christ in the way of an Instituted Ordinance.
It is, I say, to be the Substitute, and in the stead of Christ unto the Church,
for such things as are within the Officer's Commission.

Hence Office and Office-power is not a thing of a simple, absolute Nature; and
thence, is not an indelible Character imprinted on him that is an Officer,
which he carries engraven on him go he where he will: This is a Mysterious
nothing devised and much argued about by the idle and curious Brains of those
that reaped Profit by the Fiction: But it is a Spiritual Relation (to which the
Institution of Christ gives a Being) and a Right, Authority or Power
correspondent thereunto. And hence, it has a double Object by which it is
limited and terminated, namely, the Church and the Acts proper to the Office.

First, The Officer, as an Officer, is a correlate to that Church over which
the Holy Ghost has set him; but beyond that Church, his relation as an Officer
extends not at all to others, over which the Holy Ghost has not set him. The
nature of Relates is such as that they mutually give and receive Being from
each other; and thence the one is not a Relate but with reference to the other.
And hence, remove that Reference, and you take away its being, and consequently
cut off and intercept all its Operations as such; for that which has no Being
can put forth no Operation.

Hence it follows, That the Officer of a Church has no being as an Officer,
but in the Church, and wholly with reference to it. The Language of the Holy
Ghost concerning ordinary Officers is constantly such as holds forth this. They
are said to be set in the Flock, Acts 20.28. And they are to look to the whole
Flock that they have relation to as Officers. All the Flock, ibid. So Heb.
13.7, 17. Your Guides -- your Rulers, not others; that have rule over you, not
over others.

Both the Officer's power and person as an Officer, relate to that particular
Flock or Church in which the Holy Chost has set him: Even as the Eye, or the
like Organ in the Body, which is both a Member, and an Organ that has a
particular Office in the Body whereof it is a Member; but has neither
Membership nor Office out of its own body in another. The Eye in Socrates's
Head has no Office, nor is it a Member in Plato's Head, nor can it see there.
And thence, as the Body may possibly be without the Eyes, but then it is so far
an un-organized body; yet the Eye has no subsistence as an Organ (much less
any action) out of the Body: So we read of Churches that sometimes were without
Officers, Acts 14.23. but never of ordinary Officers without Churches, or that
put forth any act of Office, save in those particular Churches in which they
were both Members and Officers. For Office in the Church is super-induced and
ingrafted, as I may say, upon Membership, Romans 12.4. and thence my
Office-Relation and Power cannot be extended to others than my Member-Relation
touches and claspeth hold upon. But the Pastor of the Church of Corinth is no
Fellow-Member with the Members of any Church but that at Corinth, for by them
only can he be Censured.

Secondly, Office-power corresponds to the Relation, and is limited according
to it, as to the acts in which (as well as the persons over whom) it is to be
exerted. A Pastor of a Church has no Authority at all, by virtue of that his
Office, to Fine or Imprison, or the like. These are acts of Civil Authority,
his is spiritual, for such is his relation, and thence his power is limited to
spiritual acts. Therefore to imagine Office- power, where there is no Office-
Relation, or to allow acts of Office, and yet to deny Office-power, is to build
Castles in the Air, and frame an imagination that overthrows it self.

Again, All Church Offices are alike as to the extent of their power; for their
power arises from their Office-relation to the Church, therefore one Officer
is related to no more Churches than another; he has no more Office-power in
other Churches than another Officer has. The Deacon of the Church at Corinth
is related as Deacon to that Church, and none else but that: Even so is the
Pastor. The difference between the Offices of the Church lies not at all in
the extent of one to other persons more than the other; but in the different
work that the different Officers have allotted to them with respect to the same
persons. The Ruler is to attend with diligence to the Rule of the same Persons
or Church, and the Deacon to receive and faithfully dispose the Temporal things
committed to him of the same Church that the Pastor is to administer a Word of
Wisdom to, and the Teacher a Word of Knowledge. The Scripture no where gives
any the least intimation of a Difference between them in this regard.

To issue this Point about Church-Office.

The whole of the power of Office is of equal extent with any one part thereof,
as to the Persons over whom it is to be exercised. If Archippus may put forth
one act of his Office to all the Church at Coloss, or to other person besides,
he may also put forth other acts. If he may, as a Pastor, feed all or any with
a Word of Wisdom, none of those who are under his Charge for that, may be
exempted from under his power as to Rule. If he may rule more Churches than
one, he may administer the Lord's Supper to more than one. If the Lord Jesus
has put the Church of Cenchrea in the Commission of the Pastor of the Church
of Corinth for one act proper to his Office, he has also for all other
Officeacts. Yea, and then all the Churches of Achaia are no more exempted than
the Church of Cenchrea; And where we shall stop I know not, till we have made
him an Universal Pastor, or Bishop Ecumenical, and so set him up to justle
with the Old Gentleman at Rome; who (of the two) has the better Title to it,
having both Phocas his Grant, and actual possession some Years above a Thousand.

Of the foregoing Premises (before I pass on to the Second Point to be
considered) I shall make a double Improvement.

I. Briefly deduce some Arguments concluding the Question.

II. Return an Answer to some Objections.

First, Some Arguments concluding the Question.

Argument I. That comes first to Hand which was last touched upon. The Pastor
of the Church at Corinth may not administer the Lord's Supper where he may not
Rule or Govern: But he may not Govern in the Church of Cenchrea; And therefore,
not administer the Supper there. I know no color for it in the Word, That in
administering the Lord's Supper Archippus should be Christ's Substitute, and in
Christ's stead to the Church of Cenchrea, but in nothing else; In all other
matters pertaining to Office-power having no Authority over them from Christ.
If he be Commissioned and Deputed from Christ for the one, he is and must be
also for the other.

Argum. II. Where he may not put forth the power of a Member, he may not put
forth the power of an Officer: But in the Church of Cenchrea the Pastor of the
Church of Corinth may not put forth the power of a Member, Suppose in Voting,
Judging, Admitting, Calling an Officer, or the like.

It seems unreasonable and incongruous, that where he is not subject as a
Member, he should have the Privilege to exert the power of a Member. And if
not the power of a Member, much less the power of an Officer: But in
Administering the Lord's Supper he puts forth the power of an Officer, doing
that which none but an Officer may do.

Arg. III. Ruling Elders may as lawfully, and with as much Right, put forth the
acts of their Office, as a Pastor do any acts of his Office, in other Churches
besides that to which they have special Office-Relation; for they are both set
in the body alike, he that rules, and he that Exhorts, Romans 12. But the
Ruling-Elders of Corinth may not rule over the Church of Cenchrea, and
therefore neither may the Pastor of Corinth administer the Lord's Supper, there.

Arg. IV. Where a Man has no Office-power, he may do no Office-acts; He is
else a Busie-body, (...) 1 Pet. 4.15. There is such a necessary and innate
alliance and connection between Office- power and Office- acts, as that the
latter cannot be orderly put forth but by virtue of the former: But the Pastor
of the Church of Corinth has no Office- power in the Church of Cenchrea; for
he is none of their Officer; for he was never Called or Chosen by them; they
never submitted themselves to him; the Holy Ghost never set him over them: None
but Members in Cenchrea can have any Office there, Romans 12.4. It Is only Members
that have any Office (so we render it, the Greek Word signifies also action or
operation) in the Body. But the Pastor of the Church of Corinth is no Member in
the Church of Cenchrea: He is no more a Member there than any other Member is;
for the Pastor's Membership, and a private Members Membership are not at all
different. The Members of Corinth are not Members in Cenchrea, for the Members
make up the whole, contributing and containing in them all the essential
causes, viz. both matter and form of the whole: If therefore the Members of the
one were Members of the other, the Churches must be both one, and not two
distinct Churches: And then when Sardis is dead, and Laodicea lukewarm,
Philadelphia is so too. If the Limbs and Members of Alexander be the Members of
Aristotle; when Alexander rides, Aristotle is in the Saddle too. The Pastor
therefore of Corinth is no Member in Cenchrea, and if no Member no Officer, and
if no Officer he has no Office-power, and therefore may do no Office-act
there, such as administering the Lord's Supper is.

Arg. V. If the Pastor of the Church of Corinth may administer the Lord's
Supper in the Church of Cenchrea, he has a right or authority to do it. If he
have Authority to do it, he may require the Church to receive it at his hands,
and the Church may not refuse it: Yea, and this though the proper Pastor of
Cenchrea were living, and present with them. For the Death or Absence of the
Pastor of the Church of Cenchrea gives the Pastor of the Church of Corinth no
more power or right in the Church of Cenchrea than he had before. Right to put
forth an act of Office, and Authority to require submission to that act are
inseparable: He that may grant a Warrant, has Authority to require Obedience
to it. The Church of Cenchrea may refuse ever to receive the Supper administered
by the Pastor or the Church of Corinth, and not sin in so doing; and therefore
he has no Authority to require it. And if no Authority to require their
receiving, he has no right himself to administer it to them. For Right to
Administer, supposes him to be Christ's Substitute, Commissioned from him for
such Administration; But to be Christ's Substitute, Commissioned by him, must
needs infer an Authority and Power to require in Christ's Name, attendance upon
such an Administration whereto he is by Christ Commissioned.

Arg. VI. Without Power given him from Christ, the Pastor of the Church of
Corinth may not administer the Supper in the Church of Cenchrea: For no Man
should bless and separate the Elements, so as from Common to make them
Sacramental, unless he have Power or Authority given him from Christ so to do;
for whatever is done of this kind, must be done in the Name of Christ, whose
Work alone it is, by his poor Minister as his Substitute and Instrument to
produce and really effect that Special Union which there truly is in the
Sacrament between the Elements and his Body and Blood. Christ does not now
separate and bless the Bread and Wine amongst us immediately in his own Person:
If it be done therefore, it should be done by one that is Christ's substitute,
and Commissioned by him thereunto. If therefore, a Man have not Commission and
Authority from Christ to do it, he may not do it.

But the Pastor of the Church of Corinth has no Power or Authority given him
from Christ, to administer the Supper in the Church of Cenchrea. He can have
none from Christ but what he has by the Church; but he has none by the
Church, and therefore none from Christ.

He has none by the Church of Corinth, for they can give him no power for any
action in another Church: He has none by the Church of Cenchrea, for they do
not Call him to Office amongst them: And therefore he has none at all, for
these are the two only Churches from whom any thing can be pretended in this
Case.

Arg. VII. If he may Administer the Supper to and in the Church of Cenchrea, he
must also fulfill his Ministry toward that Church in all the other acts of his
Ministry wherein the Church needs his help: For right to administer the Supper
supposes Office, but Office-relation infers Office-Bonds, Office being not
a Power or License only, but carrying in it a Charge Command and Duty. But it
is evident, the Pastor of the Church of Corinth is not bound to fulfill his
Ministry toward the Church of Cenchrea, he is not bound to Watch there, Rule
there, Guide there, Labor in the Word and Doctrine there.

The other Officers of the Church of Corinth are bound to fulfill their Offices,
in doing the respective work thereof to the Church of Cenchrea, as much as the
Pastor; and both they and he are as well bound to the other Churches in Achaia,
as to that at Cenchrea.

Arg. VIII. If this administering the Supper in the Church of Cenchrea by the
Pastor of the Church of Corinth be Lawful and Warrantable, I demand, What is it
that makes it so? It is plain he does a special act, which none but Persons
empowered and privileged thereto may do; such special acts must have something
for the ground of them, indeed all acts must, else they are unlawful. But there
is nothing that can empower the Pastor of the Church of Corinth for thus acting
in the Church of Cenchrea. It must be either his Gifts or his Grace, or his
Election, or his Ordination: But none of these can give him power to administer
the Lord's Supper in Cenchrea.

Not his Gifts nor Grace.] For then a Non-Officer might do it. Grace gives
ability only to do a thing acceptably to God, as to the inward frame of the
heart with which it is done; not any right to do lawfully any external act
which otherwife might not be done. Gifts only furnish with ability for doing
such a thing, (whereto the Gifts are suited) unto others Edification, but
confer not a Right or Authority whereby it may lawfully be done; for then every
one that has equal Gifts must have equal Authority. Neither Gifts nor Grace
make a Man Christ's Substitute to bless and sanctify Elements in his Name, and
make them Sacramental Signs of Christ and his Benefits. Private Members, yea
Women have both Gifts and Grace; yet are not Christ's Substitutes for such an
Administration.

Not his Election.] The Church that chooses him, chooses him only for
themselves, not for other Churches; to be in Christ's stead amongst them, not
amongst others. For Christ has not given them power to confer such power on
any Man, with respect to any others than themselves: But each Church is
betrusted with it by the Lord Christ for it self. The Church of Corinth cannot
subject the Church of Cenchrea to their Pastor; and therefore cannot give him
either Office- power, or power for any Office- act in the Church of Cenchrea;
they may as well make him an Universal Pastor over all the Churches in the
whole World.

Not his Ordination.] For this presupposes, is grounded upon, and relates
wholly to his Election; and thence gives not power of a larger extent than he
was called to in his Election.

He is Ordained to no other than he was Chosen to; and therefore, if in his
Election he be not Chosen to act as an Officer in other Churches, his
Ordination impowers him not at all thereunto; He is not Chosen to one thing,
and Ordained to another. Ordination, (be it a Solemn investiture of him with
Office-power, or be it a Solemn Separation of him with supposed due Rites, and
in due manner to his Work, yet it) so necessarily and wholly relates to his
Election, that he can receive no power thereby of larger extent than in his
Election he was called unto.

In sum therefore, If neither his Gifts, nor Grace, nor Election, nor
Ordination be a just and sufficient ground for the Pastor of the Church of
Corinth his administering the Lord's Supper in the Church of Cenchrea there is
no sufficient ground at all for it: But in none of these is there a sufficient
ground for it, therefore there is none at all. As to what may be pleaded by
virtue of Communion of Churches, it shall be considered in the next Point.

This shall serve for Arguments concluding the Question. There are some
Objections that may receive their Answer from the Premises, and these come next
to be considered.

Obj. 1. He is a Pastor every where, and abides still vested with that
Relation, and the Authority of it, even when he is in Cenchrea, and not only
when he is acting as a Pastor in Corinth. It Is not with a Church Officer as
with the Elements in the Sacraments, which remain Sacred and Sacramental only
while they are using in that Ordinance; but afterward, and out of that use,
what is left of the Bread or Wine is common.

Ans. True, he does abide clothed with the Office of a Pastor, even while he is
at Cenchrea; even as the Lord Mayor of London abides Lord Mayor though he go
into Westminster; yet he can put forth none of his power as Mayor whilst he is
there: So is the Pastor of the Church of Corinth limited in the acts of his
Office, as to the object of it, unto the particular Church of Corinth;
Elsewhere, and unto others, he is but as a Private Person as to any
Office-Authority or Power: As a Father abides a Father, when he is in another
Man's House; yet has no Paternal Authority over any Children but his own.

Yea, I will grant further, that the Pastor of the Church of Corinth is to be
honored with singular esteem by the Church of Cenchrea; not only for his
eminent excelling in spiritual Gifts and Grace, but also because the Lord Jesus
has put honor upon him in calling him to such a place, and vesting him with
such an Office in one of his Churches.

Nay, I will moreover yield the Pastor of the Church of Corinth to be an
Ordinance of God for good to all the Members of the Church of Cenchrea: So
indeed he is in his feeding of the Church of Corinth with a Word of Wisdom, to
all the Inhabitants of that City, being a Vessel that carries precious
Treasure, and holds forth unto all that hear his Preaching the Word of Life.

And so is the Church it self of Corinth, it being the Pillar of Truth, and an
Ordinance provided and set up on purpose by the great God in the dark World for
this very end, to display his manifold Wisdom in the Gospel, and direct the
lost Sons of Men in the way of Communion with God by Christ, and an Eternal
Enjoyment of him.

Yet it will not at all follow from hence, that the Church of Corinth may judge
with Church-Censure the Men of the World that are without (the Apostle, 1 Cor.
5.12, 13. expressly denies it) or Excommunicate the Members of the Church of
Cenchrea, who are not of the same Lump and Body with them. No more will it
follow that the Pastor of the Church of Corinth may do any Office-acts in the
Church of Cenchrea, though he abide clothed with that Office, and in his holy
Administrations in the Church of Corinth be an Ordinance of God for their good,
as far as Providence gives them an opportunity to partake of the benefit
thereof. The Lord Mayor of London is the King's Officer, or Ordinance for good
to all the Kingdom, and therefore to all the Citizens of Bristol, as far as
they have occasion to use his power, yet the Lord Mayor of London can do no act
of his Office, nor put forth any of his Office-power within the City of Bristol.

Obj. 2. The Pastor of Corinth may as lawfully administer the Supper in the
Church of Cenchrea, as a Member of the Church of Cenchrea may partake in the
Administration of the Supper in the Church of Corinth.

Ans. The Cases are not parallel. There is a great deal of difference between a
Member's partaking, and a Pastor's administering the Supper in another Church.
For

1. A Member in communicating is not Christ's Substitute, but is considered
only as a Member of a particular instituted Church, whereof Christ is the
Political Head.

2. The Pastor of Corinth is in his proper place where the Holy Ghost has set
him, when he is administering the Supper there (which is more than can be said
when he is administering in Cenchrea) and whom the Church rightly receives to
partake with them in that Ordinance, he cannot put back, nor may he forbear his
Duty upon that account.

3. There are Instances and Grounds in Scripture, for a Member of one Church
his being received and owned, and his communicating in another Church Romans
16.1, 2. Acts 20.4, 5, 6, 7. But there are none for a Pastor's administering the
Supper out of his own Church.

4. Receiving the Supper is a Privilege, Administering the Supper is an action
wherein Office-power is exerted; and hence agai they are vastly different, and
the one much more confined than the other: Receiving unto the Supper each
others Members occasionally, being but a proper expression of Sisterly
Communion between Churches; when as Officers mutually acting as Officers in
several Churches, implies a Coalition of the Churches into one; or at least
that they are both equally under his Office-power. Sharing in a Privilege, and
putting forth of power, do so much differ, as that in a private Member the one
is much more limited and restrained than the other: A private Member of Corinth
has no Power or Right to Vote in another Church than that whereof he is a
Member, for Excommunication, Admission, Calling an Officer, or any thing else
of like nature, wherein the Members of that Church are concerned to give
Judgment, yet a Member of Corinth may there partake of the Lord's Supper. And
suppose a Member, or Forty Members of Corinth should Vote, being present in the
Church of Cenchrea, when an Officer is Called, or a Member Received or Cast
out; their Vote, though concurring with the Church of Cenchrea, would have no
efficiency, or causal inffluence at all, by virtue of any Institution of
Christ, to instate such Person in Office-Power, or to admit into, or cast out
from a Member-Relation. If therefore a Member of Corinth's being admitted to
partake of t he Supper in Cenchrea, will not infer his power to Vote or pass
Judgment there; much less will it infer the Pastor of Corinth's power to act as
an Officer there.

Obj. 3. The Pastor of Corinth is an Officer of the Church Catholic, and he
administers the Lord's Supper to the Church of Cenchrea, as Members of the
Catholic Church, not as such a particular Churh.

Ans. 1. The Scripture knows but two kinds of Churches, viz, Mystical and
Instituted.

2. The Mystical (consisting of all and only true Believers) has neither
Officers nor Ordinances seated in it, though both are designed for it
principally; but as it is, so all its privileges are spiritual and invisible,
and not Dispensed by Men, but by God himself. Nor indeed is it possible, That
the Church Mystical should be the proper subject of Ordinances dispensed by
Mortal Men, because then no Man could in Faith dispense any Ordinance to
another; for no Man can make a Judgment of Faith or certain Knowledge,
concerning another belonging to the Mystical Church. And hence, the Members of
the Church of Cenchrea supposing them all Members of the Church Mystical, yet
as such they are not Subjects nextly and completely qualified for, and
instituted to this Ordinance of the Lord's Supper; Neither is the Pastor of the
Church at Corinth an Officer over them, for the Mystical Church has no
Officers. And by the same reason, the Pastor of Corinth may give the Lord's
Supper to any that he judges Believers, wherever he casually lights on them.

3. The Instiuted Church is no other than a Particular Congregation or Church;
such as that at Corinth, and that at Cenchrea, which are parts of the general
kind, and Instituted Churches themselves; as Thomas and John are parts of
Mankind, and Men themselves. But look as John's Eye is not set in Thomas's
Head, nor can it see there; so neither is the Officer of the Church of Corinth
set in the Church at Cenchrea, nor can he do any acts or Office there. For
though all Officers in the general belong to the Church in the general, as all
Hands belong to the Body of Mankind in the general, or Humane Body; yet this
and that particular ordinary Officer belongs to this and that particular
Church, and to them only, as this and that Hand belong to this and that
particular Body. And therefore the Pastor of the Church of Corinth is no more,
nor otherwise an Officer of the Catholic Church, than my Hand or Eye is an
Organ of Mankind; that is in short, He is an Officer to the Church of Corinth,
and to no other Church besides that.

4. If Catholic Church in this Objection be taken in another Notion than
either for the Church Mystical, or for all particular lar instituted Churches,
namely, for The whole body of visible Bilievers throughout the World: I Answer
(1.) There is no such Church. For although the whole body of Believers
throughout the World be so called in our common Speech (and complying with
Custom, we may notify them by that Name) yet the Holy Ghost in Scripture,
tells us of no such Church. (2.) It was a piece of the Faith of the
Congregational Churches in the times of their Liberty, which they shall do well
now not to depart from, that, Tho the whole body of visible Believers
throughout the World are called the Catholic Visible Church, Declar. at the
Savoy, chapter 26.. 2.
and may be so called, yet it is not as such, a Church entrusted with the
administration of any Ordinances, nor has it any Officers.

And therefore the Pastor of the Church of Corinth cannot be an Officer to
them, nor have the Members of the Church of Cenchrea, under that Notion as part
of this Body, any Right or Title to have the Lord's Supper administered amongst
them. (3.) The same Persons say also expressly, that, Besides particular
Churches (such whose Constitution and Gathering they had before described)
there is not instituted by Christ any Church more extensive or Catholic,
Declar. at the Savoy Of the Institution of churches, and their Order, Prop. 6.
entrusted with power for the administration of his Ordinances, or the
execution of any Authority in his Name. If therefore there be no such Church
instituted by Christ, a Plea from it for the regularity of this Practice is
altogether vain, being wholly Founded on that which is not. (4.) This Notion of
such a kind of Catholic Church, undermines and overthrows at once all the
Principles of the Congregational way and Practice; As will quickly appear to
any that understands and will consider it, and as they well know that are any
thing acquainted with the Grounds and Writings of the different Parties in
those Points. But this Practice impleaded in this Dispute, cannot stand without
entertaining such a Notion of a Church Catholic. This should make us shy of
it, since it leads to the overthrow and renunciation of what we once believed
and built up by our Profession and Practice; and engages us to the owning of
that which is inconsistent with all the Principles of our Persuasion, touching
the Constitution of Churches, and the Order to be observed by them.

POINT II. Touching Communion of Churches.
I. Tho this Communion be partly founded in, and greatly suited to the Law of
Nature, and Light of Reason; (to the Principles whereof the New Testament
Institutions offer no Violence) yet it is to be managed by the Light of the
Rules of the Word; it being brought under a special Institution of Christ as
many other things are, which even Natural Light goes a great way in approving
of, and leading to. Although therefore this or that particular Practice may
seem a very fair and sweet fruit of the Communion of Churches; yet if it be
destitute of all Ground and Warrant in the Word, such Practice must be looked
upon as unlawful, because cause wanting a Warrant from the Holy Scriptures.

II. Communion of Churches is for the help, preservation and building up, not
only of the several Saints in those Churches considered separately and singly;
but firstly and immediately of the Churches themselves, as instituted Bodies or
Societies, made up and consisting of Saints for that end joined together
according to the Lord. Hence it must needs follow, that whatever tends to the
confounding of Churches which in their Constitution are distinct and several,
and should be so preserved inviolably, is not a right exercise and improvement
of the Communion of Churches, but a perverting thereof.

III. Hence also it follows with an high hand, That though in communion of
Churches there be a singular exercise of that love, which all Saints and
Churches ought to have and show one to another, as opportunity for it is
administered; yet it is altogether unwarrantable, for Churches walking in mutual
Communion to coalesce into, and make up a new Instituted Body, of which they
should all be Members. For tho they ought to walk in love and communion one
with another, yet they are therein in limited by the Lord, and may not become
Members one of another mutually; there being no Institution of his to Warrant
it, as there is for Saints becoming one Body in a Church, and Members one of
another by virtue thereof. Nor if several Churches should agree so to make up
one Body, would Christ be the Head of that Body, as he is of every Church or
Body of his own Institution.

IV. As notwithstanding Communion of Churches, both the several Churches as
Bodies, and also the particular Members of each of them as Members, ought to be
kept distinct; neither the several Churches, while they continue several
Churches, running into one body; nor the Members of each becoming mutually
Members of the other: So their several respective Officers, and all the
administrations of them ought to be kept distinct, and appropriated according
as the Lord has set them: Officers of Churches in Communion, being no more
generally or mutually Officers to those several Churches, than the Members of
them are mutually Members.

From the premised Considerations touching Communion of Churches, several
Reasonings concluding the Question might be deduced: But all the Improvement
that I shall make of them, is only to answer some Objections arising from
mis-apprehensions about the present Subject, Communion of Churches.

Obj. 1. The Pastor of the Church of Corinth may lawfully administer the Supper
in the Church of Cenchrea by virtue of Communion of Churches, as well as act as
an Officer in a Synod where the Messengers and Elders of Churches that walk in
Communion meet.

Ans. Notwithstanding Communion of Churches, he may not lawfully administer the
Supper in Cenchrea.

1. Communion of Churches enlarges not the object and limits of the respective
Officers Power. Such Communion Churches may not have; it would rather be
Confusion, and prejudice both the Privileges and entireness of each of them.
Communion of Churches extends not to the subjecting of Churches to each others
Officers, any more than to the subjecting of particular Members to other
Churches than their own. The Church of Corinth may as well by virtue of
Communion of Churches Censure and Cast out a Member of. Cenchrea, as the Pastor
of Corinth by virtue of Communion of Churches, act as an Officer in the Church
of Cenchrea.

Communion of Churches is ordained for the mutual help of Churches, by the
benefit and use of the Gifts that are in any of them, the help whereof another
may need; but not for a foundation of the enlarging, mutual communicating, or
exercising of Office-power.

2. Church Officers acting in a Synod to instruct or admonish an erring Church,
act not any Office-power, nor do any other thing, than a Synod consisting of
Brethren without Officers, might as lawfully do. Neither indeed, do Officers
come to, or act in a Synod as Officers, but as delegated or deputed or sent by
their respective Churches thereunto: And for such an Expression of Churches
mutual communion, there is a clear Warrant in the Word. But for Churches to
communicate their Officers to each other, or for ordinary Officers to act as
Officers to more Churches than that one to which they are chosen, there is no
Warrant at all.

Obj. 2. The Church of Cenchrea desires it, and the Church of Corinth consents.

Ans. 1. I still demand, Where is the Warrant for the desire of the one, or the
consent of the other? It Is certain one Church may possibly request, and another
agree to that which is un-warrantable.

2. The whole of the Pastor's Power he has from Christ through the Church; and
thence he is to be regulated in the exercise of that power wholly by the Rule
that Christ has given about it in his Word, not by the Churches consent or
dissent at all. For tho the Power that he exercises be devolved on him from
Christ, by the intervention of the Churches acting; yet the whole of the
Officepower that he exercises is Christ's, and to be put forth in his Name,
and it neither is, nor ever was seated in the Church.

3. The Cenchreans call, and the Corinthians consent or dismission, may
translate the Pastor, and change his relation from Corinth to Cenchrea: But
while the relation abides as before, the call or request of the one, and the
consent of the other render not his acting as Pastor to Cenchrea any other than
irregular: tho perhaps it may render it less distastful to some. For the
Office- relation remaining unaltered, the Office- power cannot be transported
from one Object to another, nor enlarged to more Churches: Because Office-power
is limited in its extent, both as to the things about which, and persons over
whom it is to be exercised; and cannot by any consent or agreement of Pastors
and Churches, be in either of those regards extended beyond, or straightened
within the compass and bounds set and fixed by Christ. A Church may as well
abridge a Pastor's Power, as extend it further than Christ has done; or extend
another Officer's power to things that Christ has secluded from his Office: As
for Example; Agree that a Deacon shall baptize; or that their Pastor shall only
Teach and not Rule. But as this Agreement and answerable Practice would on all
hands be invalid and sinful; so is this alleged desire of Cenchrea, and
consent of Corinth altogether irregular, and without Warrant from Christ; and
thence wholly null, and such as makes the Pastor's acting in the Church of
Cenchrea no more lawful, than it would be if neither Cenchrea desired it, or
Corinth agreed to it.

Obj. 3. The Pastor of Corinth brings some of his Members with him, suppose six
or seven or more, to Cenchrea, and he administers the Supper as to his own
Church, tho not assembled in the usual place, or usual number, but the
Cenchreans communicate with them.

Answ. 1. This Objection and Practice imply a tacit acknowledgment, that the
Pastor of Corinth may not administer the Supper but in his own Church; which is
the very thing expressly argued for in this Dispute.

2. I demand in whether part of this company thus assembled, resides the
Church Power of receiving or excluding from participation in that Ordinance?
Suppose a person be occasionally present that pretends to be a Member of a
Third Church, suppose one at Athens, or elsewhere in Achaia; but perhaps is
reported to be Cast out, or Guilty of some Scandal: whether must the Church of
Cenchrea, or these few Members of the Church of Corinth with their Pastor, give
Judgment concerning this Person's being received or debarred from the Supper
then to be administered? If it be said, the Members of Corinth with their
Pastor: Let the Church of Cenchrea look about them; well they may (I suppose
they will) make (some Stand at this new Practice of so uncouth an Aspect; which
plainly bereaves them (tho a Church of Christ, assembled in the Name of Christ)
of power to judge Ecclesiastically concerning a Person's fitness to be received
into so near communion with them in this holy Ordinance; and tho they apprehend
his claim to be frivolous or false, or unsatisfactoty, yet ties up their hands
from secluding him, If it be said, this Power resides in the Church of
Cenchrea; this very thing makes it evident, that the Corinthians Pastor's
bringing over with him those six or seven Members, is but a false color to
varnish over a foul business, and hide the irregularity of the Practice from
the more simple-hearted that are tender of swerving from the Rule. If it be
said, it belongs to both of them to Judge; I ask again, which is the Church,
and which is a Church-Judgment? If it be said, both; then here is an Officer of
Corinth acting as an Officer to and in the Church of Cenchrea; which is the
very thing which the practice supposed in the Objection is designed to avoid:
Besides, Communion of Churches is also perverted to confound and jumble
Churches, and make two Bodies that ought to be kept distinct, coalesce into one.

POINT III. Touching the invariableness of the Rule; and our strict Obligation
to observe it, tho with hazard of Suffering.
I. Tho instituted Worship has undergone sundry alterations; that becoming an
Institution which sometimes was not, and that again ceasing to be one which
sometimes was; yet men's strict and punctual observance of Institutions, is
bound upon their Consciences by the Second Commandment in all Generations,
throughout all those several Changes that the Wisdom of God has made in his
own Institutions.

II. Our Institutions binding us in the strength of the Second Commandment, as
is said, our swerving from the Rule of them must needs be a Sin against against
the Moral Law, and particularly, a breach of that Commandment; and hence, no
more allowed us to avoid outward Sufferings, than it is allowed a Man to steal,
against the Eighth Commandment, that he may avoid Poverty. Yea, of the two, the
Thief is on the better side, both because the commands of the First Table are
greater than the Commands of the Second; and because as his Sin is against a
disposal of Providence, darkened perhaps, exceedingly by the interposure of much
of the iniquity of Man; so ours is against the express Institution and clear
Commandment of him who is the Wisdom of the Father, and Lord over all: Besides,
our Sufferings coming for our adherence to the Commands of Christ, we have
signal Promises relating to such a Case and also a rich opportunity, and
evident hopes of glorifying Christ by our Sufferings, all which should mightily
strengthen us to our duty: But none of these things can be equally pleaded
concerning one under Poverty, who is restrained from stealing by his Conscience
of the Eighth Commandment.

III. All our Institutions in the New Testament being ingrasted on the Second
Commandment, as the Stock that bears them, no less than theirs were under the
Old Testament We are no more allowed to make bold with our Institutions, either
in neglecting any of them, or swerving from them in any kind or degree, than
they under the Old Testament might with theirs.

IV. The Rule given us being no less complete and perfect than that which was
given them. Christ as a Son being no less faithful over his own House than
Moses who was a Servant, was in the House of his Master and Lord; and our
Institutions being given forth from no less Wisdom and Grace and Authority than
theirs were: Difficulties and Sufferings can no more relax our obligation
strictly to observe the Ordinances given us by Christ, than they could relax
their obligation to observe Moses his Ordinances. Yea, we having in all these
things rather the advantage of them, our obligation in matters of Institution
must needs be acknowledged in that regard the stricter and more indispensible
of the two.

V. There is nothing truly of Institution but is a part of the Name of Christ,
and part of the the Words of Christ, no less properly and really than the most
glorious Mysteries of Faith, or most fundamental Points of Doctrine. But we
must not in any kind be ashamed of any of his words, nor in any degree or sort
deny any thing of his Name; no, tho our Lot be to live in an adulterous and
sinful Generation, and in those places and times where the not denying of them
may cost us our lives, Mark 8. 38 Rev. 2.13.

VI. The least and the greatest matters of Institution are enjoined us alike
indispensably. We may therefore as lawfully lay aside all, as lay aside any
Institution to avoid Sufferings.

VII. One end of the Lord's giving so exact a Rule in matters of Institution,
is for the Trial of our Obedience and Loyalty: And his bringing Difficulties
and Sufferings upon us for observing what he has commanded us, is also that he
might take the more through and solemn Trial of our Loyalty, Love and
Faithfulness to him. It is therefore impossible that Difficulties and
Sufferings should alter that Rule in matters of Institution, or give us any
Dispensation as to our close observance thereof.

Let me answer some Objections hence; and I shall proceed to the next Question.

Obj. 1. The Church of Cenchrea desires the Ordinance of the Supper earnestly,
and stands in great need thereof for the strengthening of their Faith in
difficult times, and warming their love to Christ and one another; being also
in the more danger of scattering, in that they are deprived of a Pastor of
their own. Surely Christ has left some way for his Church to enjoy that
Ordinance, in such a time when their need of it is singularly great: They must
needs therefore, as the Case is with them, either go without it to their great
grief and wounding, or have it administered by one that is no Teaching-Officer,
borrow of Corinth their Pastor.

Ans. 1. Cenchrea being deprived of a Pastor, they must furnish themselves with
one; every Church being bound in Conscience to provide it self with all the
standing Ordinances of Christ, as they will answer cas^ng off Christ's
Authority that has appointed them, and not be guilty of despising his love who
gives them as signal Pledges thereof, and of sinning against their own Souls,
by neglecting a special Ordinance for the Edisication and Salvation of them.

2. It Is sad when a Church is deprived of any Ordinance, especially that of
Teaching Elders, and if God do indeed withhold them from enjoying one, it ought
to be looked upon as a sore Rebuke from Christ, carrying in it no less than a
Threatening to remove his Candlestick from them, and as a kind of partial
Excommunicating of them inflicted by Christ himself from Heaven, and it is
therefore a sore and solemn testifying against such a Church by the Lord.

3. This Judgment is much the heavier when it befalls a Church in such a Day as
the Objection points at; yet Affliction is to be chosen before Sin: And the
Affliction of being deprived of that sweet and precious Ordinance of the
Supper, in such a time of special need of it, (tho very grievous to a gracious
Spirit, yet) had better be born, than the Ordinance be scrambled after in an
unlawful way.

4. The Church of Cenchrea may as lawfully have it administered by a
non-Officer, as by the Officer of another Church. For the Pastor of Corinth is
no other than a non-Officer to the Church of Cenchrea; and therefore if the one
be irregular and unlawful (as the Objection seems to grant it is) so is the
other also no less.

5. This Objection carries a Face as if the Church at Cenchrea could well
enough content themselves without a Pastor, could they but get the Lord's
Supper by any scambling shift, or could they satisfy themselves in going
without it: But surely this is an evil frame on many accounts, and argues both
little Conscience of walking in all the Commands and Ordinances nances of
Christ; and also that such a Church aims more at the keeping up the Form and
Name of a Church, than at fulfilling their Duty to their own Souls.

Obj. 2. The Church is poor, and our Rulers are so fan from giving encouragment
to Men of their Way, This was written when the Meetings of Dissenters were in
danger of being difturb'd
that they are rather severe against them; from whence it comes to pass both
that the Church is under an impossibility of maintaining, and consequently of
furnishing themselves with a Pastor of their own, and also has little hopes of
any peaceable and continued enjoyment of him with them, if they had one.

Answer 1. If the Church of Cenchrea can meet with the Pastor of the Church of
Corinth to receive the Lord's Supper (as it seems they can) they may as well
meet with a Pastor of their own, and enjoy his labors amongst them, according
to the Rule and Order of the Gospel.

2. If the Church of Cenchrea be not defective in their Duty, but lay out
themselves, as the Lord requires, for the obtaining of a Pastor of their own,
and yet cannot obtain one; they may and ought to wait on the Lord in Faith and
Hope that in due time he will provide them of a Pastor: And in the mean time
they must keep his way, Psalm. 37.34. bearing their want of a Pastor as their
affliction from the Lord, which they must not seek to ease themselves of by
sinful and irregular ways.

3. It is one special thing wherein Christ is taking a Trial of his Churches in
these Nations at this day; whether they will be at the charge of maintaining
all his Ordinances and Officers amongst them, without help therein from the
Civil Magistrate; or whether they will not rather be without them? And as it is
a special Particular wherein the Trial of the present Providence lies; So it is
that wherein Churches are in the more danger of failing, because it is a part
of the Yoke of Christ, which the generality of the Churches in these Nations
have not put their Necks under heretofore; whereas all even the poorest
Churches that we read of in the Apostles times, did from their first
Constitution furnish themselves with Officers without any help therein from the
Civil Magistrate, who was in many regards more severe against them, than
through the favor of God ours are to us. See 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. with chap. 1.6.
and 2.14. and 2 Thessalonians. 1.4. This Church was one of the Churches of Macedonia,
spoken of 2 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3.

4. If the Church of Cenchrea through extreme Poverty cannot of themselves
provide a Pastor of their own, the Lord has not left them without direction
and relief in this case. In which they ought both to search the Word
themselves, and also to consult other Churches, whose Duty it is not only to
hold forth Light to a Sister-Church in the dark, but also to yield forth
outward Supplies to a Sister-Church in distress; which is a lovely exercise and
fruit of mutual Charity and Communion between Sifter-Churches, and that which
has unquestionable Warrant in the Word; whereas this of borrowing and lending
an Officer to do a Cast of his Office in another Church besides his own, is a
thing unheard of in the Scripture, and never practiced by the Primitive
Churches under the Apostles direction.

Obj. 3. Difficult times produce unusual Cases and Extremities, and that which
in an ordinary case would not be lawful, is allowable in such Cases and Times.

Answ. 1. Difficult times do indeed produce unusual afflictions on Churches,
and make their Temptation to depart from the the Rule so much the greater, yea
too too often cause breaches and miscarriages amongst them; But no difficulty
or severity of the Times can alter the Rule given by Christ unto his Churches.

2. The Primitive Churches of the New Testament, were under as much difficulty
as any Churches in this Land can pretend to be in; yet they kept close to the
Rule, nor do we find in them any such practice as this, nor any thing that may
countenance it in the Sacred Records concerning them.

3. Difficulty of the Times calls indeed for the exercise of suitable Graces,
and also of Prudence: But Prudence has its scope only in such things in
Church-Worship as are no part of the Worship, but only circumstances thereof,
related to Worship not as it is Worship, but as an action performed by Men, all
whose actings must, have time and place for them. And thence the things wherein
Prudence may interpose to vary, are such things about which there is no
positive Divine Institution. When Place and Time come under an Institution (as
for Example, the Temple and their Feasts under the Old Testament, and the First
Day of the Week in the New) there Prudence may not alter them; nor may we on
such an account swerve from the Rule; for they become Parts of Worship.

4. The Administrator of the Supper is more than a common circumstance of the
Worship performed in that Ordinance. For he sanctifies the Elements, as the
Temple or Altar did their Sacrifices and Gifts; being the Substitute of Christ
in the administration of that Ordinance, appointed thereunto by the institution
of the Lord. And of this there seems to be an acknowledgment and sense, in the
practice pleaded against in this Dispute: For why else does the Church of
Cenchrea seek fot the Officer of the Church of Corinth, and not take any of
their own private Members for this work?

5. It Is most true, Affirmative Commands do not bind us to be always actually
fulfilling of them; yet Negative Commands restrain us at all times from
transgressing of them. And therefore tho the Church be not bound to be every
day celebrating the Lord's Supper, yet they are bound whenever they do do
celebrate it, to do it in no other manner than according to the Rule given them
by Christ the Lord; whose Rule is, that their own and not another Churches
Officer administer it amongst them.

I shall add no more on this Question, only that I know not that I am singular
in any thing that I have written; sure I am, that in the sum and main of the
case, I have the generality of the Ministers and Churches of the Congregational
Persuasion concurring with me. As an evidence thereof, let me direct to one
Testimony, and transcribe another; not doubting but had I my Books and Papers
about me, I could easily add many more. The first Testimony is Dr. Owen in his
Brief Instruction in the Worship of God, etc. by way of Question and Answer.
Quest. 26. page 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123. Where he is most express against
it, and gives sundry Arguments to confirm his Judgment. The other Testimony is
of all the Officers and Messengers of the Congregational Churches in the
Declaration of their Faith and Order, agreed on and Published Anno 1658. The
16th Proposition concerning the Institution of Churches, etc. runs thus, A
Church furnished with Officers (according to the mind of Christ) has full
power to administer all his Ordinances, and where there is want of any one or
more Officers required, that Officer, or those which are in the Church may
administer all the Ordinances proper to their particular Duty and Offices; But
where there are no Teaching Officers, none may administer the Seals, nor can
the Church authorize any so to do.

QUESTION II. May a Member of the Church at Cenchrea partake of the Lord's
Supper administered there by the Pastor of the Church of Corinth, especially
himself not being clear, whether the practice of the Pastor of Corinth in this
particular be Warrantable?

Ans. No: Whether lie be satisfied, or scrupulous about the Warrantableness of
the act of the Pastor of Cornith, he may not participate of the Lord's Supper
administered by him in the Church of Cenchrea.

1. There is such a near alliance and necessary connection by the appointment of
God, between the person administering, and the orderly administration of this
Ordinance, that I cannot partake of it, but I contract upon my self the guilt
of his unlawful administration. If a Justice of the Peace in Middlesex send out
his Warrant to fetch me before him in Essex, and it being there served upon me
I submit to it and suffer my self to be carried before him by virtue of it, I
become hereby guilty of compliance with his arrogating Authority which the King
has not given him. So it is in this case, and the reason thereof is, that
necessary connection which there is in both cases, between the act that is done,
and the person's rightful authority that does it.

2. My communicating evidently holds forth an approbation of his power or right
to administer: And so it is a Sin against that Charity which I owe to him, for
I confirm and strengthen him in that his Error. It is also a Sin against the
Charity that I owe to the Church by a nearer and special Bond, being in
Fellowship with them, and one of them; for this my communicating does also
encourage them in the Error of their way. It is true indeed, if his acting were
such as might be lawfully done by him, and desired by them, on some other
grounds; then, tho the true and justifying grounds of it were mistaken both by
them and him, then I say, my bare Presence and communicating with them could
not be justly interpreted as a sinful encouraging of them; but there being no
ground that renders his act lawful, the case is otherwise.

Obj. But sundry holy Saints have experienced the gracious presence of Christ,
speaking peace, and Strengthening their Faith and Grace in the Lord's Supper so
administered; and therefore it is his Ordinance, and rightly administered, and I
may communicate in it.

Answ. 1. Tho the error of the Administration argued against in these Papers,
should not be so deep as to make it no Ordinance of Christ; yet it may be such,
and doubtless is, as to make my communicating therein unlawful. The Cross
joined to Baptism does not make it Null, yet it makes it unlawful for me to
receive it so administered. Kneeling at the Supper destroys it not from being
Christ's Ordinance, yet makes it unlawful for me to receive the Supper at all
if I cannot receive it otherwise than Kneeling. In the case under debate,
neither the lawfulness of the Pastor of Corinth's administering in Cenchrea, nor
the lawfulness of a Member of Cenchrea's communicating in the Supper so
administered can be made good, tho it should be granted to remain Christ's
Ordinance, notwithstanding the Error that is in the Administration.

2. Christ may be experienced graciously present to a Believer's Soul in an
administration which it is not lawful for the Believer to partake of; yea,
which indeed is no Ordinance of Christ. Doubtless many good Souls, who in
former Times have through infirmity, and want of Light, conscientiously used
Common Prayer, or observed the Holydays, have had experience of special and
sweet communion with Christ, both in the one and in the other: yet neither are
Christ's Ordinance; nor will thit Experience warrant the lawfulness of the use
and observation on thereof: For the Lord therein had not any respect to the one
or the other as any Ordinance of his; but of his great Goodness overlooked the
infirmity and accepted the sincerity of his Servants, having respect to the
Graces in their Hearts that were stirred up and awakened to exercise, by the
apprehension (thoa mistaken one) of an Ordinance of his; He being so abundant
in Goodness and Truth, that he oftentimes does that for us in a way of Grace,
which we could not challenge from him by virtue of any express Promise of his;
He then by the greatness of our Error magnifying his own Grace the more.

3. The design of these Papers is not to bereave any of their precious
Experiences, nor call them in Question (yet we should not build more on them
than they will bear) but to lave us from an Error in Opinion and Practice, of a
very sad aspect and evil consequences, if it should once sind general
entertainment in the Churches: But I had rather leave them to the Reader's own
Thoughts than put my self to the trouble of declaring them.

FINIS.
Books Newly Printed for Nath. Hiller, at the Princes Arms in Leaden Hall
Street, over against St. Mary Ar.
THE Divine Institution of Congregational Churches, Ministry and Ordinances,
Asserted and Proved from the Word of God. To which is added,

A Discourse concerning Unction, and Washing of Feet. Proving, That they be not
Instituted Sacraments, or Ordinances in the Churches. Both by Haac Chauncy, M.A.

Pietas in Patriam: The Life of his Excellency Sir William Phips, Knt. Late
Captain General and Governor of New England, Containing the Memorable Changes
undergone, and Actions performed by him.


