THE MATTERS of FACT In the Present Election of SHERIFFS, For the Year Ensuing,
Faithfully Reported: And the Miscarriages of my LORD MAYOR and some other
persons in this Matter, briefly declared.
THE open and bold invasion made upon the Liberties and Franchises of the City,
and that attended with a contempt of the Laws of the Land, as well as the
Ancient Customs and Usages of the Corporation, does not only serve to justify
our complaining of the Rape committed upon the Rights and Privileges of the
Freemen of London, but invites us to detect and lay open the unreasonable as
well as illegal ways and methods that have been taken for the overthrow of
whatsoeever we enjoy either by Law, Prescription, or Charter. For as the
Electing of Sheriffs is granted by Charters, and confirmed by diverse Laws to
the Citizens of London; so the conducting the Election, and declaring upon whom
the choice through the majority of Votes does fall, has time out of mind
appertained unto, and been claimed by the Sheriffs. And tho the Common Hall be
not properly a Court, save for the punishing my Lord Mayor and Aldermen when
they transgress against the duties of their Places, and the Trusts reposed in
them; yet not only the Right of Electing Sheriffs is in that Assembly and
Convention, but the power of appointing the manner in which they will have the
Election managed, does entirely reside in the Members who constitute that great
Convocation: Yea so far is my Lord Mayor from having either a Negative upon the
Hall, or a Right to prescribe unto the Citizens whom they shall choose, that he
has not so much as Power and Authority to take the Suffrages of the Electors,
or to Adjourn or Dissolve the Hall, without the leave and consent of the
greater number of the Freemen, then and there present. And as all this has
been declared and irrefragably demonstrated in several Papers already
Published; so it has been affirmed under the hands of as good Lawyers as are
in England, and particularly of those Gentlemen whom the City have thought
worthy to be entrusted in the defending their Charter against the Quo Warranto,
put in for the seizure of it.

But in defiance of all that has been said, such is the easiness of my Lord
Mayor (to say no worse) that he has suffered himself to be prevailed upon to
despise Law, violate Charters, and act in direct opposition to the duty of his
place, and all this for the gratifying of those who have not only commenced a
Suit for the subversion of the Corporation, but openly professed that they seek
the destruction of its best and most Honorable Members. And as the recounting
the chief heads of the matter of Fact is indispensably necessary for the
information of the present, as well as future Ages; so the bare rehearsal of
those things, will fill the World with amazement, as well as proclaim the Guilt
of some persons, both to this and following Generations.

And that which offers it self first to our notice, is the accession of some
Ministers to my Lord Mayor to procure him to Drink to Mr. North, which his
Lordship without the least consideration of that Gentleman's fitness for the
Place, or any attendance to the Design in subserviency whereunto that motion
was made unto him, first tamely complied with, and afterward performed,
notwithstanding the consequences which would thereupon ensue, were faithfully
represented unto him.

The next step which his Lordship took in pursuance of the like advice, was to
run counter, not only to ancient usage, but to an ^ct of Common Council, 7 Car.
1 in sending for Mr. North, and making him Seal a Bond to hold Sheriff for the
year ensuing, before he was so much as named or proposed to the Common Hall,
that was not till Midsummer-day, which was some weeks after my Lord Mayor had
caused him under the forfeiture of 1000 l. to undertake to serve.

The third advance made by Sir John Moor against the Duty of his place, and the
Customs of the Corporation, was his altering the form of the Precepts for the
summoning the Common Hall against the 24 of June. And it is remarkable that
whereas not only by the Charters, the Citizens are to meet to choose annually
from among themselves Sheriffs, but that all former Precepts r^n in a strain,
importing their being to assemble to Elect Sheriffs; the present Mayor did by
an Unpresidented and Arbitrary Power, summon them to Conveen to confirm one
Sheriff whom he has drunk unto, and to choose another.

Nor could his Lordship stop his Irregularities here, but both after a
Declaration upon whom the Election had fallen through the majority of Hands,
and after the Poll which had been demande^, and wherein himself had acquiesced,
was peaceably and fairly carrying on, he came attended with a Company of men,
whereof many were not Freemen, diverse were armed with Swords, and several were
known Papists, and not only interrupted the Poll, but contrary to Law and
Right, assured to himself a power of Adjourning the Hall.

And having thus far embarkt in sinistruous and unjustifiable ways, his next
proceeding was partly by himself, and partly by Citizens whom he countenanced
to misinform His Majesty, and contrary both to Truth and his own Knowledge, to
abuse the King in causing him to believe that diverse peaceable persons had been
guilty of a Riot; upon which mis report as the two present Sheriff, were
committed to the Tower, so the principal blame of it must be imputed to his
Lordship. And as it is the first instance on the File of History, of persons
being Indicted of a Riot, when lawfully Assembled together, and quietly
proceeding in that which they met about; So I question whether our Law Books
furnish one Example of the Council-Boards committing two Officers whose Place
and Duty it was to manage the Poll, and govern the Assembly, not only without
the hearing of any to speak in their behalf, but in a Case, the Cognizance
whereof belongs to the Courts of Common Law.

But his Lordships illegalities hitherto had been both ascribed to the
ascendancy which some had gotten over him, and had been easily pardoned, had
they terminated here, but it seems he was too far engaged to retreat, and
therefore his next Step was to take upon him, contrary to Sense and Common
Reason, as well as Law, to Adjourn the Common Hall July 5th, not only by a
Gentleman who being no Free man, could not be substituted his Lordships Deputy,
or locum tenens; but by words signifying only a desire that they would adjourn,
which did not import the adjourning of them, but left it to themselves whether
they would do so, yea or not. And accordingly the Hall without whose consent
they cannot be adjourned nor dissolved by any till they have finished the
business about which they are astembled, not only refused to be adjourned, but
required the Sheriffs to go on with the Poll. Which as it was managed with all
prudence, and not shut up till after more than usual and due Proclamation; yet
his Lordship would not rest satisfied with what was then done (merely, as is to
be supposed, because the Election fell upon Mr. Papillon and Mr. Duboise) and
therefore obtained an Order from the King for a New Hall. For missing what he
had designed, in getting ^he present Sheriffs turned out by a Convention
intended to have been made up of one party of men (which would have been called
a Common Hall) had not other Citizens upon smelling the project assemble^
without warning, he had no other Retreat left, but to apply to his Majesty for
an Order to begin again. And tho we have nothing to say concerning his
Majesty's Order, save that the p^in^ing it for C. R. by which persons upon the
first view are apt to think they meant Charles Re^, did not express that
veneration for Majesty as is fit; yet we must take the liberty to charge my
Lord Mayor, That after he had so often interrupted the Election, and broken in
upon the fre^dom of the Cities choice, he did at last labor, and as much as in
him lay, compass the dissolving and cancelling of an Election that had been
duly made.

To this we may add his Lordships refusing to hear diverse Citizens speak, when
the Hall first assembled on Friday morning, and he was upon the Hustings, tho
it be his Duty to hear every man that has any thing to offer, and it be their
Right and Privilege to say whatsoever they will, provided it be agreeable to
the matter before them, and within the bounds and compass of Law.

Nor can there be a greater evidence of the unreasonableness both of the
faction whom his Lordship has espoused in this whole matter, and of his
indiscretion in heading such a brutish, as well as a violent sort of men, than
their refusing to suffer an Act of Parliament to be read, tho often proposed so
to be; and this after the whole Hall had hearkened to the reading of His
Majesty's Order, with the greatest respect, and profoundest silence imaginable.

And in the next place, how can my Lord Mayor answer either to God, or his own
Conscience, in keeping so many thousands together from Nine in the morning,
till past Six in the evening, when diverse contracted sickness, and some lost
their lives, by reason of the excessive heat, without coming to a resolve in
himself, whether he would acquiesce in the Election that was declared on
Wednesday before, or whether he would insist either upon a new Poll, or plead
his having chosen one Sheriff by drinking to him, and that all which he would
allow the Commons, was to elect another.

However, as we may understand the capacity of the man, by his having his Gown
many times on, to come down upon the Hustings, and pretend to adjourn the Hall,
and as often off, as willing to rest contented in the choice of Mr. Papilion,
and Mr. Duboise, which the Sheriffs had declared two days before, with all the
wonted solemnity; so his sending for for Sir G. Jefferies, and Mr. Saunders,
known enemies to the City Rights, and professedly for the overthrow of the
Charter, to advise him, and his submitting to their Opinions, which they durst
not subscribe, against the Judgment, as well as the irrefragrable Reasons of
the Recorder, Mr. Polexfen, and Mr. Williams, who signified their readiness to
put their hands to what they said, are things which he will not be able to
account for, either before a Parliament, or at the Bars in Westminster Hall.

And what will the world think of his taking his last resolution from a Letter
which he received from a Minister of State, seeing as it is an high offense
against the Statute of Westminster, 3 Ed. 1. to interpose in, or disturb the
Election of any Officers; so it is a high offense against the truth reposed in
him, and the integrity of a Lord Mayor of London, to take any other measures
th^^^^hat are agreeable to the safety and welfare of the City.

A^^^^o we want a name whereby to call his Lordships retracting his word, after
he had consented ^ the having the Poll go on a new, for two to be chosen out of
the Four who had been named, (...)e question not but to see a Judicature in
England, that will both know by what Title to st^ and to call him to an account
for renouncing all Faith, as well as Justice. For it is observable, that he had
not only agreed on Friday night, to have the Poll proceed for the Election of
Two out of Four, but he renewed his agreement as to that particular, to diverse
worthy Citizens, on Saturday morning. But what shall be said of a man who upon
tbe coming of Sir L. J. receded from his Word, as well as from Law and
City-Custom. Yea, it is no small aggravation of his Crime, that he reassumed
the pretense of his having chosen one Sheriff by v^rtue of his P^^rogative,
after he had heard the Secretary affirm, that they must take that ^ourse, tho
rueret Coelum, all things should run into confusion. And should his Lordships
Memory fail him, either as to the Polls being demanded for all Four, or as to
his granting it, there are several persons who are able to remember it, and
whose words are beyond all suspicion of falsehood.

The next thing whereof we may justly accuse my Lord Mayor, is his usurping the
managing of the Poll, not only against Law and usage, but when the Common Hall
had devolved it upon, and lodged it in the Sheriffs. For such was the modesty
of those worthy Gentlemen, that they would not undertake it, tho Custum would
have justified them in doing so, till they had consulted the Hall, and been
empowered by them, as those in whom the Authority does reside over all Affairs
which come before them. Here is an Arbitrary Power with a witness, not only to
claim what his Ancestors never did, and which constant usage directly gainsays,
but to do it in opposition to the vote of three parts in four of the Hall, who
entrusted the Sheriffs with the taking the Suffrages, and declaring the
Election.

And as he who engages once in illegal courses, knows not where he shall stop,
so his Lordship having advanced thus far without fear in himself, or Law to
countenance him, proceeded farther in taking the boldness to declare Mr. North
Sheriff, not only without his being confirmed, but when 2414. Citizens had
expressly declared and polled against his Confirmation

Nay, as it this had not been the height of Extravagancy, his Lordship pretends
to declare Mr. Box Sheriff, tho he had not 1400 Hands; whereas Mr. Papillon,
and Mr. Dubois^ had upwards of 2400 in the Sheriffs Books, besides some
hundreds that polled for them in those that were styled his Lordships. So that
he has robbed the Freemen of the Right of choosing both the Sheriffs; and
instead of proposing only one to them, whom they may confirm or not, as they
see good, he has by an arbitrary, and illegal power, assumed unto himself the
imposing two upon them, against their will and consent.

It were needless to recount all my Lord Mayors Miscarriages in this Affair;
such as not only his denying diverse worthy Citizens who were for Mr. Papillon
and Mr. Duboise, access unto him, when his house was free and open to those of
the contrary party; but the suffering several of the best quality to be
affronted and assaulted, if not in his vety presence, at least within his
gates. And as if it had not been contrary to the duty of his Office as well as
the wisdom of a man, to give up himself implicitly to the government and
conduct of Sir L. J. he not only permitted that person to be present at his
discourse with several Freemen that came to him about the privileges and
Franchises of the City; but he connived at and allowed that Minister in
checking and rebuking some Gentlemen who had the courage in his hearing to
claim their Rights.

Surely as his Lordship has taken no notice of what befell Sir Samuel Sterling,
and Sir Edward Bromfield, for Offenses not near so heinous as those he is
guilty of, so he never read of one Sir Nicholas Brember Lord Mayor of London,
that was condemned to be hanged in Richard the 2d's time, Knighten.
and with much a do, upon the Kings intercession, had the favout to be
beheaded; and this for neglecting the duty of his place, and acting conformably
to the dictates of Court Ministers; particul^rly for undertaking at the
pleasure of the King, to be Mayor without the consent, and against the will of
the Citizens. And as this may instruct Sir John Moor what he may in due time
expect; seeing the imposing such Officers as Sheriffs upon the City, not only
without the concurrence, but against the Declaration of the Freemen, is a much
greater Crime than the serving Mayor at the Command of the King, without their
consent; so it may forewarn Mr. North and Mr. Box what is likely to befall
them, if they take upon them the Office of Sheriffs against the Will of the
Citizens. For if King Richards requiring Sir Nicholas Brember to hold Mayor
without being duly Elected, could not save his Head from the Block, much less
can Sir John Moors calling these Gentlemen forth to the Office of Sheriffs,
protect them from the Punishment to which by the Law they shall be found liable
for so doing. And as they will be bold men that will undertake the Office of
Sheriffs upon the bare Authority of my Lord Mayors word; so I know not how the
present Sheriffs can resign the Goals, etc. unto such persons who pretend to
the Office of Sheriffs by no better Right.

Nay, I will be bold to say, That should my Lord Mayor and the Court of
Aldermen have the confidence to swear Mr. North and Mr. Box, on Michaelmas Eve,
that the Common Hall may Vote them out, and choose others in their Room on
Michaelmas day.

But it is pleasant to observe how this pretended Election of North and Box for
Sheriffs, against the ensuing Year, works already with the Papists and our
Masquerade Protestants: for they not only begin to talk of blasting the belief
of the Popish Plot, but of Hanging Protestants by Wholesale. And whereas Mr.
Duncomb was contented a few days ago with the Lives of 9 or 10; nothing less
will now serve them than the destroying of Scores, if not Hundreds, and this
within the compass of London and Middlesex.

However, this we have to rely upon, that whereas Mr. North had only 107 hands,
and Mr. Box 1353 in all the Books, Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois had upwards of
2700 Hands a piece, reckoning in my Lord Mayors Books with those of the
Sheriffs, and were Proclaimed to be duly Elected by the proper Officers.

And as we cannot think that the King will connive at so unjust a thing, and
which so directly subverts all the Laws, by which he has sworn to Govern; so
we are assured that the Judges in His Majesty's Courts, will esteem no
punishments severe enough, as well for them that shall act as Sheriffs by no
better Warrant, as for him that has taken upon him to declare them for such,
against all Law, as well as President.

And as my Lord Mayor may be already sensible, how his Fellow-Citizens resent
his late illegal carriage and behavior toward them, by the many Actions
entered against him, to which they have demanded appearance so he will find,
that all that is hither done in order to right themselves, and chastise his
usurpation upon their Franchises, is but like a few drops before a storm, in
comparison of what he must afterward look for.

Nor must Sir J. E. and Sir W. P. etc. think to escape being called to an
account, not only for abetting the Mayor in all these Invasions upon the
Privileges of the City, but for exciting him unto, and hurrying him upon them.
And as it is evident what esteem they have of his Lordship, by using him as a
Tool to do such unjustifiable and enormous things, which were they themselves
in the Chair, they would neither have the boldness nor indiscretion to attempt;
so their thus managing a person whom they style their Friend, as well as one to
whom they are bound by their Oaths to give safe and good Advice, renders them
Offenders against Truth, Justice, and the Rules of Friendship, as well as
against the Rights of the Corporation and their own Oath.

And as for the Common Sergeant, and the Common-Cryer, they ought to reckon
themselves accountable, as for other misdemeanors in this Affair, so for
disobeying their Masters in refusing to pronounce and proclaim what the
Common Hall, whose servants they are, required and commanded them to do. And
should the Commons of London quietly digest, and overlook the disobedience and
obstinacy of these Fellows whom they have raised and made, I will say that they
have not only forgotten their Authority, but that they deserve to be ridden and
trampled upon by their meanest Officers.

LONDON: Printed for J. Johnson. 1682.


