THE FIGURES OR TYPES OF THE OLD TESTAMENT, By which CHRIST and the Heavenly
things of the GOSPEL were preached and shadowed to the People of God of old;
Explained and improved in sundry SERMONS,

BY Mr. Samuel Mather, sometime Pastor of a Church in Dublin.

Printed in the Year M.DC.LXXXIII.

TO THE READER, ESPECIALLY Those of that CHURCH, to which this AUTHOR was
sometime PASTOR.
EVery Church is by the Ordinance of Christ a Pillar of saving truth, holding
it forth to be seen and read of all men; the Teachings and Ordinances
administered in Churches being amongst the chief of the ways whereby the blessed
God instructs and enlightens a dark world in the way of eternal Life. These
following Discourses are part, and but part of those many precious Truths and
Teachings held forth by this Servant of Christ, in the course of about fifteen
years Ministry, in that Candlestick in which the Lord made him a shining Light.
The Prophets do not live for ever, but their Words and Fruit should, yea will
live and remain after they are gone to their everlasting Rest. Not long after
this Author had gone through this Subject God took him to Heaven, (when he
wanted above six months of being six and forty years old) by an Imposthume in
his Liver; which; as some that were conversant with him judged, hung upon him
when he studied and preached these Sermons; which, perhaps, was the reason,
that from the beginning to the finishing of them so long a space ran out.
Having no more time to review them, and make any additions unto the Notes that
he prepared for Preaching, they are less perfect then otherwise they would; and
it is not unlike, but that many things studied by him beforehand, and delivered
in preaching, especially in the applicatory part (wherein he had an excellency)
are lost, because not written down by himself. Had he lived to have reviewed
and prepared these Discourses for the Press, it is like he would have spoken to
and cleared up some things more fully, and perhaps, on second thoughts, have in
some passages delivered himself somewhat otherwise. It is not expected that
every one, much less critical and captious heads, will subscribe to every thing
which they may here meet with. In so diffuse and vast, and withal so obscure a
Subject, and so untrodden a path, it is no wonder if every one will not tread
in just the same steps with him; for there are some things wherein he departs
from the Sentiments of some other learned and judicious persons: His making
some of the old legal Ordinances Types of the instituted Church and Ordinances
under the New Testament, and our Ordinances the Antitypes of theirs, it may be
some may not assent unto, following therein Ames Prol. in Ps. 2. and Mr. Jeans,
who (Exam. Exam. p. 241.) cites Chamier tom. 4. l. 9. c. 11. Sect. 13, 15. page
515. Tilenus Syntag. Part. ult. Disp. 63. Sect. 12. Ames Bellarm. Enerv. tom.
3. l. 4. c. 7. to which he might have added those words of his tom. 3. lib. 1.
cap. 4. these. 13. and lib. 2. cap. 4. these. 4. But others there are who go with
this our Author. See Beza on 1 Cor. 10.6. and on 1 Pet. 3.21. and Mr. Cotton
Holiness of Church Members chap. 2. sect. 12, and 13. Not to mention any of the
Schoolmen, or the elder Writers among Christians, who are very frequent and
very express to this purpose. Nor can it be denied that there is a common
Nature wherein their Institutions and ours agree, the one being a shadow or
darker adumbration, the other a more lightsome and lively image of the same
things. And it is beyond all contradiction, that the Holy Ghost himself does
frequently instruct us in our Duty with reference to our Institutions, from
theirs under the old Testament with relation to their typical Ordinances. As
for his calling our Institutions the Antitypes to theirs, though there should
be a truth in that observation, Theologi Graeci Typum and Antitypum promiscue
usurpant pro iisdem, pro re significata nunquam. Jodoc. Laren. apud Twiss.
Animadv. in Corv. Def. Armin. cont. Tilen. page 280. yet there is a strict and
proper acceptance of the word, wherein it may be said, that our Institutions
are the Antitypes of theirs: vid. Jun. Animadv. in Bell. Contr. 3. lib. 1. cap.
9. not. 25. and in that sense the Holy Ghost uses it, 1 Pet. 3.21. Nor needs
any one stumble at our Authors using it in somewhat a different signification;
for usage is the Master and Rule of Language; Loquendum cum vulgo, sentiendum
cum doctis. But it is not for the sake of such passages that these Discourses
are published, but at the instant desires of many, and for the sake of that
Gospel Light which shines throughout the whole, and which is therein cast upon
so great a part of holy Scripture, which was written not for their use only who
had the worldly Sanctuary, and were to observe those carnal Ordinances: but for
ours also, who live in these better times of the New Testament. And though
every thing be not so clearly and convincingly made out, as some perhaps will
desire; yet that the work is singularly useful will be manifest of it self: nor
is any humane Writing without its defects; and those which come out after the
Authors death, and were not by their own hand finished for the Press (which in
the fate of this) must have allowances beyond others. Besides that this is a
Subject which none, or almost none, has waded through before him. How he was
endowed for it, and what he had attained in it, is not for so obscure and
incompetent a Pen as writes this, to say. If this work find encouraging
acceptance, others of his labors may possibly be published hereafter. For
besides this and those three other small Tracts, viz. his Defense of the
Protestant Religion against the impotent assaults of a Popish Priest, his
Irenicum, or Essay for Union among the reforming Parties in these Nations, and
his Two Sermons against the Ceremonies, on 2 King. 18.4. which are already
printed, there are some other works of his not unfit to see the public Light.

As to you who were sometime his Charge, and used to sit under his Ministry,
this Providence should be looked on by you, as that which adds greatly unto
your account. If you be not judicious and established Christians, if you be not
living thriving Souls, you will be most inexcusable. God has made you as a
City on an hill, not only by the eminency of place where you sojourn, but also
by the luster of those Stars in his right hand, whom he has formerly set among
you: Those hoary heads, zealous and lively Dr. Winter, that mighty man in
Prayer, grave and judicious Mr. Timothy Tailor, and those of fewer days, in
whom yet was the Inspiration of the Almighty to give them understanding, holy,
humble Mr. Murcot, and this Author, the clearness and weightiness of whose
Preaching some of you have a precious remembrance of, must all of them be
accounted for unto God one day by you that sat under their Ministry. Dr. Winter
thought the Joy and Glory of Saints in Heaven receives some addition there, as
their Works while they were on earth do bring forth fruit here below, grounding
this his Judgment on Jer. 32.19. and the like Scriptures; see his Epistle
before Mr. Murcots Sermons. And there are that think godly Ministers shall at
the day of Christ have the presenting unto him those that have been converted
and savingly wrought upon by their Ministry. The Apostle Paul seems to have an
expectation, that he should present the Corinthians unto Christ as a chaste
Virgin espoused unto the Lord by him, 2 Cor. 11.2. and he looked on the
Thessalonians as his Joy and Crown of glorying before God, not only in this
world, 1 Thessalonians. 3.9. but also hereafter in the presence of our Lord Jesus
Christ at his coming, 1 Thessalonians. 2.19, 20. If the affectionate remembrance of
your former Teachers, which still lives in your hearts, and ought so to do,
shall stir you up to make a fruitful improvement of such monuments of their
labors as are yet with you, whatever advantage shall accrue to them who are
now above a thankless world and cloudy sky, certainly you will be gainers
unspeakably. Those Exhortations of the Apostle do speak unto you. Remember
those that have had the Rule over you, and have spoken to you the Word of God,
whose Faith follow considering the end of their conversation; Jesus Christ is
the same yesterday, to day and for ever: He will be the same to you that he
has been to them. You have not yet resisted unto blood; but how soon you may
be called forth unto it, is with him in whose hand are all our times. The
Churches of the Hebrews in Judaea had stood when the Apostle so wrote to them
much what about the same time that you have been in the fellowship and order of
the Gospel. And as they then might and did see a day of National Calamity
approaching, Heb. 10.25. so may you discern black and threatening Prognostics
Wherefore forsake not the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of
some is, but exhort and encourage one another to it, and that so much the more
as you see the day approaching, lift up the Hands that hang down, let the
feeble Knees be strengthened, and make straight paths for your feet, lest that
which is lame be turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed. Follow
Peace with all men, and Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord;
looking diligently, lest any man fail of the Grace of God, lest any root of
bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled, etc. For ye
are not come unto the Mount that might be touched, ye are not under the old
dark legal Dispensation, which was full of terror; but you are come to Mount
Sion, and to the City of the living God: you are under a far more glorious
Gospel Dispensation, and have in these Discourses the Gospel and spiritual
Glory of that old Dispensation shining out upon you; the veil being taken off
from it by the Ministry of this Servant of Christ for your sakes. For what your
Ministers are, they are for you. Epaphras was a faithful Minister of Christ for
the Church at Coloss. This Author was enlightened by Christ for you. The
influences that the Ministers are the Subjects of, are for their people. If
their Consolation abound through Christ, it is that they may be able to comfort
others with the Comforts wherewith they themselves are comforted of God, 2 Cor.
1.4, 6. If they be enabled to walk exemplarily in Gospel-simplicity, holiness,
justness and unblamableness through variety of singular and sore trials, it is
for your sakes, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. with chap. 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10. their Light
and Gifts are yours, and for you, 1 Cor. 3.22. These Sermons in the preaching
of them were in a peculiar manner for you: so are they now in this making of
them yet more public. So are those that now labor among you in the Word and
Doctrine your Servants for Christ's sake. The Blessing of Heaven go along with
both this Book and their Labors. Amen. And let every one also that reads, say
Amen.

ERRATA.
BEsides some literal and lesser faults, mispointing, omission or redundancy or
transposing of a small word, using the Italick letter for the Roman, a great
for a small, or vice versa, which the Reader, who observes, will not be
stumbled by; and therefore it would be needless exactness to give a catalogue
of: there are these which the Reader may do himself a kindness to correct. Two
pages misnumbred, page 327 is printed 307, and page 511 is printed 411. page 9.
the two last lines instead of Objection, that, read Objection, viz. that; p.
32. blot out the last line, p. 39. l. 2. of mind, r. of his mind, p. 43. l. 19,
20. Hebr. 5.10. r. 12. p. 120. l. 18. Soul of r. Soul out of, p. 201. l. 15.
unto r. under, p. 280. l. antep. Wheat Quemach r. Wheat, but Quemach, ibid.
blot out but, ibid. l. ult. r. breadcorn, p. 308. blot out viz. in l. 10. and
put it in l. 11. p. 384. Hamans r. Hemans, p. 421 l. penult. ye in r. ye do in,
p. 422. l. 23. to the r. of the, p. 432. l. 5. aforesaid r. aforehand, p. 433
l. 30. yenury r. penury, p. 434. l. 17 blot out in the foundation, p. 445. l.
10. inner, cap. 8. r. inner Court, cap. 8. p. 460. l. 13. perfect r.
perfecting, p. 479. l. 26. thou shall r. thou shall not, p. 511. l. 26. ark in
which r. ark on which, p. 532. l. 21, 22. bring Wheat r. bringing the Wheat,
ibid. blot out ing the, p. 445. l. 7. God to get r. God, get, p. 447. l. 7.
indeed that this was r. that this was indeed, p. 557. l. 22. says it r. says
of it. p. 566. l. antep. on the day r. on the tenth day, l. penult. the great
r. that great, p. 572. l. 7. have r. having, p. 625. the r. our. p. 639. l. 14.
Saints are that r. Saints that are, ibid. l. 21. indeed r. endowed, p. 668. l.
antep. blot out any.

Page 204. read lin. 17. before l. 15. p. 573. read the fifth and sixth lines
before the third and fourth.

The Date of the Sermons omitted in the former part of the Book may be thus
supplied, page 1. March 23. 1666. p. 27. June 27. 1667. p. 43. July 4. p. 56.
July 11. p. 65. July 18 p. 79. July 25. p. 90. Aug. 8. p. 115. Aug. 32 and
September. 5. p, 123. Sept. 5.

THE TYPES OR FIGURES OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. BY WHICH Christ and the Heavenly
things of the Gospel were preached and shadowed to the People of God of old.
Hebrews 4.2. For unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto them: but
the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that
heard it.


THE scope of this Epistle is to persuade them to persevere in their Christian
profession, and not to fall off to Judaism, from the Gospel to the Law.

To this end he sets before them the excellency of the Gospel above the Law,
the excellency of Christ above Moses. In the prosecution whereof he inserts
many wholesome exhortations and applications of those former truths and
dispensations of old to us in Gospel times: And having from Psalm the 95th.
spoken of their being shut out of Gods rest, because of their Unbelief, in cap.
3.18. And to whom swear he that they should not enter into his rest, but to
them that believed not? he applies this cap. 4.1. Let us therefore fear, least
a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to
come short of it: And inforceth this caution by paralelling their state with
ours in the words of the Text. For unto us was the Gospel preached as well as
unto them:

You see how the Text comes in as an inforcement of that exhortation, take heed
of falling short of entering into rest, seeing the Gospel is preached unto us as
it was unto them, and it became unprofitable unto them, because they did not
take heed of that sin which is here dehorted from, even the sin of Unbelief.

In the words are three Propositions.

1. That the Gospel was preached both under the Old and New Testament; to them
as well as to us; to us as well as them. The Apostle joins these together, unto
us as well as unto them.

2. That there be some, who though they hear the Gospel, yet do not profit by
it: they are but highway ground, stony ground, thorny ground hearers, as
Matthew. 13.

The word may be preached to many that live under the clear and powerful
dispensations of the Gospel, yet they not profit by it. There is but one sort
of good ground, of fruitful hearers: many there are to whom the Gospel is
preached, but they hear it unfruitfully and unprofitably.

3. That the main cause of this unprofitableness under the Gospel is because of
their Unbelief. The reason of unfruitfulness and barrenness under the preaching
of the Gospel, is for want of Faith in them that hear it. The word did not
profit them, not being mixed with faith. Unbelief is the cause of this
unprofitableness. Many complain of their own unprofitableness, and many take no
notice of the cause of it. It is for want of Faith. It is the first of these
three that I design to speak unto, the Lord assisting.

Doctr. 1. That the Gospel was preached to them under the Old Testament, as
well as to us under the New. I put it so, as best suiting with the scope I
intend.

The Apostle here supposes it as a known and granted truth, that they had the
Gospel; and he adds, that we have it too, as well as they: But that they had
it, he supposes it as a thing beyond all question; as a thing received, and
believed, and understood amongst them, and that needed no dispute. For unto us
was the Gospel preached as well as unto them. As if he should say, no doubt it
was preached to them, and so it is to us also. Gal. 3.8. And the Scripture
foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through Faith, preached before
the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, in thee shall all Nations be blessed.

The Gospel is the glad tidings of Man's Recovery by Jesus Christ, out of the
state of Sin and Death into which he was fallen, into a state of Favor and
Communion with God again; into a state of Life and Happiness. Now this was made
known to them of old; these glad tidings sounded in their ears, as well as
ours. Psalm. 89.15. Blessed are the people that hear the joyful sound.

The Reasons for the proof of it may be such as these.

Reas. 1. Because they had the same Gospel blessings and mercies promised,
preached, and revealed unto them that we have now, that are revealed and made
known unto us; and in the same way, and upon the same account as we have them
now.

There be two Branches of this Argument.

1. That they had the same Gospel mercies preached and held forth, and this 2.
In the same way, and upon the same account.
1. They had the very same Gospel blessings and mercies that we have in these
latter days. This will be easily made out and appear, if we enquire what the
good things of the Gospel are, we shall find that they were exhibited unto
them, as well as unto us. And what are they?

In general, That God would be their God. How often is this promise made to them?
and so he is to us.

Now this includes three things. 1. Regeneration. 2. Reconciliation and
Remission of Sins. 3. Everlasting Salvation.

I. Regeneration, or the New Heart, the Heart of Flesh, the writing of Gods Law
in the heart. You know most of these are Old Testament phrases. Jer. 31.33. I
will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will
be their God, and they shall be my people. This was preached and held forth to
them by that Seal of Circumcision. Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the Lord thy God will
circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live: and by all
their legal washings and purifications, which signified their cleansing from
sin; from the filth and power, as well as from the guilt of it. Ezekiel. 36.25,
26, 27. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from
all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. A new heart
also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and I will take
away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh.
And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and
ye shall keep my judgments and do them. This includes the whole frame of Saving
Grace, a new disposition in the heart, new principles, new walkings: This
succeeds the Old man, corrupt Nature: this is one great Gospel blessing common
to them with us.

II. A second great blessing of the Gospel is Reconciliation and Remission of
sins. Isai. 1.18. Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord, though
your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red
like crimson, they shall be as wool. Jer. 33.34. I will forgive their
iniquities, and I will remember their sins no more. And innumerable more
promises they had of this throughout the Old Testament.

This part of the Gospel was preached and shadowed forth to them by all their
Sacrifices and Oblations, which are thefore said to make atonement for them: It
is a phrase often used in the nine first Chapters of Leviticus, He that sinned,
shall bring such or such an Offering: and the Priest shall make atonement for
him concerning his sin, and it shall be forgiven him: Levit. 5.6. He shall
bring his Trepass Offering unto the Lord for the sin which he has sinned,
etc. and the Priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his sin: and
ver. 10. He shall offer a Burnt-Offering according to the manner, and the
Priest shall make an atonement for him for his sin which he had sinned, and it
shall be forgiven him.

Hence it is that we find the Saints under the Old Testament were so full of
confidence and holy boldness in seeking and pleading with God for pardon and
forgiveness of sin: As we see in the Psalms, and other Scripture-Prayers, what
strong and eminent actings of Faith they had this way: Which to expect had been
a presumptuous thing, if they had had no promise to ground their Faith upon:
But they had very plentiful assurances and promises of it in those times: and
that is a second Gospel-blessing revealed and assured to them, as well as to
us; the remission of all their sins.

III. Everlasting life and salvation in Heaven. This is not a truth revealed
only by the Gospel, but was well known, clearly revealed, and firmly believed
by the Saints of old: They had assurance of this that they should live with God
for ever in Glory. When I awake I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. Psalm.
17.15. Thou will guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.
Psalm. 73.24. In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. Psalm 16.11. They looked for another Country, whereof
Canaan was but a Type and Shadow, as the Apostle shows in this Epistle to the
Hebrews, cap. 11.16. They knew there was an eternal State of Happiness for the
Saints, as well as an eternal State of Misery for the Wicked; they did believe
this in those days.

Thus we see they had the same Gospel-blessings preached unto them of old, that
we have at this day: and these blessings and good things are demonstrations
that it was Gospel, because these blessings are not promised in the Law. It
knows no remission, or regeneration of a lost Soul, no salvation of a Sinner.
This was the first branch of the Argument; But for a more clear and full
eviction of it, the second part of the Argument was this.

2. Because they had these blessings upon the same account, and in the same way
as we have them now; I speak as to the principal and internal causes of them.
For in the outward way and manner of dispensation, there was a difference, but
not in this. For upon what account have we these precious benefits and good
things of the Gospel? you will find, if you consider it aright, that it was
then, as now. We receive all from the mere mercy and free grace of God in
Christ; and this was the fountain of their supplies also: If they had received
pardon of Sin, and Grace, and Glory, on the account of their own merits and
works of Righteousness, then it had not been Gospel; But they had it in the
same way we have it, as to the internal cause from whence all blessings come;
even from the Mercy and Free Grace of God; a very glorious Attribute of God,
and most abundantly, yea continually held forth throughout the Old Testament:
That he is the Lord, the Lord God, gracious and merciful. How many Prayers, and
Psalms, and Songs of Praise unto him, for that his mercy endures for ever: How
sweetly, how pathetically do the Prophets teach and preach it to them? this all
the Saints of old had recourse unto. David, Psalm. 51.1. when seeking pardon,
Have mercy, (says he) upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness:
according to the multitude of thy mercies blot out my transgressions? and
Daniel 9.8, 9. when he besought the Lord on behalf of the Jews, O Lord, to us
belongs confusion of faces, etc. because we have sinned against thee: To the
Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against
him. We do not present our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses;
but for thy great mercies, ver. 18. and for thine own sake, ver. 19. This then
was that they had recourse unto, as the Fountain of all the good whereof they
stood in need, and of all their supplies, even the infinite mercies of God.
Moreover it was the mercies of God in Christ, his mercies through the mediation
of Jesus Christ. For only through him is mercy communicated to Sinners, so
alone is mercy communicated: Therefore Daniel there prays, Dan. 9.17. Look upon
thy Sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lords sake, that is, for the Lord Jesus
Christ's sake.

Hence they did so often make mention of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, (as being
the Types of Christ) in their Prayers, and especially of David, For thy servant
David's sake, Psalm. 89. not as resting in David literally; but looking beyond
the shadow, unto him that was the truth thereof; for by David they meant
Christ: Christ is often called by that name, because David was so eminent a Type
of him.

And what is it in Christ that procures all these blessings in the Gospel for
us? It is his Blood and Satisfaction that atones Justice; his Prayers and
Intercession that prevails with mercy for us; and so it was of old: both these
had an influence into their mercies, as well as ours.

1. The death and blood and satisfaction of Jesus Christ. This all their
Sacrifices pointed at. For it was impossible that the blood of Bulls and Goats
should take away sins. Heb. 10.4. Yet it sanctified to the purifying of the
flesh: How much more shall the blood of Christ, etc. Heb. 9.13, 14. See how
clearly the Prophet Isaiah preaches this. Isai. 53. throughout the Chapter,
but look especially to ver. 10. When thou shall make his soul an offering for
sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days: and the pleasure of the
Lord shall prosper in his hand. This was the mystery of all the Sacrifices
wherein blood was shed: they were Types and Shadows of the blood of Christ.

2. His Prayers and Intercessions. For, look, as mercy is purchased by the
merit of his Death, so it is communicated and applied through the virtue of his
Intercession: Justice is satisfied by his Death, and mercy entreated in his
Intercession, and so both those great Attributes are acknowledged and glorified
in Zach. 1.12. Then the Angel of the Lord, that is, Jesus Christ the Angel of
the Covenant that appeared, he answered and said, how long will thou not have
mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, against which thou have had
indignation these threescore and ten years! And the Lord answered the Angel
that talked with me, with good words and with comfortable words. ver. 13. here
the prevailing power of his Intercession is set forth.

And as the merit of his Blood was shadowed by the Sacrifices; so the efficacy
of his Intercession was shadowed forth by the Incense and sweet Odours offered
up to God under the Law. These related to the Prayers of Jesus Christ; he
offers Incense with the Prayers of the Saints. Revel. 8.3, 4. And another Angel
came and stood at the Altar, having a Golden Censer; and there was given unto
him much Incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon
the Golden Altar which was before the Throne. And the smoke of the Incense
which came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God out of the
Angels hand.

They had therefore both the same Gospel-blessings, and upon the same Gospel
account, as we, namely, from the mere mercy of God, through the Mediation of
Jesus Christ, through his Death and Intercession.

Reas. 2. A second Argument might be taken from an Historical Induction of all
those former times, and the several Gospel Discoveries which the Lord
vouchsafed to them all along from time to time.

As to Adam in Paradise after his Fall. The Gospel was preached to him in that
great and blessed Promise, that the seed of the Woman should break the Serpents
head. This was the first Gospel Sermon that ever was preached.

Afterward to Abraham the Gospel was preached, Gal. 3.8. when it was promised
that in thy seed shall all the Nations of the World be blessed -- and in Isaac
shall thy seed be called.

To Moses, and by Moses to Israel, when the Lord said, I am the Lord thy God
that brought thee forth out of the Land of Egypt: For he was a Typical Mediator.

There were yet further Discoveries in David's time: Christ is the true David.

Thus I might go through the whole Old Testament, and show you how the Lord
from time to time made further and further discoveries of himself to his people
in succeeding ages.

Reas. 3. Either the Gospel was preached unto them of old, or else it will
follow, that they were all damned, or else that they were saved without Christ;
which to imagine were infinitely derogatory and dishonorable to the Lord Jesus
Christ.

The Fathers before the coming of Christ were saved and went to Heaven.

But without Christ there is no salvation. For there is no other name under
heaven etc. Acts 4.12.

It is impossible that any Sinner should be saved without Christ.

Qui salutem cuiquam promittit sine Christo, nescio an ille salutem habere
potest in Christo, Austin. He that promises any man Salvation without Christ,
I know not whether he can have Salvation by Christ. By the works of the Law
shall no flesh be justified or saved. Romans 3.20. Gal. 2.16.

Jesus Christ therefore is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb.
13.8. that is, in all times and ages: and so we may apply it thus. Yesterday
under the Law, to day under the Gospel, and for ever Jesus Christ is the only
Savior. Therefore if the Old Testament Saints were saved, it was by Christ,
and if by Christ, they had the Gospel preached to them as well as we.

So we see the Truth of the Doctrine.

Obj. 1. But why do we call it the Old Testament, if it was Gospel?

Answ. This is only in regard of the manner of Dispensation: we do not call the
first part of the Bible, or the times wherein it was written, the Old
Testament; and the latter part of the Bible, and the the times wherein it was
written, the new Testament, as if the former were mere Law, and the latter
nothing but Gospel. No, therefore take heed of mistaking here. For there is
very much of the Gospel, and the Grace of God in Christ revealed in the Old
Testament; many precious Gospel truths in the Old Testament: And there is very
much of the Law and threatenings thereof declared, written down and left upon
Record to us in the New Testament. Yea there is more of Hell and Damnation,
there are more dreadful threatenings thereof in the Sermons of our Lord Jesus
Christ recorded in the four Evangelists, than is to be found in all the Old
Testament: But we call it the Old Testament, because it was the first
Dispensation of the Gospel: And the Gospel we call the New Testament, because
it is the new Dispensation of the same everlasting Gospel; therefore the reason
is only in the way and manner of their Dispensation, and not in the Subjects
themselves.

Obj. 2. But there is a second Objection that the Apostle often speaks of, That
ancient Dispensation; as if it was Law, and not Gospel. Some Scriptures call
that Old Testament Administration Law, the Ministration of Death. as John 1.17.
the Law came by Moses, but Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ. If it was Law, (may
some say) then it was not Gospel: so 2 Cor. 3.7. the Ministration of Death.

Answ. We must distinguish between the thing preached, and the manner of
Preaching, between the Shell, and the Kernel, the Shadow, and the Substance.

Now the thing preached was the Gospel, though the manner of preaching it was
legal; the Kernel was Gospel, though the Shell was Law: The Spirit and
Substance, and Mystery of that Dispensation was Evangelical, though it was
involved in a legal Shell and outside, and overshadowed with the Shades and
Figures of the Law. God never had but one way only to save men by, but it had
diverse fashions and forms, diverse outward discoveries and manifestations; in
those times in a more legal manner, but afterward more like it self, in a more
evangelical manner.

This Legality of that Administration appears chiefly in five things, which
were the peculiar Properties and Characters of that Dispensation, by which it
is distinguished from the Gospel Dispensation, as being much inferior to it.
So we shall show you two things at once, both the differences of the two
Administrations, and withal the Pre-eminence and Excellencies of the New above
the Old. It was dark, weak, carnal, burdensome, and terrible.

1. It was dark, but the Gospel is clear: all things were involved in thick and
dark Shadows. Though there was a Light in that Mosaical Paedagogy, which did
appear and shine forth into the minds of Gods Elect, yet withal there was a
cloud of Darkness, as to the outward Administration, especially if compared
with the Dispensation of the Gospel since the coming of Christ.

There was and is a double use of Types and Parables, and of that whole way of
Argument by Similitude and Comparisons: they do both darken and illustrate; if
explained and understood, they do exceedingly enlighten and illustrate; but if
not explained, they are like a Riddle, they cast a dark mist and cloud upon the
thing.

So was the Law of Moses to all those that were not instructed by the Spirit to
understand the Mystery of it. The Reason and Meaning of it was hidden to the
most of them; hence a Veil is said to be upon their Hearts, that they could not
see to the end of that which is abolished, etc. 2 Cor. 3.13, 14, etc. as the
Apostle there discourses it at large.

2. It was weak, but the Gospel is powerful, 2 Cor. 3. therefore that is called
the Letter, this the Spirit.

3. There was much of external Pomp and Splendour, but little of that Power and
Spirituality that is in Gospel Worship, which though very pleasing to the
people, yet upon this account partly the Apostle calls them carnal Ordinances
Heb. 9.10. and a worldly Sanctuary, ver. 1. because they consisted so much in
outward, low, sensible things, so suitable to the relish, and desire, and
disposition of a carnal Heart.

Therefore the carnal Jews were very tenacious of these externals of Moses,
though desperately averse to the things themselves included and intended in
them.

Christ opposes their local Worship to spiritual Worship, Joh. 4.21, 23.
implying that that was not so spiritual as Gospel Worship.

The carnal Jews did turn it into mere Law and Works by their abuse and
misunderstanding of it. As the Pharisees; how did they trust in outward Works,
and expected Salvation by their own Righteousness? they rested and sat down in
the Shell and outside of things, Romans 9.32. As it were by the Works of the Law.
For they had no real legal Perfection in them; but only in their own proud and
false conceit they thought the bringing of a Sacrafice was that, that did
expiate Sin, and merit and deserve Acceptance with God: They did not look
beyond all, to the mere Mercy and free Grace of God in Christ; they did not
look to the end of things, to the time of Reformation that was to come, and so
they stumbled at the stumbling stone.

4. It was a burdensome Dispensation, Acts 15.10. a Yoke which neither our
Fathers, nor we, were able to bear. They were an insupportable Yoke, an
intolerable Burden, both as to their number and nature: They had a great
number of external Observations, from all which the Gospel has set us free.

5. The manner of Administration was legal, in regard of the Bondage and Terror
of it. It left impressions of terror upon their spirits.

God appeared in such dreadful Majesty unto them on Mount Sinai, as it shook
the Mountain, and shook all their Hearts so terrible, that Moses said, I
exceedingly fear and quake, Heb. 12.10, 18, 21. so terrible to all the people,
that they wished that God would never speak unto them immediately any more: so
the Lord gave an Interpreter to reveal and speak the Mind of God unto them; and
so it has been ever since.

Hence was that Speech of Austin. Breuis differentia Legis and Evangelii timor
and amor, the difference between Law and Gospel in brief is Fear and Love.

Thus you see the Doctrine cleared up, and so much shall serve for the clearing
up this Truth, and removing these Objections against it.

We shall conclude with two or three words of Use.

Use 1. Encouragement to study the Old Testament; and the Types and Shadows of
the Law. Is it so that the Gospel was preached to them under the Old Testament,
as well as to us under the New? We see then the usefulness of the Old Testament
to New Testament Saints: we see what use there is of searching into these
ancient Dispensations. Will you search into the Mystery of the Gospel? then
consider how God instructed and taught them of old. There are some Gospel
Truths more expressly revealed and mentioned to them of old, than to us, as that
of Forgiveness of Sins, etc. Therefore let us search into those ancient
Administrations, because there is much Gospel there; though the Shell be hard,
yet there is excellent substance in the Kernel.

Use 2. Direction how to attain to the understanding of those Mysteries, study
the Gospel. For it was Gospel that was preached to them. Faedus gratiae clavis
totius Scripturae.

Use 3. We may here learn another lesson, which wise Agur learned (and it was
his wisdom) to know that he wanted Wisdom, Prove. 3.1, 2. Many, coming to read
Chapters in the Levitical Law, are apt to think, this is a sealed Book, we are
not to bring these Offerings to God now, we know not what use to make of it:
many Christians make no more use of them, than of Apocrypha. This may show us
our ignorance. For there is no part of the Scripture but is of use; we might
see much of God, and of the Gospel in them, if we had skill to search out the
meaning and mystery of them. But we have not the understanding of the holy.
Poor, dark, ignorant Creatures we are, the Lord knows. Quantum est quod
nescimus!

Use 4. Encouragement to believe and receive the Gospel: for it is the
everlasting Gospel. This use is the direct scope of this Text, they had a
promise of entering into rest, but came short of it through unbelief. Take we
heed therefore of unbelief, least we enter not into rest: For the Gospel is
preached to us as well as to them. There is ground of encouragement to believe
the Gospel, to embrace and close with it; for it is that which all the Saints
of God both under the Old and New Testament have ventured their Souls upon. The
Gospel was preached to them as well as to us, and to us, as well as unto them.
Thou may safely venture thy Soul in that way where in so many Saints in all
ages are gone to Heaven: Let us take heed lest we fall short by unbelief; for
the Gospel was preached to us, as well as unto them; but the Word profited them
not, because it was not mixed with Faith in them that heard it. Take heed,
having the Promises of entering into rest, lest any of you fall short: take heed
of falling short of the good things of the Gospel, of that Rest which the
Gospel gives to sinful, guilty, weary Souls. Is such a Gospel preached, and
such glad tidings revealed, and wilt not thou close with them, and receive them
gladly and thankfully?

All the Gospel Dispensations in the Book of God will rise up against thee, if
thou art an Unbeliever; all the Saints of old will judge thee, and testify
against thee. They had but a little glimmering Light, yet they ventured all
upon that. But now the Sun appears and shines on the World in Clearness and
Glory. They might have objected, that the height of Gospel Light is not
discovered, which might be great hinderance to them; therefore if God was angry
with them then, how much more with us now, how shall we escape, if we neglect
so great Salvation? If every word spoken then was steadfast, and was sufficient
to bring Souls out of the state of Sin and Death, to Happiness; how much more
the Word and Light that we enjoy? For if the Word spoken by Angels was
steadfast, and every Transgression and Disobedience received a just recompense
of Reward, Heb. 2.2, 3. how shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation?
Unbelief is a damning Sin in all ages; but the more clearly the Gospel is
preached, the more inexcusable is the Unbelief of sinners that perish in their
sins; the more inexcusable is their Sin, and the more deep and dreadful will
their Damnation be. The Apostle calls the Gospel the Word of Truth, Unbelief
says it is a Lie. It gives God the lie, it makes him a Liar, and makes the
Gospel a Fable. If there be a way of recovery, why should not thou believe
and venture thy Soul on that; if there be no such way, then the Gospel is a
Lie, and will thou say the Gospel is a lie? We have a proverb, as sure as
Gospel. There is nothing so clear, and sure, and certain, as the Gospel. All
Happiness depends on the believing of the Gospel. Therefore take heed of, and
strive against Unbelief, labor as much against it as against any other
Corruption: and the chief help is a clear understanding, a clear insight and
understanding in the Mystery of the Gospel, this will help against all thy
Unbelief; then all thy Objections will vanish as Darkness before the Sun. It Is
Ignorance of the Gospel from whence so many Objections arise: Beg of God to
give thee clear Gospel Light, and this will be the best means to overcome and
overpower that sin of Unbelief. Did men see the Excellency, the Truth and
Goodness of the Gospel; they would receive it gladly and thankfully. The Gospel
is both true tidings and glad tidings, it is both true and glad tidings. Now
were this believed, it would cheer up the Hearts of poor Sinners.

Hebrews 1.1, 2, 3. God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in
time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto
us by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he made
the Worlds, who being the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his
Person, and upholding all things by the Word of his Power, when he had by
himself purged our Sins sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.


THat the Gospel was preached to them under the Old Testament, as well as to us
under the New, has been cleared from Heb. 4.2. where the Apostle says, Unto
us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto them. We are next to consider, how
it was preached unto them. Now to this the Text answers, that it was done in
diverse manners, and at sundry times. (...) and (...).

The scope of the words is to compare and prefer the Gospel Discoveries and
manifestations of God, before the Legal, which he does by a most elegant
Antithesis between them: Then God spoke to the Fathers, now to us; that was by
the Prophets, but now by his Son: Those Discoveries were of old, and so are
passed away, but the Gospel is in these last days; And finally, then he spoke
in diverse manners, and at sundry times. But now he has fixed upon this one
way, and once for all, to reveal himself by his Son.

We may resolve the Text into four general Propositions or points of Doctrine.

1. That it has pleased God to speak or reveal Himself, and his Mind, and
Will, unto poor lost Man, in order to his Happiness and Salvation. For he
speaks here only of the Gospel Discoveries.

2. That there be two grand Discoveries or Dispensations of the Mind of God
unto the Sons of Men; the one before, the other since the coming of his Son.

3. That under that former Dispensation God did reveal and speak his Mind of
old unto the Fathers by the Prophets in diverse manners, and at sundry times.

4. That in this last Dispensation, instead of all those former various
Discoveries used of old, he has spoken his Mind unto us only by his Son.

You see the two last Doctrines do contain and hold forth the Differences and
peculiar Characters of each Dispensation.

It is only the third Doctrine that we are now to speak unto, viz. that under
the old Dispensation God did reveal and speak his Mind unto the Fathers by the
Prophets in diverse manners, and at sundry times.

1. It was of old; therefore now passed away, as Heb. 8.13. that which
decays, and waxes old, is ready to vanish.

2. To the Fathers, that is, to their Ancestors; for he writes this Epistle to
the Hebrews, as the Title of it shows.

3. By the Prophets, all those by whom God revealed his Mind to others, were in
that respect Prophets, that is, Discoverers or Revealers of the Mind of God.

4. In diverse manners.

5. At sundry times.

It is these two last that I intend a little to insist upon, viz. these diverse
manners and sundry times.

I shall endeavor to show,

1. What were these diverse manners or ways of Discovery.

2. What were the several times, or the several pieces and parcels of it. For
this is the Importance of the two words, (...) and (...).

1. I shall speak first to the manner, as being first in consideration, though
last mentioned in the Text.

The Lord was pleased herein to use great variety; he did not limit and confine
himself to one way and manner of Discovery; but he spoke sometimes in one
manner and sometimes in another. It concerns us to enquire into it, so far as
we have Scripture Light to guide us. For we are built upon the Foundations of
the Prophets and Apostles. Ephesians. 2.20. Yet we must do it with Sobriety of
Spirit, eschewing and taking heed of vain Curiosity. For they themselves who
received those extraordinary Manifestations did not always fully know the
manner of them in all circumstances: as the Apostle Paul himself knew not
whether in the Body, or out of the Body. 2 Cor. 12.

This is one of the great things God does, which we cannot comprehend, as Elihu
speaks, Job. 37.5.

Yet so far as the Scripture goes before us, we may safely follow.

These diverse manners therefore of Gods speaking or revealing his Mind of old,
may be referred chiefly to these seven Heads.

1. By Visions. 2. By Dreams. 3. By Voices. 4. By inward Inspirations and
Impulses of his Spirit. 5. By legal Types and Shadows. 6. By Signs and Wonders.
7. By a special and peculiar kind of Intimacy and Familiarity.
1. The Lord was wonted then to speak by Visions, I mean visible Apparitions
and Representations of things to the eye; the person being awake and not
asleep. I do not mean things represented merely to the Mind and inward
Thoughts; for this will come in afterward under another head, namely, that of
inward Inspiration and Revelation; but I speak now of such Visions wherein
things were really and indeed objected to the outward Senses. Hence the
Prophets are called Seers; hence that phrase, the Visions of God, used
concerning Prophesies.

And what was it that they saw?

Sometimes they saw God himself, sometimes the Angels, and sometimes other
things were represented, and did appear in Vision to them.

1. Sometimes the Lord himself did appear in Visions to them: not as though his
Essence were corporeal or visible. He dwells in Light unapproachable, 1 Timothy
6.16. whom no man has seen, nor can see; but created Manifestations and
Representations of his Glory he did appear in. So Exodus 20.18. -- and 19.18,
19, 20 Jehovah descended symbolically, in regard of the glorious tokens and
symbols of his Presence.

But then they saw no similitude, only Fire and Smoke, and the Mountain
shaking. Deuteronomy. 4.12.

Exodus 24.10, 11. And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet,
as it were a paved work of a Sapphire stone -- also they saw God, and did eat
and drink.

Exodus 34.5, 6. And the Lord descended in the Cloud, and stood with him there,
and proclaimed the Name of the Lord, and the Lord passed by before him, and
proclaimed etc.

It seems by the expressions, Deum humana effigy pertranfijsse; that God
passed by in an humane shape.

All the three Persons of the Trinity have appeared distinctly in visible
Representations.

God the Father and the Son. Dan. 7.9 -- 13. I beheld till the Thrones were
cast down, and the ancient of days did sit; -- I saw in the night Visions; and
behold one like the Son of Man came with the Clouds of Heaven to the ancient of
days -- Revel. 4.1. compared with Chap. 5.7. where we find that the Lamb took
the Book out of the right hand of him that sat upon the Throne.

So that here be two of those glorious Persons distinctly appearing.

Ezekiel. 1.26. Above the Firmament there was the likeness of a Throne, and upon
it the likeness as the appearance of a Man about it -- It seems to be meant of
God the Father, because Ezekiel. 9.2, 4. He is distinguished from the Man with a
Writers Inkhorn by his side, who is thought to be our only High Priest the Lord
Jesus Christ.

The second Person Jesus Christ.

To Moses, Exodus 3.2, 4. For he is called the Angel, which agrees not so well
to the first Person.

And Moses prays for his Good will, Deuteronomy. 33.16.

Therefore it was not any created Angel, but Jesus Christ the Angel of the
Covenant of Grace; as a praeludium to his Incarnation.

So to Isaiah 6.1. he saw the Lord. It is the Lord Jesus Christ, so it is
interpreted, John 12.41.

So Genesis 32.24. And Jacob was left alone, and there wrestled a Man with him
until the breaking of the day; that is, God in the form of a Man, as the old
Geneva Note has it. The Prophet Hosea says, it was God, Hos. 12.3, 4. and
Jacob wept and made supplication unto him, and there he, or God, spoke with us.

The third Person, the Holy Ghost in the shape of a Dove at the Baptism of
Jesus Christ. Matthew. 3.

2. Sometimes Angels have appeared, sometimes in Bodies of humane shape,
provided for them by the Power of God, either created of nothing, and after the
Apparition annihilated; or compacted of the four Elements, and especially of
Air condensed, and then resolved again, after the Appearance was past, into the
matter of which they were compounded.

As to Lot, Genesis 19.1, 10. And there came two Angels to Sodom, and Lot seeing
them rose up to meet them, and bowed himself with his Face to the ground. These
Angels verse. 10. are called Men.

To David, 2. Sam. 24.17. And David spoke unto the Lord, when he saw the Angel
that smote the People, and said, Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly
etc. He saw the Angel. Which is further explained, 1 Chronicles. 21.16. And David
lift up his eyes, and saw the Angel of the Lord stand between the Earth and the
Heaven with a drawn Sword in his hand.

At Christ's Resurrection diverse Angels appeared in the shapes of Men, Matthew.
28.2, 3. An Angel rolled back the Stone from the door of the Sepulcher, and
sat upon it, etc. Luke 24.4. Behold two Men stood by them in shining Raiment.

So at his Ascension, Acts 1.10. Behold two Men stood by them in white Apparel.

Sometimes the Angels did appear not only in humane shapes, but with other
Representations accompanying them: as Horses and Chariots of Fire, that is,
with Riders upon them. 2 Kings 6.17. Behold, the Mountain was full of Horses
and Chariots of Fire round about Elisha. Zach. 1.8. Behold a Man riding upon a
red Horse, and behind him there were red Horses speckled and white -- and 6.1.
there came four Chariots out from between the two Mountains. ver. 5. These are
the four Spirits of the Heavens.

3. Sometimes other things were represented and shown in Vision to them, to
signify to them the Mind of God: as Jerem. 1.11, 13. The Prophet there sees
the Rod of an Almond tree, and a seething pot, with the face thereof toward the
North

So Amos cap. 7. ver. 1, 4, 7, 8. has several things presented in Vision to him.

And this is one of these diverse manners of the Lords speaking, viz. by
Visions, or Representations to the eye waking.

2. Another manner was by Dreams, that is, by Representation of things to the
Fancy in sleep: and they had not only things presented, but usually Words
spoken, to interpret them.

Sometimes the Lord gave divine Dreams to wicked men; as to Pharaoh and
Nebuchadnezzar, but they knew not what they meant, and so were not Prophets;
but the Lord sent the Interpretation by others, who were his faithful Servants.
But the Prophets and Servants of God usually had both the Dream, and some
further light for the Perception and Interpretation of it.

As to Abraham, Genesis 15.12. And when the Sun was going down, a deep sleep fell
upon Abram, and lo, an horror of great Darkness fell upon him, and he said
unto Abram, know of a surety, etc. ver. 13.

And to Jacob, Genesis 28.12, 13. the Dream of the Ladder, ver. 12. is interpreted
to him by God in the following verses, and 31.11, 12. The Angel of the Lord
appeared to Jacob in a Dream, and speaks unto him: and 46.2. God spoke unto
Israel in the Visions of the night.

So to Daniel, cap. 7. 1, 7, 13. the diverse night Visions he had there are
afterward interpreted to him, ver. 15, etc.

To Joseph, Matthew. 1.20. An Angel of the Lord appeared to him in a Dream,
saying, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy Wife: and Matthew. 2.13, 19. An Angel
of the Lord appears in a Dream to him, saying, arise, and take the young
Child and his Mother, and go into the Land of Israel. This way and manner of
speaking seems to have been very frequent and usual in those ancient times: as
those words of Elihu intimate, Job. 33.14, 15, 16. For God speaks once, yea
twice, in a Dream, in a Vision of the night, See Aynsworth on Genesis 20.3. and
Genesis 37.5.
when deep sleep falls upon Men, in slumbers upon the bed, then he opens
the Ears of Men, etc.

3. A third manner was by Voices, by an audible Voice uttered either by God
himself immediately, or the Angels.

And these audible Voices are accompanied sometimes with visible Appearances to
the eye; but sometimes the Voice alone without any visible apparition.

To our first Parents, Genesis 3.3. It was the Voice of God, and not of an Angel.
For he says, the Tree which I commanded etc.

But the most famous Instance hereof was at the giving of the Law upon Mount
Sinai, Exodus 19, and 20. where the Lord spoke with an audible Voice from Heaven:
chap. 19. 9, 20. so that the People might hear; and chap. 20. 22. and see, that
the Lord talked with them from Heaven.

Deuteronomy. 5.22, 23, 24. These words the Lord spoke unto all your Assembly in the
Mount, out of the midst of the Fire, of the Cloud, and of the thick Darkness,
with a great Voice.

And when ye heard the Voice --

Heb. 12.26. Whose Voice then shook the Earth:

So Matthew. 17.5. A Voice out of the Cloud said, this is my beloved Son --

But they saw no similitude, Deuteronomy. 4.12.

1 Kings 19.12, 13. A still small Voice.

4. By an inward Instinct; by immediate Inspirations and Impulses of the Holy
Ghost.

So to David 1 Chronicles. 28.12, 19. though he had it in Writing also, and left it
to his Son -- But it was revealed to him by the Spirit of God.

So to Philip, Acts 8.29. The Spirit said unto Philip --

To Peter, Acts 10.19. The Spirit said unto him, and Acts. 11, 12. the Spirit
bade me go with them --

To Paul and Silas, Acts 16.7. Not to go into Bithynia; but the Spirit suffered
them not.

5. By legal Types and Shadows: These were speaking things. And what did they
speak? They spoke forth Gospel Truths and Mysteries.

The Ceremonial Law was the Gospel in Types and Shadows. Heb. 10.1. The Law
having a shadow of good things to come. A Type is a legal shadow of Gospel
Truths and Mysteries. These were the standing Ordinances and Instructions of
those times.

6. By Signs and Wonders. These had a Voice, and did speak the Mind of God:
These were attestations to the Truth and Mind of God, and to the Authority of
the Messenger.

See Exodus 4.8. If they will not believe thee, nor hearken to the Voice of the
first Sign, they will believe the Voice of the latter Sign -- Joh. 3.2. We know
that thou art a Teacher come from God: For no man can do these Miracles that
thou do, except God be with him.

The Lord may work Miracles now.

But he does not now send forth any person with a Commission to do it, as he
did of old.

7. By a special and peculiar kind of intimacy and familiarity; as it were
mouth to mouth, without Parable or Riddle; without Obscurity; with all possible
familiarity.

And this was Moses his Privilege, Numb. 12.8. with him will I speak mouth to
mouth; apparently, and not in dark speeches. Exodus 33.11, 23. The Lord spoke to
him face to face, as a man speaks to his friend, -- thou shall see my back
parts --

That phrase of speaking mouth to mouth, notes the clearness, and certainty,
and familiarity of it: as when Joseph says, ye see it is my mouth that
speaks unto you. Genesis 45.12. This was a privilege peculiar unto Moses. Deuteronomy.
34.10. There arose no Prophet like him since, whom the Lord knew face to face.

That that comes nearest to it seems to be the ineffable things that Paul saw
and heard in the third heaven. 2 Cor. 12.1, 2, 3, 4 -- and the Revelation given
to the Apostle John in the Isle of Patmos, which is the clearest, and yet
withal the deepest and most wonderful of all the Prophesies recorded in the
Scripture.

There be two Questions may arise here, which would be briefly spoken to.

Quest. 1. Whether there were not counterfeits of these things, and if there
were, how did they discern the Lords voice in these extraordinary dispensations
from Satan's voice in his delusions.

Answ. It is true, there were counterfeits of them; there were Visons, Dreams,
seeming Miracles, Impulses from Satan, as well as from God. Diabolus est Dei
simia.

Hence that Caution of Moses, Deuteronomy. 13.1.

And hence are those complaints of the Prophet Jeremy, cap. 14. 13, 14, 15.

1 Kings 22.22, 23. That famous Instance of a lying Spirit in the mouths of
Ahabs Prophets.

Therefore to have a Vision, to dream strange and supernatural Dreams, to have
a powerful Impetus and afflatus from a Spirit, are not things simply peculiar
to the true Prophets of God.

But though Satan did, partly out of Craft, to deceive thereby the more
effectually, and partly out of Blasphemy and Malice, to put an affront as it
were upon God, use ways and means of deceiving, that had some resemblance of
Gods own ways and Ordinances; yet there were manifest and palpable differences
between them. I shall name but these four;

1. The Lord did not usually suffer Satan to transform himself so far into an
Angel of Light, as to come in these ways unto his own people, unto such as were
truly Godly.

Search the Scriptures, and you will not find, that Satan did appear to give
Satanical Dreams and Visions, and the like, to such as were Godly: It is true,
he did tempt them, but in a more spiritual manner, as he tempted David to
number the people.

Or by other outward means: As when the young Prophet that came from Bethel was
deceived by the old one.

But when Satan did inspire any with Dreams and Visions, etc. it was done to
wicked and ungodly men. As to Saul, when he raised up the Devil, he and and the
Witch saw the Gods, that is, Spirits, infernal Spirits ascending up out of the
Earth.

And to the false Prophets of Ahab, those four hundred-Idolaters; they spoke as
Prophets, and were acted by a Spirit; but it was a lying Spirit, and they were
lewd and wicked men: so that there was a great difference in the Person or
Subject recipient of Divine Revelations, and of Satanical Delusions.

2. In Divine Discoveries there was an holy Elevation of their Minds when they
did receive them; but in the Organs and Instruments of Satan, there was only a
stupefaction and depression of them.

As when John did receive the Revelation, he was in the Spirit, chap. 1. 10.

Sometimes they were so far elevated, and raised, and acted by the Spirit, that
they did not attend to any other thing; but were transported above Sense and
sensible things, to attend wholly to the Visions and Revelations of God:

So Peter fell into a Trance, Acts. 10.10.

Paul was (...), Acts 22.17.

Hence oftentimes they fell upon their Faces, being astonished at the Majesty
and Glory of the Lord; both gracious and natural Fear concurring -- Ezekiel: 1.28.
Dan: 10.8, 9. Matthew. 17.6, 7.

But this Ravishment of Spirit was not a stupefaction, but an holy Elevation of
their Minds, whereby they were taken off and lifted up above all these low
things, to the highest exercise of Faith and spiritual Reason, and so better
fitted and composed to receive those Divine Irradiations and Manifestations of
God:

So Daniel 10.1. He understood the thing, and had understanding of the Vision:

So Balaam, when the Lord was pleased in an extraordinary case to act him after
the manner of a true Prophet, Numb. 24.4, 16. falling into a trance, but having
his eyes open.

But on the contrary, such as were acted by Satan, they had their extatical
Furies, wherein their Minds were so discomposed, that they were not compotes
sanae mentis. As some have written of the Sybils, that when after their
Prophesyings, they came to themselves again, they had forgotten what they had
said, and so could not review and correct what was written from them:

But it was not so with the Prophets of God, John wrote, and had Order to write
his Apocalypse: and so the other Prophets.

And when those to whom, and by whom the Devil spoke, were not discomposed to
such a degree, even to fury and Distraction; yet they were always debased and
brought down below themselves. The Lords Prophets were raised above themselves:
These were depressed even below themselves by dealing with Satan.

3. The Prophets and Servants of God had an inward Seal from God of the Truth
of what they spoke. Not unlike that new Name in the white Stone, which none
could read but he that had it. Revel. 2.17. Jer. 11.18. -- They believed, and
therefore spoke. 2 Cor. 4.13. See Isai. 52.6. My people shall know that I am he
that does speak, behold it is I.

The true Prophets were no Scepticks; they were as sure of what they said, that
it was the Mind of God, as Ministers are now, when they preach the Gospel. 1.
Joh. 1.1, 2.

On the contrary, those by whom Satan spoke, either knew that they were acted
by the Devil, as the Witch at Endor; Or else were deluded by him to think it
was God; or else knew not, but were uncertain in themselves.

4. They had also some of those ordinary Rules of Trial that we have now. As
for instance. If God confute them by the event. Deuteronomy. 18.21, 22, -- or if it
correspond with the event; yet if it be contrary to the Fundamentals of
Religion. See Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. Or if they be wicked men on the one side, and
the Prophets of the Lord on the other -- This gave some glimmerings of Light to
Jehosaphat. 1 King. 22.7. They were Baalites, pretenders indeed to Jehovah; but
superstitious wretches; therefore he could not acquiesce in what they had said.

Quest. 2. Whether these ways of Discovery be now ceased, yea or no?

Answ. As to that, the Text is plain enough: That instead of all those diverse
manners used by God of old, he has now substituted instead thereof this one
and only way of revealing himself, viz. in and by his Son.

And his Son speaks by his Word and Ordinances; as also by the Works of his
Providence, in all which his Spirit breaths: Therefore there we are to meet
with God, and to hear his Voice, and there only to expect it.

These old things are vanished away.

Some think there be some footsteps of them to this day.

See a notable Instance of Information by a Dream in the Life of Zuinglius
Melch. Adam. p. 43. And of a Vision in Melancthon on Daniel 10.

1, But first such things are altogether extraordinary: the Lord goes out of
his ordinary course, when he does such things; they are not the standing ways
that God has appointed under the Gospel; therefore they are not to be expected
or trusted to.

2. They are only to be regarded in the way of a Providence, not in the way of
an Ordinance, and to be tried and judged by the Matter of them, as agreeing or
disagreeing with the Scripture. As if a man in a Dream have some Duty, some
Scripture-truth brought to him, he is to observe and accept the Providence of
God in it: Or if he find a strong impulse or motion of the Spirit in his Heart,
whereby some Truth or Duty is strongly impressed and set upon his Heart; Let
him examine it by the Scripture, and if the Scripture say, it is a Duty, he is
to look at that internal motion and impression, as a motion of the Spirit of
God, else not.

Use 1. See the variety of Gods Wisdom and Goodness to his people, that he has
so many ways revealed himself to them.

Use 2. We may see something of the lowness of that legal Dispensation, from
this which has been said, that the Lord spoke in such diverse manners.

Use 3. Bless God for the days wherein we live, and for the Dispensation we are
under. It is much clearer and better. For it is by his Son, speaking by his
Word, working and breathing by his Spirit. The Light shines much clearer. We
see that which many Kings and Prophets and righteous men have desired to see,
and have not seen; as Matthew. 13.17. Luke 10.24. Christ spoke it to his
Disciples then, but it holds true concerning all the Saints under the New
Testament.

It is true; there was a Cloud of Antichristian Darkness did arise, which did
exceedingly obscure Gospel Light. But that Cloud was never so dark, but that
the Elect of God did see through it in some measure.

Moreover the Lord has begun to dispel and scatter those Clouds of
Antichristian Darkness, and will in time scatter them from off the face of the
earth.

2. We are now to speak to the second Word, these diverse times.

Having showed the diverse Manners of the Lords speaking to his people of old,
we are now to show the diverse Times, or seasons, wherein he did it. For he
spoke not only (...), but (...), by piecemeal, not all at once, but here a
little, and there a little; first one piece of his Mind was discovered at one
time, then another piece at another time; first a little Light brake forth,
some darker hints and intimations, then further and clearer Discoveries and
Manifestations by degrees.

In the opening of this we shall have occasion to run through some general
heads of the History of the Church throughout the Scripture, till the coming of
Jesus Christ.

And it is an Inquiry both useful and profitable, and also pleasant and
delightful to an inquisitive Mind; to view the several states of Religion, and
of the Church of God in the several ages of the World.

Under every one of which we shall have occasion to take notice both of Gods
Manifestations, and of men's Departures from the Lord, and from the Truth; That
we may see the occasion of every new Discovery; they departed and destroyed
themselves; and then the Lord appeared again in recovering Dispensations.

Now these (...), these several pieces and parcels of the Lords Discoveries and
Manifestations of himself may be referred to two general heads.

1. Before the Law. 2. Under the Law.
These were the two great pieces of it, and the Scripture takes notice of them
both.

Of that Dispensation that was before the Law, from Adam to Moses; as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 5.14. Death reigned from Adam to Moses.

Of the Dispensation under the Law, our Savior speaks, Matthew. 11.13. For all
the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John: again Luke 16.16. the Law and
the Prophets were until John.

The difference between these two lay chiefly in this; that under the former
Dispensation, the ordinary way of preserving the Knowledge of God, was only by
oral Tradition: But from Moses his time, it was committed to Writing.

In both these the Church of God was under years, in a state of Childhood, Gal.
4.1, 3. But in the former, viz. the time before the Law, they were little
Children, it was the very Infancy and first and weak beginnings of the Church.

This Period of the Churches Infancy may be subdivided into three particulars.

1. The Dispensation they were under from Adam to Noah. 2. From Noah to
Abraham. 3. From Abraham to Moses.
1. Adams Dispensation, I mean, after the Fall. For it is the gradual breakings
forth of Gospel Light whereof the Text speaks.

We are to consider how the Lord then spoke, and how far he revealed himself in
that age and state of Mankind. Besides what was common to all times, viz. the
Works of God, and the Light implanted in man's heart: there were several things
that were the special Discoveries and Light of that Age, I shall instance in
four particulars.

1. The Lord, having convinced them of their Sin, gave them that famous
Promise, that the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents Head, Genesis 3.15.

This was the first Beam of Gospel Light that ever brake forth unto lost and
fallen Man: A comprehensive Promise, which includes the whole Gospel; as you
have formerly heard in many particulars upon that Text, Genesis 3.15.

This great and precious Promise they and all the Saints for almost four
thousand years did believe and live upon, waiting and longing for the coming of
that blessed Seed, that victorious Seed, that should slay the Dragon, and
destroy the Works of the Devil; as 1 John 3.8.

It is thought that Eve did hope to have seen him in her days, and that she her
self should have been the immediate Mother of the Messiah: And thence she
called her first Son Cain, Possession; thinking she had now got the Promise in
possession and performance: But afterward perceiving her mistake and
disappointment, she called her next Son Abel, Vanity: As it is a common error,
that we are apt to run into in the exercise of Faith upon the Promises; we are
apt to antedate the time of performance, which is from a secret mixture and
working of unbelief; for he that believes shall not make haste, Isai. 28.16.

2. To this Promise the Lord added some outward and visible Signs and Tokens
for the further help of Faith. In all times ever since God made Man, he has
given him some outward and sensible things, to be Signs and Representations of
spiritual things, as being suitable to the Nature of such a Creature, Man
consisting both of Soul and Body.

Even before the Fall there were two Sacramental Trees, the Tree of Life, and
the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil: and now under the Gospel, we have two
Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

So in these first times after the Fall, they had something of the like nature:
The signal instance hereof is, the Sacrifices, or the slaying of clean Beasts,
and offering them, and other things up to God to make atonement. For it is
expressed that Cain and Abel did it, Genesis 4.3, 4. and Noah afterward. Which to
have done without Order from God, had been detestable and abominable. Therefore
there is no doubt, but as they were taught by their Parents; so their Parents
were instructed from the Lord about it.

And in Noah's time, we find there was a distinction of Beasts into clean and
unclean, Genesis 7.2. that is, clean for Sacrifice. For it does not appear, that
any of them were used for Food before the Flood.

What this aimed at, the Scripture is plain, Heb. 9.22. Without shedding of
Blood, there is no Remission of Sins: and Christ is said to offer up himself a
Sacrifice for us, Ephesians. 5.2. therefore they did look at Christ.

Before Sin there was no need of any Sacrifice for Expiation of Sin.

Hence among the Gentiles they had a custom of sacrificing, from some slender
Fame remaining among them of such an Institution: for it was no part of the
Light of Nature; though they were ignorant of the true God, the true Object to
whom to present their Sacrifices: Hither also some refer that passage, Genesis
3.21. Unto Adam also, and to his Wife, did the Lord God make Coats of Skins,
and clothed them. This is thought to have a further Mystery included and aimed
at in it. For there is a spiritual Clothing often spoken of in Scripture.

As they were under a double Nakedness both of Soul and Body; their Souls
divested of Gods Image, and original Righteousness, and their Bodies overspread
with Shame: so the Lord provided a double Clothing for them: He did not clothe
their Bodies, and leave their Souls naked; but he gave them both the upper
Garment of Justification, and imputed Righteousness, and the inner Garment of
Sanctification and Grace inherent.

This may be considered also under another Notion, as one of the Favors of
Providence unto those first times of fallen Mankind; that now was the Invention
of many useful Arts and Sciences. Here God himself vouchsafes to teach them how
to make Clothes.

We read also in Genesis 4. of sundry other Arts and Occupations, as ver. 20.
Jabal was the Father of such as dwell in Tents, and of such as have Cattle. The
meaning of it is well explained in the Margent, the first Inventor of Tent
making, and of Pastorage and keeping Cattle. And his Brothers Name was Jubal:
he was the Father of all such as handle the Harp and Organ, ver. 21. the first
Inventor of Music, I mean Instrumental Music; For Vocal Music, Nature it
self teaches that. And ver. 22. The working of Metals, by Tubal-Cain, an
Instructor of every Artificer in Brass and Iron: whence arose the Heathenish
mistakes and fables of Vulcan.

These were great Mercies, and gave some further Discoveries of God to those
who had Eyes and Hearts to see him in his Works. For all lawful Arts and
Sciences, and all the Rules thereof, are Beams of Gods Wisdom, and Gifts, and
Operations of his Spirit, Prove. 8.12. I Wisdom dwell with Prudence, and find
out Knowledge of witty Inventors.

So Bezaleel and Aholiab, Exodus 31.3. I have filled him with the Spirit of God
in Wisdom, and Understanding, and in Knowledge, and in all manner of
Workmanship: and ver. 6. I have given with him Aholiab.

Those mean Trades and Occupations, Isai. 28. are the Gifts of God -- The Lord
teaches the Husbandman how to thresh his Corn, and to beat out the Cummin.

3. There was something also of Church Discipline exercised in those first Ages
of the Church.

A signal Instance hereof we have in Gain, Genesis 4.12. A Fugitive and a Vagabond
shall thou be in the earth. God himself pronounces Sentence upon him: ver. 16.
he is sent forth laden with the Curse of God from the Fellowship of his people.

This is thought to have been about the hundred and thirtieth year after the
Creation of the World. For probably Eves next Son, was the next year after
Abels Death, and then Adam was one hundred and thirty years old, Genesis 5.

Moreover it is noted, that in Enos his time there was a Reformation of things,
Genesis 4.26. then began men to call upon the Name of the Lord; which seems to be
meant of a Segregation of the precious from the vile.

1. It cannot be meant, that now men began to profane the Name of the Lord.
For the Apostasy began before in Cain, and his Crew, which was before the Birth
of Enos one hundred and six years.

2. Neither can it be meant, that now there was the first Religious Worship of
God. For that had been long before by Abel; and by Adam and Eve, and others of
the Godly in those times.

3. Therefore it seems clearly to be meant of some new Reformation of Religion:
the wicked party being grown by this time very numerous; the godly, as it
seems, withdrew from them; before, when there was but one Cain that had
fallen off, Reformation might be attained by thrusting him out from among them.

4. But now, so great a number, and perhaps the greater part being corrupted,
the Godly might not continue and mingle themselves with them; nor could they
cast them forth. For this, a minor part could not do to the greater part.

5. Therefore they could do no more but withdraw and walk by themselves; and so
they came to be called the Sons of God, that is, Professors of the true
Religion; who were called by this Name; and the other were but Sons of Men.

From all which, it is matter of admiration, that there should be so much of
opposition and aversion in the Minds of some, unto all manner of
Church Government and Discipline at this day, in this height of Gospel Light:
the outward Signs and Ceremonies of Religion having been connected with
Discipline in all Ages, from the first Manifestation of the Gospel, even until
now.

4. The Lord did in those days inspire, and raise up some to be Prophets and
Preachers of Righteousness; besides the Instructions of all the godly Parents
to the Children.

There were some persons peculiarly eminent amongst them: as Enoch; he
prophesied that there was a day of Judgment coming, Jude. 14. which was partly
fulfilled in Noah's Flood; but shall be more fully and perfectly at the great
Day.

The Name of his Son Methuselah was a Prediction of the Flood. For it
signifies Mortis Gladius, the Dart of Death; or when he is dead, God will send
his sword, his Dart and Arrows of Divine Wrath and Vengeance against a wicked
World.

And lastly Noah himself a Preacher of Righteousness, he lived amongst them six
hundred years before the Flood, and he preached and prophesied of the Flood for
a hundred and twenty years before it came. Of whom we shall speak further by
and by.

Now this first Dispensation of the Lord unto his Church, continued from first
to last about sixteen hundred fifty six years. For so long it was from Adam to
the Flood: as you will find, if you compute and put together the Lives and Ages
of those ten Antediluvian Patriarchs recorded in the fifth Chapter of Genesis.

But there was an Apostasy, a falling away from God under this Dispensation. It
began in Cain, and his Unbelief of the Gospel. For by Faith Abel offered a more
acceptable Sacrifice than he, Heb. 11.4. therefore the others wanting Faith,
made his unacceptable: At last he kills his Brother, and being dealt with by
God about it, he repented not, Genesis 4. But in time the Apostasy grew about it,
he repented not, Genesis 4. But in time, the Apostasy grew to its height; that all
Flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth, Genesis 6.12. and there was a general
Atheism and Profaneness, Job. 22.16, 17.

The Apostasy under this Adamical Dispensation of the Gospel (for I know not
what fitter term to express it by) consisted chiefly in three things.

1. Sensuality and brutish Lusts, they took their swinge in their Lusts. This
is mentioned in Genesis 6.2. and Matthew. 24.38. The Sons of God saw the Daughters
of Men, and took them Wives -- Hence arose all the Heathenish Fables of the
Adulteries and Whoredoms of their Gods. For the old Pagan Gods were indeed no
other, but those old Gigantine Rebels and Sinners against the Lord in the first
times and ages of the World.

2. Violence and Oppression, Genesis 6.11. The Earth also was corrupt before God,
and the Earth was filled with Violence. Being men of great Strength, and many
of them no doubt Giants, they did whatsoever they list.

3. Sinful Mixtures and Confusion between the Church and the World, Genesis 6.2.
The Sons of God, that is, the Professors of Religion, married with the
Daughters of Men, that is, Professors with such as were profane. The Sons of
God cannot be meant of the Angels, for they were not capable of bodily Lusts,
they could not fall in love with Women.

Hereupon the Lord brought in Desolation, and cut them down with a Flood: as
Job. 22.16. and so put this Adamical Dispensation to an end: but brought in
another, and a new Dispensation of himself, viz.

2. To Noah and his Posterity. This was the Lords second Dispensation to his
People. For the Lord would not yet cast off his Care of wretched Man; but
recover him, and set him up again once more.

Now unto all the former Discoveries there were several additions. For that
great Gospel-Promise, that a Savior should come, and that the Seed of the
Woman should break the Serpents Head; they had that, and did live upon it
still; they had also Sacrifices, and Clothing, and Church Discipline; but new
Discoveries were added: The Lord spoke something more of his Mind unto them.
There were some further Beams of Light appearing and shining forth upon them.

1. He saved them by Water in the Ark, the Story whereof you have in the 6, 7,
and 8. Chap. of Genesis, remembered 1 Pet. 3. as a Type of Baptism.

And (by the way) this could not but be of great use to all Posterity. For
though Nature would teach men the use of Boats, and lesser Vessels, to pass the
lesser Brooks and Rivers: yet that they had any great Ships before the Flood is
not probable: So that here it seems was the beginning of the Art of Navigation
and Shipping.

2. He renews his Covenant With them, with Noah and all his Seed, even all
mankind; and gave them the Rainbow for an outward Sign and Pledge thereof, Genesis
9.8, 9, 12. to 18. (...)
This is the first instance where the word Covenant is used concerning the
Transactions between God and Men. The Rainbow was the Sign thereof, (the horns
downwards, and the back upwards to Heaven, intimating that the Lord will not
shoot out of his Bow the Arrow of another Deluge) which, whether it were there
before, and now only made a Sign of the Covenant, or that now it had its first
Existence is disputable. But it is probable enough, that it might be altogether
new: yea, though we suppose the Rainbow to arise from natural causes. For a
years Deluge could not but cause a great alteration in all the Elements, and in
the Clouds, and in the Air, whereby there might new Phenomenon, new appearances
in the Heavens, which never were before.

Moreover it might be produced by a new creating Power of Providence; beyond
the force of any natural causes, and also instituted for a Sign of the Covenant.

It could not have afforded any great assurance to them, if they had only the
seeing and beholding of it, (which was all that was to be done in this
Sacrament,) to see nothing but what they had seen before; could yield but small
comfort and assurance to that new World.

And that this Covenant had a further Mystery in it, than merely outward
Preservation from another Deluge; See Caryl on Job. 37.15.
See Isai. 54.9. For this as the is Waters of Noah unto me -- The Covenant of
my Peace shall not be removed.

The Rainbow therefore was a Sign of the Covenant of Grace. Hence Revel. 4.3.
Behold a Throne was set in Heaven, and one sat on the Throne -- and there was
a Rainbow round about the Throne. Confer. on Romans 5.14. of Noah as a personal
Type.
Revel. 10.1. Christ the Angel of the Covenant is described, as having a
Rainbow upon his Head.

3. He inlargeth their provision of Food to eat, by giving them a Commission to
eat the Flesh of the Brute creatures, Genesis 9.3. At first there is no mention of
any other provision, but the Fruits of the Earth, Genesis 1.29. But there was need
of some further supply; because it is probable, that the Vigor of the Earth,
and the Virtue of the Herbs and Plants, and Fruits thereof could not but be
somewhat impaired and decayed by that whole years Winter.

Therefore, for men upon a Religious account to forbid the eating of some
Meats, as the Papists forbid Flesh in Lent, it is a superstitious Infringement
of the Liberty here granted, and given by the Lord unto all the Sons of Noah.

4. The Blood was wholly reserved and excepted, Genesis 9.4. But Flesh with the
Life thereof, which is the Blood thereof, shall ye not eat. This seems to be
done partly upon a moral, and partly upon a spiritual and Ceremonial account.

Moral, for man's Health, and to prevent that Ferity and Savageness which
Mankind is so apt to degenerate into: as in some barbarous Nations, they would
drink the living Blood out of the Horse they rode upon, opening a Vein with an
Instrument when they were thirsty. This is barbarous and savage, and this
Prohibition here given excludes and forbids such a Practice; which those Giants
of wickedness before the Flood, it is not improbable, but that to other
barbarous and raging sins, they might add the eating of living Creatures alive;
therefore the Lord does so directly and expressly interdict and forbid it.

And it is the Judgment of some very learned men, that the eating of Blood
cold, and dressed as other Meat, was not at all forbidden. For the Prohibition
lies not directly against Blood, but against the eating of living Flesh, Flesh
animated with the living Blood: For the Blood is the Seat and Chariot of the
Life and Vital Spirits.

Some think it was done upon a Ceremonial account. The Blood was reserved as a
sacred thing unto the Lord, till such time as that precious Blood was shed,
which has put an end to all Types and Shadows. This is expressed Levit. 17.11.
I have given it to you upon the Altar, to make an atonement for your Souls: For
it is the Blood that makes an atonement for the Soul: as the former moral
Reason is expressed, v. 14.

It is true, the Ceremonial Law came by Moses; but the meaning is, not that
there were no parts at all of it before his time; for there were Sacrifices
from the Fall of Man: But the meaning is, that Moses did incorporate and sum
them all up together, with many divine enlargements and additions, into that
great body of Ceremonial Laws by him established and settled in that Church and
People of Israel. Therefore there might be a Ceremonial Prohibition of Blood
even from Noah's time.

5. The Lord now gave unto Mankind that great Ordinance of Magistracy, Genesis
9.6. Whosoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed. Of which
Divines say truly, that it is Remedium corruptae Naturae. But yet corrupt
Nature, so far as appears out of the sacred History, never had the Use and
Benefit of it till now: but rather on the contrary, the Lord secures Cain, as
it were, by special Dispensation, Genesis 4.15. The Government of the World before
seems to have been only domestical and paternal, which might easily be; Parents
then living so long as to see whole Towns and Cities of their own Children and
Posterity: But this paternal way of Government was so mild, that it was not
effectual and sufficient to restrain Vice and Wickedness; but it grew to such
Gigantick strength and height, that there was a necessity to cut them down with
a Flood.

But therefore now to prevent the like Degeneracy and Destruction, the Lord
puts a stronger Bridle of Restraint upon the outrageous Wickedness and
Corruption of man's Nature, namely this of Magistracy or Civil Government,
whereby some are entrusted with the Power of the Sword, to take away the Lives
of others in grosser cases, especially that of Murder.

6. God divided the World amongst them, Genesis 10. which consisted of three parts
then known, though not by these names, to wit, Asia, Africa, and Europe,
whereof Sems Posterity dwelt chiefly in Asia, Chams in Africa, and to Japhets
Posterity Europe fell, known in Scripture by this name, The Isles of the
Gentiles, Genesis 10.5. of whose Posterity we our selves are.

And now one would think Mankind was happy, when God thus sets them up again,
begins with them upon a new score as it were.

But there were three or four things especially that did ruin all, and brought
this Dispensation to an end.

1. The Apostasy of Cham and his Posterity, Genesis 9.22. an unnatural sin, to
despise and dishonor his Parents, Calvin apud Wallet in Cor.
and himself not a Child when he did this, but above a hundred years old, ver.
25. the Curse is thundered forth against Canaan: so the Punishment answers the
Sin. Cham is an ungratious Son to his Father, therefore he has a cursed Son.

And perhaps Canaan might be present and Partner in his Fathers Sin; or the
most delightful of his Children, being the youngest; and so the Cursing him
would be most likely to pierce and grieve his Fathers hard Heart: and it may be
so expressed for the greater comfort of the Israelites, that the Nation they
were to expel, were a Generation of the Curse of God: But certain it is, that
Cham himself was intended, and cursed in that Curse. This fell out about forty
years (as some reckon) after the Flood.

2. That impious attempt of building the Tower of Babel, Genesis 11.4. whether to
secure themselves from another Deluge, through their unbelief and distrust of
Gods Promise; or thinking to climb into Heaven, a mad Project, but Sinners act
sometimes at a strange rate of Madness, not knowing what they do; or that they
were moved and acted by Pride and Vain glory, to get them a Name: This the Text
expresses, being probably the end most generally aimed at by them; though it
is like they had various motives and inducements, and those very foolish and
wicked.

This Defection was from that of Chams, about sixty two years, as some compute.

3. There was a ruining Judgment came upon them for this sin, viz. the
Confusion and Division of Tongues; a just and severe punishment (the Hebrew
being retained among the godly Seed of Heber: which was so denominated from
him, because his Posterity were the chief Preservers of it) which was a
punishment that did increase the Apostasy. For it made the Communication and
Propagation of the Light and Knowledge of God amongst them more difficult.

4. That provoking sin of Idolatry, I mean that grosser sort of it, worshipping
the Creatures and Images. That the rise of this Abomination was in this Period,
may appear thus.

If it had been before the Flood, doubtless the Lord would have mentioned it
amongst the Causes of that Destruction: he mentions other lesser sins, but not
this:

Moreover it was amongst Abraham's Ancestors when they dwelt beyond the River
Euphrates, Josh. 24.2. The place where this Delusion first arose, seems to be
Babylon, which is called the Mother of Fornications, which is meant of
Idolatry, and Spiritual Fornications, as well as bodily, Revel. 17.5.

And Chaldea the Land of graven Images, Jer. 50.38. therefore it is likely, the
first rise of this sin was at Babel, not long after the building of the Tower
of Babel; it being an usual stratagem of Satan, when his Kingdom has received
some deadly stroke in one form, to find out some new Appearance, some new
Device to appear in, to recover his Losses, and to seduce corrupted man again,
as Revel. 12. when the Dragon was cast down, when Paganish Idolatry was
destroyed, then he raises up Popish Idolatry, cap. 13. Beast-worship instead
of Dragon-worship.

So here Atheistical Profaneness being testified against by God from Heaven by
the Flood, and then again by confounding the Builders of Babel; Satan betakes
himself to this stratagem; that if there must be some Religion, and some
Worship amongst men; he would deceive them with a false Object, and so seduce
them from the Knowledge and Worship of the only true and living God, by
presenting a multitude of false Gods.

But thus this second Dispensation was corrupted and lost: whereupon the Lord
sets his Church and true Religion, as it were, upon a new bottom in Abraham and
his Seed.

This second Dispensation under Noah continued about four hundred twenty seven
years, as you will find it, if you compare the Lives of the Patriarchs, Genesis 11.

But you must remember in the computing of it, that Terah was a hundred and
thirty years old at Abraham's Birth, as appears out of cap. 11.32. compared with
cap. 12.4. For Abraham was but seventy five when his Father Terah died, being
two hundred and five. Now if seventy five be deducted out of two hundred and
five, there remains one hundred and thirty. In the rest of the Computation and
Chronology there is no difficulty.

3. And so we come to the Lords third Dispensation, which was that to Abraham
and his Seed. Wherein the Lord spoke forth something more of mind, than ever
formerly. There were now brighter Beams of Gospel Light shining forth upon the
Church of God than ever before. I shall instance but in four particulars.

1. The Lord calls him forth out of his own Country, and from his Fathers
House, and so plucks him like a Brand out of the Fire, from the midst of Idols
and Idolaters, Genesis 11.31, from Ur of the Chaldees to Haran, and Genesis 12. from
Haran into Canaan, Isai. 41.2. who raised up the Righteous man from the East.

2. He promised him a Seed, a blessed Seed; that of him should come that great
and blessed Seed so much expected and longed for by all the Saints ever since
the first Promulgation of the Gospel to our first Parents in Paradise: that
Seed in whom both he and all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed, Genes.
22.18.

Till then we do not find any particular and express mention of what Family the
Messiah should come.

But now this Promise of this Seed is renewed and repeated seven or eight times
over in the History of Abraham in Genesis: and it is a Promise, not only of a
numerous Posterity, and a Church-Seed, viz. his Posterity to be the only Church
of God on Earth; but which is more, a Promise of that great and blessed Seed.

3. He promised him also the Land of Canaan for an Inheritance unto his Seed
after him, when they had suffered, and been in an unsettled condition as
strangers and pilgrims four hundred and thirty years, Genesis 15.13. -- 18. which
was a typical Land, and did relate unto another and a better Country beyond
that, as Hebr. 11.

4. The Lord gave him Circumcision as a Seal of this Covenant, and of the
Righteousness of Faith, Genesis 17.10. This is my Covenant, which ye shall keep
between me and you, and thy Seed after thee -- Every manchild shall be
circumcised. Romans 4.11. He received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith.

The duration of this Dispensation, under which Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
the twelve Patriarchs and their Posterity continued and enjoyed God, till the
Lord provided further Mercies for them by the hand of Moses (of which
afterward) I say, this Period and State of the Church continued about four
hundred and thirty years, Genesis 15.13 --

We have now gone through the three first pieces, the three first steps and
degrees of the Lords gradual Patefactions and Manifestations of his Mind before
the giving of the Law.

Those other pieces of Discovery under the Law, we sall speak to (the Lord
assisting) afterward.

Mean while let us reflect a little upon this that has been said, in order to
some practical Improvement of it, in some practical Inferences and Instructions
from it.

Use 1. See the Infant state of the Church and true Religion, how low and weak
the first beginnings of it were. Christ compares it to a Grain of Mustard Seed
Matthew. 13.31, 32. in the first beginnings under the New Testament: It is true
also of the old times.

Instruct. 2. We may here see how prone Mankind is to degenerate, and fall from
God: God no sooner sets them up again, but they fall again.

The Church of God had stood but a matter of a hundred and thirty years in
Adams Family, which included all Mankind; when Cain falls into open Murder.

Well, he is turned out, and a matter of a hundred years after things are so
corrupted, that Seth calls his Son Enos, miserable man.

Well, about three hundred years after, (as some conjecture, for the particular
time is not set down in the sacred History, but it may be supposd to be
thereabouts from Cains Defection and Ejection,) there is a new Reformation in
the time of Enosh. How long this reformed state continued is not certain; but
sure it is, that when the World was but sixteen hundred fifty six years old,
there was such a general and universal Corruption of things, that the Lord
thought it necessary to cut them down with a Flood: That (as some have
expressed it) all mankind is sick of the Falling Sickness: Or, as the Lord
himself complains, Hos. 11.7. My People are bent to backsliding from me: though
they called them to the most High; yet none at all would exalt him: though the
Prophets called them to repent and turn to the Lord; yet there was none found
that would exalt and set up God in his heart and life. There is a backsliding
bent upon the Heart, like the Bias upon the Bowl, that turns it aside, a
departing disposition of spirit.

3. Behold and see the free Grace of God in so many recovering Dispensations,
and renewed Discoveries and manifestations of himself. Oh the Love of God to
worthless Man! he was loath to give up such a lost Creature. This is that Divine
Philanthropy, whereof the Apostle speaks, Tit. 3.4.

4. These old things being past and vanished away, do not sit down with
seize of such low Dispensations, but labor for such degrees of Light and
Grace, and Communion with God, as becomes Saints under the New Testament
Administrations.

Beloved, the Dispensation of the Age wherein we live is high and glorious: But
it may be thy particular Dispensation is low, thy own personal seize come
very short: Thou art but like a Believer that lived under Adams, under Noah's,
under Abraham's, Dispensation.

Signs of a Christian under a low Dispensation.

1. When there is an inordinate affecting, and a lusting after outward, and
visible, and extraordinary Appearances and Operations, such as they were Wont
to have in those childish times: Such may be Christians, and may have the root
of the matter in them; but they are Christians of the lowest form. There is a
lusting in our hearts, by nature, after such things, after extraordinary
Operations, which God is wont to cross, as he did in Naaman, 2 King. 5.11. so
when Christians linger much after, and lay much weight upon Dreams, and
Visions, and extraordinary Raptures, and Ravishments of Spirit: or it may be
looked after Miracles, if they hear of any vain pretender thereunto.

I had rather have a little solid Comfort in that good old plain Scripture way
of Faith and Repentance, and laboring with my own Heart to apply the Promises;
and I value this more, than if an Angel should appear to me out of Heaven, to
tell me, that I am a Child of God: For if an Angel should appear to me with
such a Message, I profess, I should not know whether to believe him or not; but
I am sure, that if I walk close with God, if I exercise my self unto Godliness,
and unto Communion with him in Faith and Prayer, and in seeking of him, and
humbling my self before him daily; I am sure, that in this way I cannot
miscarry; if the Gospel be true, I am safe, the Lord keeping me in that way.

I would not advise Believers utterly to reject all Evidences and Comforts,
where there is possibly something of Enthusiasm intermixed, if there be a
suitableness to their condition in the Promises brought to hand in such a way;
and if there be a spiritual Savor in the Heart, and a relish of the Gospel,
and the Promises and Blessings of it.

I say then, receive them which way soever they be brought to hand, though it
be by a Dream.

But I would exhort you not to rest in such a way; but labor for an higher and
more solid and spiritual way of Comfort, and Communion with God.

2. Art thou acted by a spirit of Light and Love, or Darkness and fear? have
thou a dark or clear Light?

It may be thy Candle gives but a dim Light, and smokes in the socket, as if it
were going out: Thou art dark, as to the Light and Work of this age. This is a
sign thou art but low in thy seize. Art thou acted by Fear or Love? If by
Fear only, this is low and legal: if by love also, this is Gospel-like.

The Law genders unto Bondage, Gal. 4.24. It was delivered Heb. 12.18. with
darkness and tempest: But the spirit of the Gospel is a spirit of Faith and
Love, not of Fear and terror.

3. Where there is an aptness to backslide and fall off from good beginnings,
and to fall again after recovering Dispensations. This is but a weak and infant
state; as little Children when first they begin to go, they catch many a fall.

4. Consider of what standing thy Profession is: at first all Believers are but
low and weak; but for an old Professor to be so, this is sad.

It may be thou have made a Profession of Religion ten or twenty years. It is
time for thee to put away childish things, Heb. 5.10. you might have been for
the time settled and established Christians, assured of Gods Love: but you are
yet under the power of sinful corruptions of Pride, and Peevishness, and
Passion; yet under darkness and prevailing doubts about your Interest in God;
and this after many years Profession of Religion: This might better become the
Sons of God under those old Dispensations, than one of thy years and standing.

We have briefly gone through the several pieces of Discovery, the several
Beams of Gospel Light that shone forth before the Law, during that first Period
from Adam to Moses.

The second grand Period is that under the Law, from Moses to the Messiah. This
we are now to speak unto: we may call it the Legal or the Mosaical Dispensation.

In this season there were further, and clearer, and more plentiful beamings
forth of Gospel Light upon the Church, above what had been before. Now might
the Spouse say, The Voice of my Beloved, behold he comes leaping upon the
Mountains, skipping upon the Hills, etc. Cant. 2.8, 9.

The Worship of God, and the true Religion and Church of God was now reduced to
a better consistence and settlement in the world than ever before.

There were two things especially which were the peculiar advantages of this
Dispensation under the Law, wherein it did excel the former, which was before
the Law.

1. That now the true Religion was preserved and propagated by Writing to
Posterity, which had been done before only or chiefly by Oral Tradition; which
might indeed be more easily done, Willet in Genesis 9 28
when men lived so many hundred years. For some have well observed, that three
Patriarchs, for the space of two thousand years and more, from the beginning of
the World to Isaac, might suffice to propagate true Religion. Adam to
Methuselah, who lived with him two hundred forty two years, Methuselah to Sem,
who lived almost an hundred years after Sem was born; and then Sem to Isaac;
for Sem lived five hundred and two years after the Flood, which reached to the
fiftieth year of Isaac. And then all the world had but one Language, whereby
they could speak and communicate their thoughts to whomsoever they would; yet
as to the generality of mankind the knowledge of God was quite lost and
forgotten by some, and by others corrupted with Fables and Superstitions.

Moreover, the Lives of men came now to be much shortened: For before the Flood
they lived eight or nine hundred years; after the Flood but four or five
hundred years. About the time of Peleg, when the Tower of Babel was built,
there was a further decurtation of men's Lives unto two hundred years or
thereabout. And lastly, in Moses his time, unto threescore or thereabout, and
there it has stood ever since.

Moreover there was a confusion of Languages, which did much increase the
Darkness, and obstruct the Communication and Diffusion of Light among them.

The way of Oral Tradition is a very insufficient way, and found by experience
so to be, as upon other accounts, so upon these occurring at this time.

1. In general, Knowledge of God in a manner lost. 2. The Decurtations of men's
Lives. 3. Through the Confusion of Tongues.
Upon all which Occurrences the Lord thought it fit to entrust his Truth no
longer with the frail and careless Memories of men; but to leave it upon Record
in Writing, a much safer and surer way for the Preservation and the Propagation
of it.

There is a threefold advantage of this way.

1. It is an help to the weakness of Memory: For if a thing be written, there
it is, and a man may recall it by reading, when he does not well remember it.

2. For the further Propagation and Diffusion of the Light: for there may be
opportunity of writing to persons absent, and and in after times, who may read,
when they have not opportunity of hearing.

3. To prevent Corruption: In the way of Oral Tradition some may say one thing
and some another.

2. A second pre-eminence and advantage of this Dispensation above the former,
was this, that now the Gospel, and the true Religion and Worship of God was
settled in a whole Nation and People by divine Promise and Institution: whereas
before it seems to have been only in Families and Congregations, formed chiefly
according to the Light of Nature, wherein the Ordinances of Worship were
celebrated by the Fathers and Heads of Families; but now a whole Nation are
made the Testes and Custodes of it, the Witnesses and the Keepers of it, as a
Depositum committed to their trust, Romans 3.2.

As to the Occasions of introducing this new Dispensation, they were partly the
defections under the former; but chiefly the Lords own Love and Goodness. For
he had engaged himself by his Promise, and by his Oath, wherein he had pawned
his Truth and Faithfulness to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, that he would do great
things for their Posterity. Therefore he is said to remember that Promise in
the things he did for Israel. See Psalm. 105.8, 9, 10. he shows that God
remembered his Covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Then follows a large
Rehearsal of his Dispensations toward Israel: And then he concludes again ver.
42, 43. For he remembered his holy Promise, and Abraham his Servant: and he
brought forth his People with joy, and his Chosen with gladness.

And there was need of some recovering Dispensation, because of those
defections that had been from under the Grace and Covenant made with Abraham.

If you look back a little unto Abraham's Dispensation, you will find, that some
of his Seed fell off, viz. Ishmael and Esau.

And the Seed of Jacob, when they were in Egypt, they learned too much of their
manners. It is thought their Calf in Exodus 32. Geneva Note on Exodus 32.4.
was made in imitation of the Egyptian Idol Apis, which was an Ox: They smelled
of the Leaven of Egypt, where they saw Calves, Oxen and Serpents worshipped.
See Ezekiel. 23.8. Neither left she her Whoredoms brought from Egypt: And what is
meant by this, is more clearly and expressly held forth Ezekiel. 20.8. neither did
they forsake the Idols of Egypt: Josh. 24.14. put away the Gods, which your
Fathers served on the other side of the Flood, and in Egypt.

Hereupon it was time for God to work, that he might not lose his People, and
to put things into some better way: And so he brought in another great
Dispensation, viz. that which was under the Law.

And as we subdivided the former Dispensation before the Law into three lesser
pieces and parcels, namely, Adams, Noah's and Abraham's Dispensation: so we must
subdivide this also into some lesser pieces.

This whole Dispensation under the Law may be subdivided into four particulars,
under each of which there were remarkable Changes made by God in the state of
Religion, and of his Church and People.

1. The Dispensation of the Tabernacle and the Judges. 2. The Dispensation of
the Temple and the Kingdom. 3. That sad Dispensation of Captivity in Babylon.
4. The Dispensation of the second Temple after their Return.
The first these was from Moses to the Temple.

The second from the Temple to the Captivity in Babylon.

The third from the Captivity to the Return.

The fourth from the Return to the Messiah.

1. The first part of the Lords Dispensation to his people under the Law, was
from Moses to the building of the Temple, most of which time they were under
the Government of Judges.

What the Lord did for them, and how, and what he spoke; what further
Discoveries of himself he gave them during this Period, you may see in these
five particulars.

1. The Lord, in remembrance of his ancient Promise, delivered them out of
Egypt with a high Hand, and with an outstretched Arm, with great Signs and
Wonders, and Plagues upon Pharaoh, and all his Host, and all his Land, dividing
the Sea before them: the History of all which is recorded in the Book of
Exodus, in the first fifteen Chapters of that Book, and so often celebrated
with triumphing Praises in the Psalms and Prophets; who often speak of all his
Wonders in the Land of Egypt, which it is thought were within two months before
their departure: and of his dividing the Sea of Edom, that his redeemed might
pass through upon dry ground: All which was a Type of Spiritual Redemption
also; and therefore it was a Dispensation of much Mystery and Glory.

2. He gave them his Law by Word of Mouth from Heaven, and in Writing in the
Tables of Stone, and in the five Books of Moses: Both the Moral, Judicial and
Ceremonial Law.

The Moral Law. The Lord came down upon Mount Sinai in much Majesty and Terror,
with an Host of Angels; and thundered forth with an audible voice from Heaven
those Ten Commandments. Exodus 19.9. that the people might hear: and cap. 20.22.
he talked with you from Heaven: and he wrote them in two Tables of Stone, and
in the five Books of Moses.

The Ceremonial and Judicial Laws were delivered in this last way, viz. by
Writing, being left upon Record in the Books of Moses.

This is celebrated as a choice Mercy, Psalm. 103.7. He made known his ways unto
Moses, his Acts unto the Children of Israel: yea as a peculiar and
distinguishing Mercy, Psalm. 147.2 last v. He shows his Word unto Jacob, his
Statutes and Judgments unto Israel, he has not dealt so with any Nation --

And now seems to have been the first Invention of the Art of Writing. The
first mention we find of it, is in Moses his time. In Jacobs time it may seem
they had no knowledge of it; because in the Covenant between him and Laban,
instead of any Articles in Writing between them, or signing or sealing of it,
they only erect an heap of Stones, as Monuments of Remembrance of it. Genesis
31.45. and seq.

And the Invention is so admirable, that it seems to transcend all humane Wit
and Industry. The reducing of all audible and articulate Sounds unto visible
Marks; and that in so familiar and short a way, by twenty or thirty Letters,
without any further load to the Memory; that we may well ascribe it unto God
himself, as the blessed Author and Inventor of it; to help his poor people to,
and in the knowledge of himself: according to that in Prove. 8.12. I Wisdom dwell
with Prudence, and find out knowledge of witty Inventions.

3. The Lord accepted the whole Nation to be his own peculiar people, erecting
a glorious Frame and Fabric of Church and Commonwealth amongst them; wherein
the Lord himself was King, and did immediately preside; and therefore it has
been fitly called a Theocracy: so Gideon Judge. 8.23. The Lord shall rule over
you: Isai. 51.16. that I may plant the Heavens, and lay the foundations of the
Earth, and say unto Zion, thou art my People.

4. He gave them glorious and visible symbols and tokens of his Presence
amongst them, walking before them in a Pillar of Cloud and Fire, Exodus 13.21,
22. which Pillar rested upon the Tabernacle, after that the Tabernacle was
built, Exodus ult. ult. which also was a symbol of his Presence with them: and
so was the Ark, and the Manna from Heaven, Exodus 16.14, 15. with the Rock that
followed them, Exodus 17.6. 1 Cor. 10.4.

5. The Lord himself conducted and led them through the Deserts of Arabia by
the Hand of Moses, and into the Land of Promise by the Hand of Joshuah, drying
up Jordan for them, subduing the Inhabitants before them, raising up Judges and
Rulers for them; and finally training them up by many instructing Providence
to fit them for the further Mercies he had yet in store for them.

One would think all things were now well settled; but there were two or three
things, partly defects in this Dispensation it self, and partly some provoking
evils on their part under it; by reason whereof the Lord brought in a further
and an higher Dispensation afterward.

1. There had been strange Rebellions and Provocations in the Wilderness, which
have had an influence into all the sorrows and troubles that have befallen them
ever since.

Murmuring against God.

Mutining against Moses and Aaron, which the Lord took very hainously; and
therefore destroyed Corah, Dathan and Abiram by miracle. For to disobey the
just Commands of a lawful Magistrate, is to rebel against God himself.

And above all Idolatry, Exodus 32.34, 35 In the day when I visit, I will visit
their Sin upon them, and the Lord plagued the people, because they made the
Calf which Aaron made. From whence the Jews have a proverb, that in every
affliction in every calamity that comes upon them, there be some grains of the
Molten Calf in it.

2. There were frequent Degeneracies and Oppressions under the Judges.

3. The Tabernacle was unfixed.

Upon all which accounts the Lord had not yet satisfied himself, in the
expressions of his own Love toward them; but his Heart was full, and he was
resolved to do yet more for them, and so to try them to the utmost. Therefore
he was pleased to put a period unto this Dispensation, which began about the
year of the World two thousand five hundred and thirteen, and lasted about four
hundred eighty seven or eighty eight years. 1 Kings 6.1.

2. The Lords second Dispensation under the Law was from the Temple to the
Captivity in Babylon.

In this Period the Glory of the Legal Dispensation rose up to the greatest
height and splendour; and that chiefly in two particulars, the Glory of the
Kingdom and Temple.

1. The Kingdom was settled in the House of David as the Type and Progenitor of
the Messiah.

And in his days and Solomon's it extended to the utmost bounds, that God had
spoken of to Abraham: though afterward for their own sins they were cut short;
the neighbor Nations shaking off the yoke, and the Kingdom it self divided
into two parts; two Tribes only left to Solomon's Posterity.

The Lord had promised Abraham, that his Seed should possess all the Land to
the River Euphrates, Genesis 15.18.

And it was performed in David's time, and in Solomon's, 1 King. 4.21, 24. 2 Chronicles. 9.26.

And this Kingdom was a Type of the Kingdom of Christ.

2. The other piece of their Glory was the Temple. Before God had dwelt in
Tents; but now he had an House built unto his Name. The Lord turned his
flitting Tabernacle into a fixed Temple; for which David made plentiful
Preparation; Solomon did erect and set it up. He did it in seven or eight years
time, or more precisely seven years and an half: for he began it in the second
month, and finished it in the eighth, 1 King. 6.1, and ult. and he began it in
the fourth year of his Reign, and finished it in the eleventh: moreover he
began it in the 480th year after the coming out of Egypt, and dedicated it
seven or eight years after, which fell into the year of the World three
thousand, or three thousand and one, as you will find, if you take the pains to
compute and put all the former Periods together.

And their Kingdom and Temple stood in some degree of outward Glory about four
hundred years from the finishing and dedicating of it, to the beginning of
their Bondage under the Yoke of Babylon.

And now one would think they had been settled in such a condition as might have
stood for ever.

But the Apostacies were very great, which brought this high and prosperous
Dispensation to an end, to a sad end. For,

1. The peoples hearts being not so with God as became a people crowned with
such Glory, God left them and their Princes, the first and wisest of them, the
very Founders of their Kingdom and Temple, unto very great and enormous
transgressions.

David committed Adultery and Murder, a very unparalleled case; for which the
Lord threatens, the Sword should never depart from his House.

Solomon was left to the toleration of the public exercise of Idolatry, for
which God rent away the Ten Tribes from his Posterity: all which came to pass,
as for other causes, so for the Sins of the People. As it said in a lesser
transgression of David, 2 Samuel 24.1. And the Anger of the Lord was kindled
against Israel, and he moved David against them, to say, Go number Israel and
Judah.

2. The ten Tribes under Jeroboam forsook the Temple and the House of David;
which, though as to Gods Providence, it was a righteous Judgment; yet on their
part it was a grievous sin; it was a complicated Sin, many Sins involved in the
bowels of it; for it was both Rebellion, and Schism, and Heresy; Rebellion
against their lawful Prince, Schism from the true Church and Worship: yea
fundamental Heresy. For as they say, Look to thy House O David: so in
rejecting David's House, they reject the Messiah, who was to come of him, 2 Chronicles. 10.16.

3. There were continual Backslidings to Idolatry, even in Judah, as well as
Israel; yea when they saw the Ten Tribes carried away before their eyes for
this Sin; yet the other would not take warning and reform. Ezekiel. 23.10, 11 --
Aholah signifies a Tent; this was the House of Israel, who were a corrupt
Church: Aholibah signifies, my Tent is in her; this was Judah, which were the
true Church of God; but they declined and departed from God so far, that he
sent them away to Babylon.

3. And so we come to the third Dispensation under the Law, namely, the time of
their Captivity and Bondage under the Yoke of Babylon.

There were three Deportations.

1. Jehoiakims, in whose time Daniel was carried captive. 2. Jechoniahs, in
whose time Ezekiel was carried captive. 3. Zedekiahs, in whose time Jeremiah
was carried captive.
They had now an experimental knowledge of the truth of all Gods Threatenings.

Yet during the time of this Affliction, the Lord did not cast off his care of
them; but gave forth many Evidences of his unchangeable Love and Faithfulness
toward them, under this sad Dispensation.

1. In that he did preserve them from utter Destruction; yet not leave them
altogether unpunished, not make a full end of them, Jer. 30.10, 11.

He restrained the Enemy from wholly rooting out the Nation, Psalm. 106.46 --
gave them Favor in the sight of them that carried them captive.

2. In that he did convince them, and left an everlasting Conviction in the
Heart of that people against the grosser sort of Idolatry: such an indelible
Conviction as has never been blotted out to this day.

Insomuch, that their great stumbling Block at this day against the Christian
Religion is, the Idolatry of the Popish Christians: For the poor blind Jews
consider the Christian Religion no otherwise, but as corrupted with those
Antichristian Abominations and Idolatries: and therefore their Conversion and
Return is not to be expected till Antichrist, that great stumbling Block, be
removed out of the way.

Yea, 3. The Lord gave them further and glorious Discoveries, by raising up
excellent Prophets to them: as Ezekiel, Daniel, Jeremy, some part of his
Prophesies were after the beginning of their Captivity and Bondage to the
Babylonians.

This sad afflictive Dispensation continued about seventy years, Jer. 29.10.

4. The fourth and last of all the Old Testament Dispensations is that of the
second Temple, from the time of their Return out of Babylon, till the Messiahs
coming. And herein there are these remarkable passages.

1. The Lord breaks the Yoke of Babylon, that his people might be delivered by
the Hand of Cyrus, prophesied of by name some hundred years before his Birth,
Isai. 44.28.

And as they were carried away at several times: so they returned also at
several times, and by degrees.

First Zerubbabel, Ezra 1. and a great company with him: afterward Ezra, Ezr.
7.1. after these things --

Lastly Nehemiah.

2. They built the Temple and the City of God again, Ezr. 3. Nehem. 1, and 2.

They met with many Difficulties and Obstructions in the Work; but yet at last
it was done; both begun and finished by Zerubbabel, Zach. 4. in forty six
years, Joh. 2.20. Dan. 9.25. seven weeks, that is, forty nine years; viz. from
the Edict of Cyrus, after which, we may well allow one year of preparation for
their Journey, another year for their Journey, and a third year for preparing
Materials for the Temple, wherein David and Solomon spent so many years: And if
we deduct three out of forty nine, the remainder will be but forty six; as Joh.
2.20. It wanted somewhat of its former Glory as to the Structure thereof, the
old men wept to see how much Zerubbabels Temple fell short of Solomon's Temple,
in Ezr. 3.12.

As to the Utensils belonging to it; the Ark was wanting, with the things
contained in it, the two Tables of Stone, the Rod of Aaron, the Pot of Manna:
also the extraordinary and miraculous tokens of Gods Presence, as Fire from
Heaven, etc. The Lord would have them now to be more spiritual, to see his
Presence by Faith, when they could not see it with their eyes.

Yet Haggai says, it had a greater Glory, that is, in regard of the Messiahs
bodily presence in it, which Solomon's Temple never had.

3. They renewed their Covenant with God, Nehem. 9. ult. and cap. 10. you have
the Articles of this solemn League and Covenant.

4. The Lord guides them to the reforming of sundry Corruptions which had crept
in amongst them, and raises them up to an higher pitch of Reformation than
ever. Gross Idolatry, they forsook that for ever; of which we spoke before. The
Preaching of the Word was restored and renewed among them, Neh. 8.1-8.
strengthened by the prophesying of Haggai and Zachary, Ezr. 5.1.

And the Histories of the Church in those times report also how there was great
care to get true and perfect Copies of the Scripture, and to review the Copies
they had.

And hither (as I suppose) belongs that famous work of the Punctation of the
Hebrew Consonants.

Much Dispute there is among learned men about it. That it is of a Divine
Original and Authority is unquestionable, if we do but grant the Divine
Authority of the Scripture. For otherwise the Sense will be vagus and incertus,
wandering and uncertain.

Some think, it was as ancient as the first Invention of Letters, which is
referred to Moses.

But if we suppose that Writing (as all other useful Arts are usually) was
brought to perfection by degrees; and that the Consonants might suffice while
it was a Mother tongue of so great a People, and they in such a flourishing
condition, not oppressed nor mingled with other People and Languages; yet
possibly the Points might be added afterward. For when they fell under the
Yoke of strangers, this help became necessary to be added: The Lord therefore
did by Ezra and others, who were divinely inspired, now at least add them. For
to refer it to an humane Original, is to overthrow the divine Authority of the
Scripture.

Yea the Lord raises them to an higher pitch of Reformation than ever. Nehem.
9. They kept the Feast of Tabernacles so as it had not been kept from the days
of Joshua. Doubtless David and other reforming Kings had kept it; but that part
of the Ordinance, the dwelling in Booths had been, as it may seem, omitted and
neglected by them; another Corruption was the mixture of the Church with
Heathens by strange Marriages, Ezr. 9, and Nehem. 10. and the Samaritans, those
Mongrels, would have intruded, but were rejected. Ezra. 4.

Thus they purged and reformed themselves from both these corrupting mixtures
in the matter of the Church.

5. And lastly, the Old Tetament was concluded by the Prophet Malachy, who was
the last of all the Prophets. The Lord would have no Prophet beyond the first
times of the second Temple; nor no Writings of men in the age immediately after
the Apostles, immediately following the Gospels Promulgation. That it might
manifest it self more clearly by its own own Light to be supernatural.

This Period, viz. that of the second Temple, continued four hundred and ninety
years, Dan. 9.24. seventy, Prophetical weeks is four hundred and ninety solar
years.

Now such a people thus delivered and restored; twice delivered out of Bondage,
first out of Egypt and then a second time out of Babylon: one would think they
would have abiden with the Lord for ever after.

And one thing they did learn, viz. to forsake gross Idolatry, and this was all.

But they grew more rigidly formal, and exquisitely hypocritical than ever: and
Religion ran out into Sects and Parties and Factions amongst them. There were
Pharisees and Sadduces and Galilaeans and Herodians amongst them, Names which
the Scripture mentions, and Histories speak of another Sect, called the Essenes.

And thus it was with them when our Lord Jesus came in the Flesh: The inward
and spiritual part of Godliness, and the Practice of that which is truly so,
was in a very great measure lost amongst them; being eaten out partly by their
Sects and Divisions, partly by their rigid Formality and Hypocrisy: And thence
at last the Lord sending his Son their Messiah, so long promised and longed for
by them, they reject and crucify him: So the Lord having, by all these various
Dispensations and turnings of his hand, mended the old House, as it were, seven
times over; he resolves now at last to pull it down: for all these legal
Dispensations were but the mending, as it were, and repairing of the old House:
but the Gospel pulls it quite down, and builds a new one.

Thus I have led you thorough the several times and seasons wherein the Lord
spoke unto them of old: you have seen the gradual progress of the Light and
Work of God among them, in those seven pieces of the Old Testament Dispensation
which have been briefly run thorough.

That which follows next to be spoken to, is the Reasons of the Point, why the
Lord spoke and revealed his mind in such diverse ways and manners, and in these
several pieces and parcels; neither in one way only, nor at one time.

Quest. What may be the Reasons of the Point? The Lord could have spoke his
whole Mind at once, in one way, and at one time; therefore why did he speak in
such diverse manners, and in so many several pieces and parcels?

Answ. Although it is a sufficient general account, to say, that this or that
is best, because God wills it: For he does all things well, and his Will is the
Rule of Goodness; and it is not for us to call him to an account of what he
does: yet we may humbly and modestly inquire into the reason of things, not to
contend him with for doing so; for that were Profaneness: but to understand
something of his Wisdom therein.

The Reasons therefore may be referred to two heads.

1. In regard of our Weakness. 2. For his own greater Glory.
I shall speak briefly unto both these, adding but a little unto what others
have said upon this Subject.

Reas. 1. In regard of our Weakness. The Lord herein condescends, and
accommodates himself unto us.

You may see his Condescension in four things.

1. In that we are dull and slow of understanding to apprehend the Truth.
Therefore the Lord illustrates the same things several ways: like the Light
shining into the House at several Windows, that in such a plenty of Light, some
of all those Beams may shine into our Hearts, Luke 24.25. we are slow of Heart
to believe.

2. We are but narrow-mouthed Vessels, not able to receive much at once. As we
are slow to receive any thing at all: so we are incapable to receive much at
once. Therefore the Lord teaches us here a little and there a little: a little
to Adam, a little more to Noah, and a little more to Abraham, and yet more
fully and copiously to Moses; leading them on by degrees, as they were able,
that so men in several ages might know what their Fathers did, and something
more. Isai. 28.9, 10, 13. Geneva Note in loc.
They must have one thing oftentimes told.

3. By this various and gradual proceeding God did prepare and fit his People,
by weaker and lower Dispensations, for further and higher Dispensations. As a
Child by learning his A. B. C. and his Primmer, is fitted to go into an higher,
harder Book: so the Church of God by those immediate Revelations and Visions,
etc. so frequent in those first times when they wanted the written Word, was
fitted to receive the Scriptures with the more Desire, and Reverence, and
Faith. Exodus 19.9. Lo, I come unto thee in a thick Cloud, that the People may
hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for ever. And they did believe
him ever after: so Joh. 9.29. We know that God spoke unto Moses.

So the Church of God being exercised under the Mosaical Pedagogy so long
together, they were thereby prepared to welcome the Gospel more gladly when it
came.

How gloriously and joyfully was it entertained when they had waited for it
about four thousand years! with what Triumphings in God! that now they saw that
which Kings and Prophets and righteous men have desired to see, but it had not
been granted to them. see Luke 10.23, 24. That which all the Prophets had
spoken of since the World began. Luke 1.70. Act. 3.24. The Mystery that had
been hid from Ages and Generations. Col. 1.26.

4. A fourth Condescension of the Lord herein is this. By these varieties of
Dispensation the Lord provides to have his Truth set on with all kind of
Arguments, yea with Arguments of peculiar concernment and suitableness to take
with us.

As Moses to the Jews. The Lord made not this Covenant with our Fathers, but
with us, Deuteronomy. 5.3. And Manna which thy Fathers knew not, Deuteronomy. 8, 16.

So Christ, Joh. 13.34. A new Commandment give I unto you. And the Apostle 1 John 2.8. A new Commandment I write unto you. It was an old Commandment, but
set out in a new dress, given forth in a new manner. The Lord adorns his Truths
with new Ornaments, as it were, that men may be excited to Inquiries and
Affections suitable.

Hence in every Age there be in one respect or other new Discoveries, or new
Dispensations and Dealings of God with his People.

Or if men be taken with Antiquity. 1 John 2.7. I write no new Commandment; but
an old Commandment for the substance of things: The good old way of Faith and
Holiness remains, which all the Saints of God have gone to Heaven in, Heb. 11.
he shows the same Race which he sets before them had been run by all the
Saints, from Abel, cap. 12.1. being compassed about with so great a Cloud of
Witnesses, let us run our race that is set before us: as if he should say; I
exhort you to nothing but what all those Saints of old have done before you:
and yet ver. 40. he professes God has better things for them, an higher and
better Dispensation: and cap. 12.18. Ye are not come to Mount Sinai; but ye are
come to Mount Sion, ver. 22. here he fetches an argument from this variety of
Dispensation, and from the pre-eminence of that which they wore under above
former times.

Reas. 2. For his own greater Glory. And under this head many things come in to
be considered. This various and gradual Dispensation tends to his greater Glory
diverse ways.

1. That there may be an harmony between this and the other Works of God. 2. To
show the inestimable Worth and Glory of the Mystery of the Gospel of his Son.
3. To manifest the variety of his Wisdom. 4. His absolute Liberty. And, 5. His
peculiar Goodness.
1. That there might be an harmony between this and the other Works of God. It
is so in other works of God, as well as in his speaking and revealing of his
Mind. As in the Creation of the World, he could have made it all at once; but
he chose rather to make it in six days: and he made various and several kinds
of Creatures. Therefore this variety of Administration in the Discoveries of
himself and his Gospel is suitable to all the rest of his Works, wherein he
ever delights, with Unity to mix Variety, with Identity Diversity, and
Disagreement in some respects, with Consent in other.

So we see in the outward Lineaments of men's Faces: so in the inward abilities
and dispositions of their Minds, both in the common and saving, in natural and
spiritual endowments; what a wonderful Composition there is, and how great
variety: and so indeed in every Creature and Work of God. Though in conclusion,
Omnia fiunt ab uno ad unum. God is the Author and the End of all.

So in the Church, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. there are diversities of Gifts,
differences of Administrations, diversities of Operations, but from the same
Author. Calv. in loc.
Symmetria Ecclesiae multiplici ut ita loquar unitate constat; the Symmetry of
the Church consists, as I may so say, in a manifold Unity.

2. To manifest the inestimable Worth and Glory of the Mystery of the Gospel of
his Son; which appears in this, in that it is attended with such a multitude of
means of diverse kinds for the Dispensation of it.

That so many ordinances, Providence, Persons and things in several ages of
the World should all be subservient to the Exhibition of this one Mystery of
Christ, and Redemption by him: This shows the Glory of it, Col. 1.27.

3. To manifest the variety of his Wisdom, that (...), variegata sapientia. It
is like a party colored Garment, Ephesians. 3.10.

As in the works of Creation and Providence: so it is in the Dispensations of
his Grace: the Wisdom of God cannot be sufficiently manifested in any one, or
in a few things; or in one manner of working: And therefore it refracts it self
into many parcels, and scatters its Beams every manner of way: that all put
together may argue unto Man the inexhaustible depth and infinite largeness
thereof: Hence he has found out many ways and means to convey the same Grace:
and every several manner has some peculiar Beam of Wisdom and Worth in it.

This great variety and change of his Dispensations was not because in process
of time God found out a better way, and so relinquished the old; as in the work
of Creation, he did not profit by Experience, though he made Man last, the most
perfect Creature last.

For the Inequalities and Degrees of things came from the Wisdom of God, as
well as the diverse kinds of them; and every thing is best in its place, and
kind, and proportion to the whole, though not simply and in it self. It is best
that in a body there should be a Foot, as well as an Head, though simply, and
in it self the Head be more excellent. The Wisdom of God appears not only in
the individual natures of things; but in their references and proportions to
other things, and to the whole whereof they are parts: so it is better, and the
Wisdom of God appears more in that there was both a Legal and a Gospel
Dispensation of Christ and his Benefits, though the Gospel Dispensation be in
it self far the more excellent.

Therefore this is a third Beam of his Glory that shines forth herein, viz. his
manifold Wisdom. As there is infinite Wisdom in every thing God does: so he
would have us see it.

4. This variety of Dispensation manifests the Lords absolute Freedom, and
Liberty, and Sovereignty in the use of Means and Instruments, that he is not
tied to any of them: He can work by little or by great means, by few or many.
He can dispense the same Grace to his Church either in a Family-way, or in a
Nation, or in all Nations. For the Church of God was first a Family, then in
populo Israelitico, and now in populo Catholico.

He can reveal himself either by ordinary or extraordinary persons; either in a
more immediate way, or in a mediate way. He has not limited himself to one
way, or time, or manner of speaking, lest we should ascribe the Glory to the
Means, to the Tools, rather than the blessed Workman and Author. Therefore he
is pleased ever and anon to change the Means, to break his Tools, as it were,
and throw them away, and make new ones.

Hence, if men begin to think that a Temple at Jerusalem has any Salvation in
it, he will burn it up, and be worshipped in spirit and truth in every Cottage;
as Joh. 4. pure Incense every where, Mal. 1.11.

5. The fifth Beam of Divine Glory that shines forth in this variety of
Administration is this, the Glory of peculiar Goodness, which the Lord will
receive by this means from every Saint of his, according to his peculiar
dealing with him.

Some will bless him for Multitude and Excellency of Means, others will admire
his Power and Grace in working by small and weak means: some will praise him
for one kind of Dispensation, others for another kind. As for instance. A
New Testament Saint will praise God that he caused him to live in the Noonday,
and under the highest Meridian of Gospel Light; when the Earth was full of the
Knowledge of the Lord. Oh, what should I have been, if my lot had fallen under
former times of Ignorance and Darkness.

But another in those former darker times, (as for instance Abraham) he will
admire and wonder at Gods Mercy, that when Darkness was round about him; yet
the Lord opened his eyes, to spy the Sun of Righteousness peeping up; and
caused him then to rejoice to see Christ's Day: that his Fleece was wet, when
the rest of the Earth was dry; his Heart drawn after God and Christ, when the
means were so scant and small.

One Believer will bless God, that the Lord was known to him by his Name
Jehovah: Another will admire that he did enable him to believe on God Almighty.

Some will bless him, that they have seen the Accomplishment of his Promises
and Predictions; and not one thing has failed of all the Good that God has
spoken, as Josh. 23.14.

Another under former Dispensations will admire that his Heart was wrought to
embrace the Promises afar off, and that the Lord made Faith to him, to be the
substance of things not seen.

Beloved, the Lord makes his Goodness special and peculiar by variety of
Dispensations even to Believers living in the same age, and in the same place:
that though in general they be all alike made partakers of the same common
Salvation; yet such variety there is in the Lords dealings with them, in regard
of Circumstances; that in one respect or other, in regard of one circumstance
or other, every one has experience of peculiar loving Kindness, singular
strains of Mercy; that he can say with Paul, never such a pattern of Mercy; I
have more to bless God for, than any other in all the world beside. It is so
much more in several ages: so that look as that variety of Wisdom in so many
several things before noted, did declare the infiniteness of Gods Wisdom: so in
like manner these various kinds and ways of Goodness being all laid together,
will yield the luster of infinite Goodness so far as finite Creatures can
contain or conceive it. I say, when all the particulars are computed, and put
together in one sum total (as they shall be when that general Assembly of all
the Saints and Angels shall meet together at the great Day, when they shall all
compare Notes as it were.) It will then appear, that there is no channel
wherein Mercy has not run, no expression of loving Kindness that has been
omitted: so manifold have his Dispensations been, that every Age, and every
Person shall be able to bring in their several and peculiar portions into the
common Treasury of Gods Mercies and Praises; and they shall all say and sing
together that Song of Praises in Psalm 40.5. Many, O Lord my God, are thy
wonderful Works, which thou have done, and thy Thoughts which are to usward:
they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee: if I would declare and speak of
them, they are more than can be numbered.

I shall conclude, for the present, with three words of Use, both from what
has beeen said to day, and in the last Discourse upon this Subject.

1. We may gather some Chronological Light. 2. We may see the rise of all the
old Heathenish Superstitions. And, 3. See the Glory of the Mystery of the
Gospel.
Use 1. Here is some Instruction and Light may be gathered as to that Question
which may easily arise in your thoughts, namely, how long this Old Testament
Administration lasted?

The Answer may be gathered from all that has been said upon this Subject,
that it lasted precisely four thousand years. This will appear, if you compute
and put those seven Old Testament Dispensations together, which were formerly
spoken to.

The first Dispensation from Adam to Noah was sixteen hundred fifty six years.

The second from Noah to the Promise made to Abraham, was four hundred twenty
seven years.

The third from Abraham to the coming out of Egypt, was four hundred and thirty
years.

The fourth from the coming out of Egypt to the Dedication of the Temple, was
four hundred eighty seven years.

The fifth from the Temple to the Captivity, was four hundred years.

The sixth, namely, from the Captivity to the Return, was seventy years.

The last Old Testament Dispensation from the Return to the Messiahs Death, was
four hundred and ninety years: And from the Death of Christ to the Destruction
of the Temple, and City, and Nation, whereby the Lord did put all that old
Dispensation to a full end was forty years: All which Sums put together amounts
exactly to four thousand years: so long did that old Testament Dispensation
last.

Use 2. We may here see the rise of all the old Heathenish Superstitions. They
were the Corruption of Old Testament Dispensations. As Popery is nothing else
but Christianity corrupted by a cursed mixture of Paganism and Judaism with it:
so in like manner Turcism is.

Use 3. We may learn from hence to see the Glory of the Mystery, yea the Riches
of the Glory of the Mystery of the Gospel; in that it was so long, and with so
great variety of Dispensation held forth to the Church of God of old.

Surely it was no small matter which the Lord made use of such various
Providence and Dispensations to reveal: for they did all tend to, and aim at
this, Col. 1.26. The Mystery which has been hid from Ages, and from
Generations: ver. 27. the Riches of the Glory of this Mystery. Therefore learn
to prize the Gospel according to this worth and this value that God has put
upon it.

To slight it, is to slight all the Glory and glorious Dispensations of God
from the beginning of the World to this day.

For this they did all look at.

A man acknowledges the Glory of the Mystery in two things.

1. When he believes it for himself, with application to himself in particular.

2. When he walks worthy of it.

But to disbelieve the Promises, and to disobey the Commands of it, is to
despise the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.

And to do so under such a clear Dispensation of it, as in New Testament times,
certainly the deepest place in Hell will be their Portion.

Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida. For if the mighty Works that
have been done in thee, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have
repented in dust and ashes.

May we not say, woe unto thee, O London, woe unto thee, O Dublin. For if the
Preaching that has been in thee, had been in Rome, they would have been
convinced, they would have repented before this day.

Use 4. Let me repeat a little, and reinculcate these things upon you which
have been delivered as Reasons, but might have been handled as Uses of the
Point.

I beseech you, give unto God the Glory due unto his Name in all his
Dispensations.

Praise him for his Condescension to our Weakness.

Observe the Harmony that is among his Works.

The Glory of the Mystery of the Gospel.

His manifold Wisdom.

His absolute Freedom and Sovereignty.

And lastly, and above all, his peculiar Goodness.

Labor to get your Hearts up to this.

As a man is never humbled enough, till this Conviction pierce his Conscience,
that he is the chief of Sinners: so a man is never thankful enough, till he
look upon himself as the greatest, strangest Object of free Grace in all the
world; till he can say, Never such a pattern of Mercy as my self!

And now, having showed that the Gospel was preached to them of old, and that
in diverse manners, and at sundry times (one signal instance whereof is the
Types and Ceremonies) I have in these preliminary Discourses made way for what
I have promised to speak unto, namely, the Types and Shadows of the Old
Testament.

That which next remains is, that we speak to them more particularly, which we
shall proceed unto hereafter (the Lord assisting.)

Romans 5.14. -- Adam, who was the Figure of him that was to come.

(...).


THat the Gospel was preached to them under the Old Testament, as well as to us
under the New; and that it was revealed to them in several ways and manners of
Discovery; and in a gradual way, in several pieces and parcels, has been
formerly showed. One signal Instance we gave of those diverse ways and manners
was this, That the Gospel was preached to them of old by legal Types and
Ceremonies. Now concerning these (not to insist upon the Analysis of the
Chapter) the Text gives you this Doctrine.

Doctr. That the Lord was pleased in his infinite Wisdom to design and ordain
certain persons under the Old Testament, to be Types or Figures of the Messiah,
that was to come.

It will be requisite here, 1. To explain the Nature of a Type, to show you
what a Type is. 2. The Reasons why the Lord spoke in this way. And then, 3. To
come to a more particular Distribution and Enumeration of them.


1. For the Nature of a Type. For the opening of this, because it is a Subject
both difficult and useful to be rightly understood, and will give light to all
that follows to be spoken upon the Types; I shall therefore

1. Give you a brief Description of a Type. 2. Some Rules for the better
understanding of them. 3. The Differences and Agreements between a Type and
other things of like nature. 4. The Names and Phrases by which it is expressed
in Scripture.
1. For the Description of a Type, what it is.

I shall content my self with the Apostles Definition of it: That a Type is a
Shadow of good things to come. Hebr. 10.1. The Law having a Shadow of good
things to come. Col. 2.17. Which are a Shadow of things to come, but the Body
is of Christ.

There be three things included in this Description.

1. There is some outward or sensible thing that represents some other higher
thing. 2. There is the thing represented thereby, which is good things to come,
which we call the Antitype. 3. There is the work of the Type, which is to
shadow forth or represent these future good things.
1. There is in a Type some outward or sensible thing that represents an higher
spiritual thing, which may be called a Sign or a Resemblance, a Pattern or
Figure, or the like.

Here is the general Nature of a Type; it is a Shadow.

It has been the Goodness and Wisdom of God in all times and ages, to teach
Mankind heavenly things by earthly, spiritual and invisible things by outward
and visible; as Joh. 3.12.

2. There is the thing shadowed or represented by the Type, And what is that?
Things to come, says the Apostle, Col. 2.17. and good things to come, Heb.
10.1. The good things of the Gospel, Christ and his Benefits; but the Body is
of Christ, as Col. 2.17.

This we call the Correlate, or the Antitype; the other is the Shadow, this the
Substance: the Type is the Shell, this the Kernel; the Type is the Letter, this
the Spirit and Mystery of the Type.

This we are still to look at, and to search into in every Type; we must look
beyond the Shadow, to the Substance, to the Truth and Mystery of it: and this
is Christ and the Gospel, as future, and hereafter to be exhibited.

This may be called the Prototype, or the Pattern, out of which, and according
to which the other is drawn; as Pictures from the Man whose Visage they
represent.

3. This Description holds forth the Work of the Type, which is to shadow forth
the Antitype.

But what is this shadowing? and how do they shadow it?

It is a metaphorical expression. A Shadow represents the proportion of the
Body, with its actions and motions; though it does it but obscurely and darkly.

So the Types had some dark resemblance of Christ and his Benefits, and did
some way adumbrate and represent them, and hold them forth unto his People, to
enlighten and inform their Understandings, and to strengthen and confirm their
Faith in him: The Types had this Voice and Language; Such an One shall the
Messiah be, He is thus to act, and thus to suffer for you.

Thus you have the Description of a Type. It is a shadow of good things to
come: or if you would have it more at large, you may take it thus,

A Type is some outward or sensible thing ordained of God under the Old
Testament, to represent and hold forth something of Christ in the New.

It may be otherwise worded. But the Description, if it be true, must be to
this effect; as if we say, that a Type is an instituted resemblance of
Gospel Truths and Mysteries; or that it is a Sign holding forth Christ, or
something of Christ in the New Testament.

You see it comes all to one scope; and indeed all the Descriptions that our
Divines have given of it are to this effect, they are all to the same scope
with this of the Apostle; a Shadow of good things to come.

2. For Rules for your further understanding of them, take these four.

Rule 1. That God is the only Author of the Types. They belong to the second
Commandment, as matters of Institution. Therefore Calvin, excellently and
judiciously harmonising the Books of Moses, refers the Ceremonial Laws to
the second Commandment.

There is something of Christ stamped and engraven upon them by Divine
Institution: They are not mere natural or arbitrary similitudes; but they were
instituted and set apart by God for that end, Heb. 9.8. The Holy Ghost this
signifying -- etc.

Hence that Sacramental phrase and manner of expression, That Rock was Christ,
1 Cor. 10.4. like that in Exodus 12. The Lamb is the Passover.

As the Church under the New Testament has not power to make Sacraments to
themselves: so they of old could not make Types -- Act. 7.43. The Types which
you made to worship them, (...). Amos 5.26. Images which you made to your
selves -- contra ver. 44 of Act. 7. -- the Tabernacle which Moses made, as he
had appointed.

And it seems, by the sacred History, that they had something of the notion of
a Type, in their heads in that Invention. For they say, Make us Gods that may
go before us; and they proclaim an Holy day to Jehovah; therefore they intended
the Calf to be an outward and visible Sign to them of his Presence.

Here arises a Question. How may we know when a thing is a Type, and that the
Lord did ordain and design it to that end and use?

The Answer is. We cannot safely judge of this but by the Scripture.

1. When there is either express Scripture for it. As Adam here in the Text is
called a Type of him that was to come: So the whole Ceremonial Law is said to
have a Shadow of the good things to come under the Gospel, Heb. 10.1. The
Buildings and holy places of the earthly Temple are said to be Figures of the
true, even of Heaven it self, Heb. 9.24. The Land of Canaan, the Country that
Abraham, and the Fathers sought for, it is said, they desire a better Country,
that is, an heavenly, Heb. 11.16.

2. When there is a permutation of Names between the Type and the Antitype,
this is a clear Indication of the Mind of God. As for instance, Christ is
called David, Ezekiel. 34.23. and 37.24. Hos. 3.5. this shows that David was a
Type of him, and Christ was the true David.

So Christ is called Adam, the second Adam, 1 Cor. 15.45.

So he is called Israel, Isai. 49.3.

He is called that Lamb of God which takes away the Sins of the World. Joh.
1.29. and our Passover that is sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7. this shows that
the Paschal Lamb was a Type of him.

He is called the Bread of Life, and the true Bread from Heaven, Joh. 6.32, 35.
this shows, that the Manna did relate to him.

So the Church of the New Testament is called Jerusalem, Gal. 4.26. but
Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the Mother of us all -- Rev. 21.2. I
saw the new Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven. We may hence conclude
that Jerusalem was a Type of the Church.

So it is said, that the Odours or Incense are the Prayers of the Saints. Rev.
5.8. Incense therefore was a Type of Prayer.

The Gospel Church is called Israel, Gal. 6.16. Peace be on them and Mercy, and
upon the Israel of God. Therefore that People were a Type of the Church of God
under the New Testament.

Gospel Ministers are called the Sons of Levi, Mal. 3.3. the Prophet there
speaking of the coming of Christ, he says, He shall purify the Sons of Levi,
that is, raise up a purer Ministry.

There is nothing more frequent in the Scripture, than for the Antitype to be
called by the name of the Type, and sometimes on the other side, the Type bears
the Names and Titles belonging indeed and more properly to the Antitype:

So Moses is called a Mediator, Gal. 3.19.

So when a Sheep or a Goat is called a Sacrifice, and said to make atonement,
or to expiate Sin: there the Work of the Antitype is ascribed unto the Type For
those things could not take away sins, Heb. 10.4. it is not possible, that the
Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sins: they were but a shadow of a
Sacrifice of Christ the true Sacrifice.

3. When by comparing several Scriptures together, there does appear an evident
and manifest analogy and parallel between things under the Law, and things
under the Gospel, we may conclude, that such legal Dispensations were intended
as Types of those Gospel Mysteries whose Image they bear. In such a case, Res
ipsa loquitur. For the Type must be made like the Antitype, as the Apostle
speaks of that illustrious Type Melchisedec, Hebr. 7.3. he was made like unto
the Son of God.

As the Deliverance out of Egypt and Babylon, if we read the History thereof in
the Old Testament, and compare it with the Prophesies in the New Testament,
concerning the Churches Deliverance from Antichristian Bondage, we shall
clearly see, that it was a Type thereof; there is such a resemblance, the one
answers the other so remarkably.

Hence Divines generally make Sampson a Type of Christ, there is such a fair
and full Analogy in sundry particulars of his Life and Death between him and
Christ: So likewise Joseph is generally looked upon as a Type of Christ; though
there be no Scripture that does expressly call him so: but if the History of
Joseph in Genesis be compared with the History of Jesus Christ in the four
Evangelists, the Analogy will be very clear and evident.

The Old Testament and the New should be compared together. The Protasis or
Proposition of these sacred similitudes is in the Books of Moses, and in the
Old Testament; but the Apodosis, the Reddition or Application is to be found
chiefly in the New.

Sometimes the Types are not so explicitly taught, but employed; and then a
thing may be known to be a Type by diligent observing and comparing the Phrase
of the Prophets in the Old Testament, and of the Apostles in the New.

Men must not indulge their own Fancies, as the Popish Writers use to do, with
their Allegorical Senses, as they call them, except we have some Scripture
ground for it. It is not safe to make any thing a Type merely upon our own
fancies and imaginations; it is Gods Prerogative to make Types. And so much for
that first Rule.

Rule 2. The Types were not only Signs, but Seals; not only Signs to represent
Gospel Mysteries unto them; but also Seals to assure them of the certain and
infallible exhibition thereof in Gods appointed time.

As we say of our Sacraments; Sacramentum est verbum visibile, the Sacrament is
a visible Promise, and holds forth the Covenant of Grace to the Eye and other
Senses, as the Word to the Ear: so it was with the Types of old. The Types were
visible Promises, and not only Signs, but Pledges and Assurances of the good
they represented. They did represent those great Mysteries not only by way of
resemblance to the understandings, but by way of assurance to the Faith of Gods
People.

Reasons to prove this, that the Types were Seals.

1. The Apostle says it expressly concerning Circumcision, Romans 4.11. he
received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, And
there is a parity of Reason in this respect between Circumcision and other
Types.

2. If they were Signs that did certainly foresignifie they were Seals. But the
Types were Signs that did certainly foresignifie; therefore they were more than
Signs, even Seals also: They did not show what a one the Messiah might happen
to be; but what a one he should certainly be: they were so many Divine
Testimonies to the coming of Christ.

3. If they were not Seals and Pledges to assure, it will follow, that it would
have been no disappointment to Gods People, and no reflection at all upon his
Truth and Faithfulness, if the Messiah had been quite another manner of Person
than the Types held forth. But to admit such a supposition, to suppose that the
Messiah might have been quite another manner of Person, than the Types hold
forth, is to take away the Analogy between the Type and the Antitype; and so by
consequence to deny that they were Types; or else to make them all Lies and
false Images. Therefore if it be but granted, that they were true Signs, it
follows even from thence, that they were Seals, or sure and certain Pledges of
Christ, and Gospel-Mysteries in him. See Calvin in 1 Cor. 10.3, 11. Beza in
Col. 2.17. Erant enim vera and pro ratione ac modo Sacramentorum efficacia
(...) ac etiam (...). They were both Signs and Seals, and true and efficacious
Signs and Seals, after that manner of efficacy that is in Sacraments.

Rule 3. The Types relate not only to the Person of Christ; but to his
Benefits, and to all Gospel Truths and Mysteries, even to all
New-Testament-Dispensations.

I mention this the rather, because I have observed that it does much darken
the thoughts of many, that they study to accommodate every Type directly to the
Person of Christ; because we commonly call them Types of Christ. But that
expression is not meant of his Person exclusively to his Benefits; but of both
together, Christ and the good things of Christ: the Types shadowed forth Christ
and all the good that comes by him. So the Apostle, Heb. 10.1. they are a
shodow of good things, to come; he does not limit or restrain them to the
Messiahs person only. As the Cherubims were Types, not directly of Christ, but
of the Angels that stand before the Lord and minister to him, and to his People.

Hence before the Gospel, there were no Gospel Types; before the first
Promulgation of it, Genes. 3. there could be no Types of Gospel Blessings:
There were some things extant before, which were made Types afterward; but
they had not that Schesis, that habitude and relation to Christ and the Gospel,
till there was a Gospel, or a Promise of Life by Christ, that blessed Seed.

Yea as they had Types of Christ's Person, and of his spiritual and saving
Benefits: so they had Types even of all New Testament Dispensations.

Our very Sacraments were shadowed forth by theirs.

As Baptism by Circumcision, and by their passing thorough the Red Sea; and the
Lords Supper by their Passover.

Yea they had Types not only of the Blessings and Benefits of Christ, but of
our Miseries without him.

As they had their Ceremonial Uncleanness; as the Leprosy, for instance, was
a Type; Of what? Neither of Christ, nor of his Benefits; but of our natural
Pollution.

So they had a Type of the Covenant of Works, viz. Hagar and Ishmael.

They had a Type of the Church of Rome, viz. Babylon: So Antiochus may pass for
a Type of Antichrist. Doeg and Achitophel of Judas. Pharaoh for a Type of the
Devil. Sodom and Gomorrah for a Type of Hell.

For as the Types look chiefly and principally at Christ and his Benefits, in
the clear and full Exhibition and Communication of them under the Gospel: so
they represent other things also, though not by way of Primacy and principal
intention; but by way of concomitancy and illustration of the Principal.

Therefore these Types of New-Testament-evils, it will not be necessary always
to handle them by themselves: For the most of them will come in better under
the several Types or Shadows of good things, the further illustration whereof
by the contrary was the thing chiefly aimed at in them.

Rule 4. As there is a Similitude, a Resemblance and Analogy between the Type
and the Antitype in some things: so there is ever a dissimilitude and a
disparity between them in other things. It is so in all similitudes.

It is a Rule in Reason. There is a mixture of Consentaneity and Dissentaneity;
or else instead of Similitude, there would be Identity.

So here in these sacred Similies, it is not to be expected that the Type and
the Antitype should quadrare per omnia, that they should agree in all things.

Therefore the Apostle, though he makes Adam a Type of Christ, whom he calls
the second Adam; yet he shows the disparity also, and that the second Adam did
infinitely transcend and excel the first, 1 Cor. 15.47. the first man is of the
Earth earthly, the second man is the Lord from Heaven.

So the Priests of old, they were Types of Christ; but Christ did infinitely
excel them, and his Priesthood was infinitely more glorious, as the Apostle
disputes at large in the 7, 8, 9, and 10. of the Hebrews, see particularly
chap. 7. v. 23, 24, 27.

There is more in the Antitype, than in the Type. Hom. 61. in Genes.
Oportet figuram minus habere quam veritatem, Chrysostom. For such is the Glory
and Excellency of Christ the Antitype, that no Type could reach it.

Hence that Distinction of Types partial, and Types total, must be understood
with some limitation thus; That some things or persons were only Types of
Christ in some one particular thing, others in many things: but there never was
any that did, or could possibly resemble him perfectly in all things.

So Jonas is called a partial Type, because he shadowed forth the Messiah in
that one thing, his abiding two or three days in the Grave, and then rising
again.

David, some call him a total Type, in regard that the whole History of his
Life has so great a shadow and representaton of Christ the true David.

But yet, if we speak rigidly and properly, David himself was but a partial
Type. For he was only a Prophet and a King; he was not a Priest; but Christ was
both Prophet, Priest and King.

Moses indeed was both a Prophet, a Priest, and a King; but his Priesthood
continued only till Aaron was consecrated, then Moses laid it down.

And Moses did mediate between God and the People as a Prophet, to interpret
the Mind of God to them; and as a King or a Judge to govern them, and as an
Intercessor to pray for them; but not by giving himself a Sacrifice unto death
for expiation of their sins: He was a Mediator ob interpretandi and docendi
officium; but not ob satisfaciendi beneficium, as some express it.

Therefore Moses himself was but a partial Type, a Type only ratione rei in
regard of Redemption and Deliverance; but not ratione modi; he did not do it by
shedding his Blood, and laying down his Life as Christ did.

Hence we must take heed of straining the Types too far, to make them agree in
that wherein indeed there is a disparity or disagreement: If the Type go with
us one mile, or rather with the Antitype one mile, we must not constrain it to
go twain.

3. The third thing propounded to be spoken to, was the Differences and
Agreements between a Type and other things of like nature: that so we may
distinguish and discern the things that differ.

I shall instance here only in four things that are partly of the same nature
with the Types, but yet not exactly the same.

1. The difference between a Type and a Simile.

A Type does belong indeed to that Argument or Notion in Logic; but with this
difference, this distinction will show you the difference between them; that
there is Typus arbitrarius and Typus fixus and institutus.

An arbitrary Type is a similitude or comparison.

So Marriage is a similitude or comparison, by which the Apostle sets out the
mystical union between Christ and the Church, Ephesians. 5.

But yet Marriage is not a Type. For then we shall make it a Sacrament, as the
Papists do: you know it was instituted for another end before the Gospel came
into the world: It is a Sign, but not a Sacrament. For by that Argument we
should have a thousand Sacraments.

So Riders on white Horses are resemblances used in Scripture to set out Christ
and the Angels; but yet not properly Types of them: And the reason is this,
because they were never instituted and designed by God for that end, to
represent Christ and the Gospel; they are only occasionally made use of.

There is a wide difference between the occasional use of a thing in the way of
a similitude or comparison, and the Designment or Institution of it for that
end and use.

As if Christ be compared to a Feast of Bread and Wine, as in the Parable of
the Marriage-Supper. This is a very true and fit comparison: but for Bread and
Wine to be designed and set apart by the Command of God to represent Christ and
his Benefits, this is a thing of an higher nature, and puts them into a
Sacramental nature and relation to him.

2. The difference between a Type and a Parable.

A Parable is nothing else but a sacred Similitude: We commonly take it as the
Scripture does, for such a similitude wherein not only the Truth and Mind of
God is the scope and matter of it; but whereof God himself is the Author. As in
the four Evangelists we read of the Parables of Christ. To call them Fables, as
Grotius does, haec Fabula indicat, etc. is a slight and an irreverent
expression.

A Parable there is the same with a Similitude, only has God himself for its
Author. But in a Type the Lord does not only occasionally use such or such a
simile; but sets such a thing apart, sets a stamp of Institution upon it, and
so makes it an Ordinance to hold forth Christ and his Benefits.

3. What is the difference between a Type and a Ceremony? This is only that
which is between the Genus and Species. For all the Ceremonies were Types; but
all Types were not Ceremonies: The Pillar of Cloud and Fire was a Type, but not
a Ceremony.

A Ceremony was some Law, or external Observation prescribed unto them, to
teach and shadow forth some Gospel-Mystery: so that a Type is more general, a
Ceremony is one particular kind of Types.

4. What is the difference between a Type and a Sacrament? I answer, they
differed in the number and multitude of them, they had many Types, we have but
two Sacraments. But there was no difference in the nature of them, further than
this, that our Sacraments are Signs of Christ already come; but their Types
were Signs of Christ that was for to come: our Sacraments are Signs Christi
exhibiti; their Types Christi exhibendi.

4. As to the Words and Phrases by which it is expressed.

First, we have this very word Type used in the Scripture, not only in its
native and proper Sgnification, Joh. 20.25. (...) the print of the Nails: But
it is used also in this borrowed and spiritual sense whereof we are treating,
in the Text, and 1 Cor. 10.6. these were Types for us. (...) and 1 Cor. 10.11.
all these things happened unto them in Types.

So the word (...) answers the Hebrew (...) exemplar figura forma a (...)
aedificavit.

They are called Shadows (...). Col. 2.17. a Shadow of things to come. Heb.
8.5. which serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, Heb. 10.1. a
Shadow of good things to come.

They are called Figures or Patterns, (...) Hebr. 8.5. (...), the Example and
Shadow, Heb. 9.23. Patterns.

They are called Signs (...), Mat. 12.39. the Sign of the Prophet Jonas; so is
Circumcision, Romans 4.11. the Sign of Circumcision.

Figures, or to render it more emphatically, parabolical Figures; (...), Heb.
9.9. a parabolical Figure for the time.

This answers to the Hebrew word (...).

And some so understand, Heb. 11.19. from whence also he received him in a
Figure.

They are called Allegories, Galat. 4.24. which things are an Allegory.

They are called Seals, (...), Romans 4.11. the Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith.

Also the Law, 2 Cor. 3.6. the Letter, that is, the Law kills, but the
Spirit, that is, the Gospel quickens.

And the Letter, 2 Cor. 3.6. the Letter, that is, the Law kills, but the
Spirit, that is, the Gospel quickens.

The Antitipe, or the thing typed and figured, is called in Scripture sometimes
by this name, the Antitype, 1 Pet. 3.21. the Antitype whereunto even Baptism
does also now save us.

The Type being called a Shadow: the Antitype is called the Body, Col. 2.17.
the Body is of Christ.

The Types are called (...), the Antytype (...), Heb. 10.1. the very Image of
the things themselves.

Future good things, Heb. 10.1. a Shadow of good things to come.

Heavenly things, Heb. 9.23. Patterns of things in the Heavens.

True, Heb. 9.24. which are the Figures of the true. Joh. 1.17. the Law was
given by Moses: But Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ.

Lastly, they are called Spirit, and spiritual things, 2 Cor. 3.6. the Letter
kills; but the Spirit gives life. Revel. 11.8. In the street of the great
City, which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt.

There is literal and spiritual Egypt.

Use. We may receive encouragement from all that has been said, to look into
the Types, and to study this Subject. For that they do adumbrate and shadow
forth Jesus Christ, and Gospel Truths and Mysteries exhibited and revealed by
him.

It is not good to despise any part of Scripture knowledge, much less such parts
as stand in such a direct relation to Jesus Christ. Though there is something
of difficulty through our own darkness and weakness; yet the fruit will
countervail the pains and labor; though they be difficult, yet they are useful
to be known.

I have been desired by my Brethren of the Ministry to speak unto them, and I
hope to receive assistance from God through your Prayers: and I do much desire
the help of your Prayers, that you would remember me to the Lord, that he would
carry me through this work, that he would enlighten and enable me by his
Spirit, to speak unto them with clear light; and not only so as may be clear
and convincing to my own Conscience and Judgment; but with such evidence of
light, as may be satisfying and illuminating to yours also, even in the
evidence and demonstration of his Spirit.

Some have not unfitly called the Ceremonial Law one of the richest Cabinets of
Divinity, full of inestimable Jewels. But many things in their Religion will
seem strange, and uncouth, and useless, if we consider them without their scope
and meaning.

All the Ceremonial Law, if a man knows not the meaning of it, looks like an
heap of unprofitable Burdens. The Temple appears but like a Shambles, or
Butchers Slaughter house; and the Priesthood a vain and useless Occupation: but
consider them in their sense and meaning and every thing is full of Light and
Glory.

A great part of the Scripture, especially the old Testament, Exodus and
Leviticus and other places will be like a Sealed Book unto you, if you have not
some insight into the Types. But if the Lord give you a little insight into
them, you will read the Old Testament with more profit and spiritual
understanding. For the Prophets do comment upon them; yea so do the Apostles
also: and indeed the whole New Testament is a large and full Exposition of the
Types.

If you ask, how may we so search and look into them, as to understand them,
and profit by them?

Take but three Rules for this, and I conclude.

Rule 1. Search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. for they are they which testify of
me (says Christ): the Scripture is the best Interpreter of it self. We cannot
judge of these legal Shadows but by Scripture Light. If either express words, or
change of Names, or a clear analogy and proportion do appear; these are
Intimations of the Mind of God, that such things are Types. Go no further than
we see the Scripture going before us.

Rule 2. Study the Covenant of Grace. Faedus gratiae clavis totius Scripturae.
Look diligently into the Gospel, get a clear and spiritual insight and
understanding into that; this is the best help to the understanding of the
Types. For he that well understands the Antitype, will more easily and readily
discern the analogy, and see the resemblance it has with the Type.

Rule 3. As you find the Lord letting in any thing of further light into your
minds, be sure you act Faith, and exercise Grace with renewed vigor upon those
Truths and Mysteries, as you find any Beams of further Light coming in
concerning them.

If a man have all Knowledge, and understood all Mysteries, and has not Fath
and Love, what is he the better for his Light? 1 Cor. 13.12.

When you see things more clearly and fully, you should endeavor to believe
more strongly, and to grow in Grace, as you grow in Light.

Quest. Why the Lord spoke so much in this way by Types and Shadows?

Answ. Something may be gathered as to this, out of what was formerly spoken in
general concerning the Reasons of the Lords using so great variety of
Dispensation, from that Text, Heb. 1.1. therefore I shall but touch upon some
few things now, and that very briefly.

R. 1. There is a general suitableness in such a way of speaking unto man's
Nature, as a sensitive Creature, consisting of a Body as well as a Soul.

Hence in all times and ages, even before Sin entered, the Lord gave unto
mankind some outward and sensible things to be Signs and Representations of
spiritual things: Hence were these two Sacramental Trees, the Tree of Life, and
the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil.

And now much more since the Fall; Man being fallen much lower, has greater
need of such Instructions.

Man is not only a sensitive, but a sense loving Creature.

R. 2. It was particularly suitable to that Infant age and state of the Church:
it was suitable to their Nonage, to be taught by such visible and carnal things.

The whole way of Gods Dispensations, See Galv. Instit. l. 2. c. 11. s. 1, 11.
both Gods Blessings and Judgments were much more external and sensible than
they are now.

Children must have their A. B. C. weak and rudimental Instructions. These are
called Elements, or Rudiments, yea weak and beggarly Rudiments (...). Gal. 4.9.

Tota legis Oeconomia veluti rudis quaedam erat disciplina rudibus conveniens.
Beza in Gal. 4.3. Like a Horn-book to a Child.

R. 3. That they to whom it was not given might not understand.

R. 4. That his People might so and understand the better.

These two Reasons are assigned by Christ himself for his own teaching so much
by Parables; and there is some affinity between a Type and a Parable, as you
heard the last time, Matthew. 13.11, 13. why speak thou to them in Parables?

Because it is given to you to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
-- because they seeing see not, etc. Similitudes not understood are Riddles and
clouds of Darkness upon the understanding; But if once interpreted and
understood, they are like bright Candles, they give a clear light. Comparata
etiam ficta arguunt, fidemque faciunt.

It is not a true and sound Rule, that of the Schoolmen, Theologia symbolica
non est argumentativa.

What! shall we say, that all the Parables of our Savior did argue nothing?
when indeed they did not only argue, but demonstrate; and that so, as did
convince and cut the hearts sometimes of his greatest enemies and opposers.

Was not Nathans Parable argumentative, yea demonstrative and convicting unto
David?

Their Rule may be true concerning their own allegorical Senses, and mystical
Froth, which may be found in their Interpretations: but concerning
Scripture-Types it is most false.

You have seen the Nature of a Type, what it is, and some short hints of
reasons of the Lords speaking this way: we shall now enter into particulars,
and go through the Types, and open to you (as the Lord shall enable) something
of the Gospel Truths and Mysteries adumbrated and shadowed forth by them;
depending upon the help and assistance of him, of whom we are to speak.

Now the first and most general Distribution of them is into Types personal and
Types real, holy persons and holy things. The terms of which distinction are so
plain, that it needs no further explication; therefore we shall not make any
tarrying here: you know the difference between persons and things.

Personal Types are such as Adam, Noah, David, and others.

Real Types are the Temple, the Ark, the Manna, the Sacrifices, and such like,
whereof hereafter.

We shall begin with the personal Types: and they may be subdivided into two
sorts.

1. Individual Persons. 2. Typical Ranks and Orders of Persons, which we may
call Religious Orders; such as the Priests, the Nazarites, etc.
1. Typical individual Persons. Concerning these there be some previous Rules,
that may be of some use, and give some general Light for your better
understanding of them.

1. They were all godly men. No wicked man, individually considered, ever was,
or could be a Type of Christ. How could Limbs of the Devil, men in whom Satan
dwelt, be Pictures as it were and Looking-glasses, in which to see the Shadow
of the most high God, who is Holiness it self.

A man personally wicked may be involved with others in a religious Order. For
the Order is holy, though the man be wicked; But if single persons be Types,
they must needs be holy men.

2. Whereas these holy men had their failings; They were not Types of Christ in
regard of their sinful failings; but only in their Graces and Excellencies. For
Sin cannot be a Type of Holiness: Therein they were not like; but unlike to
Jesus Christ the Antitype.

3. When Typical persons had real Types belonging to them (as oftentimes they
had) we shall speak to both together, at least where they cannot be better and
more conveniently referred to some other place.

As for instance, Noah's Ark was a Type, as well as he himself. Therefore we
shall speak to that, when we speak of Noah, as being a Circumstance, and a part
of his History, which was though a true and real, yet withal a typical History.

4. These typical persons, the highest and most eminent of them, were but
partial Types: Therefore together with the Analogy between them and the
Antitype, we shall sometimes, where we see it needful, note also the disparity
and disproportion that was between them. That you may see how far the Shadows
fell short of the Substance, and how the Antitype excels the Type.

And we shall not mention all, but only some of the chief and most illustrious.

And because there be diverse of them, we shall rank them, for method and
memories sake, into two Classes.

1. The personal Types that were before the Law. 2. Under the Law.
1. Before the Law. Here I shall instance only in eight Persons, namely, Adam,
Enoch, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph.

1. Adam. He was the first Type of Christ in the world.

That he was a Type of Christ is clear from express Scriptures.

The Text, Rom 5.14. Who is the Type of him that was to come, and 1 Cor. 15.45.
The first man Adam was made a living Soul, the last Adam was made a quickening
Spirit.

Now to show you the Analogy, wherein Adam did resemble and represent the Lord
Jesus Christ.

It was chiefly in this. In regard of his Headship and Influence, Adam and
Christ both stood instead of all that belonged to them. Adam was the Head of
the first Covenant, Jesus Christ is the Head of the second Covenant.

Adam was the Covenant-root and Head of all Mankind, a public and common
person, representing them; yea an undertaker for them.

What they say vainly of the Pope, that he is the Church-Representative, may be
truly said of Adam; He was the Representative of the whole World, as a
Parliament Man acting in the name of the Town or Country that chose him: He
sinning, we sinned in him; he being condemned, we are condemned in him:

So Christ is the Head of the second Covenant, and of his Elect, who are
involved and wrapped up therein: He has undertaken for them, and presented them
to the Father, Ephesians. 2.16. in one body: Therefore when he died we died with
him; when Christ was crucified, our Sins were nailed to his Cross, and
crucified and buried as it were in his Grave. If he arise, we rise with him, to
die no more. His Influence is to all his Seed. For both Adams have a Seed. As
Adam: so Christ. Isai. 53.10. He shall see his Seed -- He communicates to them
what he has: so does Christ what he has.

Adam conveys and communicates Sin and Death: But Christ Righteousness and Life.

Adam brought in these two great Intruders and Usurpers, Sin and Death, into
the world.

And as Adam conveys Sin to those that had not sinned actually: so does Christ
convey Righteousness to those that had not wrought Righteousness. As in the
Text, Romans 5.14. with Romans 9.30, 31. The Gentiles, which followed not after
Righteousness, have attained to Righteousness.

As soon as there is an Union between Soul and Body, Adams Sin is imputed to
his Seed: so as soon as there is a mystical Union between Christ and the Soul
by the Spirit of Faith, so soon is Christ's Righteousness imputed.

There be some other Considerations may be added unto these.

2. The Apostle seems to make his Dominion over the Creatures a shadow of
Christ's Dominion and Kingdom, Genesis 2.19, 20. Psalm. 8.6. compared with Heb. 2.6,
7, 8, 9.

3. His Relation to Eve. She was taken out of his Side while Adam was asleep,
and afterward married to him, Genesis 2.21. so the Church is taken out of Christ's
Side, while he was in the sleep of Death, and joined to him as his Spouse by
the Covenant of Grace, 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one Husband, that I
may present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ. Ephesians. 5.30, ^1. We are Members of
his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones -- While Christ dies, his Church
receives Life, and she which lives only by him, her has he espoused to himself
in Truth, Mercy and Righteousness, Hos. 2.

The Church is both Effectum and Objectum Redemptionis, the Effect and the
Object of Redemption.

The Effect. He died to purchase to himself a Church, a peculiar people, Tit.
2.14.

The Object. He gave himself for the Church, Ephesians. 5.25.

But yet it follows not, that Marriage is a Sacrament, though Adams Marriage
had such a sacramental or typical notion put upon it, he being the common Root
of all mankind: But this will not suffice to make Marriage a Sacrament, no more
than the annexing a typical use to the Jewish Sabbath, viz. to commemorate
their Deliverance out of Egypt, will make the fourth Commandment ceremonial.

And as Adam was a Type of Christ: so we may carry the parallel a little
further.

So Eve may be considered as a Type of the Church. For the Godly are called her
Seed, I will put enmity between thy Seed, that is, the Serpents, and her Seed.
Genesis 3.15. and Adam calls her the Mother of all living, Genesis 3.20. So Jerusalem
which is above, that is, the Church, is the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26.

4. And lastly, as Adam was a Type himself; so he had several Types belonging
to him.

There were diverse real Types belonging to the History of this personal Type.

As Paradise a Type of Heaven. For Heaven is often called by that name, 2 Cor.
12. that which in ver. 2. is called the third Heaven, is called in ver. 4.
Paradise; so Luke 23.43. this day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

Paradise was a Garden of Pleasure. Eden from whence the Greek word (...)
Pleasure: and the Heathenish Poems of the Gardens of Adonis: But at thy right
hand in Heaven are Pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11.

So likewise the Tree of Life in Paradise was a Type of Christ, though it was
created upon the third day of the Week; and before the Gospel it could not be a
Type of Christ; yet after the Fall, and after the preaching of the Gospel, Genesis
3. it might be designed and ordained to this use.

As God provided Physical Herbs for Man before he fell, or needed them as to
that use of Physic: so this Tree of Life before Sin, or the Gospel was known;
It seems to be so spoken of Revel. 2.7. and 22.2. The Tree of Life in the midst
of Paradise. Christ in the midst of the Church.

Man's Ejection out of Paradise, a Type of his deserved Exclusion out of Heaven.

And the Cherubims with flaming Swords, Genesis 3. ult. an outward and visible
shadow of the Wrath of God; and of the Angels of God as Executioners of it on
Man, who were created to be Ministers to his good, and are so again through
Grace: But, as in our natural condition, they are the Lords Hosts to fight
against us.

But there is (...) a much more put upon Christ. His saving Virtue far exceeds
that cursed influence of Adam, in sundry particulars, amply opened by the
Apostle from ver. 12. to the end of the Chapter.

1. The disparity is very great both in their Persons. The first Adam is of the
earth earthly; his Name is but Adam, Earth, or Red earth; but the second Adam
is the Lord from Heaven, 2 Cor. 15.47

2. In their Headship and Undertaking, the one of a Covenant of Works; the
other of a better Covenant of Grace.

3. In the Success of their Undertakings. The one failed; the other kept the
Covenant; the first Adam was tempted by Satan, and conquered by him; but Christ
was tempted, but overcame the Tempter.

4. In their Influences. The first Adam was made a living Soul; the second a
quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. The one conveys all evil, Sin and Death to his
Seed: the other communicates all good, Righteousness and Life to his. There is
Righteousness opposed to Sin, and Life to Death, and with a much more, Romans
5.15, 16, 17, 18. Not as the Offense, so is the free Gift. At the great Day,
when Adam shall see his Seed lost and undone, he must own it. I have embrued my
hands in the Blood of all these: But Christ shall say, here am I, and the
Children which God has given me, and not one of them is lost.

2. Enoch, the seventh from Adam.

It is true, he is not so expressly mentioned in Scripture for a Type of Christ,
as Adam is; but yet by comparing the Scriptures we may discern a clear analogy
between Christ and him; how he was made like unto the Son of God in sundry
things.

1. He was a most illustrious Type of Christ's Ascension into Heaven, and indeed
the only Type they had of it before the Law. They had but two in all; Elijah
under the Law, and Enoch before the Law: Therefore we cannot well omit him.
Genesis 5.24. Enoch walked with God, and he was not: for God took him; and Heb.
11.5. he was translated, that he should not see Death, and was not found,
because God had translated him. Some look upon this as a pledge of their
Translation that shall be found alive at Christ's second coming; of whom the
Apostle says, they shall be changed, or translated, 1 Thessalonians. 4. But it looks
first and chiefly at Christ himself, at his Ascension. This I mention first, as
being the chief particular: but a further analogy may observed in sundry other
particulars also; as,

2. There was in Enoch some shadow of Christ's Prophetical Office; we read of
Enochs Prophecy, Jude 14, 15.

But Christ is the true Prophet, who has unsealed the whole Book of Gods
Counsels, that Liber fatidicus, Rev. 5. he has opened it so far as is fit and
needful for his Church to know.

And as Enoch prophesied of the Day of Judgment: so has Christ very fully and
frequently.

3. We may set him among the Types of Christ for his unparalleled Holiness in
the age wherein he lived, which was a corrupt and evil time, all Flesh began to
corrupt their way, Genesis 5.22, 24. Enoch walked with God; it is twice repeated,
as worthy of special remark: so Christ fulfilled all Righteousness, Matthew. 3.15.

4. His pleasing God. For so it is testified of him, Heb. 11.5. so Christ,
Matthew. 3.17. this is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased -- Joh. 8.29. I
do always those things that please him. He is pleased so well with him, that he
is well pleased with Sinners for his sake, even for his Righteousness sake.

5. His very Name Enoch has something in it, dedicated unto God. (...)
consecratus, from (...) dedicavit, consecravit. From whence some derive the
Greek (...) Initio, and (...), the Feast of Dedication, Joh. 10.22.

So was Christ, Luke 1.35. that holy thing -- my Servant whom I have chosen
Isai. 42.1. and 49.5. formed me from the Womb to be his Servant.

6. Some have added, in regard of the continuance of his Life. Henochs days
were as the days of the Sun. For he lived three hundred sixty five years, Genesis
5.24. as many years as there be days in the year.

And of Christ it is is said, his Throne shall continue for ever, as the Sun
before me, Psalm. 89.36.

3. The third typical person that we mentioned is Noah. He is made a Type, 1
Pet. 3.20, 21. in regard of his preaching and saving those that believed him in
the Ark.

So Christ has published the Gospel, Matthew. 11.27. no man knows the Father,
but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him -- He came and preached
Peace, Ephesians. 2.17. 1 Pet. 3.19. Christ preached in Noah: he saves them that
believe his Doctrine; he saves them in the Ark of his Church, by the Covenant
and Water of Baptism.

4. Melchizedek was also a Type of Christ; and most especially in regard of the
excellency and eternity of his Person, Priesthood and Kingdom. Psalm. 110 4. The
Lord has sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the
Order of Melchizedek, with Heb. 7.2, 3, 4. made like unto the Son of God. But
there is not time to insist upon these, nor to proceed to the rest of the Types.

I shall therefore for the present conclude with something of Use and practical
Improvement; and shall raise the Uses not so much from the Doctrine in general;
but rather from that which has been spoken upon it at this time.

Use 1. Learn and know something more of Jesus Christ by what you have heard;
or, if you knew it before, let it be more deeply imprinted upon your hearts.

Let us sum up all together: for they are all but partial Types, and weak and
imperfect Shadows of the Messiah: but all put together will give the greater
luster; like the Galaxia, which is said to be a multitude of little Stars.

Adam was a Type of Christ in regard of his Headship and Influence; Enoch a
Type of his Ascension into Heaven; Noah of his Preaching and saving the Church
by the Covenant and Water of Baptism; Melchizedek was a Shadow of the
Excellency and Eternity of his Person, and of his Priesthood and Kingdom. Know
these things, meditate and consider them more thoroughly, and improve Christ in
these Discoveries for your spiritual good. Consider him as a common person
standing in our stead, as a Prophet, Priest and King; as ascended into Heaven,
as the Savior of the Church, which is his Body.

Use 2. Be exhorted to examine your selves, and try which of the two Adams you
are under. For there are but two Men in the World, the first and second Adam;
thou art a Member of one of them. Adam and Christ divide the whole World.

Quest. How may we know whether we be under the first or the second Adam?

Answ. Take these Trials.

1. What Birth have thou? only the natural, or spiritual Generation? Art thou
only born, or new born? For they that come only from Adam by natural
Generation, belong to him as the first Adam: They that come of Christ by
spiritual Regeneration are the Seed of Christ, and belong to him as the second
Adam.

What Experience have thou had of this great work? Nicodemus, though a Doctor
in Israel, understood little of it.

2. What Covenant does thy Soul cleave to, and act under the rule and influence
of? Works or Grace?

Works is the first Adams Covenant: but Grace is the Covenant of the second
Adam.

To go forth in a man's own Strength, to expect acceptance in his own Worth,
this is a first Covenant Spirit; a sign thou growest upon the old Stock, upon
the root of old Adam: But to live in a continual dependence upon free Grace for
every thing, the free Grace of God in Christ: this is the Spirit of the second
Covenant, and becomes the Sons and Branches of the second Adam.

Though a godly man may for a fit turn aside to the old Covenant, as Abraham
did to Hagar; yet it is not his way, it is not his Spirit to do so; and thence
he is never at rest, till he return to have his dependence and rest on Christ
again: The Spirit of one under the Covenant of Grace is, to have no confidence
in the Flesh; but to have his rest and rejoicing in Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.3.

3. What Communications, whose Influences do thou receive? Every Branch
receives from its Root, the Stream from its Fountain. Do thou receive the
Communications of the first or of the second Adam? this will show whose thou
art, and to whom thou do belong.

You have heard what it is that each of them does communicate. That old Tree
bears no good Fruit at all. Art thou under the power of Sin and Death? or under
the power of Righteousness and Life? Sin and Death reigns in the posterity of
the first Adam: But Righteousness reigns by Grace unto eternal Life, in the
posterity of the second Adam, Romans 5.21 -- 2 Cor. 5.17. if any man be in Christ
he is a new Creature.

Use 3. Here is Comfort to the Seed of the second Adam against the present
troubles they are under. There be chiefly three complaints and troubles of Gods
People, under all which here is matter of support and relief.

1. Thou art here upon Earth; Christ the Head in Heaven, but his poor Saints
and Members here below: But remember whither Jesus the Forerunner is entered for
us. As sure as Enochs Body is in Heaven, or Elijahs, by the virtue of his
Ascension, of whom they were Shadows: so sure shall thine and mine ascend
thither, if we be his, though we sleep in the dust for a time, as Chirst
himself also did.

2. But while in this low valley, the floods of great Waters are ready to
overwhelm us; the floods of Persecution, Affliction, Desertions, the
overflowing scourges of common calamities, which puts many of Gods people to
some cares and fears: But as to this, consider that true Noah; the Lord
provides an Ark of safety for his people, that the floods of great Waters may
not overwhelm them, Psalm. 32.6 -- see Psalm. 124.1-5. If it had not been the
Lord who was on our side -- if it had not been the Lord who was on our side,
when Men rose up against us: then the Waters had overwhelmed us, the Stream had
gone over our Soul -- then the proud Waters had gone over our Soul.

But 3. Thou art a poor unworthy creature, and God is angry, or appears angry;
and how can I expect such Salvation from him, who have sinned against him so as
I have done? To this, remember what an High Priest you have, even Jesus, who is
made an High Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchizedek: Therefore let us
come with boldness to the Throne of Grace. It is the Apostles Inference, Heb.
4.15, 16. the Apostle says of Melchizedek, Heb. 7.4. consider how great this
man was. It may be said much more of Christ, consider how great your High
Priest is.

How little soever thou art in thy own eyes, how unworthy soever; the Greatness
and Glory of your Redeemer is enough to remove all discouragement.

Some entrance (Beloved) has been made into the personal Types. We are upon
the individual persons that were Types before the Law, whereof eight were
named, Adam, Enoch, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Joseph,
whereof only two have been spoken to, viz. first Adam, secondly Enoch. We shall
now proceed to the rest.

3. The third is Noah, whom we did but touch upon the last time, but shall
endeavor now to clear it more fully.

The Story of Noah is written in the 6, 7, 8, and 9. Chapters of Genesis. And
so famous it was amongst his Posterity, that the Heathen have some broken
Remembrances and Traditions of it; they had heard of a Flood, as well as of the
Creation of the World. Ovid speaks of them both in his Metamorphosis: And their
Bacchus, the very name with a little alteration of the Letters, comes from Noah
Noachus, Boachus, and Janus, from the Hebrew Jajin vinum: somewhat they had
heard, as it seems, about his planting a Vinyard, and making Wine.

That this History of Noah had a typical respect, you may see in 1 Pet. 3.20,
21.

In what respect was he a Type? In two things chiefly.

1. In regard of his Preaching. 2. His saving his Household in the Ark.
1. In regard of his Preaching; he was a Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5.
he gave warning to the secure World for a hundred and twenty years together,
both by his Word and Actions: Every stroke in the building of the Ark had a
voice, and was an alarm to the World every day:

So Christ, who did preach by his Spirit in the Ministry of Noah, 1 Pet. 3.19,
20. And when he came in the Flesh, he did preach, and bring in everlasting
Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. And he has preached by his Word and Spirit in his
Apostles and Ministers ever since.

What Noah did one hundred and twenty years, Christ has been doing these
sixteen hundred years.

And as Noah had no great success in his Ministry: so Christ and all the
Servants of Christ have cause to complain, who has believed our Report, Isai.
53.1.

There were but eight persons saved in the Ark, wherein a few, that is, eight
Souls were saved by Water, 1 Pet. 3. And of those eight, all were not saved
eternally; there was a Cham, and of him the cursed Canaanites: but all the rest
of the world perished in the Flood. Doubtless they despised Noah and all his
Preaching, and thought him an old doting Fool to go and build a Ship on dry
ground, and expect that the Sea should come up thither to set it afloat; they
would not believe one word he said: so men account Preaching Foolishness, 1
Cor. 1. Hence those complaints of Christ and his Messengers, Isai. 49.4. I have
labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain -- In his
own personal Ministry and teaching we read not of very many that were converted
by him.

To the Apostles he gave more success; but yet the converted ones were but a
few in comparison of the unconverted, unbelieving world.

2. Noah was a Type of Christ in regard of his saving those that did believe
his Preaching, from the common Deluge and Destruction.

Hence the Notation of his Name Noah; it signifies Rest: Christ is Rest, and
the only Rest of the Soul, Matthew. 11.30. Genesis 5.29. He shall comfott us,
because of the Curse laid upon the Earth. Not upon the Earth only, (as the
blind Papists dream, and therefore love the Fish better than the Flesh;) but
the Earth is put for the whole Creation. The Earth, the Sea, and all the
Elemens, and all that is therein: yea the Sun, Moon and Stars are not excluded
out of the general Curse and Bondage of the Creatures: the Apostle says, the
whole Creation suffers and groans, Romans 8.22.

The ancient Dominion over the Creatures was in part restored, when they came
together peaceably in the Ark: the first Blessing of Propagation and Dominion
had its Charter renewed and confirmed, Genesis 9.9. Now Noah was an Instrument to
remove this Curse in part, to repair the Ruins of the old World, and restore
it to a better state: Some he did save out of the common Ruins, 1 Pet. 3.20.
so does Christ restore and save lost and fallen Mankind, 1 Pet. 3.21. by the
Resurrection of Christ.

This being a main thing wherein Noah was a Shadow, let us inquire and search
into it more fully: For where the Scripture gives us a general hint, that such
a thing was a Type, we may safely inquire; yea, we ought to inquire, and search
out the particulars wherein the Analogy lies.

Now this, viz. Noah's typical saving the World includes diverse things. There
were diverse real Types belonging to the History of this personal Type. As,

1. Noah's Ark. 2. The Deluge. 3. The Waters thereof. 4. His acceptable
Sacrifice. 5. The Lords Covenant with him; and the Rainbow the Sign thereof.
All which had their typical Significations. For, 1. Noah's Ark was a Type of the
Church. 2. The Deluge of the day of Judgment, and the everlasting Salvation of
some, and Destruction of others. 3. The Waters that bare up the Ark typified
the Water of Baptism. 4. Noah's Sacrifice was a Type of Christ's Sacrifice. 5.
His Covenant, with the Rainbow the Sign thereof, a Type of the Covenant of
Grace.

1. The Ark was a Type of the Church. Some have accommodated the Ark as a Type
a little otherwise; but this is the clearest. The Analogy may be made out in
many particulars, which some have done with much ingenuity, which because it
seems to be solid as well as ingenious, I shall rehearse it to you: I say the
Analogy may appear in these ten particulars.

1. Noah builded the Ark according to the Mind of God, and he was in it himself
when it was tossed, and floated upon the Waters, Genesis 6.22. according to all
that God commanded, so did he. So Christ builds the Church in perfect
Faithfulness to his Fathers Will, Heb. 3.2, 3. He was faithful to him that
appointed him, as also Moses was faithful in all his House: and he is in it, in
all the Floods and Troubles of his Church and People to the end of the world,
Isai. 43.2. when thou passest through the Waters, I will be with thee. Matthew.
28.20. Lo, I am with you always even to the end of the world. The Church is
resembled by a Ship: so Isai. 54.11. O thou tossed with Tempests. Here the
Church is compared to a Ship in a Storm: and there are many things belonging to
a Ship, resembling somewhat in the Church.

The Pump Repentance.

The Sails Affections.

Wind the Spirit.

The Rudder the Word --

2. The Workmen and Carpenters that built it, they were drowned themselves: so
carnal Ministers may be instrumental for good to others, of saving others, and
yet not not saved themselves.

It is a scruple which some Christians are exercised with, the Minister by whom
they have received good to their Souls proves an Apostate; hence they question
the Work they have found by his Ministry.

Now I confess, that ordinarily God does not bless the Labors of wicked
Ministers; but yet sometimes he does: as in the building of Solomon's Temple,
many had to do with it, who were not truly godly: So it is in spiritual
building there was a Judas, a Demas, Matthew. 7.22.23. 1 Cor. 9.27. For the
efficacy of the Ordinances does not depend upon Instrument; but upon the
Institution and Blessing of God.

3. The Materials of the Ark; Noah takes many trees out of the Woods, cuts them
down, compacts them, joyneth them together; and they must be bowed and fitted
and joynted: So Christ in building his Church; they must be cut off the old
tree where they grew before, and fitted, and hewed, and humbled, Hos. 6.5. I
have hewed them by the Prophets: and then compacted and united together in the
Faith, Love and Order of the Gospel; and so they become a Church of Christ.

4. There was a Door in the Ark, and but one Door, Genesis 6.16. So in the Church
Christ is the Door, Joh. 10.7, 9. by whom alone we enter in to the Father, and
find Pasture, that is, full supplies according to our wants.

5. The Ark had a Window to let in Light, Genesis 6.16. which resembles the
Windows of Solomon's Temple, 1 King. 6.4. which were made narrow without, and
wide within, to diffuse the Light the better.

This Light is Christ, Joh. 1.9. he is the Light of the World, Luke 11.34, 35,
36, as a Candle in a Room enlightens the whole Room: So if there be a Light in
the supreme Faculties of the Soul, that is, true spiritual Wisdom in the heart,
it will enlighten the whole man, so as to direct and guide it; the whole body
of a man's carriage and conversation will be full of Light: the Light he gives
diffuseth it self through the whole man, and has an influence into all his
conversation.

6. There were many Rooms or Chambers in the Ark; and so in the Temple; yet all
these made up but one Ark: this signifies many particular Churches; yet all the
Churches in the world make up but one Church Catholic, which is the mystical
body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. as the Body is one, and has many Members, and
all the Members of that one Body, being many, are one Body: so also is Christ;
see Cant. 6.9. My undefiled is but one.

7. There were three Stories in the Ark; it was three Stories high. Genesis 6.16.
and so Solomon's Temple had three parts, an outer Court, an inner Court, and an
Holy of Holies. This holds forth the three degrees of the Church. There is, 1.
The visible Church. 2. The mystical Church militant here on Earth. 3. The
Church triumphant in Heaven.


The Church in her lowest Story is her visible Members here on Earth, among
whom there be many Hypocrites; yet even so, she is more excellent than the
Mountains of Prey, Psalm. 76.4. Kingdoms are called Mountains of prey, that
saying being too often true, that magna Regna are indeed magna Latrocinia: But
the Church is more glorious than they.

The invisible Church is the second Story, against whom all the Gates and
Powers of Hell shall not prevail, Matthew. 16.18. It is true in some sense in
general concerning the visible Church; Christ will always have some visible
Societies of Christians in the world, that shall make profession of his Name;
but it holds chiefly concerning the mystical Body of Christ: True Believers
cannot fall away.

The third Story is the Church triumphant, which is higher than all these, and
more excellent than all the Kingdoms in the world, than all the Churches upon
earth.

8. They in the Ark were safe, and there was no safety but in the Ark: so in
the Church there is Salvation; but no Salvation out of the Church: Salvation is
of the Jews, Joh. 4. extra Ecclesiam nou est Salus. It is always true of the
mystical Church; and it is ordinarily true concerning the visible Church.

Yea the Ark was safest when the Waters were highest. Seaman have an
expression; in a Storm they use to wish for Sea-room enough: Or we may apply it
higher to Christ himself, and to his mystical Body; Without Christ there is no
Salvation; but as they were safe in the Ark: So whosoever is in Christ, and a
Member of that invisible Society, he is safe, and shall never perish.

9. In the Ark there were both clean and unclean Beasts; yet the Ravenousness
of their Natures was restrained for the time, Genesis 7.2. So in the Church there
are both Saints and Hypocrites: Hypocrites are unclean Beasts

A Cham in the Ark; a Judas, a Devil in Christ's own Family. In the visible
Church there be sometimes Wolves within, and Sheep without; though they are
Wolves in Sheeps clothing. For profane persons may, and should be kept out, but
close Hypocrites cannot.

For as in the Ark though there were ravenous Beasts; yet their Natures were
restrained: so in the Church, such as are Beasts by nature; yet the Corruption
of their Natures is restrained, there is restraining Grace upon Hypocrites in
the Church, as well as renewing Grace in the Saints, Isai. 11.6-9. They shall
not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain.

10. There issued out of the Ark a Raven and a Dove, whereof the Dove returned
again, but the Raven did not, Genesis 8.7, 8, 9. the Raven is an unclean Bird,
Levit. 11.15. a Bird of prey, and a Bird of darkness, Isai. 34.11.

The Dove is a Bird of Light: at the Baptism of Christ, the Holy Ghost
descended on him in the shape of a Dove, Matthew. 3. If a Dove go out from Christ
and his Ordinances, it shall find no rest, till it returns again into the Ark,
and be taken in by the Hand of Noah, by the Spirit of Christ: But the Raven
goes out of the Ark, and returns no more: and how many Ravens are there in the
Church that depart and fall off, and return no more? 1 John 2.19. they went out
from us, because they were not of us.

You Ravens that are going and coming, and hovering to and fro; Vide the old
Geneva Note.
as the Raven, she went and came, Genesis 8.7. and might light on the outside of
the Ark --

If you do not get into the Ark, into Christ, it shows what you are.

You that are Doves, and gone out, return again, return to your Rest, fly as
Doves to the Windows, Isai. 60.9.

The Dove is no ravenous Bird, she cannot fight as the Raven, and she is swift
of Wing; pray for the Wings of a Dove -- in this sense, Psalm. 55.6. make haste
to Christ.

Thus you see what a full and plentiful Analogy there is between the Ark and
the Church in all these ten particulars.

2. The Deluge was a Shadow of the Day of Judgment, and the everlasting
Salvation of some, and Destruction of others at that day. The Apostle Peter
parallels them, 2 Pet. 3.6, 7. the World that then was being overflowed with
Water perished: But the Heavens and the Earth which are now, are reserved for
Fire against the day of Judgment. It was indeed a lesser day of Judgment, and
magnum futuri Judicii praejudicium. Hence Hell is called the place of the
Giants, Prove. 21.16. The man that wandreth out of the way of understanding
shall remain (...) in caetu Gigantum, in the Congregation of the Giants, Prove.
9.17, 18. but he knows not that the Giants are there, and that her Guests are
in the depths of Hell.

The World will be in a like frame drowned again in deep security, Matthew.
24.37, 38, 39. though they see all the tokens appearing, and all things
fulfilled that have been foretold; yet they will not be awakened: But when they
saw the Flood came indeed, Oh the amazement that began to seize upon them! when
they saw the Cataracts of Heaven opened from above, and the Fountains of the
great Deep broke up from beneath!

So at the Day of Judgment every eye shall mourn, Rev. 1.7. see Heb. 11.7. Noah
prepared an Ark to the saving of his House, by which he condemned the World:
some saved by Noah, others condemned by him.

3. The Waters that bore up the Ark are made by the Apostle a shadow of the
Water of Baptism, 1 Pet. 3.21.

As that Water bore up the Ark, and saved them from drowning: so does Baptism
save us.

For though the Flood was a true and real History; ye there be typical
Histories; as you will hear further when we come to the real Types: Therefore
that Water had a typical respect to the Water of Baptism.

4. Noah's Sacrifice when he came out of the Ark, was a manifest Type of the
Sacrifice of Jesus Christ. For so indeed were all their Sacrifices, Genesis 8.20,
21, 22.

Hence Christ is called a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2.

God was so pleased with Noah's Sacrifice, that he promised to destroy the world
by Water no more:

So God is well pleased with Christ's Sacrifice; he is so pleased with it, that
he will be gracious unto sinners for the sake thereof, so as not to destroy
them, but save their Souls.

5. Noah's Covenant, and the Rainbow the sign thereof, was a Type of the
Covenant of Grace, Genesis 9.12, 13.

It is a question whether there was any Rainbow before, it may seem not.
Because it had been small comfort and assurance to the new World, to see that
which they had seen before, and to have such a sign of the Covenant. Therefore
some think that the Rainbow was not from the beginning: but as the Lord gave a
new Promise; so he created a new thing for a Sign thereof.

Confer. on Heb. 1.1, 2. of Noah 's Dispensation.
But how may it appear that the Covenant of Grace was here held forth? See Isai.
54.9, 10. This is unto me as the Waters of Noah, etc. Ezekiel. 1. ult. As the
appearance of the Bow thot is in the Cloud in the day of Rain: so was the
appearance of the Brightness round about -- Revel. 10.1. and 4.3.

Use. From all that has been said of Noah. Here is ground of unspeakable
Comfort to the Church and People of God in all their troubles. Afflictions are
often compared to deep Waters, Psalm 42.7. but God will provide for the safety
of his people, Psalm. 18.16, 17. he sent from above, he took me, and drew me out
of deep Waters. Isai. 43.2. the Waters shall not overflow thee.

The Rainbow appears when there has been rainy weather, the Rainbow in a Cloud
in a day of Rain, Ezekiel. 1. ult.

So when the Church has been in Floods of great Waters, Christ appears with a
Rainbow, Revel. 10.1.

And as he promised there shall be no more a Flood to destroy the Earth: so
there is a time coming, when there shall be no more floods of Persecution to
overwhelm his Church: I have sworn I will not be angry with thee, nor rebuke
thee any more, Isai. 54.9.

So for particular Souls that have been overflown with the Wrath of God, and
the Waters have gone over their Soul, there is a time coming when Christ will
appear with a Rainbow about his Head.

To some he gives such an inward Seal and Testimony of their Adoption, that
they never loose it, but carry it in their bosoms to their dying day, keep
their Assurance all their days. And though I know it is otherwise with some of
his Children; yet at last, when they dye and come to Heaven, he will never
overflow the soul any more with his Anger.

4. The fourth personal Type we named was Melchizedek; his Story is in Genesis 14.

That he was a Type of Christ is clear from Psalm 110.4. where speaking of, and
to, the Messiah, he says, The Lord has sworn, thou art a Priest for ever
after the Order of Melchizedek: as also from that which the Apostle says, Heb.
7.3. that he was made like unto the Son of God, and abides a Priest
continually. Assimilatus, or gerens similitudinem. Some Controversy there is,
who this Melchizedek was, and different Opinions there are. The Papists have
very roving conjectures about it.

He was not Christ himself, because he is said to be made like unto the Son of
God, Heb. 7.3. but no man is said to be like himself. For similitude is between
two.

That he was not an Angel, or an appearance of God, but a true and real Man,
may be proved by this Argument; because every Priest is taken from amongst men,
Heb. 5.1. but Melchizedek was a Priest.

And the Scripture speaks of him as a Man: For it mentions the place where he
dwelt, viz. at Salem; which must needs be understood historically; because
there is no reason to constrain us to run a to metaphorical sense.

And whereas some object, there was no man then superior to Abraham in Faith
and Holiness: But Melchizedek was greater than Abraham.

Some answer it thus; Non sanctitate, sed dignitate praefertur Abrahae. For
that Abraham was but an inferior person, whereas Melchizedek was King and
Priest in Salem.

But we may answer further. That there might, be some more eminent than
Abraham, some of his godly Ancestors, who were aged and experienced Saints: as
Sem for instance, might toward the end of their lives be more eminent than
Abraham was in his youth; of whom it is certain by the Genealogies, Genesis 11.
that he was yet living: and he was the greatest person then in the world; yea
greater than Abraham, as being one of his Progenitors and Ancestors.

Therefore many do conjecture that Sem was this Melchizedek: and indeed the
conjecture is not improbable; though for any certain demonstration it is not to
be expected, because the Lord has purposely concealed who he was, to the end,
he might be a more illustrious Type of Christ, appearing as it were like a Man
fallen down from Heaven, and destinated to that end.

Quest. Wherein was Melchizedek a Type of Christ?

Answ. In regard of the Eternity and Excellency of his Person and Office, both
as King and Priest. There be four particulars here included. He was a Type,

1. In regard of his Kingdom He is called Melchizedek, which the Apostle
interprets King of Righteousness, Heb. 7.2.

So Christ is King of his Church, and King of Righteousness, Psalm. 45.6, 7.
King of Salem, which signifies Peace. It is thought to be the same City which
was afterward called Jerusalem: so Christ was King of Jerusalem, Zach. 9.9. and
King of Peace, Isai. 9.6. My Peace I leave with you, Joh. 14.27. Mic. 5.5. This
Man shall be our Peace -- Peace that passes all understanding -- and
Righteousness first, then Peace; Isai. 32.17. the Fruit of Righteousness shall
be Peace. Otherwise, thou shall have no Peace from Christ; unless he give thee
Righteousness first; both imputing his own Righteousness for Justification to
thee; and infusing the inherent Righteousness of Sanctification into thee; He
will not create Peace for thee.

2. In regard of his Priesthood. Melchizedek was Priest of the most high God,
Genesis 14.18. Heb. 7.1. so is Christ both King and Priest. This was extraordinary
in Melchizedek, that he might be the more glorious Type; God did not ordinarily
allow it: the House of Aaron had not the Kingdom; the House of David had not
the Priesthood, they might not intermeddle in the Priests Office; King Vzziah
was smitten for it: but Melchizedek was both.

3. In that shadow of Eternity which the Story in Genesis does cast upon him.
He is there brought in as a greater person than Abraham the Father of the
faithful: but neither his Birth nor Death mentioned, neither his Father nor
Mother, without either beginning or end of days, Heb. 7.3. It is not meant,
that he was so really, but only in sacred History, and in a Type or Shadow: For
it is impossible for any Creature to be without beginning, that is an essential
property of God; Novitas essendi est de Essentia Creaturae.

And that Melchizedek was a Creature, and not God, was proved before; because
he was Priest and King of Salem; and every Priest is taken from amongst men, de
Ratione Sacerdotis est ut sit verus Homo, it is an essential requisite in a
Priest, that he be indeed a Man: Melchizedek therefore was a Man; but yet
eternal typically and in a figure.

Christ is called a Priest for ever, Psalm. 110.4. and of Melchizedek the
Apostle says, he abides a Priest continually, Heb. 7.3. You shall never have
cause to say, My Friend, alas my best Friend is dead: For he has an
everlasting Priesthood, and lives for ever to intercede and make mention of you
to the Lord, Heb. 7.25.

4. In regard of his Pre-eminence and Excellency above all other men. Vide My
Notes of Christ's Priestly Office, wherein greater than Aaron.
Behold how great this man was, Heb. 7.4. he was greater than Aaron the Priest
of the Lord; yea greater than Abraham the Forefather of Aaron.

He was greater than Abraham, as in other respects: so in these three.

1. In that he blessed Abraham, Genesis 14.19. Heb. 7.7. and without contradiction
the less is blessed of the greater: so Christ blesses us, Luke 24, 50, 51. All
our Blessings are through him; he is the Fountain of Blessing.

2. In that Melchizedek did refresh Abraham and his Army, Genesis 14.18. and
Melchizedek King of Salem brought forth Bread and Wine, that is, (as the old
Note well explains it) for Abraham and his Soldiers Refreshment, and not to
offer Sacrifice: So Christ refreshes his Church with the Word and Sacraments,
Matthew. 11. I will give you rest, or I will refresh you, Ego reficiam vos.

3. In that Melchizedek did receive an homage and acknowledgment of Tithes from
Abraham, and from Levi and Aaron in his Loins. Thus they paid their Respects to
him, Genesis 14.20. Heb. 7.9. whether of his Spoils, or of his Goods, it was the
tenth part. Some have gone so far from this, as to infer, that we ought to give
unto Christ the Tenth part of our Goods, as well as the Seventh part of our
Time.

But to let that pass: Certain it is, that we ought to give some fit proportion
of our Estates unto God, for his use and service. And as he was herein greater
than Abraham: so likewise greater than Aaron, and the Aaronical Order.
Melchizedeks was an higher Order in many respects, largely opened in that 7th.
to the Hebrews.

Use. This that has been said concerning Melchizedek as a Shadow of Jesus
Christ affords the greater encouragement to believe, and comfort to them that
do believe in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Encouragement, having such an High Priest, thou may safely venture thy Soul
upon him.

Comfort, that so great a Person is thy Savior.

True, thou art unworthy; but his Worth and Excellency is enough to
preponderate and overballance all thine unworthiness.

He is both a King and a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedek: and if
thou do accept of him as thy King to rule thee, thou may safely rely and
rest upon him as thine High Priest to justify and reconcile thee to his Father.

Aug: 15. 1667.
Of the individual Personal Types that were before the Law, there be four yet
remaining to be spoken to.

You have heard of Adam, Enoch, Noah, Melchizedek, how they were Types and
Figures of him that was to come.

It remains, to speak of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Joseph.

1. Abraham; As the Apostle says of Melchizedek in other respects, Heb. 7.4.
so we may say of Abraham; Consider how great this Man was, in that so many
Patriarchs, so many righteous men, so many Prophets, Priests and Kings, yea
Jesus Christ himself, were once in Abraham's Loins.

I confess he is omitted by diverse that have handled this Subject, for what
reason I know not, unless it be from an aptness to restrain all the Types to
the Person of Christ, wherein perhaps they found the accommodation not so clear
in respect of Abraham; in whom nevertheless you will see some clearness, I
hope, by and by, even as to that; though it is not always necessary in a Type,
that it point directly at the Messiahs Person; but it is sufficient if there be
an adumbration or shadowing a forth of any Gospel Truth or Mystery any way
belonging to him.

But there were many of them shadowed forth in Abraham, and the Scripture owns
him for a typical Person, as you will see in the particulars. I shall but
instance in five or six things.

1. If we consider him together with Isaac and Jacob, that proceeded from him,
we may observe that in these three persons, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, there is
a weak and dark shadow of a very great Mystery, even of those three glorious
Persons, God the Father, Son and Spirit, in the order of their Subsistence and
Influences to our Salvation. For Abraham was the Father and Original of both
the other; and in his Love to God he spared not his only Son Isaac, but offered
him up to Death for a Burnt-offering: so God, in his Love to Man, spared not
his only begotten Son, but delivered him up for us, Romans 8.32.

Isaac was sacrificed in a Figure: Vide my Expos. on Genesis 22.
so was the Son of God, the second Person of the Trinity, in our Nature slain
and sacrificed for us.

And Jacob, you know, came both of Abraham and Isaac, and he is renowned for
the Spirit of Prayer, by which he had power with God and prevailed, Genesis 32.28.
He did not prevail by his own strength, but by the Power of the Holy Ghost, who
did appear in him, and acted him as a Spirit of Prayer and Supplication unto
such invincible wrestlings with the Lord.

From all which you see, that there is some glimpse and shadow of the Fathers
Love, of the Sons Death and Sufferings, and of the Spirit his breathings and
workings in us. Here is something of a low and weak representation of that
glorious Mystery of the Trinity, and the influences thereof to our eternal
peace; though it is but a low and weak and dark shadow of it, as all Types are
in comparison of the Antitype.

2. If we consider Abraham with his two Wives Hagar and Sarah, and their
Posterities Ishmael and Isaac.

Here the two Covenants of Works and Grace, legal and evangelical Professors
are shadowed forth.

For this we have the Apostles Authority, and the Testimony of the Holy Ghost
himself, the best Interpreter of his own meaning, Gal. 4.22, 23, 24.

1. The Differences and Properties of the two Covenants are here held forth.
Hagar by the strength of Nature has a Child; but Sarah by the Faith in the
Promise, Gal. 4.23. So Works and Fruits brought forth in a man's own strength,
these are legal: if by Faith in Christ, this is evangelical.

The first Covenant-Spirit is a Spirit of bondage, Gal. 4.24, 25. bondage unto
sin and death: the second Covenant-Spirit is a Spirit of liberty and freedom;
not liberty to sin, but liberty of spirit in and unto Duty.

The first Covenant-Spirit is a Spirit of Persecution, Gal. 4.29. the second
Covenant-Spirit is a Spirit of Love.

Let those Professors look to it, and take heed to their Spirits, who have a
rigid, a violent, an imposing spirit toward the people of God, the Children of
the Promise; take heed least you prove Hagarites, and mere legal Professors.

2. It is true, as Abraham did turn aside unto Hagar: so a Believer that is in
the Covenant of Grace may possibly turn aside in some particular actings to a
Covenant of Works; when through unbelief and neglect of the Promise they act
according to the Law, in their own strength, or in a way of violence, not of
love to their Brethren.

3. But the Bondwoman and her Seed must be cast out, Genesis 21.10. Gal. 4.30.
Away with the Law of Works; we must renounce the old Covenant, and get free
from the snares of such a Spirit.

3. If we consider Abraham as the Head of the Covenant to that Church and
People: so he is a Type of Christ the Head of the second Covenant.

You know God covenanted with Abraham for his Seed: so he does with Christ for
all his Elect.

Gods Promise to Abraham was to give a Seed to him, and an Inheritance to his
Seed, viz. the Land of Canaan, the Land of Promise: so God did promise to Jesus
Christ, that he should see his Seed, Isai. 53.10, 11. and to bring them to
Heaven, Heb. 2.10 -- Jesus Christ is the true Head of the second Covenant, he
engages and undertakes for all his Seed: Abraham was but a typical Head
thereof.

4. Abraham was a Type of Christ in regard of his absolute Obedience to the
Will of God; coming from his own Land, and from his Fathers House, submitting
to that painful, and, unto carnal Reason, shameful and contemptible Ordinance
of Circumcision; dismissing Ishmael, a thing grievous to a tenderhearted
Parent; yea, which was yet: more, sacrificing and offering up his Isaac, his
only Son Isaac: there was nothing so difficult, but if God require it, Abraham
will do it; there is not such another Example, there is not an higher instance
of Obedience in all the Scripture, than in Abraham, save only in Jesus Christ,
who was obedient to his Fathers Will in all things, even unto Death it self,
Joh. 6.38 -- 8.29 -- 10.18.

As God tried Abraham in his Isaac: so will he try every Son of Abraham in what
is dearest to him.

5. Abraham's Intercession for the Righteous in Sodom, and the efficacy of it
with the Lord, is some shadow and resemblance of the Prayers and Intercession
of Jesus Christ, and the prevailing efficacy thereof for the Salvation of the
Elect, Genesis 18.25. For as Lot was saved by means of Abraham's Prayer from the
Destruction of Sodom: so are we for Christ's sake from everlasting Damnation.
For Sodom was a Type of Hell, which is therefore called a Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, Rev. 21.8.

Lastly, That he, who was the Father of the Faithful, should be so great a
Soldier, and Conqueror of five Kings (and indeed Abraham is the first godly
Warrior we read of in Scripture): It was a good Omen, and a Presage, what
Believers, the Sons of Abraham, should do; and especially in the latter days,
when the Kingdom of Christ shall prevail, as Dan, 2. and chap. 7.

2. Isaac; the Scripture takes notice of him as a Type of Christ, when it calls
both him and Christ the promised Seed, and says he rose from the dead, and so
he dyed also in a Figure, or as a Type. He was therefore a Type of Christ in
three respects.

1. In his Birth. 2. In his Death and Sufferings. 3. In his Resurrection from
the dead.
1. In regard of his Birth, which was extraordinary and incredible, not by the
power of Nature, but by virtue of the Promise of God. Isaac was the Seed of the
Promise made to Abraham, Gal. 4.28. in whom all the Nations of the earth should
be blessed: But Christ was indeed the promised Seed, he was chiefly and
principally intended in that Promise, see Gal. 3.16. in whom alone we are truly
blessed, Psalm. 72.17.

Isaac was born by virtue of the Promise believed on, against and above the
ordinary course of Nature, of Sarahs dead Womb, Romans 4.19.

So Christ was born of the Womb of the Virgin Mary in a miraculous
unconceivable manner, not according to the ordinary course of Nature; but by
the power of the Holy Ghost overshadowing her, Luke 1.35.

An Angel did reveal the Birth of Isaac to Sarah, and she thought in her self
it was impossible, Genesis 18.11, 12. Sarah heard it, and it had ceased to be with
Sarah after the manner of Women, and Sarah laughed within her self, saying,
after I am waxed old, shall I have pleasure, my Lord being old also?

So did an Angel reveal to the Virgin Mary, that Christ should be born of her,
and she admires and says, how can this be, seeing I have not known Man? Luke
1.34.

Isaac's Birth was promised and waited for many years; from the first Promise
of a Seed made to Abraham, to the Birth of Isaac was five and twenty years: For
he was seventy five years old when he left Haran, Genesis 12.4. and he was an
hundred years old when Isaac was born, Genesis 21.5.

So Christ the promised Seed was long expected and waited for; from the first
Promise of Christ in Genesis 3.15. Vid. Ainsworth in loc.
to his coming in the Flesh was well nigh four thousand years.

2. Isaac was an eminent Type of Christ in regard of his Death and Sufferings.

Isaac without resistance, without repining or reply, willingly yields himself
to his Father even unto Death: So was Christ obedient to his Father even unto
Death. So each of them was led away like a Lamb to the slaughter, as is said of
Christ, Isai. 53.7. Act. 8.32.

Isaac carried the Wood whereon he was bound to Moriah, Genesis 22.6. so did
Christ carry the Cross whereon he was nailed to Golgotha, Joh. 19.17. and so
the Wood was first laid upon them both, and then they were laid upon the Wood.

Isaac was to be offered alone, the Servants being left behind at the foot of
the Hill, Genesis 22.5. So Christ must tread the Winepress alone, his Disciples
being fled and scattered from him, Joh. 16.32.

The place where Isaac was offered was Mount Moriah, Genesis 22.2. and there was
the Temple built, a Type of Christ's Body: and there also his Body was
crucified, upon another part of the same Mountain.

And as to the time, something of analogy may be noted: some accommodated it
thus, that as Isaac came the third day to the place of his Immolation: so
Christ came to his Sufferings the thirty third year of his age, consisting of
three tens and three units. And it was three years after his Entrance upon his
public Ministry, which is three days, putting a day for a year according to
the Prophetic style, Luke 3.23. he began his Ministry the thirtieth year of
his age.

And there be four Passovers mentioned in the Gospel of John, in the sacred
Story of his Life and Death.

Or we may apply this circumstance more literally in reference to his
Resurrection from the dead, which is the

3. Third thing wherein Isaac was a Type of Christ, thus; that they were both
delivered from Death the third day.

Look, as Isaac was reputed among the dead in his Fathers thoughts and purpose
for three days, who had given him up unto the Lord; but he received him again
as from the dead after three days.

So Christ was in the state of Death three days; but then rose again to dye no
more; so that as Isaac in three days was both alive and dead, and revived in a
figure, Christ was so in truth. In this respect the Apostle clearly makes him a
Type of Christ, Heb. 11.19. accounting that God was able to raise him up even
from the dead, from whence also he received him in a Figure. For Isaac's Death
and Resurrection was not a real Death and Resurrection; but a figurative Death,
and a figurative Resurrection: The truth of which Figure is in Christ, who both
dyed and rose again really and indeed. I am he that lives and was dead, and
behold I am alive for evermore, Amen, and have the Keys of Hell and of Death,
Revel. 1.18.

3. Jacob; he also was a Type of Christ, and is intimated in the Scripture so
to be, in that Christ is called by his Name, Isai. 49.3. Thou art my Servant, O
Israel, in whom I will be glorified; they are the words of God the Father unto
Jesus Christ.

Jacob was a Type of Christ, 1. In his Sojourning. 2. In his Wrestling.


1. In his sojourning and traveling to and fro in an afflicted condition
almost all his days: For he seems to have been the most afflicted Saint that we
read of in Scripture, except Job; He leaves his Fathers House and goes to
Haran, and lives there as a Servant for his two Wives, Rachel and Leah, Genesis
28.10. and 29.18, 27.

So Christ left the Bosom of his Father, descended from the highest Heavens,
and sojourned here upon earth in the form of a Servant, to purchase to himself
a Spouse, a Church of Jews and Gentiles.

Jacob also went down into Egypt by Gods direction, and there Joseph fed him,
Genesis 46.3.

So Christ was carried into Egypt by Joseph the Son of another Jacob, being
warned so to do by the Lord in a Dream: and was there fed and provided for by
Joseph his reputed Father, Matthew. 2.13.

And as the Lord brought Jacob back again in his Posterity, who carried his
Bones with them, Genesis 46.4. I will surely bring thee up again.

So he brought Christ out of Egypt in his own person.

And that this History had a typical respect to Christ, you may see in Matthew.
2.15. Hos. 11.1. when Israel was a Child, then I loved him, and called my Son
out of Egypt. It is spoken there historically; but not only so, but
prophetically also: For that History of Isreal's going into Egypt, and returning
again, was a typical History, and did represent what was to be done in Christ
the true Israel.

2. Jacob was also a Type of Christ in regard of his wrestling and prevailing
with the Lord; When he was to meet Esau, he betakes himself to Prayer that
night and prevailed, from whence he got the name of Israel, Genesis 32.28. and he
said, thy Name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: For as a Prince thou
have power with God and with men, and have prevailed: Hos. 12.4. Yea he wept
and made supplication unto him.

So Christ often, and particularly the night before his Sufferings, Heb. 5.7.
who in the days of his Flesh, when he had offered up Prayers and Supplications
with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from Death; and
was heard in that he feared; for he had that which was equivalent.

You know his Agonies in Prayer that night, when he said, Father if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me; nevertheless not my Will, but thy Will be
done.

Yea he lives for ever to intercede, Heb. 7.25.

4. The fourth and last personal Type that is now to be spoken to, is Joseph.
The History of Joseph in the latter end of Genesis is a very admirable and an
affecting History. In Poems and Romances to please and affect the Mind, men
take liberty to feign; yet they come far short of this which was a real History.

It is true Joseph is not so expressly mentioned in the New Testament as a Type
of Christ, as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are; but the analogy is so clear and
full, that we cannot well omit him.

Joseph multis modis Figuram Christi gestavit, vel potius viva fuit ejus Imago,
says Calvin in Matthew. 2. ult.

The Analogy is mavelous clear in sundry particulars; I shall but instance in
four things, wherein he was (as the Apostle speaks of another eminent Type)
made like unto the Son of God.

1. In his personal qualifications and endowments of Wisdom and Holiness. 2. In
his Sufferings. 3. In his Advancement. 4. In his Carriage toward his Brethen.
1. In regard of his personal Qualifications and endowments.

Joseph may be fitly numbered amongst the Types of Christ; for he was very
eminent both as to Wisdom and Holiness.

As for Wisdom, he had a Prophetical Light shining in him, from whence Pharaoh
gave him that honorable name Zaphnath payaneah, a clear Revealer of Secrets,
Genesis 41.45. the Egyptian Language, though not the same with the Hebrew; yet had
some affinity with it. The first word Tsopnath Secretum comes from (...)
recondidit; The other payaneach is thought to be a compound of two words, from
(...) claruit, and (...) duxit placide, Joseph was eminent for leading by the
hand into secret hidden mysteries.

It was said of him by Pharaoh, Can we find such a man as this is, in whom the
Spirit of God is? Genesis 41.38. and forasmuch as God has showed thee all this,
there is none so discreet and wise as thou art.

So in Christ are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. 2.3. He
received the Spirit without measure, Joh. 3.34. He is the wonderful Counselor,
Isai. 9.6. the wonderful Numberer, Dan. 8.13. the true Palmoni, or numberer of
Secrets.

And as for Holiness, Joseph was tempted by his Mistress to bodily Adultery,
but he resisted and overcame the temptation: So Christ was tempted to Idolatry
(which is spiritual Adultery,) but overcame the Tempter, Matthew. 4. And
Believers also are victorious through him. Thanks be to God who gives us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.57.

2. In regard of his Sufferings, both from his Brethren, and from Strangers
also, his Mistress and other Egyptians. His Sufferings were very grievous, the
Archers sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him, Genesis 49.3. It is
said, the Irons entered into his Soul, Psalm. 105.17, 18.

So Christ did suffer grievous things from the Jews, his own Brethren and
Countrymen, and from the Romans, those spiritual Egyptians. He came to his own,
but his own received him not, Joh. 1.11. See Calvin on Matthew. cap. 2. ver. ult.
but they delivered him up to the Romans: He was a Nazarite as it were,
separate from his Brethren, Genesis 49.26. Deuteronomy. 33.16. And what moved them to
this? It was, for that of God that was in him. The Patriarchs, moved with envy,
sold Joseph into Egypt, Act. 7.9.

So it is said of Christ, that Pilate knew that for envy they had delivered
him, Matthew. 27.18.

They hated him especially for that he by divine Visions and Revelations told
them, that he should be exalted, Genesis 37.8.

So the Jews sought the more to kill the Lord Jesus Christ, because he not only
had broken the Sabbath, as they thought, but said also that God was his Father,
making himself equal with God, Joh. 5.18 -- If we let him alone, you will see all
men go after him, Joh. 11.48.

And when did they do this injury to Joseph? It was when he was showing
kindness, and doing good to them: For his Father had sent him to seek and visit
his Brethren in the Wilderness, Genesis 37.13, 14. Then they conspire against him,
and call him Dreamer, sell him for twenty pieces of Silver to the Ishmaelites,
and they to the Egyptians, where he is falsely accused, condemned and put in
Prison.

So Christ is sent from Heaven by his Father into the Wilderness of this world,
to visit his Brethren the Sons of Men; but Judas and the Jews conspire against
him, call him a Seducer; he is sold for 30 pieces of Silver by one of his own
Disciples, he is falsely accused, condemned, and crucified between two
Malefactors, like Joseph imprisoned with Pharaohs two Servants.

And as Joseph's Brethren, when they were resolved to kill him, and had thrown
him into the pit, they thought they had made sure work with him, we will see
what will become of his Dreams, Genesis 37.20.

So the Jews thought of Christ, they thought they had him sure enough when they
had him upon the Cross, and in the Grave.

But the hand of Providence was in all this, ordering and overruling it for
good, to another issue than the Instruments intended or expected, Genesis 45.5, 7,
8.

So it is said of Herod, and the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, that they
were gathered together to do whatsoever thy Hand and thy Counsel determined
before to be done, Act 4.28. Act. 2.23. him being delivered by the determinate
Counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken etc.

And you know the end of it was good to his Brethren; for so he calls his
Elect, Heb. 2.11. yea saving everlasting good both unto Jews and Gentiles, who
both had an hand in his Sufferings; as both Joseph's Brethren had, and the
Egyptians too in his Sufferings, the end and issue whereof was the saving of
the Lives of both of them.

3. Come we now to Joseph's advancement to all his Glory; here likewise was a
shadow of what was done in Christ. For as Joseph was brought first into such a
low condition, and then to the greatest height of worldly Glory, from a Prison
to a Kingdom, Genesis 49.23, 24. So Christ was first humbled, then exalted.

Who would have thought that had seen Joseph in the Prison, that ever he should
come to be a Prince and a Ruler in the Land?

And when the Disciples saw Christ upon the Cross, how little did they think to
see him reign? they were giving up their hopes in him, we trusted it had been
he, which should have redeemed Israel, Luke 24.21.

Now was Joseph's Dream fulfilled, that all their Sheaves would bow to his; now
the Sun, Moon and Stars did obeisance to him. For he was made next to Pharaoh,
and they cried before him, bow the knee, Genesis 41.43.

And in the name of Jesus every knee shall bow: For God has given him a Name
above every Name, Phil. 2.10, 11.

Thou shall be over my House, says Pharaoh, Genesis 41.40. and he made him Ruler
over all the Land of Egypt, ver. 43.

So he has put all things into the hands and under the feet of Jesus Christ,
and has made him head over all things to the Church, Ephesians, 1.22. He is an
Head of eminence over all; he is an Head of saving influence to the Church.

And Joseph's Brethren, as stout as they were, yet at last came to him for
supplies, and did obeisance to him whom they had sold and slighted.

So must Sinners to Jesus Christ, and so shall his Brethren the Jews, though
they have stood it out long against him, yet they shall come in at last, and
humble themselves before him whom they have pierced, Zach. 12.10.

4. Joseph bare a similitude of the Son of God in his carriage toward his
Brethren, which was most heroic and Saint-like, yea Christ-like, in requiting
good for evil, forgiving all their injuries, and showing kindness to them, who
had done all the wrong they could to him.

And does not Christ so to us? he prayed for those that crucified him, he saves
us, who have killed him.

This in general was Joseph's deportment and carriage toward his Brethren, and
you see it was indeed divine and excellent: but let us also look into some
particular passages of it which were most remarkable.

1. He knew them, when they knew not him, Genesis 42.8.

So does Christ know us before we know him: yea when we are tempted to think he
takes no notice of us. I saw thee when thou wast under the Fig Tree, Joh. 1.48.

2. He carries it roughly toward them a while at first, to bring them to
Repentance, Gen, 42.7-21. and this made them reflect upon their own sins.

So does Christ to Souls, he first humbles, and then comforts; first he wounds
and breaks the heart, and then he heals it and binds it up; he frowns upon them
at first, and pierces their hearts through with godly sorrow, Act. 2.37. and
afterward he pours in the oil of Joy and Comfort, Isai. 61, 1, 2, 3.

3. Joseph reveals himself to them at last, in the sweetest melting expressions
of his Love and Bowels toward them, when they were fit for it, and when his
own heart was full, that he could contain no longer. See the Story of it, Gen
45.1, 3, 4, 5.

So does Jesus Christ reveal himself to the Souls of his people, when they are
fit for it; he gives them clear and sweet discoveries, ravishing and amazing
manifestations of his Love; I am Joseph your Brother: I am Jesus thy Savior,
who was crucified and pierced for thee, as well as by thee, which thou have
been so long mourning for; but I have seen thy tears, I have heard thy Prayers,
and I am now come to comfort thee, and to tell thee, that I am thine, and thou
art mine: such words as these they hear, to this effect he speaks, when he
causes them to hear the voice of his Loving Kindness, and sheds abroad his
Love in their hearts by the Holy Ghost.

4. Joseph supplies all their wants, makes provision for them every way; he
gives them their Corn, without taking their Money; washes them, sets them at his
Table, and feeds them, Genesis 43.16, 33, 34. gives them Victuals and Chariots for
their Journey, with a Charge not to fall out by the way, chap. 45.19, 24. And
finally places them in Goshen, in the best of the Land, there to dwell, till
they should go to Canaan, the Land of Promise, cap. 47.11.

Jesus Christ does all this in an higher way. He gives us all the good we need,
and that freely, without Money, or without price: he washes and cleanses us
inwardly by his Spirit, as well as outwardly by the Water of Baptism; feeds us
at his Table, not only with bodily, but with spiritual Food; gives us his
Ordinances as Chariots of Salvation to bring us to himself, and Signs and Seals
of his Love to us, and of our Love to him, and to one another. It is his great
Commandment to his Disciples, to love one another: and finally he plants us in
Goshen here, in a state of Light and Grace, till we come to the heavenly
Canaan, to a state of Glory. Thus does our true Joseph provide for us.

5. Yet after all this, they had some secret fears and doubtings of his Love;
whereupon they seek Pardon of their former Sins; but he gives them renewed
assurance of it, to quiet their fears, and settle their doubting thoughts, Genesis
50.15, 21. through the remembrance of their own Guilt, and Sins against him.

So poor Souls, when Christ has spoken Peace, yet there be oftentimes some
secret fears and doubts remaining, or returning upon them again, after all his
appearances; when he appeared unto them again in Gallilee; as Matthew. 28.17. it
is said, and when they saw him, they worshipped him, but some doubted.

But in such as are the Lords, these fears and doubts set them upon the renewed
exercise of Grace, reflecting and searching their own hearts and ways, and
seeking Pardon of former Sins: and in this way, the Lord renews his Love, and
gives them new and fresh evidences and further assurance of it, and bids them
fear not; and so quiets their hearts again, as Joseph did his Brethrens.

-- Who is the Type or Figure of him that is to come. Romans 5.14. Aug. 22. Sept.
5. 1667.

THe individual Persons that were Types of Christ have been referred unto two
Classes.

1. Such as were before the Law. 2. Such as were under the Law.
The typical Persons that were before the Law have been spoken to. We are now
to proceed (as the Lord shall enable) unto typical Persons under the Law, and
they were many and diverse. I shall not mention all, but only (as in the former
sort) some of the chief and most illustrious of them.

And because the nature of the matter will not only bear it; but does partly
lead unto it, none of them giving a full and perfect Representation of the
Messiah; and there being something of Connection remarkable in the Histories and
Actions of diverse of them; I shall therefore put them together in pairs, or in
several Conjunctions and Constellations, as it were, whereby they will yield
the greater luster, and give a more clear and full Representation of that
glorious person whom the Lord ordained and designed them to represent; like the
Galaxia in the Heavens, which Philosophers conceive to be a Conjunction or
Conglobation of many lesser Stars shining together, which gives that luster,
which we call the Via lactea, the milky way in the Heavens. The conjoyning or
putting of them thus together will be some help both to your Uerstandings and
Memories.

Now there were four eminent Conjunctions or Constellations, as it were (for I
know not well what fitter word to express it by) of typical Persons who shone
like bright Stars in the night, in those darker times under the Law, before the
Sun of Righteousness himself arose with Light and Healing in his Wings.

The first is Moses and Josuah, whereof the one delivered them out of Egypt,
the other brought them into Canaan; a Shadow both of the evil we are saved
from, and of the good we are possessed of, by him who is the true Moses and
Josuah.

The second Constellation or Conglobation of typical persons is, Sampson, David
and Solomon, all which three put together, gives a bright and glorious
Representation of Jesus Christ: Sampson in his Death and Sufferings, David in
his Victories and Conquests, Solomon in the peace, and quiet establishment of
his Kingdom.

The third is Elijah, Elisha and Jonah, three Prophets; the first whereof was
an illustrious Type of Christ's Ascension, the second of the Continuance of his
Presence and Spirit in his Apostles and Ministers ever since (for the Spirit of
Elijah did rest upon Elisha,) and the Death of Christ, which was the procuring
cause both of his Ascension, and the effusion of his Spirit, is shadowed forth
in Jonah.

The fourth and last that I shall speak to, is Zerubbabel and Jehoshuah; one
whereof was the Prince, and the other the High Priest, and both Rebuilders of
the Temple, and Restorers of the collapsed estate of the Church of God in those
times.

1. First then for Moses and Joshuah, the one (as I said) delivered them out of
Egypt, the other brought them into Canaan; and so shadowed forth both our
Deliverance from spiritual Bondage and Misery, and the bringing of us into a
state of spiritual Rest and Happiness by Jesus Christ. There was a
Prefiguration of the former in Moses, and of the latter in Joshuah.

This Moses, the Scripture speaks of him, as the greatest person upon all
accounts that ever was in the world, except Jesus Christ. See the three last
verses of Deuteronomy; And there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto
Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face: In all the signs and wonders which the
Lord sent him to do in the Land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and all his Servants, and
to all his Land, and in all that mighty hand, and in all the great terror which
Moses showed in the fight of all Israel.

As to all humane and divine Excellencies and Accomplishments, and appearances
of God in him, there was never his fellow.

Melchizedek indeed was greater in one respect, as to that shadow of Eternity
and unchangeable Glory beforementioned: Solomon was greater as to the outward
Peace and Splendour of his Kingdom, and as to universal Insight into all the
depths, and secrets, and mysteries of Nature: But neither of them had such
continual visible Intercourse and Communion with God in visible appearances to
him upon all occasions: Neither of them wrought such Miracles, nor were they
instrumental to so great a work of Providence, as the Deliverance of Israel out
of Egypt, which, with all the passages and circumstances belonging to it, was
the greatest and the highest Dispensation of Providence that ever was,
excepting that of our Redemption by Jesus Christ.

Yea so famous was the History of Moses, that though it was very ancient; yet
the Heathen Historians and Poets have said something of it. And he is thought
by some to be their Mercurius Trismegistus, of whom they spoke out of some
broken remembrances and traditions, though corrupted with fabulous Inventions
intermixed; wherein yet some footsteps of the Truth may be discerned. They call
their Mercurius, Interpres Divum, and paint him with a Rod twined with
Serpents, etc.

Now that Moses was a Type, the Scripture is clear, Deuteronomy. 18.18. I will raise
them up a Prophet from among their Brethren, like unto thee -- Heb. 3.2. Jesus
Christ, who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithful
in all his House.

But how, or wherein was Moses a Type?

The Answer is in two respects: For Moses may be considered two ways.

1. In regard of his Dispensation, and so he was a type of the Law. 2. In
regard of his Person, and so he was a Type of Jesus Christ: And so we have two
things to inquire into. 1. What of the Law, and 2. What of Jesus Christ was
shadowed forth in Moses.

I shall begin with the lower Notion first.

1. Moses was a Type of the Law in regard of the Dispensation wherein the Lord
was pleased to use him, and to introduce by his Ministry into the Church. For
(as has been formerly showed) the Types are not always to be restrained only
to the Person of Christ; But there were legal shadows of all other Truths,
which are more clearly and fully revealed under the New Testament: And so they
had their Types and Shadows even of the Covenant of Works, as was showed in
Abraham's Wives and Children: So likewise Moses his Administration of the Mind
of God shadowed forth the same thing.

Hence the Scripture speaks so much of the Law of Moses, under the notion of
Works. The Law came by Moses, Joh. 1.17. that is, as contradistinguished unto
Gospel Grace and Truth, for it follows: but Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ.
Not that Moses his Dispensation was indeed a Covenant of Works but a shadow or
representation of it. For had it been indeed a Covenant of Works, it would have
been their Duty to seek Salvation by their own Merits: but they were saved by
Grace as well as we, and not by Works: they were saved by Faith in Christ, and
in his Righteousness, whereof they had some discoveries; they were under a
Dispensation of Grace: but it was like a Covenant of Works, and did very much
resemble that legal way in many respects.

Quest. But wherein was the Mosaical Dispensation so like unto the Covenant of
Works? what of the Law was shadowed forth in Moses?

Answ. Something was hinted as to this in the first Sermon on Heb. 4.2. But now
to speak a little further to it.

1. In regard of the dreadful Majesty, and Terror, and Glory of that
Administration. Herein it was like the old Covenant, Heb. 12.18. -- 21. God
acts as a Sovereign Lord in the Covenant of Works, and appears in the dreadful
Glory of his absolute Sovereignty and Dominion over his Creatures.

2. There was a darkness also in that Dispensation, Heb. 12.18. Ye are not come
unto blackness, and darkness, and Tempest.

Hence Moses had a Veil upon his Face, Exodus 34.29, 30, 33. But there was a
further mystery in this Veil; it signifies a spiritual Veil, a Covering upon
the Heart, 2 Cor. 3.13.14. a Veil upon their Minds, Act. 13.27. the Prophets,
they understood them not, though read every Sabbath day.

3. There was a Yoke of Bondage, which neither we nor our Fathers (says Peter)
were able to bear, Act. 15.10. so the Law genders unto Bondage, Gal. 4.24, 25.
Such as are under the Law, their Spirits are under continual Bondage: but the
Gospel is spiritual Liberty.

4. The abiding Strength and Power of the Law to condemn, 1 Cor. 3 -- the
Letter kills -- It is the Ministration of Death: And as Moses his natural
Force was not abated, Deuteronomy. 34.7. so neither is the Strength of the Law, as to
its condemning Power over Sinners.

Hereby the continual force of the Law is signified, the Power whereof decays
not in the Conscience of Sinners by number of Days or mutitude of Works,
Answorth in lec.
till God take it away, and abolish it by Grace in Christ.

5. The Weakness of it to save. Moses might not enter into Canaan, though he
did much desire it; see Deuteronomy. 32.52. And the Reason alleged is his failing in
that one point, Numb. 20.12.

What was Moses his error and mistake at that time? There is something of
difficulty to discern, and make it out.

Three things the Scripture seems to intimate.

1. He smote the Rock twice, Numb. 20.11. when his Instructions were no more,
but to speak unto it, v. 8. 2. Something of inordinate Passion seems to be
noted, Psalm. 106. he spoke unadvisedly with his Lips, v. 33. 3. His Unbelief is
expressly taxed, because ye believed not my Word, Numb. 20.12.
But what was this Unbelief? or how came it to be working in him at this time?

Some have guessed at it thus.

This Occurrence fell out eight and thirty years after their first murmuring
for Water: and their was a new Generation now risen up, and they falling into
the very same sin, and that at the same place, upon the Borders of Canaan, and
upon the same occasion, want of Water, for which the Lord had rejected and
excluded their Fathers; Moses was afraid that the Lord would now take advantage
against this Generation also, as he did against their Ancestors, causing them
to wander forty years; and as indeed he might justly have done against these
also: But yet Moses should not have given way to such Fears, unless the Lord
had declared it, which as to this Generation he did not: But for this one
failing Moses could not enter into Canaan.

So the Law, if but one Sin be admitted, keeps the Soul of Heaven: the Law is
strong to condemn and destroy Sinners, but it is unable and weak to save them.
The Law cannot save, Romans 8.3.

Yea, 6. The abrogation of it through Grace.

As Moses's Body was buried that it could not be found, Deuteronomy. 34.6. and Satan
would have brought it forth again; but Michael opposed him, Jud. 9. so he has
buried the Law; though Satan would revive it in the Spirits of Men.

7. Moses did prepare the people for Joshuahs Dispensation: So the Law prepares
and sits the Soul for Christ, Gal. 3.24. wherefore the Law was our
Schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by Faith. It
does not put us into Christ, but it prepares us for Christ.

Thus, in regard of the Terror of that Dispensation, and the Darkness and
Bondage of it, the Strength to condemn, the Impotency of it to bring them into
Rest, and the Abrogation of it, and that nevertheless it did prepare and fit
them for it, Moses did adumbrate and shadow forth the Covenant of Works.

But, 2. We may consider Moses under an higher notion, though in respect of the
external Dispensation introduced by him, he shadowed forth the Law; yet in
other respects, if we consider him in his own Person, he was a Type of Christ.

The Scripture is clear for this also, Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18. A Prophet shall the
Lord thy God raise up unto thee of thy Brethren like unto me -- That this was
spoken of Christ, see Act. 3.22. Peter there applies it unto Christ, he was
like unto Moses.

There was a Similitude, but yet there was not a Parity. For Christ was far
above Moses, Heb. 3.3. For this man was counted worthy of more Glory than
Moses, inasmuch as he who builded the House has more Glory than the House: and
again ver. 5. Moses verily was faithful as a Servant; but Christ as a Son over
his own House, v. 6. You may see it in these particulars.

1. In regard of his Birth. 2. In his personal Qualifications. 3. In the whole
course of his Life. 4. In the close of it.
1. Moses was a Type of Christ in regard of his Birth, in that he was born but
of mean Parents, in the time of Isreal's Bondage in Egypt, Exodus 2.1. persecuted
in his Infancy by Pharaoh, and wonderfully preserved, Exodus 2.3, 9.

So Christ, Isai. 53.2. He shall grow up as a Root out of a dry ground.

When the House of David was brought very low, and the Glory of it seemingly
extinct, they were of the poorest sort of people, as appears by their Offering,
which was but a pair of Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons, Luke 2.24. when
they taxed all the world, that is when the Jews were under Bondage to the
Romans, Luke 2.1, 4. and you know Rome is spiritually called Egypt; then, and
in this condition of Subjection to the Roman Power was Christ born: And as soon
as born, he was persecuted by Herod, Matthew. 2. who sought his Death; but
wonderfully preserved, and by means of his reputed Father, as Moses by the
Mother that adopted him; both of them by wonderful Providence saved and
delivered, that they might be Saviors and Deliverers unto others.

2. Moses was a Type of Christ in his personal Qualifications, which were very
eminent. He was the most accomplished Person that ever was, except Jesus Christ
himself.

1. In Learning and Knowledge, Act. 7.22. He was learned in all the Wisdom of
the Egyptians.

So Christ, Isai. 11.1, 2, 3. the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the
Spirit of Counsel and of Knowledge rested upon him, to make him of quick
Understanding in the Fear of the Lord; insomuch that he disputed with the
Doctors at twelve years of age, Luke 2.42, 46, 47. Those Doctors were as too
many are now adays eaten up with men's Traditions, and ignorant of the
Scripture. The Jews acknowledged and admired it, Joh. 7.15. And the Jews
marvelled, saying, how knows this man Learning, having never learned,; and
ver. 46. the Officers answered, never man spoke like this man.

2. Clear and extraordinary Vision and Sight of God, Numb. 12.6, 7, 8. Face to
Face, Mouth to Mouth God spoke to Moses, even apparently, and not in dark
speeches; and the similitude of the Lord did he behold: expressions arguing
unparalleled Clearness in the Lords revealing himself and his Mind to Moses.
There was never the like vouchsafed to any other. To others, even Prophets the
Lord made known himself in a Vision, or spoke to them in Dreams, ver. 6. but to
Moses at another rate.

So Christ, Joh. 1.18. no man has seen God at any time, but the only begotten
Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him.

3. There was in Moses an admirable mixture of Meekness and Zeal; eminent in
meekness of Spirit, and that seasoned and tempered with holy Zeal, Numb. 12.3.
forty years he bare their manners in the Wilderness, Acts 7.36. with 13.18.
though murmuring and rebelling against God and himself, with an invincible
Patience.

So Christ, Matthew. 11. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart. When his
Disciples tempted him, he would not fetch down Fire from Heaven against his
Despisers and Opposers; yet he was angry at the Defilement of the Temple, and
whipped them out: And so was Moses at the Golden Calf -- Meekness without Zeal is
nothing else but Lukewarmness and Cowardice. Zeal without Meekness degenerates
into sinful Passion. We should be meek in our own Cause; but zealous in the
Cause of God.

4. Faithfulness to his Trust; this was eminent in Moses, but more eminent in
Christ, Heb. 3.5, 6. Moses was but faithful as a Servant in his Lords House.
But Christ as a Son in his own House. He will not lose one Soul of all those
that the Father has committed to him, Joh. 6.39, 40. In his last Prayer he
professes, Joh. 17.12. those that thou give me I have kept, and none of them
is lost, but the Son of perdition: not the least Believer can or shall miscarry.

If thou say, How may I know whether I was committed to the trust and care of
Jesus Christ by the Father?

The Answer is, If thou do commit thy self to him, the Lord has done it.
Thou could never trust thy self with him; thou could not commit thy Soul to
his keeping, if the Lord had not first entrusted thee with him in his eternal
Counsel and Covenant of Redemption. But thou have done it, and it is thy daily
work; therefore thou may safely conclude with Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12. he will keep
the thing I have committed to him: He will be faithful to God, and faithful to
thee; he never failed any that trusted in him.

3. Moses was a Type of Christ in the whole course of his Life. And here many
things come to be considered.

1. His Work and Office.

2. His Sufferings and Conflicts in the Discharge thereof.

3. The Lords owning and bearing witness to him by Miracles and Signs and
Wonders; in all which there was a manifest Prefiguration of the Lord Jesus
Christ.

1. In his Work and Office. He was in general a Mediator between God and the
People, a typical Mediator. All the good that God was pleased to confer upon
that People, it was by his Ministry, and Interposition between God and then,
Gal. 3.19. the Law was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator -- Deuteronomy.
5.5. I stood between the Lord and you at that time, to show you the Word of the
Lord; for ye were afraid by reason of the Fire, and went not up into the Mount,
Exodus, 19.7, 8.

So Christ is the Mediator of the Covenant of Grace, Heb. 9.15. and for this
cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament. But he has the pre-eminence
above Moses, Heb. 8.6. but now has he obtained a more excellent Ministry, by
how much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant.

God was pleased to redeem his people Israel out of their Bondage in Egypt by
Moses his Ministry: God sent him, and he left his former Employment and Place
to do this Work, Exodus 3.10. Come now therefore and I will send thee unto
Pharaoh, that thou may bring forth my people the Children of Israel out of
Egypt.

But by Jesus Christ he redeemeth us out of the spiritual Bondage of Sin and
Satan, which is worse than Egyptian Bondage; and he was sent by his Father, and
was content to come down from Heaven, and to leave his Glory to do this great
Work; wherein Christ has the pre-eminence. For Moses was a Mediator only of
temporal and typical Redemption: but Christ is the Mediator of spiritual and
eternal Redemption.

By Moses his Mediation also, the Law was delivered upon Mount Sinai, Gal.
3.19. it was ordained in the hand of a Mediator, or a middle person that stood
and transacted between God and the people, Act. 7.38. who received the lively
Oracles to give unto us.

But by Jesus Christ the Gospel is published. In this respect he is the
Mediator of a better Testament.

Moses gave the moral, judicial and ceremonial Laws.

But Christ reveals the Gospel and Gospel Worship.

Moses appoints the Passover, Sacrifices, builds the Tabernacle made with hands.

But Christ gives the Lords Supper, a most lively Representation of himself and
his own Death, the true Sacrifice: And he is himself also the true Temple and
Tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not Man: so that Christ has the
pre-eminence in all things, inasmuch as Gospel Worship excels Legal worship,
and Truth and Substance excels Figures and Shadows.

Lastly, Moses did mediate between God and the people as an Intercessor by his
Prayers and Supplications, and did prevail for them, for the Destruction of
Amalek, Exodus 17. And again, when they murmured upon the evil Report of the
Spies, Numb. 14.12, 13, 20 -- and when they made the molten Calf, Exodus 32.10,
11, 14. then with much wrestling he prevailed with the Lord for them, Psalm.
106.23. Moses stood in the breach.

So does Christ intercede, and pleads for us with the Father, when we provoke
him by our Sins, 1 John 2.1, 2. yea, he lives for ever to intercede, Heb. 7.25.

2. Moses his Sufferings and Conflicts in the Discharge of his Trust, and
Exercise of his Office, had in them a Shadow of the like to be undergone by
Christ.

Moses fasted forty days and forty nights in the Mount.

So did Christ in the Wilderness.

He suffered many Contradictions both from his Enemies and from his Friends,
professed Enemies, Jannes and Jambres, and the Magicians of Egypt, 2 Timothy 3.8.
His Friends, the people to whom he was sent rejected him, Exodus 2.14. often
murmured at him, forty years he bore their manners, Acts 13.18. yea his nearest
friends sometimes, Aaron and Miriam.

So Christ, he was rejected of the Builders, Psalm. 118.22. came to his own, and
his own received him not, Joh. 1.11. His own Disciples sometimes thought his
Doctrines hard sayings; as when he spoke against Divorces, they thought a man
had better never be married, than submit to such a yoke: and all along how weak
and wayward were they? But the Scribes and Pharisees, like Jannes and Jambres,
openly resisted and opposed his Doctrine and Miracles.

3. The Lords owning and bearing witness to him by Miracles, Signs and Wonders,
Deuteronomy. 34.10, 11, 12.

So to Jesus Christ Acts 2.22. a man approved of God among you, by Miracles,
Wonders and Signs -- some note in all about five and forty of them recorded by
the four Evangelists, and wrought in the three years and an half of his publik
Ministry, viz. three in his first year, nineteen in his second year, and
thirteen in his third year, and ten in his last half year, before Judas
betrayed him; besides those at his Death, and after his Resurrection.

Only there were these two differences between Moses his Miracles and Christ's.

1. That Moses his Miracles were wrought in Christ's Name: but Christ's Miracles
were wrought in his own Name.

2. That Moses his Miracles had more of Terror and Majesty; Christ's more of
Love and Sweetness. Christ seldom wrought any Mirales for the hurt of his
Enemies in a way of righteous Wrath and Judgment; but ordinarily only for the
help both of Friends and Enemies: as for instance, the healing of Malchus his
Ear. I remember but two Miracles wrought by Jesus Christ in a way of Wrath and
Punishment against his Enemies, the suffering the Devil to enter into the
Gadarenes Swine, and causing his Enemies to fall backward, when they came to
apprehend him.

All the rest were Miracles of Mercy and Kindness: But by the Hand of Moses
there were no less than ten miraculous Plagues upon Egypt. There were
Thunderings and Lightnings at Mount Sinai. The Earth opened her mouth upon
Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and swallowed them up quick, with other such dreadful
and terrible things in righteousness.

The reason of this difference was, because Moses was the Minister of the Law,
which is a voice of Words, and Terror, and Fear, and genders unto Bondage; but
Jesus Christ is the Minister and Author of the Gospel, which is Grace and
Peace: Therefore these two different kinds of Dispensations were attested with
two different kinds of Miracles. But as to the general, the working of Miracles
by Moses, and so being owned by the Lord, and born witness to by him, herein
there was a resemblance and prefiguration of what was done by Jesus Christ.

4. And lastly, Moses was a Type of Christ in the end and close of his Life,
viz. in his Death, Resurrection, and Ascension into Heaven. He dyed willingly,
he went up to Mount Nebo, which was a part of Mount Abarim, and there
surrendered up his Soul.

So Christ, No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self, no man
takes it from me: see Joh. 10.18. I have power to lay it down, and I have
power to take it again. He went to Mount Golgotha, and there gave up his Soul
to his Father.

Moses after his Death and Burial rose again; buried he was, Deuteronomy. 34.6. and
that he rose again, and ascended into Heaven, may be gathered from Matthew. 17.
For he did appear and talk with Christ at his Transfiguration, together with
Elias.

So you know Jesus Christ rose again from the dead, and ascended into Heaven.

Thus Moses was a Type of Christ all along. In his Birth, in his personal
Qualifications, in the whole course of his Life, his Office, his Sufferings,
his Miracles, and finally in his Death, Resurrection, and Ascension into Heaven.

But yet though there was such a full analogy, and so great a resemblance
between them; yet there was a disparity; Christ having the pre-eminence above
Moses, Heb. 3.5, 6. Moses was faithful as a Servant in his Lords House: but
Christ as a Son in his own House -- Thus much as to Moses --

Now for Joshuah, his Successor.

That he was a Type appears, because Christ was called by that name in the
Hebrew.

And Joshuah is called Jesus in the Greek, in the New Testament, Acts 7.45.
Heb. 4.8. that is, a Savior; though he be but a temporal Savior: Christ a
spiritual Savior, Author of eternal Redemption, Heb. 9.

The Analogy appears chiefly in five things.

1. Joshuah brought the people into Canaan after Moses his death, which Moses
could not do being alive: He divided the Land among them, assigning to every
one his Portion.

So Christ brings us to Heaven, which the Law could not do, Romans 8.3.

And as Joshuah went in himself before them.

So Christ to Heaven, Joh. 14. I go to prepare a place for you; in my Fathers
House are many Mansions, Heb. 6. ult. whither the Forerunner is entered for us.

And as when Joshuah did this, the Cloud and Manna ceased, which had been in
Moses his time. Of the Manna it is expressed, and the time when, Josh. 5.12. of
the Pillar of Cloud and Fire, that it did cease is evident by many passages
afterward in the sacred History; but the time when is not set down. Probably
it might be after they had passed Jordan, being divided by the Ark, and were on
shore on the other side: So shall Ordinances cease when we come to Heaven, Rev.
21. God himself is instead of all.

2. Joshuah was a Type of Christ in regard of the Miracles wrought by him; we
read of three.

1. He divided Jordan, Josh. 3.

But herein, as in all things, Christ has the pre-eminence; for Christ in the
same Jordan divides the Heavens when he was baptized, Matthew. 3. And he
commanded the Winds and Seas, and walked upon the waters, as upon dry ground.

2. Moreover, Joshuah threw down the Walls of Jericho, by the sounding of Rams
Horns, a weak and an unlikely means for so great a Work, yea ridiculous and
contemptible in the eye of Reason, Josh. 6. but it was done by Faith, Heb.
11.30.

So Christ by the Foolishness of Preaching subdueth Souls unto himself, and
throws down strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.

And as Joshua did it again and again, six days, seven days before the Walls
fell.

So it is in the preaching of the Gospel: There must be Assiduity in that work;
Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept; and at last the strong holds are won,
and the Sinner subdued unto the Lord.

3. Joshuah commanded the Sun to stand still, till he had slain his Enemies,
Josh. 10.12, 13 -- ver. 14. and there was no day like that, before it, or after
it, that the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a Man.

So Jesus Christ, when fighting with Principalities and Powers upon the Cross,
Matthew 27.45. when the Sun was ashamed, and the Moon confounded, and all the
Angels in Heaven stood aghast.

Thus you see how great a Person this Joshuah was, in that all the Creatures,
all the Elements obeyed him; the Earth, the Walls of Jericho prostrate
themselves and fell before him, the Waters also, viz. in Jordan were at his
Command, yea the Heavens also, the Sun and Moon obeyed him: thus God magnified
him in the sight of all Israel, as it is said, Josh. 4.14.

But behold a greater than Joshuah is here: For it is said of Christ, That God
has given him a Name above every Name, Phil. 2.9. that in the Name of Jesus
every knee should bow; of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things
under the Earth, ver. 10.

3. Joshuah was a Type of Christ in regard of his Conquests and Victories over
his Enemies: We read of five Kings at once subdued by him, Josh. 10. and he
bids his Captains tread upon their Necks, and cap. 12. of one and thirty Kings
which he smote; yet notwithstanding there were some few Enemies left, though
weak and inconsiderable: but not one that durst or could oppose or disturb the
public peace of Gods people; yet they were left for a time, for their good,
least the wild Beasts should multiply upon them, Deuteronomy. 7.22.

So Christ Jesus is a mighty Conqueror, he subdueth all the enemies of his
people: see him described, Rev. 6.1, 2. conquering and to conquer, not only
five, nor one and thirty, but thousands of them. One man was possessed with a
Legion of Devils; but they are all cast forth by Jesus Christ.

And as Christ, so his Followers are as Joshuahs, Conquerors with and through
him: and he gives Believers to tread upon the necks of their own Lusts, and of
the Devils Temptations: yet however there be some Canaanites left in the Land;
some Corruptions in the Hearts of Gods people in this Life to exercise their
Graces and to keep them humble; which yet, if it be not through their own
careless negligence, shall not disturb their Peace with God.

But there were some Enemies that were devoted unto everlasting Ruin, and
Destruction irrecoverable by Joshuah in the spirit of Prophecy, viz. Jericho,
cap 6.26. which Curse did not fall to the ground, but was fulfilled in Hiel the
Bethelite, 1 King. 16.34. a shadow of the irreparable Ruins, and everlasting
Destruction of all the implacable Enemies of God and his people, and especially
Rome and Antichrist, Rev. 18.21. Babylon shall be cast down, like a Millstone
into the Sea, never to rise more. The Curse of Christ will fall upon such as
endeavor to restore Rome again, and raise up the Ruins that he has brought
upon it. For it is devoted by our Lord Jesus, the true Joshuah, to irreparable
everlasting Destruction.

4. Though Joshuah conquered and destroyed resisting Enemies; yet he saved
those who submitted themselves; as Rahab and the Gibeonites; Rahab cap. 6. the
Gibeonites cap. 9. Though they acted very sinfully, they came out of slavish
fear, and they dissembled: but yet they did submit themselves.

So Christ resists the proud; but gives Grace to the humble, that yield up
themselves unto him; though there be a mixture of much slavish Fear, and sinful
Selfishness and Unbelief in their so doing, as Mark 9.24.

5. Joshuah gave them rest, fulfilling and accomplishing all the good promised,
cap. 21.45. and 23.14. Joshuah appeals to all their Knowledges and Consciences
about it.

So when we come to Heaven, we shall see the Truth and Faithfulness of God; we
shall have all the Promises accomplished through Christ the true Joshuah; and
be able to say with Joy unspeakable, not a word has failed; and all through
Christ the true Joshuah: For in him all the Promises are Yea and Amen, 2 Cor.
1.20. and this will be Rest for ever.

As they had Rest; so now Believers enter into an everlasting Rest, Heb. 4.9,
10, 11.

But yet withal there is a great disparity between Christ and Joshuah, and the
Rest they bring their Followers into Joshuah brought them but into a state of
outward Rest, in the Land of Promise; but this was not the true Rest: But
Christ gives us an higher Rest in Heaven, by bringing us into a state of Grace
and Glory.

Thus you see how eminently Joshuah was a Type of Jesus Christ.

Sept. 12. 1667.
-- Who is the Type or Figure of him that is to come, Romans 5.14.
THe second Conglobation of typical Persons under the Law is Sampson, David and
Solomon, three famous Rulers amongst the people of God of old. All which three
put together gives (...) and glorious Representation of the Messiah. Sampson in
(...) and Sufferings, David in his Victories and Conques^^, (...) in the Peace
and quiet Establishment of his Kingdom.

1. Sampson, a person whose Story is famous in the Scripture, and some think
that the Fame of him went forth amongst the Heathen; and that their Fables of
the Strength of Hercules, and Nisus his purple Locks took their rise from the
Story of Sampson.

The Grecians commonly turning all into Fables, Graecia Mendax; and being great
pretenders to Antiquity, being as drunk with the Pride of that Pretense though
as false) as the Papists are at this day; and therefore making their own
Country the Scene and the Stage of every wonderful thing (as some have well
observed of them); they report of Nisus the King of Megaris in Greece, that he
had on his head a purple Hair, on which the Preservation of his Life and
Kingdom did depend, which Jewel his Daughter Scylla is said to have delivered
unto King Minos, her Fathers Enemy, with whom she fell in Love, etc.

Of which Fables it may be said, Fabula fundatur in Historia, these Fables seem
to be founded in the History of ancient times.

That Sampson was a godly man, it is certain, because he is numbered amongst
those eminent Believers, Heb. 11.

That he was a Type of Christ appears by the clearness of the Analogy between
him and the Antitype; and there seems to be some intimation of it in Jacobs
Prophecy, Genesis 49. of which hereafter.

And indeed the Analogy is so clear, that I meet with none that have written of
the Types, but takes notice of Sampson for one; so does also Calvin and Beza on
Matthew. 2. ult.

He was a Type in regard of his Death and Sufferings; yet not in that only; but
chiefly, as being most peculiar and signal to him, both above other Types, and
above other respects wherein himself was a Type: For there were other respects
also, besides this, which I shall touch upon, and so come to this as the main.

Sampson therefore was a Type of Christ in four respects.

1. In regard of sundry passages and circumstances of his Birth. 2. in some
special Actions of his Life. 3. In his Strength and Victories over his Enemies.
4. In his Sufferings, and in the Victoriousness of his Sufferings.
1. The first Analogy between Christ and him is, in some passages about his
Birth. The time of it, when Israel was under great Oppression by the
Philistines, Judges 13.1. then Sampson arose like a little Sun, as his Name
imports (...) Soliculus or Sol parvus, from Shemesh, Sol, and gave them some
dawnings of the Day, some beginnings of Light and Liberty in that deep night of
Darkness and Bondage.

Answerably Jesus Christ appeared when the Jews were under the yoke of the
Romans and both they and the whole world under the spiritual thraldom of Sin
and Satan. The Pagan world overwhelmed in Idolatry and ignorance of God, the
Jews degenerated into Formality and a spirit of Bondage: then did this true Sun
of Righteousness arise with healing in his Wings.

His Birth was beyond the ordinary course of Nature. And so was Christ's: For
Sampsons Mother was barren, the Mother of Christ a Virgin.

It was foretold, together with his Office, to his Mother by an Angel, and
confirmed by a Sign.

And so was Christ's.

His Office was to begin to deliver Israel from the Philistines, Judge. 13.5.

Christ's to save his people from their Sins, Matthew. 1.21.

The Sign to Sampsons Mother was the Angels appearing again, and ascending in a
flame of Fire, Judge. 13.20.

The Virgin Mary had the Message confirmed also by a Sign, though not so
terrible a Sign as this: But the Angels acquainting her with her Cousin
Elizabeth's Conception, and the Babe leaping in her Womb, and she breaking forth
into those blessed expressions; Blessed art thou among Women, and blessed is
the Fruit of thy Womb, and whence is this, that the Mother of my Lord should
come unto me, Luke 1.36, 42, 43.

Moreover, they were both Nazarites from the Womb.

Sampson by the Law of Nazarites, Numb. 6.2.

Christ by special Sanctity fulfilling that Type; that holy thing that shall be
born of thee, Luke 1.35.

As also by the place of his Residence, being born indeed at Bethlehem, but
bred at Nazareth, Matthew. 2.1, 5, 23. and thence called a Nazaren, or a Nazarite.

2. There is a second Analogy between Christ and Sampson in some special
Actions of his Life.

As in his Marriage with a Philistine, and the Text says, it was of the Lord;
therefore some think that his first Match was not sinful; but that he had a
special Dispensation for it, Judge. 14.4.

So Christ took a Spouse unto himself out of the Gentiles, Hos. 2.20.

At his Marriage Sampson put forth his Mind in Parables and Riddles to the
Philistines, Judge. 14.12.

And so did Christ to the Pharisees, Matthew. 13.34.

3. There is a third Analogy, in their Strength and Victories over their
Enemies, especially in this circumstance; That Sampson wrought his Victories
alone, by his own personal Strength, his Countrymen would not stand by him,
Judge. 15.10, 11, 12,

So Christ trod the Wine Press alone, when all forsook him.

Sampsons first exploit was, the slaying of a Lion in the Desert, that roared
upon him, Judge. 14.6.

So the first Work of Christ at his entrance into his Ministry was, the
conquering that roaring Lion that assaulted and tempted him in the Wilderness,
and roared upon him with those three hideous Temptations, Matthew. 4.

And as upon the Lion Sampson slew, he gave this Riddle; Out of the Eater came
forth Meat, and out of the strong came Sweetness.

So ex Corpore Diaboli mystico, out of the Devils Body, being slain, out of the
Devils Destruction comes the sweet and blessed tidings of the Gospel; and
Flocks, or Churches, or Societies of Christians, like so many Swarms of Bees.
The Saints were onco in an unregenerate condition, Children of Wrath, Limbs of
Satan; but Satan being slain and conquered, they are transformed; and it is as
great a change, as for a Be to be bred of a dead Carcass.

Some Interpreters have observed, English Annot. on Judge. 14.8.
that this was extraordinary: For Naturalists observe, that Bees do not use to
breed in the Carcass of a Lion; but rather of an Ox or Bullock. We may apply it
to the Dispensations of Providence. God works by unlikely, yea contrary means;
Meat out of the Eater. The Canaanites, our Enemies, they are Bread for us,
Numb. 14.9. their very Sins, Corruptions, Temptations, the Lord in his
unsearchable Wisdom produces good out of them; Light out of Darkness, yea Life
out of Death, out of the Death of the Lord of Life.

Moreover, Sampson slew a thousand men with the Jaw Bone of an Ass, a very weak
and unable and unlikely Instrument to effect such a Work by; yet the Spirit of
the Lord coming upon him, what slaughter does he make! Judge. 15.14, 15.

So Christ by the Foolishness of Preaching, through the Power of his Spirit,
subdues and overcomes the Souls of men unto himself, and slays the Enmity.

4. A fourth Analogy between Christ and Sampson is, in his Sufferings, and the
Victoriousness thereof against his Enemies, especially his Death; I say Sampson
was made like unto the Son of God, in regard of his Sufferings from his Enemies.

Some have summed them up briefly thus.

That they were both sold for Money, under pretense of Love, apprehended by
their Enemies, led away bound, brought forth at a great Feast, blinded, (Christ
was blindfolded) scorned, fastened to a Post, offered themselves willingly to
death, died amongst wicked men, and thereby destroyed the Power of the Churches
Enemies.

And as there were many circumstances in his Death, which did evidently
prefigure what befell the Antitype: so let me desire you to take notice of these
three.

1. That it was voluntary: so Christ, no man takes it from me, Joh. 10.18. I
lay it down of my self.

2. That it was by his Enemies, not a natural Death, but violent: so was
Christ's.

3. That he was victorious in his Death, he did suffer, and conquer, yea he
conquered in and by his Sufferings: he slew more at his Death, than in his
Life, Judge. 16.30.

So Christ by his Death gave the most deadly blow to Satan's Kingdom, Col. 2. In
his Death he spoiled Principalities and Powers. This prophesied of by Jacob,
Genesis 49.16, 17, 18.

Sampson was a Serpent, by the way to the Philistines in the Foxes, and in the
Jaw Bone of an Ass: and the Pillars of the House are compared by some to the
Heels of the Horse whereupon three thousand Philistines rode and fell backwards.

And I have waited for thy Salvation, says Jacob, that is, for Christ, whom in
the Spirit of Prophecy, he saw afar off.

And as Sampson, when he was in Azzah, when the Philistines thought they had
him sure enough, he rose at midnight, Judge. 16.3.

So when the Enemies thought they had Christ sure enough, he arose in his
might, carried away the Gates and Bars of Death, and broke the Bonds of it,
Romans 1.4. Acts 2.24.

2. David, that he was a Type appears by this, that Christ is called by his
Name, Hos. 3.5. Ezekiel. 34.23, 24. My Servant David shall reign over them for
evermore.

Sampson began, David went on with the Work.

See the Analogy between David and Christ in these four particulars.

1. He was eminently sitted for the Work, to rule, to feed Gods people Israel,
though he was the meanest of his Family.

So Christ came when the Family was brought low into obscurity.

David was eminent for Holiness, a man after Gods own heart.

So Christ, holy, harmless and undefiled, separate from Sinners.

A person of such worth, that the Story of his Life is more fully and largely
recorded in holy Writ, than any other person in all the Old Testament.

So Christ is the person treated of throughout the whole Scripture.

David beloved of God.

So Christ, Matthew. 3. this is my beloved Son.

2. He had many Enemies both open and secret, Saul, Doeg and Achitophel,
treacherous Dealers, Types of Judas, who dealt treacherously with him; and for
open professed Enemies, the Philistines, and the Ammonites, and the Syrians
engaged by the Ammonites, see 2 Samuel 10.6. and 2 Samuel 8.

So had Jesus Christ the Scribes and Pharisees, the Jews, the Romans, Men and
Devils for his Enemies.

3. His Kingdom had but small and weak beginnings; first a Shepherd, then an
Officer in Saul's Army, then an Exile with a matter of six hundred men,
afterward King over Judah and Benjamin at Hebron, lastly King over all Israel
at Jerusalem.

So the Kingdom of Christ grows from small beginnings; it is therefore compared
to a grain of Mustard Seed: It is at first like a River breaking forth at the
Foot of a Mountain in a little Stream, that you may stride over it: but in its
progress it enlarges, and grows to a deep and broad River, and at last ends in
the Ocean, as all Rivers do: so does the Kingdom of Grace in the Ocean of
eternal Glory.

4. Glorious Successes, and Victories, and Deliverances, all his Enemies fell
before him. He slew the Bear, the Lion, Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.37. conquered all his
Enemies round about, see 2 Samuel 8.12, 14.

Moreover, Saul and his bloody House were rooted out before him: He never fell
into his Enemies hands; though in this there is some dissimilitude.

For Christ was content to yield up himself into their hands, to let them try
their Strength, and do their worst upon him; therefore he gave up himself to
Death: But he rose again from under the power of Death, and prevailed against
them all; and after his Resurrection Death has no more dominion over him. All
his Enemies shall fall and perish sooner or later; but he shall reign for ever
and ever.

3. Solomon; I shall but mention a threefold Analogy between Christ and him.

1. In his personal Wisdom, 1 Kings 4.29, 30.

So Christ, Col. 2.3. in him are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.

2. In the glorious Peace and Prosperity of his Kingdom: The Kingdom was
peaceably settled in his hand, 1 Chronicles. 22.9. 1 King. 4.24, 25. And so he fell
to the work of building the Temple: as Christ does the Church; but of that
hereafter, when we come to the real Types.

So Christ, Isai. 9.6. he is the Prince of Peace, the great Peacemaker, Ephesians.
2.

3. In his Marriage with Pharaohs Daughter.

Some observe, that the Daughter of Pharaoh never seduced him; neither is there
any mention made of the Egyptian Idols, 1 Kings 11.5, 7. In his other
Outlandish Marriages he did sin; but this is mentioned as by way of special
exception, 1 King. 11.1.

He took others besides Pharaohs Daughter. For she was a Proselyte, and so it
was no sin to marry her.

And the Love between her and Solomon is made a Type of the Love between Christ
and the Church.

Christ has took us Gentiles to be a Spouse unto him, Psalm. 45.

Use 1. Resolution of that great Case of Conscience, whether you do belong to
Christ or no.

Is his Kingdom set up in thee? art thou conflicting? art thou conquering?

Use 2. Comfort against the low and weak beginnings of Christ's Kingdom. Sampson
did but begin to deliver Israel; but David carried the work through: But in
Solomon's time there was glorious Peace.

You see here, as in a Glass, the method and progress of Christ's Kingdom: It
begins in War, it is carried on in Victory, it ends in Peace.

Use 3. Here is Comfort and Support, as to all the Conflicts and Enemies that
God is pleased to exercise his people with, whether particular Saints, or whole
Churches.

1. They had so: Christ had so, secret as well as open Enemies, secret
Underminers as well as open Opposers.

2. These Conflicts will end in peace and quiet establishment, Psalm. 37.37.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright man, for the end of that man is
peace.

This is the difference between Christ's Peace and Satan's Peace; for they both
give Peace to their subjects.: But Satan's Peace is a Peace of freedom from
trouble, and of sinful security in sin.

Christ's Peace is a Peace after and out of trouble, by War and Victory over Sin
and spiritual Enemies, Isai. 9.3. His Servants rejoice as those that divide the
spoil after the Victory.

Quest. But how may I know, that Peace will be the end of all my present
Conflicts.

Answ. Do thou get the Victory? then the end will be Peace. Are there any
beginnings of Victory? whatever thou do, do not lay down thy Weapons, but
fight still, this is the beginning of Victory, and the end will be Triumph, and
Peace, and Joy.

Sept. 19. 1667.
-- Who is the Type or Figure of him that was to come, Romans 5.14.
THe third Conjunction or Conglebation of typical Persons under the Law, is
those three Prophets, Elijah, Elisha and Jonah, whom I put together, because
Elijah was a Type of Christ's Ascension into Heaven, and Elisha of the
Continuance of his Presence and Spirit in his Apostles and Messengers ever
since, and Jonah of his Death and Sufferings the procuring cause of all.

1. For Elijah, that great Prophet. I confess he is omitted by many that have
written of the Types, and indeed by all that I have seen. I know not well, how
it comes to pass.

But that he was a Type, is certain, because John the Baptist is called by his
Name; therefore he was a Type, 1. Of John. Yea, 2. Of Christ himself.


1. He was a Type of the Messiahs Harbinger and Forerunner John the Baptist.
For the Types (as has been often hinted) are not to be restrained always only
to the Person of Christ himself; but all the things of Christ were typified to
them of old. There were Types of all New Testament Dispensations; therefore
John is called Elijah, Mal. 4.2 last v. and Christ himself explains it, Matthew.
11.14.

But why is John called Elias?

Not that he was Elijah personally, but mystically; he rose up in the Spirit
and Power of Elijah: So Elijah was John in a Type or Figure. John was Elijah in
Spirit and Power, as Luke 1.17. There was something of Analogy in his very
outward Garb and Deportment, an hairy man, 2 King. 1.8. that is, in regard of
his Habit or Clothing; in a rough hairy Garment: So John, Matthew. 3.4. a Girdle
of Hair; but chiefly in regard of his Spririt and inward Endowments, and of his
Work and Office, to convert and recall a backsliden Generation.

2. Elijah was a Type of Christ himself. And that he was so, will be very
evident, if you do consider how great a Person this Elijah was, in three
respects.

1. His eminent and heroic Spirit of Holiness, and invincible Courage and
Activity for God. His very Name signifies God the Lord, Elijah or Elijahu in
the Hebrew, Elias in the Greek in the New Testament.

He abode with God when almost all the world forsook him, 1 King. 19.10. he
reduced and brought back the people, cap. 18.39. he was a man mighty in Prayer,
Jam. 5.17, 18. a man of an invincible Courage, who feared not to stand himself
alone against four hundred Prophets, and against Ahab the King, and Jezabel the
Queen, whose Chaplains these false Prophets were: He is brought forth in the
sacred History not unlike Melchizedek, without Father or Mother, without either
Birth or Death, 1 King. 17.

2. The great and wonderful Miracles wrought by him, there be twelve recorded
in the History of him in the first and second Books of Kings.

1. His shutting up the Windows of Heaven, that there should be no Rain for
three years and an half, 1 King. 17. whence some have called him Fraenum Caeli,
the Bridle of Heaven.

2. His being fed by a Raven morning and evening at the Brook Cherith beside
Jordan. This was the effect of his Faith and Prayer, and may be reckoned
amongst his Miracles; English Annot.
not that it is likely that he did eat raw Flesh, but rather that God by his
Providence directed the Ravens to the places where they might have it, as to
some rich men's Kitchens, or the like.

3. His miraculous Supply of the Widow of Zarephath, called Sarepta in Luke
4.26. that her Barrel of Meal wasted not, nor did the Cruise of Oil fail.

4. His raising of her Son from the dead, by stretching himself upon the Child.
This was the first person we read of in Scripture that was raised from the
dead, and Elijahs fourth Miracle. All these are recorded in 1 King. 17.

5. In fetching down Fire from Heaven upon his Sacrifice, to confound the
Priests of Baal.

6. His opening the Windows of Heaven, and fetching down Rain after he had done
justice upon the Priests of Baal; these two are in cap. 18. he did this also by
Prayer, and by persevering in Prayer, cap. 18. ver. 43.

7. His fasting forty days and forty nights, cap. 19.8. In Mount Horeb, and in
his Journey thither and back again, the place where God appeared to Moses,
Exodus 3.1, 2. and where he gave the Law to Israel, Deuteronomy. 4.10, 14.

Never any man fasted forty days, besides this Elijah and Moses, Exodus 34.28.
and Christ, Matthew. 4.2.

Herein both Moses and Elijah were manifest Prefigurations of the Lord Jesus
Christ. This was Elijahs seventh Miracle.

8. His calling the Prophet Elisha, and causing him to follow him, by casting
his Mantle upon him, which had such an influence, that he left all and followed
him; therefore this may be put into the Catalogue of his Miracles, cap. 19.

And in the like miraculous influence of the Spirit did Christ call his
Apostles to leave all and follow him.

His ninth and tenth Miracles were the Destruction of the two Captains and
their Fifties, when Ahaziah sent to take him, 2 King. 1.1. they both perished
alike. For like Sins pull down like Judgments.

The 11th was the dividing of Jordan by his Mantle, that he and Elisha might
pass over, 2 King. 2.

And the 12. was his Ascension into Heaven in a Chariot of Fire, 2 King. 2.11.
a Prerogative that never any man had but himself, and Enoch before the Law, and
Moses who gave the Law; but Moses died first, and was translated afterward, as
has been formerly showed. They were all three eminent Types herein of Christ
his Ascension into Heaven.

They that are faithful and zealous for God in times of general Apostasy, the
Lord is wont to own them in a special manner, and to put special Honor upon
them one way or other.

3. His commissionating Successors after him to carry on the Work of God when
he was gone, 1 Kings 19.15, 16. Elisha to be Prophet. Hazael King of Syria,
Jehu King of Israel.

So Christ sends forth his Apostles and Ministers, Matthew. 28. some that are
godly, and sometimes he imploys others that are not godly, but only gifted, and
makes some use of them, as he did of Jehu, and of Judas, and Demas for a time.

2. Elisha, called in the New Testament Elizeus, Luke 4.

He was a Type of Christ in three respects.

1. In that Elisha in respect of Elijah, was, as it were, a Continuation of the
same person: For he rose up completely in the same Spirit. The Prophets
discerned it, 2 Kings 2.15. the Spirit of Elijah did rest upon Elisha.

So when Christ departed and ascended up to Heaven, he left the Comforter in
his stead, Joh. 16. and he left the Apostles and Ministers to carry on his
Work, and poured forth his Spirit upon them for that end.

Or we may accommodate this with respect to John the Baptist, thus. As Elisha
succeeded Elijah; so did Christ come after John the Baptist: and so Elisha was
in this respect a Type of Christ himself.

2. In regard of the remarkable Vengeance and Destruction that came upon his
wicked Enemies.

The Children that mocked him were devoured by two She-Bears, 2 Kings 2.23, 24.

Gehazi his treacherous Servant smitten with Leprosy, 2 Kings 5.27.

So Despisers of Jesus Christ, and the Gospel, shall be punished with most
remarkable and dreadful Destruction; Hear ye Despisers, and wonder, and perish,
Acts 13.41. For I work a Work in your days, a Work which you shall in no wise
believe, though a man declare it unto you; incredible Plagues shall the
Despisers and Rejecters of Christ, and of the Gospel, be punished with.

And Judas the Traitor, his Servant, you know what dreadful Destruction came
upon him, Acts 1.18. his Bowels gushed out, through the horror of his
Conscience, and the Fury of the Almighty rending his very Body in pieces, as
well as his Soul from his Body.

3. In regard of his Miracles.

He and his Predecessor Elijah were the greatest workers of Miracles (except
Moses) that ever we read of in Scripture, or that ever the Lord raised up in
his Church. For Moses was to be the Founder as it were of that Church Estate
and Worship that was in those days: and Elijah and Elisha were the Preservers
and Restorers of it in a most degenerate and corrupted Age.

The Miracles of Elisha were very great and many; they are recorded in the
second Book of Kings, in the 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7th. Chapters and one more in
chap. 13. They were about one and twenty in all. There be three recorded in the
second chapter, viz. his dividing Jordan with Elijahs Mantle, his healing the
Waters of Jericho, the devouring two and forty scoffing Children of those
idolatrous Parents, the people at Bethel, by two She-Bears.

In the third Chapter there is another, viz. the overflowing of the Wilderness
of Edom with Water, crp. 3.20. see ver. 8. to the Destruction of the Moabites.

In the fourth Chapter there be five more, which are the Analysis and Contents
of that Chapter, viz.

1. His multiplying the Widows Oil, while she had any empty vessels to fill.

2. His giving a Son to that great and good Woman the Shunamite.

3. His raising her Son when dead unto life again: and this is the second
person that ever was raised from the dead.

4. His healing the deadly Pottage, which had poisoned the Students in the
College at Gilgal.

5. His feeding of an hundred men with twenty Loaves.

In the fifth Chapter there be two more, the curing of Naamans Leprosy, and
the smiting of Gehazi with that Disease.

In the sixth Chapter there be six more.

1. His causing Iron to swim.

2. His disclosing the secret Counsels of the King of Syria by the Spirit of
Prophecy.

3. An Army of Angels coming down from Heaven for his defense at Dothan.

4. The opening of his Servants Eyes to see them.

5. The smiting of the Syrians with Blindness. And

6. The opening their Eyes again.

In the seventh Chapter are three more, the hideous which noise was heard, and
caused such a pannick terror in the Camp of the Syrians, that their whole Army
fled; and the incredible Plenty in Samaria; with the Death of that unbelieving
Nobleman who had questioned whether God could do it.

And then lastly, cap. 13.21. a dead man is restored to life by touching his
Bones. And this is the third person that was raised from the dead.

All these Miracles in general were Presignifications of what the Messiah was
to do in that kind: and some of them were more particularly fulfilled and
answered by the Antitype.

As that of feeding an hundred men with twenty Loaves.

You know Christ did that and more, feeding five thousand with five Loaves and
two Fishes, Matthew. 14.21.

And at another time four thousand with seven Loaves and a few little Fishes,
Matthew. 15.38.

His raising the dead to life, whereof we have three instances in the Old
Testament, the Widow of Sarepta her Son, the Shunamites Son, and the Man buried
in Elisha's Grave. These were Types and Pledges of what Christ should do in
raising the dead.

As in raising Lazarus, Jairus his Daughter, the Widows Son of Naim; and his
own blessed Body out of the Grave, and many Saints that arose with him.

And those which the Apostles raised by his Name.

And finally, the raising all his Elect unto eternal Life, and all the Sons of
men unto Judgment at the great Day.

There might also be a spiritual application and accommodation of them, as to
the quickening of men's Souls, the healing of the Diseases of the Soul, feeding
them with the Bread of Life, pouring into empty Vessels, empty Souls, the Oil
of Gladness, the Joys and Graces of his Spirit.

3. Jonah, him I connect with Elijah and Elisha, to make the Type more complete
and full.

Some have conjectured that Jonah was the Widows Son of Zarephath, whom Elijah
raised from the dead, 1 Kings 17.22, 23. but this is but a conjecture without
proof: it is probable enough he might live about their time, or perhaps
somewhat after.

That he was a Type of Christ, the Scripture is express, Matthew. 12.39. No Sign
shall be given them, but the Sign of the Prophet Jonah.

You may see how the Type fits the Antitype in four respects.

1. In his Death; he offered himself willingly unto Death to assuage the Storm,
Jon. 1. and so he is cast into the Sea, and devoured by the Whale.

So did Christ, to appease the Tempest of Gods Wrath.

And as upon Jonahs being cast into the Sea, the Sea ceased from its raging,
cap. 1.15. and the Seamen were saved from drowning.

So upon Christ's Death Gods Wrath is pacified, and Believers saved from the
Wrath to come.

Jonah had sore conflicts, and inward agonies of Spirit when he was under that
shadow of death in the Whales Belly, cap. 2.

So had Christ when he cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me! there
were unutterable anguishes in his Soul, those (...), unknown, unconceivable
sufferings in his Soul.

2. He was a Type of Christ in his Burial. For, look, as Jonah was buried in
the Belly of the Whale three days and three nights: So was Christ in the Belly
of the Earth the same space, Matthew. 12.40.

3. In his Resurrection. For, look, as Jonah overcame all the dangers he was
in, and came forth again alive out of the Whales Belly.

So did Christ out of the Grave within three days: he overcame greater Enemies,
even the power of Satan, Death and Hell; and upon this sang Praise to God, cap.
2.

So did Christ triumph; Oh Death, where is thy Sting? Oh Grave, where is thy
Victory? Hos. 13.14. and Psalm. 22.22, 23, 25. and Psalm. 18.48, 49.

4. In his preaching after his Resurrection. For, look, as Jonah after his
Resurrection preached Repentance to the Ninevites, and that with great success
and efficacy; for they did repent upon his preaching, the whole body of them
with an outward Repentance; and many of them doubtless with a true and saving
Repentance: and so were saved both from that present temporal Destruction, and
from eternal Damnation: and Jonah did preach to the Israelites also, as well as
to the Ninevites, 2 Kings 14.25. but which was first the Scripture does not
express.

So Christ, when risen from the dead, sent his Spirit, and preached by his
Spirit in his Apostles and Ministers; and not only to the Jews, but to the
Gentiles, such as those Ninevites, to the Conversion and Salvation of
multitudes of them, as was foretold of him, Psalm. 22.22. and to the deeper
Condemnation of Unbelievers, Matthew 12.41. because a greater than Jonas is here.

4. The fourth and last Conjunction that I shall speak unto, of typical Persons
under the Law, is Zerubbabel and Jehoshuah; of whom the one was the chief
Magistrate, the other the chief Priest, and both of them Rebuilders of the
Temple, and Restorers of the collapsed estate of the Church of God in those
times: in all which there was an eminent Praefiguration of Jesus Christ.

But what of Christ was shadowed forth by these two?

For I shall put them both together, they being contemporaries, and joint
instruments in the Work and Service of God in that Generation.

There were three things of Christ typed and shadowed forth by them.

1. Both his Offices of King and Priest. Zerubbabel was the Prince of the
People of God in those days, and the chief person of the Line of David. And
Jehoshuah was at the same time High Priest. And that there was something of
peculiar Glory in his Priesthood, relating to Jesus Christ our great High
Priest, is not improbable. In Zach. 3. he is presented in Vision to the
Prophet, as standing before the Lord, and resisted by Satan, but Satan does not
prevail against him, ver. 1, 2. for he is clothed with change of Raiment, ver.
4 and has a fair Mitre set on his head, ver. 5.

So Christ, though opposed and resisted by Satan, yet went through with his
Work, and had blessed acceptance with God, and success therein.

2. His building the Temple, the Church of God. For these two did build the
Temple, Ezra, 4. conjunctly each of them in their several capacities, being
stirred up to it by the Prophet Haggai, as you may see Hagg. 1.12, 14.

And it is said of Zerubbabel, that as his Hands laid the Foundation of the
Temple: so his Hands should also finish it, Zach. 4.9. and the building of the
Altar is ascribed to them both conjunctly, Ezra 3.2.

So does Christ spiritually, as the Apostle tells us in that very metaphor of
building the House of God, Heb. 3.3, 4.

3. His bringing back the Captivity of his People out of spiritual Bondage
under Sin and Satan in their natural estate, and out of antichristian Bondage
under Rome, which is mystical Babylon.

Thus Zerubbabel and Jehoshuah were the Conductors and Captains of the
Salvation of that People from literal Babylon, Ezra 1.5, 8. and 2.2. and 5.14.

But there will be occasion to speak further to these things when we come to
the real Types.

Besides the personal Types that have been spoken to, there be diverse others
also that are noted by learned men; as of the first Classis before the Law:
some have noted Abel the Proto-martyr, as also Seth, Methuselah, and Lamech
Noaks Father, and Heber the seventh from Enoch, as Enoch was the seventh from
Adam. He was a pious man; in his Seed the primitive Language, and the true
Religion and Church of God was preserved, when the rest of the world was lost
and fell into Idolatry: and from him the Church had their Denomination,
Hebrews; as Christians have from Jesus Christ.

And it was prophesied, that Chittim should afflict Heber, Numb. 24.24. Chittim
is the Romans, Christ is the chiefest of Heber, whom Italy or Chittim
afflicted, as in other respects; so chiefly at his death: for he was crucified
under Tiberius the Roman Emperor.

Judah the Son of Jacob, to whom it was said, Thy Fathers Sons shall bow down
unto thee, Genesis 49.8.

Also Job in his Sufferings and Patience, both unparalled, and his prevailing
Intercessions for his offending Friends, are by some looked on as Types of
Christ.

And as to the second Classis, viz. those under the Law, some have added Aaron
the Priest of the Lord: but what might be said of him, will come in when we
come to handle the Office of the Priesthood.

Also Gideon and Jephtah, Judges of Israel of old.

And Samuel the Prophet, who was a Judge also, and a Nazarite.

Hezekiah and Josiah, those great reforming Kings.

Eliakim, Isai. 22.20. for the like phrase which is there used, ver. 22. of
Eliakim, is applied to Christ, Isai. 9.5. Revel. 3.7.

Some have set Cyrus also among the Types of Christ, the Founder of the Persian
Monarchy, who may be thought to have been a godly man, much good and no evil
being recorded of him in the Scripture: and he did a very good work (and a
great and glorious work it was) the breaking the Yoke of Babylon, and setting
the Israel of God at liberty, and rebuilding the Temple; and indeed the Elogies
and Expressions of the Prophet Isaiah concerning him are very high and
excellent, Isai. cap. 45. beginning, and cap. 46.11.

Daniel also a person of extraordinary Eminency in his Generation.

I do not omit these Persons, as concluding they had no typical relation to
Jesus Christ: For indeed I think diverse of them had: But in some the Analogy is
but weak and dark, and in some few particulars: and though in others it is more
clear; yet it would have been too large to go thorough every person.

I have thought it sufficient to my intended scope, to instance only in some of
the clearest and most eminent, referring the rest to your own Meditations in
the Scripture, to observe and improve what you find written concerning them.

Use 1. See the Glory of Jesus Christ the Antitype, in that so many excellent
persons do but weakly and imperfectly represent him: as if all the Candles in
the world were put together, it would not equalize the Glory of the Sun: But
how bright then is the Sun it self, which shines brighter than all the Candles
of the world; yea than all the Stars in the Firmament?

So here how glorious is the Messiah, of whom all these were but weak and dark
Umbrages? He is indeed the chiefest of ten thousands, Cant. 5.

Use 2. Look whatever Glory was in any of these Persons by way of Prefiguration
of Jesus Christ: it is and should be found in every Believer by way of
Participation from Christ and Imitation of him.

Therefore in these Examples we see our own Duty; in their Seize, we see
what should be our Endeavors: our Endeavors did I say? I may say also,
through Grace, our Seize. For tho it is true, we are not yet perfect;
neither have we already attained; yet there is a time coming, when thou and I,
if we be true Believers, shall be more holy than ever Elijah or Elisha were in
the days of their pilgrimage here below: when we shall serve God better than
Zerubbabel and Jehoshuah did, when they restored and rebuilt his Temple;
namely, when we come to Heaven. Then there is not the least Saint, but is more
holy than ever the most eminent Saint was here upon Earth. For the best of them
had a Body of Sin and Death in them: but in Heaven there shall be no Sin at all.

For as these eminent Persons had a typical relation unto Christ: so every true
Believer has a mystical Union and Communion with him: and by virtue thereof
they do partake of his Spirit and Glory.

So that as we have here a motive unto what we ought to do: so we have also
Encouragement and Comfort, as to what we shall attain.

We shall attain it then, when Jesus Christ shall present all his Members to
his Father blameless, and spotless, and faultless, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Jude 24.
before the presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy.

-- Who is the Type or Figure of him that was to come, Romans 5.14. Sept. 26.
1667:

THe personal Types of Christ have been referred unto two sorts. 1. Individual
Persons. 2. Religious Orders, or whole ranks and kinds of typical Persons. The
former have been spoken to, we shall now proceed to the latter, and so finish
the Text.

The difference between individual Types, and religious Orders or kinds and
ranks of typical Persons lies chiefly in this, That no wicked man could be an
individual Type of Christ; but he may be involved in a religious Order of
Types: For the Order is holy, though the Man be wicked: And here it is not
directly the Person but rather indeed the Order that is the Type, and the
Person as involved and invested in such an Order.

Quest. What were these typical Orders and Ranks of Men?

Answ. I shall instance only in these six.

1. That whole Nation and People of Israel. 2. The Firstborn of that Nation.
3. Their Nazarites. 4. Their Prophets. 5. Their Priests. 6. Their Kings.
1. The whole Nation of the Jews; they were a typical People; their
Church State being very ceremonial and peculiar to those legal times; and
therefore now ceased and abolished: and did adumbrate and shadow forth two
things.

1. Christ himself; hence Christ is called Israel, Isai. 49.3. By Israel is
meant Christ, and all the Faithful, as the Members of him their Head.

2. They were a Type of the Church of God under the New Testament. Hence the
Church is called Israel, Gal. 6.16. and Rev. 7. The twelve Tribes of Israel are
numbered up by Name to show forth the Lords particular Care of every one of his
People in particular. That place is not meant properly of old Israel, because
it relates to the times of the Antichristian Locusts. Compare cap. 7. with cap.
9.4. the Analogy lies in this, That they were a peculiar people to the Lord,
chosen and singled out by him from all the world:

So is Christ the Lords chosen. Behold my Servant whom I have chosen, mine
elect in whom my Soul delights: So are all the Saints, 1 Pet. 2.9. A royal
Nation, a peculiar People, gathered from among all Nations, Rev. 5.9. Hence the
Enemies of Israel were typical Enemies; as Egypt and Babylon under the Old
Testament, Types of Antichristian Enemies under the New: and the Providence of
God toward that People of old, Types and Shadows of his intended future
Dispensations toward his People under the New; as you will see further when we
come to speak of typical Providence.

2. The Firstborn of that Nation were also a typical sort of persons:
therefore Esau in despising his Birthright despised a spiritual Privilege; and
therefore justly called a profane person, Heb. 12.16.

And they also typified Christ and the Church.

Christ: For he is the Firstborn among many Brethren, Romans 8.29.

The Church: And thence the same Name and Title is given to all the Saints,
Heb. 12.23. The general Assembly and Church of the Firstborn.

The Analogy appears chiefly in two things.

1. In regard of the Lords special Interest and Propriety in them. 2. In regard
of their Pre-eminence and Dignity above others.
1. The Lords Propriety in them as his in a special and peculiar manner; The
Firstborn are mine. Because he had redeemed them, when the Firstborn of Egypt
were destroyed, Exodus 13.2.

So Christ has a special relation to God, as his first begotten, yea his only
begotten Son; his Son by Nature, (we are Sons only by Adoption and Grace)
Primogenitus ante quem nullus, and unigenitus post quem nullus -- Joh. 1.14.

So the Saints: The Lord has a special relation and propriety in them, all
manner of ways; by Creation, by Redemption, by Regeneration, by his own choice
of them, by their consent and choice of him, etc.

2. In regard of their Dignity and Pre-eminence above others: The Firstborn
had many Privileges above his Brethren; he was, as it were the second Father
of the Family:

So Christ, Isai. 9.6. is called the everlasting Father.

He had the Honor, and the Government; the Priesthood was his, and a double
portion of the Estate, Deuteronomy. 21.17.

The Firstborn at first had the Priesthood, Exodus 24.5. Young men sacrificed
-- Afterward Levi was set apart instead of the Firstborn, Numb. 8.

Therefore Reuben left the Government to Judah, the Priesthood to Levi, the
double Portion to Joseph, who was divided into two Tribes Ephrahim and Manasseh:

So Christ has the Honor above all Creatures, Heb. 1.6. Let all the Angels of
God worship him.

And the Saints which are the Lords Firstborn in a secondary way, are
honorable persons, as being Members of Christ: they are precious in his sight
and honorable: therefore he says, I will give Nations and Princes for thy
Life, Isai. 43.3, 4.

3. Their Nazarites; the Institution of their religious Order, with all the
Rules and Observations belonging to it, you have in the 6th chapter of Numbers.
It was an Order of much esteem amongst the People of God in those times, and is
reckoned as a great Honor and Glory to that People, Amos 2.11. I raised of
your Sons for Prophets, and of your Young men for Nazarites. Her Nazarites,
Lam. 4.7. were whiter than Snow.

There were two degrees of it; either for a certain time, or during a man's
whole life.

Of Persons that were Nazarites all their days, the Scripture gives some very
great and eminent instances; as Sampson, Judge. 13.5. also Samuel the Prophet, 1 Samuel 1.11. also John the Baptist, Luke 1.15.

Of Persons under the Vow of Nazariteship only for some certain time, we have
instance in Paul the Apostle, Acts 18.18. and again Acts 21.23, 24.

How long they were to be under the Vow, the Scripture limits not. The Jewish
Writers report, that one month was the shortest time in use amongst them.

This Order shadowed forth sundry things relating, 1. To Christ himself. 2. To
the Members of Christ. 3. To the Benefits of Christ.


1. The Nazarites were Types of Christ himself; not that Christ himself was a
Nazarite according to the Law, but only in the Spirit and Truth of this Type.

That he was not a Nazarite literally, is clear; because he drank Wine, as at
other times, so at his last Supper, which they might not do.

But in him this Type was fulfilled in two respects.

1. In regard of his usual Name and Title, Jesus of Nazareth, or Jesus the
Nazarite, Matthew. 2. ult. Joh. 19.19.

Thus he was usually called, which the Jews would never have done; but that by
the Providence of God he had lived in that place. In which disposal of
Providence, altius fuit Dei Consilium; as Calvin in Mat. 2. God had a further
Design and Counsel than they were aware of, that from thence called him by that
Name: Which, though it was given him upon another occasion by the Jews, namely,
from the place of his Residence; yet God in his infinite Wisdom did so contrive
and order it, that by this means he should be commonly called by the Name of
this religious Order. See Matthew. 2. ult. where the Evangelist tells us, that by
this means of Christ's living in Nazareth, was fulfilled that which was spoken
by the Prophets, namely, that he should be called a Nazaren -- By the Prophets
is meant those Prophets that wrote the Book of Judges; and the place intended,
is Judges 13.5. as Calvin from Martin Bucer judges.

It is true indeed, the words there are spoken of Sampson literally; but
intended mystically of the Messiah, of whom both Sampson, and all the Nazarites
were Types.

It is true, there is some literal difference between Zain and Tsade; and the
Syriack Translation (which yet is but a Translation) renders Nazareth by Tsade
Notsoreth, whereas the word Nazarite is (...) with Zain. But that the Holy
Ghost regarded such a literal exactness is not probable. See Bucholcer Cbronol.
p. 285.
It may suffice that there is an allusion and affinity in the sound. And though
Matthew uses the word Nazarene, as signifying one of the religious Order of
the Nazarites; yet Pilate, Joh. 19.19. uses the same word of him, never
dreaming of any thing more, than the place where Christ had dwelt. Some indeed
have thought that this passage in Matthew. 2.23. refers to Isai. 11.1. where
Christ is called Netsor, the Branch, a flourishing Branch. But we do not find
that flourishing Branches are called Nazarites in the Scripture: so Calvin in
Matthew. 2. ult.

2. In regard of his peculiar Holiness and Separation unto God, They were
ceremonially holy; but he was holy indeed, and after an higher and infinitely
more excellent and glorious manner. He is called that holy thing that shall be
born of thee, Luke 1.35. and Dan 9.24. the most holy, or the Holy of holies.

2. The Nazarites were Types of all the Saints and Members of Christ. All
Believers, who are an holy people, are spiritual Nazarites separated unto God;
I say, all Believers whether male or female. For there were Women Nazarites as
well as Men, Number. 6.2. when either Man or Woman shall separate themselves to
vow a Vow of a Nazarite. For in Christ Jesus there is neither male nor female,
Gal. 3.28.

3. There was in this Order a Ceremonial shadow and adumbration of the Benefits
of Christ which Believers do receive from him; and they are chiefly two;
Sanctification and Justification.

1. Sanctification. This was shadowed out in this, that the Nazarites were
persons separated and devoted unto God in a special manner by a Vow, Numb. 6.6.
As also in the particular Rules and Ceremonies belonging to this Order, which
were three.

1. Not to drink Wine, Numb. 6.3, 4. So Sampson.

This was to teach them Temperance and Mortification of fleshly Lusts, which
Wine often provokes men to, and takes away their hearts from that which is
good, Hos. 4.11. and causes them to err and stumble, Isai. 28.7.

Moreover this Ceremony taught them, instead of Wine, to be filled with the
Spirit, Ephesians. 5.18. and inebriated as it were with the Joys thereof in the
sense of Gods Love, which is better than Wine, Cant. 1.4.

2. Not to cut their Hair, ver. 5.

This is thought to be appointed (as many other ceremonial Laws were) in
opposition to the heathenish Idolatry of those times; and to signify the
keeping himself from all uncleanness and impurity. For when the Nazarite was
purged and cleansed from impurity, his Hair was shaved off, ver. 9. and so the
Leper, Lev. 14.8, 9. therefore to keep it from shaving seems to signify the
keeping themselves from uncleanness: so some expound it.

It shadowed forth also the growth of the Graces of Gods Spirit in them, as in
Sampson, who with the loss of his Hair, lost the Power of God: and as his Hair
grew again, so his Strength in God renewed, Judge. 13 25 -- and 16. This
Strength came not by the growth of the Hair, otherwise than as an outward Sign
appointed unto them of God, who sanctifies to his people what outward Signs
himself pleases, to signify and convey Grace; as he sanctified the Waters of
Jordan to wash away Naamans Leprosy, Ainsworth on Numb. 6.5.
which of themselves had no such efficacy, 2 Kings 5.14.

3. Not to defile themselves by the dead, ver. 6, 7, 8.

This refraining from the dead, in whom the Image as it were of Gods Curse for
Sin was to be seen. For the Wages of Sin is Death, Ainsworth in loc.
Romans 6.23. figured out abstaining from sinful and dead Works, and from such as
live in them, who are dead whilst they live, 1 Timothy 5.6.

It showed their Constancy in the Rules of their Profession, and their
Magnanimity in the loss of dearest Comforts.

2. Justification by Christ alone was shadowed forth in two Rules or
Observations belonging to this Order.

1. That legal strictness and severity of Purification in case of accidental
Defilement, ver. 9, 10, 11, 12. If a Nazarite chance to be defiled, he is to
begin again upon a new score. This shows the absolute Purity and Perfection of
the Law of God, which will not admit the least error or failing; but whosoever
continues not in all things, is cursed and condemned by it, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal.
3.10. If a man keep the whole Law, and fail but in one point, he is guilty of
all, James 2.10. and so needs Christ and his Blood to make atonement even for
the least Sins, and those which are in some sort involuntary, as the original
corruption of Nature is, and many actual Sins of mere infirmity and frailty.

2. Sacrifices of Atonement, even when they had fulfilled their Vow, ver. 13 --
to 21.

It taught the secret and unseen Guiltiness, which cleaves to the most holy
men in their best and most perfect works, which, without atonement by the Blood
of Christ, Ainsworth in loc.
cannot be pure and pleasing in the sight of God. For though a man know nothing
by himself; yet is he not thereby justified, 1 Cor. 4.4.

When we have kept our Vows, and done our Duty; yet we need Atonement and
Pardon.

4. A fourth religious Order amongst them of old, was their Prophets. These
also were Types of Christ and Christians.

Of Christ; For as they taught the will of God: so does Christ. For he is the
great Prophet, Deuteronomy 18.15. Acts 3.22. Joh. 1.18. no man knows the Father, but
he to whom the Son reveals him, Matthew 11.27.

But though there be a resemblance and analogy; yet there is also a great
disparity in this Type. For all the Types (as has been often observed) fell
short of the Antitype in Glory; and so in this; for none teaches like him, Job
36.22. in regard of the Authority and Efficacy of his teaching.

1. The Authority; For the Prophets speak in the Lords Name; Thus says the
Lord: but Christ in his own Name, and the Fathers; as a Son over his own House,
Heb. 3.6.

2. The Efficacy. All the Prophets could not reach the Heart: but Christ, he
teaches inwardly, and effectually: for he sends his Spirit to bring the Truths
to remembrance with power and efficacy, Joh. 14.26.

And as their Prophets were Types of Christ: so likewise of all Believers; for
they are spiritually Prophets, 1 John 2.27. 1 Cor. 2.15. the spiritual man
judges all things. They are said to prophecy as the Lords Witnesses. Rev. 11.

5. A fifth religious Order in those legal times was that of Priesthood. Their
Priests, and especially their High Priests were Types of Christ and Christians:
Therefore Christ is so often called a Priest, and the High Priest, Heb. 3.1. of
our Profession.

The Analogy between Christ and them appears chiefly in two things.

1. That as they offered Sacrifice, and by Sacrifice made atonement: so Christ,
Ephesians. 5.2. gave himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet
smelling favor.

2. There was in them the shadow (though but the shadow) of an everlasting
Priesthood; because the Office was settled in the House and Family of Aaron:
and so though the persons died; yet the Office was never vacant: for the Son
succeeded the Father, and was sometimes invested during the Fathers life, as
Eleazer, Numb. 20.26.

And though Melchizedeks Priesthood was of an higher Order, and more
illustrious than that of Aaron, as the Apostle shows, Heb. 7. yet in this also
there was but a shadow of Eternity, as has been formerly showed.

But Christ is indeed a Priest for ever: he is often so called in the Epistle
to the Hebrews. He was made a Priest not after the Law of a carnal Commandment,
but after the Power of everlasting life, Heb. 7.

The Disparity between Christ and these typical Priests was manifold. I shall
instance in a few particulars.

1. Theirs was but the shadow: Christ the true Sacrifice, and true
Reconciliation with God.

2. They offered Sacrifice first for their own Sins: but Christ had no Sins of
his own, to offer for, and to make satisfaction for, Heb. 7.27.

3. All those Priests of old, even Melchizedek himself, they were but Priests;
they were not both Priest, Altar and Sacrifice.

But Christ is all three.

He is Priest as God-man.

He is the Altar in regard of his Divine nature: for this is that that
sanctifies the Gift, and makes the Sacrifice so infinitely efficacious and
meritorious.

And Christ himself is also the Sacrifice in regard of his Humane nature: His
Humane nature suffered death, and so was offered up as a Sacrifice unto God for
us.

Thus in all things Christ has the Pre-eminence.

I might also show, how all the Saints are Priests. He has made us Kings and
Priests unto our God, Revel. 1.

But there will be occasion to speak further of the Priesthood when we come to
the Temple, and the Temple Ministry.

6. A sixth religious Order was their Kings of the House of David.

It is true, Magistracy is a civil Ordinance belonging to the second Table: But
yet, as God was pleased to annex a typical respect unto the Sabbath, which is
in it self a moral Duty: and unto Adams Marriage with Eve, which was a civil
Relation: so he did unto Magistracy or Kingship, as stated and settled amongst
that people.

Hence as in the business of Marriage, and of the Sabbath, the things
themselves are not abolished, but only the typical respects are taken off: so
here Kingship as amongst them was both a civil and a religious Order. Non
dubium est, quin caelestis pater in Davide ejusque posteris conspici voluerit
vivam Christi Imaginem, Calvin. Institut. l. 2. cap. 6. sect. 2. and cap. 7.
sect. 2. See the Analogy in three things.

1. In their Inauguration; they were anointed with holy Oil, Psalm. 89.20. with
mine holy Oil have I anointed him. This typified the Gifts and Graces of the
Spirit; the Spirit of Government, Acts 10.38. how God anointed Jesus of
Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, which Christ received above his Fellows. Psalm.
45.7. not by measure, but above measure, Joh. 3.34.

2. The Lord settled the Kingdom by an everlasting Covenant in a perpetual
Series and Succession of persons in the House of David:

So with Christ, he has made an everlasting Covenant, that his Kingdom shall
endure for ever, Isai. 9.7 -- of the increase of his Government and Peace,
there shall be no end.

3. The moral work and duty of their Office had also a typical use, to shadow
forth what Christ does spiritually in and for his Church.

1. They made Laws for the people of Israel; though they did it still in
subordination to, and pursuance of the Laws of God, as all Magistrates ought to
do, not in opposition to them:

So Christ is the Lawgiver of his Church, Isai. 33.22. the Lord is our Judge,
our King, our Lawgiver.

2. They subdued the Enemies of Israel: so did David the Philistines, the
Moabites, etc.

So does Christ subdue and tread down the Churches Enemies.

3. It was their work to execute Vengeance upon Rebels; as Solomon, the
peaceful King, did on Joab, Adonijah, Shimei.

So does Christ, the Prince of Peace, on Unbelievers and Hypocrites in the
Church. This King will say, Bring forth these mine Enemies, and slay them
before my face.

Yet there was a great Disparity between Christ and those Kings. His Kingdom is
spiritual, his Government infinitely better than theirs was, 2 Samuel 23.4, 5.
some understand and render to this purpose, See ths Belgic Annotations.
There shall be a Ruler over men, a righteous one, ruling in the Fear of God --
Although as yet he make him not to spring up.

From the whole,

Use 1. See the Unwarrantableness of reviving religious Orders under the New
Testament.

It falls heavy upon the Papists, who have their religious (as they call them,
but indeed superstitious) Orders. Their Monks, Nuns, Fryiars, etc. for which
they pretend the Jewish Order of Nazarites.

But this was a Type: and therefore to revive it, is inconsistent with the
truth of the Gospel; it is as if they should say, there is a Messiah yet to
come, who will be just like a Monk or a Friar; but what horrible Blasphemy is
this!

Besides there was a Command, an Institution from God for the Order of
Nazarites; but there is not so for Popish Orders.

And, which is observable in all the Rules and Ceremonies, and Burdens of those
legal times, the Lord never restrained Marriage from any; but all sorts,
Priests, Prophets, Nazarites were wont to marry, which the Popish Orders vow
against, which the Apostle deservedly calls a Doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1,
2, 3.

Obj. But some of these Orders are not ceased: For there be Firstborn in every
Nation, and Magistracy or Civil Government.

Answ. It Is true: But therefore some of these Orders were of a mixed nature;
there was something moral, and something ceremonial in them, as was showed
before in David's Kingdom: that which is moral remains, that which is ceremonial
is done away: But there were other religious Orders that were wholly
ceremonial, and these are wholly abolished.

Of this sort was Nazariteship and the Priesthood. These were Orders merely
religious, and so are ceased, and vanished away with the legal Religion of
those times. But the Popish Orders of Monkery and Nunnery, etc. are an apish
and wicked imitation of that old legal Nazaritism.

Use 2. See the Glory of the Antitype in whom all these meet in one; all the
individual personal Types before mentioned, and all these religious Orders now
opened. He is the true Israel, and the Firstborn, he is the true Nazarite; he
is our Prophet, Priest, and King. They were but Stars that shone in the night,
he is the Sun of Righteousness.

Use. 3. See our own Dignity and Duty; for all the Members of Christ do in
their measure partake of the Glory of him their Head: Therefore walk as becomes
the Israel of God, as his Firstborn; do not, with profane Esau, sell your
Birthright for a Mess of Pottage, Heb. 12.16.

You are Nazarites separated unto God: therefore be ye not conformed to the
world, Romans 12.1, 2.

You are the Lords Witnesses and Prophets: therefore bear your Testimony to
him, and to his Truths and Ways, though thou prophecy in Sackcloth.

You are also Priests unto God, not to make atonement, (that Christ has done);
but as he has offered the Sacrifice of Atonement: so you should offer the
Sacrifices of Praise and Thanksgiving to his Name.

And finally, remember you are Kings; for he has made us Kings unto our God,
Revel. 1. Therefore walk and act as Kings, to rule over your own Lusts, and not
be underlings to them.

It was David's Prayer, Psalm. 51.12. Uphold me with thy free Spirit, that is,
thy Kingly, thy Royal Spirit, as some explain it.

And if you reign with him as Kings in Grace here, you shall reign with him in
Glory for ever.

THE GOSPEL OF THE OCCASIONAL TYPES.
1 Cor. 10.11. October. 3. 1667. Sept. 26. 1668.
(...), Now all these things happened unto them for Types, and they are written
for our Admonition, etc.


THE Types (Beloved) have been distinguished into two sorts, personal and real,
typical persons and typical things. This is the first and highest distribution
of them: the personal Types have been run thorough. We are now to proceed (the
Lord assisting) to the real Types; and these may be subdivided into two sorts,
occasional and perpetual; for some Types were transient, and some permanent:
Some were extraordinary and occasional; as Manna, and the Brazen Serpent, etc.
some were perpetual, viz. the whole ceremonial Law, the Ordinances whereof are
frequently called everlasting Statutes: so that this Distinction is founded
both in the nature of the things, and in the Scripture expressions about it. We
shall clear it further, when we come to the second part of the Distribution.

Concerning the former sort, viz. extraordinary and occasional Types, this Text
speaks, and gives you this Doctrine;

That there were diverse extraordinary Providence of God toward his people of
old, which were intended by him to be Types of Gospel-mysteries, and
Instructions to us in Gospel Times.

The Text is plain, and the word in the original is Types, as your Margent
reads; Now all these things happened unto them for Types, (...) and before, in
ver. 6. (...) and he had before mentioned the Cloud, and the Rock that followed
them, their passing through the red Sea; with other famous Dispensations
toward Gods people of old. There were not only typical persons, but typical
Providence.

For the right understanding of this Doctrine, to prevent mistakes; take these
two Propositions by way of Caution.

Caut. 1. That there is an historical Verity in all those typical Histories of
the Old Testament. They are not bare Allegories, or parabolical Poems, such as
is the Song of Solomon, or Jothams Parable, Judge. 9.7. or Nathans Parable to
David, 2 Samuel 12. but they are a true Narration of things really existent and
acted in the world, and are literally and historically to be understood.

If it be said, that in some of those transactions, as for instance, their
Deliverance out of Egypt, and traveling through the Wilderness to Canaan, the
whole frame of the History all along is so suitable to express spiritual
Redemption, as one would think it was an Allegory devised on purpose for that
end.

The Answer is, that God had the ordering of his World in his own hands; and
therefore could make it suit all his ends at once, so as the same thing might
be both an History of temporal Redemption; and yet withal and Allegory of
spiritual Redemption also.

Neither indeed is it necessary to the nature of an Allegory that it be always
Res sicta: God, who is the Author of all the Arts (for all the true Rules of
them are Beams and Rays of his glorious Wisdom) he has set no such Rule in the
Art of Rhetoric, and if any Rhetoricians have done it, it is a mistake: For
Abraham and Sarah, and Isaac, and Hagar and Ishmael is a real History; yet the
Apostle affirms that it is an Allegory, Gal. 4. The turning of all such
allegorical and typical Histories and Providence into mere Romances and
Fictions, is not unlike the Transubstantiation of the Sacramental Elements; as
if things could not be real and yet typical too. You will find many Treasures
of divine Wisdom and Gospel Light in the Scriptures, by attending this Rule of
understanding, and of accommodating typical Scriptures both to Type and
Antitype, not excluding either, they being really meant of both, and most fully
of Christ the Antitype, who is the scope and center of all the Counsels and
Dispositions of God.

Caut. 2. That the Lord in these occasional and extraordinary Dispensations
whereof we speak, did aim at sundry ends, and intended them to be for several
uses, namely, to be not only Types, but other ways also to be instructive and
useful: and herein his infinite Wisdom appears the more, in causing so many
ends to meet at once: and indeed so it is in all the rest of his Dispensations
toward his people, and in the world: and so in the Ordinances we have at this
day, they do not serve for one use only.

Quest. But what are these ends?

Answ. Not to insist upon the general Ends of all the Types; in this sort we
are now upon, viz. transient and occasional Types, there were three great Ends.

1. For their outward and temporal good; they had by these things outward
supply and deliverance: so the passing through the red Sea, the Manna, the
Water out of the Rock were outward Mercies: so the Brazen Serpent gave outward
and bodily Healing to them, beside that spiritual and sacramental use it had to
adumbrate Jesus Christ.

2. They were Instructions in moral Duties, as indeed all Providence are: the
Lords giving them Water out of the Rock, and Bread from Heaven, were
instructing Providence to depend upon God in straits, and to trust in him at
all times.

3. The third End was the typical Adumbration of Christ and Gospel-mysteries,
besides all other ends and uses of them; besides outward and temporal good and
moral Instruction; they did, by the positive Intention of the Spirit of God,
point at Christ, and lead to him. For this the Text is express, all these
things happened unto them in Types, and ver. 4. that Rock was Christ.

Quest. How may we judge what providential Dispensations had such a typical
respect and use?

Answ. This has been formerly partly spoken to, and this Rule was given, that
it is not safe for men to form Allegories out of their own Fancies, unless it
be some way hinted in the Scripture, unless it be either expressed, or may be
gathered from thence by clear consequence; as when by comparing the Scriptures,
a manifest analogy does appear as clear as the Sun at noon day. But for men to
set their Fancies a work to extract Allegories out of every Scripture history,
as the Popish Interpreters use to do, is not safe nor becoming a judicious
Interpreter.

Luth. in Genesis 3. fol. 57.
Luther called such Allegories Spumam Scripturae, they beat the Scriptures into
Froth by allegorizing all things. Allegorias esse vanas speculationes, and
tanquam spumam sacrae Scripturae. And fol. 57, 58. Hoc monuisse sit satis, ut
qui Allegoriis uti vellent iis utantur quas indicarunt Apostoli, and quae
habent fundamentum certum in ipsa litera seu historia alioqui fiet ut
aedificemus super fundamentum paleam and stipulas non aurum. Paraeus Protogom.
in Genesis and in Gal. 4.24.
Parce admodum Spiritus sanctus (...) the Holy Ghost is sparing in the business
of Allegories. He does not allegorize every Providence, but some he does.

And so these Providence were also Ordinances: God was pleased to superinduce
the nature of an Ordinance upon them.

Quest. What were those typical Providence, which we call occasional and
extraordinary Types?

Answ. They may be referred and distributed into 2 sorts, things and actions. A
distribution that some have made use of in this Subject, who have not well
known where to place it; but this I take to be the proper place of it: It is
indeed these occasional Types that are best distributed into things and actions.

1. As to occasional typical things, we may instance in seven particulars, and
I shall set them down before you according to the order of time wherein the
Lord gave them.

1. Jacobs Ladder. 2. Moses his burning Bush. 3. The Pillar of Cloud and Fire.
4. Manna, or the Bread that came from Heaven. 5. The Rock that followed them,
and Water out of the Rock. 6. The The Brazen Serpent. And 7. Some have added
also those healing Waters of the Pool of Bethesda. These were typical things.
Occasional typical actions are such, as their coming out of Egypt, passing
through the red Sea, etc. of which afterward.

We are to speak to these occasional typical things, some whereof were given to
particular persons, as that visional Ladder to Jacob; the burning Bush was
showed to Moses -- others of them were given to the whole people of Israel, as
the Pillar of Cloud and Fire, and all the rest that were enumerated.

1. Jacobs Ladder, which he saw at Bethel. This was but an occasional Type, it
was no permanent thing. The History of it is in Genesis 28.12-16.

That it had a typical respect, our Savior himself seems to insinuate, Joh. 1.
ult.

It represented Christ as the means of Intercourse between God and Man.

Yet it was not to speak properly a Type, but rather a typical Vision, being
not a thing actually existent, but only in a Vision of the night: however
because diverse that have spoke upon the Types have made mention of it, I shall
also speak a word to it.

Yet even this circumstance some have thought of a typical accommodation for it
thus. That as Jacob saw this Ladder but in a Vision: so we see Christ here but
in a Glass darkly, 1 Cor. 13.12. till the daylight of Glory in Heaven dawn
upon us; but then face to face.

But I shall draw the Parallel only in these five things.

1. Here was some dark shadow of the Person, Natures and Office of Christ,
thus; In that this Ladder the foot of it stood upon the Earth, and the top of
it reached up to Heaven, whereby Heaven and Earth did meet as it were:

So Christ in regard of his human Nature touches the Earth; yet in regard of
his Deity, he is the God of Heaven.

And as in this Ladder, the top and the foot of it made but one Ladder.

So both the Natures of Christ are but one Person; and by this Union of his two
Natures he brings Heaven and Earth together, unites God and Man, which was the
great work for which he came into the world.

2. This visional Ladder shows the way to Heaven.

There is no ascending to Heaven, but by the spiritual Ladder Jesus Christ, no
Salvation but by Christ, no comfortable Intercourse and Communion between God
and us, but only in and through him.

Men cannot climb to Heaven by their own Works and Merits: though they should
heap Mountain to Mountain of Duties one upon another; yet they would fall
short. Neither is there Salvation in any other; for there is no other Name
under Heaven given amongst men whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.12.

3. We have in this typical Ladder an express Figure of the Ministration of
Angels through Jesus Christ unto the Saints, which is a Fruit of that great
privilege of Adoption: For they ascended and descended in the Vision by this
Ladder.

To wicked men the Angels are Enemies (as if the King frown upon a man, all the
Court does so too) and fight against them, as they did against Senacheribs
Army, when they slew an hundred eighty five thousand in one night, 2 King.
19.35 -- so Psalm. 35.5, 6. Let them be as Chaff before the Wind, and let the
Angel of the Lord chase them; let their way be dark and slippery, and let the
Angel of the Lord persecute them. The blessed Angels are ever chasing and
persecuting Reprobates and wicked men.

But through Christ they minister unto us for our good, Zach. 1.9. they
appeared behind him, and ver. 10. these are they whom the Lord has sent forth,
and ver. 11. they give up their account t^ him.

4. Jacob sees God at the top of the Ladder, renewing his Covenant with him,
ver. 13.

So it is through Christ that God enters into Covenant and renews his Covenant
with us; through Christ the Promises are Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1 20. God could
never have spoken words of peace to Sinners, but by the Mediation of Jesus
Christ.

5. Where was this Ladder seen? At Bethel, which signifies the House of God,
ver. 19. he called the name of the place Bethel.

So Christ is seen in the Church, Ephesians. 3.10. and through the Church made
known to Principalities and Powers, etc. If you would have a Vision of Christ,
go to Bethel, into the Churches of his Saints and People, Cant. 1.8. if thou
know not, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the Flock. There be several
steps of this Ladder; some apply it thus, Several degrees of Grace; as many
Rounds of the Ladder, so many Graces: The lowest Round is poverty of Spirit,
the highest is Perfection.

Thus you see how Jacobs Ladder represented and shadowed forth something of
Christ, and of the Gospel, to him and us; and so much for this spiritual Ladder
which Jacob saw.

2. A second typical thing in those typical days was the burning Bush which the
Lord showed to Moses, Exodus 3. in the ten first verses: a very memorable
Dispensation; therefore largely repeated by Stephen, Acts 7, 30. to 35.

The Bush burnt, and was not consumed.

A most lively Emblem of the Churches subsisting in the Fire of Persecution
through the presence and good will of him that dwelt in the burning Bush. That
is the Instruction we should learn out of it. As Israel in the Iron Furnace in
Egypt: for it related both ways, both to show the state of Israel in Egypt, and
of the Church of God on earth afterward.

So the three Children, Dan. 3. in the fiery Furnace were not consumed, no nor
hurt by the Fire.

So in the times of Antichrist, Rev. 11.3: the Lord has his Witnesses
prophesying all the thousand two hundred and threescore days: God has his two
Witnesses all the while, though they prophecy in Sackcloth; yet prophecy they
do, and bear witness to him: The Lord does not leave himself without Witness
when his Church and Interest is in the lowest and most aflicted condition: and
indeed all along under the New Testament this Bush has been burning in several
Fires, and yet not consumed.

There was first the fire of Pagan Persecution during the three first Centuries.

Then the fire of Arrianism, and Contention in the Church, etc. set forth under
that prophetical representation of Fire in the first and second Trumpets, Rev.
8.7, 8.

Then the fire of Antichristian Persecution a thousand two hundred and
threescore days.

And then lastly the Persecution of three days and an half in the last part of
his Reign.

But yet still the burning Bush is not consumed: the Church of God subsists,
and lives, and outlives all opposition, it cannot, it shall not be consumed.

They have power over the Fire, Rev. 14.18. It is understood by some
Interpreters not unfitly concerning the Martyrs that suffered by Fire, but were
not overcome by it; their Faith and Patience was not overcome, but did triumph
and conquer through Jesus Christ: and all this through the Presence of God with
them. For he that dwelt in the burning Bush, dwells in the midst of his Church,
Deuteronomy. 33.16. Acts 7.35. The Son of God was in the Furnace. Dan. 3.25. And under
the New Testament he walks in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks,
Rev. 2.1 -- He has promised, Isai. 43.2. when thou walk through the Fire,
thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the Flame kindle upon thee.

These two typical things were presented to particular persons, namely, the
mystical Ladder to Jacob, and the burning Bush to Moses.

The other five were more public to the whole people of Israel, namely, the
Pillar of Cloud and Fire, the Manna, the Rock and Water out of it, the Brazen
Serpent, and the Pool of Bethesda.

1. The Pillar of Cloud and Fire, Exodus 13.21, 22.

As to the nature of it, it seems to have been not unlike those things which
are called in Scripture Pillars of Smoke, Joel 2.30. which the Apostle renders
Vapor of Smoke, Acts 2.19. which the Lord did now create, and in a miraculous
way, and by the Ministration of his Angels, who are the Instruments of his
Providence, and Ministers to his Church; did carry it, and move it to and fro
from place to place.

It is called a Cloud, because it had something of that appearance; but it was
not an ordinary and natural, but a supernatural and miraculous Cloud; and
differed from other ordinary Clouds in many respects.

It was of such an height and bigness as was and might be seen by all the House
of Israel, Exodus ult. ult. other Clouds are soon dispersed and dissipated: But
this remained firm for the space of forty years together, till they came into
the Land of Canaan; the lower part of it rested upon the Tabernacle, after that
the Tabernacle was erected, and from thence it ascended and went up like a
Pillar of Smoke, as we read of Pillars of Smoke, Judge. 20.40. Cant. 3.6. it was
one and the same substance, which was a Cloud by day, and Fire by night.

It was not real natural Fire; therefore called the appearance of Fire, Numb.
9.16. It was not Ignis urens, but only Ignis lucens; it was no burning, but
only shining Fire: For it sat upon the Tabernacle, which was made of boards
and other combustible matter. It kept its form, and was not moved by the Wind
or by any other ordinary and common Cause, but by the Lord himself: and it
moved and walked no faster than the whole Camp could follow.

Out of this Cloud the Lord spoke and delivered his Oracles to Moses. And there
the Glory of the Lord appeared to the people, Exodus 16.10. and 33.9. and 34.5.
Levit. 16.2. Psalm. 99.7. Numb. 11.25. and 12.5. Deuteronomy. 31.15.

Thus for the History of it.

Now that there was a Mystery in this Pillar of Cloud and Fire, is clear from
Isai. 4.5, 6. for there never was a literal Cloud and Fire upon Mount Sion.

This fiery Pillar did cease when they were entered into Canaan: Isaiah
therefore intends a spiritual thing under those expressions.

So it is here mentioned by the Apostle in the Context as representing a
Gospel-mystery; They were all baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, 1 Cor. 10. ver.
2.

It signified and shadowed forth, 1. Something of Christ himself. 2. The
Benefits of Christ. 3. The Ordinances of Christ.


1. Christ himself; some have noted a shadow both of his Deity and Humanity.
There was a fiery Brightness in the Cloud, which yet was but a dark shadow of
the Glory of his Deity, which was often in Visions so represented: But his
divine Nature was veiled and overclouded by his humane; as in this shadow there
was a Pillar of Cloud as well as Fire. In Revel. 10.1. Christ is represented as
clothed with a Cloud, and his Feet as Pillars of Fire. Expressions notably
answering this ancient Type and Shadow.

2. It holds forth something of the Benefits of Christ. What Benefits had they
from this Pillar of Fire and Cloud?

They had three.

1. Light and Direction. 2. Defense and Protection. 3. Ornament and Glory. All
which we have in an higher manner in Christ by the Gospel.
1. Light and Direction in the way that they should go in those Arabian
Deserts, where no man dwelt, and which no man passed thorough; where there was
neither Path nor Guide: But they had the Lord himself to guide them. So it is
said of this Cloud in Exodus 13.21. where it is first mentioned, that it was to
lead them the way by day, and by night to give them Light; and more fully and
with much emphasis, Numb. 9.17, 18. and to the end of the Chapter.

So does Christ direct and conduct his people in their travels through the
Wilderness of this world to Heaven, the true Canaan: He is the true Light, Joh.
1.9. who coming into the world, enlighteneth every one that is enlightened. For
so that place may be fitly rendered, He is the way the truth and the life, Joh.
14.6.

There is a directing Light: they are under the everlasting conduct of his Word
and Spirit. He does not leave his people in the dark, as to things absolutely
necessary for their Communion with him here in this world, and for their
Salvation with him in the world to come: we must follow Christ as they followed
the Cloud.

2. A second Benefit they had by this Cloud was Safety and Protection, both
from the heat and scorchings of the Sun in those burning Sands and Deserts of
Arabia: For the Cloud covered and overshadowed them; therefore it is said of
it, Psalm. 105.39. he spread the Cloud for a Covering: And likewise from their
Egyptian Persecutors and Enemies: For the Cloud went behind them when their
Safety so required, Exodus 14.19, 20. as if the Lord should say, You shall not
hurt them, till you have stricken thorough me first.

Yea the very same Dispensations which are directing and protecting to his
people, are dark and destructive to his Enemies: as here, the same Cloud was
light to the Israelites, but darkness to the Egyptians. Upon all the Glory
shall be a Defense and a Covert from the Storm, Isai. 4.2 last. There is a
protecting presence of God in his Church; we do experience the truth of this at
this day in all our solemn Assemblies, there is a wonderful protecting
Providence over us.

Every Church of Saints is a spiritual Army of Jesus Christ, and these Armies
are terrible, Cantcles 6.10. glorious as the Sun, terrible as an Army with
Banners. It is a terrible thing to offend or trouble them: a man had better
fight against all the power the great Turk can raise, than oppose or offend one
Church of Christ, and there were more hope of Success. For the Lord himself is
a Wall of Fire round about them, Zach. 2.5. as well as the Glory in the midst
of them. Therefore it is written, Isai. 54.17. no Weapon that is formed against
thee shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment
thou shall condemn.

Some allude thus upon these two Benefits they had by the Cloud. That Truth is
as a Pillar of Fire to go before us, and Peace as a Pillar of Cloud to
overshadow and refresh us.

3. This fiery Pillar was exceeding glorious, it was an honor and glory to
them: so in the Church, Christ is the Glory of his Church. See Isai. 4.2.

We would think, if we could see a company of Kings and Princes, and Nobles and
great men walking together in the Ways and Ordinances of Christ, this were
glorious, but Deus maximus in minimis.

There is a Glory in the meanest of the Assemblies of his Saints, though
spiritual, that carnal eyes are not able to discern it. When you come to the
meetings and Assemblies of Gods People, you should endeavor to see this divine
Glory: you should by Faith discern and see a Pillar of Cloud and Fire over the
places where they meet, and a Guard of Angels and fiery Chariots round about
them. God is present there, in his Temple does every one speak of his Glory,
Psalm. 29.9.

Thus the Pillar of Cloud and Fire did figure and exhibit to them the Benefits
of Christ, Light and Direction, Safety and Protection, Ornament and Glory.

3. It figured also the Ordinances of Christ, and his Presence in and with
them: For the Ordinances are the outward and visible tokens of Gods Presence
with his people; as this fiery Pillar was of old. And therefore when the
Tabernacle was made and set up, it rested upon the Tabernacle, Exodus 40.38.

There be some Duties are secret, which the world sees not, nor may see; as
Alms-deeds, personal and secret Prayer.

But the Ordinances of Institution are things that ought to be practiced with
all the publickness that may be. They are outward and visible tokens of Gods
Presence; particularly that great Ordinance of Baptism, as in this Chapter, 1
Cor. 10.2.

The Cloud, it seems, had a refreshing moisture in it, to shade and to refresh
and cool them from the burning heat: And they were bedewed with it, as we are
with the Water of Baptism; whereby this legal Cloud became a Type of
Gospel-Baptism. And so you see how it represented something of Christ himself,
and something of his Benefits and something of his Ordinances under the New
Testament.

So much for this third typical thing, this Pillar of Cloud and Fire.

1 Cor. 10.11 (...). April 16. 1668.



A Fourth typical thing amongst them of old was their Manna or Bread from
Heaven. And a fifth was the Rock that followed them, and gave them Water. Here
was spiritual Meat and spiritual Drink. Of these two, the Lord assisting at
this time. They are both mentioned above in the 3, and 4th verses of this
Chapter; And they did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and did all drink the
same spiritual Drink: For they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them,
and that Rock was Christ.

The fourth, I say was the Manna, or the Bread that came from Heaven; the
History whereof we have in Exodus 16.14, 15. Behold upon the face of the
Wilderness there lay a small round thing, as small as the hoar frost, on the
ground -- And Moses said unto them, this is the Bread which the Lord has given
you to eat; which, that it was indeed a Type, and that the Truth and Mystery of
it was Christ himself, as the Bread of Life, and the Food of our Souls, Christ
himself assures us in Joh. 6.32. Verily, verily I say unto you, Moses gave you
not that Bread from Heaven, but my Father gives you the true Bread from
Heaven. And ver. 48. I am that Bread of Life. And ver. 51. I am the living
Bread which came down from Heaven: and so the Apostle a little before the Text
instanceth in this, 1 Cor. 10.3. They did all eat the same spiritual Meat. This
then was the general scope of it, to hold forth Christ as the Food of our Souls.

But now to let you see a little more particularly the excellent Correspondence
between the Type and the Antitype, the clear and full Analogy that is between
the Shadow and the Truth prefigured by it. You may discern it in these five
particulars.

1. This Manna was a Portion prepared of God, and given down from Heaven to an
unworthy murmuring rebellious people -- When the Children of Israel first saw
it, they said one to another. It is Manna* for they wist not what it was, Exodus
16.15. This word Manna your Margent tells you, it may be rendered what is this?
or it is a Portion, a prepared or distributed Portion, from the Verb (...)
numerare, and in piel (...) praeparavit; because God prepare and distribute it
among them, and it was ready to their hand, to be eaten as they found it;
though they might also bake it, if they would. The Hebrew word Manna is
retained in the New Testament in the Greek, Joh. 6.31. and from thence and in
our own and other Languages there is another thing known by the same name, of
which Writers say, that it is a Syriack Dew; but it will neither melt with the
Sun, nor putrefie in the night; nor is it fit for Food, but for Physic only:
so it differs wholly from this Hebrew Manna whereof we speak, which God in a
miraculous way did rain down from Heaven: Psalm. 78.23, 24. He commanded the
Clouds from above, and opened the doors of Heaven, and rained down Manna upon
them, and gave them of the Corn of Heaven.

And this without any care or pains, or Industry of theirs; a Food which they
neither sowed nor labored for, but had it for the taking up.

And this he did for an unworthy, murmuring, sinful people, when they were in a
most rebellious frame; when they were murmuring, and said, Exodus 16.3. Would to
God we had died in the Land of Egypt, when we sat by the Fleshpots.

Hereupon the Lord promises, ver. 4. I will rain Bread from Heaven for them.

So is Christ a Portion, and a Food prepared for every hungry Soul; and he came
down from Heaven, and is sent and given of God even to rebellious Sinners: He
gave Gifts to men, even to the rebellious, Psalm. 68.18.

2. This Manna was outwardly and seemingly despicable and contemptible; yet
indeed the choicest Food, and most excellent in all respects, both as to Color
and Figure, Taste and Use.

It was but a little thing in quantity, Exodus 16.14.

It is called Angels Food, Psalm 78.25. men did eat Angels Food.

The Figure of it round, Exodus 16.31. like Coriander Seed, which Philosophers
note to be of the best and most perfect Figure.

The Color white, ibid. and Numb. 11.7. like to the Color of Bdellium.

The Taste sweet, like fresh Oil, or Wafers baked with Honey, Numb. 11.7.

And it sustained six hundred thousand fighting men, besides Women and Children.

They might eat it either as they found it, or grind and bake it, Numb. 11.8.

Yet the Murmurers loathed it, and grew weary of it, Numb. 11.6. they called
it, this light Bread, Numb. 21.5. for which they were destroyed.

In like manner Jesus Christ, as to his outward appearance is despicable and
contemptible, and despised by the world, Isai. 53 -- though in himself most
precious and excellent, Cant. 5. ult. 1. Pet. 2.7. to you that believe he is
precious. Christ in the Promises and Ordinances is precious to the spiritual
Taste, 1 Pet. 2.3. If so be you have tasted that the Lord is gracious -- and
sweeter than the Honey or Honeycomb, Psalm. 119.103.

Their grinding and baking it, some apply to the Sufferings of Christ, whereby
he was prepared to be unto us the Bread of Life.

And he fills and satisfies the desires of all Believers, the whole Israel of
God.

But as in other Types, there is not only a resemblance in part, but withal a
disparity and pre-eminence of the Antitype above the Type: so in this Christ
infinitely excels the literal Manna, as the substance does the shadow: For that
did but feed the Body, but Christ feeds the Soul; that preserved only the
natural Life of the Body, and that only for a time, but could not give Life;
but Christ preserves spiritual Life, yea gives spiritual and eternal Life to
Souls that were dead in sins and trespasses: and as he gives it, so he
maintains and preserves it for ever. Your Fathers did eat Manna and are dead,
Joh. 6.49. but he that eats this true Bread shall never die, ver. 51.58. so
that in this (as in all things) Christ has the pre-eminence.

3. Something of Mystery may be observed in the quantity they were to gather,
an Homer full, Exodus 16.22. now an Homer was about two Quarts, or as others
express it, three Pints and an half of our measure; God gave them a liberal
Allowance.

The Homer was the Vessel which did contain, and wherein they were to put the
Manna.

The Vessel that holds Christ is the Heart and Soul; and so to get the Vessel
full of Manna, is to get the Heart full of Christ.

And he that gathered had none to spare, Exodus 16.18. for it seems their manner
was, when they had gathered it, to distribute to every one the same proportion,
quoted by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8.14, 15. to persuade them to a liberal
communication of outward supplies to one another.

It might also figure that spiritual Equality that is among Believers, all
sorts of Believers having an equal portion in Christ the true Manna, Gal. 3.28,
29. 2 Pet. 1.1. them that have obtained like precious Faith with us. We are all
one in Christ Jesus as to relative privileges -- Justificatio non suscipit
magis and minus. The Virgin Mary her self, though she be Sanctificatior, yet
she is not Justificatior quam altera. All Saints are equally justified: and
having the same precious Faith, shall be all made partakers of the same common
Salvation: every Believer is complete in Christ, the weak as well as the
strong, Col. 2.10.

4. Where did they get this Manna? There were three things chiefly remarkable
as to the place, which seem to have something of Mystery in them.

1. It was about the Camp of Israel, and no where else to be found but there.

So is Christ the Bread of Life to be had in the Church, but no where else:
Extra Ecclesiam non est Salus. Where two or three are gathered in his name,
there is Christ, Matthew. 18.

His Parents found him in the Temple, Luke 2.

If you would gather Manna, go to the Camp of Israel. If you would get Christ,
go to the Church, and seek him there.

2. It was hidden in the Dew, lapt up (as it were) in two beds of Dew, the one
above it, and the other under it. Exodus 16.14. When the Dew was gone up, the
Manna appeared on the face of the Earth -- Numb. 11.9. When the Dew fell upon
the Camp in the night, the Manna fell upon it: So Christ is exhibited in the
Word and Ordinances. Dew is often mentioned as an expression of Gods favor. I
will be as the dew unto Israel, Hos. 14.5. And the Word is compared to Dew,
Deuteronomy. 32.2. And it is a hidden word to some. 2. Cor. 4.3, 4. Christ is
therefore fitly called the hidden Manna. Rev. 2.17. We should labor to see
Christ, to get Christ in the Word, Christ in an Ordinance; to gather Manna out
of the Dew.

3. They went and were to go out of their Tents to gather it. Exodus 16.16. So
we must go forth out of our selves out of Sin, and self, and the Creature, to
get Christ. He that stays within in his own Tent cannot gather Manna; yet it is
but stepping out of doors. Oh the sloth and negligence of such as perish for
want of it! When Manna falls round about our Tents in the Dispensation of the
Gospel, wherein Christ is offered from day to day.

5. The time when they had this Manna. There were many Circumstances in the
time, that are very significant and instructing to us.

1. They were to gather it early in the morning, Exodus 16.12. The Quails came
at Evening, for naturally they flew in the day time to the Sea, and came to
Land toward night. Numb. 11.31. But Manna came in the Morning, because it sell
with the Morning Dew. Answorth in Exodus 16.12.
And the Quails are not noted in the Scripture to be a spiritual meat, as the
Manna is: we should seek after Christ betimes, in the Morning of our Lives,
with our first endeavors. Psalm. 90.14. Satisfy us in the Morning with thy
loving kindness. They that seek me early, shall find me, Prove. 8 -- This should
be our first work, Mat. 6.33. Seek first the Kingdom of God and the
Righteousness thereof, and then all other things shall be superadded, and given
(as it were) into the bargain.

2. They were to gather it and feed upon it daily, from day to day: if they
kept it, it putrified and stank, Exodus 16.19, 20. It wormed Worms, as the
phrase is in that emphatical Language, that is, it bred them abundantly, or
crawled full of Worms.

A miraculous Judgment for their Unbelief, and Curiosity, and Disobedience;
whereby they were taught to depend upon a daily Providence for daily Bread, as
we pray in the Lords Prayer, Give us this day our daily bread -- we should be
content with the present Supplies that Providence casts in, without inordinate
cares and thoughts for to morrow: Let your conversation be without
Covetousness, and to be content with such things as you have, Heb. 13.5. Take
no thought for to morrow, Matthew. 6.31, 34.

This passage may have a further reference, and be applied unto Christ, the
Mystery of this Type, thus; that as Manna must be daily gathered, daily fed
upon: so must Christ; we must receive him, and believe and feed upon him every
day: or else the sweetest Manna will become as rottenness, and a favor of
Death unto Death unto carnal and formal Professors, who suffer Manna to lie by
them un-eaten, who suffer Christ to lie by them un-imployed and un-improved for
spiritual supplies: we must feed upon Christ, and receive fresh supplies from
Christ every day.

3. They were to gather a double portion upon the sixth day, and none upon the
Sabbath, Exodus 16.23 -- to 27. By this the Lord taught them to rest upon the
Sabbath. This is the second place where the Sabbath is expressly mentioned
before the giving of the Law upon Mount Sinai. The first mention of it is
before the Fall of Man, Genesis 2.1, 2. which shows the Antiquity of the Sabbath:
For that was two thousand five hundred and thirteen years before this; which
would be a very vast and strange Prolepsis, if it were so as the
Anti-Sabbatarians weakly and foolishly pretend. And here now we have a second
mention of the Sabbath before that upon Mount Sinai: And it does not seem by
any circumstance of the History, to be here mentioned as a new thing unto them;
but rather as a Duty they formerly knew; but the Observance of it now, anew
recommended to them by a very special Providence.

Moreover, they might here learn, That God dispenses Christ, the true Manna,
to Believers most plentifully toward their later end; as he did to Simeon in
his old age, Luke 2. Christians when they grow near the Grave, and near to
their eternal Rest, they should gather double Manna.

Yet further we may here learn and see, That after this Life all endeavors are
in vain: If you have not gotten Christ before, there is no Manna to be rained
down then. There be no offers of Grace, nor means of Grace; then you must pray
no more, hear Sermons no more; but an end then of all your former
opportunities. They went out to gather, but they found none, ver. 27. So the
foolish Virgins asked the wise for Oil, but it was too late: their time was
past. It is the case of many a Soul.

The weekly Sabbath now is a day of spiritual gathering, and getting Food for
your Souls: But there will a Sabbath come, a time and state of Rest, when you
must live upon the Manna you have got and gathered in this Life, or else you
perish.

4. It ceased when they came to Canaan: they had it till then, Exodus 16.35. but
then they did eat of the Fruit of the Land of Canaan, Josh. 5.12. The Manna
ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the old Corn of the Land: So shall
all Means and Ordinances, when we come to Heaven; Word, Sacraments, offers of
Grace shall be no more; then means of Grace and opportunities shall be no more.

5. Yet nevertheless there was a Golden Pot of it reserved and kept by them for
ever, being laid up before the Lord in the Holy of Holies, Exodus 16.33, 34. a
Pot; it is called in Heb. 9.4. a Golden Pot.

So shall Christ remain, and all the Dispensations of him in this life, they
shall remain in precious remembrance with the Saints in Heaven before the Lord
to all eternity; Christ shall be laid up as it were in the Golden memories of
the Saints, like Manna in the Golden Pot, for a memorial before the Lord; the
Love of Christ and all the Dispensations of himself.

They had likewise Aarons Rod blossoming laid up to the same end and purpose.

The Saints shall remember in Heaven, how the Rod of Aaron budded, how the
Ministry was blessed and made fruitful to them when they were in this World.

So much as to the Manna or Bread from Heaven. You see how full it was of
Christ and Gospel Mysteries.

A Fifth Typical thing of old was the Rock that followed them with Water
issuing forth out of the Rock.

The History of this Type is in the 17th. Chap. Exodus see verse 6. That it was
a Type, is expressed by the Apostle a little before the Text, 1 Cor. 10.4 --
which Rock was Christ. This Rock and the Water issuing out of it, was a Type of
Christ and of His Spirit. It was a Dispensation often Celebrated by His people,
to the praise of God in after times.

But wherein did the Rock represent Christ? I shall but instance in four
Respects.

1. As to strength and firmness, and stability. He is indeed the Rock of Ages,
Isai. 26.4. The Rock of eternity; Everlasting strength, as it is not unfitly
interpreted by our Translators -- Isai. 33.16. His defense is the Munitions of
Rocks. Impregnable safety to his people, Their bread shall be given them; Their
waters shall not fail -- 1 Pet. 2.6. Behold I lay in Sion a chief Corner stone,
elect, precious; and he that believes in him shall not be confounded. The
Church is built upon this Rock, Mat. 16.18. Hence a wise Hearer is said to
build his house upon a Rock. Mat. 7.

2. As to shadow and refreshment. Isa. 32.2. As the shadow of a great Rock in a
weary Land: this World is a weary Land. Psalm. 121.6.5, The Sun shall not scorch
by day, nor the Moon by night. Those that dwell under the shadow of this Rock;
those that are in Christ.

3. He is fitly resembled to a Rock for offense and scandal accidentally, not
in himself, but only accidentally through the prejudices and lusts of Men.
Hence he is called a Rock of offense, and a stone of stumbling, 1 Pet. 2.8 --
Romans 9.33. As it is written ( Isa. 8.14. and 28.16.) Behold I lay in Sion a
stumbling stone and Rock of offense; and whosoever believes on him shall not
be ashamed.

4. He is a Rock as to meanness and unlikelihood of that supply of Water. Who
would expect or look for water out of a Rock? Therefore it is so often
remembered with admiration, Psalm. 78.20.

The Rock was of no great pomp to see to, but only a rude thing standing in a
vast Desert.

So in Christ to outward view, there is no beauty that we should desire him,
Isa. 53. Neither is there any likelihood of salvation to be had in Christ, if
men behold him only in his meanness, and look only at his abasement with an eye
of sense and carnal reason, as the Jews of old did.

And as the Rock represented Christ unto them: So 2. the water out of it
represented the Spirit of Christ. Joh. 7.37, 38, 39 -- Out of his belly shall
flow Rivers of living water. This spoke he of the Spirit.

There is nothing more frequent in Scripture, then to express the Spirit by
water, Isa. 44.3. and that most fitly, because of the cleansing and refreshing
virtue of it.

But let us here consider it in reference to the Rock from whence it came: and
in this there is a fourfold Analogy observable.

1. As the water issued out of the Rock, So the Spirit proceeds and comes from
Christ -- The Comforter whom I will send unto you from the Father, Joh. 15.26.
To refresh the weary soul when ready to faint away.

2. The water came forth out of the Rock when smitten with the Rod of Moses,
Exodus 17.6.

So the Spirit proceeds from Christ, being smitten as it were with Moses his
Rod, with the curse of the Law for our sins, Isa. 53 -- he was smitten of God
and afflicted. Had not Christ dyed and suffered, we had never had any
refreshing water, never any Rivers of Joy and Consolations from his Spirit.

3. The next time the Rock must be spoken to, Numb. 20.8. It seems that God
in his unsearchable Wisdom and Providence did so order it, That the Waters did
cease at this time, which had followed them Thirty eight Years. Hereupon the
people murmur, and their murmuring causes Moses himself to stagger at the
Promise through unbelief. Though in this Moses did miss it too, for that he
smote the Rock in stead of speaking to it.

But this we may learn from it; Christ must be preached, as well as suffer for
us; and in and by the speaking and preaching of the Gospel he does communicate
his Spirit: Gal. 3.2. Received ye the Spirit by the Works of the Law, or by the
hearing of Faith --

As Christ smitten is the procuring cause of sending the Spirit: so Christ
preached is the instrumental cause.

4. There is yet a fourth Analogy in this, that the Rock followed them; either
the Rock it self, or (as others) the Rock in regard of the rivers and streams
of water issuing from it.

So does the Spirit of Christ follow his people in all their changes and
travels up and down in the wilderness of this world; when we run from Christ,
he follows us. This Water of the Rock, the Spirit of God, pursues and follows
them up and down from place to place, and from one condition to another.

I shall close with a threefold Improvement of this Truth.

Use 1. We may here see that they had the Gospel preached unto them, as well as
we: For this spiritual Bread was Christ and the Rock that followed them was
Christ: If they had not, all that I have preached to day, and ever since I
begun upon the Types, it is all false Doctrine; for you know the scope of all
has been to let you see what of Christ, and what of Gospel Grace and Truth was
held forth under those legal Types and Shadows.

Use 2. This should render Jesus Christ precious, exceeding precious to us; for
that he is every way suitable to our necessities: He is a Rock for support: He
is the Bread of Life, and the Water of Life, for Food and Nourishment.

Use 3. Here is Comfort and Direction to poor, weak, hungry, thirsty Souls,
whither to go, and to whom to repair for help, and for supply; here is a Rock
and sure Foundation for thy weak and weary Soul to rest upon; here is spiritual
Bread and spiritual Drink: Therefore feed upon Christ by Faith, and this will
fill thy Hunger, and quench thy Thirst, and stay and support thy weary Soul.

But thou have been rebellious, and murmuring, and questioning the Truth and
Goodness of the Lord: so was Israel. Moses indeed stuck at this, and so could
not enter into Canaan.

But we should believe that there is Water for Rebels.

1 Cor. 10.11. April 23. 1668.

A Sixth typical thing amongst them of old was the Brazen Serpent, the History
whereof we have in Numb. 21.5, 6, 7, 8. The mystery and meaning of it we have
by that infallible Interpreter, our Lord Jesus Christ himself, in Joh. 3.14, 15.

And so the paralleling and laying these two Scriptures together, the one
whereof declares the History of the Type, and the other reveals the Mystery
intended and aimed at therein, will be a great part of my Discourse at this
time.

You see in the History there be two things, the bodily Disease, and the Remedy.

Now this shadows forth the spiritual Disease, and Remedy for the Soul.

I shall speak first to the Disease, which was the deadly stinging of fiery
Serpents for their Ingratitude, and Murmurings against the Lord.

In this Disease there was a shadow of the spiritual Sickness of the Souls of
men. And let it not seem strange, that they should have a typical
representation of spiritual Evils: For it has been formerly showed, when we
opened the Nature of a Type, from Romans 5.14. that all the Types are not to be
restrained only to the Messiahs person, or to his Benefits; but they had dark
and legal Adumbrations under the Old Testament, of all those things and truths
which are more clearly revealed under the New.

That this was indeed a Typical Disease, is evident from the coherence that
must needs be between the Disease and the Remedy, I mean thus.

Such as the Remedy was, such was the Disease.

An outward Remedy supposes and implies a bodily Disease: a spiritual Remedy
must needs relate to a spiritual Disease: but the Remedy here was spiritual and
typical; for this our Savior is express, Joh. 3.14. therefore so was the
Disease.

Now for the Particulars wherein it was so.

Having this general ground and foundation in the Scripture for it, as to the
Particulars, we must beg of God Spiritual Wisdom to accommodate and apply
things rationally and scripturally, and not in a way of loose and wanton wit
and fancy.

In the hope of whose assistance, through the help of your prayers, I shall
instance only in 5. Particulars of spiritual Instruction out of this Type, as
to the diseases of our Souls.

1. That Satan is indeed the Old Serpent. 2. That he is a fiery Serpent. 3.
That sin is the sting of this Serpent. 4. This sting of sin is painful and
deadly. 5. The Lord suffers those most of all to be tormented and plagued by
it, who despise Manna as a light Food.
1. That Satan is indeed the Old Serpent. For this, the Scripture is express,
Rev. 12.9.

He is so represented in Prophetical and Typical Scriptures, both because that
was the first Shape wherein he did appear as a Devil in tempting and destroying
our first Parents; and for the subtilty and venom of that Beast, and the curse
inflicted upon him in that appearance.

In darker places, as amongst the Pagans of old, and amongst the Americans of
late; he has delighted to appear unto them in that Shape of a Serpent:
Therefore the Pagan Temples were wont to be haunted with Serpents, in so much
that it grew into a Phrase of Speech amongst them. Sacer anguis.

2. The Devils are fitly called Seraphims or fiery burning Serpents. The
Serpents wherewith they were stung in that Wilderness were such, Deuteronomy. 8.15.

The Prophet Isaiah speaks of fiery flying Serpents, Isa. 14.29. and 30.6.

The word in the Text is (...) hane chashim haseraphim, Serpents burners, Numb.
21.6. or burning Serpents. The Root is (...) urere. The name Serapis that
Egyptian Idol may be derived from hence.

Some derive from the Hebrew Saraph by Inversion of Letters, the Greek word
Praester which signifies a kind of venomous Serpent, which is also called
Dipsas and Causon, with which he that is bitten is tormented with such a
burning heat and thirst, that though he drink never so much, Diascor. l. 6.
cap. 38, and 40. apud Aynsw. in loc.
his thirst will not be quenched or satisfied: and the bitings of these Serpents
were lest off by the most ancient Physicians as altogether incurable.

They are also fitly called, fiery Serpents from their Color. For they had a
shining and glistering Skin, as if it had been made of Fire. And we see it in
our ordinary Snakes that seem to shine and sparkle against the Sun. So Tailor
on the Types, page 305. Satan is fitly so called, as being a Serpent of the
worst kind, a most terrible and deadly Serpent. Hence he is elsewhere compared
to a great red Dragon, Rev. 12. upon the same account as here to a fiery
Serpent, because he is such a dreadful enemy.

This name Seraphim that is here used, is applied to the holy Angels, Isa. 6.2.
For the spiritual brightness, and burning heat and zeal and love to God that is
in those blessed Spirits, those pure flames. He has made his Angels Spirits,
and his Ministers a flame of fire, Heb. 1.

And Satan himself was such a one at first, though now by his fall, he is but a
fiery Serpent: He is a Seraphim debased and fallen below himself.

3. The sting of this Serpent is sin, Therefore the temptations of this fiery
Serpent are called fiery Darts, Ephesians. 6.16. with which he stings the soul to
death. He has thrust his Sting into the nature of man, and poisoned it, and
made it like himself. And he is continually tempting and thrusting in his
Sting: Sin is called a Sting, 1 Cor. 15. The sting of death is sin.

4. Sin the Sting of this Serpent, is painful and deadly poison: it both
torments and kills.

It is true, it is sweet poison while under the tongue; but withal it is
tormenting and mortal in the Bowels, Job. 20.12, 13, 14. Though sweet in his
mouth, it is the poison of Asps within him; sweet in the commission, but
tormenting and destructive afterward.

Oh the pain it puts the Conscience of a sinner too! Deadly pain and anguish;
there is no anguish like it, no poison so inflaming, so tormenting to the Body,
as Sin is to the Soul.

5. The occasion of all this misery, was their slighting and murmuring against
the Manna wherewith the Lord had fed them from Heaven.

There had been many murmurings before upon other occasions: but now they come
to slight and despise Manna wherewith the Lord had fed them so miraculously,
for about eight and thirty years together: (for so some Interpreters compute
the time of this murmuring.) All the while till now, though that Wilderness
through which they traveled was full of fiery Serpents, and Scorpions, and
Drought, as Deuteronomy. 8.15. Yet the Lord had not suffered any of them to be stung.

But now he lets loose these fiery Dragons to fly upon them, as Amos 9.3. I
will command the Serpent and he shall bite them -- and upon occasion of their
ungrateful murmurings against the Manna, Numb. 21.5. The Instruction we may
learn and see in it is this, That God lets loose those fiery Serpents, Satan
and their Lusts, to sting the Consciences and torment the Souls of Men, for
contempt of Christ and Gospel mercies.

When Manna has been slighted, when Christ is offered and rejected, then the
Serpent stings. Psalm. 81.11, 12. Because Israel would none of me; therefore I
gave them up to their own hearts lusts.

Have you never felt the truth of this Type by woeful experience, how sin has
raged and gotten more strength, when the Gospel has been slighted, and offers
of Grace despised?

So much of the Disease, the deadly sting of these fiery Serpents for their
murmurings.

Now 2. for the Remedy. The Brazen Serpent. That Christ is this Brazen Serpent,
himself declares, Joh. 3.

1. It was made of Brass, and in the shape and form of a Serpent, yet not a
real Serpent. It was not made of Gold, but only of Brass; which though it be a
strong and bright Metal, yet was contemptible in outward appearance, and most
unlikely to have attained such an end, to work such a cure.

So is Christ strong and mighty, and bright and glorious, Rev. 1.15, 16. The
brightness of his Fathers glory. Heb. 1.3. Yet a man, and the Son of man;
Therefore low and mean in his outward appearance, and despised of the world.
Christ crucified is to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness; but to them that are saved the wisdom of God and the power of God,
1 Cor. 1.23, 24. Yea he condescended to appear in the similitude of sinful
flesh, for so the Apostle most accurately expresses it, Romans 8.3. He was
counted a sinner, but he was indeed without sin, Heb. 4.15. As this brazen
Serpent was like a Serpent, yet had neither Venom nor Sting: so Christ appeared
like a sinner. He came in the likeness of sinful flesh, and yet knew no sin. 2
Cor. 5.21. But though he was not sinful, yet he was indeed under the curse due
to sin, as the Serpent was cursed, Genesis 3. So Christ became a curse for us,
Gal. 3.13.

2. This brazen Serpent was a Remedy and a Cure provided of God, in mere Grace
and sovereign Mercy for ungrateful and unworthy Rebels, when some of them were
stung to death, and ready to perish for their contempt of Manna; and others of
them were dead, and gone, and past recovery for the same sin.

It was against the merit of their murmurings, when they spoke against him, and
against Moses: in like manner does God give his Son Jesus Christ of free and
mere grace, when we were enemies, without and against our merit; when so great
a part of mankind perishes without him in their own rebellions, and especially
for their contempt of the Gospel. Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world, (it was a
most intense love) to give his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on
him might not perish, but have eternal life.

3. The Serpent must be lifted up upon a Pole, Numb. 21. That all Israel might
see it, whether near or further off: so Christ was lifted up. Joh. 3.14. As
Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of man be
lifted up: that is, upon the Cross -- Joh. 12.32, 33. And I, if I be lifted up
from the earth, will draw all men unto me. This he spoke, signifying what death
he should die.

And in the preaching of the Gospel, in the sight of all men. Gal. 3.1. Before
whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth, crucified among you.
Both to those that are near and far of, Ephesians. 2.17.

4. This brazen Serpent must be also looked upon by the Israelites when stung,
Numb. 21.8. So must Christ by the eye of Faith, Joh. 3.15.

Faith is often expressed unto us by that Metaphor of looking. Look unto me all
ye ends of the earth and be saved, Isa. 45.22 -- Isa. 65.1. I said behold me,
behold me. Faith looks with a fixed eye, and with a mourning eye. A man's Spirit
is much seen and does much discover it self by his eye.

5. In this way it gave healing unto those that being stung did look upon it,
whom nothing else could heal; Moses and his Law could not do it, Numb. 21.8.

So Christ Mal. 4.2. Unto you that fear my Name, shall the sun of righteousness
arise with healing under his wings -- Psalm. 103 -- who heals all thy
diseases. And none but he can do it, Act. 4.12. There is no healing of a
wounded Conscience, but by Jesus Christ alone, as lifted up upon the Cross, and
beheld by the eye of Faith.

The brazen Serpents being lifted up was not enough, but it must be looked
upon: so Christ must be believed on, or else the soul cannot be healed.

Ignorant Souls that see not Christ, or that despise him, shall not be saved by
him: as if any of the people had said, what virtue can there be in such a
brazen Serpent to health, and so would not look up to it? Such, they deservedly
perish: so do Unbelievers and Despisers under the Gospel.

Though they were but weak and dim-eyed, blear-eyed, dim-sighted, etc. yet
looking up to the brazen Serpent, they were healed: so, though Faith be weak,
yet being sincere it saves.

Though in the utmost parts of the Camp -- some say it took up twelve miles;
Yet look unto me all the ends of the earth and be saved, Isa. 45.22.

6. The brazen Serpent retained this virtue, only while instituted by God for
that end; and therefore when the sacred Stamp of Institution was taken off, we
read no more of any Miracles wrought by it: and Hezekiah brake it in pieces, 2.
Kings. 18.4.

Now this part of the History cannot be fitly accommodated to Christ himself,
but to his Ordinances, thus. That the very same things and actions which are
good and useful when God appoints them, are useless, yea abominable, if there
be no stamp of Institution upon them. Thus we may fitly apply it, because the
Types (as has been said) relate to all Gospel Truths: and the same Truth
shines forth in all the rest of those ancient Types and Shadows.

The Lord then appointed ministering Garments, for his Priests and Ministers:
but for Ministers to use sacred Vestments now, is unlawful and abominable.

The Lord then appointed a kind of legal Hierarchy and spiritual Supremacy of
the High Priest, over all the rest of the Priests and Levites; they were to act
by the appointment of Aaron and his Sons, Numb. 4.19. But for one Gospel
Minister to claim a supremacy of Jurisdiction over another Gospel Minister,
within his own Charge or Congregation; This is that for which we justly call
the Pope Antichrist.

The Lord then appointed the Feast of Tabernacles, and the Passover, and
Pentecost: But for us to keep these Feasts now, under the names of Christmas,
Easter, or Whitsuntide, or the like, as the Pope has taught us to do, it is a
far greater sin then people do imagine: the retaining of such legal Shadows
being an implicit denial of the Truth of the Gospel: but men consider not the
meaning of their own Actions.

7. The last occasional Typical thing which the Lord gave to his People of old,
was those healing Waters of the Pool of Bethesda, which indeed are not
mentioned in the Old Testament, but in the New, John. 5. It was a Miracle; but
yet it had also a symbolical use (as many other Miracles had) to lead them from
the consideration of earthly things, unto heavenly things.

Healing Waters are often spoken of in the Scriptvre, with a reference to
spiritual healing, as Ezekiel. 47.1, 8, 9, 11 -- Rev. 21.1.

So Christ speaks of Rivers of Waters flowing out of the heart of a Believer,
Joh. 7.38. which cannot be meant of literal Water, but is meant of Metaphorical
and Spiritual Waters; this in general. But to unfold the Allegory a little more
particularly, that we may see more fully what instructions we may learn out of
it.

1. Those healing Waters of that Pool of Bethesda, may fitly represent the
Ordinances of Christ in the Church; which is indeed Bethesda, an house of
mercy: for so the word may be interpreted (...) Beth chesda, Domus
misericordiae, though others expound it (...) Domus effusionis.

The Church of Christ is indeed a spiritual Hospital, an house of mercy to the
Sick, to poor diseased Souls, where there be the choicest Waters, the Waters of
Life, and all other Medicines of spiritual help and healing.

2. The healing virtue of the Water, may hold forth to us the spiritual good of
Ordinances, the healing of our Souls. This is frequent in the Scripture, (as
was said before) for bodily healing to teach and represent spiritual.

3. The motion of the Angel, leads us to take notice of the effectual Operation
of the Spirit of Christ, in and by the Ordinances in the time of love.

It is not the Means, it is not the Ordinances, but the Angel of the Covenant
by his Spirit, moving and working in them, that heals and does good to souls:
the Ordinances are not effectual at all times, but only when and as they are
moved and influenced by the Spirit: for it was a place much frequented, as
appears by the five Porches, and its neerness to the Temple: and the Text says
many sick lay there. He could have healed all as well as some: Verum ut
miracula suum habent finem, ita and modum habere debent. Calvin in loc.

As when there were so many dead, and but one raised, 2 Kings 4.32 -- So many
Widows, and the Prophet sent but to one, 1 Kings 17.9. Luke 4.25, 26.

Who would have looked for help and healing from troubled Water? We must follow
God against our own reason: the judgment of reason is often contrary to the
mind of God. 2 King. 5.10. Naaman thought washing in Jordan an unlikely means
to recover the Leper -- Elisha 2 King. 2.20. heals the Waters by casting in
Salt; an unlikely means: for Salt is wont rather to cause barrenness.

The Water here did it not, for then it would have healed all, and at all
times, one as well as another. He singles out one whose condition was most
deplorable, his disease inveterate, incurable 38. years. So he that was born
blind, and had been so, till he grew up to man's estate. Cap. 9.1 -- So Lazarus
when dead, buried four days, Joh. 11.39. The Woman twelve years, Mat. 9.20.
Another eighteen years, Luke 13.11.

4. These times were unknown and uncertain to the people, they knew not when
the Angel would come to move the Waters.

So is the day of grace, and the opportunities of salvation to Souls: because
man knows not his time, Therefore is he snared in an evil time, when it
falls suddenly upon him: Eccl. 9.12. Oh that thou had known! Luke 19.41, 42.

Therefore Eccl. 11.6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold
not thine hand: for thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that,
or whether they both shall be alike good. Lay hold upon all opportunities.

5. These excellent Waters did not heal all, but only him that was put first
into them: which was for our instruction, that we might learn to lay hold
betimes upon seasons and opportunities, for our spiritual good: They that seek
me early, shall find me. Prove. 8.17. Be at work for God and your Souls betimes,
lest you come too late.

Christ asks him verse. 6. Will thou be made whole? He prevents him before he
expressed any desire to Christ; not as though Christ were ignorant of his
desire, but to excite and stir up desire and expectation in him; and to stir
up the attention of those who were providentially present at that time, that
they might mind and take notice of the Miracle. Verse. 8. Jesus says to him,
rise, take up thy bed and walk. He could have said, be whole; but he chooses
rather to express it by an infallible effect and fruit of it. To the Maid,
arise, Mark. 5.42. To Lazarus, come forth, Joh. 11.43. and verse. 44. Let him
go. To the Paralytick. Mat. 9.6. Arise take up thy bed, and go unto thine house.

On the Sabbath day, that so it might be the more taken notice of; the people
would wonder to see a man carry his bed abroad, and so inquire about it.

There were (beside these we have now handled) some other occasional typical
things, as Noah's Ark, but that was spoken to in the History of Noah, and some
others may occur afterward: but these are all I shall speak unto here.

Let me conclude with a few words of use, to help you to a practical
improvement of all that has been said upon these Typical things.

1. We may here see the complete and perfect fullness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to all the necessities of our Souls.

That spiritual Ladder represents him as the Mediator and means of all the
intercourse between Heaven and Earth, between God and us.

The burning Bush shows his presence with, and protection of his Church and
People in the Fires of Persecution and Affliction.

The Pillar of Cloud and Fire holds forth that everlasting blessed Conduct and
Guidance of his People, by his Word and Spirit, through the Wilderness of this
World to their eternal Rest.

The Manna, and Water out of the Rock holds him forth, as our spiritual Food.

And now lastly the Brazen Serpent, and the Pool of Bethesda teaches us, that
here is healing also, so that he is both Meat, and Medicine.

The same thing is held forth also under other Metaphors: Rev. 22.2. The Leaves
of the Tree of life are for healing of the Nations: so that Christ is all in
all.

2. Learn from hence not to despise these Truths concerning the Types, how
weakly soever they may be held forth by him that speaks unto you: for you see
they are full of Gospel marrow and mystery. Any thing of Christ should be sweet
and precious, and it is so to you that believe.

3. We may here see the glory of Gospel Truths and Mysteries; and withal how
dull and slow of heart we are to apprehend them, in that the Lord teaches us
and holds them forth in so great variety of spiritual representations, to our
weak and narrow understandings.

Here is Light and Safety, and Strength, and Meat and Drink, and Medicine, and
all laid up in Christ, and Christ hereby held forth unto us: and all little
enough to help us to a true and right Idea of him.

4. Here is very great and sweet encouragement from that which has been said
this day, to diseased Souls, to repair to this Physician; whatever thy diseases
be, go to him for help.

And that you may obtain help and healing virtue from him, remember these three
Rules and take them along with you.

1. Seek to him in his own Means and Ordinances. If he set his Stamp upon a
piece of Copper (as he did of old) do not despise it. If he send his Angel into
a Pool or Well of Water, do not say with Naaman, are not the Waters of Abana
and Pharphar, as good as the Waters of Jordan?

Are not other Pools as good as the Pool of Bethesda? They may be so in
themselves, and yet may not have the virtue that meaner Waters have, if the one
be appointed of God for this use, and the other not.

2. Do not expect healing from the Means, from the Well, or Waters of it, but
by the Angel of the Covenant moving the Waters; not from the Ordinances, but
only from the blessing and presence of God in them.

3. Be sure you be found waiting his time and leisure: wait at the Pool of
Bethesda, though you do not find help in 38 years; yet wait, and be ever ready,
lest you be out of the way, when the Angel moves the Waters.

May 7. and 21. 1668.
1 Cor. 10.11.
THe occasional Types (beloved) were referred to two heads.

Things and Actions.

Of Typical things we have spoken.

That which follows next in order is, occasional Typical actions.

Before we enter into them, it may be useful to recall to remembrance three
things formerly delivered.

1. That the Types are not to be restrained only to the Person of Christ, but
they extend even to all New Testament Dispensations. 2. That there is a real
historical verity in these typical actions. 3. That they did serve for diverse
other ends and uses, as well as for this typical use.
I must desire you to remember these three things, and to carry them along with
you in all that shall be said.

They may be referred to two heads.

1. Typical deliverances to his People. 2. Typical destruction of Enemies.
Which, though they might be handled together; yet for the greater clearness and
distinctness we may consider them severally.
1. There were typical Mercies, Deliverances, Preservations of his People of
old which happened to them in Types, and are written for our Instruction, upon
whom the ends of the World are come.

The Lord intended those ancient Dispensations to be Types and Patterns, and
Pledges of what he intended to do for his People in the latter days.

There be many signal Instances thereof, in the story of the Old Testament.

I might here instance in the Lords protecting Providence over the Fathers and
Ancestors of that People, viz. Abraham Isaac and Jacob, in all their
sojournings and journeyings to and fro at the call of God. Psalm. 105.12, 13,
14, 15. When few in number, and in the midst of Enemies, He suffered no man to
do them harm.

Mentioned as the first great and speaking Example, how the Lord would protect
his People in all future times: but to let pass the Presidents given in
particular Persons, and to instance only in such Dispensations as befell that
whole People.

There were six famous Dispensations of Providence which happened unto them in
Types, and are written for our instruction upon whom the Ends of the World are
come.

1. Their deliverance out of Egypt. 2. Their passage through the Red Sea. 3.
Their marching through the Wilderness. 4. Their passage through the River
Jordan under Joshua's conduct. 5. Their entrance into Canaan. 6. Their
deliverance out of Babylon.
1. Their deliverance out of Egypt, the History whereof is recorded in the Book
of Exodus.

This History may be typically applied three ways.

1. Unto Christ himself, and so it is expressly in Mat. 2.15 -- It is quoted out
of Hos. 11.1. Those words are spoken by the Prophet Hosea, concerning the
deliverance of that People out of Egypt: but this being typically done to the
Members of Christ, was in the full intent of it accomplished in Christ, the Head
and Antitype: and therefore is so applied by Matthew.

Look as Israel, in the Infancy of that People went down into Egypt, and God
brought them forth again: so Christ in his Infancy fled thither, and the Lord
called him back again.

2. Here was also a shadow and representation of our spiritual deliverance, out
of spiritual bondage and misery under Sin and Satan, and the World in an
unregenerate estate, unto the state of Grace and Glory. The Scripture hinteth
this unto us, in that it does expressly apply the Terminus ad quem of their
deliverance Mystically and Allegorically: Therefore the Terminus a quo was also
Mystical and Allegorical: for there is the same reason of both.

We made use of the like demonstration before, upon the fiery Serpents: so
here, such as the Rest was, such was their Bondage: but the State they were
brought into, was a State of typical Rest and Peace in Canaan. It is made a
Type of another Country, even of Heaven it self, Heb. 11.16. Heb. 4.8, 9.
Joshua did not give them Rest: But there remains a further rest to the people
of God. If their Rest in Canaan was a Type of spiritual and heavenly Rest; Then
their Bondage in Egypt was a Type of spiritual Bondage.

Sin (as some have well said) is indeed the Egypt of the Soul, upon all
accounts: Temptations to it, Actings in it, Troubles for it, are its house of
Bondage and Vexation. We are all by nature in a condition of spiritual slavery
to Sin and Satan, as Israel was in outward slavery to their Egyptian
Taskmasters: and the Lord redeems us spiritually, as he did them literally.

Hence in the Preface to the Ten Commandments which are moral and perpetual,
the Lord therein says to us, and to all his People, as well as to them: I am
the Lord thy God which brought thee forth out of the Land of Egypt, out of the
House of Bondage. He redeemeth us out of another and worser Egypt.

You may see the Analogy a little more particularly in 4. things.

1. They were under very cruel Bondage. The Egyptians made them to serve with
rigor, Exodus 1.14. They must make Bricks: the Monuments whereof are thought by
some to be the Pyramids. So Josephus reports.

Though some object that the Pyramides are not made of Brick. To which it may
be answered, That what manner of Brick that was which the Israelites made,
cannot be now determined and found out, no more than what Materials the
Pyramides were made of: yea, they must make Bricks without Straw, an
unreasonable piece of rigor and tyranny: and their Male-Children were to be
drowned: a Law the most barbarous and inhumane that ever was then acted amongst
men: which how long it stood in force, the Scripture expresses not. The Jews
have a Tradition that it was ten Months: but whether it were a longer or a
shorter time, in this blackest time and Midnight of their oppression Moses was
born, who afterward delivered them. But a most bloody and barbarous Law it
was: and which is yet worse, these Egyptian Tyrants would not let them have the
liberty of their Consciences to serve and worship God.

So is the Bondage of Sin and Satan, very sore and hard Bondage. The service of
a Lust, the bondage of a base Lust, is worse then any Turkish or Egyptian
Bondage, to do the Devils drudgery: Thou have wearied thy self with the
greatness of thy way. Isa. 57.10. Sinners take much pains, endure much labor,
and hardship in the satisfying of their lusts.

2. Though they did sigh under their bondage, and they had none to help; yet
when help was offered, they had no heart to receive it, and close in with it;
but did foolishly and frowardly refuse and reject it. They refused Moses, Exodus
2.14. Act. 7.25, 35. So Sinners in their natural bondage, they will sometimes
cry out and complain of their sins, but yet refuse offers of Grace. When the
Lord comes to deliver them, they hold fast deceit, and refuse to return. Jer.
8.4, 5.

3. When they began to think of getting free, Pharaoh pursues them with all his
might: all the Land is in an uproar, whereas all was quiet before, Exodus 14.5,
9. And they are brought to a desperate strait, the Sea before them, the
Mountains on each hand, their Enemies behind them at Baal zephon, Exodus 14. So
does Satan, when the Soul begins to break loose, then Beelzebub roars; he lets
it go on quietly till then, but then pursues it with dreadful temptations. Luke
11.21. When the strong man armed keeps the house, all is in peace; but when a
stronger then he comes to dispossess him, then he rages, and often drives it
into desperate straits and distress of Spirit.

4. Yet notwithstanding all this opposition, the Lord delivers them, and brings
them forth with a mighty hand and with an outstretched arm, Exodus 14. So he
brings forth the Soul in despite of Satan from out of its natural condition, by
the outstretched arm, and by the almighty power of the Holy Ghost; converting
Grace is irresistible.

3. Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt of old, was a Type of the New Testament
Churches deliverance from the Yokes of Antichrist. For Egypt is expressly made a
Type of Rome, Rev. 11.8.

To be under the yokes of men, under Antichristian bondage, it is worse than
Egyptian bondage: for that was chiefly over the bodies, but this over the Souls
of men, this is Romes Merchandice, Rev. ^8.

That men must have their Consciences kept in the Pocket of a base Priest at
Rome; for him to oppress their Consciences and exercise dominion over their
Faith, what fearful slavery is this?

Hence also to make the Parallel yet a little clearer, look as Moses and Israel
sang when they came forth out of literal Egypt.

So in like manner when the Churches of the New Testament came forth out of
Antichristian bondage, they are said to sing the song of Moses and of the Lamb.
Rev. 15.3.

2. Another typical Dispensation of Deliverance and Mercy toward Israel of
old, was their Passage through the red Sea, as on dry Land: the Story whereof
is recorded, Exodus 14.

A very great and mighty work of Providence, and very often celebrated with
triumphing praises to God, in after times. See Isa. 63.12, 13. and Hab. 3.8, 9.
and often in the Psalms.

The Sea they passed through is called the Red Sea: the reason of which name is
thought to be from Esau, who got the Surname of Red, and whose Seat and
Habitation was bordering upon this Sea. The place where they passed over, I
find in Geographers that it was four Miles broad.

The means was by Moses stretching forth his Rod, and the Lord sending an East
Wind, verse. 21. The Waters stood as a Wall: not in the shape and figure of a
Wall, (for then it is not likely that Pharaoh and the Egyptians, as mad as they
were, would have dared to have pursued them) but probably in the ordinary
figure that other Waters use to have: but they did serve to the use of the Wall
on each side the Camp, to keep off the Egyptians that they could not enclose
the Israelites, and compass them about.

That this was a typical Dispensation, the Apostle does affirm here in the
Context, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. The Mystery of it was this; it represented Baptism,
and that both in the outward form, and the inward good of Baptism.

1. Here was a manifest Representation of the outward Ordinance: for here was
an application of the Element of Water by Moses the Minister of God, unto the
whole Church of God, who were six hundred thousand Men, besides Women and
Children: These were all baptized by Moses in the Sea: but how was the Water
applied to them? The Egyptians were drowned and overwhelmed in it; but there
was no contiguous application of it to the Israelites, otherwise than what
drops of Water might be blown upon them by the Wind, that strong East Wind: but
they passed through the place of that Element, and so here was (...) figure and
a shadow of Baptism.

2. Beside the outward form, the inward good (...) was also represented and
lively set forth in this (...) thus: That as Israel when departing out of
Egypt, (...) by Pharaoh did pass safely through the Sea, when the ^^yptian
Enemies were drowned in it: So when the Israel of God are departing and making
their escape to the spiritual Rest, they see before them the swelling Waves and
Billows of the Wrath of God ready to swallow them up, and the Iniquities of
their heels together with the Prince and Powers of Darkness pursuing them: but
Jesus Christ drys up these Floods and deep Waters of the Wrath of God for all
his People, and is as a Wall of safety to them on each hand, and leads them
safely through it.

But he causes these Floods to overwhelm their Enemies, he triumphs over them
in his fury, over Principalities and Powers and all implacable Adversaries; he
kills and buries Sins and Devils, that they can no more rise up to hurt his
people, than a drowned Egyptian can to hurt an Israelite.

The Wrath of God is often compared in the Scripture to Floods and deep Waters,
Psalm. 69.1, 2. God is said to be with his people when they pass through the
Waters, Isa. 43.2. And he is said to drown their sins in the depths of the Sea,
Micah. 7.19. And as Israel was thus Conducted safe in the morning Watch, Exodus
14.24, 27. So Christ in the morning Watch of his Resurrection, and in the
morning of the general Resurrection and last Judgment, triumphs over all the
Enemies of his people, Psalm. 49.14. Then his Church is fully passed from death
to life, eternal life; then may Israel sing the Song of Moses and of the Lamb,
and say, the Lord shall reign for ever, and ever. Exodus 15.18.

Much Teaching, and many other Instructions might be learned from all the
Circumstances of this Dispensation. The Egyptians here, met with a punishment
suitable to their sin. They had drowned the Children of Israel; and now
fourscore years after, they themselves are drowned in the Red Sea: and from the
sore distress that Israel was in, the Sea before them, their Enemies behind
them, the Mountains on either side; insomuch that they had no other choice, in
the eye of reason, but either to be drowned or slain. We may here observe, that
the most glorious Deliverances of the Church, are in their greatest straits and
most desperate distresses: we may also observe the invincible safety of the
Church of God in all Trials, under all troubles.

The Fire cannot burn them, as you have seen before in the burning Bush, which
burnt, and was not consumed: the Sea cannot drown them; you have formerly heard
of Noah floating upon the Waves in an Ark of safety, when all the World was
Sea; and now you see Israel safe in the bottom of the Sea.

Oh! Trust God and follow the Lord fully, when he leads you into dangers and
difficulties, as deep as the bottom of the Sea: 2 Chronicles. 20.12, We know not
what to do, but our eyes are unto thee. It was by Faith that Israel did this,
Heb. 11.29. Some make the Red Sea a Type of the blood of Christ, That through
his blood we pass to the Land of Promise.

3. Their marching through the Wilderness, those Deserts of Arabia with their
God in the head of them, Psalm. 68.7. The Wilderness of an unregenerate
Condition: so Buroughs of holy Courage on Heb. 11.27. Cap. 25, and 26.
Interprets and applies this their Passage out of Egypt unto Canaan.

Herein was an eminent Prefiguration of three things.

1. Troubles, difficulties, temptations in the way to Heaven, that through many
tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God, Act. 14.22. This World is
but a Wilderness, an howling Wilderness, full of Lions and Leopards, sins and
troubles, Cant. 4.8. full of fiery Serpents, and Scorpions, and Drought: as
those Arabian Deserts were.

2. We may here see as in a Glass, the Corruptions of our own hearts.

That this was a great part of the meaning of this Type, the Apostle shows at
large in many Verses of the Context, v. 5. to 10.

Look what Israel did, and how they carried it in the Wilderness, we are apt to
do the like: we are apt to think they were a very murmuring froward People: but
if thou had been in their Circumstances, thou would have done as bad as
they.

3. The perishing and miscarrying of many Souls under some preparative and
initial Works, is also here plainly held forth. For many of them perished in
the Wilderness while they were in transitu, between Egypt and Canaan.

So does many a Soul after some beginnings and motions heavenwards. The Apostle
applies it thus, Heb. 4.1, 11. lest any man fall short after the same example
of unbelief: and here 1 Cor. 10.5. many of them were destroyed in the
Wilderness.

4. Their passing through Jordan under Joshua's Conduct, the Priests bearing
the Ark, going in before them, and standing in the midst thereof, till all the
people were gone over. Joshua 3.13, 17. and 4.10, 18.

The signification of this, was (as the Dispensation it self was) much after
the same nature with their Passage through the Red Sea, but accompanied with
differing Circumstances.

In general it represented and held forth Christ going before his people, and
himself bearing their sorrows that would have sunk them: he wafteth them safely
through all their sorrows and miseries, and through death it self over unto
their eternal Rest.

It was at this place Bethabara (...) domus transitus the house of Passage,
from (...) domus and (...) transire. Chytraeus in Josh. 3. and 4.
The place that Jesus Christ was baptized at when he entered upon his Ministry,
Joh. 1.28.

And as Israel of old did pass over on the tenth day of the first Month, Josh.
4.19. Paulus Eber. Pref. in Calend. Hist.
Encamping in Gilgal where they kept the Passover. Josh. 5.10. So it seems that
on the same tenth day of the first Month, Christ rode into Jerusalem, where he
not only kept the Passover, but presented himself the true Paschal Lamb to be
slain for us, and encountering with the swellings of Jordan, the whole
Confluence of the Wrath of God, and the sins and sorrows of all his Elect: he
has opened a Passage for them through the midst of Jordan, as it were into the
Land of their eternal Rest.

5. And so this brings me to the Fifth typical Dispensation of Providence to
them of old, viz. Their Entrance into Canaan under the leading and conduct of
the same Joshua, who had led them through Jordan. The History whereof is the
main Subject of the Book of Joshua.

The Mystery of this Dispensation is plain and obvious. Canaan was a Type of
Heaven; it shadowed forth another and a better Country, that is an heavenly,
Heb. 11.16. Their Rest in the Promised Land shadowed forth another Rest
remaining for the people of God. Heb. 4.8, 9.

These things were partly spoken to, when we were upon the Personal Types,
where we spoke of Joshua as a Type of Christ, the true Jesus or Joshua,

6. The last typical Deliverance that I shall mention, is their deliverance out
of their Captivity in Babylon.

Their Bondage in Babylon was a Type of spiritual bondage: their Deliverance, a
Type of spiritual deliverance by Christ, and of his raising up his spiritual
Kingdom.

Hence it is observable, that the Prophets, when speaking of that Recovery from
Babylon, they pass from that to Christ, and our spiritual Restoration through
him: and they spoke more magnificently of that, than was fulfilled in the
Letter and History; and they often intermix Passages that are plainly and
undeniably meant of Christ, and of his spiritual Grace and Kingdom, of which
that temporal Deliverance was but a taste and Type. See Jer. 32.36, 37, 40, 41.
also Jer. 33.15, 16. and in very many other places, See Calvin in loc.
the Prophets still lead the people from that to Christ, in whom all the
Promises and Prophecies are fully and perfectly accomplished.

Moreover Babylon was a Type of Rome, and consequently their deliverance out of
Babylon, a Type of the Churches deliverance in the New Testament from under the
Yoke of Antichrist: and the Circumstances also agree.

1. That it was a gradual work: for some came back with Zerobabel, others
afterward with Ezra, and others lastly with Nehemiah: So is the Reformation
out of Popery. The first Reformers were not infallible; therefore could not
reform all things at once.

2. It met with much opposition, and was carried on through great difficulties:
and of all their Enemies, the Samaritans did most obstruct them, of whom you
read 2 Kin. 17. that they served the Lord, and other Gods. and Ezra 4.1, 2.
When rejected, then they brake out into open opposition: and again in the New
Testament, Joh. 4.9. whereby it appears that they did believe and expect the
Messiahs coming, as well as the Jews, Joh. 4.20. and again Rev. 3.9. they are
there described. The Sum is, they had a kind of mongrel Religion made up partly
of Judaism, and partly of Paganism. So now when the Church of God under the New
Testament, is coming forth out of spiritual Babylon: There is a mongrel
Generation risen up, whom some have fitly called Calvino Papistas, Calvinian
Papists, who are for the Protestant Doctrine, and for Popish Worship.

I refer it to every ones Conscience, to judge whether it may not be fitly
applied to our late Innovators, who are for a Linsey-woolsey Religion, a
mixture of sound and wholesome Doctrine, with Antichristian popish worship:
their Wine is mixed with Water; the Protestant Faith, with popish Ceremonies and
Superstitions: they build Hay and Stubble upon the Foundation.

The Foundation of our Church is right, which is Jesus Christ, and
Justification by Faith in his blood: but the Superstructure they build upon it,
is humane Inventions and Superstitions: which is not Gold and Silver, pure
Worship, and wholesome Discipline; but Hay and Stubble, and the day will
discover it, 1 Cor. 3.

2. Typical vengeance and destruction upon the Enemies of his people. For as
the Jews were a typical people, and did prefigure and represent the whole
Church of God under the Gospel: So the neighbor Nations with whom they had to
do, were also Typical of Gospel Enemies to the Church; and their Sins and
Judgments, did prefigure and shadow forth something Analogous under the New
Testament.

I shall refer them to 2. sorts. Typical Prefigurations.

1. Of Rome, and 2. Of Hell it self.
1. Types of Rome. There be 5. places and people in the Old Testament, that
seem to be Types of Rome and Antichristian abominations.

1. Sodom, Rev. 11.8. for their monstrous Lusts, and unnatural filthiness and
uncleanness.

2. Egypt, for their Idolatry, and cruelty to Gods People: Therefore the
Plagues of Rome are described with allusion to the Plagues of Egypt. Rev. 16.
Here is noisome boyles, and Rivers of blood, and darkness, and Locusts, etc.

3. Jericho. Hence that Curse of Joshua upon the Rebuilders of it, Josh. 6.26,
27.

This City was the first that stood out against the People of God, which Curse
was not in vain, 1 Kin. 16.34. This seems to have had a further meaning, to
hold forth the irreparable ruins and everlasting destruction of all the
implacable Enemies of God and his People, and especially Rome and Antichrist,
which is to perish like a Millstone cast into the Sea, never to rise more, Rev.
18.

Vid^ on Joshua among the personal Types.
This Curse of Joshua, will come upon all such as shall attempt to Rebuild Rome
and restore Popery, when the Lord has cast it down.

4. Edom and Bozra the chief City thereof, that is, Italy and Rome: therefore
the same expressions which belong to Babylon, and are spiritually understood of
Rome, Isa. 13.19, 21. are also used concerning Edom. Isa. 34.11 -- and verse. 4.
The ruin of Idumea is set forth with expressions like unto those, Rev. 6.12,
13. The land shall become burning Pitch, verse. 9, 10. the meaning is, dreadful
vengeance, hideous indignation. Isa. 63.1. Who is this that comes from Edom,
with dyed Garments from Bozra? Christ is there set forth as clothed with
Garments, dipped in the blood of his Enemies.

5. Babylon. For this the Scripture is express, Rev. 17.5, and verse. 18.

From all which we should learn, both to know and to take heed of Antichrist,
seeing the Lord has so many ways declared, and foresignified him unto us.

Shall we look back toward Sodom? Remember Lots Wife. Shall we return into
Egypt again? Shall we Rebuild Jericho? Would we be found in Bozra or Babylon,
in the day of the Lords fury?

2. Types of Hell. For as they had Types of Heaven and spiritual Glory; so they
had likewise of Hell and spiritual Torment and Misery.

They had all things taught and represented to them, by things outward and
visible. And the visible expressions of divine vengeance upon Wicked Men of
old, led the People of God further to see and take notice of that eternal Wrath
that is to come.

I shall instance therefore in 4. Prefigurations of Hell.

1. The Deluge, or destruction of the Old World by Water. The Apostle parallels
this and the destruction that shall be by Fire at the great Day together, 2
Pet. 3.6, 7. Hence Hell is called in the Old Testament (...) Quahal rephaim
Coetus Gigantum. Prove. 21.16. Prove. 2.18. Isa. 14.9, 10. It stirs up the
Rephaims for thee.

God that has overthrown the Giants of the old World, and cast them upon their
backs in Hell; Those men of Renown are now roaring and wailing under the
Waters, as the vulgar Latin reads that place Job. 26.5, 6. Gigantes gemunt sub
Aquis; he has conquered those Gigantine Sinners, who were cut down with a
Flood, as Job. 22.16. He is able to deal with other Rebels: Never any hardened
himself against God and prospered, Job. 9.4.

2. Sodom. Therefore Hell is called the Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone. Rev. 20.10. and 21.8.

3. Egypt, when under the ten Plagues, especially that of darkness, Exodus
10.21, 22. For Hell is a place of utter darkness, Mat. 25.30.

In stead of darkness the Psalmist does not mention that, but says, He sent
evil Angels amongst them. Psalm. 78.49. A lively prefiguration of Hell, wherein
there is utter darkness; but yet light enough to see affrighting apparitions of
Devils and evil Angels.

4. Tophet, an horrid and cursed place wherein they were wont to Sacrifice
their Children in the fire, to Molech. It was in the Valley of the Son of
Hinnom. Hence Hell is called in the New Testament (...), quasi Vallis Hinnom.

This Tophet was a place every way execrable, both for the hideous Wickedness
there committed, and for the hideous Plagues and Judgments there executed.
There they did Sacrifice their Children to the Devil, with an hideous noise to
drown their Cries and Skreetchings.

Vid. my Notes on the Creation. Genesis 1. Mede. Disc. 7.
For an external detestation whereof King Josiah polluted it, and made it a
place execrable, ordaining it to be the place, where dead Carcasses, Garbage
and other unclean things should be cast out; for the consuming whereof to
prevent annoyance, a continual Fire was there burning.

Yea the Lord himself as it were Consecrated this place of Execration, by
making it the Stage of his Fury, and the Field of his Vengeance in hideous
Plagues and Judgments. For here he destroyed Senacherib, with the rest of that
blaspheming Army* that damning roaring Crew. Here an hundred eighty five
Thousand of them were slain miraculously, and their Carcasses (as it seems)
burnt with Fire, to prevent annoyance and infection, and putrefaction of the
Air. Isa. 30.31, 33. For Tophet is prepared of old.

And in the same place again in another day of the Lords Fury, when he did let
loose the Chaldeans upon them, the Jews were slain in so great numbers, till
there was no room left to bury them, see Jer. 7.31, 32, 33. From all which this
place came to be the name of Hell, as being a place every way execrable, and
having been made by God the Gate of Hell as it were, and the passage to eternal
Destruction, by so many remarkable Executions of his dreadful and direful
displeasure in that place. We do not find Gehinnom used in the Old Testament
for the name of Hell, as the Learned have observed. But Hell got that name
during the time of the second Temple: the forementioned grounds and occasions
of the name, being not till about that time in being, Mede. Disc. 7. page 41.
and accordingly the name is to be found in the Jewish Writers of that time:
and was used by our Savior as a name then vulgarly known among the Jews. You
see then what Types of Hell they had under the Old Testament, namely the
Deluge, Sodom, Egypt, and Tophet.

You have heard also that they had five Types of Rome, to wit, Sodom, Egypt,
Jericho, Edom, and Babylon.

These were typical presignifications of Gospel Enemies and Gospel Vengeance.

And now I have gone through these Occasional Types, whether things or actions,
whether typical mercies, or typical vengeance.

That which next remains, is those perpetual standing Types which the Scripture
calls everlasting Statutes. For besides these Occasional Types which were
exhibited in a transient way, and did exist but for a time; they had also other
Types that were of a more enduring nature, and did continue to the end of that
Old Testament Dispensation, namely, the whole Ceremonial Law, whereof we shall
speak hereafter, the Lord assisting.

THE GOSPEL OF THE PERPETUAL TYPES.
June 4, and 7: 1668.
Heb. 10.1. For the Law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the
very Image of the things, etc.


SOme entrance and progress has been made upon the Types. You have heard
(Beloved) what a Type is. The nature of it has been opened from Romans 5.14.

We have distributed them into two Sorts, Personal and Real: which distribution
will carry us through this whole Subject.

The Personal Types we have gone through as briefly as we could, instancing
both in several individual Persons both before the Law, and under the Law, and
in typical Ranks and Orders of men, which were destined and ordained of God to
represent and shadow forth him that was to come. The Real Types we have also
begun to speak unto, and we distributed them into two sorts, Occasional and
Perpetual. Occasional Types are such as God gave them upon special Occasions,
the most of them before the ordinary and perpetual ones were settled. Such as
the Pillar of Cloud and Fire, Manna, the Brazen Serpent, their passing through
the Red Sea, and other such like occasional and extraordinary Dispensations, of
which we spoke from 1 Cor. 10.11. All these things happened unto them in Types.

By the perpetual Types we intend such as God by institution settled and stated
in that Church, to the end of that Age, of that whole Old Testament
Dispensation, till the coming of Christ the Truth Substance and Scope of them.

Of these we are now to speak, as the Lord shall enable us, it is the Scripture
Phrase, it calls them perpetual Statutes or everlasting Statutes.

The Phrase is first used, as I remember, in reference to Circumcision, which
is called Berith Yolam, a perpetual Covenant. Genesis 17.7, 8.

Afterward we have it again concerning the Passover, Exodus 12.14, 17. which is
there called (...) Statutum saeculi, an everlasting Statute.

See likewise Exodus 27.21. and 28.43. A Statute for ever. and 29.9. A perpetual
Statute: so Levit. 3.17. and 24.9. An everlasting Statute, Levit. 16 34. And
indeed this Phrase of Speech does occur between twenty and thirty times in the
Books of Moses. It shall be a perpetual Statute, or an everlasting Statute, or
a Statute for ever throughout your Generations, that is, a standing Type, and
not merely transient and occasional.

Only there has been some mistake and misunderstanding of this Phrase, which
must be cleared before we leave it.

The unbelieving Jews have seemed to interpret and understand it, concerning an
absolute Eternity, which has been one occasion or pretense alleged by them,
for their stumbling at Christ and at the Gospel, because he has removed and
taken away the Law of Ceremonies.

But besides many other things that might be said, to show the weakness and
folly of their pretense in this matter, I shall but note these two things.

1. That this word, for ever, is often used in Scripture for a limited
duration. As for instance, it is used for duration till the year of Jubilee.
Exodus 21.6. He shall be a servant for ever, that is, only till the year of
Jubilee, in case he lived so long. For then he was to go free by virtue of that
Law, Levit. 25.13, 28, 40, 41.

Sometimes it is used for a continuance during life. As 1 Samuel 1.22. that he
may appear before the Lord, and there abide for ever. Explained verse. 28.
Therefore also I have lent him to the Lord as long as he lives.

Sometimes it is used for duration, to the end of the Old Testament
Dispensation For all the Land which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to
thy Seed for ever. Genesis 13.15. The Land given to thy Seed for ever: which
cannot be Interpreted concerning an unlimited Eternity, unless they will say,
that God has broke his Promise: for they have been Ejected and cast forth of
that Land these sixteen hundred years. 1 King. 8.13. I have surely built thee
an house to dwell in, a settled place for thee to abide in for ever. Psalm.
132.14. This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it. He
does not dwell, nor manifest his presence there now: but God has given them up
to invincible perverseness and darkness, and prejudice in this particular.

2. There be manifest intimations in the Old Testament, that these Ceremonial
Laws were not to continue always, but to cease and be abolished in the fullness
of time. Jer. 3. They shall say no more the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord.
Jer. 31. Not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, but this
shall be the Covenant, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts, etc.

But so much for the explication of this Distinction of the Types, into
Occasional, and Perpetual. You see the true sense and meaning of it, and what
clear Scripture ground there is for it.

These perpetual Types or everlasting Statutes, are no other but that which we
call the Law of Moses, or the Ceremonial Law, whereof this Text speaks, and
lays down this Proposition.

Doct. That the Law has a shadow of future good things, but not the very Image
of the things themselves.

The same thing is asserted and held forth, though in other words, but to the
same scope and sense in other Scriptures. As Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of
the Law for Righteousness, to every one that believes. Joh. 1.17. The Law came
by Moses, that is, the Law as opposed to Grace and Truth: but Grace and Truth
by Jesus Christ. Truth here is not opposed to falsehood, for Moses spoke no
lies; but to Shadows and shadowy Promises: and so the truth of them, is the
performance or accomplishment of them, in opposition to the bare shadow and
typical Promise of them. And this is called Grace, because there is so much of
that in the Gospel, and so little of it (but on the contrary much of rigor and
terror) in the Law of Moses. So the sense amounts to thus much: That Moses
delivered Law, that is, Shadows and Ceremonies, which were but legal, and dark
and rigorous: but Christ brought in Grace and Truth, that is, the real and
sweet accomplishment and performance, of all the good that Moses had promised
in that dark and low and legal way, which is consonant to that we have here in
the Text, that the Law has the shadow, but not the very Image of the things
themselves.

Here be Four things to be cleared.

1. What is meant by the Law. 2. What by these future good things. 3. What by
the Shadow which the Law has, and the very Image of them which the Law wanted.
4. What are the particular several parts of this Law of Ceremonies, these
perpetual or everlasting Statutes.
Quest. 1. What is here meant by the Law?

Ans. A Law, is a rule of Acting given by a Superior, who has Authority and
Power of commanding, to his Inferior: this is the general nature of a Law.

God therefore being the supreme Lord and absolute Sovereign over all his
Creatures, is the Great Lawgiver. James 4.12: There is one Lawgiver, who is
able to save, and to destroy.

All those to whom God commits Power over others, may be said to give Laws to
them: except ordinary Officers in the Church whom he has entrusted no further,
but only with the execution of his Laws, promulgated and recorded by himself,
by his extraordinary Officers in the written Word.

But Magistrates may be said to be Legislators as to Civil Laws: of whom Moses
was the first that delivered Laws in Writing to the People under him, which he
received from the Mouth of God.

Now the Laws delivered by Moses, are referred in the Scripture to three Heads.
Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial, which are expressed by three words, Thorah or
Mitsvah, Chuquim, and Mishpatim: which words are sometimes used and put
together in the Scripture, to signify these three sorts of Laws, Deuteronomy. 6.1.
Mitsvah, Chuquim and Mishpatim: the same words Deuteronomy. 26.17. see Ezra 7.10 --
Mal. 4.4. Thorah Asher Tsivithi: the Law which I commanded.

The first sort of Laws, viz. Moral, respects them as Men: the second, as a
Church: the third, as a Commonwealth.

The first sort, viz. the Moral Laws, are still in force and binding unto all
men in all Ages.

The third sort, viz. Judicial Laws are of a mixed nature, some being Hedges as
it were, and Fences to the Moral Law: and some to the Ceremonial, and so they
participate of the nature of those Laws to whose defense they serve.

The Judicials that serve to the defense of the Moral Law, have something of
moral equity and reason in them, and so are still in force. As that he that
sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: this is a Fence which God
has set about the sixth Commandment, and so remains in force in all Nations,
to all times and Ages unto this day.

But others of these Judicials are set as Fences about the Ceremonial Law, and
so must needs be fallen together with it.

Now the Law of which the Text speaks, it is not the Moral, nor the Judicial as
such, but the Ceremonial Law of Moses called Ephesians. 2.15. the Law of
Commandments contained in Ordinances and Col. 2.14. the Hand writing of
Ordinances.

This Text cannot intend the Moral Law, for that had no shadow of Gospel
benefits: nor the Judicial Law, as such, for part of it was an Appendix to the
Moral Law, and the other part was only for the defense of the Ceremonies.

But the Ceremonial Law is here intended: for that was of a shadowy nature, it
had a shadow of good things to come.

Quest. 2. What are these future good things?

Ans. It is the good things of the Gospel, which may be said to be future upon
a double account.

1. Future, in respect of the Law, and Old Testament times.

2. Future, in respect of this life. So future good things, is eternal good
things. Calvin in loc. see 1 John 3.2. It does not yet appear what we shall be.
Though we have the foretastes and beginnings of them already, yet the
perfection of them is future, reserved in Heaven for us.

Quest. 3. What is meant by the shadow of these future benefits? And what by
the very image of the things themselves?

Ans. In a word, a Shadow here, is a dark and weak resemblance and
representation of things. But the very Image of the things themselves, is a
clearer and better representation of them.

The Apostle uses this Metaphor of a shadow, concerning the Mosaical
Ceremonies. Col. 2.17. In opposition to Christ the body and substance thereof.

Here he opposes (...) and (...). Alluding (as it seems) to the rude draught
and first delineation of a Picture by the Painter, and to the full perfection
thereof, when drawn forth in all its Lineaments and Colors and whole
Proportion. So the Shadow is the first rude Draught.

The Image is a more lively and exact representation. So the dark Shadow is
ascribed to the Law. The more lively Image to the Gospel. The things themselves
are in Heaven. So some Interpreters carry it, Vid. Mayer. Calvin in loc. And
the Apostle has some expressions looking that way in other Scriptures: as when
he says, that here we see but in a Glass darkly, that is, the Glass of Gospel
Administrations, wherein we see the lively Image and Picture (as it were) of
Christ crucified, Gal. 3.1. 2. Cor. 3.18. see as in a Glass. He is there
comparing the Law and the Gospel, But in heaven we shall see face to face, see
1 Cor. 13.12.

Under the Law they had no more but the Shadow, but now under the Gospel we
have the very Image; we see things as in a Glass, but in Heaven we have the
things themselves.

And now to sum up all that has been said in Explication, the Doctrine amounts
to thus much: That the Ceremonial Law has a shadow, or a dark and weak
representation of the good things of that eternal future happiness, the more
lively Image and Portraiture whereof, we have under and by the Gospel.

Quest. 4. What are the several parts of this Law of Shadows and Ceremonies,
these perpetual Types or everlasting Statutes?

Ans. This is a large Field. I shall refer them at present to five several
Heads, omiting Sub divisions, lest they be troublesome to weak memories.

1. The initiating Seal, to wit, Circumcision. 2. Their Sacrifices and
Purifications of sin and of uncleanness. 3. The Temple and Tabernacle, and
other holy places. 4. The Priesthood, with the whole legal Ministry. 5. The
Festivals or Legal Times and Seasons.
These five general Heads will carry us through this whole Subject of the
Types. For the whole Ceremonial Law, and all or most of the Statutes of it,
will come in under some of these Heads.

1. The initiating Seal of those times, which was Circumcision, the first
Institution whereof we have in Genesis 17.10, 11. This is my Covenant which ye
shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee: Every man child among
you shall be circumcised. And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin,
and it shall be a token of the Covenant betwixt me and you. Which is contracted
and epitomized into a few words by Stephen, Act. 7.8. And he gave him the
Covenant of Circumcision: and so Abraham begat Isaac, and circumcised him the
eighth day: and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat the twelve Patriarchs.
Wherein he briefly tells us the substance of this Shadow, and the meaning of
this Type, namely, that it signified and shadowed forth the Covenant of Grace.

2. Their Sacrifices and Purifications for sin, and for uncleanness: of which
Psalm. 40.6. Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire: burnt-offering and
sin-offering have thou not required* with Heb. 10.5, 10.

Many things will come in under this Head: for they had both Sacrifices of
Expiation for moral sins, and Ceremonies of Purification for legal uncleanness
and impurity.

I put them both together, because they did both aim at one Scope, namely the
cleansing and purging away of sin.

They had burnt-offerings, meat offerings, peace offerings, sin offerings,
trespass offerings.

They had legal Uncleanness of several sorts: they had unclean Meats, unclean
Persons, unclean Houses, unclean Garments, unclean Vessels: the saddest of all
their ceremonial Uncleanness, was the Leprosy, for all which they had
Purifications answerable.

The general scope of all which, was to shadow forth Jesus Christ in his
purifying cleansing power and virtue, as cleansing us from the guilt of sin by
his Blood shed and sacrificed for us, and from the filth and power thereof by
his Spirit dwelling and working in us. Therefore he is said to offer up himself
a Sacrifice for us. Ephesians. 5.2. and to wash us, and cleanse us. verse. 26, 27.

3. The Temple and Tabernacle, and the Utensils thereof, with all their holy
places. For they had many and diverse of them: the whole Land of Canaan was an
holy Land. They had Cities of Refuge.

Jerusalem was an holy City, Mount Sion was an holy Hill, the Temple was an
holy House.

And before they had a sixed Temple, they had (which was equivalent in
signification, as well as like unto it in outward form) the Tabernacle. Heb.
9.1, to verse. 6.

All which signified and shadowed forth both Christ and the Church: Christ in
his humane nature, the Church both as visible, and as militant and mystical,
and likewise as triumphant in Heaven.

Therefore the Church of God is called his House, 1 Timothy 3.15.

4. The Priesthood, with all the rest of the Temple Ministry, Heb. 8.2. They
had, beside the High Priest, the other Priests and the Levites, some whereof
were Porters, some Singers; And here the Temple Music comes to be considered:
the High Priest was an eminent Type of Christ, the true and great High Priest
of his Church.

And all this Temple Ministry was a shadow of the true Gospel Ministry: which
though they cannot be called Priests in the Popish sense, yet they may be
called Antitypical Priests. The further mysteries of all which legal Ministry,
we shall open more particularly afterward, the Lord enabling us.

5. A Fifth of these perpetual Types, was the Festivals or Holy Times appointed
by the Law, whereof they had many: their weekly seventh day Sabbaoths: their
New Moons: their yearly Feasts: That of Tabernacles, Passover and Pentecost:
their seventh year: their Jubilee of fifty years, containing the Revolution of
seven times seven: all which were a shadow of good things to come. Col. 2.16,
17.

Use 1. This Text and Doctrine gives much light for the resolution of that
question, whether the Law of Moses was a Covenant of Works, or Grace.

The answer is, That the Law has a shadow of the good things of the Gospel,
but not the very Image of the things themselves. There was a mixture in that
Dispensation, you may take the Answer more fully in three Propositions.

1. The thing it self adumbrated and shadowed forth in this Law of Ceremonies,
is the future good things of the Gospel: so that it was indeed a Covenant of
Grace that they were under.

2. The manner of representation of them was legal, and in the way of a shadow,
not of a full and lively Image: so that it was a kind of legal Gospel they had
in those times.

Vid. on Heb. 4.2.
3. The carnal Jews made it mere Law, by sticking in the shell and shadow, and
rejecting the Gospel, or the thing it self that was adumbrated and shadowed
forth unto them.

Use 2. See the Justice of God in the rejection of the Jews. For might not
Israel have understood? They did not want a competency of outward means, but
they wanted hearts, Deuteronomy. 29.2, 3, 4.

Use 3. Encouragement in the search we are now upon as to the Types: for it is
the Gospel, and the good things of the Gospel that we look into, when we
enquire and search into the Types. The Law having a shadow of them: Vid. on
Romans 5.14. Sermon. 1. Use: where there are three Rules for the better
understanding of them. To which let me add this as an Appendix to the first,
seek Light from God: Psalm. 119.18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold
wondrous things out of thy Law. You may see wondrous things indeed, Jesus
Christ and the Gospel, and many precious mysteries in this part of the Law of
God; this Law of Ceremonies, if God open your eyes; but otherwise all will be
dark to you.

Use 4. Encouragement to believe and receive the Gospel: for it has been held
forth to the Faith of Gods people all along, and they have rested upon it and
found peace.

We have it declared in the clearest way, and indeed every way, for we reap the
Fruit of those former Dispensations; therefore how shall we escape, if after so
many ways of teaching, we do not receive Instruction: see Heb. 2.3, 4.

THE GOSPEL OF CIRCUMCISION.
October 30. 1666.
Acts 7.8. And he gave him the Covenant of Circumcision, and so Abraham begat
Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day: and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob
begat the twelve Patriarchs.


THis excellent Sermon and Apology of Stephen, the first Martyr of the New
Testament; the Scope of it, is to show them the variety of Gods Dispensations
toward his people, together with the various Rebellions and Oppositions of the
Sons of men against him, and so to convince them that the scope and tendency of
them all was to lead to Jesus Christ: and that as former Dispensations had been
despised, so was this, which was the Glory of all the rest. He goes over the
History of the Church, from Abraham's time to the time of Christ, in sundry most
eminent and principal Dispensations of God toward his Church. In this Verse he
is speaking of the Dispensation of God to Abraham. He had showed before how he
had called Abraham out of his own Country, how he had promised him a
Possession, the Land of Canaan; how he had foretold the affliction of his Seed
for four hundred years, and their Deliverance afterward; how the Lord had given
him the Covenant of Circumcision, and how (under the influence of this
Covenant) Isaac was born, and Jacob, and the rest of the Patriarchs.

And he gave him the Covenant of Circumcision.

I shall give you no other Doctrine but the words themselves.

Doct. That God gave to Abraham the Covenant of Circumcision, that is the
Doctrine.

That which I do design and intend, is a little explanation of Circumcision,
and of the Covenant thereof, (for that is the Phrase here) and that in
reference to our attendance upon God in this Ordinance of the New Testament
Circumcision, which we are now to wait upon him in.

To open to you the nature of Circumcision.

You know there is an outward, and an inward part of it, as there is in all
other Signs and Sacraments whatsoever.

Something must be spoken.

1. Of the Sign, the nature of the external Ordinance. 2. Of the Covenant that
it relates to, and 3. What those respects are wherein it does relate to that
Covenant.
1. For the external part of this Ordinance of Circumcision.

It was the cutting away the Foreskin of the flesh of Abraham, and his Male
seed upon the eighth day.

The first institution of this Ordinance, is recorded Genesis 17.10, 11. This is
my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee,
every man child among you shall be circumcised. And ye shall circumcise the
flesh of your foreskin, etc.

The Lord did appoint the Seal of this Covenant to be in that part of the body,
in his infinite Wisdom and Sovereignty, a thing which carnal Reason would
despise.

There seems to be two principal accounts of it.

1. Because those Members of the Body are so much abused to sin, in the way of
uncleanness and filthiness; therefore the Lord would now sanctify them, and
separate a Seed and Generation to himself: and usually the greatest Wrath of
God to the Souls of men, is expressed by giving them up to abuse those parts of
the Body.

The World was grown very degenerate, and the Lord was resolved to leave a
Monument, an everlasting Monument of his Wrath for those sins in all Ages, and
therefore destroys Sodom, Genesis 18. and before this Destruction, he appoints
this Seal and Ordinance.

2. Another account of it is this, that it might be a sure and a strong Wall of
Partition, between the Jewish and Gentle Nations of the World. It made the
Partition Wall the surer, because carnal Reason could not but despise such an
Ordinance.

Those that know not God have no spiritual sense of the thing, therefore we
find the Heathens scoff at it: as Horat. -- Curtosque Judaeos. and
-- Credat Judaeus Apella.
because by their carnal Reason they could not see the reason of it. Therefore
when the Lord would have both united to Jesus Christ in one Body, he abolishes
Circumcision.

This Ordinance was dispensed to the Males, the Females were included and
comprehended in the Males, and as fully and clearly comprehended in them, as
the Land and the Trees are said to be Circumcised: so are all the Daughters of
Abraham, as they came of circumcised Parents, and married to circumcised
Husbands: and their Sons were circumcised, so that it was a circumcised Nation
and People.

It was to be done upon the eighth day after the Birth of the Child; and so in
this Text, He gave him the Covenant of Circumcision, and so Abraham begat
Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day.

The reason of this limitation might be, partly because of the Infant state of
the Church in those times; therefore the Lord teaches them, and limiteth them
even in such small particulars, which are now left to be determined only by the
general Rule of the Word, even the particular time and season of our
Circumcision.

Its thought also this might have some further mystery in it, in reference to
the Christian Sabbath, which is the eighth day in one respect, the first in
other ways of numbering; and to respect a new state and life, after that the
complete and full number of the days of this life here are gone through; after
the Week is ended, (the Week of this life here) we come to Heaven and Glory,
which was one thing intimated in Circumcision, as you will hear afterward. But
so much for the external part of this Ordinance, the cutting off the foreskin
of Abraham and his Male seed, and that upon the eighth day.

2. To speak a little to the mystery of this Ordinance, the meaning of it, the
spirit of this external Dispensation. For besides the Shell, there was a
Kernel; besides the letter of the Law of the Ordinance, there was much
spiritual mystery intended and aimed at in it. Now then what is the mystery of
Circumcision, the inward part of it, that is the Covenant. And he gave him the
Covenant of Circumcision. So that Circumcision is the Covenant, and it is the
same expression where this Ordinance is first instituted: You shall have my
Covenant in your flesh, Genesis 17. It is called a Covenant, as other Signs and
Sacraments are: it is a sacramental Phrase: the Lamb is called the Passover,
the Bread the Body, the Wine the Blood of Christ: so Circumcision is the
Covenant of it.

But what Covenant is it that Circumcision does relate to?

This is the great Question.

You know there be two Covenants, that of Works and Grace.

Now Circumcision was not the Covenant of Works, but the Covenant of Grace.

That it was not a carnal Covenant, and a Covenant of Works; take these five
Considerations to make good that ground, before we proceed any further: for if
it be the Covenant of Works, it cuts off all that is to be said, as to the
spirit and mystery of this Ordinance: all that you will hear afterward, will
be things belonging to the Covenant of Grace; therefore let us prove that it is
not a carnal Covenant that Circumcision does relate to.

Argum. 1. Jesus Christ is not the Covenant of Works, but Christ is the
Covenant of Circumcision; and therefore it is not Works, but Grace. He is so
called in Isa. 49.8. I will give thee for a Covenant to the people. Now Christ
was in Circumcision, he was the Minister of Circumcision, he is the Seed which
Circumcision relates to, I will be the God of thy Seed. This Seed is Christ,
Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He says not,
and to seeds, as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ.
Christ is the sum and substance of the Covenant of Grace: now this was the
Covenant that God made with Abraham, and sealed in Circumcision, that he would
give him a Seed, which Seed is Christ.

2. The Gospel is Grace and not Works. The Covenant of Abraham was the Gospel,
and therefore it is Grace, but not Works. It is the Apostles expression that
the Gospel was preached to Abraham. Gal. 3.8. The Scripture foreseeing that God
would justify the Heathen through faith, preached the Gospel before to
Abraham. There is no Gospel of Works, for Works is Law, and bad tidings: if it
be the Gospel, it is the Covenant of Grace.

3. If it was a Covenant of Works, it will follow, that Abraham and all the Old
Testament Saints either were not saved, or else were saved without Christ,
neither of which can be admited. The truth is, if it were Works, it will
follow, they were all damned, for by works shall no flesh be justified and
saved. If they were saved, and yet by Works, they were saved without Christ,
but without Christ there is no salvation. In him, in this Seed shall all the
Nations of the World be blessed, that is, by Jesus Christ: no blessing and
salvation without him, and therefore he and his Seed were saved by Christ, for
Grace was in this Covenant.

4. To be a God to any man, this is not carnal, this is not Works, but Grace.
It is true, God was a God to Adam before he fell: but to be a God to Sinners,
this is Grace: he was a God to Adam in innocence by virtue of the Covenant of
Works, but he is not a God to any Sinner but in a way of free Grace. Now that
was the Covenant, I will be a God to thee and thy seed, Genesis 17.7. Abraham was
a sinner, and a Child of Wrath by nature, as well as others; yet God was his
God truly. For God to be a God to those that never sinned, there may be merit:
but for God to be a God to those that have sinned, this is Grace indeed. Angels
are saved by Works, Sinners cannot be saved but by Grace. That ever the Lord
should condescend to engage in such a Relation, as to give a Sinner interest in
him, and propriety in him as his God, this is Grace; they that do not think
this is Grace, they do not need Arguments, but pity and prayer.

5. Consider that it was the fatal error and miscarriage of the carnal Jews,
that they did understand Circumcision and all the rest of those ancient Types
and Ceremonies, they did understand them all as a Covenant of Works, and herein
they lost Christ and their Souls. It is every where charged upon them as their
sin; it is that which all the Prophets and Apostles do endeavor with all their
might, to beat them out of those misconstructions of Circumcision, and the
Covenant of God in those times.

The Apostle proves it at large in Romans 4. that it was Grace and not Works,
that Abraham was justified by. Now this was the error that all the carnal Jews
fell into, that they took it to be a Covenant of Works: as the Pharisees they
had a Righteousness of their own, they were all of that Spirit; they took it
all as Law, even the Gospel and the Grace that was in the Covenant, and so fell
short of the blessings of it: therefore if our New Testament Circumcision be
practiced by any as the Covenant of Works, as the Jews did when the Apostle
preached to them, they will fall short of Heaven. Now if they took it to be a
Covenant of Works, shall we justify their errors and miscarriage against the
whole preaching of the Gospel?

This is enough to show that it is the Covenant of Grace, that Circumcision
does relate to.

Now briefly what is this Covenant of Grace? And what is the Grace of the
Covenant that Circumcision does relate to?

This is a very large Field. There were three parts of this Grace of the
Covenant that the Lord made with Abraham and his Seed.

1. To be a God to him. 2. To give him a Seed. 3. To provide an Inheritance
both for him and them.
And these three general Heads will comprize and take in the whole mystery of
Circumcision.

1. The first part of the Covenant is this, that God would be a God to him and
his Seed: and this indeed is most comprehensive, and includes all the rest. I
will establish my Covenant, and be a God to thee and thy Children after thee.
Genesis 17.7.

And what is it for God to be a God, to be a God to a man? thy God, or a God to
thee?

It is, when he gives to a poor Creature a special interest and propriety in
himself: so that God in his alsufficiency and efficiency is ours, and we are
his. All his Attributes and Works are ours, for our good. I will be thy God,
that is, all my Attributes shall be thine, and for thy good, as really as they
are mine for my Glory. The infinite Wisdom of God shall contrive their good,
whose God he is; the infinite Power of God shall effect it: the infinite Love
of God is theirs; his Mercy, Truth, and all his Attributes are theirs. As his
essential Power: so his working Power, or his actual Power. As he will be all
to them: so he will work all for them. Now this, as I said, includes and infers
all the rest: this is the first and most general.

2. That he would give him a Seed, that was another part of the Covenant. Genesis
17.5, 6. Thou shall be a Father of many Nations, thy name shall be no more
called Abram, but Abraham. I will make Nations of thee. As God did lengthen out
his name: so he would lengthen out his Posterity, even to length of time.

But now what is this Seed the Lord promised to Abraham? The question is,
whether it be a mere natural Seed, or a spiritual Seed?

Certainly it was not merely a natural Seed; it is true, that is one thing that
was the Shell and outside of it; but the Kernel of this promise was a spiritual
Seed.

There was a fourfold Seed promised to Abraham above a natural Seed, and I
shall prove each Particular out of plain Scripture.

1. That great Seed, that was not only the Seed of the Woman, but the Son of
God: this was the first and chief Seed here intended, Gal 3.16. He says not as
to Seeds, but to thy Seed, which is Christ, such a Seed in whom all Nations are
blessed. Now it is in Christ only that all Nations are blessed, therefore he
was this promised Seed.

The Lord had not before limited the Seed Messiah to any particular Family, but
left it at large (so far as appears) among the whole Race of Mankind. It was
said to Adam, the Seed of the Woman, there was then no further limitation till
Noah's time, and then in Abraham's time, the Lord limits the Covenant to his Seed.

It was afterward confined to Judah, one of the twelve Tribes: at last the
Lord went further to one Family in Judah, namely, David's: but here he limits it
to Abraham, that of him should come that great and blessed Seed: This was the
main thing indeed, as without which all other Promises could never be bestowed
and fulfilled; but through him they are Yea and Amen. Abraham saw my day and
rejoiced, he saw the Messiah was to come of his Loins; this was the Seed in
whom he believed, and by which he was saved.

2. There was a Church-seed promised; the meaning is this, That the Church of
God should be continued in his Race and Posterity, the true Religion should be
settled there.

There were other godly persons before and after: we read of Melchisedech and
Job and his Friends, and it is very like there might be others: and when God
had settled Salvation to Abraham, it was the duty of all others to join
themselves to that Church. The Lord entailed by Covenant all his Ordinances to
Abraham and his Posterity. He gave them his Statutes and Judgments, he chose
them to be a peculiar People, a People to the Lord; and that is a Church, a
Society entrusted and invested with the Ordinances: and thus he dealt with
them, he showed his Statutes to Israel: this is no small privilege and mercy
to enjoy the Ordinances: this is called the Kingdom of God.

This Christ threatened the Jews, that it should be taken from them and given to
other people, Mat. 21.43. that is God would settle his Church among the
Gentiles, and give them his Ordinances. And that this is a Privilege, we see
by that expression of the Apostle to the Ephesians, wherein he mentions it as a
part of the dreadful misery of the Ephesians, that they were Aliens to the
Common Wealth of Israel.

3. There was a third thing intended, and that is a believing Seed, such as
should be truly Godly: and of this the Apostle speaks in Gal. 3.7. Know ye
therefore that they which are of faith, are the Seed of Abraham: so that all
true Believers are his Seed in that sense. He is called the Father of the
Faithful, all Believers are his Posterity. There were Multitudes that were
truly Godly of Abraham's Seed, and all that are Godly are his Seed; they walk in
his steps, they are the Seed of the Covenant, they are spiritually related to
him. He was the Pattern and typical Head of that Covenant, in which we do all
believe, the Pattern of Faith to us: He is called our Father. It is said of
him, that he believed against sense and reason, this was not written for his
sake alone, but for us also that we might follow his steps.

4. There was included in this Covenant an ingrafted Seed: it is the Apostles
expression in Romans 11.17. I mean, a Seed not only of the Jews, but of the
Gentiles God did not only engage to Abraham that there should be Church of his
own natural Seed, and that there should be Saints of his natural Seed, but that
the Gentiles should be ingrafted into his Covenant, and so become his Seed.
Thou being a wild Olive Tree were grafted in among them, and partakest of the
root and fatness of the Olive Tree.

God did above and beyond the ordinary course of things, ingraft the Gentiles
into that Covenant that he had once made with Abraham.

And thus you see what the Seed is which the Lord did promise in the Covenant,
whereof Circumcision was the Seal. He did promise to give to Abraham that Seed,
firstly and chiefly that Seed, who was the Son of God; and a Church Seed, and a
believing Seed, and not only a Seed of the Nation of the Jews, but a Seed
ingrafted into that Grace and Covenant from among the Gentiles.

We have gone through two Branches of the Covenant: the third is this.

3. That God would give an Inheritance to him and them; this was the third part
of Gods Covenant with him.

It is the greatest desire in nature to have Children, and it is a good desire,
it is of God. And what do Parents desire next? a comfortable Inheritance for
them: and this did the Lord promise to Abraham. And in that Text which has
been so often alleged, God first promises to make him exceeding Fruitful; and
then, I will give to thee and thy Seed after thee, the Land wherein thou art
yet a Stranger. The Lord promised an Inheritance, and that Inheritance was the
Land of Canaan.

Now the Question is, whether this was a temporal or spiritual Inheritance?

Doubtless the Lord did not promise to Abraham Canaan merely as a temporal
Inheritance, but as a spiritual Inheritance. Canaan was not as other Lands are,
a mere outward thing; but it was a typical Land, it was the Land of Emmanuel,
it is the Land of Glory. Canaan was a Type of Heaven, and in that respect it
was that they did so earnestly prize it, and look upon it as being Heaven in an
earthly Shadow, therefore Jacob and Joseph must needs be buried there:
therefore the Apostle assures us, they did seek a better Country, they
professed themselves Strangers and Pilgrims here upon Earth; They that say such
things declare plainly, they seek another Country which is an heavenly one;
wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God. It is a heavenly City,
whose Builder and Maker is God: so that under that Shadow the Lord did promise
Heaven to Abraham, and this was the third part of this Covenant. This Land of
Canaan is called the Mountain of Holiness: what expression can be higher? Dan.
11. and therefore the Saints did look beyond that to another Country.

You see what the Covenant was, and what were the principal things and Branches
of it: That God should be his God, that God should give him a Seed, and that
God should give an Inheritance to him and them.

You see what the Covenant is that Circumcision does relate to.

Now the last thing that was propounded was this, what respect it is that
Circumcision has to this Covenant? He gave him the Covenant of Circumcision.
For this, Note these five things.

1. Circumcision respects the Covenant as the Seal or Sacrament of Initiation
into the Covenant.

The reason of this last question is, because that all the Ordinances and
Institutions of those times, they did all relate to the same Covenant. Every
Ordinance did, but with some peculiarity, with some special respect, and in a
peculiar manner.

Now Circumcision has this peculiar respect, it was the Sign of Initiation.
The Scripture uses all those words, and they are fitly used Romans 4.11. it is
called a Sign and Seal of the Righteousness of Faith: and all the fixed Signs
of the Covenant of Grace are Seals also; there are no nuda Signa. As they are
Signs to represent: so they are Seals to ratify and confirm the Covenant of
Grace, and the blessings of it, and also means to exhibit them, as you know the
nature of Sacraments is so.

So then Circumcision it was a Seal and a Sacrament, in the way of a Type: it
was a typical Sacrament. We have Sacraments now, but ours are not typical, are
not shadows of good things to come, and of the Gospel and Messiah yet to be
exhibited, but it is past and done in our times: but Circumcision was such a
Sacrament, as was to be a Type of the future exhibition of the Covenant and
blessings of it: and it was the Type or Sign, or Seal and Sacrament of
Initiation: or of entrance or solemn admission into the Covenant: for it was to
be the first, preceding the Passover, as you know it was appointed and
ordained in Exodus 12. Circumcision was first to be administered: not that
persons were admitted by Circumcision into the Covenant or Church of God; no,
they were in the Covenant before, else they were not to be admited to
Circumcision; they have no right to the Seals of the Covenant, that are not
first in the Covenant.

It is a common mistake in our times, that many think that Baptism does make a
person a Member of the Church of God, it does seal membership, or else they
have no ground to have it administered to them: this is the first.

2. As holding forth the suffering of Jesus Christ: he is the principal Seed
whereof the Covenant speaks.

Circumcision was a bloody Sacrament, and the first blood that Jesus Christ
shed, was in Circumcision: you know he was circumcised the eighth day, and so
it had a respect to that, to shadow forth that, and the whole state of his
humiliation: and so it was some part of that atonement and expiation that
Christ made for our sins.

It is not only the last act and the last suffering, the separation of his Soul
and Body; but all his sorrow he underwent from the Cradle to his Grave: all
these were parts of the price paid to Gods Justice for us. Now Circumcision did
foreshew this, for it was a Sacrament very painful to the flesh, and a
Sacrament wherein some blood was shed in the circumcised part.

3. It did in a special manner, shadow forth the great and glorious
Righteousness that we do receive by Faith, the Righteousness of Jesus Christ
for our Justification. The Apostle is express in Romans 4. He received the Sign
of Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. Circumcision was not a
Seal to Abraham before he did believe, that were a strange thing indeed: but in
the true nature of the thing, and in the design and intendment of the
Ordinance, it was a Sign and Seal of the Righteousness of Faith.

We are justified by Christ's Righteousness, and that Righteousness we believe
in, is imputed to us for our Justification: therefore the Apostle disputes very
clearly and strongly, That Abraham did receive Circumcision after that he did
first believe unto Righteousness; and so Circumcision was a Seal of that
Righteousness which he was possessed of, before his Circumcision: Romans 4. for
they were all to look to Christ by Faith, by virtue of their Circumcision; and
if they did not, it was their great sin, and folly, and error, as indeed the
carnal Jews did not: that is the third.

4. Circumcision had a special respect to another great blessing of the
Covenant, and that is, Mortification, or the cutting off the superfluity of
Naughtiness and Corruption: therefore the Lord promises to Circumcise their
hearts, or to cut off the Foreskin of their hearts, Deuteronomy. 30.6. therefore he
often blames them, that they were not circumcised in heart. That shows that
Circumcision did look at the work of Mortification in the heart: and not only
at Mortification, but also at Holiness or Regeneration of the heart, life and
whole man: it looks at the cutting off of the superfluity of sinful Corruption,
therefore Corruption is expressed in that way of Uncircumcision: the
unsanctifiedness of any part, is in Scripture expressed by the uncircumcisedness
of it. I am a man of uncircumcised lips: you know his complaint, that is,
corrupt, not so mortified as I should be. Act. 7.51. Ye stiff-necked, and
uncircumcised in heart and ears.

This is called the Circumcision made without hands; Col. 2.11. In whom also ye
are circumcised with the Circumcision made without hands. What does he mean by
this? but putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, through the
Circumcision of Christ: this is the fourth.

5. It had a special respect to show and shadow forth, the New Testament
Ordinance of Circumcision. And what is the Ordinance in stead of Circumcision
under the New Testament? It is Baptism: therefore the Apostle makes an express
parallel between Circumcision and Baptism. Col. 2.12. he makes them to be the
same: Buried with him in Baptism, and circumcised with spiritual Circumcision.
For look as Circumcision was the initiating Seal then, so Baptism is now.

As in Circumcision there was cutting off the superfluity of the flesh: so in
Baptism, there is a washing away of the filth of the body: they both respect
Mortification. Thus you see in what particular ways and manners Circumcision
does respect the Covenant: and so you have seen both what the outward part is,
what the inward part is, what the Covenant is, and in what particular manner it
does respect the Covenant: He gave him the Covenant of Circumcision.

And now all that I shall add, shall be this: Look as there was a gross abuse
of the Ordinances under the Old Testament, of this Ordinance of Circumcision:
so there is of our Gospel-Circumcision: look as this Ordinance of Circumcision
might be made of none effect, and might be turned into a nullity, their
Circumcision might become Uncircumcision: so it is with many in their Baptism,
their Baptism is no Baptism.

It is the Apostles complaint in Romans 2. If thou art Circumcised, it profits
thee, if thou be a keeper of the Law; but if thou be a breaker of it, thy
Circumcision is become Uncircumcision. Romans 2.28, 29. For he is not a Jew,
which is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision, which is outward in the
flesh: but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the
heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of
God. The same holds concerning this Ordinance which Circumcision does hold
forth. He is not a Christian which is one outwardly, neither is that Baptism
which is outward in the flesh: but he is a Christian that is one inwardly, and
Baptism is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose
praise is not of men, but of God. The Apostles Scope, is to depress the
external part of the Ordinance as of no worth and value, separated from, or
compared with, the spiritual part: so it is with our Ordinances, that we do
enjoy under the New Testament. What is the washing away of the filth of the
body, if the heart be not washed? But it is, as Circumcision was to them, an
aggravation of their sin and condemnation. I will punish (says God Jer. 9.25,
26.) all them which are circumcised together with the uncircumcised. Egypt and
Judah and Edom, and the Children of Ammon and Moab, and all that are in the
utmost Corners, that dwell in the Wilderness; for all these Nations are
uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart.

So God will punish the Baptized with the Unbaptised together. For many people
are unbaptised in the flesh, and many of the house of Israel, many professing
Christians are not baptized in heart. They have the Circumcision, but not the
Covenant of Circumcision; they have the Water, but not the Spirit of Baptism.
Therefore take heed of separating the outward part from the inward part of the
Ordinance, do not rest in the external privilege, but look after the spirit and
blessing of every Ordinance: get God to wash thy heart, and the heart of thy
Seed. It Is not enough to have thy body washed, if thy heart and soul be not
washed from its filth.

THE GOSPEL OF THE SACRIFICES.
June 14. 1668.
Levit. 7.37, 38. This is the Law of the Burnt offering, of the Meat offering,
and of the Sin offering, and of the Trepass Offering, and of the
Consecrations, and of the Sacrifice of the Peace offerings, etc.


THe Perpetual Statutes of the Law of Ceremonies, have been referred to Five
general Heads.

1. The initiating Seal of Circumcision. 2. The legal Offerings and Sacrifices
and Purifications. 3. The Temple. 4. The Priesthood. 5. The Festivals.
Of the initiating Seal of those times, we have formerly spoken from Act. 7.8.

That which next follows in the method propounded, is the legal Offerings,
concerning which the Text lays down two Assertions or Points of Doctrine.

1. That there was a divine Institution and Command of God for the Offerings
and Sacrifices that were under the Law.

2. That there were six kinds or sorts of propitiatory Sacrifices under the
Law, viz. the Burnt offering, etc. this is the Scope of verse. 37. The former
Doctrine is the Scope of the 38: but that which is last mentioned in the words
of the Text, is first in order of Consideration.

Doct. 1. That there was a divine Institution and Command of God for the
Offerings and Sacrifices that were under the Law.

The Text indeed speaks properly of propitiatory Sacrifices: but there is a
general truth in the Proposition concerning all their Sacrifices, and all the
sorts and kinds of them.

This Book of Leviticus begins thus, And he called Vaikra: that is, the Lord he
called by an audible voice from his dwelling Place the Throne of his Glory,
which was upon the Mercy Seat between the Cherubims, as he had promised Exodus
25.22. see Numb. 7.89. It is true, it is said Jer. 7.22. concerning
Burnt-Offerings or Sacrifices, that God commanded them not, etc. But the sense
and meaning is comparative, though the Grammar of the words sound as if it were
negative. It cannot be explained better than the Old Note has done it:
showing, that it was not his chief intent and purpose, that they should offer
Sacrifices, but that they should regard wherefore they were ordained, to wit,
to be joined to the word as Seals and Confirmations of Remission of sins in
Christ; for without the word they were vain and unprofitable.

To open this Doctrine a little to you, we must first consider what a Sacrifice
or an Offering is.

Now an Offering in general, is any thing presented to the Lord to become
peculiarly his, and to be typical of Christ and Gospel Mysteries.

The former part of the Description extends to Anti typical Offerings, as well
as typical; to Gospel, as well as legal Offerings: for our Souls and Bodies and
all our Services are offered and presented to the Lord, but not as Types and
Shadows of another Gospel; but they become his in a spiritual and peculiar
propriety, as theirs of old did. Their Offerings by being offered became the
Lords, they presenting, and the Lord accepting them: therefore they are called
Holy, as being separated to the Lord, separated and set apart from common use
to holy use.

Hence they are called Gifts, Quorbanim, as being given to the Lord: a Quarab,
appropinquavit: so in in the Text, their Oblations or their Corbans, see Mark
7.11.

All this holds true of Gospel Offerings under the New Testament: but the Legal
Offerings were set apart for God, with respect to Christ and his great
Sacrifice and Offering of himself up unto God for us: they all had some
Relation to this, either as to the thing it self, or the blessed Effects and
Fruits of it.

Some have distinguished them into three sorts.

1. Such as were offered at the Brazen Altar, or the Altar of Burnt-Offering:
which represented the Death and Sufferings of Jesus Christ.

2. Such as were offered in the Sanctuary, more near to the Holy of Holies,
viz. the Shewbread, and the Incense at the Altar of Incense: which had respect
to his Intercession for us at the Throne of Grace, in the virtue, and by the
merit of that Sacrifice which he before had shed and offered up to the Justice
of God for us.

3. Such as were offered in the Holy of Holies, where the High Priest came upon
some extraordinary and special occasions: which did represent the full
attainment of the ends of both the former, namely, our full Access unto, and
Communion with God through the influence both of the Death and Oblation, as
likewise of the Prayers and Intercession of our Lord Jesus Christ for us.

The two latter of these we shall speak unto, when we come to those parts of
the Temple where these Services were to be performed: but the first sort, viz.
the Sacrifices and Offerings at the Brazen Altar we are now to speak unto.

These Sacrifices that were offered at the Brazen Altar, are commonly
distributed into two sorts: Propitiatory and Eucharistical; (...) and (...) or
Sacrifices of Expiation and Sacrifices of Thanksgiving, Psalm. 107.22.

It is the former sort whereof the Text speaks; and they are here called
Corbans, a Term which (as some affirm) is usually appropriated to this sort of
Offerings, though the notation and original signification of it be more general.

For the opening whereof unto you, I shall first give you a short description
of them, and then annex some additional Rules for the further enlightening and
illustration of them.

And first you may see the nature of them in this short description: these
propitiatory Sacrifices were Holy of Holinesses, or Offerings most holy to the
Lord, for atonement, or for the appeasing of his Wrath by the destruction of
the Sacrifice, to shadow forth the true atonement and expiation of sin by the
death of Jesus, and our Reconciliation to, and Communion with God through him.

1. That they were Holy of Holinesses, or Offerings most Holy to the Lord: it
is the Phrase which the Scripture uses concerning them, Lev. 2.3, 10. So are
called in the Law those sacred things which ought not to be touched, and those
Meats whereof none were to eat, but only the consecrated Priests in the holy
Place, near the Altar. Deodat. in loc. quodesh quodeshim: only there is some
limitation about the Peace Offering, of which afterward.

It is a distinction that does occur in Lev. 21.22. He shall eat the bread of
his God, both of the most holy, and of the holy.

The old Note is this, the most Holy, as of the Sacrifice for sin: the Holy, as
of the Tenths and First Fruits.

[ Deodat. thus, most Holy] as were the Shewbread, the Meat Offerings, the
parts of Sin Offerings, and Trespass Offerings.

[Holy] such as were the First Fruits, Tithes and Offerings of Thanksgiving.

By Holy of Holinesses, is meant most Holy: that Language elegantly expressing
the superlative Degree by such a reduplication: as King of Kings, Song of
Songs, Heaven of Heavens, that is, the most excellent in their kind: so Holy of
Holies, that is, most Holy.

The other sort are but Holy, or holiness of Praises, quodesh hillulim: as the
Phrase is in Lev. 19.24. Ye shall count the Fruit thereof as uncircumcised
three years, but in the fourth year all the Fruit thereof shall be Holiness of
Praises to the Lord.

The ground of this double degree of Holiness seems to be chiefly this: the
more immediate and direct Relation they had to the Person, Actions, and
Sufferings of the Messiah, the more holy these legal things of old were:
therefore these Sacrifices of Expiation, relating directly to the great work of
our Redemption and Reconciliation unto God by the death of his Son, they were
Holy of Holinesses unto the Lord.

2. The end of them was atonement of their sins, or appeasing the offended
Justice of God: hence they are said to have a sweet smell, Lev. 1.9. Genesis 8.21.
This is the Phrase, Lev. 1.4. Lecapper, to make atonement, applied to Christ
Romans 3.25. 1 John 2.2. and it is a Phrase often used.

Hence arises the distinction of Sacrifices, from their ends and uses; some
being for Atonement, as these whereof we now speak; and others for
Thanksgiving, of which something may be spoken hereafter if the Lord will.

God is angry with Sinners, Justice is provoked and burns like Fire: therefore
some satisfaction must be made, that Justice may be satisfied, and God atoned
and reconciled to the Sinner.

3. This atonement was made by the death or destruction of the Sacrifice: this
is the nature of all propitiatory Sacrifices, nothing can atone God, nothing
can appease offended Justice, but Death and Destruction. The Sacrifice must be
destroyed, either in whole, or in part; and this was done by Fire.

Hence they are called Fire-Offerings, or Offerings made by Fire: (...)
Ignitiones, Fireings: Oblatio ignita.

And if they were living Creatures, they must be slain and killed: hence called
Zebachim, in Greek (...), as much as to say, a slaughtered Offering: in which
sense Zebach is contradistinguished unto Mincha, the former being of living
Creatures, the latter of Meat and Drink: but in both there was a destruction of
the thing sacrificed, either by Fire, if it were of Inanimate things: or if it
were a living Creature, both by Blood and Fire.

4. The end and design of all this, was to prefigure and represent the death of
Jesus Christ, and our Reconciliation unto God thereby: for the Law had
threatened Death for Sin, and the blood of Bulls and Goats could not take away
sin. Heb. 10.

Some of the very Pagans have had so much glimmerings of Light, as to subscribe
to the Truth of this: and thence Satan triumphing over the fallen Sons of men,
and abusing and perverting their convictions, seduced them in the distress and
horror of their Consciences, even to Sacrifice men to appease their angry gods:
wherein the acted upon this Principle, Quod pro vita hominis nisi vita hominis
reddatur, non posse aliter Deorum immortalium numen placari arbitrantur. as
Caesar de Bell. Gal. lib. 6. reports of the ancient Druids: they thought that
unless the life of man were sacrificed for his life, the Deity of the immortal
Gods could not otherwise be appeased. Vid Lee Temple page 332. Homer also ibid.
wherein the old Pagans had more Light than the Apostate Jews have at this day.

Christ therefore is called a Sacrifice Ephesians. 5.2. 1 Cor. 5.7. Christ our
Paschal Lamb is sacrificed for us.

And as they refer directly unto Christ himself: so the Scripture teaches us
to apply them in a lower way to the Saints also, whose souls and bodies and
services are living Sacrifices, acceptable unto God through Jesus Christ, Romans
12.1. Heb. 13. with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

The Sacrifice of Christ does placare Deum, appease an incensed God: our
Sacrifices do but placere Deo, please an appeased God.

Thus you see the Description made good in these Four things put together,
wherein you see the nature of these Legal Offerings and Sacrifices, that they
were Holy of Holinesses, or Offerings most Holy to the Lord, for atonement, or
for the appeasing of his Wrath by the destruction of the Sacrifice, to shadow
forth the true atonement and expiation of sin, by the death of Jesus Christ:
and so much for the nature of them, which was the first Enquiry. For further
Rules of illustration which was the second, take these Propositions.

Prop. 1 That the Institution of them, was presently after the Sin and Fall of
man: but the renewed Institution and further Direction and Regulation of them,
was by Moses unto Israel.

I say the first Institution of them, was presently after the Sin and Fall of
man: for there neither was, nor could be any use of them before.

The first Intimation, (though somewhat obscure) that we have of them, is in
Genesis 3.21. the Lord made them Coats of Skins and clothed them, but they could
not wear the Skins until the Beasts were slain: and slain they were (it is
like) for Sacrifice, there being no need of them for Food at that time, nor any
mention of the use of such Food till Noah's time after the Flood, Genesis 9.

But we read of Sacrifices more plainly, Genesis 4.4. where Abel is said to have
brought an Offering to the Lord of the firstlings of his Flock, and of the fat
thereof, which, being a Godly man, he neither would nor durst have done, had
not the Lord appointed it: so likewise Noah Genesis 8.20, 21. builded an Altar
unto the Lord, and took of every clean Beast, and of every clean Fowl, and
offered Burnt Offerings on the Altar. And the Lord smelled a sweet savor: so
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob.

Gods acceptance of Noah's Sacrifice, and before that of Abels, is a sufficient
proof and evidence of his having instituted and appointed them: for Cultus non
institutus, non aest acceptus, Worship not commanded is not accepted.

See likewise Exodus 10.25. and 18.12. where they were used among the Jews,
before the giving of the Law upon Mount Sinai.

But from this ancient Institution, with some further help from the Jews, the
Heathen had a traditional dead knowledge of this Truth: but as they forgot and
lost the true Object to whom they should have offered up their Sacrifices, so
they had nothing but a dead form of Sacrifices, wholly perverted from their
true and right end and use: therefore God by Moses, restores and renews this
great institution; therefore the Text says verse. ult. This is the Law which
the Lord commanded Moses, in the day that he commanded the Children of Israel
to offer their Oblations unto the Lord.

The Institution was so corrupted, that there was need of some renewed Light
and Reformation about it: but being of so great Antiquity before there was any
Tabernacle or Temple, or Priesthood, or Festivals appointed: therefore I put
Offerings and Sacrifices before the rest, the Institution of them being much
more ancient.

Prop. 2. In this renewed Institution and Regulation of their Offerings and
Sacrifices, there were sundry Adjuncts and Ceremonies, some whereof were
required, and some severely forbidden to be added to them, all which were
mystical and significant. It may be truly said of them which has been falsely
boasted concerning humane Ceremonies, that they be neither dark nor dumb, but
mystical and significant, and fit to stir up the dull mind of man to the
remembrance of his duty toward God, by some special and notable signification,
whereby he may be edified. They had their spiritual significations by Gods
intendment and appointment, (as indeed it is Gods prerogative to appoint
mystical and significant Ceremonies in his Worship.)

That they had so, will appear in the Particulars, both ex natura rei, from the
very nature of the thing it self, and by conference of sundry other Scriptures,
by the Light whereof, we must search and find out the Interpretation.

They may be interpreted and applied (many of them) to the Church, in a
secondary way, in regard of the union and communion it has with Christ, as
well as unto Christ himself primarily and chiefly. The Adjuncts required and
annexed to them were many, which will come to be spoken to, when we come to the
several sorts and kinds of Sacrifices: only some Generals may be now mentioned,
deferring the explication of them, to the places where their Institution is
first mentioned. As,

1. They were all tied and appropriated by divine Institution, to the Brazen
Altar at the door of the Tabernacle.

This was a new addition in Moses his Reformation: for they had Sacrifices (as
has been showed) from the first Promise of the Gospel, after the entrance of
Sin: but there was no Tabernacle, nor one only Altar appointed and instituted,
till Moses his time.

2. Another appurtenance of all the Sacrifices was Salt, Levit. 2.13. Mark
9.49. every Sacrifice is salted with Salt.

3. Music, Temple Music both Vocal and Instrumental, whereof the former sort
indeed was Moral, but the latter, Ceremonial. While the Sacrifices were
offering, the Trumpets were sounding, and other musical Instruments.

4. Incense. As soon as they had offered the Sacrifice, and the Music and
Trumpets ceased, the Priest went into the Holy Place to offer Incense, and the
people without prayed.

5. Many ceremonious Actions, partly of the Sinner that brought the Sacrifice,
but chiefly of the Priests and Levites in ordering and sacrificing of it: and
here (amongst the rest) the Ceremonies of Purification from legal and
ceremonial Uncleanness, may come to be considered: such as these, were the
Adjuncts required.

The Adjuncts forbidden, were in general any conformity or compliance with the
Pagans in their Rites and Ceremonies; Deuteronomy. 12.4, 30.31.32. Ye shall not do so
unto the Lord your God What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou
shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it. so Rev. 14.9, 10. compliance with
Popish Worship is forbidden, under pain of Gods Wrath.

Particularly two things were severely interdicted and forbidden in all their
Sacrifices, (except some peculiar Cases, of which afterward) Leaven and Honey,
Levit. 2.11. the mysteries of all which, we shall endeavor to open to you by
the help of Christ, in our further progress upon this Subject.

Prop. 3. The occasions upon which they were to be offered, were of all sorts;
I shall but instance in four Heads of things. As,

Confer ser. of the Burnt-Offering on Levit. 1.
1. When under guilt of sin; for this was the direct intent and scope of them
all, they were to offer a Sacrifice for Reconciliation.

2. For the obtaining of any needful Mercy, and for the preventing and removing
of any Judgment or Danger, either impending or inflicted: as 1 Samuel 7.9, 10.
Samuel offered a Lamb for a Burnt Offering, and it found great acceptance with
God, when Israel was fighting against the Philistines.

So the Israelites Judge. 20.26. when seeking unto God by Fasting and Prayer,
for Success and Victory in their War against the Benjamites.

So David to remove the Plague, 2. Sam. 24. ult.

The neglect whereof in great Enterprises, has sometimes caused a good Cause
to miscarry, as Judges 20.26. this seems to have been one of the fatal Errors
in their management of it the two former times: for we read not that they
offered Sacrifice, till their third attempt.

3. To testify their Joy and Thankfulness for Mercies received: as Noah when
he came out of the Ark, Genesis 8.20. and Solomon when he had obtained Wisdom, 1
King. 3.15.

4. In the instituted seasons of them; for besides Vows and free
Will-Offerings, upon such emergencies of Providence as those before mentioned,
there were many Cases wherein they were instituted and required: as when a
Priest was to be Consecrated, an unclean Person to be Purified, any Festival or
Holy Day to be Celebrated: they had all their respective Sacrifices and
Offerings appointed by the Law.

Thus you see the nature of these Legal Sacrifices, as also the first
Institution, the adjuncts and occasions of them.

As to the several sorts and kinds of them, the next Doctrine will inform you,
viz.

Doct. 2. That the Sacrifices of Propitiation under the Law, may be referred to
these six kinds or sorts: namely, the Burnt-Offering, the Meat Offering, the
Sin Offering, the Trepass Offering, the Offering of Consecrations, and the
Sacrifice of the Peace Offerings.

They are, and may be several ways distinguished and distributed; but I shall
content my self at present with this distribution in the Text, and shall speak
unto them (as the Lord shall enable me) in the order wherein the Text has set
them down before us, the Words whereof are a short recapitulation of the
general Heads of the seven first Chapters of this Book; all which treat upon
these several sorts of Sacrifices and Offerings, with the Rules and Rites
appertaining to them; which, having been delivered and laid down at large, the
Text concludes and winds up all thus, This is the Law of the Burnt-Offering and
of the Meat Offering, etc.

Quest. Wherein lay the difference between these several kinds and sorts of
Sacrifices?

Ans. There were some things wherein they all agreed, namely, in all those
general things before mentioned, in the description and explication of them. As,

1. They were all offered at the Brazen Altar, and so were Offerings of a lower
nature also. But,

2. These were all Quodesh Quodeshim most Holy, Holy of Holinesses.

3. They were all Ishim, Offerings made by Fire.

4. They were all Propitiatory, they did serve for Expiation and Atonement:
therefore they differed not in the general nature, or in the general scope and
intent of them, which was the same in all; namely, to shadow forth Christ in
his death, as the true Sacrifice for our sins, and in other mysteries of his
Wisdom and Grace and Love, in the Gospel of our Salvation.

But the difference consists in three things.

1. Partly in the different matter of them; as an Ox or a Sheep in some,
Flower and Wine in others of them.

2. Partly in the particular Ends and Designs and Occasions of them; some being
for sins of Ignorance, as the Sin Offering: some for sins against Knowledge, as
Trespass Offerings: some for Consecration of the Priests, etc.

3. Partly, yea principally in the different Ceremonies accompanying them: some
were cut in pieces, as Sheep and Oxen: but some were only slit in the middle,
but not cut asunder, as Birds.

And various other Ceremonies there were, as you will see further when we come
to open and explain the several sorts and kinds of Sacrifices. At present I
shall conclude with two words of use, from all that has been said.

Use 1. Let us learn this great Lesson, to keep close to the Rule of divine
Institution in matters of Worship.

I beseech you mark the Text, how emphatical the expressions are, This is the
Law of all the several sorts of Sacrifices which the Lord commanded Moses, when
he commanded the Children of Israel to offer their Oblations, etc. As they did
nothing but what the Lord commanded Moses, so we should do nothing, but what
Christ has commanded us. Make that your great enquiry in all things, that
concern the Worship of God; has the Lord commanded it? Is the Command gone
forth from Mount Sion for it, Yea or No? The Apostles were limited Mat. 28.
ult. in their preaching, to teach only what Christ had commanded them; had they
taught their own Inventions, they had exceeded their Commission; they had not
been faithful to their Trust; but they were faithful in teaching and
transmitting to the Churches, what the Lord himself had taught and commanded
them: 1 Cor. 11.23. What I received of the Lord, that I delivered unto you,
that the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread, etc.

When a Minister baptiseth with the sign of the Cross, or any such like
superstition, he cannot say, I received this from the Lord. Practice nothing
which the Word does not require; omit nothing that the Word does require,
whatever worldly troubles or dangers you incurr.

Use 2. See the worth and value of the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and the
necessity of it for the Justification and Salvation of lost Sinners. For what
was the meaning of all these Offerings and Sacrifices whereof they had so great
a multitude, and so many several sorts and kinds of them under the Law, but to
lead us by the hand to Jesus Christ, to the true Sacrifice and Atonement that
is in his death and blood: for he is the Propitiation for our sins. 1 John 2.2.
This was the scope and design of them all; for it was impossible that such
Sacrifices should do the work of making satisfaction to Divine Justice, and
reconciling God and sinners; therefore they were not to terminate their
thoughts there, but to look beyond them to Jesus Christ, in whom both we and
they are reconciled to God. That this was the Scope of them, appears throughout
the New Testament; therefore Christ is called a Sacrifice, Ephesians. 5.2. and a
Propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.2.

And hence the Apostle so argues; Heb. 9.13, 14. If the blood of Bulls and
Goats, and the ashes of an Heiser, sprinkling the unclean sanctifies to the
purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through
the eternal Spirit offered himself with out spot to God, purge your Conscience
from dead works to serve the living God.

THE GOSPEL OF THE BURNT-OFFERING.
June 21, and 28. 1668.
Levit. Cap. 1. Of the Burnt-Offering. Yola.


THe first sort of propitiatory Sacrifices under the Law, is the Burnt
Offering; this is set down first in that enumeration of them, Lev. 7.37. and
taught first in this Book, as being the chief and of most common and continual
use.

I shall speak to it somewhat the more largely, because it will give Light unto
the other sorts of Sacrifices that follow, wherein we may be more brief.

The Institution of it being recorded in this place, I know not how to speak to
it better than in the way of an Exposition upon this Chapter, borrowing also
some further Light out of other Scriptures, and out of other Chapters of this
Book, and particularly the 6th. where some things are further explained.

It is called the Burnt-Offering, or the whole Burnt-Offering, because it was
to be wholly burned and consumed in the fire, except only the Skin. In Hebrew
(...) from the Root (...) ascendit, because being wholly burnt, it ascended and
went up to Heaven in smoke and vapor; in Greek (...) and (...).

The special occasions upon which it was to be offered, were many and various;
Confer on Lev. 7.37, 38. of the general occasions of Sacrifices.
they may be referred to three Heads.

1. Such as were providential, as upon all emergent occasions, when they had
Guilt, or Judgments to be removed or prevented, or Mercies to be bestowed and
acknowledged.

Of these, see Lev. 22.18.

2. Such incidental occasions wherein they were required by the Law, as at the
Consecration of Priests, Exodus 29.18. And of the Levites; Numb. 8.12. At the
Purification of unclean persons, and upon several other occasions.

3. At their stated Festivals and appointed Seasons, which were both daily,
weekly, monthly, and anniversary, of which hereafter. Amongst the rest, there
was a constant Burnt-Offering every day, or rather two Burnt-Offerings, the one
in the morning, and the other at evening, Exodus 29.38, 42. Numb. 28.3, 4.
called the Juge sacrificium. (...) whereof Daniel speaks, how it was profanely
interrupted by Antiochus, Dan. 8.11, 12.

The end of it (as of the rest) was atonement, reconciliation and remission of
sin; Verse. 9. a Savor of Rest, or a sweet Savor. For as a sweet smell
refreshes and quieteth the Senses: so Christ's Oblation appeaseth Gods Spirit,
Ainsw. in loc. Hence is that Phrase, Ezra 6.9, 10. Sacrifices of Rest, or of
sweet Savours to the God of Heaven; so Ephesians. 5.2. Christ gave himself for us,
an Offering, and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling Savor.

The Laws and Ordinances of the Burnt-Offering were either concerning the
matter of it, or the actions to be performed about it; which being different,
according to the different matter of it, will come in under the several sorts
of matter whereof the Sacrifice was to consist, which was in general clean
Creatures.

This Rule was to be observed in all the Sacrifices; and it was very ancient;
for we read of this distinction of Beasts into clean and unclean, even in Noah's
time, Genesis 7.2. and Genesis 8.20.

There were two sorts of cleannesses of the irrational Creatures, clean for
Sacrifice, and clean for Food.

Of the cleanness for Food, we read in Lev. 11. which seems to have been then
first appointed; for to the Sons of Noah there is no such restriction given,
but a large and general Commission to eat any wholesome Flesh. Genesis 9.3. Every
moving thing that lives, shall be Meat for you.

But the cleanness and uncleanness for Sacrifice, seems to have been from the
very first Institution of Sacrifices.

The Rule whereof in general is this, that there were no wild Beasts or Fowls,
no ravenous carnivorous Beasts or Birds of prey allowed in Sacrifices, but such
as were of the milder sort. The reason whereof, is thought to be partly from
their Properties, being more harmless and innocent, more useful and profitable,
and serviceable Creatures to man's use, and so fittest to signify the like
things in Christ, and in his people: and partly because of man's peculiar
possession and propriety in them, being more fully in his power and possession,
than the wild Beasts of the Field. Or if no reason for it could be assigned, we
must acquiesce in the supreme Authority of God, so ordaining and appointing: as
why not a Hen, as well as a young Pidgeon.

How abominable it was to transgress in the matter of their Sacrifices, you may
see by those expressions in Isai. 66.3. He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew
a man: he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs neck: he that
offers an Oblation, as if he offered Swines blood. In all which, the Lord
expresses the greatest detestation by those Resemblances and Comparisons.

But in this the Heathen greatly corrupted themselves; for as they forgot and
lost the true Object of Worship, offering their Sacrifices to Devils, and not
unto God, 1 Cor. 10.20. So they sacrificed all sorts of Creatures, without any
difference of clean or unclean, even Swine, wherein the Jews also did corrupt
themselves, at least so far as to the eating of it, as appears out of Isai.
65.4. yea, they proceeded so far as to Sacrifice men; their Sons and Daughters
(an horrible thing) which the Lord commanded not, and which never came into his
heart. Jer. 7.31. For as it was not possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats
should take away sin: so neither could the blood of man do it, but only of that
man who is God also, Act. 20.28.

The matter of the Burnt-Offering which was approved and appointed of God, was
of three sorts: Of the Herd, that is, the bigger sort of Cattle; and of the
Flocks, that is, the lesser sort of Cattle, and of the Fowls: and so this
Chapter divides it self into these three parts.

1. The Burnt-Offering of the Herd, to verse. 10. 2. The Burnt-Offering of the
Flock, verse. 10. to verse. 14. 3. The Burnt-Offering of Fowls, verse. 14. to the
end.
1. The Burnt-Offering of the Herd; we may here consider the matter of it, and
the Actions to be performed about it.

1. The matter of the Offering is a Bullock, a Male without blemish, verse. 3.
see this Law repeated and confirmed, Lev. 22.20, to 24. see Mal. 1.7, 8, 14.
And being so vehemently insisted on, we may well think it is not without some
special mystery: the Best and most Perfect, is fittest for so great a God.

Moreover this did also figure and represent Jesus Christ his perfection in
himself, and ours in him. He was a Male, and without spot or blemish. 1 Pet.
1.19. a Sacrifice of absolute purity, and perfection.

And the like expressions are used concerning Christ mystical, in Ephesians. 5.27.
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, holy, and without blemish: we shall
be so perfectly at that day. And in this life (in some degree) there is a
perfection of sincerity here; there is a blameless spotless Conversation.

As the Burnt-Offerings of old: so should we and all our Sacrifices and
Offerings to the Lord be. We should serve him with the best we have, the best
of our time and strength, the vigor of our spirits, the utmost improvement of
all our abilities in his Service, and to his Glory: we should sacrifice all to
him.

2. The actions to be performed about it: for the Lord was pleased to ordain
and appoint sundry mystical and significant Rites and Ceremonies, to be used
about the Burnt-Offering, which were full of Teaching, and spiritual Mystery.

For what has been vainly and falsely boasted and arrogated to religious
Ceremonies of men's devising, it is most true concerning these divine
Ceremonies: That they be neither dark nor dumb, but mystical and significant,
and fit to stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his Duty toward
God, by some special and notable signification, whereby he may be edified.

I shall enumerate them with some short hints of Instruction from them, in nine
Particulars, as they lie before us in the Text, which mentions at least nine
ceremonial Actions about the Burnt-Offering.

1. The Offerer was to bring it to the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, before the Lord. 2. Lay his hand upon it. 3. The Priest must kill
it. 4. He must pour out the Blood and sprinkle it round about. 5. Flay and cut
it in pieces. 6. The Pieces to be salted. 7. The Legs and Inwards washed. 8.
All must be laid upon the Altar and burnt with Fire. And, 9. The Ashes carried
out of the Camp into a clean place.
1. The Offerer was to bring it to the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, before the face of the Lord. verse. 3. Great weight is laid upon
this, Lev. 17.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9.

We may learn three or four things out of this.

1. Here was a voluntary act of the Offerer: for the Priest was not to go to
him to fetch it, but the man himself is to bring it verse. 3. of his own
voluntary will: so Christ dyed willingly, and offered up himself a Sacrifice
and a whole Burnt-Offering unto God for us, Ephesians. 5.2. Joh. 10.18. I lay down
my life of my self: so should we in all our Services be a willing people; we
should come before the Lord with willing minds, when we present our Corbans,
our Gifts, Services and Oblations to him: God loves a cheerful Giver, 2 Cor.
9.7.

2. This leads us by the hand, and points every way to Jesus Christ as the
cause of our acceptance with the Lord: in that they were to bring it to the
door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, to be offered upon the Altar which
stood there.

For Christ is both the Door and the Tabernacle, and the Altar, and the Priest:
He is the door of the Sheep. Joh. 10.7. And he is the true Tabernacle and the
Sanctuary which the Lord has pitched, and not man. Heb. 8.2. A greater and
more perfect Tabernacle not made with hands. Heb. 9.11. And he is the Altar.
Heb. 13.10. which sanctifies the Gift, and makes it accepted; Mat. 23.19. And
Christ is the Priest also, that presents and offers up our Sacrifices to the
Lord: He is often called a Priest, and our great High Priest.

This therefore teaches us, That all our access unto, and acceptance with the
Lord, is only in and through Jesus Christ: it is through him alone that our
Services and Sacrifices are accepted: there is no acceptance out of Christ. For
he that neglected this, was to be cut off. Lev. 17.8, 9.

3. They are to bring it hither before the face of the Lord, or the presence of
the Lord: this refers to the holiest of all, where God dwelt, and where his
presence did appear.

So the meaning is, that we are to see God in all our Services, and to eye the
presence of God, and that he is to be seen there, and there only, even in and
by the Lord Jesus Christ. Luke 1.75. that we might serve him before him -- 2
Cor. 4.6. the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ.

4. The Tabernacle was a Type of the Church, which is often called the
Tabernacle and Temple and House of God. We are to worship God in his Church, in
the Assemblies of his people. Heb. 10.25. and 12.22, 23. So much for the first
ceremonial Action about the Burnt-Offering.

2. The Sinner that brought the Sacrifice, was to lay his hand upon the head of
it. verse. 4. this was not required in the Sacrifice of Fowls, but only of
Beasts, see the like Exodus 29.10

There is some controversy here, whether he was to lay on his right hand or his
left hand, or both; but seeing it is in the singular Number, and seeing it is
expressly commanded that the Priest should lay on both his hands, Lev. 16.21.
that is, both for his own sins and the peoples: therefore it is thought by some
not improbably, that when any of the people offered, he laid on but one hand.

But whether the right, or the left? We may suppose that whatsoever was not
limited by God, was left at liberty. This Ceremony relates to the confession of
sin, and the translation of the guilt of it upon the Sacrifice: the Offerer in
this Ceremony disburthening himself of sin, and putting over his own Guilt upon
the Sacrifice; so it is explained Lev. 16.21. He shall lay on his hands, and
confess over him the Iniquities of the Children of Israel.

So Christ has born our sins, and carried our sorrows. Isa. 53.4, 5.

And we are to confess our sins over him by Faith in Christ; and through the
blood of his Sacrifice, it shall be forgiven us, 1 John 1.7, 9.

3. The Sacrifice must be killed and slain, and that upon the north side of the
Altar. verse. 5. and verse. 11.

It is questioned here, who did this; whether he that brought the Offering, or
the Priest? But doubtless it was the Priest; for it is said of him that kills
the Offering, that he shall stay it. verse. 5, 6. but that was the Priests work.

And to the killing of the Sacrifice of Beasts, answers the wringing off the
head of sacrificed Fowls. But this is expressly affirmed to be the Priests work,
verse. 15.

Only this we find, that the Levites were added to the Priests to assist them,
and help them in the whole work of their Ministry, Numb. 8.19. and we find it
often recorded that they did so, 2 Chronicles. 29.34. Therefore in verse. 22. of that
Chap. where the Killers and the Priests are distinguished, it is not to be
understood concerning the people, as if they had killed the Offerings, but
rather the Levites: see likewise 1 Chronicles. 23.28, 31. and 2 Chronicles. 35.10, 11.

So much for the literal explication of this Ceremony: now for the mystery and
meaning of it.

What might be noted from hence, concerning actions and administrations
properly and peculiarly ministerial, we shall observe when we come to that
place, to the legal Priesthood and Ministry.

But it is plain and obvious, that it holds forth the death of Christ, the
Messiah was slain and cut off, Dan. 9.26. His Soul was made an Offering for
sin. Isa. 53.10.

As to that Circumstance of killing it on the north side of the Altar. verse.
11. the same Rule is given concerning the Sin-Offering, Lev. 6.25. and the
Trespass Offering, Lev. 7.1, 2.

There be various applications of this.

Some think there is no further mystery in it, but that the Tabernacle door and
the Altar were so situate and placed, that on the north side there was more
space for such Acts as required most room, as the killing and dressing of the
Sacrifices did: so our own Annotators.

But others conceive this Law was not without something of mystery in it: some
note how their greatest Troubles and Sufferings were from the North; Jeremiah
sees a Seething Pot, and the face thereof was toward the North. Jer. 1.13. and
then verse. 14. Out of the North an Evil shall break forth upon all the
Inhabitants of the Land. Therefore some conceive, that to restrain the Evils
and Judgments of God, the Offerings were slain on the north side of the Altar:
also that the situation of the Temple was on the north side of the City: Psalm.
48.2. Mount Sion on the sides of the North.

Moreover here is no regard had to the Sun, and to the East, but thither the
Ashes were carried forth, as verse. 16. Whereas the Heathen were accustomed to
Sacrifice, and to direct their Worship toward the East, and toward the Sun,
which they made an Idol of. In opposition to which Idolatry, (as some conceive)
the Lord appointed his people to sacrifice toward the North.

And lastly, the Gospel has prevailed more in the northern Hemisphere of the
World, (which also is more inhabited) than in the Southern.

Ezekiel in his Vision of the holy City, does first describe the north Gates of
the holy City restored: which some think is not without something of mystery,
Ezekiel. 48.1, 16, 30. Tidings out of the North. Dan. 11. that is (say some) the
Reformation in these northern Countries, the Tidings whereof is evil News to
Antichrist, and the continual progress of that Work, has been a continual
trouble to him these hundred and fifty years.

But I think we may acquiesce in what was first mentioned: Aynsworth has this
Note on Lev. 6.25. hereby was figured that Christ our Sin-Offering, should be
killed by the Priests in Jerusalem and Mount Sion, which was on the sides of
the North: Psalm. 48.2. Crucified on Mount Calvary, which was on the North-West
side of Jerusalem: as by the Jews Tradition, the morning Sacrifice was killed
at the North West Horn of the Altar.

4. The blood must be poured forth at the foot of the Altar, and sprinkled upon
it round about. The former indeed is not expressed in this Chapter, but it is
necessarily employed, and you find it expressed Cap. 8.15. for we must borrow
Light from other Scriptures; poured forth, Lev. 8.15. sprinkled in this Chapter
verse. 5. it was poured forth.

And almost all things in the Law were purged by blood: Heb. 9.22. and without
shedding of blood there is no Remission. This was a great mystery; a Type of
the blood of Christ; it leads us to the effusion and application of the blood
of Christ. First the effusion of it to the satisfaction of divine Justice;
Isai. 53.12. He has poured out his Soul unto death. Mat. 26.28. my blood which
is shed for many, for the remission of sins. Jesus Christ did often bleed for
us in the day of his Humiliation, under the guilt of our sins.

As at his Circumcision, then were the first drops of that pure and precious
blood shed, that Sin-Expiating, that Soul-Saving blood: and in his Agony in the
Garden, he did sweat clodded blood: and when he was scourged, then he bled
again for us: and when Crowned with Thorns, and in his Death and Crucifixion.
And finally when they pierced his Side with the Spear, when that sacred Blood
and Water issued forth, which John saw and bare record of. Joh. 19.34, 35. One
of the Soldiers with a Spear pierced his Side, and forthwith there came out
Blood and Water, and he that saw it bare record, and his record is true, and he
knows that he says true, that ye might believe.

Thus was the blood of the Sacrifice poured forth.

And it was also sprinkled: so is Christ's blood, and therefore it is called
Heb. 12.24. the blood of sprinkling.

Sprinkling is a Ceremony very significant of spiritual things; but where was
this blood sprinkled?

The Text says, It was sprinkled upon the Altar round about. From this
expression, we may note the mistake of such as think the setting of the
Communion Table close to the Wall like a Dresser or Side-Table, is to set it
Altar-wise.

For it is most clear and certain, that their Altars were ever so situate, as
that they might be compassed round about.

This expression does occur no less than twelve times in this book; of
sprinkling upon the Altar round about. so Psalm. 26.6. so will I compass thine
Altar.

As to that conceit no other account can be given of it, but the profound
ignorance of Papists and Prelates.

Now the Altar was a Type of the Deity of Christ, as being that which supported
and sanctified the Sacrifice: Mat. 23.19. It is the Altar that sanctifies the
Gift. It was the Deity of Christ that gave that infinite value and virtue to
his Sufferings: therefore look as the Altar was a Type of the divine nature of
Jesus Christ, and the blood was his Sufferings in the humane nature: so the
pouring forth and sprinkling this humane blood upon the divine Altar, may lead
our thoughts to consider the conjunction of the humane nature to the divine,
and the influence of that Conjunction into all the Sufferings of the humane
nature.

Were not the Blood at the bottom of the Altar, and sprinkled round about upon
the Altar, it could have no merit, no value nor efficacy, it could have no
Soul-Redeeming virtue and efficacy and acceptance with the Lord.

But it is the blood of God. Act. 20.28. and therefore infinitely valuable and
meritorious, the Offering being sanctified by the Altar of his Deity.

It was sprinkled also upon the Book.

The Scripture and Ordinances must be sprinkled with the blood of Christ, if
ever they be made effectual to us for our good.

And upon the people, Heb. 9.19, 20, 21.

This shows the application of it to our Souls and Consciences, 1 Pet. 1.2.
Isai. 52.15.

5. The fifth ceremonial Action about the Burnt-Offering was this, the Priest
is to flay it and cut it into its pieces. verse. 6. The Skin must be taken off,
and the Body of the Sacrifice must be cut asunder, yet not merely chopped in
pieces and mangled, but according to the several joints and pieces of the Body:
for God will have order in the things of his Worship. The Skin was the Priests
Portion, see Cap. 7.8.

As to the mystery of this, I would not make too curious an application of it:
but there be four things we may observe and learn out of it.

1. It related in general to the Sufferings of Christ, for great Sufferings are
set forth by such expressions: Micah 3. 2, 3. Who hate the good and love the
evil, who pluck off their Skin from off them, and their Flesh from off their
Bones: who also eat the Flesh of my people, and flay their Skin from off them,
etc. Psalm. 22.15, 16.

2. Something we may note here as to spiritual clothing: Skins were first used
for Apparel, God clothed Adam with Skins. Genesis 3.21.

And much of our Clothing at this day, is either the Skins of Beasts, or the
Hair and Wool taken from those Skins: as the Sacrifice being dead and slain,
did leave a Skin for clothing to the Priest by whose hand he died: so Jesus
Christ our true Sacrifice, who was led as a Sheep to the slaughter for our
sins, yet being dead, leaves a Garment of Righteousness to cloth Believers
with: therefore we are said to put on Christ as a Garment.

Romans 13.14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. (...).

Jacob got the Blessing, having his hand and his neck covered with Goat Skins,
and being clothed in the Garments of his Elder Brother.

So Believers are blessed of God, being clothed with the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ.

3. Whereas the Sacrifice in this Action was laid open, and the inward parts of
it discovered to open view: so is Jesus Christ fully and openly discovered in
the preaching of the Gospel; Gal. 3.1. before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been
evidently set forth, crucified among you, like a Sacrifice that is flayed and
cut asunder.

Moreover God sees the inward part of every Service, of every Sacrifice we
present unto him.

The Sacrifice was (...) and (...) flayed and cut up; Heb. 4.12, 13. so all
things are (...) and (...) before him with whom we have to do.

The Sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God searches the heart, as the
sacrificeing Knife did the bowels of the Beast: there is no Skin, no cloak of
Hypocrisy that can hide thee from the Lord.

4. The Skin of the Sacrifice went to the Priest: it was part of his
Maintenance; see Cap. 7. 8. and the Priest that offers any man's Burnt
Offering, even the Priest shall have to himself, the Skin of the Burnt
Offering, which he has offered. As before the Law the Sacrificer had the Skin,
he enjoyed the benefit of that, either to cloth him, as Adam and Eve, Genesis
3.21. the Lord God made them Coats of Skins, and clothed them. Or to buy
clothing with, or what else he needed. And under the Law there was hardly any
Sacrifice, of which the Priest had not his part.

It teaches us that they that serve at the Altar, should live of the Altar. 1
Cor. 9.13, 14. from whence the Apostle argues to the care that should be taken
for the maintenance of Ministers under the Gospel.

So much for the fifth Ceremony about the Burnt-Offering, namely, the flaying
it and cuting it in pieces.

6. The Pieces were to be salted. This indeed is not expressed in Cap: 1. but
you will find it in other places: for as I said at first, we must borrow Light
from other Scriptures: Lev. 2.13. Every Oblation of thy Meat Offering shall
thou season with Salt, neither shall thou suffer the Salt of the Covenant of
thy God to be lacking. Ezekiel. 43.24. the Priests shall cast Salt upon them.

The Rule is general to all Sacrifices, as well Burnt, as Meat Offerings: Mark
9.49. every Sacrifice shall be salted with Salt.

I find by conference with other Scriptures, a twofold Mystery hinted and aimed
at in this.

1. Salt does preserve things, and keep them from putrefaction: this therefore
signifies and shadows forth the Perpetuity of the Covenant of Grace. Hence is
that emphatical expression in the Text, Lev. 2.13. the Salt of the Covenant of
thy God. So Salt is used Numb. 18.19. It is a Covenant of Salt for ever before
the Lord unto thee, and to thy Seed with thee: that is, says the Margin, sure,
stable and incorruptible. So 2 Chronicles. 13.5. Ought ye not to know, that the Lord
God of Israel gave the Kingdom over Israel to David for ever, even to him and
to his Sons by a Covenant of Salt? that is, Perpetual, because the thing that
is salted is preserved from Corruption, says the Geneva Note upon the place.

2. Salt makes things savoury and wholesome, which without Salt would stink and
putrify: Col. 4.6. let your Speech be seasoned with Salt. That is, contrary to
that corrupt Communication Ephesians. 4.29. wise and savoury and gracious Speech,
Mark. 9.49, 50. when there is no Salt, no Savor in a man's words, his Speech
stinks and is corrupt: the Sacrifice is unsalted, and so it stinks.

7. The Legs and Inwards must be washed, Verse. 12. the Feet and the Inwards
are the fowlest part of a Beast: washing away the filth, signifies spiritual
washing and cleansing.

So the bodies of Believers are said to be washed with pure Water, and their
hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience. Heb. 10.22. they are made clean both
within and without, and their filthiness washed away through Jesus Christ.

8. The several parts of the Offering must be laid upon the Altar and burnt
with Fire, till it be consumed and burnt to ashes. Seeing the Fire which once
fell from Heaven, Lev. 9.24. was to be continually kept and preserved upon the
Altar, Lev. 6.12. and the use of all other Fire forbidden in Sacrifices, Lev.
10.1. putting of Fire upon the Altar in this place, can signify nothing but
kindling of it, Deodat. in Lev. 1.7. See Lev. 6.9. the Fire burnt all night.
The Wrath of God is the Fire, and Sin the Wood or Fuel that feeds it.

This is the Fire of the Justice and Wrath of God from Heaven, which seized
upon Christ; and every part of him (as all the parts of the Offering) was
burnt; his Head crowned with Thorns, his Side pierced with the Spear, his
Hands and Feet with Nails, his whole body did sweat drops of Blood, yea his
Soul was heavy unto the Death, yea burnt to Ashes as it were, brought to the
utmost extremity of misery: his Saints also endure the fiery trial, 1 Pet. 4.12.

Though theirs is not a fire of Expiation, as Christ's was, Heb. 12.10. but only
a fire of Purgation which they pass through in this Life, to prepare and fit
them for Heaven: but after this Life, there is no Purgatory as the Papists
dream.

9. The Ashes must be carried out of the Camp into a clean place. Lev. 6.10, 11.

The contrary is said of the Rubbish of a leprous house, that the dust and
stones thereof, should be poured forth into an unclean place. Lev. 14.40, 41.
For they came from a polluted house.

But these from the Lords holy dwelling place, and were the Relics of an holy
thing which the Lord here manifests that he has a special regard of.

This Ceremony is applied by the Apostle to Christ, Heb. 13.11, 12, 13. Look as
the Ashes of the Sacrifice being burnt, signified the dead Body of Christ: so
the carrying of the Ashes out of the Camp, signified how his crucified Body
should not be buried within the City, but carried into a clean place, into a
new Sepulcher where never any man lay before. Joh. 19.41.

So the dead Bodies of all his Saints, when they are spent and consumed to
Ashes, they are regarded and preserved in the dust by God, as sacred Relics;
and he will raise them up again unto eternal Life.

So much for the Burnt Offering of the Herd, and the Ceremonies appertaining to
it.

There were also some other Actions about it, as that in Psalm. 118.27. of
binding the Sacrifice with Cords, even unto the Horns of the Altar. But this,
as it is not mentioned in this Chapter; so it seems rather to be an Action of
natural necessity unto such a work, as the slaying of a Beast, then to have any
special mystery in it. Therefore let this suffice for the Burnt-Offering of the
greater sort of Cattle.

Now the other two sorts that follow, are the Burnt-Offering of the Flock, that
is lesser Cattle, Sheep or Goats. verse. 10. And of Fowls, viz. Turtle Doves,
and young Pigeons. verse. 14.

Quest. Why the Lord appointed these lesser Sacrifices?

Ans. He did it, that so none might be able to plead excuse to be exempted from
his service: for you know men are very apt to make excuses.

If the Lord had only appointed Oxen and Sheep, some might have pretended
Poverty, and have said, we would offer Sacrifice but we are not able. Therefore
these lesser Sacrifices were ordained, that so both Rich and Poor might serve
the Lord: so that here is no room left for any excuse. If they cannot bring an
Ox, the Lord will accept a couple of Turtle Doves, or young Pigeons: the Lord
accepts these smaller Sacrifices from the Poor, as well as greater from the
Richer sort of people. See Verse. 17. it is of a sweet savor to the Lord.

This Offering was brought by the Parents of Jesus Christ, Luke 2.24.

As to the building of the Tabernacle, he that could not offer Gold or Silk or
Purple, might bring Goats hair. Exodus 35.5, 6. Therefore let not poor people be
discouraged; alas, I have no Estate, I have no Parts nor Learning, it may be
so: but God accepts of mean services, where there is but mean ability. For if
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and
not according to that he has not. 2 Cor. 8.12.

I might add, that the Burden is much easier under the Gospel: God does not
put us upon such costly service, such a chargeable Religion as theirs was under
the Law, especially in these latter days. There is not a Servant in a Family,
but may be able to buy a Bible, and so to read the Word of God.

Now for the Particulars; they were of two sorts, lesser Cattle, and Fowls.

Concerning the Offering of the lesser sort of Cattle, there is nothing
peculiar in the Rites and Ceremonies thereof, save only that of killing it at
the north side of the Altar, which belongs indeed to other Sacrifices also; and
was therefore spoken to before, upon the Burnt-Offering of the bigger sort of
Cattle.

The third and last part of the Chapter is, concerning the Burnt-Offering of
Birds or Fowls, verse. 14, to the end.

We are to note here what Birds they were, and what were the ceremonial Actions
about them.

The Birds were not Ravens and Vultures and such like; but Doves and Pigeons
and Sparrows, at least in that peculiar case of the Leprosy, Lev. 14.

The Dove is often commended in the Scripture, for innocence and harmlesness;
Mat. 10.16. Be ye wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves. The Spirit appeared
as a Dove. Mat. 3.16. So are the Saints; Psalm. 74.19. deliver not the Soul of
thy Turtle Dove -- and often in the Song of Solomon, my Love, my Dove -- all
the practical application I shall make of it, shall be this; Believers
themselves are living Sacrifices unto God: but if thy Sacrifice be accepted,
thou must be a Dove, not a Bird of prey, but harmless as Doves.

The ceremonious Actions about them, aim at the same general scope with the
ceremonious Actions about the Burnt-Offering of Cattle, whereof we spoke
before, and diverse of them are the same.

There be only three differing Ceremonies in the Burnt Offering of Fowls,
whereof we are now to speak.

1. That the Priest shall wring off his head, verse. 15. which the old Geneva
Note explains thus --

The Hebrew word signifies to pinch off with the Nail, (...) ungue secuit. It
occureth only here, and in Lev. 5.8. where the same Rule is given concerning
the Trepass Offering.

The Rule concerning the Burnt-Offering of Cattle, is only to kill them; that
is, with the sacrificing Knife to cut the Throat, and so let out the life and
blood of the Beast, and then cut off the head, and cut all the parts asunder,
as verse. 5, 8.

The reason of this difference in the outward Ceremony, seems to be from the
different matter of the Sacrifice: both aiming at the same general scope, viz.
to shadow forth the Sufferings of Jesus Christ, and the violence done to him
for and by our sins. For as the blood of the Turtle Dove was wrung out with
violence: so was the blood of Jesus Christ, when he made his Soul an Offering
for sin.

Some note further, that the Head was not to be quite wrung off, as the parts
were not to be divided asunder; of which by and by.

2. The Priest was to pluck away his Crop, with his Feathers, and cast it
beside the Altar, on the east part by the place of the Ashes. verse. 16.

Why to the East? they had a place on the east side of the Court, to which they
carried forth the Ashes.

Because this was the furthest off from the Holy of Holies: for the Temple
stood directly West, as you may see Ezekiel. 8.16. which the Lord did in
opposition to the common Idolatry of those times, which were wont to worship
toward the East. There was therefore a place eastward from the Tabernacle
where they threw the filth of the Sacrifices, as in reverence of the Divine
Majesty, as far as might be from the Ark of the Testimony.

We must abandon whatsoever is unclean, when we come into Gods presence; all
filthiness must be removed far away out of his sight. As we come to an holy God
in an holy duty; so we should come in an holy manner, and with holy hearts: I
will wash mine hands in innocence, and so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord.
Psalm. 26.6.

3. He shall cleave it with the wings, but shall not divide asunder. verse. 17
-- cleave it, that is, long ways: so as there was a Wing on each side. This
Ceremony of not dividing the Fowls, was very ancient: for Abraham used it, Genesis
15.10.

And in reference to the same Scope, it was, that the Head and Body were not
quite disjoined, but only the Neck pinched with the Priests Nail.

Now what is there in Christ the Antitype, that may answer this? Not a bone
was broken. Joh. 19.33, 36.

Moreover the divine and humane nature were never totally separated,
notwithstanding all his Sufferings, though his Soul was separated from his
Body; yet neither Soul nor Body was separated from the Son of God, but
incomprehensibly and ineffably united, when in the Grave, and in the dust of
Death.

His Deity as the Head or principal Part, was not divided from his humane
nature: nor was he who is the Head of his Church, divided from his mystical
Body by all his Sufferings; but remains indissolubly and everlastingly united
to them.

So much for the explication of the Burnt-Offering, whether of the Herd, or
Flock, or Fowls, with the Ceremonies appertaining to them: now for the use of
all.

Use 1. See here the difference between Gods Ceremonies, and men's; between
religious Ceremonies of divine Institution, and of humane Invention.

Divine Ceremonies are full of Light, full of Spirit, full of Gospel Marrow and
Mystery.

But humane Ceremonies in the Worship of God, are full of Darkness and Vanity,
thick Darkness, there is no Light, no signification in them: as men cannot
bless their own Ceremonies, and make them effectual for spiritual ends: so they
cannot so much as make them suitable and significant; they are commonly so
foolish, so impertinent and ridiculous, that it is hardly sit to name them in a
Pulpit, lest they provoke laughter.

As for instance; for I will give you an instance or two, because there is an
holy scorn, and an holy laughter.

A man must wear a white Garment in a ridiculous manner like a Shift on the top
of his Cloths, to signify Purity and Holiness: a man must bow down like a fool
to a thing made of Wood or Stone, call it a Crucifix, or an Altar, or what you
please; to signify I know not what, unless it be that they are Imps of
Antichrist, and in heart members of his pretended Monarchy that do such things.

But I hope you see, that it is not thus with Gods Ceremonies. If the Lord open
our eyes, we may see wondrous things out of his Law. Psalm. 119.18.

I suppose the things that have been spoken, may not have the same Light and
Evidence with all that have heard me this day, as I hope through grace they
have with some: but yet I hope there is Light enough even to the weakest, to
see and to discern a difference between Gods Wisdom and man's folly; between
divine Ceremonies in Religion, and such as are merely humane.

Humane Inventions are teaching Signs; but they are Teachers of lies. Hab. 2.18.

But Gods Institutions teach Gospel Truths.

Not to mention all the other evils of them: our Consciences are the Throne of
God. But will they needs reign in our Consciences, and so sit down in the
Throne of God, and pluck the Scepter (as it were) out of Christ's hand, and the
Crown from his Head? He will speak to them in his Wrath for this, and vex them
in his sore displeasure; he will break them with his Rod of Iron, and dash them
in pieces like a Potters Vessel.

Use 2. See the fierceness of the Wrath of God against sin, and it may be a
word of awakening to secure sinners.

It is nothing but death and blood and slaughter, that will appease offended
Justice; God must and will have a Sacrifice, and the Sacrifice must be slain
and burnt with fire. Our God is a consuming Fire. Heb. 12. ult.

If thou have not a Burnt-Offering to present him with, to be slain and
sacrificed for thee, thou must perish.

It is not enough to see the power and bondage of sin, but thou must see thy
self under Guilt; and that there is a necessity of a Sacrifice to expiate thy
sins, and make atonement if ever thou art saved.

You need Christ for your Justification to be your Righteousness, as well as to
be your Sanctification.

If there be no sense of this, if you go on resisting and despising such
Convictions, if you live so, and dye so; thou art the man, the woman against
whom the Lord has Indignation for ever, and thy sin will not be purged with
Sacrifice nor Offering for ever, as the Lord said of Elie's Sons, 1 Samuel 3.14.

Use 3. Direction under the guilt of sin what to do, and what course to take,
to make atonement and reconciliation between God and thee: go and bring your
Sacrifice to the Priest, and by him unto God. Jesus Christ is both the
Sacrifice and the Priest, and the Altar; he is all in all: go with him into the
presence of God, and present him to the Lord by Faith: and this Sacrifice that
he has offered shall be accepted for thee, to make atonement for thee, for thy
sin whatever it be, and it shall be forgiven thee.

Use 4. Unspeakable consolation unto them who have took this course, and have
fled for Refuge thither; here is peace and comfort under the guilt of sin, of
what kind soever.

Two things may quiet any man's Conscience, under the greatest Guilt.

1. Is there not a sufficient Sacrifice? Is there not satisfaction and
atonement in the blood of Christ? Is not this a sufficient Sacrifice?

2. Is it not thine? This I know unbelief is apt to stagger at. But therefore
do but lay thy hand upon the head of the Sacrifice, confess thy sins over the
head of thy Burnt-Offering, lay thy Burdens upon him by Faith, and he is
thine, and all that he has done and suffered was for thee, and shall be as
effectual for thy good, as available and effectual with the Lord for thee, as
if thou thy self had suffered, yea infinitely more. See verse. 4. He shall put
his hand upon the head of the Burnt Offering, and it shall be accepted for him,
to make atonement for him.

The Apostle says, we have received the atonement. Romans 5.11. and he insists
upon this notion of receiving Verse. 17. receive abundance of Grace, and the
gift of Righteousness.

Now this is done by Faith; and what is the effect of this? Therefore we joy in
God. verse. 11. and 17. We reign in life through one Jesus Christ. It puts the
Soul into a triumphing frame.

THE GOSPEL OF THE MEAT OFFERING.
July 5, 12, 19. 1668.
Levit. Cap. 2. 2. The Mincha, or Meat Offering.


THis is mentioned in the second place in that Enumeration of the
Legal-Offerings, Lev. 7.37. and treated of in the second Chapter of this Book,
next after the Burnt-Offering; and therefore comes now to be spoken of out of
this Chapter, with help and conference of other Scriptures.

It is called in Hebrew Mincha; concerning the notation or etymology of which
word, which may give some light to the sense of it, there be diverse Conjectures.

Some derive it from Nachah, to bring or Offer; hence Mincha, munus: in like
manner as Mizvoh, praeceptum; from Zivah, praecepit.

And though the Rabbis read the Plural Number Menachoth, whence some derive it
from a feigned Root Manach, that so [Mem] may be a radical letter; yet the
Plural Number is read Minchoth in Psalm. 20.3.

It is used in Scripture in three senses.

1. It is often used generally for any thing gift or Present, whether to God or
men: which confirms the Etymology before given, as Genesis 32.13, 20 -- Genesis 43.11
-- 1 Samuel 10.27.

2. It is used not only for Gifts or Presents to men, but for all sorts of
Offerings to God: even such Sacrifices wherein Beasts were slain, as Genesis 4.4.
where Abels Sacrifice of the Firstlings of his Flock, is called his Mincha: so
it agrees with Qorban, and is of as large extent in signification.

3. It is frequently used in a narrower sense for an Offering of the Fruits of
the Earth, as contra distinguished unto Sacrifices of living creatures. So
Qorban is the general, and Mincha a species of Qorban: so in this place Lev. 2.
Qorban Mincha, and in many other Scriptures.

All propitiatory Sacrifices being referred in Scripture unto these two Heads,
Zebach and Mincha: as Dan. 9.6 -- Psalm. 40.6. which the Apostle renders (...),
Heb. 10.5. that is, slain Sacrifices of living Creatures, which were offered
both by Fire and Slaughter; which are called Zebach (...), hostia victima
sacrificium mactatum: and Offerings of Meat and Drink called Mincha, munus
sacrum frumentaceum libum, libamen: which being not living Creatures could not
be slain, but were offered only by Fire and pouring forth.

Our Translators render it, (and not unfitly) the Meat Offering; from the
matter whereof it consisted, and from the Rite and manner of Offering, the
greatest part of it being to be eaten for Meat.

Now concerning this Mincha or Meat Offering, there be these six things to be
enquired into.

1. The Materials of it, which were Corn, Oil, Frankincense and Salt.

2. The Actions to be performed about it; it was to be brought to the Priest,
the Memorial of it burnt upon the Altar, and the Residue eaten by the Priest in
the holy place.

3. The meaning and signification of it; to be a sweet Savor before the Lord.

4. The Additions prohibited to be annexed to it, which were two, Leaven and
Honey.

5. The Appurtenance of Drink Offerings by divine Institution added to it.

6. The several Seasons and Occasions on which the Meat Offering was to be
offered.

These six things we shall enquire into, (the Lord enabling us) chiefly out of
this Chapter, and partly also out of other Scriptures, especially in the two
last Enquiries, which are not expressly spoken to in this Chapter.

1. The Materials of it, they were these four, Corn, Oil, Frankincense, and
Salt.

1. Bread Corn, Wheat or Barley, 1 Chronicles. 21.23. Wheat for the Meat Offering.
See also Ezekiel. 45.13, 15. where Wheat and Barley are mentioned for the
Meat Offering.

This was dressed and ordered several ways.

They might offer the Meat Offering of Wheat.

Either only ground and sifted into Flower, without any further preparation,
verse. 1. Soleth, simila, the Flower of Wheat; or dressed and cooked into Cakes
and Wafers verse. 4. Or baked. verse. 5.6. Or fried in a frying Pan. verse. 7. Or
First Fruits; not so much as grinding it into Meal or Flower, only dried and
beaten. verse. 14.

This Meat Offering of First Fruits was of Barley, because that was first ripe
in that Country: therefore the name of the first Month in the Year was called
Abib, Exodus 13.4. quasi mensis spicarum, the Month of Ears of Corn.

Out of all which Corn-matter of the Meat Offering, I shall mark three things.

1. It must be fine Flower, purged from the Bran.

It shows the pure estate of Christ, and of all Christians, with their services
in him, being purged as it were from the Bran of natural Corruption; Aynsw. in
loc. Isai. 66.20. it appears their manner was to bring them in a clean Vessel.

We should labor in all our Offerings and Sacrifices to be pure and clean in
his sight, and to come with purged and refined Spirits. God must have the best,
as the Flower must be fine and not course: so in the Burnt-Offering the Beasts
were to be without blemish: and whatsoever they offered to God must be of the
best, all betokening the purity and perfection of him, of whom they were Types,
to wit, Jesus Christ, and beseeming the excellency of him to whom they were
offered: Engl. Annot. on Numb. 28. ult.

2. There was a Meat Offering of First Fruits; what this is, the Apostle
informs us 1 Cor. 15.20. Christ is the First Fruits by whom the whole Lump is
sanctified.

There may be also some further accommodations of it, whereof we may speak
further, when we come to the Feast of First Fruits.

3. It must be ground, sifted, baked, fried, beaten, and the like; some such
bruising and contusion of it there must be.

So Christ was bruised for our Iniquities, and beaten with stripes for our
sins. Isai. 53.5. wherein his Members are partakers with him. Col. 1.24.

Hence Ignatius sweetly and spiritually, when he was to suffer Martyrdom by
being devoured of wild Beasts, he speaks how his body was the Lords Corn, and
must be ground by the Teeth of the wild Beasts, to be prepared for the Lord: as
in the Meat Offering, the Corn was to pass under some such preparation.

2. The second Ingredient in the Meat Offering, was Oil. verse. 1, 4, 5, 7, 15.
The quantity of Oil is not expressed, but the meaning was, there should be a
quantum sufficit, a fit proportion of it mingled with the Flower.

Much use of Oil there was under the Law, and so we shall have occasion to
speak further to it.

It signified in general, the Spirit of God in the graces and comforts of it;
Isai. 61.1. which Jesus Christ did receive above measure, and from him all
Believers in some degree, do partake of his anointing. There is and must be
this sacred Oil in all our Offerings, the influence of the Spirit of God.

3. Frankincense. The use of this was to make a sweet perfume in the Air, when
the burning of the other things might have caused an ill scent.

It figured the acceptableness unto God of the persons and services of his
people, through the mediation and intercession of Jesus Christ: he is set forth
by Pillars of smoke, perfumed with Myrrh and Frankincense, with all Powders of
the Merchant. Cant. 3.6. and without him our Offerings are not acceptable, nor
our Sacrifices sweet unto God. Jer. 6.20. Hence there was no Oil nor
Frankincense in the Sin-Offering, Lev. 5.11. nor in the Jealousy-Offerings,
Numb. 5.15. because though it was for a Memorial, yet it was not to bring the
person or his services to remembrance with acceptance before God, but to bring
his sin to remembrance.

4. Salt. Verse. 13. which being required in all their Offerings, and so in the
Burnt-Offering, there we spoke to it, and showed that it was to teach them the
perpetuity of the Covenant of Grace that God had made with them: and the
wholesome and savoury carriage and walking of his people.

Now put all this together, and it spells thus much: That our Meat Offerings,
our good Works being anointed with the Spirit, and perfumed with the Incense of
Christ's Mediation, are accepted of God, and that in a Covenant of Salt, through
the unchangeable faithfulness of God in the Covenant.

So much for the Materials of the Meat Offering, Corn, Oil, Frankincense, and
Salt.

2. The Actions to be performed about it, and they were three, verse. 2, 3.

1. It must be brought to the Priest. 2. He is to burn a part of it, the
memorial of it before the Lord. 3. The remnant of it must be eaten by the
Priest.
1. They were to bring it to the Sons of Aaron the Priests, verse. 2. There was
the same Action before in the Burnt-Offering, and there we showed the meaning
of it, that it imports a voluntary act of the Offerer, and a making use of
Christ for acceptance, in all our services and approaches unto God.

2. The Priest is to burn the memorial of it upon the Altar, before the Lord.
verse. 2, 9, and 16.

[For a memorial] This (as Interpreters well observe) is spoken after the
manner of men, to put God in remembrance of the person, or rather of his own
love to him, and Covenant with him in Jesus Christ. Psalm. 20.3. The Lord
remember all thy Offerings, and accept thy Burnt-Sacrifice -- Act. 10.4. Thy
Prayers and thine Alms are come up for a memorial before God. Hence Nehemiah
prays Remember me, O my God, concerning this. Neh. 13.14, 22. the meaning is,
that the Smoke thereof was to come up before God with acceptance; therefore
there was Frankincense burnt with it, to make a sweet smell.

3. The Remnant was Aarons and his Sons. verse. 3. and again verse. 10. that is,
to eat it in the Sanctuary. see Lev. 6.16, 18. Except the Meat Offering of the
Priests which might not be eaten, but was to be all burnt for a whole
Burnt-Offering. Cap. 6. verse. 23.

This may be applied two ways.

1. To the Communion and Participation of Christ, by all Believers; For they
are all Priests unto God. Rev. 1.6. A Royal Priesthood. 1 Pet. 2.9. verse. 5. An
holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices. And Christ is our
Meat Offering, he is the Bread of God, the bread of life. Joh. 6.33. So then
the Priests eating the Meat Offering, is Believers feeding upon Christ by Faith.

As the Meat Offering was partly burnt upon the Altar, and partly eaten by the
Priests: so Jesus Christ, having offered up himself once for all, does always
continue a spiritual Meat Offering, and Food for the hungry Souls of all
Believers to feed upon. His flesh is meat indeed, his blood is drink indeed.
Joh. 6.

2. This was part of the Priests maintenance. As indeed they had something out
of every Offering, see Numb. 18.9, 10.

From whence we see, that they who serve at the Altar, should live of the
Altar; they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

The third thing concerning the Meat Offering, is the scope and intent of it:
this is hinted in verse. 3. To be an Offering made by Fire of a sweet savor
unto the Lord.

More particularly, there was a fourfold Mystery shadowed forth by it; I speak
now as to the general scope of the whole: for the mysteries of particular Rites
and Ceremonies about it, must be spoken to under each particular Rite.

1. It did prefigure and shadow forth the atonement or expiation of sin, by the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, both by his Sufferings and Actings, his active
and passive Obedience.

That this was one part of the mystery of the Meat Offering, the Scripture is
express: 1 Samuel 3.14. the iniquity of Elies house shall not be purged or
expiated (...) with Sacrifice, or Offering for ever. Neither by slain
Sacrifices, nor by Meat Offerings for ever; so 1 Samuel 26.19. if the Lord have
stirred thee up against me, let him accept a Mincha. And Psalm. 40.6. speaking
of propitiatory Sacrifices, he says Zebach and Mincha; slain Sacrifices and
Meat Offerings thou would not.

The Apostle applies this to the sufferings of Christ for the expiation of our
sins, Heb. 10.5, 10. Therefore when Christ was come, he did cause both Zebach
and Mincha to cease, Dan. 9.27. both the slain Sacrifices, and the
Meat Offerings.

And it is expressly said of the poor man's Meat Offering for his Trespass, that
it shall make atonement, Lev. 5.11, 13.

This is thought to be some account of the Apostles limitation, Heb. 9.22.
where he says, That under the Law almost all things were purged by blood. For
it was not always done by slain Sacrifices, but sometimes by Meat Offerings.

And as the Scripture is clear for it: so indeed the thing it self speaks. For
there was in the Meat Offerings, an express adumbration of both the parts of
that justifying Righteousness of Jesus Christ, by which we are reconciled to
God.

His Sufferings or passive Obedience. For there was a destroying of the Mincha
by fire, and pouring it forth; as well as of the Zebachim by fire and blood.

Here was also an adumbration of his active Obedience, or fulfilling all
Righteousness, which was his meat and drink. Joh. 4.34. My meat, is to do the
will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. I know some have made some
question of this, whether the Meat Offering were Propitiatory, or only
Eucharistical? But you see how clear it is, both from the Scripture, and from
the Analogy of the thing it self.

2. The Meat Offering signified also the persons of Believers, who (through
Christ) are sanctified and cleansed to be a pure Oblation or Meat Offering unto
God. They are compared in Scripture to a Meat and Drink Offering; Isai. 66.20.
They shall bring their brethren for a Mincha or Meat Offering unto the Lord.
which was fulfilled in the Conversion of the Gentiles, as the Apostle speaks
Romans 15.16. and in the sufferings of the Saints, especially when they suffer
unto death and martyrdom in the Cause of Christ. They are a Drink Offering to
the Lord, exceedingly accepted of him; Philip. 2.17. Yea, if I be offered up as
a Drink Offering (si pro libamento offerar Beza) upon the sacrifice and service
of your Faith, I joy and rejoice with you all. 2 Timothy 4.6. For I am now ready
to be offered, (...). and the time of my departure is at hand. The Note upon it
is this, I am ready to be offered for a Drink Offering; and he alludeth to the
pouring out of blood or wine, which was used in Sacrifices.

3. The Meat Offering signified not only their persons, but their services,
those fruits of grace and good works that Believers do perform, whether toward
God or toward man; which are often compared to fruits, and to meat and drink.

And the Meat Offering you know, consisted of the Fruits of the Earth, of
things to be eat and drunk. Good works are called fruits, Phil. 1.6. and again
Philip. 4.17. And meat and drink. Joh 4.32. I have meat to eat that ye know not
of, and what was that? See verse. 34. My meat is to do the will of him that sent
me, and to finish his work. As the Meat Offering consisted of the Fruits of the
Earth, things to be eat and drunk.

To instance in particulars.

1. Prayer. Psalm. 141.2. Let my prayer be set before thee as Incense, and the
lifting up of my hands as the evening Mincha, or Meat Offering: so when the
Lord told the Jews, I will not accept a Mincha or Meat Offering at your hands;
he adds, that in stead of them, Mal. 1.10, 11. From the rising of the Sun to
the going down of the same, Incense shall be offered to my Name, and a pure
Mincha, a pure Meat Offering. which is fulfilled when men pray every where
lifting up pure hands, etc. 1 Timothy 2.8.

2. Praise and thankful acknowledgment of Gods goodness and sovereignty, and
the interest God has in us, and in all our comforts and enjoyments, which, as
they come from him, are thus acknowledged by way of Chief-Rent in Sacrifice.
This small Rent (as a Peper corn in some Leases) being an acknowledgment of
their Homage, that he is the great Landlord and Owner of all the good they
enjoyed: therefore while his Worship was neglected, he blasted them in all
their outward comforts, Hag. 1.9, 10, 11. But when they acknowledged him, he
remembered them; Cap. 2. verse. 19. And left a Meat Offering and a
Drink Offering in the house of the Lord, as Joel 2.14. This is a second duty
taught in the Meat Offering.

3. Some conceive here was a prefiguration also of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, and indeed something of Analogy does appear: for the Meat Offering did
consist of Bread and Wine, as the Lords Supper does. And as the Meat was eaten
by the Priests: so is the Bread by Believers, who are Gospel-Priests.

But yet, as in all Similitudes and Types; beside the Analogy, there be also
sundry disproportions and disparities, between the Type and the thing typified:
so here for the Meat Offering, was both a Feast and a Sacrifice, part of it
being burnt upon the Altar. But the Lords Supper is only a Feast and not a
Sacrifice, being wholly eaten by the Priests.

The Meat Offering did refer to what was future, the Lords Supper to what is
past: that was a prefiguration of the true Sacrifice; the Lords Supper is a
commemoration of it.

In the Meat Offering the Wine was only poured forth before the Lord: but in
the Lords Supper, the Communicants are to drink it. Drink ye all of it. Mat.
26.27.

In a word, that was a Type; this a Sacrament.

4. There is a fourth duty which the Sacrifice of the Meat Offering may refer
to, and that is, Alms, bounty and liberality to the Saints, and to the Poor:
this is a true Sacrifice, and a Gospel Meat Offering. The Apostle seems to
speak of it under such a notion; Heb. 13.16. To do good, and to communicate
forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. And Philip. 4.17, 18.

4. The Meat Offering shadowed forth the acceptance of our persons and
services with the Lord: so in the places before alleged, Philip. 4.17, 18. the
Apostle calls what the Philippians sent unto him for his supply, An Odor of a
sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing unto God. see Mal. 1.10. God
rejects the Jews, but accepts the Gentiles in their stead, together with their
prayers and services, verse. 11.

Upon this account, Frankincense was an Ingredient in the Meat Offering, to
make a sweet smell; Hos. 9.4. They shall not offer Wine Offerings to the Lord,
neither shall they be pleasing unto him. The Lord has sometimes given signal
evidence and testimony of his good acceptance of this Sacrifice, and of his
people therein: see 2 King. 3.9, 10, 20.

So that look as our Reconciliation to God, was in a special manner taught and
held forth by the Burnt-Offering: so our Sanctification and acceptance with
him, is in a peculiar manner taught and shadowed forth in the Meat Offering:
which has occasioned some to restrain it to this Scope only, though that is a
mistake as has been showed.

Thus you see the general Mysteries adumbrated and shadowed forth in the
Meat Offering, namely, Jesus Christ his atoning and reconciling us to God: as
also Believers, their persons, their services, the acceptance of both before
God.

4. The fourth Enquiry touching the Meat Offering is, concerning the additions
forbidden to be annexed to it; which were two, Leaven and Honey. verse. 11.

The reason and intent of this, is worthy to be considered and enquired into.

And first for the literal sense and meaning of the Prohibition, it is
concerning Fire-Offerings at the Brazen Altar: Leaven and Honey might not come
upon the Altar; but yet Leaven was permitted and allowed in Thank Offerings,
Lev. 7.13. and in the Offerings of First Fruits, Cap 23.17. So here in this
second Chapter, Verse. 12. it is thought to be spoken by way of caution; they
might offer it leavened, but not sacrificed at the Altar.

Honey also is numbered among the First Fruits, 2 Chronicles. 31.5. Though some
understand that of Dates, which are as sweet as Honey. This 12. verse. some
explain it thus: ye shall offer them to the Lord for a Wave-Offering, but not
for an Oblation at the Altar. This is strictly forbidden both in this and in
diverse other Scriptures as in reference to the Passover, and that very severely
under the pain of Extermination or cutting off, Exodus 12.19. And in Amos 4.5.
they are sarcastically reproved for it: for that Interpretation agrees best
with the Scope.

Now for the Reasons of the Prohibition.

And first for Leaven: Leaven you know has a sower taste, (it has its name)
one of its names in Hebrew (...) from the sowerness of the taste Vinegar is a
Conjugate from the same Root, Numb. 6.3. Chometz Jajin.

And it has a sowring and a swelling quality and property, and an infecting
spreading quality, when it is put into a Batch of Dough, it cease not till it
has made all the rest like unto it self: as our Savior speaks of it, Mat.
13.33. Leaven which a Woman took and hid in three measures of Meal, till the
whole was leavened. And so the Apostle Gal. 5.9. A little Leaven leaveneth the
whole lump.

Aul. Gellius. Lib. 8. Cap. 15.
The Heathen did retain by blind Tradition, some footsteps of this Ceremony: for
the flamen dialis or Roman Priest, might not by their Canons touch any leavened
Meal.

Plut. quest. Romans apud Aynsw. in Exodus 12.15.
Plutarch scanneth the reason of it thus; because Leaven it self proceeds
from corruption, and corrupts also the Meal with which it is mixed.

And therefore by the way that Metaphor of Fermentation so much used by some
late Philosophers, it may be doubted whether it be always so congruous, and so
full of light to clear up the mysteries of nature, as they suppose who make
such continual use of it; for it is but one kind or way of corruption.

But for the spiritual mystery of it.

Leaven argues Corruption, and therefore unleavened, is as much as to say
uncorrupted.

I find Leaven applied in Scripture to sin and sinners, and Corruptions of all
sorts, and particularly to these four.

1. To false Doctrine, Mat. 16.6, 11, 12. The Leaven of the Pharisees, is the
false Doctrine of the Pharisees.

2. To scandalous and wicked practices; 1 Cor. 5.6, 7, 8. Purge out the old
Leaven, that ye may be a ^ein lump as ye are unleavened -- Let us keep the
Feast not with old Leaven, neither with the Leaven of malice and wickedness,
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

Discontent; Psalm. 73.21. thus my heart was grieved Or according to the Hebrew
Metaphor, thus was my heart leavened or sowred: Ki Jithchametze leba^i, or
rather leavened and sowred it self.

Malice and cruelty, the Leaven of maliciousness; Psalm. 71.4. Deliver me O my
God, out of the hand of the unrighteous and cruel man, the leavened person,
Chometz. So likewise Pride is fitly compared to Leaven, because it puffs and
swells the heart.

3. To Hypocrisy and secret sins; Luke 12.1, 2. the Leaven of the Pharisees,
which is Hypocrisy.

4. To promiscuous Communion and carnal mixtures in Church society; 1 Cor. 5.6.
A little Leaven leaveneth the whole lump.

Some are apt to say, their sin will do me no hurt: but you may be deceived in
this. I tell thee their sins may infect and damn thee; One Fornicator or
profane person must not be allowed in the Church, lest many be defiled. Heb.
12.15, 16.

This is a Truth so clear throughout the whole Scripture, that if I were to
choose what Death I would dye, I think I could never choose to dye in a better
cause, than for bearing witness to this Truth. That the Church of God ought not
to be made a Den of Thieves, and a Refuge and Receptacle for wicked Livers:
there must be no such Leaven in the House of God.

Now put all these together, and put them into the affirmative, and you see a
fourfold Instruction in this Prohibition of Leaven.

It teaches us.

1. Soundness in the Faith of Christ. 2. Holiness of life. 3. Sincerity of
heart. 4. Purity of Church Communion.
2. Honey was forbidden also; it may seem strange that so sweet and so good a
thing should be so severely interdicted. How often is the Land of Canaan
commended as a Land flowing with Milk and Honey? But to eat too much of it, is
not good. Prove. 25.16, 27. It cloys and loads the Stomach, and turns to choler
and bitterness; and if poured upon the Fire, it swells and rises up in Froth.

Three things we may learn out of this Prohibition of Honey.

1. That God will be worshipped according to his own Institution and Command;
his Will is the Rule we must submit unto, though we cannot well see the reason
of it.

We must not follow any Invention of our own, though to our carnal thoughts it
seem as sweet as Honey, though it seem never so decent; never so orderly: as
that is the common pretense, it is for decency and orders sake.

But what think you Friends, is not Honey sweet and decent too? But God
requires it not: therefore away with it from the Meat Offerings of the Lord.

2. That holy temperature and equability of spirit, that becomes Saints in all
the conditions and vicissitudes they pass through; we must take heed of
Extremes. There should be neither Leaven nor Honey; neither too much sower, nor
too much sweet; neither inordinate sorrow, nor inordinate pleasures in the
Meat Offering of the Saints; they should neither be dejected nor lifted up, but
in an even well composed frame and temper of Spirit, 2 Cor. 12.7, 10. neither
leavened and sowred with discontent under worldly troubles, nor surfeited with
the sweatness and Honey of carnal pleasure, and delight and contentment of the
Creature.

3. Some apply it unto Christ himself, thus: That there is in Christ our
Meat Offering, no such sweetness which turns to loathing, no such pleasure
whereof a man can take too much; there is no glutting, no satiety, no after
sorrows, no such delight as proves bitter in the latter end, as much Honey
does. But on the contrary, the more any man tastes of the sweetness and comfort
that is in him, the more he shall long for it, and say, Lord evermore give us
of this bread. as Joh. 6.34. more of this bread, more of this comfort, this
Communion with God. He is not sweet at first, and bitter afterward: but his
Yoke seems heaviest at first, but lighter afterward: he speaks first of the
Cross, then of the Crown of Glory.

These four are all in this Chapter; for the other two additional Enquiries, we
shall borrow Light out of other Scriptures further to illustrate this.

5. The fifth Enquiry concerning the Meat Offering is, concerning the
appurtenance of Drink Offerings by divine Institution, affixed and annexed to
the Meat Offering.

I reckon it as an appurtenance to the Meat Offering, for two Reasons.

1. Because it is not mentioned as a distinct Species in that Enumeration of
the Legal-Offerings, which has been so often quoted Lev. 7.37. The
Drink Offering is there omited, as being included and understood in the
Meat Offering.

2. Because it was never offered alone under the Law, but always in conjunction
with the slain Sacrifices, to complete the Meat Offering belonging to them.

It is true, before the Law we read of Drink Offerings alone; Jacob Genesis 35.14.
he set up a Pillar in Bethel, and he poured a Drink Offering thereon, and he
poured Oil thereon.

But after that Regulation and Reformation of the Offerings by Moses, we never
read of any Drink Offering alone, but only in Conjunction with Meat Offerings,
and Slaughter-Offerings. As Numb. 15.5. And the fourth part of a Hin of Wine
for a Drink Offering shall thou prepare, with the Burnt-Offering, or Sacrifice
for one Lamb. And verse. 7. For a Ram, thou shall offer for a Drink Offering the
third part of a Hin. And again verse. 11. For a Bullock. And Numb. 28.7. The
Drink Offering thereof shall be the fourth part of an Hin for one Lamb, etc.
Lev. 23.18. They shall be for a Burnt Offering unto the Lord, with their
Meat Offerings, and their Drink Offerings.

And in Hezekia's time, when he purged the House of God, it is said 2 Chronicles.
29.35. The Burnt-Offerings were in abundance with the fat of the
Peace Offerings, and the Drink Offerings for eve By rurnt Offering.

I shall speak to three things upon the Drink Offering.

1. The matter of it. 2. The Rite and manner of Oblation. 3. The Mystery of it.
1. First then for the matter of it, it was Wine; Numb. 15.5. Wine for a
Drink Offering shall thou prepare. Called Shekar in Numb. 28.7. from whence the
Greek Sikera, that is, a strong inebriating Wine; our Translators here render
it strong Wine.

Hence Hos. 9.4. They shall not offer Wine-Offerings to the Lord.

Hence Judge. 9.13. in Jothams Parable the Vine says, should I live my Wine
which cheereth God and man?

How does Wine cheer God? It cannot be said to cheer God otherwise, than in
Offerings and Sacrifices.

The Heathen fell into an horrible Corruption, as to this; for that they
mingled Blood in their idolatrous and superstitious rage in Drink Offerings,
whereto the Psalmist alludes, Psalm. 16.4. and declares how he abominates such a
practice; Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten or give Gifts to
another God: their Drink Offerings of Blood will I not offer. It is not unlike
the Health Drinkers of our times, of whom you may have heard of some who (in
their raging profanness) have mingled their own Blood with Wine, and so have
drunk it in Healths to the Devil, and to the confusion of Sion, and Sions King.

2. The Rite and manner of Oblation was, by pouring of it forth before the
Lord: Numb. 28.7. In the holy place shall thou cause strong Wine to be poured
out unto the Lord for a Drink Offering, that is, upon the Altar say some, but
not upon the Fire; or as others beside the Altar: for it is likely the Wine of
the Drink Offering was to be poured forth, where the blood of the slaughtered
Sacrifices was poured forth: but that was at the bottom of the Altar, as you
have formerly heard upon Cap. 1. with Cap. 8.15.

Hence it has its name in Hebrew Nesek, libamen, a sacred effusion, or a
pouring out; from the Verb Nasak, fudit, effudit.

They were not to drink it; that might have been an occasion of intemperance
and drunkenness, there being daily and continual Drink Offerings; nay there was
no piece of legal worship wherein they were commanded to drink Wine.

But there is an express prohibition of any such Rite; Lev. 10.8, 9. And the
Lord spoke unto Aaron, saying, Do not drink Wine or strong drink, thou nor thy
Sons with thee, when you go into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, lest you
die. Verse. 10. And that you may put difference between holy and unholy, and
between unclean and clean.

3. The spiritual Mystery of it. Doubtless it had much of spiritual mystery in
it: the Psalmist calls it the Cup of Salvation. Psalm. 116.13. I will take the
Cup of Salvation and call upon the Name of the Lord, for what other
Administration under the Law that expression could relate unto, besides this, I
know not: there being no other use of Cups of Wine amongst them in the Worship
of God, but only in these Drink Offerings whereof we speak.

Three things I shall briefly note.

1. Wine in typical and allegorical Scriptures, does sometimes signify the joys
and consolations of the Holy Ghost: for Wine rejoices and cheers the heart,
Psalm. 104.15. Wine that makes glad the heart of man. Therefore the Apostle
Ephesians. 5.18. so speaks, Be not inebriated with Wine wherein is excess, but be
ye filled with the Spirit. The Apostles Antithesis between Wine and the Spirit
intimates this; Cant. 1.2. Thy love is better than Wine. And verse. 4. We will
be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more than Wine. And
Cant. 2.5. Stay me with Flagons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love.
Stay me with Flagons, that is, with Flagons of Wine. Metonymia subjecti
continentis pro contento. As in the Supper the Cup is put for the Wine. This
Cup is my blood, that is, the Wine in the Cup: so here Stay me with Flagons,
she prays for the sense of his Love.

2. We find the Saints pouring out their blood in the Cause of Christ, compared
to a Drink Offering, Phil. 2.27. 2 Timothy 4.6, And so is in an higher, in a much
higher sense the blood of Christ represented by Wine in the Sacrament of the
Supper, as his Flesh by Bread: and so the Meat and Wine in the Meat Offering,
may also represent his Flesh and Blood.

3. It shadowed forth the Lords acceptance of his people, Shall I leave my Wine
wherewith I cheer both God and man? Judge. 9.13. that is, pleasing to God in
Sacrifice.

Hence when the Lord declares his rejection and disacceptance of them; Hos.
9.4. he thus expresses it, they shall not offer Wine Offerings to the Lord,
neither shall they be pleasing unto him.

6. The sixth and last Enquiry that was propounded concerning the Meat Offering
is, the Seasons and Occasions upon which it was to be offered.

There is the more cause to speak to this, both because the Scripture is
Copious in it, and because there has been something of controversy, and
something perhaps of inadvertency and of mistake about it.

You may note this in general: There be some Offerings which were
Meat Offerings as to their matter, which yet did not come under the Rule of the
Meat Offering, as it is here laid down in this second Chapter of Leviticus.

There be three Instances of this.

1. The Wave Sheaf. Lev. 23.10, 11.

2. The two Wave Loaves. Lev. 23.17. It is true, these agreed in the matter
with the Meat Offering properly so called; for they were of the Fruits of the
Earth, that were to be eaten: but yet they did not come under the Rule of the
Meat Offering.

For they were not Ishim Offerings made by Fire, they were not to be burnt, nor
were they most holy, to be eaten by the Priests alone in the holy place: and
they were to be made with Leaven, which is contrary to the ordinary Rule of
Meat Offerings.

But they were Heave-Offerings, which were but singly and not doubly holy.

3. A third Instance is the Jealousy-Offering. Numb. 5. which differs from the
Meat Offering, partly in the matter. For the Jealousy-Offering was not fine
Flower, nor yet Flower of Wheat, Qemach Sheirim Meal of Barley; (...) some
render it the Bran of Barley.

Barley the coursest sort of Bread-Corn and Bran, the coursest part of that
Grain: not Wheat, but Barley; not Flower, but Meal and no Oil nor Frankincense
with it.

It differed also and chiefly in the end and use, the Meat Offering being for
expiation, as has been formerly proved: but the Jealousy-Offering was for
exploration and discovery of guilt or innocence. It was for a Memorial, but not
for a Memorial of acceptance, but to bring sin to remembrance, Numb. 5.15.

For these Reasons, though there be something of general agreement, being of
the Fruits of the earth, and so may be called a Meat Offering in a general
sense, and so accordingly is called Mincha, verse. 15. Yet you see how much it
differs from the Rule of the Meat Offering, in this second of Leviticus;
therefore it was not properly a Meat Offering.

Quest. But when then was the Meat Offering offered? And what Offerings were
there under the Law, that come more fully under that notion?

Ans. They were of two sorts, either separate, or conjoined with other
Offerings. Of separate Meat Offerings there are two signal Instances.

1. The poor man's Trespass Offering, Lev. 5.11, 12. in stead of the Trespass
Offering of Cattle, because of his poverty.

2. The Show Bread, Lev. 24, 7, 9.

It seems to have been a Meat Offering for the Incense was burnt as a Memorial
for the Bread, say some.

Or as others; an handful of the Flower whereof they were made, was burnt for
the whole: and the rest was eaten by the Priests, after they had been
presented, and had stood for a time before the Lord: so much as to separate
Meat Offerings.

Now 2. as to Meat Offerings conjoined with other Offerings.

The general Rule is this. That they were conjoined with Burnt Offerings of
Cattle, and with Peace Offerings, whether offered as Vows, or as
Freewil-Offerings, or at their solemn Feasts, and in sundry other incidental
occasions.

But they were not conjoined with Burnt Offerings of Fowls* nor with Sin, or
Trespass Offerings*

This Rule is both affirmative and negative, it is grounded upon Numb. 15.4, 9.

Hence as there was a daily Burnt-Offering, so there was a daily Meat Offering;
Numb. 4.16. Numb. 28.4, 5.

And sometimes the Lord gave signal testimonies of his acceptance of it, as 2
King. 3.9, 10, 20. So at the Consecration of the Priests and Levites, Lev.
8.26, 27. And Lev. 9.4. At the Consecration of the Levites, Numb. 8.8. At the
Expiration of the Nazarites Vow, Numb. 6.17. At the Dedication of the
Tabernacle. there were twelve Meat Offerings according to the number of the
Tribes, Numb. 7.13, 14.

Also the Sheaf of First Fruits, though it self was a Wave-Offering, yet there
was a Meat Offering annexed to them, Lev. 23.18.

So that generally where you have a Burnt-Offering, or a Peace Offering under
the Law, whether under the notion of a Vow or a Freewil-Offering, or at their
stated Feasts, and in most incidental occasions, though I cannot say in all,
for it is not mentioned in the purification of women after Childbed, Levit.
12.6. They had a Meat Offering by divine Institution, annexed and conjoined
with it.

The other part of the Rule is negative, and it is this: we do not find that
Meat Offerings were annexed unto the Burnt-Offerings of Fowls, or to Sin, or
Trespass Offerings, or to First Fruits, or Tithes, or to the Paschal-Lamb,
though to the Feast of the Passover they were, Deuteronomy. 16.1, 2. And in the
cleansing of the Leper, the Meat Offering seems to be annexed to the
Sin-Offering, Lev. 14.10. which is a peculiar Case.

This Rule is drawn from the authority of the Scripture negatively, there being
no such annecting of it unto these in that place, Numb. 15. where it is annexed
unto Burnt-Offerings and Peace Offerings: but where it was not commanded, where
they were not directed to it in the Law, they might not do it.

Use. See the fullness of spiritual Mystery, and the plenty of Gospel Light and
Teaching, that is in the Sacrifice of the Meat Offering.

To recapitulate briefly some Heads of things, which have been more largely
opened to you.

It relates both to Christ and Christians, and is full of spiritual mystery as
to both.

1. As to Christ, he is the true Meat Offering, the Food of our Souls: it was
to consist of fine Flower, to denote his Cleanness and Purity.

The baking, frying, drying, beating of it: points us to his Sufferings, and so
does the burning of it upon the Altar.

The pouring forth the Wine belonging to the Meat Offering, plainly represents
the pouring out his Blood.

The Green Ears, represents Christ as the First Fruits, by whom all the rest is
sanctified.

The Priests eating it, tells us how Believers feed upon Christ by Faith, as
the Bread of Life.

The Oil, is the Spirit of Christ.

The Incense, his Prayers and Mediation, and the efficacy and acceptance
thereof with God for us.

The Salt of the Covenant, is the stability and everlasting faithfulness of God
as our God, in a Covenant Relation through Jesus Christ.

The prohibition of Leaven and Honey, frees Christ from all Corruption of life
and doctrine, and all such deceiving comfort, which afterward like Honey turns
to bitterness.

2. Apply it to Christ mystical, to the Saints and Members of Christ, for it
may be so applied: the Gentiles under the Gospel are presented as an acceptable
Meat Offering to the Lord, Isai. 66.20. Every particular and circumstance of it
is full of teaching.

The Fine Flower, teaches us to purge our selves from the Bran of our natural
Corruption.

We must be anointed with the Unction of the Spirit.

The Incense, teaches us to be much in prayer, and to expect acceptance with
the Lord.

The Salt, instructs us in the safety of our Covenant-Estate and Interest in
God: and that our speeches and whole deportment, should be savoury and seasoned
with Salt.

The forbidding of Leaven and Honey, calls upon us to purge out the Old Leaven
of sinful Corruption, and to take heed of the sweetness and pleasures of sin.

I beseech you brethren do not rest in the notional understanding of these
Truths, but reduce all to practice.

If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. Joh. 13.17. But if you
know all mysteries, and have not love, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2. it profits nothing.

And to press you a little further; you may observe, that the Meat Offering
under the Gospel, is larger than it was under the Law; as you will find if you
compare Numb. 28. with Ezekiel. 46. For in Numb. 28.5. the Meat Offering is but
the tenth part of an Ephah, it is but the fourth part of an Hin of beaten oil.
But in Ezekiel. 46.13, 14 it is augmented, the Meat Offering to a sixth part of an
Ephah, and the third part of an Hin of oil.

This speaks a greater degree of fruitfulness and more ample obedience under
the Gospel, then was of old under the Law.

That look as the Grace of God in Christ abounds toward us under the Gospel,
so should we abound in our Returns of thankful and fruitful obedience. 1 Timothy
1.14. And the Grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with faith and love,
which is in Christ Jesus.

Can you not go along with the Apostle in those expressions? Has not God
abounded toward you in Mercy and free Grace? Have you not sometimes said,
never such a Pattern of Mercy, never the like Riches of free Grace, if the Lord
pardoned such sins, and heal such backslidings: therefore be you abundant in
the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. ult.

If you know these things, happy are you if you do them.

THE GOSPEL OF THE PEACE OFFERING.
Lev. 3. July 26. August 6, 9. 1668.
The Peace Offering. Shelamim.


THe third sort of Sacrifices or Offerings under the Law, is the Peace Offering.

We had the Burnt-Offering in the first Chapter, the Meat Offering in the
second Chapter; and now follows the Peace Offering here in the third. Yola.
Mincha. Shelamim.

We may open it in this Method, which I hope will be plain and edifying.

1. The name. 2. The ends, occasions and seasons of it. 3. The matter of it. 4.
The sacred Rites and Ceremonies, or ceremonious Actions about it.
1. For the name; it is Shelamim which we render the Peace Offering, and Zebach
Shelamim the Sacrifice of the Peace Offering; from Shalom pax, so called,
because it was a Sacrifice of Peace Offering amongst all the parties: God, and
the Priests, and the people being all partakers of it, as being all agreed, and
therefore sociable partakers of the same thing.

The word may be otherwise rendered; but this Interpretation is most generally
received, and suits well with the nature of this Sacrifice of Peace Offerings.

2. The ends occasions and seasons of the Peace Offerings (for we may put all
these together) First as to their ends, they were of a mixed nature, they were
both Hilastical, Eucharistical and Euctical, both for atonement, and for
thanksgiving, and for prayer: they were in general for peace and reconciliation
with God.

Some I know have questioned this, which I must confess I have often wondered
at, and they have thought it merely expressive of moral duties, of homage and
thankfulness to God, etc. But it was a Fire-Offering upon the Brazen Altar; all
the rest of which, were for reconciliation and atonement, and therefore why not
this?

It is said to be a savor of rest. verse. 5. which signifies Gods acceptance.
The Actions about it, speak forth this end; for it was slain and burnt upon the
Altar, the Blood poured forth and sprinkled upon the Altar round about, etc.
All pointing to Jesus Christ, who is indeed the true Peace Offering. Ephesians.
2.14. He is our Peace, and he has made peace by the blood of his Cross; Col.
2.20. Yet this was but the general, and not the special, nor the only end of
them.

There be two particular ends mentioned in Cap. 7.

1. Peace enjoyed, to testify their thankfulness. 2. Peace desired and sought
after; each of which had their different Rites, of which afterward.
1. One end was for thanksgiving, by way of Retribution for mercies received.
Lev. 7.11, 12. of which Psalm. 107.22. And let them sacrifice the Sacrifices of
thanksgiving, and declare his works with rejoicing. Heb. 13.15. By him
therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of praise to God continually,
acknowledging Christ in all our mercies.

2. Another end of the Peace Offerings, was for the impetration or obtaining of
mercies wanted, either in the way of a Vow, or a Freewil-Offering, Lev. 7.16 --
Judge. 20.26. The Tribes in their Fast for obtaining victory against the
Benjamites, offered Peace Offerings in the way of a Freewil-Offering. Psalm.
56.12. Thy Vows are upon me O God, I will render praises unto thee. Or I will
pay confessions unto thee; that is, he would in a way of praise, offer the
Peace Offerings that he had vowed. So Jonah 2.9. But I will sacrifice unto thee
with the voice of thanksgiving, I will pay that I have vowed: Salvation is of
the Lord. Genesis 28.20, 21, 22. The tenth of all that God should give him, Jacob
vowed to give to God, that is, as a Peace Offering.

The difference between a Vow and a Freewil-Offering was only this. That in the
Freewil-Offering they did present the thing it self unto the Lord; but in a Vow
they did first promise it, being (it may be) not in a capacity to perform it at
that time. As Jonah in the Whales belly: and then when the deliverance was
bestowed, and the Prayer heard and granted, they paid their Vows unto the Lord.

Hence some have thus referred and compared these three sorts of Offerings
hitherto described, and directed in this Book.

That as the Burnt-Offering Cap. 1. principally figured our Reconciliation to
God, by the death of Jesus Christ: and the Meat Offering Cap. 2. had a special
respect to our Sanctification in him before God: so this Peace Offering,
signified both Christ's Oblation of himself, whereby he became our Peace and our
Salvation; and likewise our Oblation of Praise, Thanksgiving and Prayer unto
God, in the midst of our troubles, temptations and spiritual conflicts, which
we fight by Faith in this world: so that in this Sacrifice, we come boldly to
the Throne of Grace, that we may receive Mercy, and find Grace to help in time
of need, as Heb. 4.16.

Therefore some have noted, that this Sacrifice of Peace Offering, was often
added under the Law to other sorts of Sacrifices. Because, beside the expiation
of sin by the Blood of Christ, there must be an effectual application of the
atonement in a way of actual communion with God, in a way of grace and peace
through Jesus Christ. Christ does not only procure peace for us, but
Communicate and apply it to us.

Here was an actual Participation, and an exercise of mutual Communion between
God and the Priest, and the Offerers feasting together.

Quest. What were the times and seasons when they offered and were to offer
Peace Offerings?

Ans. They were either Occasional, or more stated.

The Occasional times, were either, 1. in thanksgiving; or 2. as Vows; or 3. as
Freewil-Offerings, which were formerly spoken to.

The more stated times are such as these.

1. At the Consecration of the Priests. One of the Rams is called a Peace
Offering. Exodus 29.28. And at the first Consecration of Aaron and his Family,
Lev. 9.4. Also a Bullock and a Ram for Peace Offerings, to sacrifice before the
Lord.

2. At the expiration of a Nazaretical Vow; Numb. 6.14. One Lamb without
blemish for a Peace Offering.

3. At the Dedication of the Tabernacle. Each of the twelve Princes of the
twelve Tribes of Israel, brought for a Sacrifice of Peace Offerings two Oxen,
five Rams, five He Goats of the first year. Numb. 7.17.

So at the Dedication of the Temple by Solomon. 1 King. 8.62, 63. Solomon
offered a Sacrifice of Peace Offerings which he offered unto the Lord, two and
twenty thousand Oxen, and a hundred and twenty thousand Sheep.

4. In the Feast of First Fruits. Two Lambs of the first year for a Sacrifice
of Peace Offerings. Lev. 23.19.

As for the Offerings at the Purification of a Leper; the two Birds. Lev. 14.
It differs so much from the ordinary Rule of the Peace Offerings, that it
cannot well be annumerated to them: but it was a peculiar Sacrifice of
Purification, of which we shall speak hereafter.

So likewise the Passover Lamb. Exodus 12. though Eucharistical; yet cannot well
be reduced to the Peace Offerings, or to any of the six ordinary kinds: but was
indeed a peculiar Sacrifice, having other Rites than what belonged to the Peace
Offering.

3. The matter of the Peace Offering: it was either of the Herd, or of the
Flock; either of the bigger, or of the lesser sort of Cattle; either Lambs or
Goats.

There was no Peace Offering of Fowls, as there was of Turtle Doves and young
Pigeons in the Burnt-Offering.

The reason whereof is thought to be, because this was to be divided amongst so
many; to God, and the Priest, and the Offerers: but in Birds being so small,
this division could not so conveniently be made.

Moreover it must be without blemish, and this was required before in the
Burnt-Offering, and indeed in all their Sacrifices.

And finally the Peace Offering, it might be either Male or Female; which was
otherwise in the Law of the Burnt-Offering, that was to be Males only. Cap 1.3.

This Interpreters do apply spiritually to the estate of the Church in Christ,
in whom there is neither Male nor Female. Gal. 3.28.

He that accepts a Female in his Sacrifice, does not exclude Women from his
Service: they are not excluded from his Love, and therefore should not count
themselves freed from his Law.

It was a good speech of a Woman that was a Martyr, Jesus Christ suffered as
much for the redeeming of our Souls, as he did for Men: and therefore, why
should not we have as much courage as they to suffer for him? God is no
Respecter of persons.

4. The Rites and Ceremonies of the Peace Offering, they were of two sorts.

1. Common unto this, with other Offerings. 2. Peculiar to the Peace Offerings.
As to the former sort, there be five sacred Ceremonies required here, which
were mentioned before in the Burnt-Offering Cap. 1. and accordingly were there
explained. As,

1. It must be brought to the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.

2. The Owner must lay his hands upon it.

3. It must be killed.

4. The blood shed and sprinkled upon the Altar round about.

5. Burning it upon the Altar; all which having been explained before when we
were upon the Burnt-Offering. We may now proceed to the second sort, viz.

2. Such Rites as are here first mentioned, as having some peculiar respect to
the Sacrifice of Peace Offerings.

Now these may be reduced to four Heads.

1. The division of it into three parts, namely between God and the Priest and
the people.

2. The limitation of time, for eating the Priests and peoples part, to wit,
upon the same day, or the next.

3. The addition of Leaven.

4. The prohibition of fat and blood.

These are the sacred Rites and Ceremonies that were peculiar to the
Peace Offerings; the reasons and mysteries whereof require a little opening.

1. The division of it, etc. 1. It was divided into 3. parts, etc.

1. Some parts of it were to be burnt before the Lord upon the Altar, upon the
Burnt-Offering, viz. all the Suet and the Fat of the Inwards, the two Kidneys,
the Cawl upon the Liver, or the Midriffe and all their Fat.

This is repeated three times over, viz. concerning the Peace Offerings of the
Herd, verse. 3, 4. And again concerning the Lamb, verse. 9, 10. And again lastly
concerning the Goat, verse. 14, 15. Only with this difference, That in the Peace
Offering of Lambs, there is added the whole Rump; verse. 9. the fat thereof and
the whole Rump, it shall he take off hard by the Back Bone. Whereof some
Interpreters give this account, That this in some kind of Sheep is very great
and fat, especially in those parts of the world. As Pliny lib. 8. cap. 48.

Therefore it is here commanded to be burnt upon the Altar, with the other Fat
and Inwards: so Aynsw. in loc.

Others give this account of it, That there is not the meanest part of the
Creature, but God has a right unto it: and though it be a thing never so
contemptible in it self, God can make it honorable and sacred, by applying it
to his service.

As the Rump here in the Sacrifice of Peace Offerings.

And so the Foreskin in the Sacrament of Circumcision, Genesis 17.11. Thus our own
Annotators in Lev. 3.9.

These parts of the Peace Offering must be offered: Yal ha yola in holocaustum
for a Burnt-Offering, as some render it; that is, these parts were in stead of
the whole, and had the use and virtue of the whole Burnt-Offering. Here is pars
pro toto, a synecdochical Offering, as we shall meet with many such kind of
Administrations under the Law, wherein a part is equivalent and accepted as in
stead of the whole.

Others Interpret it thus, Yal hayola; that is, upon the Burnt-Offering, (...),
as being added to it.

The Burnt-Offering was offered first, before any other Oblation; and then this
and other Offerings, superadded to it.

And so we may learn this out of it, That we are first to be reconciled unto
God by the death of his Son, applied and received of us by Faith, before any
Oblation of ours can be acceptable to him.

This sacrificed part of the Peace Offering, is called the Bread of the Altar,
and the Bread of God. Verse. 11 -- Numb. 28.2. My Offering and my Bread for my
Sacrifices made by Fire, shall ye observe to offer to me

They are called his Bread, because the Fire of the Altar did consume and eat
them up: and so the Justice of God devours and feeds upon the sinner.

The fierceness of the Wrath of God against sin and sinners burning as fire,
and devouring Souls: and the necessity of satisfaction and atonement by the
blood of Christ, in order to our peace with God; are the general Truths held
forth and taught in all the Sacrifices, and so in this of Peace Offerings.

2. God and the Altar being thus fed and satisfied in the first place, the rest
of the Peace Offering was divided between the Priest and the Owner that brought
it, to be eaten by them.

The Priests part was the Breast, and the right Shoulder.

The Owner had the rest.

This appears out of the 7. Chapter of this Book: the Breast was to be waved
before the Lord for a Wave-Offering, verse. 30.31.

The Shoulder to be heaved or lifted up before him for an Heave Offering, verse.
32, 33.

The Offerer with his Family was to eat the rest, such of them as were clean,
verse. 19, 20, 21. nay the unclean might not so much as touch it, verse. 21.
under pain of Extermination; if they did, it made the flesh unclean.

First as to the Priests part, we are here taught again that Gospel Truth of
the maintenance of Ministers.

The Apostle spells out this Lesson to us, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. They that serve at
the Altar, must live of the Altar.

And that the Breast and the Shoulder was for them; some have applied a little
more particularly thus.

That the Priests should be as Breasts and Shoulders; that is, Counselors and
Supporters to the people, preaching to the Ignorant with the Wisdom of a
prudent Breast, and bearing the Infirmities of the Weak, with the strength of a
patient Shoulder.

Others thus, (1) he was to have the Shoulder because of his bearing the
people, and carrying them and their Sacrifices before God. Lee Temple page 346.
And (2) the Breast, the seat of the heart; to note his compassion tenderness
and bowels to them, bearing them always in his prayers upon his heart before
the Lord.

Both which Accommodations are ingenious and spiritual, and taken from the
nature of the things: but the safest way, is to observe what hints the
Scripture gives: those Senses are solid, and carry the best evidence of light
and demonstration with them.

Secondly, as to the Offerer with his Family or Friends partaking of it: here
was an exercise of Communion, as 1 Cor. 10.21. They have communion with Devils
that eat of Idols Feasts: so this signified their communion with, and
Incorporation into Christ. Here was an holy Feast wherein they did rejoice
before the Lord; Deuteronomy. 12.6, 7. And thither shall you bring your
Burnt-Offerings, and your Sacrifices, and your Tithes, and Heave-Offerings of
your hand, and your Vows, and your Free Will Offerings, and the Firstlings of
your Herd, and of your Flocks, and there you shall eat before the Lord your
God, and ye shall rejoice in all that you put your hand unto, ye and your
Households wherein the Lord thy God has blessed thee.

We must learn to enjoy all our Enjoyments in and for the Lord, and to rejoice
in Communion with him, in spiritual feasting at his Table.

Eating the Peace Offering, is feeding upon Christ by Faith, and holy rejoicing
in him.

Christ was not offered for the Priests alone, or communicated to them alone,
but for the people also.

And that the unclean are so strictly excluded from either eating, or so much
as touching it. We see how dangerous a thing it is, for unclean and unworthy
persons to participate in the Feasts of the Lord. Hypocrites that partake of
the Sacraments in their uncleanness and receive unworthily, they eat and drink
their own damnation. 1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29. The flesh of these Sacrifices being
a figure of the flesh of Christ, to be eaten of the Saints by Faith.

This Law signified, that Unbelievers, Hypocrites, and wicked ones that profess
the Gospel, and partake of the Signs and Seals of Grace unworthily, do eat and
drink Judgment to themselves. Aynsw. in Lev. 7.22.

As no Peace Offering belongs to the unclean: so there is no peace to the
Wicked says my God. To the Wicked God says, what have thou to do to take my
Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed. Psalm. 50.

And here comes in that Quoere concerning the Peace Offerings, whether they
were of the Holy of Holies, whether they had the double, or only the single
Holiness?

They are not called most holy, as the other five sorts are. The reason whereof
is, because that some part of them was eaten by the people; but yet a part also
was burnt upon the Altar, and another part eaten by the Priests, and these
parts were most holy, though the whole was not.

Therefore some have called the Peace Offering, Sacrificium varium, a diverse
Sacrifice, as being partly holy, and partly most holy. And the other sorts they
call simplex, by a simple Sacrifice, intending that which was all of it most
holy: and the whole, was to shadow out the Sacrifice and satisfaction of Jesus
Christ, so Mede. Disc. 49.

2. The second Ceremony of the Peace Offering, was the limitation of time for
the eating of it.

The parts belonging to the Priest, and to the Offerer, must be eaten by them
the same day, or the next: but if any was left till the third day, it must be
burnt with fire. Lev. 7.15, 16, 17.18.

And here there is a distinction in the Rule between the two sorts or occasions
of Peace Offerings, namely, That if it were for Thanksgiving, it must be eaten
the same day that it is offered: but if it were for a Vow, or a voluntary
Offering, it must be eaten within two days. The former Rule is in verse. 15. The
Rule for the latter is in verse. 16.

But how if they did not observe this Rule; see the penalty in verse. 17.18. To
eat any of it upon the third day, was very detestable and abominable; see verse.
17, 18. It is forbidden under the penalty of utter Extermination.

There might be something of a natural Reason for this; because the flesh might
putrefy in that hot Climate, if kept longer.

But surely this is not all that was intended in such a severe and vehement
Prohibition.

Therefore there be also two spiritual Mysteries, that seem to be intended and
aimed at by the Spirit of God in this Ceremony.

1. To teach us, that we should make haste and not delay Communion with God, in
the exercise of Faith and thankful obedience. Do not delay and put off the work
of Believing: but receive Christ, and Communicate of him in this our day.

This Instruction is clear and evident out of this Ceremony; for seeing eating
signifies our feeding upon Christ by Faith, and to day and to morrow denotes a
short time: therefore this instructs us speedily to lay hold upon the Mercy of
God in Christ, and to feed upon this our Peace Offering while it is called to
day, according to that Psalm. 95.7, 8 -- Heb. 3.12, 13, 15.

So for other duties of obedience, we should not delay the expressions of our
joy and thankfulness to God. Psalm. 119.60. I made haste and delayed not to keep
thy Commandments.

They had a like Rule touching the Passover. Exodus 12.10. Ye shall let nothing
of it remain until the morning, and that which remains of it until the
morning, ye shall burn with fire.

One scope whereof was, to teach us to lay hold on present opportunities. Do
not protract the time; there is a day of Peace after which, when once expired,
it is too late: God will not accept thy Peace Offerings then.

2. It is thought to have respect unto Christ's Resurrection, which was upon the
third day: therefore he says Luke 13.32. Behold I cast out Devils, and I do
Cures to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected. Then he
ended his work and state of humiliation for our Redemption, and had no more to
do in a way of Sacrifice and Peace Offering for our sins. In which respect, the
number of three was a mystical number under the Law, as well as the number
seven: the Scripture often sets a mark upon it. Isaac was offered the third
day. Genesis 22.4.

Against the third day they were to be ready to receive the Law upon Mount
Sinai. Exodus 19.10, 11. Sanctify the people to day and to morrow, and let them
wash their Clothes and be ready against the third day, for the third day the
Lord will come down in the sight of all the people upon Mount Sinai: so the Ark
went before them three days before it rested. Numb. 10.33. And they departed
from the Mount of the Lord three days journey, and the Ark of the Covenant of
the Lord went before them in the three days journey, to search out a resting
place for them: And after three days to pass over Jordan into Canaan. Josh.
1.11.

In the third day the unclean person was to purify himself: but if he purify
not himself the third day, then the seventh day he shall not be clean. Numb.
19.12.

In the third day Hezekiah went up into the house of the Lord and recovered
from the sentence of death, 2 King. 29.5. Hos. 6.2. After two days he will
revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his
sight. With many other memorable things: all which intimates something of
mystery in the third day. And the greatest Dispensation that ever was upon that
day, was the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, after he had layn part
of three days in the Grave. Then he was perfected and had no more to do in way
of Sacrifice and satisfaction for our sins; as after the third day there was no
more of the Peace Offering remaining.

3. A third Ceremony in the Peace Offering was this, That they were to offer
leavened bread with it. Cap. 7. verse. 13.

This is the more remarkable; for that in all their other Sacrifices, Leaven
was usually very strictly and severely forbidden: but here it is required.

Here we may learn first, That it is not the nature of the thing it self, but
merely the will of God, that makes a thing good or evil in his worship.

To put Leaven into any other Offering, it makes the Sacrifice odious unto God,
and like a smoke in his Nostrils all the day; but if it please him to require
it in the Peace Offering, then it must be used.

So for Honey he forbids it in other Sacrifices, Lev 2.11. But in the First
Fruits they were to offer Honey; 2 Chronicles. 31.5. The Children of Israel brought
in abundance of the First Fruits of Corn, Wine, Oil, and Honey, and of all the
Increase of the Field. God herein manifesting his Authority, and the supremacy
of his Will.

If it had pleased our Lord Jesus Christ to command us to sign men in his Name,
with the sign of the Cross, it would have been a duty, and a blessed thing to
do it: and if he had not commanded us to wash men with Water in his Name, it
would have been a sinful and an unlawful Administration to baptize.

More particularly, Leaven is taken both in a good, and in a bad sense: and I
find Interpreters do accommodate and apply it both ways, as to the Sacrifice of
the Peace Offerings.

1. In the good sense, thus our Savior uses it in his Parable, Mat. 13.33.
the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto Leaven, which a Woman took and hid in three
measures of Meal, till the whole was leavened. And you have the same Parable
recorded again by Luke Cap. 13.21.

The Lord makes use of Leaven here, to teach and hold forth unto us the inward
and secret working of the Word and Spirit in the heart, sanctifying the heart
effectually, but gradually, by imperceptible degrees, as Leaven seasons the
Lump.

Thus the joining of Leaven with the Peace Offering, may teach us, That we and
our services must be seasoned with the new Leaven of Grace; whereby the old
Leaven of Corruption is changed and altered, and so the whole man made savoury.

Look as there is an old Leaven which must be purged out; for they that are in
the old unsavory lump of the Flesh, cannot please God: so there is a new
Leaven wherewith every ones heart and life should be seasoned; a new principle
of Grace, a spirit of Life from God, which in time works out the contrary old
principle of sinful Corruption, as an Antidote that works out poison out of the
body.

2. Take Leaven in the bad sense, and so it signifies sinful Corruption. In
this sense the Scripture often speaks of it, as 1 Cor. 5.

Hence we may learn that as God accepts the Peace Offering, though offered
with Leaven: so he accepts the sincere endeavors and services of his people,
though there be a mixture of sinful Corruption in them.

Or if we take Leaven as in that sense of sorrow and grief, as Psalm. 73.21.
thus my heart was leavened. Their having some sower Leaven amongst their
Feasts, may teach us, That in all our rejoycings in this World, there is a
mixture of sorrow; there is no prosperity so entire, but has some sorrow, some
affliction with it: as there is no day but has some Clouds.

Roses have Thorns, Honey has a Sting, Crowns and Scepters have Cares and
Troubles.

And it is not only so in natural Joy, but in those better Joys and
Consolations of the Almighty.

Spiritual Joy is and ought to be accompanied with godly sorrow, and is too often
accompanied with a mixture of carnal sorrow, and unbelieving doubts and fears.
There is some of this Leaven with the Peace Offerings of praise and
thanksgiving to the Lord.

4. The fourth Ceremony is this, That they must not eat the fat nor blood, but
give it wholly to the Lord, verse. 16, 17.

I number this among the Ceremonies of the Peace Offering, because it is here
first mentioned; and here indeed was the first occasion for it: for there being
no part at all of the Burnt-Offering to be eaten, there was no need there to
forbid the eating of fat or blood: but in the Peace Offerings, they were to eat
some part; therefore here comes in this exception, respecting the
Peace Offerings in the first place, though extended likewise to all the rest.

The first Prohibition is of Fat.

And here first for the literal sense of the Ceremony, before we come to the
mystical signification.

There be two Cautions to prevent mistakes, that the legal Rigor may not seem
greater then it was indeed.

1. It is meant only of that Fat that was to be sacrificed, as the Suet and Fat
of the Kidneys, etc. For of the other Fat that is diffused through the rest of
the flesh, throughout the whole body of the Beast, there is no mention in this
Restriction in the Text; and therefore being not restrained and prohibited, we
may justly presume, it was allowed and permitted to them, they might lawfully
eat of it. Neh. 8.10. eat the Fat, and drink the sweet.

2. It is meant only of the three kinds of Beasts, that were appointed to be
used in Sacrifice; for they were permitted to eat the Fat of other clean
Beasts. See Levit. 7.23, 25. where this restriction of Fat is clearly
explained, and restrained to the Fat of those three kind of Beasts.

Now as to the mystery and spiritual signification of this Ceremony, that we
may learn some wholesome Instruction out of it, the best way will be this: let
us consider when the Scripture speaks of Fat in an allegorical or metaphorical
sense, how is it meant?

For a Similitude is typus arbitrarius, and a legal Ceremony is no more but
typus fixus or destinatus, and differs from an Allegory or Metaphor or
Similitude, only in the fixation or destination of it by God, unto such an use
and end in a stated way.

Now you will find that the Scripture speaks of Fat in such a Metaphorical
sense two ways, (as was before noted concerning Leaven) both in a good, and in
an evil sense, which will give this Type a double aspect, as that also had.

Nor is there any real absurdity or incongruity, in the accommodation of a
Type, two or three several ways: for they are not so many contrary senses, but
only so many several Instructions or spiritual mysteries to be learned out of
one of Gods teaching Signs: such manifold Instructions being all included in
the vast aim and comprehensive wisdom of the Holy Ghost, designing and choosing
out such things for teaching Signs, as may afford and yield plentiful
Instruction to his people.

1. Then the Scripture speaks of Fat in a good sense. My soul shall be
satisfied a with marrow and fatness, Psalm. 63.5. That is, to be filled with the
best things.

So Isai. 25.6. In this Mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all people a
Feast of fat things, a Feast of Wine on the Lees, of fat things full of marrow.

So Genesis 45.18. Pharaoh says to Joseph's brethren, ye shall eat the fat of the
Land, that is, the best of it.

So all the Fat of the Oil, and all the Fat of the Wine, and of the Wheat,
Numb. 18.12. for so the Margin from the Hebrew reads: it denotes the best Oil,
the best Wine, the best Wheat, as the Translation well explains it.

Hence it is said of Abel by way of Commendation, Genesis 4.4. That he brought and
offered unto the Lord of the Firstlings of his Flock, and of the Fat thereof.

Thus the Lords challenging the fat of all the Sacrifices peculiarly to
himself, may instruct and teach us thus much: That we must serve God with the
best we have, the best of our time and strength, the vigor of our Spirits, the
best of our endeavors should be the Lords.

For men to spend their youth in the service of their lusts, and then at last
bring their decrepit old age unto God; this is to give the fat of their
Sacrifice to the Devil, and the lean unto God. But with such Sacrifices God
will not be well pleased.

And yet when we have brought the Fat, the best we have unto the Lord, it is
accepted not for our own sakes, but through Christ. As the Fat in the
Peace Offerings was burnt upon the Altar upon the Burnt-Offering, for a sweet
savor unto the Lord.

2. The Scripture sometimes speaks of Fat in deteriorem partem, in an evil
sense: so it is said of wicked men, their heart is as fat as Grease, but I
delight in thy Law. Psalm. 119.70. So Deuteronomy. 32.15. But Jesurun waxed fat and
kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with
fatness. Isai. 6.10. Make the heart of this people fat, lest they understand
with their heart, and convert and be healed. So it denotes a senseless hard
heart, the Fat in the body having little sense.

A Fat heart in this sense, is opposed to a fleshy heart: so it denotes
hardness, insensibleness, unbelief.

Now then the Fat being burnt upon the Altar, teaches us, That our Corruptions
must be burnt up by the Spirit of God, as a Spirit of Burning, and of Judgment.

And it is the Fat of the Inward parts, and of the Kidneys, and Liver, which
are the seat of Lust and Concupiscence.

We may learn from hence, that even secret sins in the Inward parts must be
destroyed and mortified. It is not enough to avoid open and outward sins, but
inward heart hypocrisy; secret lusts, they must be burnt before the Lord upon
the Altar, destroyed and mortified by the Spirit. God trys the Heart, searches
the Reins, sees into the Inward parts. That fatness of the heart must be
consumed, those Inward lustings unto sin, destroyed and mortified.

5. The last Ceremony was the forbidding of blood, verse. 10. This Prohibition
was more general than the former of Fat: for that was only some kinds of Fat.
But all manner of blood is forbidden, without any restraint or specification of
this or that kind.

The first Prohibition of blood that we read of in Scripture, was to Noah's
Sons. Genesis 9.4. But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof ye
shall not eat.

And now again by Moses here, and afterward in other places. As Cap. 7.26, 27.
and Cap. 17. from verse. 10, to the end: very largely and vehemently under the
forest pains and penalties, even utter extermination, and cutting off by the
immediate hand of God.

But that Prohibition in Noah's time, seems to differ from this by Moses: in
that it was living blood which was there forbidden: but here it is all manner
of blood. As to the mysteries and reasons of it, there be two things expressed
in Lev. 17.11.

1. Because the blood is the life of the Beast, verse. 11, 14. That is, it is
the Seat and Vehicle of the Spirits, which are the Soul and the Life of it, as
Philosophers say. Anima rationalis equitat in sensitiva, sensitiva equitat in
vegetativa. The sensitive Soul is the Chariot of the rational Soul, and the
vegetative of the sensitive: so their Blood is the Chariot of the vegetative
and vital Spirits.

The scope seems to be this, to forbid and prevent cruelty: it argues too much
greediness, and it tends to make the Spirits of men salvag and barbarous, to
drink living blood, or to eat the flesh, if it be not fully killed and cleansed
of the blood, 1 Samuel 14.32, 33, 34.

Some report, that it has been a custom used in some barbarous Nations,
amongst the Old Tartarians: they would open a Vein with an Instrument in the
Beast they rode upon, and so quench their thirst by drinking warm blood out of
the Veins of a living Creature. This is forbidden to Noah's Sons, Genesis 9. as a
salvage cruel thing.

Cruelty is abominable at all times, but especially when you come with your
Peace Offerings before the Lord.

It concerns you then especially, to take heed of harshness toward your
brethren.

How can men expect Peace from God, when ready to drink the blood of their
brethren.

A violent persecuting Spirit, is as black a Mark as any I know. To use
violence to their Consciences, this is to eat or drink their blood which God
abhors.

2. The second reason there assigned is, because I have given it to you upon
the Altar, to make an atonement for your Souls. Lev. 17.11. that is, typically,
as representing the blood of Christ.

So that here is a mystical Intimation of reverence to that precious blood, to
keep men in a reverend expectation of it: therefore they must abstain from
blood, as sacred to the Lord.

As David refused to drink of the Waters of the Well of Bethlehem, 2 Samuel
23.17. because it was per equivalentiam, the blood of them that fetched it with
the peril of their Lives.

So here, blood was typically the blood of Christ, and therefore sacred to the
Lord, they must not use it to other common use.

The Lord would hereby teach them a reverential esteem and high valuation, of
the blood of Jesus Christ.

Some go a little further, and observe this in it. That look as eating and
drinking signifies Communion: so 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? And forbidding to eat,
is a forbidding Communion. Act. 10.13, 14. In Peter's Vision, rise, kill and
eat. It is meant of exercising Communion with the Gentiles; and Peter's
objecting, Not so Lord, for I have never eaten any thing that is common or
unclean. His meaning is, he refuses Communion with them.

So this Prohibition of eating blood, which was given upon the Altar to make
atonement for men's Souls; and of Fat, which was given upon the Altar to be
consumed there with Fire, and so was the Lords; seems to forbid figuratively,
all ascribing and assuming unto our selves the work of our Redemption, which is
only by the blood of Christ, or the work of our Sanctification to our selves,
which Christ by his Spirit performs in us. Aynsw. in Lev. 3. ult.

To take this work to our selves, is to eat the blood as it were, which the
Lord will not endure.

There is a further reason given by some, That the Lord did it, to distinguish
his people from the Heathen, who were wont to drink the blood of their
sacrifices. Psalm. 16.3.

As indeed in all these ancient Institutions, the Lord had a special eye unto
that, to keep them off from the heathenish Customs and Idolatries.

Thus you see the reasons why blood was forbidden under the Law, the chief
whereof is, the respect it had to the blood of Christ. From all which, you have
a clear resolution of that scruple of Conscience that has troubled some,
concerning that Prohibition of blood under the New Testament by the Synod, in
Act. 15.

But the Answer is, That the main reason why blood was forbidden of old, being
because the Lord had given blood to them for atonement, and this use being
figurative, which had its end and accomplishment in Christ, who by his death
and blood shedding, has caused the Sacrifices and Oblations to cease, Dan. 9.

Therefore now this Law must needs be expired, and not still in force upon the
Consciences of Believers.

And as for that Decree of the Council, Act. 15. It is forbidden by them merely
upon the account of love, which is tender and loath to give offense.

The sins there forbidden, may be referred to three Heads or Glasses.

1. Sins against the first Table, eating things offered to Idols.

2. Sins against the second Table, against the seventh Commandment,
Fornication; because it was a common sin, and wherein the Heathen were very
blind, some of them accounting it but an indifferent thing.

3. Sins against the general Rule of love to our brethren.

Of this sort is the eating of things strangled, and blood, which had formerly
been a sin against the second Commandment: being forbidden of old in the way of
a perpetual Statute, during the whole legal Aeconomy. Lev. 17.15.

That which dies of it self, includes strangled: for there is no other place in
the Law that forbids the eating of things strangled, but only this. And Deuteronomy.
14.21. where there is the same expression. But now the same thing is forbidden
in a more occasional and temporary way, upon the account of scandal to sincere
but weak Believers. 1 Cor. 8.13.

And there was a further benefit of this Observation, in that juncture of time:
for it did prevent and cut off all appearance and occasion, for that Calumny,
and false Aspersion cast forth by the Pagans, in those first times of
Christianity. That the Christians were wont to feed upon man's flesh, and to
drink blood in their Assemblies. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 1. Tertull.
Apolog. cap. 9.

And though they are called necessary things; yet there be diverse sorts and
ways of necessity.

As some things are necessary in their own nature, upon a moral and perpetual
account, as to avoid Idolatry and Fornication: so other things are necessary
only pro hic and nunc, in regard of present Circumstances; as to abstain from
blood, or from eating flesh. As 1 Cor. 8.13.

And though they are joined with grosser sins; yet the same penalty and much
more the same Prohibition, may be set upon things of a very different nature.

As Death is the penalty of Murder. Genesis 9.6.

And of having Leavened Bread. Exodus 12.15, 19.

It cannot possibly be the sense of the Council, to forbid that kind of Meat as
in it self, and morally and perpetually unlawful: because all difference of
Meats, is most expressly and clearly taken away under the New Testament. As Mark
7.14, to 20. Act. 10.10. 1 Cor. 8.8. But meat commends us not to God, for
neither if we eat, are we the better, neither if we eat not, are we the worse.
And 1 Cor. 10.25. Whatsoever is sold in the Shambles, that eat, asking no
question for conscience sake. Tit. 1.15. To the pure, all things are pure. But
in 1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5. the Apostle thunders against this Error, of making
difference of Meats under the Gospel.

Thus you see the nature of the Sacrifice of Peace Offerings. Something will be
expected, as to the practical Improvement of these Truths.

Let me therefore only repeat and reinculcate some few of the general Heads of
things, which have been doctrinally cleared and made out, I shall but touch
them now in a more applicatory way.

1. Then be persuaded and encouraged, to feed and feast upon Christ our
Peace Offering. Do not say, such and such, may if I had such Parts and such
Abilities, and so Eminent as such and such, I durst believe.

This blessed Peace Offering is not for the Priests only, for Saints of the
highest Rank, and greatest Eminency; but for the common people also. Do but
draw near with a pure heart, and then come and welcome: take your share, and
eat it with a glad heart, God has given it you.

2. Do not defer the eating of your Peace Offerings: take heed of a
procrastinating Spirit. As many who think to repent and return to God when they
are dying, and dropping into hell, whereas they should eat the Peace Offering,
and eat it now.

Do it to day before to morrow, or at least before the third day: for rhen thy
Peace Offering will not be accepted.

Come in to God the third hour of the day, or if thou have lost that season,
yet come in at the sixth, the ninth, at least at the eleventh hour of the day.
If you stay till the Sun be set, and the day of the Lords patience run out,
then your Peace Offerings shall not be accepted, then thy Faith, thy Repentance
will not save thee.

Oh! But I will cry God mercy, and trust to Christ then.

Ay but thy Conscience then will say, you should have eaten the Peace Offering
sooner: eating it the third day shall not be accepted: nor will catching at
Christ when thou art gone to hell. Oh then that thou had known in this thy
day, the things belonging to thy Peace! Luke 19.42.

3. Let all your Peace Offerings be seasoned with the new Leaven of Grace and
Holiness; get this blessed Leaven of the Kingdom of God into your hearts.

4. Give God the fat, the strength, the vigor of your Spirits, the best of your
endeavors; do not leave the worst you have to him, the very dregs of time at
night, when you are all drowsy and sleepy, for prayer and family duties, when
you have spent the strength of your time in your Callings. Reserve some of your
good hours for God, and duties of Communion with him. With such drowsy
Sacrifices God will not be well pleased.

5. Take heed of accounting the blood of the Peace Offering a common thing. But
as the typical blood might not be eaten, but was sacred to the Lord: let the
blood of Christ be sacred and precious to you.

It is a dreadful sin to count the blood wherewith you are sanctified a common
thing. Heb. 10.

Oh this contempt of Christ, contempt of the Gospel, of those glad tidings, and
of that Soul Redeeming blood! That soul shall be cut off from his people.

To you that believe he is precious; there is a reverential esteem of him, in
the hearts of all that are his: they dare not arrogate nor meddle with that
which is his peculiar Glory, and assume their Salvation to themselves.

The Papists will say they are saved by Christ; but how? Why, through the blood
of Christ, but how come they to be made partakers of him? Why God foresees that
they will repent and believe, and so ordains them to life upon the foresight of
what they will do. And thus they do as it were, devour the blood of the
Peace Offering, and destroy the Glory they pretend and seem to give to him.

THE GOSPEL OF THE SIN-OFFERING.
Lev. Cap. 4. August 13.16, 23. 1668.
The Sin-Offering. Chattaah.


THis is the fourth of those six kinds of legal Sacrifices, which are handled
and directed in the seven first Chapters of this Book.

The first is Yola the Burnt-Offering. Cap. 1.

The second is Mincha the Meat Offering. Cap. 2.

The third is Shelamim the Peace Offering. Cap. 3.

The fourth is Chattaah the Sin Offering, in this 4. Chapter.

The fifth is Asham the Trepass Offering. Cap. 5.

The sixth is Milluim, the Offering of Consecrations.

As to this fourth namely the Sin-Offering; many of the Laws and Rites thereof
are the same with other Sacrifices, and in particular with the Burnt-Offering,
which is the first, and where the common Rites are first mentioned, and
accordingly were there explained.

As for Instance, the matter of this, is the same with the former Sacrifices
before explained.

The general end and use, is the same, viz. for Atonement and Expiation of sin,
which is mentioned and repeated four times over in this Chapter, verse. 20, 26,
31, 35. And the Priest shall make an atonement for him, for the sin that he
has committed, and it shall be forgiven him.

Moreover as to the sacred Rites and Ceremonies, there be many of them which
are the same in the Sin-Offering, with what was before ordained in the
Burnt-Offering, and in the Peace Offering: as that it must be brought to the
door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, the Offerer must lay his hand upon
it; (...) it must be killed and burnt, at least in part upon the Altar, those
parts of it which were to be so dealt with in the Peace Offering. The Mysteries
of all which have been formerly explained. Therefore all that remains is, that
we speak a word to those things which are more special and peculiar to the
Sin-Offering, and they are these.

1. The special end of it viz. for sins of infirmity.

2. The various and fourfold appointment of the matter of it, for four sorts of
sinners, to wit, the Priest, the body of the people, the civil Ruler, and any
private person.

3. The threefold disposal of the blood of it; part to be sprinkled in or
toward the Holy of Holies, part to be put upon the Horns of the Altar of
Incense, and part to be poured forth at the bottom of the Brazen Altar of
Burnt-Offerings.

4. The burning it without the Camp, with the Rites and Ceremonies thereto
belonging.

5. The eating another part in some cases, with the sacred Rites thereof.

1. The special end of it, and so the difference between this and other
Sacrifices, especially the Trepass Offering which comes nearest to it, and
has most affinity with it, verse. 2.

The general end, is atonement or expiation of sin; but the question is for
what kind of sin?

I confess there is much difficulty as to this.

I have made some search into diverse Authors and Writers about it, and have not
met with that clearness and full satisfaction that were to be desired, and
which is to be found in other things.

Therefore I shall but tell you my own judgment of it in a few words.

The Sin Offering may be taken either in a larger sense, as including the
Trespass Offering; or in a straiten sense, as contradistinguished to it.

Take it in the largest sense, and so it extends to any sin whatsoever that is
pardonable; and thus the Sin Offering is a genus including two species, namely,
the Sin Offering strictly taken, and the Trespass Offering.

Thus it is opposed only to presumptuous sinning, which had no Sacrifice
provided for it in the Law: for such persons were to be cut off. And of this
sense, and this opposition Numb. 15. speaks clearly; see verse. 27, 28, 29.
compare this with verse. 30. There is a way of sinning for which there is no
forgiveness.

Thus (...) and (...) are opposed.

Of the latter the Apostle says, Heb. 10.26. There remains no more Sacrifice
for sin.

But there be other sins which though against knowledge, yet are not
presumptuous to such an height; but the Soul is carried aside out of ignorance
and surprise, and by the violence of temptation and of sinful passions and
dusts, through inadvertency, carelessness, unadvisedness, etc. For these there
is a Sin Offering.

In this sense, even the Trepass Offering is and may be called a Sin Offering,
Cap. 7. verse. 7. See Cap. 5. verse. 6, 11, 12.

But take it in a more narrow sense as contradistinguished unto the Trespass
Offering, and here lies the difficulty, wherein the Sin Offering (whose Rites
and Laws are here set down in this 4. Chapter) wherein does it differ from the
Trepass Offering in the 5. Chapter, as to the special end and use of it?

Some have thought the Sin-Offering refers to sins of Omission, the
Trepass Offering to sins of Commission.

But this Rule will not hold; for the Trespass Offering concerns sins of
Omission, as well as the other. Cap. 5.1. If he do not utter it, when he ought
to do it. Here is an omission, for which a Trepass Offering is there appointed.

Some have thought that the Sin Offering was for sins against the second Table,
and the Trepass Offering for sins against the first.

But the Text is clear, That the Trepass Offering relates both to first and
second Table sins, such as deceit and violence to his neighbor, as well as
perjury against God. Cap. 6.2. If a Soul sin and commit a Trespass against the
Lord, and lie unto his neighbor, etc.

Others have stated it thus, That there is ignorantia facti, ignorance of the
Fact in the one, and ignorantia juris, ignorance of the Rule in the other.

But this is a notion that has no footing in the Text.

But the true difference between them consists, as I conceive, in this. That
the Sin-Offering was for sins of ignorance and infirmity: but the
Trepass Offering did extend even to sins against knowledge.

The Reasons for this, are partly from the propriety of the Hebrew words, and
partly from some expressions in the Text.

The Hebrew word for the Sin-Offering Chattaah, from chata peccare, which
properly signifies to miss the Mark a man shoots at. Proprie est errare, vel
aberrare a Scopo. Buxtorf.

So Judge. 20.16. the seven hundred chosen men of Benjamin it is said, they
could sling stones at an hair breadth and not miss. Velo jacte nec aberrabat
and not sin, that is, miss of the Scope and Mark they intended and proposed to
themselves.

Hence God is said to reduce sinners, that is, such as go astray and miss their
way, into the way again. Psalm. 25.8. Good and upright is the Lord, therefore
will he teach sinners in the way.

In the Conjugation Pihel, it signifies to purge and cleanse from sin, by
making satisfaction and undergoing the penalty due to it. As Exodus 29.36. and
thou shall cleanse the Altar, ve chittetha yal hamisbeach -- Lev. 14.52. he
shall cleanse the house, vechitte eth habajith. Genesis 31.39. Jacob says to
Laban, that which is torn of Beasts I brought not unto thee, I bare the loss of
it. Anoki achattinah, ego expiabam illud. Arias Montanus, I expiated it. Poenas
luebam pro eo, so Pagnin. Buxtorf. I suffered for it.

Thus you see the proper importance of the word here used and translated, the
Sin-Offering Chattaah.

Moreover the Text says upon the Sin-Offering. That if a Soul err and miss it
thus, Bishgagah through error or ignorance, which further clears up the true
sense. Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted I went astray; it is the same word
any shogeg, ego errans.

But the word which is used for the Trepass Offering Asham, though it is used
for sin in general, yet it seems to imply in a more special sense sins of an
higher nature, such as are committed with more deliberation, or with more
consent of will, or against more light, or with less of temptation, or more of
injury unto others, sins of a more grievous and heinous nature: for the same
word signifies also desolation and laying waste. Isai. 24.6. therefore has the
Curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate, vajeshmu.
And in the same sense is this word used elsewhere, e. g. Psalm. 5.10. destroy
them O God, desolato eos tanquam reos, Buxtorf.

Moreover there be Instances given here in the Trespass Offering, of gross sins
against light and knowledge, conscience-wasting, soul-desolating sins, as lying,
cheating, perjury, Cap. 6.2, 3. And we may therefore render Asham piaculum.

The issue then is this, That the Sin Offering relates to those involuntary
infirmities which are unavoidable, while there is a body of sin and death
dwelling in us, and which are consistent with assurance and sincerity.

But the Trepass Offering, to those greater conscience wasting and
soul-desolating sins, which are inconsistent with assurance and true Communion
with God, though it includes some lesser sins, yet it extends to these also.

2. The second Law of the Sin-Offering is this, That there is a various matter
of this Offering, for four sorts of persons that sin and miss the way, which
indeed are the Analysis of this Chapter.

1. For the anointed Priest a young Bullock, verse. 3. 2. For the whole
Congregation a young Bullock, verse. 13. 3. For the Ruler a Kid of the Goats, a
Male without blemish, verse. 22. 4. For any particular person a Kid, or else a
Lamb, a Female without blemish. verse. 27. And so the Chapter divides it self
into these four parts.
1. The Sin Offering for the anointed Priest is a young Bullock, etc. verse. 3,
to 13.

There is some difficulty upon this. Who is meant by the anointed Priest? Some
restrain it to the High Priest only, because none but he was anointed with
material Oil.

The word in the Text is Hachohen hammashiach, the Priest that is anointed.
verse. 3.

But if this be restrained to the High Priest only, the question will be, what
shall become of the other inferior Priests? Is there no Sin Offering? Is there
no Expiation for their sins and sailings? Doubtless there is.

But we cannot well refer them amongst the common people of the Land, the
Priests and people being so continually distinguished every where throughout
the Scripture.

Therefore it seems more congruous to conceive (as some do) that all the
Priests are here included, and that the word anointed intends no more but
dedicated, consecrated, set apart unto that work and office: or that it may
refer to that first Consecration of them in Aaron their Fore-father. Exodus
29.7. And thou shall take the anointing Oil, and pour it upon his head and
anoint him. The Law is, if he shall sin le ashamath hyam according to the sin
of the people, as our Translation renders it, that is, like one of the common
people. For the Priests were not made infallible, or impeccable by their
Office; and therefore had need to offer for their own sins, as well as for the
peoples. Heb 5.2, 3.

It is not to be restrained only to such sins of his, as wherein he seduceth
and draws the people aside to sin with him, or whereby he brings public
Judgments upon them, as some have rendered it, si delinquere fecerit populum;
and others, si deliquerit in populi noxam. For then here were no relief for
him, as to all his other failings in the discharge and execution of his trust
and office in the house of God, and in his own private and personal walkings.

Therefore it must be understood in the largest and most comprehensive sense,
for any sin or failing of weakness in any of the Priests. Let him bring a young
Bullock for his Sin Offering.

2. For the whole Congregation a Bullock, verse. 13. the whole body of the
people collectively taken: the same that was appointed for the Priest, though
with some difference in the Rites. There the Priest, but here the Elders as in
the name of the people, being to lay their hands upon the Head of the Sacrifice.

3. For the Ruler a Kid, a Male, verse. 22. Nasi, Princeps, quasi elatus super
alios; from Nasa, exaltavit, tulit, that is, any Civil Ruler that is raised or
lifted up above others.

The word is used, not only concerning Kings and chief Magistrates, as Ezekiel.
34.24. but concerning inferior Rulers also; Exodus 16.22. And all the Rulers of
the Congregation came and told Moses, etc. Numb. 16.2.

4. For any of the common people, their Sin Offering is a Kid, a Female, verse.
27. or else a Lamb, a Female, verse. 32, to the end of the Chapter.

Now from this second Law of the Sin-Offering, namely, this various matter of
it for so many sorts of persons that sin: we may learn these Instructions
before we proceed to the third Law.

1. That the anointed Priest may err. Therefore the Bishop of Rome if he were
an Officer of Christ, he might err and miss his Mark: though being Antichrist,
it may be granted to him that he seldom errs from his Scope, it being to
promote the Devils Kingdom, and to obstruct the Kingdom, and oppress the Church
of Christ.

I must confess I have wondered at this error of Popery, that the Pope cannot
err: I wonder, why he may not err in Doctrine, as well as in life? Why may he
not deny God in words, as well as in his works?

That he may and does err in his life, and that his works are evil, themselves
have not the impudence to deny: therefore he may err in his Faith, as well as
in his life; in his words, as well as in his works.

And if you do but look into a weekly News book, you will ever and anon find
mention of the Popes Nephews, what they do, and what preferments he provides
for them.

But who are these? It is fit you should know the meaning of it.

The word Nephew, it is an Italian Phrase of Speech for a Bastard: and so
indeed the Popes Nephews, is nothing else but the Popes Bastards: this is he
that cannot err.

Among the Papists, Priests you know must not marry: and the Pope is not so
humble as to own others of his poor Kindred.

But yet we must believe in this unclean Beast, and we must call him his
Holiness forsooth, whose Leprosy is written in his Forehead, and who declares
his sin as Sodom, and hides it not as Gomorrah. For they are not ashamed of all
their uncleanness and abominations, having their Consciences seared with an
hot Iron; and yet this sinful doleful Creature cannot err, when his Bones are
full of the sins of his youth, which shall ly down with him in the dust.

2. The second Instruction is this, That there are degrees of sin, and that the
sins and errors of an anointed Priest, are of the worst and greatest guilt.
This is here taught and held forth both by the Matter of the Sin-Offering, and
by the Rites belonging to it.

As to the Matter, the Priest must have as great a Sacrifice for a Sin
Offering, as the whole body of the people collectively considered. A young
Bullock is the Sin-Offering for the Priest, and it is no more but a young
Bullock for the whole Congregation.

And there is a difference as to the Rites for the several sorts of sinners;
for the Sin-Offering for the Priest, and for the body of the people, was to be
sprinkled before the Vail, and upon the Altar of Incense.

But that for the Ruler, and for private persons, were not sprinkled before the
Vail, nor upon the Incense Altar, but only upon the Altar of Burnt-Offering,
verse. 25, 30, 34. For the sins of the Priest and of the whole Congregation, as
being more heinous, required a more solemn manner of atonement; so our
Annotators on Lev. 4.25.

It was an error of the Stoic Philosophers of old, that peccata sunt aequalia,
all sins are equal. It is true, sin is a privation, but there are degrees in
Privations; there be total and partial privations. As in the Twilight and dim
sightedness, every sin deviates and swerves from the rule of Righteousness. But
there are degrees of rectitude and curvity; some crooked lines depart further
off from the strait line, and some come nearer to it: so it is in sins.

The sins of a Minister do receive peculiar aggravations, and are greater in
many respects, then the sins of other men. For them to be covetous and greedy
after the world, for them to be of an unbrotherly imposing spirit, that is,
ambitious and contentious, it is worse then in other men: and that especially
in two respects, which are both hinted in the Text.

1. Because of their anointing or separation unto Office, whereby they stand
nearer to God than others do, being to minister to him in his holy things.

2. Because their sins and errors, have usually a very pernicious influence
upon the people, either to seduce or scandalize them. Many will be ready to
follow their pernicious ways.

Hence some read and understand the words, verse. 3. If he sin, to cause the
people to err, or to bring public Judgments upon them.

Hence many are so apt to plead; such a Minister thinks it lawful, and such a
one does it, and why may not I?

See 1. Sam. 2.17, 24. how the sins of Ministers do scandalize the people,
causing them to transgress some of them in like manner, and others to abhor and
despise the Ordinances of the Lord: and this makes Ministers sins great before
the Lord.

But people should consider that an anointed Priest may sin and err, and their
Errors oftentimes do much hurt. This is a second Instruction.

3. The whole Church may err, verse. 13.

This is another Assertion of the Papists, That their Church cannot err: a
strange and wonderful Assertion. Did not the whole Church err, when they
crucified Christ? And they did err fundamentally; yet the Jews were then the
only true Church and people of God in the world.

Therefore it is very unsafe to pin your Faith upon the Churches Sleeve, or
upon the Ministers Sleeve either: for both Church and Minister may err.

It is not safe to be led merely by multitude or by example. Exodus 23.2. Thou
shall not follow a multitude to do evil, neither shall thou speak in a Cause to
decline after many to wrest Judgment.

Yea, a true Church may in time err so far, and degenerate so deeply, as that
they may cease to be a Church.

As the Church of the Jews for Instance. The Lord has said unto the house of
Israel, as he threatened by the Prophet Hosea, Lo-ruhamah and Lo-ammi. I will
not have mercy on you; and you are not my people. Hos. 1.6, 9. And Cap. 2.2.
Plead with your Mother, plead: for she is not my Wife, neither am I her Husband.

The Church of the two Tribes also, are now in the same condition with the
other ten. Zech. 11.10. And I took my Staff, even Beauty, and cut it asunder,
that I might break my Covenant which I had made with all the people. The
meaning is, that he would discovenant and unchurch them; but yet he will at
last restore them.

But would you see an Instance of a Church which God has rejected and
unchurched, and which shall never be restored any more.

Behold the Church of Rome; it was once a true Church, and the Pastor thereof a
true Minister, when Paul wrote his Epistle to the Romans sixteen hundred years
ago: but now, so far declined from their first estate, and from the primitive
and Scripture Pattern, That the Church of Rome is become the Whore of Babylon,
and the Bishop of Rome the Head of that Church, is Antichrist. See Rev. 13.
They are set forth under the notion of two wild and venomous Beasts; the first
Beast in that Chapter which has ten Horns, etc. is the Church of Rome; the
second Beast with two Horns, is the Pope of Rome: the first is Babylon, and the
second Antichrist.

The truth is, they have erred so far, that (except the Church of the Jews,
when they crucified Jesus Christ) I think there was never any Church that erred
so much, as this Church that pretends they cannot err.

4. Instruction. That the Elders and public persons act, and are to act for
the people. For the Elders are to lay their hands upon the peoples Offering.
Verse. 15. That is, as their Agents and Representatives.

The people are not to think themselves merely passive, in what their Elders
and Rulers do: no, believe it, you are more concerned then so.

Their act involves the people, which gives a just account of Gods sending
public Calamities upon the people, for the sins of their Rulers: for what the
Parliament do, the people do.

The method of Providence is often thus. First the people they sin, and provoke
God to anger, then he leaves their Rulers to sin for their sakes, and then
comes Wrath. For while there is a Phinehas, a Josiah, they stand in the gap,
and stave off public Judgments it may be all their days: but when they are
gone, or if they sin too, this opens a gap for public Judgments to break in
upon the people See 2 Samuel 24.1. And again the anger of the Lord was kindled
against Israel, and he moved David against them to say, go number Israel and
Judah.

Observe the method; first God is angry with Israel for their sins, then he
moved David their King to sin, and then comes the Plague.

People are very apt when things go amiss, and the public affairs do not
prosper, they are very apt to be discontent with their Rulers and Magistrates,
and to say, that it is their fault. But if they do amiss, you should consider
why God leaves them to it: it is often for the sins of the people.

It would better become private persons to reflect upon themselves and upon
their own sins; and their own unworthiness, then to work out in discontent
against those that God has set over them.

3. The third Law of the Sin-Offering is, concerning the blood thereof. There
is a threefold disposal of it appointed by the Rule in this Chapter, verse. 5,
6, 7.

1. The Priest is to dip his finger in the blood, and to sprinkle it seven
times before the Lord.

2. He is to put part of it upon the four Horns of the golden Altar of Incense.

3. He is to pour out the rest of it at the bottom of the Brazen Altar of
Burnt-Offering. Of these three Ceremonies, a few words.

1. The Priest is to dip his finger in the blood, and to sprinkle it seven
times before the Lord, that is, before the Vail of the Sanctuary toward the
Holy of Holies. Upon the great day of Expiation, he was to sprinkle it within
the Vail; but because he was not to enter into that Holy place every day, but
only once a year; therefore at other times he did but sprinkle it toward the
holy place, upon or toward the Vail; see Lev. 16.14. But the signification was
the same in both.

It teaches us three things.

1. That there is no entrance into Heaven, but by the blood of Christ shed and
poured forth, and sprinkled and applied effectually. For the place within the
Vail, the Holy of Holies was a Type of Heaven, and the Priest entered there not
without blood, Heb. 9.11, 12, 24, 25, 26.

Heaven is a Possession purchased by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 1.14. Heb.
10.19, 20. We enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus. We had never come
there, had not the blood of the Sin Offering been sprinkled there for us.

2. There is a full and perfect cleansing in the blood of Christ; for he is to
sprinkle it seven times.

Seven is a number of perfection; because in seven days the Creation of the
world was finished, and God rested from his works.

Hence seven is a mystical number, often used in Mysteries throughout the
Scripture, both in typical, and in prophetical places. Vid. Aynsw. in loc.

As seven times sprinkling the Leper, and seven days for his cleansing. Lev.
14.7, 9.

Seven days for consecrating the Priests. Lev. 8.35. For purifying the unclean.
Lev. 12.2. Numb. 19.19.

Seven Priests with seven Trumpets, blew seven days to the overthrowing of the
Walls of Jericho. Josh. 6.

Every seventh day, was a Sabbath.

Every seventh year, a year of Rest.

And seven times seven years brought the Jubilee. Lev. 25.3, 4, 8. In the Book
of the Revelation, the Lamb that was stain, which is Jesus Christ, is
represented with seven Horns, to signify the perfection of his Power; and with
seven Eyes, to show the perfection of his Wisdom: and the seven Spirits of God,
the Holy Ghost in the perfection of all gifts and graces. Rev. 5.6.

There be also seven Candlesticks, seven Churches. And indeed the whole Book
does analyze and divide it self into three sevens: seven Seals, seven Trumpets,
and seven Vials.

The seven Seals, holding forth the state of the Church under heathenish
persecution, with the issue thereof in the three first Centuries.

The seven Trumpets under Antichrist, and other intestine troubles.

And then finally, seven Vials of Wrath for the ruin of Antichrist and other
enemies, for the Churches prosperity.

From all which, you see that there is something of mystery in the number of
seven.

And in this Ceremony, it teaches us the full and perfect cleansing and
atonement we have in the blood of Christ; and that our sins need much
cleansing, much purgation. Heb. 9.13, 14. Heb. 10.14. For by one Offering, he
has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

3. We may learn further, that sprinkling is significative enough of the
spiritual cleansing and perfect virtue that is in the blood of Jesus Christ.
For the Priest was not to pour out the blood upon the Vail, nor to wash the
Vail in the blood, but only to dip his finger, and so to sprinkle the Vail with
it. Isai. 52.15. 1 Pet. 1.2. Heb. 12.24.

2. Another part of the blood was to be put upon the Horns of the Golden Altar
of Incense, verse. 7. And again verse. 18.

So in the Sin-Offering upon the great day of Expiation, Lev, 17.18, 19. this
was used only in the Sin Offering of Bullocks: but in the Sin-Offering of Kids
or Lambs, it was only poured and sprinkled upon the Brazen-Altar, verse. 25, 30,
34.

The mystery of this Ceremony was this, That Christ's Intercession is founded in
his own blood and satisfaction. For the Incense Altar was a Type of Prayer: he
prays in the virtue of his own blood and sufferings, and by the merit thereof,
he prevails with God for us.

And it is upon the same account, that our prayers also do prevail and find
acceptance with the Lord; it is because the Incense Altar is sprinkled with
blood. We pray in his Name, and we desire nothing in our prayers, but what he
has deserved and procured by his merits. See. Rev. 8.3. There was given him
much Incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the
Golden Altar. And 9.13. I heard a voice from the four Horns of the Golden
Altar. The Golden Altar is the Altar of Incense: a voice is heard from thence
as in answer to prayer.

But did ever any Christian pray for the coming in of the Turks upon the
Christian world? No, but God answers the prayers of his people oftentimes, by
wonderful and terrible things in Righteousness, as Psalm. 65.5. The most
dreadful Revolutions of Providence, are in answer to prayer: and that which
makes prayer so powerful, is because the Altar of Incense is sprinkled with the
blood of the Sin Offering.

3. The rest of the blood, was to be poured forth at the bottom of the Altar of
Burnt-Offering; verse. 7, 18, 25, 30, 34.

This instructs us, that Christ was consecrated and dedicated unto God in his
own blood.

The effusion of the blood of Christ, as a Sin-Offering to the Justice of God
for us, for our Salvation, for the purchase of the pardon of our sins, and the
relation of that blood to the Altar of his Deity, are here taught. But this was
opened before when we were upon the Burnt-Offering. Cap. 1.5.

But consider this, as in conjunction with the former; the blood was sprinkled
both upon the holiest of all, and upon the Altar of Incense, and now the rest
poured forth by the Altar of Burnt-Offering.

It teaches us, That the blood of Christ has an influence into all the
concernments of our Salvation, from first to last.

Exercise Faith in that blood upon all occasions, and for all the concernments
of your Souls.

Would you see your sins forgiven, and atonement made? See and take notice of
that blood in the effusion of it, as poured forth at the bottom of the Altar.

Would you see your prayers accepted and answered? See the blood upon the Horns
of the Incense-Altar.

Would you see Heaven Gates opened, and way made for you into the Holy of
Holies, an abundant entrance opened for you into Heaven? See the blood
sprinkled before the Vail.

See the blood of Jesus Christ influencing all the concernments of your Souls.

4. The fourth Law of the Sin-Offering, is concerning the burning of it, verse.
8, 9, 10, 11, 12. And again verse. 19, 20, 21.

The inward parts of it were to be burnt upon the Altar, as in the Ordinance of
the Peace Offering.

All the rest; the whole Bullock was to be burnt in a clean place without the
Camp.

This Law is peculiar to the Sin-Offering of a Bullock, whether for the Priest,
or for the whole Church.

But in the Sin-Offering of Goats or Sheep for the Ruler, and for any
individual of the common people, this Ceremony of burning without the Camp was
not required.

There is this reason given for burning the whole Sin Offering if it were a
Bullock, and not allowing any of it to be eaten; namely, because the blood of
it was brought into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, to reconcile withal in
the holy place. Lev. 6.30.

You may see the practice of this Ceremony in the Sin Offering, at the
Consecration of the Priests. Exodus 29.14.

And as it was burnt without the Camp in their present unfixed posture: so when
the Temple was fixed at Jerusalem, it was burnt without the Gates of the City.

The Apostle explains it at large, Heb. 13.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and educeth
three great Gospel Truths and Mysteries out of it.

1. That they which serve the Tabernacle, have no right to eat of our Altar
under the Gospel, verse. 10. Our New Testament Altar is Christ.

To eat of the Altar, is to partake of the Offerings offered upon it.

They that serve the Tabernacle, that is, the old worldly Tabernacle, such as
serve that, that is, such as adhere still to legal ways and Observations, have
no right to Christ the Altar, and to the Sacrifice he has offered, and to
Salvation by him.

Such as cleave to their own Righteousness, and to their own Wisdom in the
things of God, they deprive themselves of Communion with Christ.

2. As the Sin Offering was burnt without the Camp where they did cast forth
the Ashes: so Christ suffered without the Gates of the City. They carried him
out of Jerusalem to Golgotha, to the place of dead men's Sculls. Mat. 27.33. And
when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a
Skull, which is called Luke 23.33. Calvary. That as it is said of the
Sin-Offering in the place where they pour out the Ashes, there shall it be
burnt, Lev. 4.12. So Christ suffered without the Gate. Heb: 13.12.

3. This Ceremony teaches also the mystery of our Communion with Christ, in
bearing his Reproach. Heb. 13.13.

For it was because sin was upon the Offering, which carries shame along with
it, that it was carried forth.

Malefactors were to be put to death without the Camp, so the Blasphemer, Lev.
24.14. so the presumptuous Profaner of the Sabbath, Numb. 15.35.

If you cannot be content to bear the disgraces and reproaches of the world, to
be accounted a simple Heretic, a Fanatic, no true Son of the Church; but a
Schismatic against the Church, and a Rebel against the King, an enemy to
Caesar, for so they said of Christ; you refuse to go forth with him out of the
Camp, bearing his reproach. The Apostles were accounted the very filth of the
world, (...). 1 Cor. 4.9, to 13. (...) such as by sweeping is gathered
together, says the marginal Note. (...) quod detergere significat. Beza.

Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you: for so did their Fathers to
the false Prophets. Luke 6.26. To these add,

4. Whereas he that did perform this Ministration about the Sin-Offering, was
to be unclean until the Even: so in the Sin-Offering of the yearly Feast of
Expiation. Lev. 16.27, 28.

The same Law we find concerning the red Heifer, whereof they made the water of
separation. Numb. 18.9 And he that burns her, shall wash his Clothes in
water, and bath his Flesh in water, and shall be unclean until the Even.

Hereby was shadowed forth, not only the imperfection of the legal Priesthood
and Ministrations, in that the Priests themselves which prepared the Means of
Sanctification for the Church, were themselves polluted in the preparing and
doing of them: so Ainsw. in Numb. 19.8, 9.

But it may instruct us also in a more general Truth, concerning the Iniquity
of our holy Offerings, our best duties and services.

There is something of secret spiritual defilement cleaving to them, even when
we are making our Peace with God; when we are atoneing, or receiving the
Atonement, and acting about it. Lava lachrymas meas Domine; Lord, wash even my
tears.

5. The last Law of the Sin-Offering, is concerning the eating of it: of this
see Cap. 6. verse. 24, to the end.

This did not concern those Sin Offerings, whose blood was brought into the
holy place, and whose flesh was burnt without the Camp, but only the
Sin Offerings of the Ruler and private persons: as Lev. 6.30.

There be three Ceremonial Laws and Ordinances about this.

1. The Priests are to eat it in the holy place, verse. 26.

Moses expostulates with Aaron for the neglect of this, Lev. 10.19, 20. And he
there hinteth at some part of the mystery of it, verse 17.

The Priest by eating the Sinners Offering, did typically bear the iniquity of
the Sinner, and so abolish it as in a figure. It holds forth our Communion with
Christ our Sin-Offering, as the Food of our Souls, whom by Faith we eat and
feed upon. Joh. 6.56.

2. Whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy. verse. 27.

This Rite was peculiar to the Sin-Offering: and seeing the Sin-Offering was a
Type of Christ who was made sin for us: This teaches us the holiness that
should be in them, who have any thing to do with Christ.

God reproves the Priests, as Hos. 4.8. they eat up the sin, or the Sin
Offering, Chattaah, of my people.

The old Note is this, the Priests seek to eat the peoples Offerings, and
flatter them in their sins.

Every one of us should know how to possess our Vessels in holiness and honor.
1 Thessalonians. 4.4.

3. The Vessel wherein it is boiled, must be cleansed by rinsing with Water, or
by breaking it in pieces. Verse. 27, 28. The like Levit. 11.32, 33. and 15.12.

The earthen Vessels were to be broken, in regard of the cheapness of them, the
loss would not be great: the more costly to be scoured and rinsed. The Apostle
speaks of those ( Heb. 9.10.) diverse Washings and carnal Ordinances, imposed on
them till the time of Reformation.

The Pharisees in such Observations as these, went beyond the Rule, (as
Superstition is apt to do:) but Christ severely rebukes them for their high
strains of superstitious Devotion. Mark. 7.4, 8.

But out of Gods Institution here, we may spell this lesson of spiritual
Instruction, namely, the strange defilement and deep contagion and pollution
that is in sin, that there is so much ado for the cleansing of it: and what
care there should be to purge and cleanse our selves from it. Heb. 10.19, 22 --
2 Cor. 7.1.

And to make it out a little more particularly.

If you would find out the meaning of a Type, it is a good Rule to observe the
Scripture use of the same word, in the way of a Metaphor and allusion.

Now we find both wicked men and good men compared to earthen Vessels. It is a
Metaphor concerning wicked men, and the breaking is the destroying them. Jer.
19.11. Psalm. 2.9. Jer. 48.38. God will break wicked men and unclean persons
with utter destruction, as Vessels wherein is no pleasure.

But good men also are called earthen Vessels, and so the Type must be
accommodated a little otherwise. 2 Cor. 4.7. We have this Treasure in earthen
Vessels. And so the cleansing these Vessels by washing with water, points to
the spiritual cleansing, by the Spirit of Christ, Ezekiel. 36.25. and by his
blood. Heb. 9.13, 14.

And breaking, signifies the utter abolishing of all sin and uncleanness by
death. We are not fully cleansed till the Vessel be broken, but then there is
no more defilement in the Vessel.

And God will make it up again in the Resurrection, as pure and holy as if it
had never been defiled with sin at all.

Thus we have gone through the special Laws of the Sin-Offering, in these five
Heads: for they do either concern the end, or the matter, or the blood of it,
or the burning, or lastly the eating of it.

I shall conclude all that has been said upon the Sin-Offering, with some
general Instructions from the whole.

1. We may here learn and be instructed, that even sins of Infirmity they do
contract a guilt upon the Soul, yea, such a guilt as needs Atonement and
Expiation in the blood of Jesus Christ.

There are no venial sins, the least sin is death. You must bring your Sin
Offering, if you expect to be forgiven. Do not slight sins of Infirmity, for
then they become more than mere Infirmities.

2. Here is relief unto Faith against those usual complaints of daily
Infirmities, which many gracious Souls do so much complain of, and mourn under.

Alas I can do nothing well; if I pray, my thoughts wander; when I hear the
Word, I understand little, and remember less; I am easily overtaken and carried
aside daily, I sin in all I do.

But you see here is a Sin Offering provided.

There is not a just man upon earth that does good, and sins not. Eccles.
7.20. In many things we offend all. James. 3.2. Therefore the Lord ordained
this Sin-Offering, which, as it served for a legal Expiation and purging of
their sins under that Dispensation: so it did prefigure to them the blood of
Jesus Christ, which cleanses us from all our sins.

3. Here is great encouragement to engage in the service and work of God,
notwithstanding our own Infirmities and disabilities; yet do not withdraw when
called, though conscious to thy self of much unworthiness and unfitness: for
the Lord has provided a Sin-Offering for us; he will accept our sincere,
though weak endeavors, and pardon our failings.

4. See and take notice what continual Obligations of love, are upon us to
Jesus Christ, we have such continual need of him.

Behold and wonder at his love, in that he was content to be made a Sin
Offering for us, and so procures our pardon for such continual sins and
failings. He that knew no sin, was made sin for us, that is, he was made a Sin
Offering for us 2 Cor. 5.21. Hence we have pardon; and not only pardon, but
power also against sin. Romans 8.3. and for sin condemned sin in the flesh.

[And for sin] that is, God sent Christ for a Sin Offering: as you have the
same word so rendered, Heb 10.6. (...) in Sacrifices for sin, thou had no
pleasure.

Object. But my sins are worse then mere Infirmities of Saints, they are sins
of a grosser nature.

Ans. There is relief for such in the Trespass Offering, if they do not sin
presumptuously and obstinately. For God will wound the hairy Scalp of him that
goes on in his Trespasses. Psalm. 68.21. But if you repent of it, and bring
your Trepass Offering to the Lord, there is hope in Israel even concerning
such kinds of sin also: of which, the Lord assisting, we shall speak the next
time.

THE GOSPEL OF THE TREPASS OFFERING.
Lev. Cap. 5. and Cap. 6. to verse. 7. August 27, and September 6. 1668
The Trepass Offering. Asham.


THis is the fifth sort of legal Sacrifices.

The difference between this and the Sin-Offering, as to the special end of
them being in this, That the Sin-Offering seems to carry some limitation to
sins of weakness and ignorance: but this extends further, even to sins against
knowledge.

This points at Christ as the Sin Offering, and all the rest did: therefore
Christ is called Asham, Isai. 53.

The method which the Holy Ghost is pleased to use upon the Trespass Offering,
is this. He proposes 1. the Case, and 2. the Remedy: and in this method he
goes over a fourfold Case, and a Cure and Remedy for them.

The sacred Rites and Ceremonies here required, differ little from other
Offerings before handled, and therefore we may be the briefer.

The first Case is threefold, I mean there be three Cases put together.

1. Concealment of man's knowledge, when called to testify upon Oath. Verse. 1. If
a Soul sin, and hear the voice of Swearing, and is a Witness, whether he has
seen or known of it, if he do not utter it, then, etc.

[A Soul] that is, a person, the Soul the more noble part, being
synecdochically put for the whole man.

The temptation seems to ly here; if the persons for Rank and Quality in the
world be great, so that a Witness is afraid to speak and utter his knowledge.

[Hear a voice of Swearing] that is, either of the Judge adjuring, or calling
him forth to speak upon Oath.

Or of sinners Swearing, Cursing, Blaspheming.

You have an Instance of the former in the High Priest. Mat. 26.63. I adjure
thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be Christ the Son of the
living God.

Unto which Adjuration or voice of Swearing, our Lord Jesus Christ made answer,
and did declare the truth, though before he held his peace. For it was Casus
Confessionis, a case wherein confession of the Truth was called for.

Of the latter we have an Instance in Lev. 24.10, 11. They that heard the man
blaspheme, made complaint to Authority.

A man may contract upon himself the guilt of other men's sins, by concealing
them, if he be called to reveal them.

This presupposes a Magistrate that is not given to swearing, and cursing and
damning himself: for if God give up his people unto the hands of such
Magistrates, in such a case they have none to complain to.

2. The second Instance, is ceremonial uncleanness, verse. 2, and 3. whereof you
read in the 11. Chapter of this Book, and so forward to the 16. wherein the
several sorts of legal or ceremonial uncleanness are treated of at large.

But do these things defile the Conscience, and contract a guilt upon the Soul?

They do not under the Gospel; but yet they did under the Law, because then God
had forbidden it.

But suppose it were unknown and involuntary; is the Conscience defiled by
Casualties?

No, but yet they must seek atonement, and bring their Trepass Offering.
Doubtless this was to teach them and us to seek pardon for unknown and secret
sins; I mean unknown to our selves, as well as to others Psalm. 19.12. Who can
understand his errors? Cleanse thou me from secret faults.

[When he knoweth] As soon as God convinces the Conscience of any sin, any
defilement that we have contracted, there is no delaying, but we must make have
to make our peace with him: but as soon as the sin is known, by the knowledge of
the Rule that enjoins duty and forbids disobedience, men must look out for
pardon.

3. The third Case is, swearing to do an unlawful thing, as David did. 1 Samuel
25.22.

Herod's Oath, Mark. 6.23. was such an one: and so was theirs that swear to kill
Paul. Act. 23.21.

Of this sort was Jepthahs Vow, Judge. 11.30, 31. it was a rash Vow. What if a
Dog or a Swine had met him first? Or some other Beast that was unclean for
Sacrifice?

Here was ground for a Trepass Offering.

Now the Remedy provided is in general, confessing his sin with a
Trepass Offering. verse. 5, 6.

It is in particular threefold.

1. A Lamb or a Kid, a Female. verse. 6.

2. If he be not able to compass this. Two Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons,
the one for a Sin-Offering, the other for a Burnt-Offering: whose Rites and
Ordinances are set down, verse. 7, 8, 9, 10.

The Lord graciously condescends and provides for the poverty and necessities
of his people.

[Vers. 10. According to the manner] According to the Institution. Cap. 1.

The Sin-Offering was for that peculiar sin that burdened his Conscience. The
Burnt Offering, for all his sins in general.

The particular sin was to be first expiated, as that the guilt whereof was
most pressing upon the Conscience, and which provoked God most.

3. In case he be not able to compass this. Then the tenth part of an Ephah of
fine flower. verse. 11, 12, 13.

The second Case is, trespassing ignorantly against the holy things of the
Lord. Verse. 15. compare it with Cap. 22.14, 15, 16.

The holy things of the Lord is things dedicated to him, whereof there were
many, and of many sorts under the Law.

As for Instance, They were not to eat within their private Gates the Tyth of
their Corn, Wine, Oil, etc. Deuteronomy. 12.17, 18. They were to sanctify all the
Firstling Males. Deuteronomy. 15.19.

To this sort may be referred the sin of Ananias and Sapphira, they did rob God
of his holy things, Act. 5.1, 2. though they did it knowingly, and so it was
worse than this case, which supposes ignorance.

The Remedy provided and appointed in this case is, 1. A Ram for a
Trepass Offering. 2. Restitution with the addition of a fifth part. verse. 15,
16.


The same proportion was added in the case of things redeemed by the Owner.
Lev. 27.13, 15, 16.

[With thy estimation] the Speech is directed to Moses, and so in him to the
Priests that were to suceeed; see Cap. 27.12. And the Priest shall value it
whether it be good or evil. According to thy estimation O Priest, so shall it
be.

[The Priest shall make atonement] For though the Trespasser do restore; yet
atonement could not be made, but by the Priest and the Sacrifice appointed,
which leads us to Christ and to his death, to seek atonement with God there.
There is no expiation of sin in our amendment or reformation, but in the blood
of Christ.

3. The third Case is general concerning sins unknown, and of weakness, verse.
17, 18, 19.

And the Remedy provided is a Ram. Though he wist it not, yet he is guilty and
shall bring a Ram. That is, when it comes to his knowledge.

The former Cases verse. 4. and 15. speak also of ignorance.

But some state the difference thus, That this is for sins never known
certainly, but in a doubt and suspense. There is to be a doubtful
Trepass Offering, vid. Ainsw. in loc.

4. The fourth Case is in Cap. 6. to verse 8. wherein there is a bundle of
grievous sins put together, all against light and knowledge.

1. Injustice and theft. 2. Force and violence. 3. Lying fraud and deceit. 4.
Perjury or swearing falsely about it.
[If a Soul sin and commit a Trespass against the Lord, and lie against his
neighbour] For sins against our neighbor, are also sins against God.

Psalm. 51.4. Against thee only; that is, thee chiefly. For he had sinned
against Vriah and against Bathshebah, and had done them both irreparable wrong.
But that which lay heaviest upon him, was the injury done to God: I have sinned
Luke 15.18. against Heaven, that is, against the God of Heaven.

The Remedy appointed is threefold; the two former are not for satisfaction to
God, but to the party injured, without which there can be no effectual
application of the atonement to thy Conscience.

1. Restitution. Verse. 4. This is the ground of that saying, non remittitur
furtum, nisi restituatur ablatum: the theft is not forgiven, without
restitution.

2. Addition of a fifth part. verse. 5. This is when the sinner out of the
conviction of his own Conscience, does it of his own accord. For if he were
convicted by the Magistracy and public Justice of the Land, he must restore
fourfold in some cases, and double in other cases: see Exodus 22.1, to 4.

3. A Ram for a Trespass Offering. verse. 6.

Some general Instructions from the whole.

1. We may here learn and see in the Trespass Offering, and the Laws and
Ordinances thereof, how much there is of the will of God in the matters of his
worship: for there are diverse things in this, as well as in the other Offerings
and Sacrifices, whereof there can no account be given, but the divine will and
good pleasure of the Almighty.

As that the Trespass Offering, which mentions greater sins, such as stealing,
lying, perjury, should have a lesser Sacrifice to expiate the guilt thereof,
than was appointed in the Sin-Offering for a Ram is the highest Sacrifice here
required.

But the Sin-Offering, which is for ignorances and infirmities, requires no
less than a young Bullock for some kind of persons. And why a young Bullock for
the Priest, and no more but a Goat, a Male for the Civil Ruler?

Reason would say, this should be as great, if not greater then the Priests;
Magistracy being as great, and as high a power as Ministry. Who is able to give
any necessary reason for these things? One Reason indeed might be to lead them
from the shadow to the substance, that they might not dwell and rest in the
outward Type and Ceremony, but look further to what was figured by them.

For if the atonement had lain in the Type, there must have been other
proportions set down between sin and sin: but the will of the Lawgiver is
enough, and this we must acquiesce in, where no other reason does appear.

You have formerly heard, how the Lord says upon the Meat Offering, I will
have no Leaven nor Honey; but in the Peace Offering he says, I will have
Leaven. In all the Fire-Offerings he says, I will not have Honey; but in the
First Fruits he will have Honey.

His Will is our Rule, his Will as revealed in his Word.

Use 2. See the sovereign virtue of the blood of Christ: for he is our
Trepass Offering, as well as our Sin Offering.

Therefore Isai. 53.10. its said, When thou shall make his Soul an Offering for
sin. The word is the same with this, Asham naphsho his Soul a Trepass Offering.

Here are sins against knowledge mentioned: thieving, lying, perjury; sins which
do amount to a very stupendous guilt.

Use 3. Hence thirdly here is encouragement to the greatest sinners, to have
recourse to him and to his blood, and to make use of him for atonement. There
is atonement in the blood of Christ our Trepass Offering, even for Thieves,
Oppressors, Liars, and perjured persons.

Let me speak particularly to these sins mentioned in the Text, and that in
this method.

1. To show the greatness of these sins. And then, 2. That yet there is
atonement for them in the blood of Jesus Christ.
1. Theft and unjust dealing. That this is a very grievous sin appears by this,
because it is so contrary to the very light of nature, and to that golden Rule
of equity, to do as you would be done to, and is destructive to humane Society.

That it is against light appears, because they labor to hide it, and are
ashamed of it, if it come to be known. Jer. 2.26. As a Thief is ashamed when he
is found.

And this further shows the greatness of it, That God insists upon restitution
and satisfaction to the party injured. Consider this all you that are
Tradesmen, and have much dealing in the world, and you that are Apprentices and
Servants. If you steal and pilfer from your Masters, though it be but a Groat
or Sixpence, if you do not restore it, God will never pardon you.

But what if a man be not able, and have not wherewith to restore? That is a
sad case; but in such a case God may accept the will for the deed.

But suppose the persons may be dead and gone?

The answer that Casuists give in such a case is, that then you must restore it
to God, by giving it to the poor, or to some good use; restore you must, one
way or other.

For without restitution there is no remission; and the Reason is clear.
Because the detaining of unjust gotten Goods, is a continuation of the sin: the
taking possession of them was theft, the keeping that unjust possession, is a
continuation of that theft. Zach. 5.4. The curse of God shall enter into the
house of the Thief, and remain in it, and consume it, with the timber and
stones of it. The curse of God will be upon thee in all thy comforts, in all
thy concernments.

But yet there is atonement. We have two Instances in the Scripture, of Thieves
that were converted and saved.

Zacheus, Luke 19.8, 9, 10. but he made restitution, verse. 8. And the Thief on
the Cross.

2. Violence; here is a sin against the sixth Commandment added to a sin
against the eighth: for Violence belongs to the sixth Commandment. Thou shall
not murder: they are beginnings of blood, they have a tendency to it, and
blood is a sin that cries.

There are many threatenings against this sin. Psalm. 104.11. Evil shall hunt the
violent man to overthrow him.

This is against light, for no man would be so used himself.

Yet there is atonement for this; you have Instance in violence of the worst
sort, proceeding even unto blood, and that in a way of persecution for
Righteousness sake, in Manasseh and Paul, who had been men of much violence,
and yet were converted and saved. Manasseh 2 King. 21. with 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13.
And Paul 1 Timothy 1.13, 14.

It is like the Thief on the Cross was such a one: an Highway man, a violent
thief, or else by their Law they could not have put him to death; but yet the
Lord showed mercy to his Soul.

3. Lying; a grievous sin, and against a double light and knowledge; both
knowledge of the Rule, and of the Fact, which rises up in the mind against a
Liar when he speaks a lie.

It is usually one of the first actual sins that breaks forth in Children.
Psalm. 58.3. The wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray as soon as
they be born, speaking lies. And there be dreadful threatenings against it, see
Rev. 21.8. you that are Parents may do well to teach your Children that
Scripture.

Yet there is atonement for this sin also.

David sometimes told lies to save his life: but yet he was deeply humbled for
it, his Soul cleaved to the dust about it, and melted for heaviness. Psalm.
119.25, 28, 29.

4. Perjury and false swearing; a most horrible sin, for a man to invoke the
God of Truth to join with him in a lie, and to co-attest and bear witness with
him to a lie: and this sin seldom escapes unpunished, even in this life.

God usually sets some visible mark and token of his vengeance and wrath upon
them, even in this life. Jer. 34.15 -- 18. Ezekiel. 17.15 -- 18, 19.

Yet we have an Instance, and but one that I remember in all the Bible, of a
man that found mercy for this sin, and that is Peter, who denied Christ with
swearing and cursing: but he went out and wept bitterly, and when his broken
bones were set again, as in nature they grow stronger there than in another
place: so Peter grew very bold in preaching and confessing Christ, whom before
he had so fearfully denied.

Obj. 1. But there be diverse sins which are not here specified.

Ans. Yet they are included, and understood by a parity of reason: and there
might be some reasons given, why it might not be convenient to mention some
sins particularly, which yet were included, and for which there was atonement.

As if a man be overtaken in drink, or lust, or passion, rash anger, etc. these
and all other pardonable sins, are included either in the Trespass Offering by
a parity of reason, with the Instances mentioned in the Text, or else under the
Sin-Offering, or the Burnt-Offering.

Obj. 2. But some sins were not intended to be included in any of the
Sacrifices of the Law: but they had no atonement, no Sacrifice provided for
them, as Murder and Whoredom.

Ans. This was for a special reason, because there was a civil penalty
appointed in such Cases, and for such sins extending even unto death. And it
had been incongruous to that legal and external dispensation they were under,
to appoint a Sacrifice to make atonement for Capital sins, for which the sinner
was to be cut off.

This made David cry, Sacrifice thou would not, Psalm. 51. else would I give
it, he was at a loss what to do. There was no provision made by the Law for
atonement in that case of his: but as God by prerogative and special
dispensation spared his life, so he did also forgive his sin, and taught him
upon this occasion the imperfection of all the legal Sacrifices: but yet there
is an atonement and a Trespass Offering provided under the Gospel, even for
such sins. There is a spiritual Sacrifice, Jesus Christ and his blood:
therefore such notorious sinners should not despair: see 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were
some of you, foul enough and bad enough, but ye are washed, but ye are
justified.

Obj. 3. But there be some sins even under the Gospel, for which the Apostle
says, there remains no more Sacrifice for sin, Heb. 10. but fiery
indignation and fearful looking for of Judgment.

Ans. This is only the sin against the Holy Ghost, which, because many when in
trouble of Conscience, are apt to fear they have committed this sin; I shall
therefore open a little to you the nature of it, to prevent mistakes and
discouragements: I shall endeavor to show you both wherein it does not, and
wherein it does consist.

And first wherein it does not consist.

1. It is not every error in fundamentals that amounts to this sin: for some
Heretics have been renewed by repentance, have been converted and reclaimed
from the error of their way, which they that sin against the Holy Ghost cannot
be.

Yea 2. suppose a man do not only err in fundamental truths, but speak
reproachful piercing words against it, as the Quakers use to do when they scoff
against a Christ without us, and against the Bible, calling it a dead letter.

This is blasphemy; but yet it is not impossible even for such a one, to repent
and be forgiven: for Mat. 12.30, 32. every Blasphemy against the Son, that is,
every kind or sort of Blasphemy, may be forgiven.

3. Yet further, that sin which of all other does in some respects come nearest
to the sin against the Holy Ghost, is Persecution. For here is malice; yet
some, even of these also, have obtained mercy; as Paul the Apostle, who before
his Conversion was a Persecutor, he was both a fundamental Heretic, and a
Blasphemer, and a Persecutor.

4. Some have thought it does consist in universal Apostasy; but these are
rather Circumstances that may accompany it, but are not of the essence of it.

Apostasy is not essential to it, much less universal Apostasy. It is true,
those in Heb. 10. and Heb. 6. were Apostates that fell away from their former
profession: therefore Apostasy is sometimes found in this sin, but not always.
For the Pharisees had never professed Christ; yet they did sin against the Holy
Ghost. Mat. 12.32, 33.

Moreover Apostates in some cases may be recovered. Hos. 14.4. Rev. 2.5. and
3.18.

And as to that of universal apostasy, the Pharisees did not cast off all
profession of God and of the truth, they were not universal Apostates.
Therefore a man may pretend to Religion and be a Professor of it in some
degree, and yet a Pharisee, doing despite unto the Spirit of Grace.

Thus you see negatively, concerning this impardonable sin, what it is not.
There may be fundamental error, yea Blasphemy, Persecution, yet not
unpardonable: moreover a man may sin this sin, and yet not be an universal
Apostate, as the Pharisees. But if all this be not the sin against the Holy
Ghost, what is it, and wherein does it consist?

Ans. There be two Ingredients that do concur to this sin.

1. Inward conviction by the Holy Ghost.

2. Malice; This is that the Apostle intends by (...) if we sin wilfully. Heb.
10. Hence our Savior calls it Blasphemy against the Spirit. Mat. 12. That is,
against the inward illumination and conviction of the Spirit in a man's
Conscience.

If there be not a conjunction of both these, both inward conviction and
malicious opposition, if there be only one of these, without the other, it is
not the sin against the Holy Ghost.

Peter in his denying Christ, and swearing falsely about it, he sinned against
Light and inward Conviction; but this was not the sin against the Holy Ghost,
because he did it not in malice, but only out of fear to save his life.

Paul before his Conversion, did sin and persecute out of malice; but yet he
did not commit this sin, because he wanted Light and inward Conviction: himself
gives us this account of it, 1 Timothy 1.13. but I obtained mercy because I did it
ignorantly.

But can this be known concerning others?

Yes it may be known; therefore 1 John 5.16. pray not for such.

It will further clear up the nature of the sin, to name some Instances of such
as have committed it.

There be some Instances and Examples of it in the Scripture: and there have
been some since the Scriptures were written.

The Scripture mentions the Pharisees, Mat. 12.

The Apostle Paul instanceth in the Convicted, and yet apostate Jews in his
Epistle to the Hebrews.

Since the Scriptures were written.

Julian the Apostate is thought to have sinned this sin: for he had Light
enough, he was a Christian, and an high Professor of Christianity, before his
Apostasy.

He did profess Religion to such a degree, that he was wont to read in the
Church in the public Assemblies; he did not disdain to read the Bible to them
in the Church Assemblies, though he was of the blood Royal: but after he was
settled in the Empire, he fell away to Paganism; and not only so, but to most
malicious and crafty Persecution.

Some have observed of him, that he did not put forth such Edicts for the
putting Christians to death, as some former Persecutors had been wont to do. He
did forbear to do it out of craft and malice, because he had observed the truth
of that Speech, sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae, the blood of Martyrs is the
Seed of the Church: he saw that such a course would propagate Christianity the
more, and increase the Church rather than diminish it.

Therefore he chose rather to lay snares for their Consciences, by way of
subtilty to draw them from the Truth, and so to wash his hands in the blood of
their Souls (a sweeter victory to him) then of their bodies; and to triumph
over them in their falls, rather then in their deaths, denying them the use of
Books or Schools to get Learning, suffering none to bear Office in War or
Peace: and when he dyed, being shot with an Arrow in a Battle, and feeling
himself mortally wounded, he plucked out the Arrow and threw it up with his own
Bowels, with these words, vicisti, Galilaee vicisti.

In these latter times, of all the Persecutors in Queen Marys time, there is
none that seems to have sinned and shed the blood of Saints against Light, more
than Stephen Gardner; of whom there is this Story in the Book of Martyrs and
others, that write of those times: That having invited sundry persons of
Quality, the Duke of Norfolk and others to dine with him at his house. he would
not sit down to Dinner, till he had news brought him by his servant, of the
death of two Martyrs Ridley and Latimer, who suffered at Oxford, and so made
his Friends and Guests stay, and wait upon his cruelty and blood thirstiness
till four a clock in the Afternoon: and then being informed, that fire was most
certainly set to them, he said, now let us go to Dinner; and he began to eat,
but was taken ill and carried sick from his Table, and so lay fifteen days in
most intolerable torments, having no ease or voidance of any thing in his body
by Urine or otherwise, his body being miserably inflamed thereby, and thrusting
his tongue out of his mouth swollen and black: and while he lay in this
condition, uttering sometimes words of despair and blasphemy, when Dr. Day
Bishop of Chichester came to him, and began to comfort him with the Promises of
the Gospel, and free Justification in the blood of Christ; what, my Lord (says
he) will you open that Gap now? Nay then farewell all together: such words may
be fit for one in my condition; but if once you open that Gap to the people,
then farewell altogether. And when he was put in remembrance of Peter's denying
his Master, he said, that he had denied with Peter, but had never repented with
Peter.

Acts and Monuments vol. 3. page 527. and page 957.

Here was Light and inward Conviction, that this was indeed the right way; and
yet malice even unto blood.

Open that Gap to the people, and then farewell all together: just as the
Pharisees said, they feared the people would go after Christ.

Some have Instanced also in some of the last killers of the Witnesses of
Christ: Rev. 11. of whom it is said, fire proceeds out of their mouths and
devours their Adversaries. verse. 5. which they parallel with that expression of
the Apostle, Heb. 10.27. a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery
Indignation that shall devour the Adversaries. (...) A receiving of Judgment,
that is, in their own Consciences, God sealing up with some flashes of his
Wrath, their eternal damnation: they have some sparks of Hell fire spit into
their Consciences, from the lives and doctrine of the Witnesses. It is spoken
in Rev. 11. in allusion to Moses, by whom those Rebels ( Corah and his Company,
as also Nadab and Abihu) were burnt with fire.

There be two things which are sure signs a man has not committed it.

1. When the Soul is afraid of it, least they have committed this sin; here is
no malice against the Spirit of Grace: for on the contrary, here is a fear
least they have sinned against him this great sin.

2. If there be but common meltings and relentings of heart, yea though without
any true and saving brokenness and softness of heart; yet even this common work
is evidence enough, that this sin has not been committed: for the sin against
the Holy Ghost, is the highest degree of wickedness and hardness of heart: but
where there are any common meltings, there is not the highest degree of
hardness; therefore there is not the sin against the Holy Ghost. In such there
is a perfect fixation of the will in evil, like the very Devils and the damned
in Hell.

Therefore let the greatest sinners know, if God has but kept them from this
unpardonable sin, that there is hope and help in the Gospel for them: there is
atonement in the blood of Christ for all that come unto God by him, God has
not excluded thee, do not thou exclude thy self.

It Is true, there is atonement; but how are we to apply this atonement? How may
we so improve and apply that precious blood of Christ, as to get peace by it,
and sense of pardon and reconciliation with God?

1. Turn your eyes and thoughts from all other things but the blood of Jesus
Christ alone for reconciliation: a man may set his mark upon his Sheep, but it
is his money that bought them.

Other things may be Evidences of Justification; but it is the Redemption that
is in Jesus Christ that purchases it, Phil. 3.7, 8. Never think to make God
amends, or content his Justice, or appease his Wrath by any thing that you can
do.

2. Get a thorough conviction in thy Conscience, of the fullness of the
atonement, and the Soul-redeeming virtue that is in the blood of Jesus Christ,
that it cleanses from all sin. 1 John 1.7. The redeeming power of the blood of
Christ, is greater then the condemning power of sin. This excellency it has
from the excellency and dignity of his person, ( for it is the blood of God
Act. 20.28.) which makes his obedience and suffering give more glory to God,
then our sufferings in Hell would have done. Desire the Lord to make a clear
discovery of this mystery to thy soul.

3. Consider how freely this blood is held forth and offered in the Gospel, to
be rested on by sinners, Romans 3.25. and 16.26. God has revealed it, that it may
be rested on.

4. Be not afraid of receiving the Atonement, Romans 5.11.17. but rather be
afraid to reject it, Heb. 4.1. We should not be afraid of believing, but of not
believing: for the Gospel is not tendered unto men, that they should have
notions in their heads, but that they should believe, Romans 4.23, 24.

5. Let your acting of Faith upon Jesus Christ, be always accompanied with
repentance, Ezekiel. 16. last. This obviates that Objection about fear of
presuming: if thy Faith be accompanied with repentance, thou do not presume.

THE GOSPEL OF THE OFFERINGS and SACRIFICES.
September 10. 1668.
Lev. 7.37.
INtending at this time (my brethren) to wind up this Subject of the Legal
Offerings and Sacrifices; I have therefore now resumed this Text, from which
you may remember two Doctrins have been formerly observed.

1. That there was a divine Institution and command of God, for the Offerings
and Sacrifices that were under the Law.

2. That there were six kinds or sorts of propitiatory Sacrifices under the
Law, namely, the Burnt-Offering, the Meat Offering, the Peace Offering, the
Sin-Offering, the Trepass Offering, and the Offering of Consecrations, in
Sermon. 1. of Doct. 1. on this Text page 232, 233.

Doct. 2. That the propitiatory Sacrifices under the Law, may be referred to
these six kinds or sorts, viz. etc --

In the prosecution of this Doctrine, we have gone through many of the
Offerings and Sacrifices of the old Law, in the way of Exposition upon the
former Chapters of this Book, to verse. 7. of Cap. 6.

The five first sort of Sacrifices have been spoken to at large.

As to the sixth, the Offering of Consecrations, there will be occasion to
speak something of it, when we come to the Priesthood: neither is it handled at
large in these first Chapters of Leviticus, but only some of the Laws of it
briefly touched upon; therefore I shall refer what I shall speak of it, to that
other place.

As to what remains of the 6. and 7. Chapters of this Book, they containing
some additional Laws to the Offerings before treated of, they were spoken to
under the Offerings to which they belong.

I shall therefore now proceed unto two or three Questions that remain to be
considered, before we leave this point.

Quest. 1. The first is, whether the legal Sacrifices may not be otherwise
distributed, and what other distributions there be of them?

Ans. The answer is, That the Scripture gives other distributions also, as well
as this in the Text; but I chose to handle them in this, as the plainest for
weak memories.

They are sometimes thus divided into Zebach and Mincha; that is, slaughtered
Offerings and Meat Offerings. Dan. 9.27. He shall cause the Sacrifice and
Oblation to cease. The word is, the Slaughter Offering and the Meat Offering to
cease; Zebach and Mincha, and in many other Scriptures.

The Meat Offerings, were of Inanimate things offered up to God by fire upon
the Altar.

But the Slaughtered Offerings were of living Creatures, and these were offered
up both by fire and blood, the Beast being first slain, and then burnt with
fire.

Some have distinguished these two, in respect of their ends and uses, thus;
That the slain Sacrifices respected chiefly the sufferings, and passive
obedience of Christ, as making satisfaction for our sins, by his death and
blood: and that the Meat Offering related chiefly to his active obedience,
whereby he fulfilled the Law for us, by his holy and blessed life, good works
being as it were meat and drink to an holy heart.

In the Meat Offering therefore (say they) was shadowed by the burning and
ascending of Inanimate things, the obedience and merits of Christ to come: but
it is not to be restrained to his active obedience only; for the burning and
destroying the Meat Offering by fire, did plainly represent the sufferings of
Christ for the satisfaction of divine Justice, as was formerly showed more
fully in the Exposition of the Meat Offering.

Moreover the slaughtered Offerings may be subdivided from their ends and uses,
thus: That they were either simply for atonement and pardon of sin, or for
other occasions also.

Those for atonement of sin, were either for all sins in general, or with
special respect to some particulars.

For all sins in general, was the Burnt-Offering, which therefore was offered
every day. There was holocaustum juge, for those peccata jugia, a daily
Burnt-Offering for those continual daily sins, and sinfulness of our hearts and
natures. Numb. 28.10. This is the Burnt-Offering of every Sabbath, besides the
continual Burnt-Offering, and its Drink Offering: which was offered every day
at morning and at evening, says the Geneva Note: of which Daniel says of
Antiochus, that by him the daily Sacrifice was taken away. Dan. 8.11.

As to particular sins, they being of two sorts either lesser or greater; there
were two sorts of Sacrifices provided for them. For sins committed through
ignorance and infirmity, the Sin-Offering: but the Trepass Offering, extended
even to sins committed against light and knowledge. These were the Sacrifices
merely for atonement and expiation of sin.

As to other occasions also, there were two Sacrifices appointed and ordained
of old.

1. As to assurance of peace, and of the love of God; the Peace Offering, which
was a Sacrifice both of atonement and of thanksgiving.

2. As to acceptance and entrance into Office in the Church, the Milluim, or
the Offering of Consecration, wherein, besides atonement of sin, this was
superadded, the Investiture of the person into trust and office in the house of
God.

Quest. 2. A second Enquiry may be this; whether there were not other
Sacrifices, besides what are comprehended under these distributions.

Ans. There were some others, but they were peculiar Sacrifices; these were the
ordinary sort of them.

As for the rest, either they may be some way reduced and referred to some of
these, or else they will come in and may be fitly handled in other places. As
for Instance; the two Sparrows in the cleansing of the Leper^, were a peculiar
kind of Sacrifice, Lev. 14. And they will come in among the Laws and Ceremonies
of Purification, when we spirit of ceremonial cleanness and uncleanness: so
will also the Sacrifice of the red Heifer and the holy Water, or water of
Purification made of the Ashes, of that Sacrifice. Numb. 19.

The Paschal Lamb also was a peculiar Sacrifice, but it will fitly come in to
be handled in the Feast of the Passover, when we come to the Festivals: and
there also the Sacrifices of the yearly Feast of Expiation, on the tenth day of
the seventh month will come to be considered: one part whereof is the Escape
Goat. Levit. 16. But the ordinary Sacrifices, were these that have been handled.

Quest. 3. The third Quaere may be this; These six here enumerated in the Text,
being the ordinary sorts of propitiatory Sacrifices; what other Sacrifices had
they, besides these of propitiation or atonement?

I answer as to that; when I entered first upon the Subject, you may remember I
distributed the Offerings at the Brazen Altar into two sorts: Holiness of
Holiness, and Holiness of Praises; or Sacrifices of Atonement, and of
Thanksgiving.

You find this distinction of double Holiness and single Holiness, in Lev.
21.22. he shall eat the Bread of his God, that is, of the Sacrifices, both of
the most Holy, and of the Holy: so the Fruit of the Land after it was
Circumcised, is said to be Holiness of Praises to the Lord, Lev. 19.24. Quodesh
Hillulim, is contradistinguished unto Quodesh quodeshim.

The former sort of Sacrifices, namely those that were Holy of Holinesses for
atonement, were made by fire: but the latter sort, viz. such as were merely
Sacrifices of Thanksgiving, or Holiness of Praises, were not offered up to God
in the fire, but by other Ceremonies.

Of these there were two sorts, the Heave Offering, and the Wave Offering; of
both which we shall speak a word briefly, both concerning the matter, the
manner, and the signification of them.

The first mention we have of them, is in Exodus 29.24, 26, 27. in the Offering
of Consecration.

The Shoulder is an Heave Offering, and the Breast a Wave-Offering. Again in
Lev. 7. the right Shoulder and the Breast, is reserved out of all the
Peace Offerings for a Wave Offering, and an Heave Offering to the Lord for the
Priests, see verse. 34.

Again in Lev. 23.10, 11. we read of a Wave-Sheaf of the First Fruit of your
Harvest unto the Priest. And ye shall wave the Sheaf before the Lord, to be
accepted for you. This was to be done the morrow after the Sabbath of the
Passover, and fifty days after, at the Feast of Pentecost, they were to offer
two Wave-Loaves, verse. 17, 20.

Thus you see the matter of these Offerings.

The Rite and Ceremony with which they were offered, was Waveing and Heaveing,
from whence they have their names of Wave-Offering and Heave Offering.

Waveing, that is, moving it to and fro round about toward the East, West,
South, and North. Tenuphah agitatio, from the Verb Nuph, which in Hiphil is
agitavit, ventilavit.

Heaveing, that is, lifting it up toward Heaven. Terumah, from Rum elevari,
extolli.

These were Gestures (some may think) somewhat strange, and hardly grave enough
in the Worship of God.

But what was the mystery and meaning of them?

You will find that clearly expressed, in Numb. 8.11. And Aaron shall offer the
Levites before the Lord, for an Offering of the Children of Israel, that they
may execute the service of the Lord.

The Hebrew reads it (as your Margin tells you) thus, and Aaron shall wave the
Levites before the Lord for a Wave-Offering of the Children of Israel.

This then was the end and the meaning of these Gestures, to present and
dedicate the thing to the Lord, who, if he will have it done by such or such a
Gesture, who, or what is vain man, that he should control or find fault with
the unsearchable Wisdom and sovereign Authority of the Lord God Almighty.

These words are used generally concerning all things given or dedicated to
God; as Exodus 35.22. And every one that offered, offered an Offering of Gold
unto the Lord Heniph Tenuphath, agitavit agitationem: he waved a Wave-Offering
of Gold unto the Lord: even Land it self, Ezekiel. 48.8, 9, 10, 20.

Persons also are said to be waved as a Wave-Offering, when dedicated to the
Lord. Numb. 8.11.

For Wave, the Greek translateth separate; which word Paul uses, speaking of
his Designation to the Ministry. Romans 1.1.

Some have observed something more in these Gestures, especially that of
waveing to and fro round about.

The original word is sometimes used for sifting in a Sieve, Isai. 30.28. That
signifies Trials and Afflictions, Luke 22.31. And so the Prophets apply this
word unto Troubles, Isai. 10.32. and 13.2. and 30.28.

The sense then will amount to thus much, That the Saints and Ministers are
spiritual Priests, are consecrated to the Lord through sufferings. As it is
said of Christ the Captain of our Salvation, Heb. 2.10. so the Saints 2 Cor.
6.4, 10. As the Wave-Offering was tossed and waved to and fro, and thereby
dedicated to the Lord.

There is some Controversy upon these, Mede Disc. 49. page 384.
started by a learned man, and one of much Light in other things, however he
mist it in this, there being aliquid humanum in the best of men: and humanum
est errare, no man but is subject to error and mistakes.

The Question is, whether they were Ceremonial and ceased, or Moral and
Perpetual.

But the case is clear and easy concerning them both; both the Heave-Offerings
and the Wave-Offerings, they were Ceremonial, and they are abolished.

Object. They were not Types of Christ.

Ans. If they were Types or legal adumbrations of Christian duties, or of any
of the Benefits of Christ, this suffices, and is enough to make them
Ceremonial, and consequently abolished. For the Types (as has been often said
and proved, and must be now again repeated) do not relate only to the person of
Christ, but to all Gospel Truths and Mysteries.

Object. They might be eaten by others besides the Priests, and in other
places, not in the holy place only: therefore could not be typical, unless all
the people and every Corner of the Land were typical.

Ans. So might the Peace Offerings in this Chapter, Lev. 7.15, 16. The Offerer
had a share in them, and yet they were Ceremonial, and not Moral.

Moreover, not only the Temple and the Priests there, but the whole Land of
Canaan and the people of Israel, were a typical Land, and a typical people: and
(as has been formerly and shall be further showed) all the Fruits of the Land
had a typical Holiness; the First Fruits being virtually the whole, they were a
typical dedication of the whole.

Object. The Scripture expressly rejects other Sacrifices and Offerings, and
does not mention these.

Ans. Yet these are included by a parity of reason; if the chief be rejected,
much more the lesser and inferior.

Object. But Christians under the New Testament, are bound to give part of
their substance to the Lord, and to his use and service: therefore these are
Moral.

Ans. I answer, it follows not; for this is a moral duty to give part of our
substance to the Lord: but yet the Heave-Offerings and Wave Offerings are
ceased, that is, the Ceremony is ceased: but the substance or thing signified
remains.

The formalis ratio of these Offerings, did not consist (as some have thought)
in prayer and thanksgiving: for there was prayer and thanksgiving in other
Offerings also, as well as these, yea in all their Offerings.

Are they not commanded to lay their hands upon the Sacrifice of Atonement, by
way of prayer and confession? Cap. 1.4.

But the formalis ratio of this and other Offerings, does consist chiefly in
the Ceremonies ordained to be used about them, which is a great part of that
which distinguishes one Offering from another, as you have formerly heard:
therefore if Waveing and Heaving be not to be used under the Gospel, as sacred
and significant Ceremonies in the presenting and dedicating of our substance to
the Lord, the Wave, and the Heave Offering are ceased.

But the Gestures of waving and heaving are not to be used, as sacred and
significant Ceremonies under the Gospel: therefore the Wave and Heave Offering
are ceased.

Use 1. Remember those great Gospel Mysteries which are the scope of all
Sacrifices, which (as you have heard) are chiefly these two, Atonement and
Thanksgiving.

1. Atonement and Reconciliation; this was the great Mystery taught and held
forth in all the propitiatory Sacrifices, that we are reconciled unto God, by
the death and sufferings of his Son: and that they had so great a multitude and
variety of Sacrifices, plainly taught them two things.

1. The imperfection of all those legal Sacrifices; it taught them to look
beyond these, for a more perfect Sacrifice then any of these, which might serve
once for all.

The Apostle expressly spells out this Lesson to us, from the multitude and
iteration of the Sacrifices. Heb. 10.1, 2.

2. This great variety of Sacrifices, taught them also the various and manifold
Benefits of Christ, and of his death and blood. Though Christ be one, and dyed
once for all; yet the Benefits that come by him are many: no one thing alone
was sufficient to represent the fullness that is in Christ.

2. The second great thing held forth by their legal Offerings, is Praise and
Thankfulness: This was the intent of the holy Offerings, as Atonement was of
the most Holy.

This was the meaning of the Heave Offering and the Wave-Offering; a thankful
frame of spirit, to dedicate and give up our selves unto the Lord, to be owning
God, acknowledging and admiring God in every thing, receiving it as from his
hand, and returning it to him again, by using it to his Glory.

Use 2. We see here the rise, and withal the sinfulness of diverse of the Popish
Superstitions; they borrow many of them from the Jews, and from the Ceremonial
Law.

As when they talk of a Sacrifice, a propitiatory Sacrifice in the Mass for
Quick and Dead: and so to call the Communion Table an Altar.

It is true, we have an Altar and a Sacrifice under the Gospel: but this Altar
is the Deity of Jesus Christ: this Sacrifice is the blood of Christ: this is
the true Atonement between God and sinners, whereof the blood of Bulls and
Goats, was but a weak and low and shady representation.

So the Priest his lifting up the Host over his head, as if it were an
Heave Offering: and that late Abomination, that they must do it on the north
side of the Communion Table or Altar, as they love to have it called.

To reintroduce these old legal Ceremonies, and to talk of literal Sacrifices
under the Gospel, is to dig Moses out of his Grave, and to deny Jesus Christ:
there is more evil in such things, then many do imagine or will believe.

Use 3. Exhortation to keep close to the Command of God, in all the matters of
his Worship. Consider the 38 Verse of this Chapter: This is the Law of the
Burnt-Offering, and of the Meat Offering, (and so of all the rest of their
Offerings) which the Lord commanded Moses in Mount Sinai, in the day that he
commanded the Children of Israel to offer their Oblations to the Lord, in the
Wilderness of Sinai.

The manner of Worship is under a Command, as well as the matter: the Mode of
Worship has a Law, which must be attended and observed and kept close unto.

Let me press this Exhortation, that you would in all your Worship keep close
unto the Rule of the Word, with these four Motives.

1. It has been the great design of Satan in all times and Ages, to defile and
corrupt the Worship of God: if he cannot persuade men to be downright Atheists,
and to say, there is no God; he labors then to drive them into the other
extreme of Idolatry and Superstition, and to impose upon them with an Image,
with an Idol, in stead of God; and the hearts of men are like Tinder, to the
fire of these temptations.

The Stratagem has been I think, as successful and as advantageous to the
Devils Kingdom, as any that ever came into that Old Serpents head.

When, or how soon this delusion came into the world, I need not here dispute.
Certain it is, it was very early; for we have express mention made of it
amongst Abraham's Ancestors, Josh. 24.2. Now the Call of Abraham, was but four
hundred twenty-seven years after the Flood, or thereabout; as you will find, if
you compute and put together the Ages of those ten Patriarchs, recorded Genesis
11, with Genesis 12.5. So that mankind having been cut down with a Flood but a
little before, for Atheistical profaneness and wickedness; they were lost
again, and the whole world in a manner overwhelmed, and drowned (as it were)
with another and worser Deluge of Idolatry, within that short space of four
hundred years or thereabouts: for unto that Period as I conceive, the Rise of
Idolatry must be referred. And what was the great sin amongst the Jews? Was it
not this? And amongst the old Heathens and Pagans, and amongst the Papists, and
other superstitious Christians at this day? What is the great Design and Work
of Christ in this Age, the work of this Generation, but to bring forth his
Worship into purity, that the new Jerusalem may come down from Heaven? This
therefore Satan studies chiefly to oppose, and so to countermine the Lord Jesus
in his great Work. And will you take part with him, and be on his side against
the Lord?

2. It will be varnished over with fair colors and plausible pretenses;
departing from the Will of God, revealed in his Word, in the matter of his
Worship, has ever been so. The Image that fell down from Jupiter, (cried they
Act. 19.35.) this was given out for that Ephesian Diana: so the Whore of
Babylon, gives the Wine of her Fornication in a golden Cup. Rev. 17.4. And as
the Light increases: so the Crafts and Methods of Satan are more refined, and
more subtle and spiritual. In the first times of the New Testament, he did
appear almost like himself in the shape of a great Red Dragon in the Roman
Pagan Emperors: but when Michael and his Angels overcame and overthrew him in
this appearance, Rev. 12. Then he puts on a new Vizard, and appears in another
shape of two wild Beasts, Rev. 13. but still pursues the same design, though
under new pretenses, and by other Instruments, viz. by the Church and Pope of
Rome. For he has made it his business ever since the time of Constantine the
Great, to revive the old Heathenish Idolatry under other names, that the world
might not be said Idola relinquere, but simulacra mutasse; that whereas before
they worshipped the Devil under the names of Jupiter, Diana and Apollo, etc.
now they commit the same Idolatry, and worship the same Devil still; but under
the names of popish Saints. Now it is not Jupiter and Diana any more, but St.
Francis, and St. Becket, and the Vicar of Christ, and the holy Catholic Church
of Rome; thus does that Harlot paint her face: so the prelatick Superstitions
at this day, those Relics of Popery are painted over with those glozing
pretenses of Antiquity, Fathers, Councils, Order, Decency, Edification, the
Peace of the Church, and such like.

3. If once you leave the Rule of the Word, the will of God revealed there, and
begin in a way of Superstition, you will never know where to stop or stay, nor
where to make an end; but you will multiply your Idols, and increase your
Idolatries, and grow worse and worse.

As in those sensual lusts of drunkenness and uncleanness, the poor Creature
says, I will seek it yet again: so in these spiritual lusts they are
unsatiable, Ezekiel. 16.28. because thou wast unsatiable. It is an endless sin.

If you do but wear a Surplice for peace sake, why not as well admit the Sign
of the Cross in Baptism, or bow to an Altar? And then within a little while,
the same reason is as strong for bowing to an Image, to a Crucifix; and why not
as well say Mass too, for the peace of the Church? And then at last, swallow
down every thing, submit your Consciences to the Pope, worship the Beast, and
so be damned and go to Hell, and all for the peace of the Church. O there is no
end here, but like a man that is tumbling down a steep Hill, that cannot stop
till he come to the bottom.

Popery came in by degrees; the first four Trumpets made way for the perfection
of that Apostasy that came in by the fifth.

Among the Idolatrous Kings of Israel, those in succeeding times were worse
then their wicked Predecessors.

Jeroboam was bad enough; but he only sets up the two Calves at Dan and Bethel:
but Omri went beyond him, for it is said, he did worse then all that went
before him. 1 King. 16.25. We read of the Statutes of Omri. Mic. 6.16.
Idolatrous and persecuting Laws. But his Son Ahab was worse then he. For, as if
it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam, he did set
up the Worship of Baal, and did more to provoke the God of Israel to anger,
then all the Kings of Israel that went before him. 1 King. 16.31, 32, 33. So
that you see it is an increasing and an endless sin.

4. All the honor men do, or think they do to God by worship of their own
invention, does redound indeed, and in truth to the honor of the Devil, which
is a fearful thing to consider.

Superstition is a sin directly against the means of worship; but it is
ultimately against the Object of worship. Strange worship sets up a strange
God: Ames Med. Theol. lib. 2. cap. 13. These. 14, 15, 42.
for it necessarily supposes and feigneth to it self, such an Object of
worship as is well pleased with such manner of worship, as Superstition offers
up: and to whose will soever we submit our Consciences, as the Rule of our
religious worship, him we set up as our God. Though it be not so in men's
intentions; yet it is so indeed, and in Gods Interpretation. The Lord so
interprets false worship, that a new God is devised for the Object of it: so of
the Heathenish Idolatry, the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they
sacrifice to Devils, and not to God. 1 Cor. 10.20. And so the Lord interprets
the Jewish Idolatry; Jeroboam ordained Priests for the Devils which he had
made. 2 Chronicles. 11.15. Lev. 17.7. Deuteronomy. 32.17.

And he puts the same construction upon the Popish Idolatry, they repented not
of worshipping Devils. Rev. 9.20. And their Factors and Emissaries are called
Spirits of Devils. Rev. 16.14. they think they worship St. Peter and the Virgin
Mary, yea God himself and Jesus Christ; but it is indeed and in Gods account,
the Devil whom they worship.

It is true, you cannot honor God too much, his Name is above and beyond all
praise: but you may mistake and honor the Devil, when you think you honor
God. A fearful mistake indeed it is; but yet it is that which all those fall
into, who in their worship, depart from the will of God revealed in his Word,
and turn aside to any of the Inventions of men.

THE GOSPEL OF THE CEREMONIAL UNCLEANNESS and CLEANSINGS.
September 13, 20. 1668.
Heb. 9.13, 14. For if the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes of an
Heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh: How
much more shall the blood of Christ, etc.


IN the distribution I formerly gave of the Ceremonial Law, you may remember, I
did put the Legal Sacrifices and Purifications together under one Head, as
partaking in the same general nature; both of them tending to the purging away
of sin, and of uncleanness; Moral uncleanness being taken away by Sacrifice;
Ceremonial uncleanness by Ceremonial Purifications, whereof we are now to speak
as the Lord shall enable us, from this Text, which speaks very fully and most
divinely to this Point.

There be two things in the Text.

1. The Type, verse. 13. For if the blood of Bulls and of Goats, etc. 2. The
Antitype, verse. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, etc.
Under each of which, there be three particulars which are here set by the
Apostle, in a way of opposite correspondency the one to the other.

1. He speaks of uncleanness in the Type. To which answers dead works, as the
thing figured by it.

2. He mentions Ceremonial cleansing to the purifying of the flesh. To which
answers the purging of the Conscience from dead Works, to serve the living God.

3. The Means of the one, answers to the Means of the other: The blood of Bulls
and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, which is the
Means of legal cleansing. To this answers the blood of Christ, who by the
eternal Spirit, offered up himself without spot unto God, which is the Means of
spiritual cleansing.

Though withal the Apostle shows, that these two answer not each other in a
way of equal Analogy, there being indeed a preeminent excellency of the one
above the other, of the Antitype above the Type: therefore he expresses it
with an how much more.

If those legal Purifications, attain the end of legal cleansing for which they
were appointed; how much more shall the blood of Christ cleanse the Conscience?
It has a greater efficacy, and is a Truth of clearer and higher Evidence.

These particulars of the Analogy between the Type and the Antitype, we may
cast them into three doctrinal Propositions thus.

1. That they had a Ceremonial uncleanness under the Law, which figured the
Moral uncleanness of dead works.

2. That they had also Ceremonial cleansings or purifyings of the flesh, which
signified the purging our Consciences from dead works, to serve the living God.

3. That the Means of Ceremonial putification by the blood of Bulls and Goats,
and by the ashes of an Heiser sprinkling the unclean, signified the blood of
Christ, who by the eternal Spirit, offered up himself without spot unto God.

1. For the first, namely, that they had a Ceremonial uncleanness under the
Law, which did figure out the Moral uncleanness of dead works: therefore he
sets them one against the other: so that those uncleanness did signify dead
works: and what is meant by dead works, we may see Heb. 6.1. not laying again
the foundation of Repentance from dead works.

What do we repent of? We repent of our sins. These are therefore the dead
works here spoken of, and sin is called a dead work, because it proceeds from
death, and is a part of spiritual death, and tends to eternal death. As good
Actions tend to life, so sin tends to death: so then Ceremonial uncleanness,
signifies Moral uncleanness of sin and dead works.

There were two or three sorts of Ceremonial uncleanness.

1. Unclean Touchings. 2. Unclean Issues. 3. That unclean Disease of the
Leprosy.

1. They had unclean Touchings and Tastings: here was uncleanness from without.

2. They had unclean Issues: here was uncleanness from within a man's self.

3. That Disease of the Leprosy, was a Disease of Ceremonial uncleanness: and
here was both an inward and an outward uncleanness.

1. There was a Ceremonial uncleanness by eating or touching any unclean thing,
Lev. 11. In that Chapter it is treated of: which Chapter, shows what Beasts,
what Fishes, what Fowls, and what creeping things might, and what might not be
eaten. And it is said of those that might not be eaten, Whosoever touches the
Carcass of them, shall be unclean. Verse. 24.

And this was a thing of so great weight, that the Lord uses those vehement
expressions about it. Ye shall not make your selves abominable with any of
those unclean things and creeping things, etc. 43. verse of that Chapter. For I
am the Lord your God; you shall therefore sanctify your selves. It did make the
person abominable, who did defile himself with those things.

We read of two kinds of uncleanness of Beasts under the Law.

1. There was an Uncleanness of Beasts for Sacrifice, and an Uncleanness of
Beasts for Food.

That distinction of Clean and Unclean referred to Sacrifices, that was from
the first entrance of Sin into the World. Therefore in Noah's time, there were
so many Clean and so many Unclean Beasts with him in the Ark.

2. The uncleanness of the Beasts for Meat seems now to be appointed by God,
there having been a more general liberty in the time of Noah, and ever since,
to eat of any wholesome living Creature; God now laid a restraint upon it by
Moses.

Quest. But why such a difference? Is not every Creature of God good?

Answ. They are good in themselves. It is not any natural Uncleanness, but an
instituted Uncleanness; that Uncleanness that is in them by virtue of the
Ceremonial Law.

And the Reason is, The absolute supreme authority and dominion of God over all
his Creatures.

He would have all men know, That whatsoever they eat it is by his allowance,
and they must forbear so far as he restrains them.

And this further account may be given of it: That it did make up and
strengthen that Partition Wall between Jew and Gentile, which the Lord thought
good to set up in those times. The Gentiles being unconvinced of any such
things, and the Jews being strictly trained up to it.

Quest. What Creatures be they that were Clean? and what were Unclean?

Answ. They be set down at large in Levit. 11.

And there be three Rules observable about the Beasts which were Clean and
which were Unclean; which might be eaten and touched and which might not; and
they were known thus.

1. By the parting the Hoof. 2. By chewing the Cud. 3. By the properties and
dispositions of them.
1. Such as parted the Hoof were Clean. Levit. 11.3. Whatsoever parts the
Hoof, and is cloven footed among the Beasts, that shall ye eat. And they that
did not were Unclean.

This plainly notes a right distinguishment of things that God requires of his
people.

That we should walk in them with a right foot, distinguishing of things that
differ. Phil. 1.9, 10. And this I pray, that your love may abound more and more
in knowledge and in all judgment, that ye may approve things that are
excellent. The Margin renders it thus. That you may discern of things that
differ. For many things there are of a different nature which a Christian
should distinguish; as the difference between the Law and the Gospel; between
our general and particular Callings; that there be not an intrenching of the
one upon the other. This is one property, the parting of the Hoof.

2. The second is the chewing of the Cud, which intimates Meditation,
ruminating on the things of God, digesting Spiritual Food; for the Word is
compared to Food. Amos 8.12. I will send a Famine in the Land; not a Famine of
Bread, nor a thirst for Water, but of hearing the Words of the Lord. The Word
of God is Spiritual, and it must be chewed and ruminated upon by deep and
serious Meditation. Psalm. 1. Blessed is the Man that meditateth in Gods Law day
and night. Luke 2.19. It is spoken in the praise of Mary, that she pondered on
those things, and laid them up in her heart. It is the misery of Sinners and
unclean Creatures; that they cannot ponder the path of Life. Prove. 5.6. Her
feet go down to death, her steps take hold on hell, lest thou should ponder
the path of life.

The want of a meditating considering frame of heart undoes poor sinners, they
cannot consider what they do, they are not serious in meditating and ruminating
on the word of God.

3. There is a third difference and character between the Clean and the
Unclean, and that is, in the properties of each. Some had good properties, and
some bad. As the Swine, which wicked men are compared unto, for that fowl and
dirty disposition and property of wallowing in the Mire. 2 Pet. 2.22. The Dog
is turned to his vomit, and the Sow that is washed, to her wallowing in the
mire.

So that as the Dog licks up his vomit again; so many a poor Sinner that has
been washed and made clean, and has confessed his sins, and vomited up his
filthiness, he licks it up again, and returns to the same sin he had vomited up
by confession, like the Dog and Swine.

This uncleanness of the Beasts did intimate two things.

1. A distinction of persons. 2. The necessity of forbearing Communion with
some kind of persons.
1. That there is a difference of persons, clean and unclean Men, which is
intimated by clean and unclean Beasts.

It is common in Scripture to speak of men under such resemblances, and
especially wicked men, to compare them to unclean Beasts. We see it in Peter's
Vision. Acts 10. He saw all manner of four-footed Beasts and creeping things,
etc. verse. 15. What God has cleansed, call not thou common nor unclean. And so
hereupon when Peter was meditating on this Vision, the Spirit said unto him, go
down with these men, doubting nothing, for I have sent thee. And he had
encouragement to go and preach to the Gentiles by that Vision.

This Sheet let down with unclean Beasts signifies the Gentile people.

There is a great distinction in the Godly themselves, and much more in Wicked
and Ungodly Men.

Daniel represented the four Monarchies by four Beasts. The Lion of Babylon,
the Bear of Persia, the Leopard of Greece, and the Roman Monster.

This speaks thus much: That some persons are clean, and some are unclean,
godly and ungodly, clean and unclean.

2. It bespeaks a restraint of Communion with wicked men.

Eating is an action of Communion, and not eating implies a restraint of
Communion. Therefore when it is said to Peter, kill and eat, the meaning is, go
and communicate with the Gentiles.

Our Communion with Christ is set forth by eating and drinking; eating his
flesh, and drinking his blood, having inward Communion with him thereby.

So to eat, or not to eat of such and such Beasts is to have Communion, or not
to have Communion with such or such Persons. Some men must be abstained from as
unclean, that is wicked and ungodly men, the neglect whereof God often
reproves. Ezekiel. 44.7. He reproves them, that they had let in strangers into his
Sanctuary. And verse. 23. They shall teach my people the difference between the
Holy and Profane, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean.
Men of unclean and corrupt Lives, are unclean as to spiritual Communion: but
men of sound Judgments and good Lives, are persons fit to converse with.

Under the Law they had unclean and clean Meats, and they contracted
uncleanness or not, by touching or not touching.

2. The second sort of Uncleanness, was the unclean Issues.

3. There was also the unclean Disease of Leprosy; as in Lev. 13. and the
cleansing of it, Cap 14.

See the Advertisement to the Reader, before the next following Text.
This indeed of the Leprosy, was the worst of all the Ceremonial uncleanness,
an^ has been spoken to, from Lev. 13. concerning the Leper, and the signs of a
leprous Soul*

All that we shall do now, is to conclude with some general Uses by way of
Inference from all that has been said, referring the further explication and
prosecution thereof, until the next opportunity: and now for the Improvement of
these things.

Use 1. Here is a further discovery of some of the popish Superstitions: you
may here observe both the Rise and the evil of them.

Three things there be that are still retained amongst them, and other
superstitious Christians that retain some remnants of Baal, popish
Superstitions in the worship of God.

1. The difference of Meats: not to eat such and such Meats, at least not at
such or such times. They borrowed this from the Ceremonial Law: some things
might be eaten, some not.

2. They have their Holy Water: and this they had from the Water of Separation
spoken of here, the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the Unclean, mentioned Numb.
19. which Water, was a Water of separation made of the ashes of an Heifer, and
with this they sprinkled the Unclean, which sanctified them when they had eaten
or touched any unclean thing, which the Scripture calls Holy Water. Numb. 5.17.

Now this device of Holy Water they had from thence, a foolish and ridiculous
device it is in them, being wholly without any warrant from the word of God in
New Testament times.

3. The third is the Purification, or Churching of Women after Child birth. An
apish Imitation of that old legal Ordinance of God, in Lev. 12. for the
Purification of Women.

In the Book of Common Prayer, they have omitted some gross things, but retain
the Title, Churching of Women, and order the Woman to speak in the Church, and
say the 116, or 127. Psalm, wherein too they leave the good and sound
Translation which we have in our Bibles, and follow a corrupt one, wherein they
make the Woman talk of giving a reward unto the Lord: and moreover they appoint
absurd broken Responds and tossings of their Prayers like Tennis Balls, as is
common with them also in other of their Offices.

The Rise of these Superstitions is, they are borrowed from those things which
were once Ordinances, but now are Superstitions, because the Stamp of God is
taken from them.

That Command is not now in force, but is abrogated by sending the Substance
Jesus Christ which is now come.

And as you see the Rise of them: so also the abolishment of them under the
Gospel. For if they were Types and Shadows of spiritual uncleanness, and
spiritual cleansing by the blood of Christ (as you see the Apostle here
interprets them) they must needs be ceased, now that Christ is come: therefore
our Savior says, that which enters into a man, cannot defile a man. Mat.
15.11, 17, 18, 19, 20. Whatsoever enters in at the mouth goes into the belly,
and is cast out unto the draught; but those things which proceed out of the
mouth, come forth from the heart, and they defile the man.

How contrary are such words, to the retaining of this difference of Meats?
Every Creature of God is good, if it be received with thanksgiving; for it is
sanctified by the word of God and Prayer. 1 Timothy 4.4. It is good that the heart
be established with Grace, and not with Meats, which have not profited them
that have been occupied therein. Heb. 13.9.

A man may eat any thing that is wholesome, if it be not upon the account, that
there is some hurtfulness in it.

But these Popish Superstitions are borrowed from Moses, and in the practice of
them, men implicitly deny that Christ is come, and has cleansed our
Consciences by his own blood, from dead works.

Use 2. See here the miserable pollution of our hearts by nature. This was the
thing intended and aimed at in a^ these legal Uncleanness.

If the water of separation sprinkling the unclean, sanctify to the purifying
of the flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ purge your Consciences
from dead works.

There is a spiritual defilement on the hearts of sinners by nature, and this
was exhibited and shown by these legal Shadows.

Take notice then what unclean Creatures you are by nature.

There is a threefold degree of spiritual uncleanness upon us, in an
unregenerate estate.

1. There is external infection and defilement from without: every thing we
touch defiles, and is defiled by us in our natural condition; the very
ploughing of the wicked is sin, his prayer is abomination to the Lord.

If carnal men touch any Ordinance, they defile it; if they come into the house
of God, they pollute his Sanctuary. There is a fearful defilement on the Souls
and Consciences of men, in this respect. Every thing that a wicked man has to
do withal it defiles him, and he defiles it. To the pure, everything is pure,
(says the Apostle) but to the unclean, every thing is unclean. That is, a
wicked man, every thing infects and hurts him, he receives a secret spiritual
impression as it were, of hurt and defilement from it: and does also defile
whatever he meddles with, especially the persons they converse with.

A wicked man leaves a defilement on those he converses with, and he is defiled
by them. One wicked man corrupts and infects another: we see it in bad Company
how they infect, and are infected by one another mutually.

Therefore take heed lest there be any Fornicator, or any profane person among
you, any root of bitterness springing up and so many be defiled Heb. 12.

2. There be unclean Issues, running Sores. Isaia 1.5, 6. putrefying Sores, no
sound part.

And what is this but the out-breaking of Corruption in actual sins. Original
sin is like a corrupt Fountain, and actual sins are unclean, and evil, and
bitter streams that issue from it.

3. There is an unclean Leprosy in the heart of every carnal man, which
Solomon speaks of and deplores in 1 Kings 8. Knowing every one the plague of
his own heart, or the leprosy of his own heart: The same word that is used in
Levit. 13.

And hence it follows (4.) that they are unworthy and incapable to converse in
holy things, and to draw near to God in his Ordinances. For the unclean person
was to be separated during the time of his uncleanness till purified and made
clean again.

Use 3. See Christ in the Gospel in the Law of Moses; labor to see Jesus Christ
and the Gospel in the Ceremonial Law.

How excellently does the Apostle put them together?

The sprinkling of the Unclean sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh: The
blood of Christ purges the Conscience from dead works to serve the living God.

If we cannot see these divine mysteries in the Text; if we cannot see
Gospel Truths in these legal Ceremonies, and how admirably they are adapted and
fitted the one to the other; the Type to instruct and teach us, and inform us
about the Antitype, it is because of our own darkness and dimsightedness in
spiritual things.

Use 4. Behold also the pre-eminence and excellency of Christ above Moses, and
the Gospel above the Law. How much more shall the blood of Christ purge your
Consciences from dead works? [How much more?] It has a greater and an
irresistible efficacy, to cleanse the Soul and Conscience. And this is a Truth
of clearer and higher evidence than the Ceremonial cleanness by those legal
washings and purifications, which were the means of that Ceremonial Cleanness.

The Apostle uses the like note of pre-eminence when he compares Adam and
Christ. Adam was a personal Type, as this was a real Type. Romans 5.15, -- 17.
For if by one man's offense death reigned by one, much more they which receive
abundance of Grace, and of the gift of Righteousness shall reign in life by
Christ Jesus.

So here Gods design is, that in all things Christ might have the pre-eminence,
and be preferred above Moses.

Use 5. Labor to see and find in your selves the experience of this spiritual
cleansing whereof the Apostle speaks; this cleansing by the blood of Christ,
and go thou thither, have recourse to that blood for it.

Thou that have an unclean heart, and have lived it may be an unclean life (at
least in secret) though perhaps men have not seen it, get thy Heart, and Life,
and Conscience purified from dead works to serve the living God. There is
healing cleansing virtue enough in the blood of Christ. And would you be
cleansed indeed? you see the way of it. Has the Lord discovered to thee thy
defilement, and convinced thee of thy own uncleanness? then get this blood of
Christ applied. And as the Water of Purification was sprinkled on the Unclean
under the Law; so get this blood of Christ sprinkled on thy Soul and Conscience
by the Gospel.

It is often called the Blood of sprinkling. The reason is, because that as
they did apply it by sprinkling, as a means of cleansing, etc. so is the blood
of Christ applied to the Conscience. It is applied by the Spirit in the
Promise. Under the Promise held forth, we receive it by Faith; and the Promise
so received, the blood of Christ is brought home and sprinkled on the Soul; and
this will cleanse thee, though thou have been never so unclean, there is
healing purifying virtue in that blood, though thy uncleanness be never so
great, and thy Conscience never so defiled; yet there is cleansing by the blood
of Christ.

Thy Case is not desperate; there is virtue enough in the blood of Christ. How
much more will the blood of Christ cleanse thy Soul, if the blood of Bulls and
of Goats, and the ashes of an Heyfer sprinkling the unclean could cleanse the
body.

And remember this blood is offered: all that thou have to do is to receive it
by Faith, to beg a part in Christ, and desire him to make it effectual to thee.

The reason of all the defilement that appears in men, and that continues under
the use of Ordinances, is because they ge^ not the blood of Christ sprinkled on
their Consciences, they do not receive it. And two things keep them off: either
there is a Spirit of security, that they never seek after it, neither pray, not
endeavor, or mourn after it.

Or 2. There is a Spirit of discouragement, they never fly to Christ and his
blood, they seek not to him: but since he is offered, do not refuse him: thou
can not displease him more, then by so doing; but fly for refuge thither, as
a poor unclean guilty Creature, venture all on the infinite cleansing power and
virtue, that is in the blood of Jesus Christ.

Use 6. See the bondage and burdensomness of the legal Administration, they
could scarce be sick, but they became unclean: they could not touch so many
Creatures, but they were forthwith unclean; and being unclean, might not come
into the Temple, or public society; and in some cases were shut up. They had
Porters to keep them that were unclean in any thing, 2 Chronicles. 23.19. that they
should not enter in at the Gates of the house of the Lord. Let us bless God
that we are delivered from this Yoke of bondage.

An ADVERTISEMENT to the READER.
THe attentive Reader will quickly observe, that here is nothing upon that Head
of Uncleanness by Issues which according to the Authors proposed method should
have been here treated of. But there is not any thing thereon to be found
amongst his Papers, nor to be recovered by the help of any that took in writing
these Discourses from his mouth. It is therefore not improbable, that the
Author did purposely pass over in silence that Head, for reasons to him
satisfactory; which now can be but conjectured at.

Moreover the Reader is desired to bear in mind, that the following Sermon on
Levit. 13. concerning uncleanness by the Leprosy, was not preached in the
Authors course as it fell in his way in going over the Types, but sundry years
before, on occasion of dispensing the Censure of Excommunication in that
Church, whereof the Author had the Oversight. This it was thought needful to
advertise the Reader of, partly because of the different method of this Sermon,
from his other discourses on the Types; and partly because some Passages
therein, evidently refer to the Dispensation of that Ordinance, on occasion
whereof it was preached: and partly to account for the date of this Sermon,
which the Reader will see is some years before those that go before it. The
like is to be observed also concerning the foregoing Sermon on Circumcision,
which in this Book is at Page 218. It was preached on occasion of the
Administration of Baptism, as appears by a Passage in it, Page 219. And more
then two years before it fell in the Authors way in his going over the Types;
yea sundry Months before he entered on this course and subject in his Ministry.

THE GOSPEL OF THE LEPROSY.
Levit. 13. April 12 1665.

BRethren and Beloved in the Lord: If this Chapter seem to us at the first
reading to be a dark and abstruse place and to have little edifying matter in
it, we must impute it to our own ignorance and unskilfulness in Scripture
Truths and Mysteries. It is true: there is a dark shadow upon the words. But
there is much light, and many useful Truths intended and held forth under these
dark legal shadows.

The subject both of this and of sundry foregoing and following Chapters is
concerning Ceremonial Uncleanness, of which there be several kinds, whereof
this of Leprosy is one.

The general scope of this Chapter is to give Rules of trial whereby to discern
it.

The next, viz. the 14. Chapter, gives the Rules for cleansing the Leper.
Concerning both which God gives them afterward a strict and solemn charge that
they should take heed and observe diligently and do according to these commands
of his concerning the Leprosy. Deuteronomy. 24.8.

The Leprosy, and the legal uncleanness thereof, was typical. It signified and
held forth three things.

1. Sin; which is fitly compared to a Leprosy for the loathsomness, and
painfulness and infectiousness of it.

Yet this is not all. For Sin may be compared to any other disease as well as
to the Leprosy. Any sore, or sickness* or disease whatsoever may signify and
hold forth sin. As Isai. 1.5^ 6. full of sores -- the meaning is Spiritual
sickness: They were a sinful people -- Mat. 9.12. The whole need not a
Physician, but they that are sick, that is, sick of sin.

2. Therefore secondly it signified Original sin. For the Leprosy overspreads
all. Actual sins are the Boils and Sores that break forth, but Original sin is
as the Leprosy overspreading the whole nature.

Yet this is not all: For this is in the best: and therefore if this were all,
the people of God might be accounted Lepers. For all have Original sin; but yet
there be some that be not Lepers.

3. Therefore thirdly the Leprosy signified a state of sin and unregeneracy.
For the Leper must be shut out of the Camp, from among the people of God, as
being none of them, as having such a spot, as is not the spot of his people.
Therefore it seems also to hold forth a state of sin, a sinful or unregenerate
condition.

Now for the exposition of this Chapter; to let you see a little further into
some of the Truths and Mysteries contained in it, I shall only give you some
general Observations, under which we shall explain some part of the Chapter.

Obs. 1. That it is a work both difficult and weighty for people to discern and
judge aright of their own spiritual condition.

This appears by all these Rules and Directions. Were it not necessary, what
need of any Rule? were it not difficult, what need of so many Rules of trial
about the Leprosy?

This condemns the slightness of many that are slight and careless about this
great work; bestow few thoughts and cares about it, about searching into their
Spiritual Condition, as if it were an easy or a slight matter. It is the
exhortation of the Apostle 2 Pet. 1.10. that we should give diligence to make
our Calling and Election sure.

Obs. 2. That it is the Priests Office to judge of the Leprosy. It is the
Office of the Ministers of God to help his people, in discerning their own
spiritual estates and conditions toward God: therefore it runs so much upon
the Priest throughout the Chapter. Bring him to the Priest, and the Priest
shall make him unclean. Defile him, pollute him -- that is, Ministerially
declare him so to be. As Ezekiel. 43.3, 4. destroy the City -- that is, prophecy
its destruction.

God has given his Ministers power to retain and remit sins, Joh. 20.23. which
is the thing intended in this typical work of the Priests.

How should I understand without an Interpreter? Act. 8.31. How could men know
the meaning of the Scripture, or apply it aright, without this means which God
has appointed for their help? Ordinarily they cannot.

Use. It reproves that reservedness of many, who know not their own condition,
whether they be Lepers or no, and yet will not disclose their case; whereas it
may be the Priest might declare and evidence it to them, that they are clean.

To complain to every one, and to make Table talk of their Corruptions, and so
to fish out praises, savours of Hypocrisy. But to make known their condition
to some able faithful friend or Minister, especially if in the use of other
means you cannot attain to a comfortable discerning of it, is a duty, through
the neglect whereof, some are kept long in the dark about their own estates. It
is often times out of shame, their sins and sores and spiritual Leprosies are
loathsome and shameful.

But were it not better to make it known, then to let the sores of thy
Conscience sester inwardly? Their Wounds stink and are corrupt, because of
their foolishness in this particular.

Obs. 3. Note here (which will carry us through many particulars in the
Chapter) the Rules of Trial, whereby the Priest is to judge of the Leprosy.

There be five Rules especially, which be clear and safe to judge of the
spiritual Leprosy by.

1. If it be but skin deep, it is not the Leprosy, he is clean: but if deeper,
he is unclean. Verse. 3, 4 -- and again Verse 20, 25, 30. if it be but skin deep,
it is some sin, some sore of a lesser nature: but if deeper then the skin, in
the Vitals, blood, and spirits, he is unclean: it is the Leprosy.

So if there be sins and corruptions appearing like spots in the skin, in a
man's outward walkings; yet if the heart be not tainted, it is a good sign.

A Child of God may have spots in his Skin, frailties in his life; but his
heart is sound, his heart is perfect with God, sound in his Statutes.

But there be some sins that go deep, not only in the Skin; but the sin is
deeply rooted in the heart, and spirits and affections of a sinner; so that the
Vitals are infected.

This is a sign he is a Leper.

2. Trial. Does it stand at a stay? Or does it spread further and further?
Verse. 5, 6, 7, 8. And again verse 23, 27, 28, 34, 36, 37. If it stand at a stay,
he is clean. If it spread, he is a Leper.

So a leprous sinner that is in a sinful state and condition, the Leprosy will
spread in him. Evil men and Deceivers, will grow worse and worse. 2 Timothy 3.13.
Their Corruptions gain ground upon them.

But it is a sign there is some beginning of healing, if it stand at a stay. If
the Lord be healing a sinner, mortifying his Lusts, he is clean.

There is sinful Corruption in a Child of God; but it does not grow, spread,
and gather strength from day to day: but on the contrary, it is decaying, it is
on the losing hand. The house of Saul grows weaker and weaker; but the house of
David grows stronger and stronger. This is a sign God intends good to him.

3. Trial is this. If there be proud raw flesh in the Rising, verse. 9, 10, 11
-- and 14, 15. he is not to be shut up in suspense, the thing is evident.

But how shall we apply this to the spiritual Leprosy?

Thus. Is there proud raw flesh of pride and presumption and impatience of
reproof? This is an evil sign the sin is grown to some strength.

There may be sores and spots in a Child of God; but they are not so sore, as
that they will not be touched; they will bear reproof. As David when Abigail
reproved him. 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel which sent
thee, and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou. And so Psalm. 141.5. Let
the Righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness.

Others you cannot touch them, but you must be fensed with Iron, and the Staff
of a Spear; Mic. 2.6. and 2 Samuel 23.6, 7. Such are the Sons of Belial, that
shall all of them as Thorns be thrust away, and utterly burned with fire.

When a man cannot bear to be told of it, but his quick raw flesh appears; it
is an ill sign, he is a Leper indeed.

Such an one it seems Nabal was, 1 Samuel, 25.27.

But where this froward touchiness is wanting, if a man will take a reproof
well, it is a good sign, it is not the Plague of unregeneracy.

4. If all be turned white, a man is clean. Verse. 12, 17, and 34. This seems to
be the strangest Rule of all, and the darkest Passage in all this Chapter:
there is some difficulty, both concerning the natural reason, and concerning
the spiritual meaning of it.

The natural reason seems to be this; because it is a sign of some inward
strength of nature, that it expells the Disease, and sends it forth to the
outward parts.

Whereas if there be raw spots among it; it argues it is more inward, and the
Vitals not so strong as to drive it forth.

The spiritual meaning is by some thought to be this; if all become white by
true repentance and mortification, then it is not deadly.

But this is too general: therefore it seems to intend this further, that if we
think there be any sound part in our corrupt nature, it is a sign of a Leprous
sinner: so Ainsw. in loc.

If men have any confidence in themselves, if they seek any life by the deeds
of the Law, then shall they be pronounced unclean. But an humble acknowledgment
of the overspreading corruption of our natures, and flying to Christ for help
under a thorough conviction and sense of our own total uncleanness and
pollutedness; this is a sign the Plague is healed, and the Leper made clean.

The language of a Child of God is, There is no soundness in my flesh. Psalm.
38.7. And in me, that is in my flesh, there dwells no good thing. Romans 7.18.

The Opinion of Free will is a very dangerous Opinion. But if a man be
thoroughly convinced of his own Corruption, and soundly humbled under it, it
will make him look up earnestly, and cleave firmly to Jesus Christ to make him
clean. It is the most dangerous thing in the world to take up high conceits of
a man's self, and of the power of corrupt nature. This is a sure Rule, if people
think themselves clean, and any part in them sound, they are in a sad condition.

5. In case the Leprosy be in the Head he is doubly unclean verse. 44. The Head
is the principal part of the body, and the feat of Reason. Therefore a Leprosy
there must needs be very dangerous.

So in case men be corrupt in their Mind and Judgments, they are unclean,
unclean. Corrupt Opinions are a sign of a sinful condition; such are far from
the Kingdom of God. Where sin has prevailed so far, as to blind the very Mind
and Understanding, they are more incapable of Conversion than others, because
so far from Conviction: For Conversion begins in Illumination.

There may be failings in the lives of the people of God: But they disown them;
they are not so corrupt in their Minds and Principles as to justify themselves
in them.

There be several other Rules in the Chapter; some relating to the bodily
Disease, and so not necessary to seek out a Spiritual meaning of each
particular expression: And the same Rules in the first 17 Verses are repeated
again in other cases of the Leprosy, in Clothes, in Skins, etc.

Let us therefore proceed to a fourth Observation.

Obs. 4. Note the duties imposed upon the Leper, when thus detected, they are
five. verse. 45, 46, 47.

1. To rend his Clothes: a sign of sorrow and lamentation: so 2 Kings 6.30. The
Kings Clothes were rent in that Famine.

2. His Head must be bare: For the same end, this being another outward
expression of sorrow, usual in those times.

3. He must cover his Lip: Thus they were wont so to express their shame, see
Mica. 3.7 -- Ezekiel. 24.17.

He must keep silence before God, as being under shame and confusion.

4. He must cry unclean, unclean: He must give warning to others to shun him.
He may speak of his own Leprosy, but otherwise he must be silent.

So a scandalous Sinner may speak in confession of his sin, he must tell others
he is unclean. He must not charge others with their failings, but load his own
Conscience, and take his guiltiness home to himself.

5. He shall dwell alone: They were to be put out of the Camp, and excluded
from the fellowship of Gods People. The Priest must shut him out and he must
submit. So King Vzziah did. 2 Chronicles. 26.20.

This was a Type of Excommunication, that great Gospel Ordinance, which is, the
shutting of a sinner out of the Camp.

This brings me to speak of Excommunication, which is suitable to the present
Providence. For this shutting out the Leper from the Camp of Israel, signified
shutting out of the Church.

This therefore I shall speak a little to, both the Text and the present
Providence of God leading and calling to it, under these five heads.

1. The nature of it 2. The cases wherein it must be done. 3. The ends and uses
of it. 4. The manner of proceeding. 5. To whom this work and power belongs.
1. For the nature of Excommunication. It is the putting of a Man out of the
Church, and delivering him unto Satan. Put away from among you that wicked
Persons 1 Cor. 5. ult. So Diotrephes, 3 John 10. cast the Brethren out of the
Church. There is a going out of the Church, when men rend themselves off by
Apostasy, Heresy, or Schism. 1 John 2.19. they went out from us -- In which
they are active, and cut off themselves, that is their own act; but in this
they are sufferers, this is the Churches act by the power of Christ.

For as persons are united by consent into spiritual fellowship: so by the
Churches dissent, to have him be of them any longer, he is cut off, or cast
out; upon which he falls into the hand of Satan unavoidably. Delivering him
unto Satan. 1 Cor. 5.5.

For the Church is the visible Kingdom of Christ in this World: therefore when
cast out of that, they fall into the hand of Satan who is the God of this
World; if put out of Christ's Kingdom, and from under his gracious Scepter; they
must needs fall under the Kingdom and power of Satan.

Quest. What power of Satan is this?

Ans. Not a bodily Possession; because the Apostle writes to the whole Church
of Corinth to do it.

But it cannot be supposed, that the whole Church had the gift of Miracles:
neither indeed is the Lord wonted to work Miracles for that end. We do not find
it in Scripture, that the Lord does put men by Miracle into Satan's hand, but he
rather works miraculously to deliver them from it.

But a spiritual power of Satan over them is hereby meant, namely, either to
terrify or stupefie them.

1. Sometimes he gives Satan a terrifying power in order to their humbling.

But, 2. If they be not terrified by Satan, when under this Ordinance, there is
a stupefying hardening power: and there never was any man justly Excommunicated,
but fell under one of these two.

Quest. 2. What are the Cases wherein Excommunication ought to be administered?

Ans. It being the highest Censure, and the severest part of that spiritual
vengeance which the Lord has entrusted his Ministers and Churches with; it
should never be used but in Cases of great extremity, when no other means in
the ordinary course of Gods dispensation, will attain the end.

But when the sinners Case is such, that it is beyond the reach of other means
to help. Immeditabile vulnus ense recidendum est.

Hence it is not to be used for mere sailings, and infirmities, and sins of
weakness, which a Godly man may fall into, and yet walk with God uprightly.

But for such sins and evils as are inconsistent with Grace here, or Glory
hereafter: such, as if a man lives and dies and goes on in; it is not possible
he should have any Grace in his heart, or any grounded comfort or hope of
Salvation.

Hence also it is not to be used for things doubtful and disputeable, Romans
14.1. much less for things indifferent; for they neither commend us, nor
discommend us unto God, 1 Cor. 8.8. and therefore should not to the Church. For
in such things, we are not either the better or the worse for practicing or
forbearing: as the Apostle there expressly asserts.

But for things clear and certain, and universally acknowledged amongst all
that deserve the name of Christians: the Scripture speaks clearly to two Cases.

1. Fundamental errors of Judgment. So the Apostle 1 Timothy 1. ult. dealt with
Hymeneus and Philetus. And what they held, is more particularly expressed in 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. viz. that the Resurrection is past already.

So Titus 3.10. An Heretic after his being twice admonished reject: so here
Lev. 13.44. if the Leprosy be in the head, he is utterly unclean.

Hence therefore, if any man deny one God and three Persons, deny the
Scriptures, the Deity of Christ, the Immortality of the Soul, the Resurrection
of the body, or such like fundamental points; it is the duty of the Church to
cast him out from among them; he is unclean.

2. For scandalous practices in a man's life and conversation. The Rule is
plain, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. Withdraw your selves from every brother that walks
disorderly: so in the case of the incestuous Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5.13. put away
from among your selves that wicked person. So Mat. 18.17. So of old, 2 Chronicles.
23.19. Jehoiada set Porters at the Gates of the house of the Lord, that none
which was unclean in any thing should enter in.

This includes Moral as well as Ceremonial uncleanness.

Quest. 3. The ends of this Ordinance.

Answ. They are many: The principal are these three.

1. To vindicate the name of God from the dishonor done to it by wicked men
creeping in among his people. This vindicates the holiness of God, that though
he loves sinners, yet he shows his love in sanctifying and turning them from
their sins, not in sheltering and encouraging them in their wickedness. This
end is intimated in 1 Cor. 5.1. It is commonly reported that there is
Fornication among you, and that such Fornication as is not so much as named
among the Gentiles. q. d. The name of God suffers by it: The Gentiles take
offense against Religion because of this; they are ready to say as Ezekiel. 36.20.
these are the Lords people. And so the holy name of God is profaned by such
sinners, as the Prophet there speaks.

So again, 2 Cor. 7.11. what clearing of your selves? In clearing themselves
they clear the name of God.

I mention this first, because this is the great and chief end of this
Ordinance. And it never fails of attaining this end, though it have little
success in other respects: Though the sinner be never so obstinate, yet however
the name of God is cleared.

2. For the Churches good, to take away infectious persons from amongst them,
and so to preserve and warn the rest; to keep the Church pure and free from
infection. 1 Cor. 5, 6. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. One root of
bitterness may defile many. Heb. 12.15.

And to warn others, that others may fear. 1 Timothy 5.20. That all Israel may
hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously. Deuteronomy. 17.13.

3. For the good of the sinner himself, to bring him to Repentance. For the
destruction of the flesh, 1 Cor. 5.5. the incestuous Corinthian must be
delivered unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh. And God did so bless
this Ordinance to him, that he was humbled, and brought to deep and thorough
repentance thereby.

I confess this end is not always attained: But yet the Ordinance is not in
vain. For this is not the only end of it, nor yet the chief end. For Gods glory
is the chief end, the vindicating his great name, the manifesting his justiee,
and holiness, and hatred of sin; and this end is attained, though the sinner is
not converted by it.

Quest. 4. What is the manner of proceeding in Excommunication?

Ans. Some things herein are left to Christian prudence, and must be judged of
by the particular circumstances of every case.

But there be some general Rules to guide us in each particular.

There is chiefly this general Rule wherein all agree, all the godly learned
that have written upon this subject do agree thus far.

That in some cases there ought to be a more gradual and delatory kind of
proceeding by certain steps and degrees: But in other cases the proceedings of
the Church may be more speedy and summary.

Rule 1. In some cases there ought to be a more gradual and delatory way of
proceeding by certain steps and degrees.

These steps and degrees are two. First Suspension, and then Excommunication.

The first degree is called by some the lesser Excommunication. And the second
they call the greater Excommunication.

Suspension is a temporary debarring of a person from the present enjoyment and
participation of Church privileges. As the Sacraments and power of Voting,
till such time as his Case be fully determined.

Some call it Suspension, others call it Admonition, others the lesser
Excommunication.

But he is a Member still.

For Excommunication cuts him off; Suspension only debars him of present
communion with the Body for a time: But Excommunication cuts off and dissolves
his union with the Body.

The Rule for Suspension is in Levit. 13.4, 5. from the Priests shutting up the
Leper seven days -- And Mat. 5.24. Leave thy gift before the Altar -- And Mat.
18. The Church must be told of his sin, and of his obstinacy under the former
steps of proceeding with him, and it must appear that he does not hear the
Church before he may be made an Heathen and a Publican.

Quest. But how long must they delay the sentence of Excommunication?

Answ. There cannot be a particular time limited, because of the infinite
variety of particular Cases and Circumstances: Therefore whether an Offender
should lie under suspension a week, or a month, or a longer, or shorter time,
God has left it to Christian wisdom.

It is dangerous to limit and make particular Rules, when God has made none.

The general Rule, which is sufficient to guide and give light in all
particular cases, is this. That till it do appear that the Offender sins
presumptuously, the Church should not proceed to Excommunication.

If the Case be dubious and uncertain, whether he be a leprous, a presumptuous
sinner or no, as Levit. 13. then shut him up seven days more, till it do appear
that he is a Leper, and a Presumptuous sinner.

The same Rule is given concerning lesser and private offenses, in Mat. 18.15,
16, 17. If thy Brother offend thee, tell him between him and thee: If he will
not hear thee, take with thee one or two more: And if he shall neglect to hear
them, then tell it to the Church.

Tell it. What is meant by the word [it?]

It must needs relate to the private offense before mentioned.

This Text therefore speaks not of public Scandals; but of such Offenses as
are private, till the Offenders impenitency necessitate the making of them
public.

The same Rule is given in case of corrupt Opinions. Titus 3.10. There must be
a first and a second Admonition before Rejection. The Reason is because it may
be hoped in these Cases, that the man's sin may have been for want of
Conviction, and therefore not of Presumption; unless he resist light, when
means and matter of Conviction is held forth. And in private Offenses the
matter may possibly be healed privately.

Rule 2. In other cases there is no need of such delatory proceeding. If it be
evident and apparent, that the Sinner does not sin for want of Light, but
presumptuously against Light.

And if the thing be already public, so that it cannot be hid nor healed
privately, as in the case of public scandals. When the Offense is so heinous,
that it cries to heaven for vengeance, wastes the Conscience, and is generally
scandalous; the Censures of the Church may proceed with more expedition. See
Scobels Collect of Acts and Ordinance, an. 48. cap. 118. page 119.
Thus ordained that great reforming Parliament by the advice of that Assemby of
Divines that sat at Westminster upon their Call.

The Reasons to prove this, viz. that the proceedings with Offenders, ought to
be more speedy and summary in Cases of atrocious wickedness, are such as these.

Reas. 1. From Lev. 13. The Priest is directed to suspend or shut him up seven
days, if the Case be doubtful.

But if it be evident that the man is a Leper, (and presumptuous sinners may
well be accounted Lepers) the Rule is to shut him out of the Camp, not to
suspend him seven days, but shut him out immediately. See verse. 3, and 46.

Reas. 2. From the Case of the Incestuous person in 1 Cor. 5. The Apostle does
not warn them to take heed of Excommunicating him, and to suspend him first,
and then to wait meekly and mercifully for him, till he repent. No, but he
declares he had already determined the Case, that he should be delivered to
Satan, verse. 3, 4.

And indeed there is a general silence throughout the Scripture, concerning
such gradations and delays in case of public flagrant scandals. There is no
Caution, no direction given for such previous Admonitions to be given to such
persons, in order to the preventing of Excommunication.

Reas. 3. From the strange impenitency and hardness of heart that is in
scandalous sinners.

To instance in the sin of Uncleanness, which is the Case that now lies before
us, it is a very blinding hardening sin. Prove 9.18. But he knows not that the
dead are there: and that her Guests are in the depths of Hell.

It is the fruit of a seared Conscience, a Conscience past feeling. Ephesians.
4.19. Who being past feeling, have given themselves over unto lasciviousness to
work uncleanness.

This meets with that Objection: should the Church censure a repenting sinner?

I will not now dispute that question, whether Repentance be always enough to
prevent Church Censures.

Some think it is not: for doubtless Aaron and Miriam repented. Numb. 12.11,
12. See how Aaron there confesses and bewails the sin; and he speaks in the
plural Number for them both.

But here was a very scandalous sin, insolent and seditious speeches against
the chief Magistrate and Prophet of God, who was exceeding faithful in his
place, for which God smites her with Leprosy; and notwithstanding their own
confessions, and Moses his Intercessions for them, the Lord would have her shut
out. Verse. 14. And the Lord said unto Moses, if her Father had spit in her
face; should she not be ashamed seven days? Let her be shut out from the Camp
seven days.

So we may say of Fornicators, or of any other flagitious sinner: if his Father
had but spit in his face, should he not be ashamed seven days? And shall he not
be shut out of the Church at all for Fornication?

But there is no need to debate that: for all scandalous sinners are impenitent
persons, and are so to be accounted by all that fear God, till full proof and
evidence do appear, that they have forsaken those scandalous and wicked ways.
And this neither does, nor can appear ordinarily, till after there has been a
sufficient space and time, and trial and experience how they walk.

Confession of a public Scandal when the Evidence of the Fact is undeniable,
is no sufficient Evidence of repentance: for Pharaoh and Saul and Judas did
this.

And no man that has the use of his Reason, can or will do otherwise: for to
what purpose is it to deny that which all men know? Or to seek to conceal that
which cannot be hid?

In the Confessions of such persons it is observeable, That they are either
merely forced and extorted by the hand of God upon them, as Pharaohs was when
he confessed the Lord is righteous, but I and my people are wicked: and Judas
his, by the horror of his Conscience, Matthew. 27.3, 4, 5. Or else their
Confession is extorted by the undeniable Evidence of the Fact, and mingled with
manifest discoveries of Pride, even when they seem to be taking shame to
themselves; as Saul, 1 Samuel 15. Or, (which is worst of all,) their Confessions
are mingled sometimes with Invectives against those which reprove them. As
Matthew. 7.6. They turn again and rent you.

Instead of an humble broken hearted Confession, you shall sometimes have a
venomous virulent Confession from them, wherein their Confessions against
themselves are mingled with slanderous reflections and invectives against their
Reprovers. Yet when Excommunication is most speedy, it should not be without
admonition, both before, and in the Ordinance, and after. But shut out they
must be.

Hence continual suspension is an abuse; for scandalous sinners to stand
suspended from year to year, but never fully cast out.

Quest. 5. To whom does the power of Excommunication belong?

Answ. This has been matter of much controversy; there have been several
claims set on foot, and many pretenders to this power. The Pope and Prelates
have been sufficiently detected to be mere Thieves, and Robbers, and Usurpers
upon the inheritance of the Lord.

All the Question that remains, is about the power of the Elders and the
People. But I shall wave that which is controversal among the godly learned.

I would endeavor so to state the Case as to prevent and cut off Disputes and
Janglings. Therefore note only thus much: That it is a general Rule in all
Church Administrations, that the Officers are to guide, and go before the
Flock, and the People are to obey them in the Lord. Hence they are called
Guides and Rulers. Obey them that have the Rule over you. Heb. 13. See Rev. 4.
When the four living Wights, that is the Elders of the Church, give glory to
God, then the four and twenty Elders, that is, the Members of the visible
Church fall down before him and worship him. So in this business of
Excommunication, both the Elders and People have something to do in it. To
speak to them severally.

1. The Duty of the Elders or Ministers: This lies in two things.

1. It is the Ministers part to enquire of the Lord for his People, and to
declare the mind of God unto them, what the Lord would have them to do. It is
the Ministers duty to enquire of the Lord for them. They must Deuteronomy. 17.9, 10,
11. come to the Priest for judgment: So Abiathar inquires of the Lord for David.

It is their part also to declare the Answer of God to his People. To hold
forth the mind of God, and their duty to them. Deuteronomy. 17.9. They shall show thee
the sentence of Judgment. There is the like Rule for Gospel times. Ezekiel. 44.23,
24.

2. To pronounce the Leper unclean: To make him unclean, that is
authoritatively to declare him so. This belongs to the Elders of the Church.
Levit. 13.3. Some body must do it, and who fitter than the Officers, who have
the Government of the Church in their hands? Whose sins ye retain, they are
retained. Whose sins ye retain, that is, in a Ministerial way, in Christ's name,
they are retained.

Now when the Minister has done his part; what is the Peoples part in this
work?

As I said before: I shall not wade into controversies.

There be two things which are clear. There is a double act of obedience on the
peoples part.

1. To give an actual consent of heart, and mind, and affections to what the
Officers do in the name of Christ, supposing the Officers to have done their
part aright. Deuteronomy. 27.15. etc. all the people shall say, Amen. So the Apostle
to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.12. do not you judge them that are within? their
judgments should concur in it.

As at the Great Day the Saints shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2. how? by
approving the righteous judgment and sentence of Christ upon them: so here, the
people are to approve and consent unto the judgment declared by the Elders from
the Word of God.

2. It is the peoples duty to forbear keeping company with such a person. 1
Cor. 5. Keep no company with Fornicators. Verse. 9. With such an one not to eat.
Verse. 11. Withdraw from every brother that walks disorderly, that he may be
ashamed. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.

The Reason hereof is plain.

Either the people must thus concur, or else dissent, or else stand by as idle
Spectators, and persons unconcerned: but they may not dissent: for remember how
the Case was stated concerning Officers that are faithful in the discharge of
their trust. In such a Case for the people to dissent, is, not so much to
disobey them, as to disobey the Lord Christ.

They have not rejected thee, but me. 1 Samuel 8.7.

Neither are the people to stand by as Newters, and persons merely unconcerned:
for this were to frustrate the sentence of Excommunication, and to make it
void, for the sentence does exclude him from the fellowship of Gods people: and
therefore unless they make Conscience of it, to forbear keeping company with
him, the sentence is vain. It remains therefore that there is, and ought to be
a concurrence of the people in Church Censures.

Object. But all this that has been said, goes upon this supposition; that the
Officers are faithful in the discharge and execution of their Office.

But suppose the Officers be unfaithful, and will not exclude ignorant and
profane people, or will receive them, and shut out better then they.

Or suppose the people be froward, and will not withdraw from the looser sort,
or will not consent to have them cast out; what is to be done in such a Case?
What is the Remedy there?

Ans. This is a Case that seldom or never falls out in reformed Churches, in
Churches rightly constituted, and Officers rightly qualified, it cannot often
fall out: because the Lord has promised his presence to be in the midst of
them; and therefore he will manifest and make known his mind, and their duty to
them.

But if it do -- After all other means used, Light held forth, and patient
waiting and seeking to the Lord, and to the Godly-wise for advice and counsel,
etc.

The last Remedy that Ministers have, is, to reform the matter of the Church,
by withdrawing from such a corrupt Majority, as will not be persuaded to obey
them in the Lord, and to close with the lesser, but sounder part of the people.
And this is the Remedy that all the Godly Ministers generally have taken: they
have left out the ignorant and profane part of the Parish from the Sacraments,
especially from the Lords Supper.

So in like manner, if Ministers be so large in their Principles, that they
will needs pollute the Ordinances; what can the people do in such a Case to
help themselves: but, after all other means used, to betake themselves to some
better Minister and purer Church? This is the last Remedy in such a Case: and
so I have done with the fourth Observation concerning the Lepers duty, or
punishment. Beside other things, he must dwell alone, and be shut out.

Obs. 5. We may here note the mavelous defiling, infecting nature of sin, in
that the Leprosy infecteth Clothes, and Skins, and Garments, verse. 47, 48. And
sometimes houses also, see Cap. 14. It gets into the Walls and Timber: so that
sin reaches other things beside the person.

Sin may spoil a man's business, infect all his Comforts, it may ruin his house.

We see of what an infectious nature it is: therefore keep off at the greatest
distance, have nothing to do with it. We should hate the very Garments spotted
with the flesh.

Obs. 6. Note from the whole, what an intricate and cumbersome Dispensation the
people of God were then under in those Legal times, in regard of the Law of
Ceremonies.

Here was (beside the bodily Disease) a Ceremonial uncleanness in it, which was
very burdensome and difficult to judge of, and to keep themselves from it, and
to cleanse it. And it was such a burden, as might light upon a Child of God, a
Godly man might possibly be a Leper.

As it is not improbable by some expressions, but that might be H^mans Case
Psalm. 88. he says, he was shut up, an abomination to them, and that Lover and
Friend were gone.

They had this burden of Ceremonial uncleanness, besides all their other
burdens. That, as Peter speaks Act. 15. were a Yoke which neither we, nor our
Fathers are able to bear. We are free from all this: we have no further care or
burden lying on us, but to look to the health of our bodies, and the moral
uncleanness of sin: but the Ceremonial uncleanness is vanished away.

Use. It should stir us up to thankfulness, and (as the best expression of it)
to love and prize and keep close to the Ordinances and Institutions of the
Gospel, which are but two, which are plain and easy and spiritual, viz. Baptism
and the Lords Supper, with some few other things for the order and way of
enjoying these, as a Church Estate and Ministry to dispense them.

As he said to Naaman: if the Prophet had required some great thing, would
thou not have done it? How much rather, when he says to thee, wash and be
clean?

So if the Lord had put that old Yoke upon our Necks and Consciences, which he
has been pleased to remove; should we not have taken it upon us? How much
more, when he required only so few, such plain, easy, simple, spiritual things.
We should love and prize them, and the Lord in them, and bring forth the fruit
of Gospel Dispensations.

THE GOSPEL OF THE LEGAL PURIFICATIONS.
September 20. 1668.
Hebr. 9.13, 14.
HAving spoken of the Ceremonial Uncleanness, and the Moral Uncleanness
figured thereby: It follows in the next place to speak of the Ceremonial
Purifications, and the Spiritual Cleansing signified thereby, together with the
means thereof. If the blood of Bulls and Goats sanctified to the purifying of
the flesh -- These general expressions include all: But the Apostle specifies
one particular, viz. The ashes of an Heyser sprinkling the unclean. The Law for
it is in the 19. Chapter of Numbers.

There be two things chiefly to be considered in it, as in other Sacrifices.

1. The matter of it. 2. The Ceremonies, or actions about it for Purification.
1. The Matter; and under this there be four things observable.

1. That it was an Heyser. 2. A Red Heyser. 3. Without spot or blemish. 4. On
which never came Yoke.
1. It must be an Heyser: So in the Text, so in Numb. 19. verse. 12. The Lord
spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, this is the Ordinance of the Law which
the Lord has commanded, saying, speak unto the Children of Israel, that they
may bring thee a red Heiser without spot, wherein is no blemish, and upon which
never Yoke came.

Here is Gods Authority, so appointing that it should be an Heifer, though
ordinarily they were to offer Males; yet here the Law you see, is expressly
otherwise; it must not be a Bullock, but an Heifer: therefore this was a
peculiar kind of Sacrifice. God by his sovereign Authority did, and might
appoint what he pleased to be offered in his Sacrifices.

2. It is particularly required, that it be a red Heifer: a color often and
fitly applied to Christ in a mystical sense.

My Beloved is white and ruddy. Cant. 5.10. so Isai. 63.1. Who is this that
comes from Edom, with red Garments from Bozrah? Red with his own blood, and
with the blood of his conquered Enemies. And Rev. 19.13. his Vesture dipped in
blood.

The redness of the Heifer did also point at the humane nature of Christ, which
he had from Adam, who was made out of red Earth. Genesis 2.7. from which also he
took his name Adam.

Thus Christ is red, and that in regard of his sufferings, and in regard of his
victories, and of the blood of his conquered Enemies, and also in regard of his
beauty; and lastly, in regard that he took part of flesh and blood, was really
and truly man.

3. It is further required in this Sacrifice, that it must be without spot and
blemish. Numb. 19.2.

This was required in all the Sacrifices, as Lev. 1.3, 10. without blemish. And
it speaks forth the purity and perfection of Jesus Christ: therefore it is
said, 1 Pet. 1.19. We are redeemed by his blood, as of a Lamb without spot and
blemish. And him that knew no sin, has God made sin for us, that we might
become the righteousness of God by him. 2 Cor. 5.21. So he is both white and
ruddy -- Ruddy in regard of his bloody Sufferings: but white in regard of his
pure and perfect Righteousness.

4. It must be such an Heifer, on which never came Yoke. Numb. 19.2. So Christ
was free from the bondage of sin, and did never come under the yoke of men's
Inventions and Commands: nor did he suffer by compulsion, but freely and
willingly when he died for us,

Sin, and the punishment of it, is compared in Scripture to a Yoke. Lament.
1.14. The Yoke of my Transgressions is bound by his hand: they are wreathed,
and come up upon my neck. And so Joh. 8.33, 34, 35, 36.

He that lives in sin, and commits and makes a Trade of it, he is the servant
of sin.

They boasted that they were free, and never in bondage to any man; but he
tells them of a spiritual servitude, which they understood not* This was Christ
free from

And yet further, as there was not this Yoke of sin upon him: so neither was
there any Yoke of constraint or compulsion in his Sufferings, in any thing he
underwent for us: all he did and suffered, was spontaneous and voluntary. Joh.
10.17, 18. I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man takes it
from me, but I lay it down of my self: I have power to lay it down, and I have
power to take it again. So here is a Heifer, a red Heifer, a Heifer without
spot, and one upon which never came Yoke.

2. Consider the Actions and Ceremonies about the Heifer, which were also very
significant, and full of spiritual mystery. Not to insist upon the bringing of
her to the Priest, which was common to all the Sacrifices, there were four
especially remarkable.

1. That she must be slain without the Camp. 2. The blood sprinkled seven times
toward the Tabernacle. 3. The body burnt with Cedar, Scarlet, and Hyslop, call
into to the fire. 4. The Ashes reserved to make an holy Water to sprinkle the
unclean.
1. This Heifer must be slain without the Camp This is required Numb 19.3. This
Ceremony was required also in the Sin-Offering. Cap. 4 12.

This is expounded at large by the Apostle, Heb. 13.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. We have
an Altar whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the Tabernacle. For the
bodies of those Beasts, whose blood is brought into the Sanctuary by the High
Priest for sin, are burnt without the Camp. Wherefore Jesus also that he might
sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the Gate. Let us go
forth therefore unto him without the Camp, bearing his reproach. For here have
we no continuing City, but we seek one to come.

Some Sacrifices were to be eaten; but other Sacrifices, the Sin Offering, and
this of the Heyfer for Purifications, they were not to eat them, but to kill
them, and burn them out of the Camp. This shows that they which serve the
Temple, which adhere to old legal carnal ways, they have no right to eat of the
Altar, says the Apostle; they that serve the Tabernacle, that adhere to Moses,
and to those things that are of men's wisdom and invention (as all Moses his
Ceremonies now are, being abolished by God. And therefore now to adhere to
them, and to serve the Tabernacle, is to follow our own wisdom, and worship God
according to our own pleasure) such have no right to eat of the Altar; they
have no right to Jesus Christ, in that they keep not to the purity of his own
Institutions.

Again, Jesus Christ did suffer without the Gate, which was prefigured by this
their carrying this Heyfer out, there to be slain.

So they carried Jesus Christ out to Golgotha, there they Crucified him, so
that it was fulfilled in Christ in a very manifest way. For that he suffered
without the City, as this Heyfer was to be slain without the Camp.

Jesus Christ therefore being a reputed Sinner and Malefactor, and under that
reproach and shame did therefore suffer without the Gate. We must therefore be
content to suffer with him in the same disgrace and dishonor. If ye cannot be
content to bear the reproaches and disgraces of the world, ye cannot bear his
reproach.

The Apostles were accounted the very filth of the World, such as by sweeping
is gathered together (as in the Margent) the swepings and refuse of all things.
Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you Luke 6 26. We see the mystery
then of this Ceremony, that the Heyfer must be slain without the Camp.

2. The Blood must be sprinkled seven times directly toward the Tabernacle.
For the Priest is spoken of as standing without the Camp where the Heyfer was
slain, who was to sprinkle the blood toward the Camp, and so toward the
Tabernacle.

The Tabernacle was a Type of Heaven; therefore the sprinkling the Blood
toward Heaven, taught us, That our access into Heaven is only by the perfect
merit of the blood of Christ. Heb. 10.19, 20.

The sprinkling seven times notes the perfect efficacy of the blood of Christ;
for seven is a number of perfection; therefore often used in those mystical
Dispensations of old. It shows the perfection of his blood, and that there must
be frequent and renewed application of it from time to time; It must be
sprinkled again and again, and seven times over upon our Consciences.

3. The body of the Heyfer must be burnt with Cedar, Hyssop and Scarlet, cast
into the fire, and the Priests that do it are unclean until the Even verse. 5,
6, 7, 8.

Of the Burning you have heard upon other Sacrifices.

The casting in of Cedar, Hyssop and Scarlet, is peculiar to this Sacrifice;
and something of Instruction we may pick out of it by looking into other
Scriptures.

Cedar is noted for an excellent kind of Timber, the chief of Trees; and the
Scripture does sometimes apply it unto Christ in a Metaphorical way. Cant.
5.15. It is said of Christ, his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the
Cedars. It is a stately and durable Tree, not subject to putrefaction.
Therefore some interpret this Law as a shadow of the perpetual efficacy of the
death of Christ, who by one offering perfected for ever them that are
sanctified. Heb. 10.14.

As for Hyssop, it is said verse. 18. there must be a bunch of it to sprinkle
with. Hence David prays, Purge me with Hyssop. Psalm. 51.7. Some apply it thus:
That the Bunch of Hyssop wherein they sprinkled the blood, is the Word of
Promise, by which Christ is applied to the Soul.

Or thus. The Bunch of Hyssop signifies the Instrument of the application of
Christ's blood. And what is the Instrument by which we apply the blood of
Christ, but Faith, and this Faith lays hold on the promise. It is the word of
promise that brings Christ and his blood unto the Soul, and the Soul receives
it by Faith. This must be cast into the burning.

It is by the death and sufferings of Jesus Christ, that the promises are made
effectual, and that they have the virtue of cleansing us from our sins. And
they were also to cast Scarlet into the burning.

Scarlet is of a red color, and we read in Scripture of Scarlet sins. Isai.
1.18. Though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be made as Snow. The death and
blood of Jesus Christ says the Apostle, cleanses us from all sin. 1 John 1.7.

And further, he that does all this, must yet be unclean until the Evening: so
before in the Sin-Offering, Lev. 4. with Lev. 16.27, 28. which plainly holds
forth the imperfection of all Legal Sacrifices, and the Iniquity that cleaves
to our holy Offerings, as was there showed.

4. The fourth thing is, the ashes must be gathered and reserved to make an
holy Water of, to sprinkle the unclean. Numb. 19.9 -- 17, 18.

This Water which was made by means of this sacred Relick, is called in another
place of Scripture, Numb. 5.17. holy Water.

It is called holy, because it was appointed by God for a holy use. He can set
his Stamp upon, and hallow this Water, as he did on the Bread and Wine,
appointing it for a holy use: and so this, it must be kept for an holy use, and
every unclean person must be sprinkled with it.

Now the meaning of this sanctifying to the purifying of the flesh, is this, it
plainly signifies the sprinkling of the blood and spirit of Jesus Christ upon
us, for Justification and Sanctification. 1 John 5.8. There are three that bear
witness in the Earth, the Spirit and the Water and the Blood, and these three
agree in one.

There is the Spirit of Faith in Vocation.

The Water of Sanctification.

And the blood of Jesus Christ for Justification.

These three concur in their Evidence and Testimony, that there is virtue and
life in Christ for them that believe: so you see the mystery of it. When
persons were sprinkled with this Water, they became clean; others might
converse with them, they might come into the Tabernacle, and have Communion
with God in his Ordinances.

This holds forth Souls being sprinkled with the blood of Christ, and with the
Spirit, which is often compared to Water, as when it is said, I will pour water
on the dry ground, and my Spirit on your Off spring. Isai. 44.3. see also Ezekiel.
36.25. and Joh 7.38, 39.

So they that have this sprinkling by the blood of Christ, they have access to,
and fellowship with God by the blood of Christ. And so much for the meaning of
the Ceremonial actions relating to this Heyfer.

Now for Use and Application a little, and so we shall conclude.

Use. Learn this Instruction: See the Sovereign virtue and transcendent
excellency of the blood of Christ; and it gives direction and encouragement to
unclean souls to have recourse to Jesus Christ for cleansing. If these things
did so avail to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of
Christ cleanse your Consciences from dead works to serve the living God?

The virtue and excellency of his blood appears, as to the purging of our Souls
and Consciences in a fourfold respect.

1. If compared with Ceremonial blood, of which the Text speaks. The Sacrifices
were but shadowy cleansings, but a shadowy purification: But the blood of
Christ cleansing the Conscience is the thing aimed at. These were the means to
shadow out this spiritual cleansing. This is the end, the substance aimed at.

They gave an outward holiness, no inward holiness. When they were made
Ceremonially clean, they did not change the mind, they removed but the shadow
of Moral uncleanness, for Ceremonial uncleanness was no sin, but only a shadow
of it: But the blood of Christ removes the sin it self; the guilt of sin in
Justification, and the power of sin in Sanctification. So the blood of Christ
has a surpassing excellency, being compared with the blood of Bulls and Goats,
etc.

2. Compare it to the blood of Souls and Sinners.

The blood of Jesus Christ brings more glory to God, than if all the Elect
themselves had suffered to all eternity, more glory to God: And it is more
efficacious for the good of Souls.

If the Elect had suffered, and their blood had been shed for their own sins,
God had wanted much of that glory, which he has by the blood of Jesus Christ.
And more efficacious for good to them: For they could never have been saved by
their own sufferings.

The worth of the blood of Christ appears 1. In regard of the worth of the
Person. 2. In regard of the speedy satisfaction. 3. In regard of the full
satisfaction.


1. The worth of the Person: This is often taken notice of in Scripture, as
belonging to the efficacy of the blood of Jesus Christ, that it is the blood of
God: As Acts 20.28. and Zach. 13.7. He is the Man that is the fellow of the
Lord of Hosts: Therefore the Apostle having spoken in Coll. 1. how that we have
redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sin. In verse. 14. he
falls into a description of the glory of the person of Christ. Who is the Image
of the invisible God, by him were all things made. The dignity of his Person
puts an infinite value on his blood and sufferings, mounting the blood of
Christ to a higher satisfaction of Divine Justice, than the blood of all the
Elect.

The Righteousness of Jesus Christ, is a more glorious Righteousness than if
all the Elect had suffered for themselves; that had been but the blood of
Sinners, this the blood of God.

2. The speedy satisfaction that is made to Divine Justice. Christ paid all the
Debt at once, which Sinners must have been paying for ever: And this is more
satisfactory to the Creditor, than to have the Debt long a paying.

If a man owe an hundred pounds, and must lie in Prison till the Debt be paid,
paying ten pounds every year; this Debt will be long in paying, and it will not
be so satisfactory to the Creditor, as if a Rich Man should come and set the
Prisoner free by paying the Debt presently.

3. He satisfied fully, and paid the whole Debt. Joh. 19.30. Our Savior says,
Now it is finished. He has made full and perfect satisfaction to Divine
Justice. So that the Law of God has more honor, and the Justice of God more
glory, by the sufferings of Christ, than if all the Elect had suffered.

3. Compare the blood of Christ with the Righteousness of Saints and Angels,
his Righteousness, and their Righteousness. There is a greater Glory of Jesus
Christ, his obedience Active and Passive; then in the Righteousness of all the
Angels in Heaven, though they had never sinned. For theirs is but the
Righteousness of Creatures, in whom is a negative imperfection. Job. 4.18. He
charge the Angels with folly, and the Heavens are impure in his sight.
Christ's Righteousness is more worth, then all the Righteousness of all the
Creatures.

4. If compared with the power of sin in its kind, to defile and damn souls;
there is a far greater power in the blood of Christ to cleanse and save, then
in sin to defile and destroy. Romans 8.3. The Law became weak to do good, but it
has power to condemn. The strength of sin is the Law. 1 Cor. 15.56.

The Law gives a strength to sin, because by virtue of the curse of the Law,
sin reigns and defiles the souls of men through that righteous Curse. The Soul
that sins shall dye.

But the blood of Jesus Christ has greater power to save, then sin (together
with the Law) has to condemn: for the blood of Christ takes away and abolishes
it utterly. Where this blood is applied and brought home, sin it self cannot
ruin that Soul. The Soul is poisoned and corrupted by sin; but the blood of
Christ takes away that poison, and makes the Soul pure and holy, as if it never
had sinned: therefore as to those discouragements, I shall never get power
against these sins, against these Corruptions, they will be my ruin. These are
deep reflectings on Jesus Christ, as if sin were stronger then he, as if thy
sin were more powerful to damn thee, then Christ is to save thee.

Therefore be encouraged, how unclean soever thy heart and life have been, make
use of this Atonement which has been made to God by the blood of Jesus Christ.

What is the preaching of the Gospel, but the sprinkling of this blood? It
holds forth Christ, and if men will refuse this blood, their destruction is of
themselves; they perish not under the Gospel, because there is no means of
Salvation, no means to help, no means to cleanse and purify them; but because
they will not make use of it.

And what a woeful thing is this, when light is come into the world, and help
brought by Jesus Christ, for sinners to refuse it. For sinners to stand on
their own Objections, this is to bid defiance to the Gospel, and to say, that
Jesus Christ is no sufficient Savior. But apply it, and make use of it, and it
will cleanse thy Soul for ever.

Hebr. 9.13, 14. September 27. 1668.

THe Apostle in these expressions, [the blood of Bulls and Goats] includes, by
a parity of reason, all the other Ceremonial Cleansings which are not
particularly mentioned.

As they had three sorts of Ceremonial Uncleanness; so they had three ways of
Purification.

1. For the uncleanness by touching any unclean Meat or thing.

The purification for this was by the Red Heyfer, which the Holy Ghost mentions
in the Text particularly, whereof we spoke the last time.

2. For unclean Issues: Two Turtle Doves or two young Pigeons, the one for a
Sin Offering, the other for a Burnt Offering. Lev. 15.14, 15. and Lev. 12.8. Or
a Lamb and a young Pigeon, ver. 6. The rites whereof being the same with the
Burnt-Offering and the Sin-Offering, were there handled, and so need not be
spoken to here again.

3. The third sort of Ceremonial uncleanness, was that unclean disease of
Leprosy, which is treated of at large in Lev. 13. and the Cleansing of it in
Chap. 14.

Of the Disease we have formerly spoken in the exposition of the 13. Chapter,
and shall therefore now proceed to the cleansing of it; which was done by
several Sacrifices and Ceremonies appointed and directed in that 14. Chapter of
Leviticus, wherein the method the Holy Ghost is pleased to use is this. He
gives direction first concerning the cleansing of a Leprous person to ver. 33.
and then of a Leprous house, from ver. 33. to the end of the Chapter.

The Rules and Directions about the cleansing of a leprous person are of two
sorts: Preparative and Executive.

The preparatory directions are these three.

1. He must be brought unto the Priest. Lev. 14. ver. 2.

This was an Ordinance of God, and therefore Christ himself requires the
observation of it; of that Leper whom he himself had cured miraculously. Matthew.
8.4. Go show thy self unto the Priest, and offer the Gift that Moses commanded.

The Leper was to dwell alone without the Camp, and without the City; but he
was to be brought to the outmost part of the Camp, or to the Gates of the City,
to the Priest.

Now the true Priest is Jesus Christ: Therefore the meaning of this Ordinance
was plainly and clearly this.

That Leprous souls must come to Jesus Christ by Faith for spiritual healing.
He is said to arise with healing in his wings. Mal. 4.2.

You know how many Lepers he did heal in the days of his flesh. And all the
Miracles of Christ had a symbolical use to instruct us in what he does for
Souls in a spiritual way, by what he did for men's bodies in a miraculous way.

2. The Priest must go forth out of the Camp to the Leper. ver. 3.

This plainly speaks thus much: That Jesus Christ goes forth unto poor sinners
when in their distance, in their back slidings and separations from the Lord:
he seeks them and finds them out, whose blessed Office it is, to seek and to
save lost sinners. Luke 19.10.

We are by nature far from God, shut out and cast forth aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel. Ephesians. 1.12. When thou wast in thy blood, I passed by
and pitied thee. Ezekiel. 16.6. He goes to meet the returning Prodigal. Luke
15.20. As the Priest here to meet the Leper, when shut out of the Camp of
Israel.

3. The Priest shall see and behold if the plague of Leprosy be healed in the
Leper. ver. 3. The Judgment of it is committed to the Priest, and he must judge
as the thing is.

It is Christ himself that is the Judge of Souls, and he will judge true and
righteous Judgment, Isai. 11.3. he shall not judge according to the seeing of
his eyes.

Though men judge thou art a Leper, a Schismatic, a Fanatic, be not troubled,
if the Priest pronounce thee clean, if the Lord has said it to thee by the
witness of his Spirit in his Word.

It is the Priest must judge, and it is this Word which cannot err nor lie,
that shall judge of thee at that day.

It belongs also to Ministers in an inferior way to judge of men, to discern
between the Clean and the Unclean, and to retain or remit sins Ministerially.
Joh. 20.23. These are the preparatory directions for the purification of the
Leper.

Now, 2. The Executive part follows from verse. 3. etc. and it consists mainly
in two things.

1. The Sacrifice of two Birds and their Ceremonies, to verse. 10. 2. A
Sacrifice of three Lambs with their Appurtenances and Ceremonies, from verse.
10, to 21.
1. The first part of the Purification of the Leper, is by two Birds and the
Ceremonies belonging to them, from verse. 3, to verse. 10. The Materials here
required are two living clean Birds, together with Cedar Scarlet and Hyssop,
verse. 4.

The Birds are thought to be Sparrows.

The Hebrew word Ziphor signifies a Bird in general, any winged Fowl. Deuteronomy.
4.17. They are forbidden to make the likeness of any winged Fowl that flies in
the Air. Psalm. 8.8. The Fowls of the Air.

And is sometimes used particularly concerning a Sparrow, Psalm. 84.3. and 102.7.

We may understand it here in the largest sense for any clean Birds. These two
Birds and the Herbs, are the Ingredients that must all concur to make up the
matter of this cleansing Sacrifice.

The two Birds were not two Sacrifices: for one of them was not slain, but
dismissed: but they did both make up one Sacrifice, some of the Mysteries
whereof, could not be represented by one Bird: and therefore two were
appointed, the one to dye, and the other to live.

They had another Ordinance of the like nature, and of the same importance with
this, viz. the two Goats on the yearly Feast of Expiation, Lev. 16. whereof the
one was slain, the other did escape, being sent away into the Wilderness:
therefore called the Seape-Goat.

But why were there two Birds, and what was the Mystery of this?

Ans. It shadowed forth both the natures and estates of our Lord Jesus Christ.

1. Both his natures; his eternal Deity and his mortal Humanity, are here
prefigured and represented.

The slain Bird, represents his humane nature capable of death and suffering.

The other Bird his divine nature, which was and is immortal and impassible.

As both these Birds were necessary, and must be used in this Sacrifice: so
Christ our Sacrifice must be both God and man. We are not cleansed and saved
either by his Deity or Humanity alone: but both his natures do concur in his
mediatorial Actions for our Salvation.

2. Here is a shadow of the twofold state that Jesus Christ passed thorough:
first a state of death and humiliation, and then a state of life and glory. 1
Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but
quickened by the Spirit.

Put to death in the flesh, that is, in his humane nature; but quickened by the
Spirit, that is, by his Deity raising him up again from death to life; he must
both dye and live again for us.

As to the Cedar Hyssop and Scarlet, they were used in the Purification by the
Red Heifer, of which we spoke before, and shall now add thereunto only thus
much further.

That of these three, it is conceived, that there was a sprinkling Brush made,
namely the Brush of Hyssop, the Handle of Cedar Wood, and the binding of a
thread of Scarlet die.

The Apostle calls it Scarlet Wool in Heb. 9.19. And as there seems to be a
general respect had to the properties of these Plants, as was formerly showed:
so some do observe a particular sutableness between the Leprous Contagion, and
these means of Purification, thus.

That as the Leprosy did corrupt and putrify the body; opposite to this was
the Cedar-Wood, which is commended for firmness and soundness against
putrefaction.

And as the Leprosy was of a foul color: contrary to this was the fresh and
fair color of Scarlet.

And as the Leprosy had a very ill and unsavory scent: the sweetness of
Hyssop was a Remedy against that. So our Annotators on Lev. 14.6.

Thus for the Materials of this purifying Sacrifice.

Now the purifying Ceremonies and Actions were of three sorts, and all full of
mystery: some relating to the slain Bird, some to the living Bird, and some to
the Leper himself.

Let me briefly open them unto you.

1. The Ceremonies of the slain Bird, were chiefly these three.

1. It must be killed, verse. 5. You know the mystery of this in all the
Sacrifices; it was a prefiguration of the death of Jesus Christ the true
Sacrifice. Almost all things in the Law were purged by blood, and without
shedding of blood there is no remission. Heb. 9.22.

2. It must be killed over running Water, or living Water. That is, Spring
Water called Living, because of the continual motion resembling life thereby;
that is, it must be taken out of a Spring or a River, not out of a Pond, or
Rain Water.

What this means, our Savior himself interprets Joh. 4.10, 14. where he speaks
of spiritual Living Water.

And the blood thus falling into, and being mingled with the Water; points us
clearly to him, who came to cleanse us and save us by water and blood. 1 John
5.6. For as water and blood here meet: so there were Streams of both issuing
out of his Side, when he was slain for us. Joh. 19.

But this water and blood, is the blood of Justification, and the water of
Sanctification, both plentifully flowing from Christ our Purification.

There is an ever flowing Fountain of these Waters of life in and from the Lord
Jesus Christ, for the cleansing of sinful and leprous Souls.

3. This must be in an earthen Vessel. The like, Numb. 5.17. The sense of this
part of the Allegory, may be easily gathered from the former. That
Soul-cleansing blood and water issued out of his blessed body: therefore his
body was this earthen Vessel, which was frail and brittle, and accordingly
broken by death at last; and mean and contemptible amongst men, as earthen
Vessels use to be.

The Ministers of the Gospel also are compared to earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7.
God uses contemptible Instruments many times, for the effecting of great
things.

These are the Ceremonies relating to the slain Bird; it must be killed, and it
must be killed over Living Water, and this is in an earthen Vessel.

Now, 2. The Ceremonies belonging to the living Bird, they are also three.

1. The living Bird must be dipped in the blood of the slain Bird, verse. 6. A
most evident and excellent representation of the union of the divine and humane
nature of Jesus Christ, and the influence of that union into the concernments
of our peace. Had not the Deity supported and influenced the humane nature in
its sufferings, they could not have been available with God for us.

Upon the account of this divine union and dipping of the living Bird in the
blood of the slain, the Apostle calls the sufferings of the humane nature, the
blood of God. Act. 20.28.

2. The Cedar Scarlet and Hyssop, must be dipped also with it. verse. 6. That
is, all the concernments of our Salvation, they do all receive a tincture, an
influence from the blood of Christ.

Whether we refer the mystery of these Plants to the Graces and Excellencies
that are in him as our Savior, or to the Graces we receive from him: all must
be considered with relation to his blood. Take it in the latter, all the
Graces, Virtues, Excellencies we receive from him, must be dipped in his blood
to cleanse them, and make them and us accepted of God.

3. The living Bird must be let loose into the open field, verse. 7. This
clearly represents, not only Jesus Christ his escaping and deliverance from
death to life: after he had suffered and humbled himself unto death, he did
escape and live again, and lives for ever. But also the open publication and
preaching hereof, as it were in the open Firmament, in the view of all men: so
that Phrase imports, Rev. 14.6. flying in the midst of Heaven, preaching the
everlasting Gospel.

This respects also the setting of the Leper free from his restraint that was
upon him before, by reason of his uncleanness, as appears by the Connection. He
shall pronounce him clean, and let the Bird loose into the open field.

These are the Ceremonial Actions relating to the living Bird.

3. The Ceremonial Actions in reference to the Leper himself, these also are
three.

1. The Priest shall sprinkle upon him seven times, and pronounce him clean.
Verse. 7.

This sprinkling of that typical blood and water upon him, is nothing else but
the application of the blood of Jesus Christ.

There must be a particular application of it to the Soul: it must be sprinkled
upon the Leper, and then he is pronounced clean. All the other Ceremonies would
not make him clean without this: though the Bird were killed, and other
Ordinances observed; yet it must be also sprinkled.

The death and blood of Christ is not enough to the cleansing of our Souls,
unless the blood be sprinkled, the death of Christ applied to us. There must be
a work of Application, as well as of Redemption.

All the precious blood that Christ has shed, will not save a sinner; unless
this blood be effectually applied and sprinkled on the Soul.

Application is a great and necessary part of our Recovery and Salvation, as
well as the blood of Christ it self.

And it must be applied seven times, both frequently and perfectly, over and
over again; once is not enough, suppose thou have believed and laid hold upon
Christ already, and applied him by Faith to thy self in particular, (the blood
must be sprinkled seven times over) thou must apply Christ, and lay hold upon
Christ again.

And lastly, the number seven is a number of perfection: so it holds forth
perfect cleansing, as well as frequent application of the blood of Christ for
that end.

2. The Leper must wash his Clothes and himself, and shave his Hair, and then
come into the Camp; but not yet into his Tent. verse. 8. The like Ceremony is
required in other Cleansings.

As at the Consecration of the Levites. Numb. 8.7. they were to cause a Rasor
to pass over all their flesh. And Deuteronomy. 21.12. Of the Captive Woman it is said,
she shall shave her head, and pare her nails. Some allegorize this in a plain
and a good way, thus: That it was a figure of casting away all remainders of
malice and filthiness, James 1.21. Those excrescencies and superfluities of
sinful Corruption, it shadows out and teaches the work of Mortification, or
paring away of sinful superfluities of Lusts and Corruptions, as fast as they
grow, which we cannot be quite rid of, but must be paring and cutting them off
continually.

This Expression is used Isai. 7.20. in a metaphorical way, to signify the
Lords consuming and weakening their strength: for much hair argues strength of
nature. Hence in age when there is a decay of strength, the hair falls off, and
baldness comes in stead of hair. Therefore in a leprous person, it seems to
argue strength of the Disease: therefore the shaving it off, is thought to
signify the cutting off and taking away the strength of the Disease, and
plague of the heart.

And as to washing, this was often required: therefore the Apostle speaks of
diverse washings, Heb. 9.10. And the Holy Ghost refers them to the blood of
Christ. Rev. 1.5. And they respect also the Spirit of Christ, often compared to
water, Isai. 44.3. This is that Fountain set open Zach. 13.1. for the house of
Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to wash in, for sin and for uncleanness.

A sinner must wash and bath himself in this Fountain, if ever he will be made
clean.

We read of the washing of Regeneration, Titus 3.5. which is an allusion to
these Ceremonial washings, rather than to Baptism. And the Leper was to wash
his whole body, not some part only, because Sanctification is a cleansing of
the whole man. 1 These. 5.23. And he must wash his clothes as well as himself.

To teach us that we must purge our selves from all manner of filthiness, and
every thing that defiles, hating the very garment that is spotted with the
flesh Any thing of uncleanness, the least degree of it, Jude ver 23. hating
even the garments spotted by the flesh: An amplification, says the Margin,
taken from the forbidden things in the Old Law, that did defile, that is, all
appearances, occasions, any thing that has the least touch of sin. It is a
worse sign of a leprous graceless heart, for a man to dally with his lust, and
to allow himself therein, than one particular fall into a grosser act of
uncleanness if it be abhorred and repented of.

Thus the Leper must be washed: He and his Clothes, and his Hair shorn; and yet
after all this, he is not to return to his Tent. The reason is, Lest there
should be any thing of infection in his Tent. For the very Houses and Garments
sometimes were infected with Leprosy.

3. The third Ceremony, or his after-duty is this. After seven days he must use
the same Ceremony of shaving and washing over again. ver. 9. This plainly
teaches us, that cleansing work must be renewed from time to time. The
mortifying and purging out of Corruption, it is a gradual work, and a frequent
work. For the Leper is not made clean at once, in the first moment, nay after
all his former observations, he is not perfectly clean, though he be begun to
be made clean, but here are seven days must intervene, and then he must wash
and shave again. So that it is a gradual work. We should do so in Spiritual
Cleansing, especially upon the Sabbath day, which is the seventh in this sense;
that is, it is one of seven; and it is, and should be a day of Spiritual
washing and cleansing.

Thus you have seen the first part of this purifying Sacrifice for the Leper,
viz The two Birds with the several Ceremonies and Ceremonial actions and
performances appertaining to them, both to the slain Bird, and to the living
Bird, and to the Leper himself.

2. The second part of the purifying Sacrifice appointed for him is that of
three Lambs, with the Ceremonies thereunto belonging: and this is declared at
large from ver. 10. to 32. of that 14. Chapter of Leviticus.

The Materials of this are two He Lambs, the one for a Burnt-Offering, the
other for a Trespass Offering; and an Ew-Lamb for a Sin Offering; and fine
Flower for a Meat Offering; and a log of Oil. These are the Materials. Now what
must be done with them?

The Ceremonies about them are chiefly these three.

1. The Sacrifices must be slain and offered according to the manner and
institution, ver. 12, 13. But this having been opened formerly, we shall not
insist upon it.

2. The Priest must put some of the blood of them upon the tip of the right ear
of him that is to be cleansed, ver. 14. and some part on the thumb of his right
hand, and on the great toe of his right foot.

You have the like Ceremony, Exodus 29.20. injoined in the Consecration of Aaron
and his Sons.

The sprinkling these parts did represent, and was instead of sprinkling the
whole body. The sprinkling of a part of the body was appointed by God, as
significative of universal cleansing of the whole man.

Engl. Annot. on Exodus 29.20.
Our Annotators have this Note upon it. The Ear was to be sanctified for holy
hearing, and against the hearing of any corrupt communication* And the Hand for
working; and the Foot for walking, that his Conversation might be holy, and his
Person sanctified from head to foot. So in Baptism, there is no necessity of
plunging the whole body in water; but the sprinkling of it on the Forehead may
suffice to signify the mystical meaning intended by it, where by a Sacramental
Synechdoche, though but a part be sprinkled, the whole is washed and cleansed.

This is the second Ceremony some of the blood in these Sacrifices of the three
Lambs must be put upon the Leper.

The 3d. is, That the Priest is to take the Oil* and sprinkle part of it before
the Lord, and with part to anoint the Leper; his Ear, Thumb and Foot, in the
place where he had put the blood before, and pour the rest upon his head. ver.
15, 16, 17, 18.

This mystical Oil whereof they had such continual use under the Law, we have
often heard, that it typifies the Holy Ghost: and therefore the Son of God is
said to be anointed with the Spirit. Isai. 61.1. And Act. 10.38. God anointed
Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with power.

Therefore the putting of the Oil upon these parts, signifies the saving Graces
of the Spirit of Christ, whereby they are cleansed and sanctified and
comforted, who have been justified and reconciled by his blood.

As to the putting it upon these parts for the whole, this teaches us the same
that was noted before out of the same Ceremony concerning the blood.

And whereas he must put the Oil upon the blood, that is, upon the same place
where he had put the blood before, as it is explained more fully verse 28. This
teaches us, that our Sanctification flows from our Justification: the blood
must be applied first, and then the Oil upon it: the Spirit of Christ is the
purchase of the death of Christ: and therefore the Spirit of Sanctification, is
the fruit of the blood of Justification. Look not to have thy Soul cleansed
from the power of sin by Sanctification, unless it be cleansed from the guilt
of sin by the blood of Christ applied for Justification. We are first justified
and reconciled by his blood, and then sanctified and anointed by his Spirit. He
forgiveth all thine Iniquities, and heals all thy Diseases. Psalm. 103.
Justification is in order before Sanctification: first the blood, and then the
Oil upon the blood.

These are the Laws and Ordinances for the purifying of the Leper.

But now a Case of Conscience may arise: what if the Leper be not able to get
all these Sacrifices and Requisites for his cleansing, what shall be done in
such a Case?

The Answer is, That the Lord has made a gracious provision for the
necessities of his people: therefore lesser Sacrifices are provided and
appointed in such a Case, from verse. 21, to verse. 33. where this Case is fully
spoken to, viz. in stead of three Lambs, he requires here but one Lamb, and two
Turtle Doves, or else two young Pigeons, whichsoever he could best get. And in
stead of three Omers of fine flower for a Meat Offering, he requires in this
Case but one Omer, that is, about a Pottle of our measure; and a Log of Oil,
that is, about half a Pint. This is the same that was before; and these lesser
Sacrifices are as effectual for the cleansing of a poor Leper, as the greater
Sacrifices were for richer persons. God accepting a man according to that he
has, and not according to that he has not. 2 Cor. 8.12. The Rites and
Ceremonies of these, are the same with the former: so I shall pass from this,
observing only the gracious Condescension of God to the several capacities and
necessities of his people.

The latter part of the Chapter, is concerning the cleansing of a leprous
house, from verse. 33, to the end. Some say it was a peculiar thing in that
Land, a strange infection that seized the Land in some Cases, the whole Land
being a typical Land, as we have heard.

I shall only note two or three general Observations from it, and from the
whole Chapter, and so conclude.

Obs. 1. The mavelous infectious and defiling nature of sin, in that it
infects and defiles other things, the very house and the Garments. To the
unclean all things are unclean, as to the pure all things are pure Tit. 1.15.
It poisons and corrupts all the concernments and enjoyments of a sinner. The
Apostle speaks how the whole Creation groaneth and travelleth in pain together
until now. Romans 8.22. For the Creature was made subject to vanity, etc. The
Stones out of the Walls, and the Timber out of the houses, are troubled with a
wicked man, and cry out against him, as Habakkuk has it, Chap. 2.11. That Is
the first Observation. Learn the wonderful defilement, and infectious nature of
sin, that it corrupts all the concernments that a sinner is concerned in.

Obs. 2. Whereas the leprous house, if it were incurably infected, must be
pulled down, and all the Materials of it cast away. verse. 40, 45.

This teaches us, that all the Monuments and remainders of leprous and
corrupted things, must be destroyed.

Idolatry and Superstition, is a Leprosy that has overspread the whole
Christian World, during Popery. And as the Prophet says concerning Babylon,
Jer. 51.26. They shall not take of Babylon a stone for a Corner, nor a stone
for Foundations; but thou shall be desolate for ever, says the Lord. It holds
true of mystical Babylon that leprous Church, whose Idolatry and Superstition
is a spiritual Leprosy, which did overspread the whole Church of God in the
time of Popery: therefore away with all the Monuments and Remainders of it.

Dwalphintramis applies this not impertinently to the Popes Mass Book. The
Popes Mass Book was a leprous house, the stones and timber whereof should have
been cast aside as polluted and an abomination: therefore it was an unhappy and
a fatal error in the first Reformation, to take Materials out of that to reform
with; to take the stones and timber of that leprous house to use in the Worship
of God, which must be therefore framed to comport with those leprous polluted
things. It has been the occasion of a new Conflict to the people of God in
this Age, and of manifold sufferings to the servants of Christ, because they
contended, that these leprous polluted things should be cast aside. This might
have been prevented, if there had been a thorough Reformation at first, and the
stones and timber of those leprous houses, the Popes Mass Book, Ritual,
Pontifical, and Breviary, had been at our first Reformation cast forth as
pollutted and abominable.

Obs. 3. How difficult, and yet withal how necessary a work, the purifying and
cleansing of the Leprosy is.

The Leprosy was a Type of sin and sinful Corruption, especially that original
and universal pollution and defilement of our natures: the Purification of the
Leprosy therefore, is nothing else but the work of Mortification, or purging
out of sinful Corruption.

This is a difficult work: see how many Ingredients must concur to it in the
Type: there must be two Birds, with Cedar, Scarlet and Hyssop, and a great many
Ceremonies about these Materials. There must be Spring Water, and an earthen
Vessel, and killing, dipping, sprinkling, washing, shaving, etc. And when all
this is done, there is but half the work done: for there must be also three
Lambs for a Burnt-Offering, a Trespass Offering, a Sin Offering. And three
Omers of fine Flower with Oil for a Meat Offering, and a Log of Oil: and a
multitude of sacred Rites and Ceremonies about these materials. O how much ado
there is to get a Leprous person purified and made clean! And all these things
instruct and show you all along the method of the Lords proceeding in purifying
the hearts of sinners.

There must be a great deal of pains taken with thy own heart, in the use of
all the means and Ordinances that God has appointed. And though there be all
this pains and difficulty in the work, yet it must be done, there is a
necessity of it.

This Disease is very troublesome and loathsome, and it may be mortal at last, if
a Cure be not provided in time. Therefore the Leper must use means, and take
pains: And so should sinful Leprous souls.

Obs. 4. That as there is a Leprosy of the heart, as we are defiled and
unclean by nature; so there is a remedy and purification by Jesus Christ. And
as there is an Ordinance of Ejection of scandalous Sinners and Lepers out of
the house of Israel: So there is for readmission of healed Lepers into the
Church again. This confutes the Novatians.

The 13. Chapter of Leviticus reproves promiscuous Communions.

This 14. reproves that Novatian Error of them who would not re-admit and
receive repenting Sinners into the Church again?

The Scripture is clear for both Binding and Loosing. Binding Impenitent
sinners, and loosing and restoring the Penitent.

THE GOSPEL OF THE HOLY PLACES.
Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6. October 11. and 18. 1668.
But unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your Tribes,
to put his Name there, even unto his habitation shall you seek, and thither
thou shall come: And thither ye shall bring your Burnt Offerings, and your
Sacrifices, etc.


WE have been endeavoring (beloved) to take off the Veyl from Moses face, and
to unfold and open to you the Types and Shadows of the Ceremonial Law; they are
dark Shadows, but there are glorious Mysteries adumbrated and shadowed forth by
them. They are hard Shells, but there are sweet Kernels within, if the Lord
help us to break the shell, and to understand the mystery and meaning of them.
You have seen diverse of these Shells broken, and what precious Kernels of
Gospel Truths are contained in them.

You may remember we did refer this Law of Ceremonies to five general heads.

1. The Initiating Seal of Circumcision. 2. The Legal Sacrifices and
Purifications. 3. The Tabernacle and Temple and other Holy places. 4. The
Priesthood, with all the rest of the legal Ministry. 5. Their Festivals, or
holy Times and Seasons.
We have formerly spoken to the two first of these, to wit, the Initiating Seal
of Circumcision, and their Legal Sacrifices and Purifications.

We are now to proceed in the help of Christ unto the third, namely,

3. Their Tabernacle and Temple and other Holy places; of which this Text gives
you this Doctrinal Assertion.

Doctrine. That God was pleased to choose out certain places to stand in a
special relation of Holiness unto himself under the Old Testament.

See again in this Chapter, ver. 11, 14, 18 -- Psalm. 68.35. Thou art terrible,
oh God, out of thine holy places. And ver. 17. As in Sinai in the holy place.

But it is needless, and would be easy to multiply quotations: For this
phrase, holy place, and holy places, does occur in the Scripture above
threescore times.

Let me explain and open a little to you the nature of this holiness of places
that was under the Law.

You all know there is a two fold Holiness; Inherent, and Relative Holiness.

Inherent Holiness is nothing else, but those saving Graces of Sanctification
in the Souls of men.

Now this is only in persons, it is a thing which places are no way capable of.
But the Holiness that is in places is a Relative holiness, and it does consist
in a separation or setting them apart for God to be peculiarly his.

That this is the Scripture notion of Holiness, and that particularly in
reference to Holy places, you may see in Deuteronomy. 19.2, 7. compared with Joshua
20.7. That which in the one place is called Separation, in the other is called
Sanctification: Thou shall separate three Cities for Cities of Refuge, says
the Lord by Moses. And they sanctified Kedesh and Sechem, says the Text in
Joshuah.

The contrary to Holiness, is that which is Common or Unclean, Acts 10.14.

God has a special propriety in that which is holy, it belongs to God as his
peculiar, Exodus 13.2. Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, it is mine.

Hence the nearer to God any place or thing is, the more of Separation to his
use, the more holy.

Thus you see the general notion of it.

Now to descend to some particulars.

This Holiness of places was twofold, either transient and merely for the
present time, or else more permanent and abiding.

1. The transient Holiness of places was where the Lord gave visible
appearances of himself in his glorious Majesty to the eyes of his Servants;
such places were holy during the time of such divine appearances. So when the
Lord appeared to Moses in the burning Bush, Exodus 3.5. the place whereon thou
stand is holy ground, and he says the like to Joshuah, cap. 5.15. So Mount
Sinai was holy, and therefore might not be touched, Exodus 19.

Upon the same account the Mount where Christ was transfigured is called the
Holy Mount, 2 Pet. 1.18.

I call this a transient kind of Holiness, because it continued no longer, but
while that extraordinary Presence continued. There is no more Holiness in Mount
Sinai or Mount Tabor now, than in any other place.

The Apostle calls it the holy Mount from what it was, not that it is so still:
Therefore it is but a superstitious thing in the Papists to go on pilgrimage to
Jerusalem, and to visit the holy Sepulcher, and the like, there is no Holiness
in them now.

2. But secondly, there was also a more permanent and abiding Holiness of
places under the Law, during that whole legal Dispensation.

Quest. What were these Places?

Answ. I shall instance chiefly in four particulars.

1. The Land of Canaan was an holy Land, so called Zach. 2.12. the Lord shall
inherit Judah his portion in the holy Land. It was a Type of Heaven, Heb.
11.14, 16. they sought another Country, a better Country, that is, an heavenly;
thine eyes shall see the Land that is very far off, Isai. 32.17. glimpses of
Heaven and Glory.

And some special places in the Land were holy, as

2. The Cities of Refuge, whereof there were six, three on this side, and three
on the other side Jordan.

The Institution and Ordinance for it you have in Deuteronomy. 19. the performance in
Josh. 20. where these Cities are said to be sanctified.

And that there was a Gospel Mystery in this Ordinance, and what it was the
Apostle insinuates Heb. 6.18. who have fled for refuge, to lay hold upon the
hope set before us.

The Souls flying to Jesus Christ, and finding safety and shelter there, when
pursued by the Law, as the avenger of Blood, is the Gospel mystery of that
Ordinance.

3. The Tabernacle, the Temple, the Ark and all the places where they came, 2 Chronicles, 8.11. The places are holy whereunto the Ark of the Lord has come. The
Ark did as it were consecrate them, and so there was a reverence due to them.

The Tabernacle, you know, was made in the Wilderness by Moses, and so was the
Ark; it marched before them to seek rest for them, till they came into the Land
of Canaan.

The first place where it was pitched there, was at Gilgal, Josh. cap. 4.19.
there it continued about six or seven years, till Joshuah had conquered the
Land, and then it was set up at Shilo, Josh. 18.1. there it continued (as some
compute) 300 years from Joshuah's time to Eli's; and then the people in a
carnal confidence carrying the Ark before them to battle, it was taken captive
by the Philistines; and Shilo was rejected of God, and laid desolate for the
wickedness of his people Israel. The Story whereof you have recorded in 1 Samuel
4. --

A very instructing Providence, to teach them to take heed of carnal resting in
external Ordinances. Yea, Gospel Ordinances, Baptism and the Lords Supper, if
thou art a wicked man, will stand thee in no more stead, than the Ark did them;
Jer. 7.12. But go ye now unto my place which was in Shilo, where I set my Name
at first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel.

And after this, it is observable, that the Ark and the Tabernacle, so far as
it appears out of the sacred History, never met again after this parting.

Which should teach such as pretend to be the Tabernacles of God, in whom he
dwells, as every Christian is, to take heed of decays and backslidings in your
Christian course. For it may be God and thou may part, never to meet more. We
see sad examples of it in many Professors, that after backslidings never
recover their former Glory, they never enjoy the Ark of his Presence any more
as formerly.

What became of the Tabernacle after the Desolation of Shilo, and after this
departure of the Ark from it, the Scripture is in a great measure silent. Only
this we find, that it was at Nob in Saul's time, 1 Samuel 21.1. and that it was
afterward at Gibeon in David's time, 1 Chronicles. 16.39.

And finally, that the Vessels of it were removed to the Temple after the
building of that by Solomon. Not, as the Jews suppose, to be laid by there; but
rather to be used as occasion was, together with the other Vessels of the
Temple.

Some think the Tabernacle had a station once at Mizpeh, which they gather from
that phrase, 1 Samuel 10.17. and Samuel called the people together unto the Lord
to Mizpeh. But this is not certain, because they might be said to appear before
the Lord elsewhere, and not only where the Tabernacle was.

The places where the Ark came are more particularly recorded in the Scripture.

First, it was carried from Shilo into the Field of Aphek, against the
Philistines, 1 Samuel 4.2. where the Philistines took it captive, and carried it
from place to place, to Ashdod, to Ekron, to Gath, 1 Samuel 5.

At last they sent it home into the Land of Judah.

First to Bethshemesh, cap. 6.

Thence it went to Kirjath Jearim.

Thence to the House of Abinodab, cap. 7.

Thence to the House of Obed-Edom, 2 Samuel 6.

Thence to the City of David, ibid. ver. 12.

And finally, it was placed in the Oracle in the Temple by Solomon, 1 King.
8.6, 7. where it continued till the Captivity of Babylon; at which time it was
either destroyed in the burning of the Temple, or else carried away to Babylon,
and restored amongst the rest of the Vessels of the Lords House by Cyrus.

Some indeed think it was never returned, and that the second Temple wanted the
Ark.

But this to others seems improbable; because the High Priest was annually to
minister in the most holy place, and that in reference to the Ark: for he was
to sprinkle the Mercy-seat with Blood, of which hereafter.

But these various removals and travels of the Ark to and fro from place to
place, may teach us this lesson, that God has not tied himself and his
Ordinances, and the tokens of his Presence so to any people, but that if they
prove unworthy, he may remove them, and seek unto himself another habitation,
Matthew. 21.43. Rev. 2.5. I will remove the Candlestick.

4. Hence fourthly, among the holy places Jerusalem was very eminent, as being
the place of the Temple and Ark, and all the public Worship thereunto
belonging, Psalm. 76.2. In Salem also is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place
in Sion. Psalm. 87.2. The Lord loves the Gates of Sion, more than all the
dwellings of Jacob.

Jerusalem therefore is made in Scripture a Type of the Church both militant
and triumphant, Gal. 4.26. for Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the
Mother of us all.

Therefore in that magnificent Description of the Church Catholic mystical,
Heb. 12.22, 23. amongst other Elogies, it is called heavenly Jerusalem: So Rev.
21.2. the new Jerusalem that comes down from God out of Heaven, as a Bride
adorned for her Husband, is the Church thoroughly reformed in the latter times
both in Doctrine, and Order, and Worship. Which Purity is begun here, and
perfected in another and an higher Glory in Heaven.

And throughout the Scripture the Elogies given to Jerusalem are very high and
excellent.

It is called the City of God, Psalm. 46.4.

The Elect City, or the City which God has chosen, 1 Kings 11.32. but he shall
have one Tribe for my Servant David's sake, and for Jerusalems sake, the City
which I have chosen out of all the Tribes of Israel.

It is called the beloved City, Gog and Magog compass the beloved City, Rev.
20.9.

The holy City, Matthew. 27.53. many bodies of Saints which slept arose and went
into the holy City. Rev. 22.19. God shall take his part out of the holy City.

The City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22.

It is called the Throne of the Lord, Jer. 3.17. at that time they shall call
Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord, and all Nations shall be gathered unto it, to
the Name of the Lord, to Jerusalem.

Quest. What is the ground of this Holiness of these places, and how are we to
conceive of it?

Answ. You heard in general before, that it consists in this, in the Lords
separating of them for himself in a special and peculiar manner.

But there be four expressions in the Text, the explication whereof will a
little further clear it.

1. The Lord is said to set his Name there. 2. Thither shall thou seek. 3.
Thither shall thou come. 4. Thither shall thou bring thy holy things.
1. The Lord is said to choose these places to set his Name there, and therefore
they are called his Habitation, even to his Habitation shall ye seek; the
meaning is, his Name dwelt there.

What is Gods Name? and how is it set in such a place?

Gods Name is any thing by which he is known, the discoveries or manifestations
of himself by which he is known amongst his people, as a man is known by his
Name.

He sets his Name in such or such a place, when he constitutes or appoints it
to be the place wherein he will give forth the discoveries and manifestations
of himself unto his people.

There be five things here included.

1. That here were the standing symbols and tokens of his Presence. The Ark,
the Mercy-seat, the Altar, the Sacrifices, here they had their abode and
residence, even in the places that God chose for that end.

2. In these places were visible appearances of his Glory upon special
occasions.

As when Moses had erected and reared up the Tabernacle, Exodus 40.34. then a
Cloud covered the Tent of the Congregation, and the Glory of the Lord filled
the Tabernalce; so Numb. 12.5. the Lord came down in the Pillar of Cloud, and
stood in the door of the Tabernacle.

So when Solomon had finished the Temple, and placed the Ark in the holy place,
the Cloud filled the House of the Lord, so that the Priests could not stand to
minister, because of the Cloud. For the Glory of the Lord filled the House of
the Lord, 1 King. 8.10, 11. Isaiah likewise saw his Glory in the Temple, Isai.
6.1. I saw the Lord sitting upon a Throne high and lifted up, and his Train
filled the Temple.

3. These places had their typical significations of Christ and Gospel
Mysteries: Therefore much of the Name of God was in them.

There were chiefly two great Mysteries in them, Christ and the Church.

1. The Temple was a Type of Christ, Joh. 2.19. destroy this Temple, and within
three days I will raise it up. But he spoke of the Temple of his Body, v. 21.
Therefore the Apostle says, that in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. He was a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true
Tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man, Heb. 9.11.

2. It was a Type of the Church, 1 Timothy 3.15. how thou ought to behave thy
self in the House of God, which is the Church of the living God, Ephesians. 2.20,
21, 22. And it was a Type not only of the whole Church in general, but of every
Believer in particular, 1 Cor. 6.19. what, know you not that your Body is the
Temple of the Holy Ghost? He dwells in their very Bodies, much more in their
Souls.

The manner how the Deity dwells in these Temples is very mysterious and
glorious.

4. These places were appointed of God to be parts, yea principal and eminent
parts of his Worship. I say, they were parts of his Worship or Ordinances; they
were such eminent parts of his Worship, that they did sanctify both the
Worshipers, and all the Worship performed in them.

The Altar sanctified the Gift, the Temple sanctified the Gold, Matthew. 23.18,
19. The Places did bring acceptance to the Worship; so that the Places were
principal, and the Duties less principal, as some express it. There will I
accept them, Ezekiel. 20.40. Exodus 20.24. In all places where I record my Name, I
will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.

5. They were by Gods appointment the seat of all the public Church-worship of
those times. They did perform the moral Worship of Prayer, and reading and
hearing the Law in all their Synagogues; but their public Church-worship was
annexed and affixed to the Temple only.

There be three things in the Text as to this.

1. Thither shall thou seek; that is, for Answers and Oracles from the holy
Place, and from the Priest by Vrim and Thummim. For so the Lord had appointed,
Exodus 25.22. there will I meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from
above the Mercy-seat, from between the two Cherubims which are upon the Ark of
the Testimony. And accordingly so they did, Numb. 7.8, 9. And they were to
enquire by Vrim and Thummim. Therefore it is said of Joshuah, when he was to be
chief Magistrate, Numb 27.21. and he shall stand before Eleazar the Priest, who
shall ask counsel for him after the Judgment of Urim before the Lord: at his
Word shall they go out, and at his Word, that is, at Eleazar the Priest
answering from God, shall they come in, both he, that is Joshuah, and all the
Children of Israel with him, even all the Congregation.

All other places were forbidden for this use; seek not Bethel, enter not into
Gilgal, Amos 5.5.

And the Lord severely punished it in Ahaziah the Son of Ahab, 2 Kings 1.16.
Elijah said unto him, for as much as thou have sent Messengers to inquire of
Baal-zebub the God of Ekron, (is it not because there is no God in Israel to
inquire of his Word?) therefore thou shall not come down off that bed on which
thou art gone up, but shall surely dye.

The Devil, in imitation and abuse of this Ordinance of God, had his Oracles,
and gave Answers in the old Pagan times: but his Answers were usually
sophistical and ambiguous. And after the Death of Christ God was pleased to
chain him up: therefore Plutarch an Heathen Philosopher, in his Morals, has a
Discourse upon it, why the Oracles are ceased; and he has an expression for
the resolving of it, which has more of truth in it than himself understood.

Amongst other things he gives this account of it, that it was because the
great God Pan was dead

It was indeed because Jesus Christ, who is the great God and the great
Shepherd of the Sheep, had sufferd Death, and thereby conquered Satan, and has
therefore stopped Devils mouth from giving answers in that way ever since.

2. Thither shall thou come; that is, at all their appointed Festivals, three
times a year, Exodus 23.14, 17. and whenever they offered Sacrifice, as
afterward, ver. 6.

3. Thither shall ye bring your Burnt-offerings and your Sacrifices, etc. ver.
6. so Levit. 17.8, 9. here is a particular induction and enumeration of their
holy things.

Your Burnt-offerings] mentioned first, as being the first sort, and all the
rest depending much upon that.

Your Sacrifices] this is a general word including all that belonged unto the
Altar.

And your Tithes] these were for the Maintenance of the Priests, whereof Levit.
27.30, 32.

They had two sorts of Tithes, the first went to the Priests and Levites; then
of that which remained they were to separate a second Tithe; and this the
Owners were to eat before the Lord in the place that he should choose, as infra
ver. 17, 18.

The Heave-offerings of thine Hand] that is, the First fruits which they were
to bring in their hands before the Lord, Deuteronomy. 26.2. thou shall take of the
first of all the Fruit of the Earth, and shall put it in a basket, and shall go
unto the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to place his Name there, and
thou shall set it before the Lord thy God, and worship before the Lord thy God.

Your Vows and voluntary Offerings] of which see Levit. 7.16.

Firstlings of you Herd and Flock] often declared to be the Lords, Numb. 3.13.
because all the Firstborn are mine: For on the day that I smote all the
Firstborn in the Land of Egypt, I hallowed unto me all the Firstborn in
Israel both man and beast: mine they shall be, I am the Lord.

For the Use of all, there is a fourfold Instruction from all that has been
said concerning these holy Places under the Law.

1. The first Instruction is concerning the Cessation of this Holiness of
places under the New Testament. For this being a part of the Ceremonial Law, it
must needs be ceased and vanished away, now that Christ the thing signified is
come.

The Papists have borrowed this (as they do many other of their Superstitions)
from the Jews.

Some they borrow from the Pagans, and others are nothing else, but pieces and
relics of the Law of Ceremonies: So is this of the Holiness of Places, and
consecrating of Churches.

For there is nothing more clear, than that the difference of Places is taken
away under the Gospel.

When the Woman of S^^naria pleaded, Our Fathers worshipped in this Mountain;
but ye say that Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship. Jesus said
unto her, Woman believe me, the hour comes, and now is, when ye shall neither
in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father; but the true
Worshippers shall worship him in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4.21, 23. He turns
her eyes and thoughts away from the difference of Places, to regard and mind
the Spirituality of the Worship. For as God is no respecter of Persons; so he
is no respecter of Places. But wheresoever, for that indefinite [where] is
equivalent to an universal, wheresoever two or three are gathered together in
my name, there am I in the midst of them, Matthew. 18.22. The Apostle therefore
says, 1 Timothy 2.8. I will that men pray everywhere, (...), in every place; as
was prophesied long before by the Prophet Malachi, cap. 1.11. For from the
rising of the Sun even to the going down thereof, my Name shall be great among
the Gentiles, and in every place (therefore all places are alike) Incense shall
be offered unto my Name, and a pure Offering, which before were limited to the
Temple.

Therefore the Church at Jerusalem met in an upper Chamber, Acts. 1.13. so did
the Church at Troas, Acts 20.8. there they did preach and break bread:
therefore all places are alike. Every Place is now a Judea, every House a
Jerusalem, every Congregation a Sion.

But what a strange thing is this! that men can see no Holiness in the Lords
day, but slight and oppose that; and yet assert an Holiness in Places. Oh the
Wrath of God upon such men's Spirits!

Obj. But should there not be public Worship?

Answ. Yes, but that may be in places that are not consecrated. Dr. Usher in
his Body of Divinity, page 404. speaking against the private Administration of
the Sacraments, he thus explains it in these words; In times of persecution the
Godly (says he) did often meet in Barns and such obscure places, which were
indeed public, because of the Church of God there -- The House or Place
availing nothing to make it either public or private, even as wheresoever the
Prince is, there is the Court, although it were a poor Cottage.

Obj. But there it a spiritual Presence of God in the Places; therefore they
are holy.

Answ. It follows not. For,

1. God does not vouchsafe his Presence out of respect to the Place, but to the
Persons.

He has not set his Name upon the Place, but only upon the Persons; and is not
present with them for the Places sake, but only present in the place for their
sakes who are there assembled.

2. The Spiritual Presence of God is not enough to make a place holy; for then
all places should be holy, wheresoever Gods People do enjoy Communion with him;
and so not only dwelling houses where there are Family duties, but every
private Chamber where there is secret Prayer; yea the Fields, the Streets, and
sometimes Prisons, and Dungeons, and Gibbets, and all places whatsoever where
the Saints come and enjoy Communion with God in their Spirits, would be holy
places. And so this Objection lays all places level, the Lord having many
precious Saints that walk closely with him, who are dispersed and scattered up
and down almost in every corner of the Land.

Our public Meeting-places for Worship, they have not any such Sacred Symbols
of Gods Presence, as the Temple had, the Ark, the Altar, etc. neither have they
any such extraordinary visible appearances of the Divine Majesty and Glory, as
the Temple had upon special occasions: neither have they that typical respect
unto Christ and Gospel-mysteries: neither are they parts of Worship or
Ordinances: nor has God annexed his Worship to them. He has no way separated
or set them apart unto himself, as his own peculiar: therefore there is no
pretense for Holiness in them.

Instr. 2. The second Instruction is this; Learn to present your Worship unto
God by Jesus Christ: for he is the true Temple, and Tabernacle, as has been
showed.

Therefore that strict Injunction to bring all their Sacrifices thither
signified thus much, that we must present all our Services and Sacrifices to
God in the Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ. Make use of Jesus Christ in his
mediatory relation, a thing much and often pressed in the Scripture, as indeed
it cannot be too much insisted on, Heb. 7.25. He is able to save to the utmost
all that ceme unto God by him, 1 Pet. 1.21. who by him do believe in God Joh.
14.6. I am the way, the truth and the life, no man comes unto the Father, but
by me. Col. 3.17. And whatsoever ye in word or deed, do all in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him. A thing of absolute
necessity, if we desire either Access unto God, Acceptance witn God, or
Influence and Assistance from God.

1. There is no Access unto God, but by this greater and more perfect
Tabernacle Jesus Christ, in whom we have boldness, and access with confidence
by the Faith of him, Ephesians. 3.12.

God, considered as in himself, dwells in Light inaccessible, 1. Tim. 6.16.
dwelling in the Light which no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen,
nor can see. He is glorious and excellent in himself, but approachable only in
Christ: we cannot see him, nor conceive of him, nor get into his presence but
by Jesus Christ.

2. There is no Acceptance with God out of Christ. If you bring a Sacrifice to
God, and bring it not to the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, Blood
shall be imputed to that man. Levit. 17.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5, 6, 7. If thou could
live like a glorified Saint, shine like an Angel, if out of Christ, God regards
it no more more than the sacrificing Swines flesh, or the cutting off of a Dogs
neck, Ezekiel. 20.40. for in mine holy Mountain, in the Mountain of the height of
Israel, says the Lord God, there shall all the House of Israel, all of them in
the Land serve me; there will I require your Offerings and the First fruits of
your Oblations, with all your holy things. All our holy Offerings, our best
Duties and Services as they come from us are abominable, but through his
Mediation acceptable.

3. There can be no gracious Influence or Assistance from God, but only in this
way, by Jesus Christ. The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, the Name of the
God of Jacob defend thee; send thee help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen
thee out of Sion, Psalm. 20.1, 2. For in Salem is his Tabernacle, and his
dwelling place in Sion; there brake he the Arrows of the Bow, the Shield, the
Sword and the Battle, Psalm. 76.2.3. It is spoken of temporal Deliverance, and
may be applied to the Church; there is a protecting Presence of God there. But
it is true in an higher sense concerning Christ: Christ is the true Sanctuary
from whence all our strength and help comes -- Thou therefore, my Son, be
strong in the Grace that is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.1. Nay in all these
things we are more then conquerors, through him that loved us. Romans 8.37.

This is the reason you conquer not: but Sin and Lust prevails, and you are
worsted by Corruption and Temptation from time to time. There is a secret
distance by unbelief from Jesus Christ; did you come to the door of the
Tabernacle, the Lord would send you help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen
thee out of Sion: but men are loath to leave their own home, or loath to break
through difficulties; they faint and tire by the way before they get thither,
and so never come to receive those blessed influences, those reviving,
Soul-strengthening, Soul-refreshing influences. See Psalm. 84.5, 6, 7. It is a
description to the people in their journeys to the Temple -- They went through
thick and thin, as we use to say, through drought and heat -- till they came
before God in Sion; and there they found what they went for. They met with God
there, ver. 10.11 -- better a day there, than a thousand elsewhere: for there
the Lord will give Grace and Glory.

Instruct. 3. Remember that there is a Church-worship.

As there was a moral Worship which they were to perform every where: for it
was personal, and not merely public: so they had their public Church-worship,
viz. their Sacrifices and other Institutions which were limited to the
Tabernacle, as it was a Type of the Church.

As no Service is to be offered out of Christ: so some Services are not to be
offered out of the Church; for the Tabernacle, as you have heard was a Type of
the Church.

And therefore, as Gods end in this Institution was to lead out their thoughts
and desires and expectations to Jesus Christ, and so to prevent Idolatry and
Unbelief in that respect: so likewise to prevent Schism, and to keep them in
the unity of that Church which he had then instituted and appointed.

So now in Gospel Times look that you partake of the Ordidances in
Gospel-Churches: for these are the New Testament-Tabernacles wherein God
dwells, and vouchsafes his blessed Presence.

It is often noted, as a great corruption of Worship among the Jews, that they
sacrificed in the high places; yea though they did it to the Lord their God
only.

So in Manasseh's time 2 Chronicles. 37.17. Nevertheless the people did sacrifice
still in the high places; after some beginnings and degrees of Reformation; yet
unto the Lord their God only. And the reason they were not taken away is
sometimes noted to be the perverseness of the people: so in Jehosaphats time, 2 Chronicles. 20.33. howbeit the high places were not taken away; for as yet the
people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their Fathers.

Yea there were some good people in those times, who were unconvinced of this
truth, that they ought to sacrifice only at the Temple and Tabernacle -- though
they were against the Worship of Baal, yet they were not against the high
places: so we have some in our days that are against Popery; but they are not
against mixed Communions. They are not convinced that they ought to present
their Services and Sacrifices, their public Worship unto God in
Gospel-Temples, that is, in pure Churches, and not among profane people.

It is strange to see the supine carelessness and skepticism of some men's
spirits in this particular -- they regard not, they care not with whom they
join; whether it be a true Church or a false Church, whether a pure or an
impure Church, whether a Church or no Church.

Search the Scriptures, and you will find no instance, that ever the Lords
Supper was dispensed but in Churches, Gospel-Churches, pure Churches.

The first Institution of that Ordinance was in the first Gospel Church,
sounded by Christ himself the chief Pastor, who did dispense this Ordinance
himself to the twelve Apostles, who were the Foundation stones of the first
Gospel Church at Jerusalem -- then again Acts 2.42. they continued steadfastly
in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in
Prayers. Breaking of Bread is there mentioned amongst other Ordinances, and
therefore not to be understood of common but sacred Bread. Acts. 20.7. it is
said of the Church of Troas, that they came together on the first day of the
week to break Bread.

The same Ordinance also was observed in the Church of Corinth, 1. Cor. 11. and
whereas corruptions and corrupt members were crept in, the Apostle spends a
whole Chapter in exhorting them to purge out the old Leven, 5. chapter of 1.
Epistle.

Professors that lie amongst the Pots, never joining themselves as fixed
members in any particular Church, though they have opportunity for it, do live
in the neglect of a duty, a known duty; yea such a neglect as does infer and
carry along with it the neglect of many other duties also. For how can
Church Discipline be exercised, but in the Societies of Gods People; therefore
tnis neglect, it exposes the Ordinances of Christ to contempt and prostitution.

It is as great a sin to receive the Lords Supper in an Assembly of ignorant
and profane people, as it was to offer Sacrifices in the high places; yea it is
indeed the very same thing. For let thy Conscience speak. Are such Assemblies
the Temples of the Holy Ghost? Are they the Tabernacles of the most High? Does
God dwell there? Is this to go to the door of the Tabernacle with thy
Sacrifice, when thou know thou go into a dunghill of Profaneness, into a
dungeon of Ignorance, into an Assembly of wicked and ungodly men.

Art thou a Soul that desire communion with Christ? Then take his own
direction for the obtaining of it, Cant. 1.7, 8. Go forth by the footsteps of
the flock, this is Church society. Feed thy Kids by the Shepherds Tents. Make
use of the Ministry and Ministers of the Word, who are set in particular
Churches.

Instr. 4. Labor every one, that his own Soul may be an habitation for the
Lord, a Temple of the Holy Ghost.

For the Temple signified not only the whole Church in general, but every Saint
in particular, as has been showed.

Let not thy own Soul be, as it is said of Rome, Rev. 18.2. It is become the
habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul Spirit, and a Cage for every
unclean and hateful Bird.

But let the Spirit of God dwell there; be restless in thy self, give God in
Heaven no rest, nor thy own Heart within thee any rest, till thy Soul be an
habitation of the Holy Spirit. Say, as it is said of David, Psalm. 132.4, 5. I
will not give sleep to mine eyes, nor slumber to mine eyelids, until I find
out a place for the Lord, a habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.

THE GOSPEL of SOLOMON'S TEMPLE.
October. 25. 1668.
2 Samuel 7.13. He shall build an House for my Name, and I will establish the
throne of his Kingdom for ever.


OF their holy places under the Law the chief was the Tabernacle and the
Temple. The difference between which two, was not in their typical use and
signification, wherein they were the same; but only that the one was movable,
the other fixed. The Tabernacle was a movable Temple, the Temple was a fixed
Tabernacle: and accordingly they differed in their quantity and dimensions, the
Temple being double the quantity of the Tabernacle, suitable to its fixed
state; but the Tabernacle was lesser and lighter, because it was to be portable
and fit for the shoulders of the Levites, who were to carry it from place to
place.

The Temple being the greater and more glorious of the two, I have chosen to
speak to that, and in so doing shall speak of the Tabernacle also, so far as is
requisite to this end of opening the typical significations of these legal
shadows.

The Text speaks of two things, the Temple and the Kingdom: it is the former of
which I am to speak.

The Doctrinal Proposition in the words is this.

Doctr. That God appointed Solomon to build him a Temple, or an House unto his
Name.

A Temple is an House inhabited by a Deity.

As a man dwells in his House, so God dwelt in the Temple: or as Satan dwells
in the Temples of Idols, and in false Churches, which are therefore called
Synagogues of Satan, and habitations of Devils: so God dwells in the Temple,
and in the true Gospel-Churches. I give these opposite instances, because
contraries put together do illustrate one another.

To dwell there, is to vouchsafe his Presence there.

The Temple was a very great and glorious Type; both the Temple and all the
concernments of it were mystical and significant of Gospel Truths.

The general significations of the Temple were Christ and the Church, and every
individual Saint; See the Sermon on Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6. p. 409. where this is proved
at large.
this in general.

But, besides these significations of the Temple in general, almost all the
particulars about the Temple had their particular mysteries and instructions.

They may be referred to five heads, 1. the Builders, 2. the time, 3. the
Place, 4. the Materials and Preparations for it, 5. the Parts of the Temple.

1. The Builders; 1. of the Tabernacle, 2. of the first Temple, 3. of the
second Temple.

1. Of the Tabernacle; Moses, Bezaliel, Aholiab.

The people contributed, Exodus 35. and every Princes Offering at the Dedication
of it, is set down particularly Numb. 6.7. to show that the Lord takes special
notice of the Bounty and Liberality of his people to Work.

2. Of the first Temple; David and Solomon.

David made vast preparations for it, appointed the place, and gave the pattern
of it in writing to his Son, 2 Samuel 8.11, 12 -- 1 Chronicles. 29.2, 3, 4, 5. and 1 Chronicles. 28.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

Solomon had an Army of Workmen that were employed about it, 1 Kings 5.23, to
the end. One hundred and fifty thousand Bearers of burdens, thirty thousand
Israelites for plain work, three thousand and three hundred Officers, besides
Hirams men.

3. The second Temple; Cyrus, Isai. 44. and 45. Ezra 1. Jehoshua and Zerubbabel.

Take these Instructions from this.

1. The chief Builders were Types of Christ, whose work and office it is, to
build the Temple of the Lord. Moses, Solomon, Zerubbabel were so: and some
think Cyrus also was a good man, and a Type of Christ: but concerning the other
there is no controversy.

2. Obs. That all hands should help to carry on Church-work.

3. Obs. The Freedom and Sovereignty of God in the choice and use of
Instruments to do his work.

He chose Cyrus, who was by birth a Persian, he singles out and chooses whom he
will. He chose Paul a Persecuter to be an instrument to plant and gather
Churches. Strangers of Tire and Sidon, Kings of Persia; Gentiles as well as
Jews shall be added to the Church. Those that were once strangers to the
Commonwealth of Israel, they that are far off shall come and build in the
Temple of the Lord, Zech. 6. ult.

2. The time; the Tabernacle was built about the year of the World two thousand
five hundred and thirteen: the Temple about four hundred eighty seven years
after, 1 Kings 6.1. ult. which fell upon the year of the World three thousand,
according to that account. The Temple stood from the Dedication of it by
Solomon to the last Destruction of it by the Romans, about a thousand years.
For to the Captivity in Babylon was about four hundred years; the Captivity
lasted seventy years: From thence to the Death of the Messiah four hundred and
ninety years, which is Daniels seventy weeks, cap. 9. After Christ's Death it
was destroyed by Vespasian, about forty years after.

So that it was finished and dedicated about the year of the World three
thousand, and finally destroyed about the year of the World four thousand: so
it stood from first to last about a thousand years, viz. the fourth millenary
from the Creation of the World, excepting the intercision of the Captivity in
Babylon. It lay wast about fifty years, a whole Jubilee, some think seventy, but
the least is fifty; supposing their bondage under the yoke of Babylon to begin
about 20 years before the burning of the Temple.

In all this we see the vicissitudes and various revolutions that do befall the
Church of God, whereof the Temple was a Type; and that the ingratitude and
unprofitableness of a people may bring Desolation upon all their pleasant
things. The greatest glory of external Ordinances may by sin be laid in the
dust, as this Temple was twice. And moreover the use of it was ended, Christ
the substance being come.

3. The Place; Mount Moriah was the place of the Temple: there was a double
designation of the place to this use.

1. By Isaacs being offered there, Genesis 22. get thee to the Land of Moriah, etc.

2. By the Angels staying there, and commanding an Altar to be built there in
David's time, and Gods answering David from Heaven by fire on that Altar, 1 Chronicles. 21. with cap. 22.1. We may here learn the Sovereignty and unsearchable
freedom of the Will and Grace of God in choosing one place to be the Seat of
his Temple, of his Church and Ordinances rather than another. For it was said,
Psalm. 87.2. He loves the Gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob.
Why he chose this I know no reason can be given, but the good Pleasure of his
own Will.

So, that the Lord should choose England to have Gospel-Temples here, to plant
his Churches and Ordinances here, rather than in Spain or Italy; he has
reprobated them to be the seat of Antichrist, but has chosen these to be the
Mountains of delights of Holiness, as Dan. 11.45. No account can be given
hereof, but the good Pleasure of his Will.

4. The Materials and Preparations of them; there were the choicest Materials
and the most plentiful Preparations for them: the people contributed to the
Tabernacle very liberally, Exodus 35.21, 29. Exodus 36.5, 6, 7. So that
Proclamation was made for them to cease. And for the Temple was prepared Gold,
Silver, Brass, Iron, Wood, Stone, all in great abundance and vast Sums by David
and Solomon.

1. These rich and choice Materials instruct us, that we must give God the best
we have, and give it plentifully and liberally.

2. There must be a preparing time, and work for the building of the Temple,
which to do is Gods free Gift: therefore we must acknowledge and admire him for
it, as David did, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. who, or what am I or my people, that we
should offer so willingly. And the way to continue this frame, is to beg it of
God, as there David also does, ver. 18. keep it for ever in the hearts of thy
people.

5. The Parts; which I shall mention now, but deferring the interpretation of
them to another time; they were three, the House, the Courts, and the Vessels:
all these, were parts of the Temple, take it in the largest sense, for all the
holy Buildings and appertainances thereof.

1. The House, or Building, the covered Temple.

Of this there are the common parts that belong to every House, namely, the
Foundation, the Walls, the Doors, the Windows, the Floor, the Roof.

The peculiar parts of this house, as it was the house of the Lord, were the
Porch, the Sanctuary, and the Oracle, with the side-chambers belonging to them.
These are the parts of the House it self, or the covered Temple.

2. The second general part of the Temple, is the Courts about it: for they
were holy ground, as well as the covered Building; and they were two, the
outward and the inward Court; or the Court of the People, and the Court of the
Priests.

3. The Vessels; they were many. I shall instance only the chief, and such as
were significant of Gospel-mysteries, and they are either belonging to the
Sanctuary, or to the Oracle.

1. To the Sanctuary, and that either sub dio, or sub tecto, without or within
doors. There were four without doors, and three within: without, the Brazen
Altar of Burnt-offering, the molten Sea, the Lavers, and the Pillars of Brass:
within, the Altar of Incense, the Table of Shewbread, and the Candlesticks.

2. To the Oracle, wherein was the Ark and the appertainances thereof, Heb. 9.1
-- to 5.

Use. Exhortation unto Temple-work. It is prophesied that even the Gentiles,
Zech. 6. ult. they that are far off shall come and build in the Temple of the
Lord. We are all by nature far off, Ephesians. 2. but brought nigh by the Blood of
Christ, and built up into an holy Temple to the Lord, as it there follows, ver.
13, 17, 19, etc. to the end.

Take these Rules about Temple-work.

1. Be sure you build according to the Pattern shown in the Mount to Moses,
Exodus 25.9 -- Heb. 8.5. It is eighteen times repeated in the two last Chapters
of Exodus, [as the Lord commanded Moses: so did he] as the Lord commanded
Moses. And in like manner David and Solomon, See the Geneva Note upon it.
1 Chronicles. 28.11, 12, 19. they had both the Word and Spirit of God to direct
them.

If you ask, how may we know the Pattern? These are the means of knowing it;
the Word and the Spirit, Hag. 2.5. and they give light in this matter in the
way of effectual Humiliation and Repentance: especially repent and be humbled
for Temple-sins, Temple-defilements; for your Church-sins, Church-defilements,
sins against the Worship of God, see Ezekiel. 43.10, 11. so Rev. 11.1. a Reed is
given at the restoring of the Churches and Worship of God from the
Antichristian Apostasy, to measure the Temple, the Altar and the Worshippers.
Get this measuring Reed into your hands the Word of God, Revel. 21.15.

2. Leave out the outer Court, Rev, 11.2. that is nominal Christians. Look to
the matter of the Church, else it will be like rotten timber in the foundation
of a Building: Not that I do exhort you to rigor and severity; I know there
may be an extreme on both hands: but take heed of extremes, and of admitting
persons visibly unfit. These two Directions are of that weight, that I have
thought they are enough as to Communion of Churches. If they own the Scripture
for their Rule of Worship and Discipline, if they build by the golden Reed, and
if they leave out the outer Court; if there be care taken to keep off
promiscuous Administrations. But if they slight the Scripture as the rule of
their Walking, or of their Worship and Administrations. Or if they be not in a
capacity to keep the Ordinances pure, I do not see how we can have comfortable
communion with them.

3. Let there be no noise of Axes and Hammers in building the Temple. It was
built entirely of hewed and squared stones, whereof every one was perfectly
fitted for its place, the length of the stones, some say, being the thickness
of the Wall, 1 Kin. 6.7. It is not to be too rigorously understood, but the
meaning is is, as some express it, no sound that was obstreperous to a public
disturbance: no laborious sound from the hewing or squaring of timber, but only
a more cheerful, yea melodious harmony from the conjunction and compacting of
matter afore^^^d fitted and prepared.

Doubtless this was not without a mystery: it may be diverse ways applied; as,
that the matter of the Church should be well prepared before their admission as
members: and that the Saints are aforehand fitted and prepared unto Glory: so
that when they come to dye, they have nothing else to do but to dye: for the
Temple was a Type of Heaven, and of the Church triumphant. But the Application
that I would make of it, is this: There should be no noise of strife, no
contention, no collision of men's spirits in Church-society. And the means to
avoid this, is the well preparing of the matter: when the Soul is well prepared
by an humbling work in its first conversion, when hewed and squared, it will
lie even in the building, else not. For by Pride only comes Contention.

4 Build the House of the Lord before your own Houses: so Solomon did. The
Lords House was finished in seven years, but his own was not finished till
thirteen years, 1 Kings 6. ult. with cap. 7. 1. not that he regarded his own
House more, but less; and therefore finished the Lords House before his own.
And the Jews, after their return from the Captivity, are greatly reproved for
this neglect, Hag. 1.4. and 2.19. It is indeed the general scope of the whole
book of Haggai. It brings a Blessing upon all your concernments, Matthew. 6.33.
Seek first the Kingdom of God, and all other things shall be added. But if this
be neglected and postponed, God will blast and curse all the other works of
your hands, as he did theirs.

5. Labor to see the Beauty of the Lord in his Temple. This was David's earnest
desire, Psalm. 27.4. One thing I have desired of the Lord, that will I seek
after, that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of my life, to
behold the Beauty of the Lord, Psalm. 84.7. to appear before God in Sion, Psalm.
63.2. to see thy Power and thy Glory in thy Sanctuary. What do you come there
for, if you do not meet with God there? Be in the purest way of Worship, but
rest not in it without God. Get real visions and fruitions of God in his
Ordinances, to see the pleasant Beauty of the Lord in his Temple.

Quest. But when is God real to the Soul in his Ordinances?

Answer. When God is as real to the Soul, to the eye of Faith, as the external
part of an Ordinance is to the eye of sense. When you see Christ crucified in
the Sacrament, when you see his Body broken, his Blood poured out, as really as
you see the Bread broken, and the Wine poured out. And if there be a real sight
of Christ, it will have real effects, to subdue thy Lusts, to keep the heart in
ways of Holiness.

Quest. But what of God are we to see in his Temple?

Answ. All his Glory shines forth there, especially his Power and his Grace.

1. His Power, Psalm. 63.2. To see thy Power and thy Glory.

2. Especially the Glory of his Grace, Zech. 4.7. Cry Grace Grace unto it from
the foundation to the top-stone.

2. Sam. 7.13. He shall build an House for my Name, Nov. 1. 1668.
and I will establish the Throne of his Kingdom for ever.


NOw of the parts of the Temple. Taking the word in the largest sense, for all
the holy Buildings and the appertainances thereof, so the parts of it were
three.

1. The House. 2. The Courts, and 3. The Vessels of the Temple.
I call them all parts, for want of a fitter term to express it by: for there
is a penury of words, from whence there is a necessity sometimes of tropes, and
figures, and improprieties of speech.

1. The House it self; that is, the covered Building called (...) from (...) to
inhabit: as all the holy ground is called (...) for the whole place, and all
the Courts were holy.

As to this, I mean the House it self, we may consider,

1. The common parts of it, which belong to every House, and so to this amongst
the rest. And here the Scripture takes notice of the Foundation, the Walls, the
Doors, the Windows, the Floor, and the Roof of the Temple.

Not that we should seek a mystery in every thing, but only so far as we see
the Scripture going before us we may safely follow, when we find the Scripture
allegorizing any thing and alluding to it in a spiritual sense, we should mind,
and heedfully take out such lessons and instructions.

I must speak first to the Letter and History of them, as parts of the material
Temple; and then consider what mystical application the Scripture makes of
them. This method I shall observe under every head.

1. The Foundation of the House of the Lord; it was of great costly hewn stone,
1 Kings 5.17. But what is the Foundation in the Foundation in the spiritual
Temple? The Scripture often applies this to Jesus Christ, Isai. 28.16. behold I
lay in Sion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, etc. 1. Pet. 2.4-6. to
whom coming as to a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, etc. refused of the
Builders, Psalm. 118.22. the stone which the Builders refused is become the head
of the corner. A Scripture often interpreted in the New Testament concerning
Christ -- other foundations can no man lay, 1 Cor. 3.9, 11. The Scripture often
speaks of Christ under this notion, as a Stone, and a Rock, and a Cornerstone,
Genesis 49.24. from thence is the Shepherd the Stone of Israel -- Dan. 2.25. a
Stone cut out of the Mountain without hand. Isai. 26.4. Trust ye in the Lord
for ever: for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. The word is, the
Rock of ages; in which Rock Moses was hid, Exodus 33.22. while my Glory passes
by, I will put thee in a clift of the Rock. And Elijah, 1 Kings 19.9, 13. He is
that Stone, Zech. 3.9. engraven with seven eyes upon (...) it. And as Christ is
the foundation-stone of the Church: so the Apostles in regard of their Doctrine
are also called the Foundations of it, Rev. 21.14. Ephesians. 2.20.21. Look to it,
that you be built upon this foundation, that you be not built upon the Sand,
but upon this Rock, Matthew 7.24. For hence it is that the Church stands so
safe, because built upon this Rock: therefore the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it, Matthew 26.18.

The Papists make the Pope the Cornerstone of their Church: but it is not the
Pope, it is not Peter himself as personally considered, that the Church is
built upon.

Many build upon the sandy foundation of their own Righteousness, and their own
strength and moral endeavors. These are false foundations. But if you be upon
this foundation, fear not; whosoever believes in him shall not be confounded

2. The Walls of the Temple; they were of Stone, the inside was Cedar, adorned
with carved Cherubims, Palm trees, Flowers, and overlaid with Gold; and yet
further adorned with precious Stones, fixed, and sparkling like Stars in fit
places in the Wall, 1 Kings 6.18, 29 -- 2 Chronicles. 3.6. The outside of the Wall
was either white polished Marble, as some think, or overlaid with Silver, as
others conceive from 1 Chronicles. 29.4. For within it was overlaid with Gold.
Therefore this Silver, as it seems, was for the outside, which could not but
yield a very bright and glorious show to the eyes of all spectators, especially
when the beams of the Sun did shine and sparkle upon it. The thickness of the
Wall of the Temple is not expressed in the Scripture: but the least that can be
allowed at the foundation is four cubits; because there was a rebatement of
three cubits in the thickness of the Wall for the side-chambers, 1 Kings 6.6.
and for the Wall in the highest story, we may well allow one cubit, and so
there will be four at the bottom.

The Scripture appies this mystically to the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.12. it had
a Wall great and high, and again, v. 17. and often the Walls are mentioned.

1. The Walls of an House or City are the defense and safety of it: so Isai.
60.18. thou shall call thy Walls Salvation -- And God is said to be a Wall of
Fire, Zech. 2.5. for I, says the Lord, will be unto her a Wall of Fire round
about, and will be the Glory in the midst of her -- the Lord is for Walls and
Bulwarks to his people, Isai. 26.1.

2. The Stones in this sacred Building are spiritually Saints, who are called
living Stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. So some interpret that allusion, Psalm. 144.12, 13.
that our Daughters may be as Corner-stones, polished after the similitude of a
Palace. Vide Calv, Ainsw. in locum.

3. These Trees that were placed in the Temple either for use, as Timber in the
Building, or for Ornament in Sculptures and Ingravings, and the Flowers, I find
them mystically applied in the Scripture to the Saints and People of God in the
Church. The Trees themselves could not be planted in the Temple; but therefore
the Sculptures of them were there, as representing the Trees themselves. David
compares the righteous to the Cedar and the Palm Tree, Psalm. 92.12, 13, 14. and
himself unto the Olive Tree, which was used in and about the Doors of the
House, Psalm. 52.8. but I am like a green Olive Tree in the House of God. There
were also Sculptures of Lillies in the Temple, 1 Kings 7.19, 22 -- and Saints
are set forth by that Flower, Cant. 2.2. As the Lilly among the Thorns: so is
my Beloved among the Daughters, Cant. 2.16. my Beloved he feeds among the
Lillies. The allusion seems to lie in the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit of
God, shadowed by the excellent properties of those Trees and Flowers.

4. The Gold and precious Stones have the like signification. Those spiritual
excellencies in the true Temple, those divine Graces and Ornaments of the Soul,
more precious than Gold and Jewels, were shadowed forth by them. Therefore
Faith is compared to Gold, 1 Pet. 1.6. And the Church is said to have her
Foundations of Agats, Isai. 54.11, 12. So the new Jerusalem, which is a Vision
and Prophecy of the Church in her excellency both of Grace and Glory, Rev.
21.18, 19. And the Members of the Church, Lament. 4.7. are compared to Rubies
and Saphires.

3. The Doors of the Temple; they were made with folding leaves; and for the
Sanctuary, they were of Fir Tree, with carved Cherubims, Palm Trees and Flowers
-- overlaid with Gold; and the Posts of Olive Tree. But for the Oracle, both
Posts and Doors were of Olive Tree, 1 Kings, chap. 6. ver. 31, 35.

Now for the Mystery of this, take these hints.

1. Christ himself is the Door of entrance and admittance into the Temple and
Presence of God, Joh. 10.7, 9.

2. The Ordinance of Admission into the Church, or keeping or shutting out, is
hereby figured also. For the use of a Door is to let in some, and keep out
others, Cant. 1.12. A Garden enclosed is my Sister, my Spouse, a Spring shut
up, a Foountain sealed. Rev. 21.27 There shall in no wise enter into it any
thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a ly;
but they which are written in the Lambs Book of Life. And chapt. 22.15. Without
are dogs, etc.

4. The Windows of the Temple, 1 Kings 6.4. and for the House he made Windows
of narrow Lights. Your Margin reads it, Windows broad within, and narrow
without, or skewed and closed. They were made in that form, for the better
diffusion of the Light, and keeping out the Weather. These Windows were of a
great height from the ground: for they must needs be above the side-chambers,
which were fifteen cubits high, 1 Kings 6.10. therefore the lowest part of the
Windows was fifteen cubits from the Pavement.

Whether the Oracle had Windows in it or no, is disputed on both sides. It is a
question also whether there was any Glass in these Windows: but had the
Invention of Glass been so ancient, probably there would have been not only
much use, but express mention of it in the Scripture. It is said of Ahaziah
long after Solomon's time, that he fell through a Lattice, 2 Kings 1.2. and
thence some infer, that probably Glass-windows were not then in use. And indeed
when was the first Invention of Glass, by that little search that I have made,
I cannot find. I find no clear mention of it in the Old Testament. For their
Looking-glasses were of polished Brass, Exodus 38.8. I know some render
misrepoth majim -- Josh. 11.8. and 13.6. Fornaces vitraceas, the
Glass-furnaces, which I confess is ingenious. But it may be otherwise rendered;
and it does not seem probable, that this Invention of Glass was so ancient as
Joshuahs time. Therefore the Windows of the Temple were open to the Air, and as
to Ornament, we may suppose they were gilded or golden Lattices. But so much
for the literal explication of them.

As to the mystery of them, their use being to let in Light into the Temple; we
may here consider both external and internal Light.

1. As to external Light; this speaks forth Light, Gospel Light in the Church
from Christ by his Ministers For Christ himself is the true Light, Joh. 1.9.
that was the true Light, which coming into the world enlighteneth every man
that is enlightened; so some interpret those words. For (...) may be referred
to (...) as well as (...). He is the Sun of Righteousness shining in through
these Windows, looking through the golden Lattices, Cant. 2.9.

His Ministers are Lights also, though he is the Sun; they are but Stars that
shine with a borrowed Light, Joh. 5.35. John the Baptist was a burning and a
shining Light: and Matthew. 5.14. Christ says to his Apostles, Ye are the Light
of the world, and his Church and People shine as Lights in the world, Phil.
2.15.

2. As to internal Light; some apply it yet further to the spiritual
illumination of the minds of Gods people. As the eyes are the windows of the
Body, and so called, Eccles. 12.3. in old age they that look out at the windows
are darkened: so the eyes and windows of the Soul are the faculty of the
understanding elevated and sanctified by the Holy Ghost, whereby it receives
the Light of the Gospel. There is in the Saints a spiritual visive faculty,
those eyes of the Soul, whereby it receives the Light of the Sun of
Righteousness darting in his beams of spiritual Light into the Soul, Though it
is with many as Joh. 1. the Light shines, but the darkness comprehends it not.

5. The Floor of the Temple; This was of Planks of Firr, and Boards of Cedar,
overlaid with pure Gold, 1 Kings 6.15, 30.

This Lesson and Instruction we may learn out of it; That every thing in the
House of God is excellent and precious, the lowest, the meanest Saint or
Ordinance of Christ. The very Floor of the Temple is overlaid with Gold.

6. The Scripture takes notice also of the Roof or Covering of the Temple, 1
Kings 6.9. which was made of boards and leaves of Cedar, laid within with Gold.
What the outside was is uncertain: For it is not likely that the Cedar-boards
were exposed to the injuries of the Weather -- but covered, yet not with Lead,
that was too poor a metal to be used in this magnificent Temple, but either
with sheets of Silver, as some think, or with plates of Brass, as others think.

The Roof was doubtless flatt, according to the custom of of those times; and
therefore defended with Battlements, according to that Law, Deuteronomy. 22.8. and
adorned with Pinnacles: For the Devil carried our Savior to a Pinnacle of the
Temple, Matthew. 4.5. that is, says the Marginal Note, the Battlement wherewith
the flat Roof of the Temple was compassed about that no man might fall down,
Deuteronomy. 22.8. and though flat, yet might be some gentle rising in the middle, to
cast off the Rainwater.

The Scripture seems to apply the Covering of the Temple as an emblem of divine
shelter and protection over the Church, Isai. 4.5, 6. for upon all the Glory
shall be a Defense, or as the Margin reads it a Covering -- And there shall be
a Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a place of
refuge, and for a covert from the storm, and from the rain. This Covering and
Shelter is the Lord Jesus Christ, Isai. 12.2. Cant. 2.4. his Banner over me was
Love.

2 Samuel 7.13. Nov. 5. 1668.
He shall build an House for my Name, and I will establish the throne of his
Kingdom for ever.


WE have soken of the Foundation, the Walls, the Doors, the Windows, the Floor,
and the Roof of the Temple: these I call the common parts of the Temple,
because they are such as are in every house, of what form or of what use soever.

But the special parts, or the Rooms in a house may be various and diverse,
according to the mind of the Architect, and the use he puts it to.

The Rooms in this sacred Building and House of the Lord were chiefly three,
the Porch, the Sanctuary, and the Oracle, with the side-chambers belonging to
them.

It will be needful here to speak something first concerning the Letter and
History of these things, and then concerning their mystical significations,
because we cannot so well see the ground and the truth of the mystical
application, unless we have a right Idea and conceiving of the Letter of the
^ype it self.

1. And first for the literal or historical explication of these parts of the
Temple, you may easily conceive of them by the form of our Churches, as they
are called; only there was a difference in the position or situation of the
parts; but the parts themselves are alike in both.

For first there was a great Court about the Temple, to which answers the
Churchyard about our Churches. Then there was a stately Tower-porch, four
times as high as the Temple it self: to this answers that which is called the
Steeple. To the Sanctuary answers the Body of the Church. And then answerable
to the Oracle, is that which we call the Chancell. And finally, as the Temple
had Side-chambers and Lodgings for the Levites: so there is belonging to our
Churches the Vestry and the dwelling house for the Minister, etc.

Only there is a difference in the position or situation of these parts. For
whereas the Holy of holies in the Temple was at the West end of it: on the
contrary with us, the Chancell is ever toward the East; which was done either
in opposition to the Jews, or in imitation of the Pagans.

As to our Churches or public Meeting-places, the thing it self is necessary:
For if there must be public Worship, there must be public places to assemble
in. A Meeting Place is a necessary appertainance to the Worship: and as for
this form or fashion of Building, whatsoever is for use or convenience, or
moderate Comeliness and Ornament is lawful and allowable: and therefore there
is no evil in a Churchyard, or a Steeple, or a Vestry, or an House for the
Minister: but to have a Chancell, or one part of the Meeting Place, as more
holy than the rest, in imitation of the Jewish Oracle, this is evil and
superstitious. Public Meeting-places are necessary; but the opinion of
Holiness in them, this is superstitious. For our Meeting-places do not succeed
in the room and nature of the Jewish Temple, as a Temple; but of the Jewish
Synagogues, where they had their moral Worship in all their Towns and Cities
throughout their habiations.

It will be useful here to speak a little first concerning the Dimensions of
these several parts of the Temple, and then concerning their Position or
Situation to each other.

And first for the Porch, it was a hundred and twenty cubits high, twenty
cubits long, and ten cubits broad. This appears by comparing and putting two
places of Scripture together, 1 Kings 6.3. with 2 Chronicles. 3.4. In the Kings it
is said, And the Porch before the Temple of the House, twenty cubits was the
length thereof, according to the breadth of the House, and ten cubits was the
breadth thereof before the House. In 2 Chronicles. 3.4. the height is mentioned, the
height was one hundred and twenty cubits. It is not to be supposed, that it was
all void to the top; but that it had Chambers and winding Stairs up to the top,
according to that in 1 Chronicles. 28.11. which speaks of the pattern of the Porch
and of the Houses thereof, and of the Treasures thereof, and of the upper
Chambers thereof, and of the inner Parlours thereof.

And a gallant prospect it was from the top of this Tower-steeple, they might
see far and near. Some have written that the River Jordan the dead Sea and all
Arabia might be discerned: And so I suppose might the Mediteranean Sea Westward.

The use of this stately Porch in the front of the House was chiefly for
Ornament to the House it self, to the rest of the Temple.

2. The second part of the House was the Sanctuary, or the holy place, called
sometimes the Temple, sometimes the House, and the greater House, 2 Chronicles. 3.5.
in contra-distinction to the Oracle, which was the lesser.

This was forty cubits long, that is, from East to West, between the Porch and
the Oracle, 1 Kings 6.17. and the House, that is, the Temple before it, viz.
before the Oracle, was forty cubits long. And ver. 2. the breadth thereof
twenty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits. In this stood the Altar of
Incense, the Table of Shewbread, and the Golden Candlesticks. And here the
Lord was wont to walk as it were amongst the Golden Candlesticks.

3. The third part of the Temple was the Oracle. This was twenty cubits every
way, both in the height, length and breadth, 1 Kings 6.10. and the Oracle in
the forepart, that is, which as a man entered into the Temple lay before him in
the West end of it, was twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth,
and twenty cubits in the height thereof: so that it was a perfect cube
excavated.

It had Doors of Olive Tree, 1 Kings 6.31 and the Lintel or side-posts were a
fifth part of the Wall, that is, four cubits, the Wall being twenty: So there
was eight cubits of Wall, beside eah Door. It may be rendered a little
otherwise: but thus our Translators; and this seems the fittest proportion
for the Doors.

And here was the Veil hung, namely between the Sanctuary and the Oracle. The
Institution of the Veil we have, Exodus 26.31, 32, 33. It is said, 2 Chronicles.
3.14. and he made the Veil of blue, etc. And we find, 1 Kings 6.21. he made a
Partition by the Chains of Gold before the Oracle, that is, to hang the Veil
upon them.

It is a Question here, on which side of the Wall the Veil hung, whether in the
Oracle, or in the Sanctuary, which I shall leave to your own Meditations to
consider; as also whether the Oracle had Windows. Some think not; because the
Scripture, in allusion to it, speaks of Gods dwelling in thick darkness. So
Solomon at the Dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings 8.12. and of the new
Jerusalem, which is described with some allusion to Solomon's Temple. It is
said, Rev. 21.23. it had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in
it: for the Glory of the Lord did lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light
thereof. Neither was the work of the High Priest in this most holy place such
as needed any more Light than what the opening of the Doors might yield, from
the Light that was in the Sanctuary.

It is further Quere concerning the Oracle, whether there were any
side-chambers over it.

The Answer is, that the Text seems clear for it, 2 Chronicles. 3.1. and he overlaid
the upper Chambers with Gold, that is, the upper Chambers over the Oracle: For
the whole Context in those three verses, 8, 9.10. treats concerning the
Oracle. It was but twenty cubits high, whereas the Sanctuary was thirty:
Therefore what became of the remaining ten cubits? It is not likely that there
was a pair Stairs (as some suppose) of fifteen foot high, between the Sanctuary
and the Oracle, whereby to ascend and go up into the Oracle: but rather that
the remaining ten cubits was made into two upper Chambers, to be repositories
for the choicest things over the Oracle. And so this brings me to speak a word
to the side chambers of the Temple, of which we read, 1 Kings 6.5, 6 -- and
against the Wall of the House (or upon, or joining to it, says the Margin) he
built Chambers round about, against the Walls of the House round about, both of
the Temple and of the Oracle, he made Chambers round about. The nethermost
Chamber was, five cubits broad, the middle was six cubits broad, and the third
was seven cubits broad. For without in the Wall of the House he made narrowed
Rests round about, that the Beams should not be fastened in the Walls of the
House. So that here were three stories of Chambers contiguous to the Temple;
the lowest story five cubits broad, the second story six cubits, and the
uppermost story seven cubits; which different dimensions of the Chambers arose
from the several rebatements that were in the Wall, for the Beams of the Floors
to rest upon.

The number of these Chambers is not expressed in Scripture: but in Ezekiels
visionary Temple there wsre thirty chambers, Ezekiel. 41.6 -- and the Jewish
Writers report, that there was the same number in Solomon's Temple.

Quest. But here it may be demanded, Cubits being so often mentioned in
measuring the Temple, how much a Cubit is?

Answer. A Cubit was about a foot and a half of our measure, it comes very near
it, except some small fractions.

The Oracle therefore being twenty cubits, was about thirty foot square. The
Porch-tower being one hundred and twenty cubits high, was about one hundred and
eighty foot high.

Some distinguish of cubits, and think there were two sorts of them, the
sacred, and the common cubit, and that the sacred cubit was double the quantity
of the other: And so two sorts of Shekels, the Shekel of the Sanctuary, and the
common Shekel; and so of other Measures. But others on the contrary conceive,
there was but one Cubit, and but one Shekel: and that phrase, the Shekel of the
Sanctuary, they interpret of exact measure, the Standard of all measures being
laid up in the Sanctuary, 1 Chronicles. 23.29. It is true, the Temple is said to be
so long, according to the Cubits of the first measure, 2 Chronicles. 3.3. but this
is various ways interpreted. Some understand it of the Measures left in the
written Pattern by David to his Son Solomon. Others understand it of the
Tabernacle-measures left by Moses. See the Belgic Annot. in 2 Chronicles. 3.3.

If the Cubit used in the Temple were double to the ordinary, there would have
needed Pillars in the midst of the House to support the Roof: but the Scripture
speaks not of any such Pillars.

Obj. But if a Cubit was no more but a foot and an half, wherein then consisted
the Magnificence of Solomon's Temple? For it is said, 1 Chronicles. 22.5. The House
that is to be builded for the Lord must be exceeding magnifical of Fame, and of
Glory throughout all Countries.

Answ. This Magnificence did not consist in the House only, but in all the
sacred Buildings, the Courts and Vtensils belonging to it. Nor did it consist
in the bigness, so much as in the sumptuousness of it: for there is a
competency and a measure in things, which to exceed is not magnificent, but
rather monstrous. It is not the excellency of a dwelling house, to have wild
vast Rooms, but fit Romes for use.

The Sumptuousness of the Temple was unparalleled. It seems in this respect to
have been incomparably the most stately Structure that ever was in the world:
For I have never read in any History of any House beside this, that was
overlaid with Gold all over, both the Walls, and the Roof, and the Pavement of
it, and garnished with Jewels and precious Stones fixed and sparkling in the
Walls like so many Stars in the Firmament.

But so much for the Figure and Dimensions.

2. Now secondly of the Position or Situation of these parts to each other,
which was this. The Porch stood to the East, the Sanctuary or holy place in the
middle, and the Oracle in the West end of the Temple.

For Ezekiel standing in vision in the inner cap. 8. 16. he saw five and twenty
men between the Porch and the Altar, with their backs toward the Temple of the
Lord, and their faces toward the East, and they worshipped the Sun toward the
East. And Ezekiel. 44.1. there is mention of the Gate of the outward Sanctuary,
which looks toward the East. And again, Ezekiel. 47.1. behold Waters issued
from under the threshold of the House Eastward. For the forefront of the House
stood toward the East.

The Reason of this was in opposition to the heathenish Idolatry of those
times, who were wont to worship toward the East; and therefore had their doors
and entrances into the Temples from the West* and their Adyta and more sacred
places toward the East end, there their Idols stood. As in our Churches in
Popish times they had a Loft or Gallery over the Chancel, which was called the
Rood-loft, where all their Idols stood; as the Picture of Christ, and of the
Virgin Mary, etc. and amongst the rest, they had one great Idol, called the
Rood, which if it was, as some now think, the Picture of an old Man; from
thence the poor ignorant people came to conceive of God the Father, as an old
Man sitting in Heaven: though it seems rather to be a Wooden Image of Christ
hanging on the Cross. See Acts and Monuments vol. 2. page 302. or a Wooden
Cross only, without any Image hanging on it. From whence is the term Roodmas,
used still in some parts of England; by which they mean the first or third of
May, the Pope having made that an holy day, and called it Inventio Crucis,
because forsooth on that day the Cross on which Christ was crucified was found,
if you will believe the Fable; Mass or Mess signifying in the old Saxon a
Feast, or a set time of holy rejoicing, and Rood, as it seems, a Cross.

But this is to be observed that in all the Ceremonial Worship, the Lord took
special care to keep his people at a distance from the heathenish Idolatries of
those times, he would not suffer them to conform at all to those false
Worships, nor to comply with them in the least. And it is a good spirit to be
zealous against such things: but where there is a slight, loose, indifferent,
skeptical frame of spirit in the matters of Gods House and Worship, this spirit
is not of God, this spirit is not of him that calls you.

So much for the House it self.

2. Now secondly for the Courts of the Temple, there were two of them, the
Scripture mentions so many and no more, 2 Chronicles. 33.5. and he (Manasseh)
built Altars for all the Host of Heaven in the two Courts of the House of the
Lord.

About the Tabernacle we read but of one Court, Exodus 27.9. for the whole Camp
of Israel was the outer Court. But about the Temple there two, called the
outward, and the inner Court. The outward Court being the larger, is called the
great Court, 2 Chronicles. 4.9. and the Court of the people, because here the people
came together to be taught, Ezra 10.9. But though the people came into it; yet
it was part of the Temple, and an holy place: For none might enter that were
unclean in any thing, for it was the Office of the Porters to keep them back, 2 Chronicles. 23.19. And hence it was that the Jews took so much offense at Paul, when
they thought he had brought Greeks into the Temple, and so polluted that holy
place, Actt 21.28.

There was also another Court called the inner Court, 2 Kings 6.36. and the
higher Court, Jer. 36.10. and the Court of the Priests, Vid. plura on Rev.
11.12. This Reference in the Authors Notes shows he had written a Discourse on
that Text, and indeed so he had, which may be published in time, if God will.
2 Chronicles. 4.9. Both these Courts, as it seems did compass the Temple on all
sides round about, and they were four square. The length of each side of the
outer Court was a furlong, as the Jewish Witers report, and the whole about
half an English mile in compass.

There were also, as they report, some other Courts added unto these in after
times; but because the Scripture takes no norice of them, I shall not do it
neither. Neither shall I say any thing of the Walls about the Courts, and the
Gates, and other Buildings belonging to them, as Chambers, Porches, and
Treasuries to lay the Vessels and other things in; and for the Priests and
Levites to lodge in. For there is mention 1 Chronicles. 28.11. of the Porch, and of
the Houses thereof, and the Treasuries thereof, etc. and ver. 12. of the Courts
of the House of the Lord, and of all the Chambers round about, of the
Treasuries of the House of God, and of the Treasuries of the dedicate things.
Neither need I speak particularly to the mystical significations of the House
and the Courts.

The whole as considered together may be divided into three parts.

1. The outer Court. 2. The inner Court, with the Sanctuary. 3. The Oracle, or
the Holy of holies.
Some apply these three parts of the Temple to the three parts of a Christian
mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians 5.23. the Spirit, Soul and Body. The Body
(say they) is signified by the open Court, where all may see what is done. The
Soul (say they) may be compared to the Sanctuary, which as it was more holy
than the outward Court; so is the Soul of man an higher and more divine part
than the Body, where by the Lamp of Gods Spirit the Reason and Understanding is
enlightened. The Spirit (say they) is as the most holy place, where God
dwells in secret by Faith, which, says the Apostle, is of things not seen
nor comprehended by Reason.

Others apply it to the three parts of the World thus. The outward Court to
this inferior World, where all things lie open to the view and use of man. The
Sanctuary to the starry Heaven, which is full of Lights and Stars, as the
Sanctuary had the seven Golden Candlesticks, and Gems, and Jewels shining in
it. The Holy of holies to the third Heaven, wherein God dwells; and indeed
the Apostle himself makes it a Type of Heaven, Heb. 9.24.

There is something of analogy in the thing as to all these. But the best
accommodation of a Type is from Scripture, and from the hints and intimations
which the Scripture gives, which (as has been formerly showed) makes the
Temple a Type of Christ and of the Church.

Let us consider then what Instructions these parts of the Temple do afford as
to both these.

1. As to Christ himself. The Temple was a Type of Christ especially in regard
of that chief part of it, the Holy of holies, wherein there was a figure or
weak representation both of his divine and humane Nature. Therefore Christ is
called the Holy of holies, Dan. 9.24. seventy weeks are determined to anoint
the most holy, or the Holy of holies, that is, to initiate and inaugurate the
Lord Jesus Christ into his Mediatorial office. The Veil of the Holy of holies
typified his humane nature, Heb. 10.20. through the Veil, that is to say, his
Flesh.

We may draw forth the analogy more at large in these particulars.

1. The Humane nature did veil the Glory of his Deity, as the Veil of the
Temple did conceal the Holy of holies from the eyes of men.

2. There was curious Embroidery of Cherubims and other Ornaments upon the
Veil, Exodus 26.31. thou shall make a Veil of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine twined Linen of cunning work, with Cherubims shall it be made. So Chron.
3.16. This is not unfitly applied to those excellent Graces of the Spirit,
wherewith the Humane nature of Jesus Christ was filled and adorned.

3. The Veil shutting up the Sanctuary from the sight and entrance of the
people, signified the shutting up the mysteries of the Gospel while the old
Temple stood, Heb. 9.8. the holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the
holiest of all was not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet
standing -- There were dark shadows then of the mysteries of the Gospel.

4. The rending of the Veil when Christ died represents his Sufferings in the
Flesh, or humane nature, Matthew. 27.51. the Veil of the Temple was rent in twain
from the top to the bottom. If the Veil be the Flesh or the Humane nature of
Christ, then the rending of the Veil must needs be the breaking of his Body,
and the sufferings of his Humane nature.

5. As by this the Holy of holies was open to the view of all that came to the
Temple: so under the Gospel the mysteries of Salvation are made manifest, Rev.
11.19. and the Temple of God was opened in Heaven, and there was seen in his
Temple the Ark of his Testament. Clear discoveries of God in Christ.

6. As the Priest entered into the holy place through the Veil; so has Christ
into Heaven, and made way for us all to enter after him and with him through
his Sufferings, Heb. 9.12. neither by the Blood of Bulls and Goats, but by his
own Blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
Redemption for us; and Heb. 6.2 last, which hope we have, as an anchor of the
Soul, both sure and steadfast, and which entered into that within the Veil, that
is, into the Holy of holies, whither the forerunner is for us entered even
Jesus.

This is the first accommodation of this Type, even unto Jesus Christ himself.

2. The Temple signified also the Church; and the several parts of the Temple
may be considered here also.

1. We learn here that there is a threefold distinction of the Church, into
visible, militant, and triumphant.

The outer Court signified the visible Church, into which all the people came
that were clean according to the Law: so into the visible Church come all that
make a fair outward profession, though they are not all sincere, as all were
not Israel that were of Israel.

The Sanctuary and the inner Court signified the Church militant of true
Believers, who are indeed spiritual Priests unto God.

And lastly, the holiest of all was a Type of Heaven, and of the Church
triumphant there; so the Apostle often, Heb. 9.24. for Christ is not entered
into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but
into Heaven it self.

2. Whereas there was a Wall about the great Court to keep out the Gentiles,
for none but Jews were admitted: the Apostle shows that Christ has broken down
the middle wall of partition between us, Ephesians. 2.14. which he has done by
converting the Gentiles, and repealing the Ceremonial Law.

3. The outer Court must be left out in Church-reformation, Rev. 11.1, 2. that
is, when the matter of the visible Church is wholly corrupted these Gentiles
must be cast out, or left out.

4. Whereas the Materials of the Sanctuary and of the Oracle were the same,
Cedar-boards and Gold, and garnished with precious Stones, etc. as was showed
before, when we spoke of the Walls of the Temple; hence we may learn this
Instruction; that Grace and Glory differ not in kind, but only in degree. Grace
is Glory begun; Glory is Grace perfected, Heb. 12.23. the Spirits of just men
made perfect. A Believer has eternal life begun in him in this world, 1 John
3.15.

5. The side-chambers and all the buildings about the Chambers, wherein the
Priests and Levites had their several Lodgings and stations appointed them, may
instruct and mind us of those Mansions that are prepared for us in Heaven, Joh.
14.2. in my Fathers House are many Mansions, if it were not so, I would have
told you, I go to prepare a place for you.

6. Whereas in these Chambers were kept and laid up the Standards of all
Weights and Measures; for so some understand that place, 1 Chronicles. 23.29.
speaking of the Levites work in their several places and stations, it is said,
their Office was to wait on the Sons of Aaron, as for other things, so for all
manner of Measure and Size; that is, as some expound it, that unto their Trust
were committed the Standard measures of things, and here laid up under their
custody, as in a most safe and sacred Repository; and these were called the
Measures of the Sanctuary: as with us the Standards and Measures are laid up in
the Tower. We may here learn, that God regards Justice amongst men next to his
own Worship. To unjust persons he says, as Isai. 1.11. to what purpose is the
multitude of your Sacrifices unto me? who has required this at your hands to
tread my Courts? v. 12. The reason is given v. 15. your hands are full of
Blood. And would you know that there are Mansions prepared in Heaven for you?
you may take this as one evidence of it, Psalm. 15.1. Lord, who shall abide in
thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill? He answers in the second
verse, He that walks uprightly, and works Righteousness, and speaks the
truth in his heart.

And let me add this further, do not judge of your spiritual estate by your
getting into the outer Court: for hypocrites may get in there, if they be but
outwardly clean. But art thou admitted as a spiritual Priest into the
Sanctuary, to enjoy true communion with God in his Ordinances, and to worship
God in the Spirit; art thou a member of the Church militant, as well as of the
visible Church?

The Church militant shall be at last triumphant: they shall pass from and
through the Sanctuary into the Holy of holies, even into Heaven it self,
whither Jesus our forerunner is entered for us.

THE GOSPEL of the TWO BRAZEN PILLARS in the TEMPLE.
1 Kings 7.21, 22. November. 8. 1668.
And he set up the Pillars in the Porch of the Temple: and he set up the right
Pillar, and called the name thereof Jachin: and he set up the left Pillar, and
called the name thereof Boaz. And upon the top of the Pillars was Lillie-work:
so was the work of the Pillars finished.


SO much of the House and the Courts. Now follows the Vessels or Utensils of
the Temple, the sacred Household stuff or Furniture of this House of God; they
were many.

We read in Ezra 1.11. all the Vessels of Gold and Silver were five thousand
and four hundred.

We may distinguish the Vessels of the Temple into two sorts.

1. Such as were of natural necessity and convenience for the Worship that was
there to be performed; as Knives, Pots, Flesh-hooks, etc. which had not their
particular mystical significations. But yet thus much we may observe from them,
that the meanest instrument in the Church of God is of some use, and therefore
not to be despised.

And of this sort there were some larger Vessels: as the Kings Scaffold, 2 Chronicles. 6.13. on which he stood when he came into the Priests Court, to present
his Sacrifices before the Lord, or upon any other occasion. For you must
remember, that though none but Priests were ordinarily to reside and attend
there; yet others might come into it upon any just occasion, as the Gibeonites
did every day, to bring in Wood and Water, and every man that offered Sacrifice
was to come wirh it, and lay his hand upon the head of it, etc. And so the King
with his Sacrifices: and so Solomon did when he dedicated the Temple: For this
inner Court seems to have been the place of this Brazen Scaffold. It was five
cubits long, five cubits broad, and three cubits high: and there was a Pillar
annexed, as it seems, to this Scaffold for the King to sit or lean upon,
where Joash stood at his Coronation, 2 Kings 11.14. with 2 Chronicles. 23.13. So
Josiah 2 Kings 23.3. when he made that Covenant before the Lord. Of this nature
was also the Covert for the Sabbath mentioned 2 Kings 16.18. which seems to
have been some Roof standing upon Pillars, to be some shelter for the Priests
from the Rain, when they were to officiate in the Court in Winter-weather.

It is noted as an act of profaneness in Ahaz to take it away, because it was
an utensil of natural convenience for the performance of the Worship, though
not a sacred vessel of divine Institution, and so not a part of Worship. Though
it was not lawful for them to institute, or alter any of the sacred vessels
that were mystical and significant; yet they might make any thing that was of
moral use, or natural necessity, or convenience, for the better performance of
the Worship: As for instance, Ezra stood upon a Pulpit of wood, Nehem. 8.4, 5.
to have an Hourglass, or the like, to know the time of the day, it is a weak
thing to scruple it.

2. But beside such Utensils as these, there was a second sort that were
mystical and significant, and they may be referred to two sorts.

They were either without doors, or within.

Those without the doors of the Sanctuary were of Brass.

Those that were within doors were of Gold.

Those without doors were most of them sub dio, in the open Court: as the other
were sub tecto, within the House it self.

We shall begin with the vessels of Brass without doors, and they were four.

1. The two Brazen Pillars. 2. The Altar of Burnt-offering. 3. The molten Sea.
4. The ten Lavers.
All these had their mystical use and signification, as in each particular will
appear.

1. The two Brazen Pillars, of which this Text speaks.

And the Doctrinal proposition is this.

D. That Solomon by Gods appointment made two Brazen Pillars at the entrance of
the Temple, and called them Jachin and Bo-yas.

They stood before the House. 2 Chronicles 3.15. and before the Temple, ver. 17.
some think without the Porch. But they seem rather to have stood within the
Porch: so we render 1 Kings 7.19. -- but without the doors of the Sanctuary.
For the Porch seems to have had no Doors that could shut, but only Door-places
which stood always open. These Pillars were doubtless things of special remark
and use, because the Holy Ghost has said so much of them, and has described
them so largely, both in the book of Kings and Chronicles, and in the Prophet
Jeremy, 1 Kings 7. v. 13 to 23. and again v. 41, 42. and 2 Kings 25.17. 2 Chronicles. 3. the 3 last verses, and cap. 4.12, 13. Jer. 51. v. 17, 20, 21, 22, 23.
And Ezekiel saw them in his visionary Temple, cap. 40. ult. and it is said
concerning these Pillars, 1 Kings 6.22. so the work of the Pillars was
finished, which (as some have observed) seems to put a special emphasis upon
this above any other of the utensils of the Temple: for it is not said so
concerning the Cherubims, or the Sea, or the Candlestiks, or the Tables.

I shall sum up very briefly what is written in those Scriptures of Kings,
Chronicles and Jeremy before quoted concerning these Pillars, as to the
litteral description of them. Not quoting the verse for every particular: for
you may read the places at your leisure, save only where any phrase needs
explication.

The matter they were made of was Brass: the height was eighteen cubits apiece,
both of them amounting to thirty six; though there was but thirty five that did
appear, one cubit being lost and swallowed up in the conjunction of the Pillars
and the Chapiters that did adorn the tops of them: the compass or circumference
of each Pillar was twelve cubits, the diameter four: therefore some read the
19th ver. of 1 King. cap. 7. thus; And the Chapiters which were on the head of
the Pillars of Lilly-work, were in the Porch four cubits, that is, did
comprehend in their diameter so much as would take up four cubits in the floor
of the Porch. Moreover, these Pillars were hollow in the middle, but they were
four fingers thick of solid metal; the top of the Pillars was adorned with
Lilly-work.

There were also on the top of these Pillars two Chapiters, as we translate it,
as much as to say, heads, because they were on the tops or heads of the
Pillars. The word is Kothereth Coronamentum; so Arias Montanus and fecit duo
Coronamenta, duo Capitella, as Pagnin. two Coronets: it is from the verb Kitter
cinxit, circumdedit instar Coronae: it is the same word that is used in Prove.
14.18. but the prudent are crowned with knowledge; which is derived from
Kether, Diadema, Corona. These Chapiters or Coronets were five cubits in
height, and but four cubits diameter; and therefore in an oval form: and so the
end of the Chapter rested in the hole which was at the top of the Pillar.
These Coronets were curiously adorned with nets of Chequer-work, and wreaths of
Chain-work, a very artificial work, and with two rows of Pomegranates upon each
Coronet, four hundred goodly Pomegranates in all, which were put upon chains in
two rows; though but ninety six did appear upon a chain, the rest being hid by
the Wall. This Coronet or Chapter upon the top of the Pillar was a curious and
comely Crown upon the head of it: or (as some note) the Chapter was like two
Crowns joined together.

The Pillar on the right side, he called Jachin, or rather Jakin, which
signifies, he, that is, the Lord will establish. Jakin is the conjugation
Hiphil, from the verb Koun, stabilivit, firmavit.

The other Pillar on the left hand, he called Bo-yaz, in him is power, from Bo
in it, or in him, and Yaz strong or strength, from the verb Yazaz roboravit.

Thus you see the literal or historical part of this Type, these two Pillars of
the Temple, Jakin and Bo-yaz.

Now for the Significations.

Certainly these things are not without a mystery, not without a meaning: for
these Pillars were extraordinary, and very remarkable in four respects.

1. In their height, being eighteen cubits, that is, seven and twenty foot of
our measure.

2. In their thickness and compass, being twelve Cubits, that is, eighteen foot
in the circle round about.

3. In their curious and admirable Ornaments; the Lillies on the upper end of
the Pillars, and the Coronets or Chapiters upon the tops of them, with the
curious chains, and nets, and rows of Pomegranates round about these Crowns.

4. In their use; which was not only for Ornament, but as it were to support
the Temple, as Pillars do support an House: not that they did support or bear
it up properly, as if they had been placed in the material Building, no more
than the twelve Brazen Oxen did indeed carry the molten Sea to the four
quarters of the world, 2 Chronicles. 4.4. but only as in an emblem or figure, as
Abraham received Isaac in a figure, Heb. 11.19. so here: For the Temple had no
Pillars in it, for the Beams of the Roof rested upon the Walls, as you have
formerly heard, and not upon these Pillars: but they were an emblem or figure
of support.

Now the Temple is the Church of God; and we may apply this Type three ways.

1. To God and Christ. 2. To the Church. 3. To particular Saints.
1. As to God and Christ. These Pillars speak the support of the Church of God,
by the purpose of his Will, and by his almighty Power. Our Faith stands upon
these two Pillars; these two do support the Church, and the Churches Faith.

1. The faithful purpose of God, and good pleasure of his Will. Jakin he will
establish, here is the resolved purpose of his Will and Love. Heb. 10.23. He is
faithful who has promised. This includes, (1.) his Purpose, (2.) his purpose
of Love, (3.) his Promise, (4.) his unchangable Faithfulness in all.

Thou say, I am unworthy. True, but if the Lord will save, and will have
mercy, who can resist his Will? his purpose is unchangeable and immovable as
Brass; he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy.

2. The Power of Christ, his almighty Power; this is the other Pillar, Bo-yas,
in him is power -- 1 Pet. 1.5. kept by the power of God through Faith unto
Salvation.

Thou say, alas! I am weak, I can do nothing. But therefore depend, and rest,
and stay thy self upon this almighty Power, which is able to do above what we
are able to ask or think: as Abraham, Romans 4.20, 21. who was strong in Faith,
being persuaded that he was able to perform what he had promised.

This is of special use in difficulties, when difficulties and impossibilities
do appear. Can the Lord pardon such sins, heal such backslidings? Yes; in him
is Power. Take both these together: Love and good will withour Power is but
lame to help us: Power without Love and good will is but deaf to hear us; but
both put together is a support firm enough, and safe enough for Faith to rest
upon; yea, if thou doubt of the one, improve the other, Matthew. 8.2. if thou will thou can: here be both these Pillars; but he could not lean upon the
one, he doubted of Gods Will; but therefore he relies upon the other, thou
can, and Christ accepts this Faith of his; and therefore says, ver. 3. I
will, be thou clean: so do thou, lean and rest upon both these Pillars, yea
upon either of both and thou art safe enough. If thou art not assured of his
purpose; yet then rest and stay thy self upon his Power.

2. Consider them in reference to the whole Church; here is shadowed forth the
impregnable safety of the Church: The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it, Matthew. 16.18.

3. Particular Saints are compared to Pillars in the House of God, Rev. 3.12.
especially Ministers, Gal. 2.9 -- Jer. 1.^ I will make thee an Iron Pillar, and
Wall of Brass; therefore it is in vain to oppose them and contend with them.

There be two properties of a good Pillar, it must be strait and strong. It is
a sad thing when they that should be Pillars in the House of God are warping,
and leaning, and bending this way and that way, when they should stand upright
and steady.

And there were two Coronets upon the tops of these Pillars so they that
persevere to the end shall receive the Crown of life 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.

These Pillars were broken in pieces, and carried away to Babylon, but living
Pillars in the spiritual Temple shall go out no more, Rev. 3.12. but abide in
the house for ever, Joh. 8.35. A true Believer is (as one says) Monumentum
aere perennius, more durable then Pillars of Brass. Would you be assured of the
Crown of Glory? Is there this rectitude and straitness, this strength and
firmness in the ways of God? thou art then a Pillar in the House of God, and
shall go no more out.

THE GOSPEL of the BRAZEN ALTAR.
2 Chronicles. 4.1. Moreover he made an Altar of Brass, twenty cubits the length
thereof, and twenty cubits the breadth thereof, and ten cubits the height
thereof.


THe Vessels of the Temple (beloved) we are upon. They may be referred to two
sorts, either sub dio, or sub tecto; either without doors or within, either in
the Courts, or in the Temple: those without doors were of Brass, those within
were of Gold.

Of the former sort, there was the Altar of Burnt-offering, the molten Sea, and
the ten Lavers; as also the two Pillars Jachin and Boyas, which were of Brass,
and placed either in or by the Porch.

We are now to speak (as the Lord shall enable us) concerning the Altar of
Burnt-offering: concerning which we may observe this doctrinal Proposition out
of the Text, as the foundation of our Discourse, viz.

Doctr. That Solomon by Gods appointment made in the Temple a Brazen Altar for
Burnt-offering.

The first express mention we have of Altars in the Scripture is in Noah's time,
after the Flood, Genesis 8.20. and Noah builded an Altar unto the Lord, and took
of every clean Beast, and of every clean Fowl, and offered Burnt-offerings on
that Altar. Concerning Offerings, we read before in Genesis 4.3, 4, how Cain and
Abel brought their Offerings unto the Lord. Whether Altars were as ancient as
Sacrifices, or whether the Lord afterward added them as a further improvement
of his Worship, and a further help to the Faith of his people, I shall not here
dispute.

The name in Hebrew is Mizbeach, quasi Sacrificatorium, from Zebach
Sacrificium, from the Sacrifices offered thereupon: and so in Greek, (...),
from (...) Sacrificium. There is another Hebrew word for it, Bamah excelsum,
from their ascending up to it, from whence the Greek (...): so the Latin altar
is derived ab alto; because their Altars were built on high above the earth,
but the Hebrew Bamah is more, usually applied to the idolatrous Altars: Ara
Idolorum Buxtorf. we commonly translate it high places.

And here I must observe the same method as in other things, first to open the
Type and then the Antitype, first the History of the Altar, and then the
Mystery of it: for the right understanding of the Type, makes way for the
better understanding of the thing typified.

Now then as to this great Type, the Altar of Burnt-offering, we may consider
four things.

1. The Materials of it, they made Altars of Earth upon present occasions;
Moses his Altar was of Shittim-wood, but overlaid with Brass, Exodus 27.1, 2.
This was to continue for the constant use and service of the Tabernacle.

But how then came it to pass that the Wood was not burnt and set on fire, by
the continual fire that was upon the Altar?

It is answered unto this by some, That the Fire might be kept in the Grate at
a due distance from the Wood. And some answer further, that there was an
especial Providence in it. God as he sent down Fire from Heaven upon the Altar:
so he did limit and overruled the operation of it at his pleasure. Solomon's
Altar was of Brass, within either of Earth or Stone, but not of hewn Stones,
that being expressly forbidden, Exodus 20.24, 25.

In that it was of Brass.

This was for strength and durablenss, to bear the Fire that was continually
burning upon it, and so to represent the strength of Christ to endure the Wrath
of God, without being burnt up and consumed, and overcome by it. For Brass is
often mentioned to signify strength, Job 40.18. His Bones are as strong pieces
of Brass. Is my Strength of Stones, or my Flesh of Brass? Job 6.12. Am I not a
poor, weak, frail creature? So Zach. 6.1. the mountains of Brass signify Gods
irresistible Purpose and Decree: so likewise Christ is represented under that
appearance, Ezekiel. 40.3. a man whose appearance was as the appearance of Brass:
and Rev. 1.15. his Feet like unto fine Brass, as if they burned in a furnace.

These Representations have the like mystery of strength and invincibleness.

[That it was of unhewed Stones:] This instructs us, that humane polishments do
not perfect, but corrupt the Worship of God; that which carnal Wisdom thinks
does adorn, does indeed pollute; there be no perfect additions. We must observe
the plainness and simplicity of Institution.

2. As to the figure and dimensions of it; it was four square, with four Horns
upon the four corners of it.

Moses his Altar was five cubits in length, and five in breadth, and three
cubits high: But Solomon's was twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in
breadth, and ten cubits high; compare Exodus 27.1, 2. with the Text, 2 Chronicles.
4.1.

The apiece form (says Ainsworth on Exodus 27.1.) signifies firmness and
stability: therefore the heavenly Jerusalem is apiece, Rev. 21.16. so was
the figure of it, Ezekiel. 48.20. so was the Oracle, or most holy place in the
Temple and Tabernacle too, 2 Chronicles. 3.8.

The height of Solomon's Altar was too high for any Priest to reach; yet they
might not go up by steps to it, Exodus 20.26. therefore it is thought there was
an easy ascent by a declivity on the South side, the ground rising by little
and little.

The largeness of Solomon's Altar beyond that of the Tabernacle might intimate
the enlargement of the Church, and great increase of the Worshippers and
Worship of God under the Gospel, which is the mystery of those great
inlargements in Ezekiels visionary Temple beyond Solomon's, as Solomon's went
beyond Moses his Tabernacle.

3. The situation of the Altar was sub dio, in the open air, that so the nidor
and fuligo, the scent and smoke of the Sacrifices might be the less offensive.

Moreover it stood in the Priests Court, before the Porch of the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 8.12. the Altar of the Lord which he had built before the Porch -- Joel.
2.17. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord weep between the Porch and the
Altar.

4. The use of it was to offer Sacrifice upon, Exodus 20 24. An Altar of Earth
shall thou make unto me, and shall sacrifice thereon thy Burnt-offerings and
thy Peace Offerings -- 2 Chronicles. 8.12. then Solomon offered Burnt-offerings unto
the Lord, on the Altar of the Lord which he had built before the Porch.

The Altar did two things.

1. It supported the Sacrifice; for the Sacrifice was laid upon it.

2. It sanctified the Sacrifice, and made it holy and acceptable to the Lord.
The Altar it self was first consecrated with holy Oil, Numb. 7.1. and then it
did consecrate and sanctify other things, Exodus 29.37. whatsoever touches the
Altar shall be holy: Therefore it is said, the Altar shall be holiness of
holinesses, or most holy, Exodus 40.10.

But now here comes in a Question; How it came that the Fire of the Altar was
not sometimes put out by the showers of Rain? and how it could suffice for the
consuming so many Sacrifices, and that the Sacrifices did not fill the Court
with soot and smoke, and flies and putrefaction from the offal and ordure of so
many Beasts there slain? Slaughter-houses are very noysom and offensive,
especially in Summertime.

I meet with a twofold answer unto this.

1. The Fire of the Altar was no ordinary and culinary Fire, but celestial and
divine: and as it came down from Heaven, 2 Chronicles. 7.1. and was so far from
being quenchable by Rain or Water, that it would presently lick it up, as it
did, 1 Kings 18.38. when the Trench was filled with twelve barrels of Water: so
it left not such a sooty feculency behind it as common Fire does. We see in
Lightening, how quickly and in an instant, it consumes any thing that resists
it. The Altar of the Lord is called Ariel. Isai 29.1. that is, the Lion of God,
and a very devouring Lion it was. Fuller Pisgah-sight, p. 394.

2. There seems to have been something of a peculiar Providence in it. The
Heathen Temples were such stinking places, and so infested with swarms of Flies
that came to feed upon their Sacrifices, that the Jews were wont in an holy
scorn to call the Devil Baal-zebub: it is the name of the Idol at Ekron, 2
Kings 1.2 and Mark 3.22. and Luke 11.15. as much as to say, Dominus muscarum,
the God of flies not able to drive away a fly.

The Ekronites it is thought called their Idol, Bayal zebachim, the Lord of
Sacrifices. Some Heathen Writers speak of Temples built Jovi (...) muscarum
abactori, Greg. Greg. Lexic. sanct. Tit. 166.
to Jupiter the Fly-chaser.

But let this suffice for the literal explication of this great Type, the Altar
of Burnt-offering.

Now for the mystery and spiritual signification of it.

There has been a very unhappy mistake as to this in some of the Ancients,
commonly called Fathers, whose darkness in this and other points did make way
for Popery in after times. They have applied the Altar to the wooden Cross on
which Christ was crucified; they say, Christ suffered in ara crucis, upon the
Altar of his Cross, but this is a weak and low interpretation, yea indeed a
dangerous mis-interpretation of this great Type.

1. For first, the Cross of Wood was nothing else but the instrument of man's
cruelty against the Lord Jesus Christ: it has no spiritual use nor virtue in
it, it is no Gospel-mystery; therefore no need it should be typified by so
great a Type. If there be any thing of old that may any way relate to it, it
must be some small circumstance of some Tie, but not such a great and principal
a Type as the Altar.

2. The Altar is greater than the Gist, Matthew. 23.19. but the wooden Cross is
not greater or more excellent than the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he
gave for us; nor does it sanctify or make Jesus Christ accepted.

Therefore the wooden Cross is not the Altar.

There has been also another weak and impertinent application of it, which is
to be found in some books of Devotion, viz. the Altar of our Hearts. But
wherein the Heart is like an Altar I cannot tell. The same argument confutes
this also; It is not thy Heart that sanctifies thee, or thy Services.

But then, what is the Altar?

The Answer is, that the Altar is Christ himself: so the Holy Ghost himself
expounds it, Heb. 13.10.

Quest. But how does the Altar represent Christ?

Answer. In two respects; in regard of his Deity, and Priestly Office.

1. It is Christ in regard of his Divine nature.

Reas. 1. Because his Humane nature was the Sacrifice, therefore his Deity is
the Altar: for in offering Sacrifice there must be both a Sacrifice and an
Altar. And so in Christ there are two natures, his Deity and Humanity, whereof
the Humane nature being the Sacrifice that was slain and offered for us, it
remains that his other nature was the Altar.

Reas. 2. Because it is the Altar that sanctifies the Gift. Matthew. 23.19. Exodus
29.37. But it was the Deity of Christ that gave that infinite virtue and value
to his sufferings. It was his Deity that sanctified his Humane nature, to be
such an acceptable Sacrifice to the Lord.

Reas. 3. Because the Altar did support and bear up the Sacrifice. But it was
his Divine nature that did support his Humane nature in those unutterable
Sufferings, Heb. 9.14. through the eternal Spirit he offered up himself unto
God. What did that piece of Wood do? It did but cruciate and torture his
blessed Body, it did not bear up his Spirit. It is true, that Tree did lift up
his Body from the earth; but it was another manner of support that was
necessary to our Salvation.

2. The Altar typifies Christ in regard of his Priestly Office.

You know he has a threefold Office; he is a Prophet, Priest and King. The
Altar looks chiefly at his Priestly Office and the concernments of that; for as
a Priest he offered Sacrifice, and it is the Altar that does support and
sanctify the Sacrifice. Both the Natures of Christ have an influence into all
his Offices, and so into his Priestly, by which he made satisfaction for our
sins.

To open it a little more particularly, all the concernments of the Altar are
full of mystery and teaching. I shall instance in seven particulars about it,
wherein you may see something of Christ, and of the Gospel.

1. There was but one Altar; the Lord forbad all others, though intended to
himself, 2 Kings 18.22. so there is but one Mediator between God and men, the
Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5.

The Papists have other Mediators, Saints and Angels, etc. this is to have many
Altars: whereas the Lord accepts none but this, nor no Sacrifice but what is
offered upon this Altar.

2. The Altar had four Horns upon the four corners of it; they are called Horns
because they were made like Horns upwards, but bending toward the top, Ezekiel.
43.15. upward shall be the four Horns. The use of them was not only for
Ornament, but to keep things from falling off the Altar, and to bind the
Sacrifice to them when they were to slay it, as Psalm. 118.27.

Horns is an emblem of power, Jer. 48.25. the Horn of Moab is cut off, that is,
his strength and power, says your Marginal note: Lam. 2.3. he has cut off in
his fierce anger all the Horn of Israel. 1 Samuel 2.1. Mine Horn is exalted in
the Lord, it is applied to God, Hab. 3.4. he had Horns coming out of his hand,
and there was the hiding of his power.

These four Horns of the Altar signified the Power and Glory of Christ's
Priesthood for the Salvation of his Church gathered together from the four
corners of the earth. Ainsw. in Exodus 27.1.

If the Altar be his Deity, the Horns of this Altar is the Power of his Deity,
the Horns of an almighty Power. Fly for refuge thither, and thou art safe
enough. Joab fled to the Horns of the Altar, but he was plucked from thence and
slain, 1 Kings 2.31. according to the Law, Exodus 21.14. But he that flies to
Christ and hangs upon the Horns of this Altar shall never be plucked thence, he
that comes to me I will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6.37.

3. The Altar was anointed, and so sanctified unto its Office, Numb. 7.1. Exodus
40.9. this is the Sanctification or Inauguration of our Lord Jesus Christ into
his Office; he was anointed with the Spirit above measure, not only the Graces
thereof in his Humane nature, but that glorious Person himself goes forth by
commission from the Father and the Son, as the Son by commission from the
Father, to reconcile and save sinners.

4. There were diverse Vessels of the Altar belonging to it, for the use and
service of it, Numb. 4.14. of Brass, 1 Kings 7.47. of Gold, 1 Chronicles. 28.17.
also pure Gold for the Flesh-hooks.

Of which, they being necessary instruments for the work of sacrificing, we
need not seek a particular mystery and signification in every Vessel, only in
general some apply them to the Ordinances of the Gospel, the means of Grace
which do attend upon the Altar, upon the Service of Jesus Christ in his Church.

As we have an Altar under the Gospel, so we have Vessels belonging to this
Ordinance, Gospel Ordinances, whereof there is great use. As the Priests could
not sacrifice and officiate about the Altar without Knives, and Flesh-hooks,
and Shovels, etc. so we cannot have communion with Christ without means and
Ordinances.

5. The Altar was furnished with Fire from Heaven, which was to be kept always
burning.

Now what is the mystery of this sacred Fire.

1. The Wrath of God against Sin; He is a consuming Fire, an everlasting
burning against sin and sinners, Heb. 12. ult. Isai. 33.16.

2. The Spirit of God is compared to Fire, Matthew. 3.11. He shall baptize you
with the holy Ghost, and with Fire. Isai. 4.4. When he shall have purged the
Blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of Judgment, and by the
spirit of burning.

And it is a sacred Fire that never goes out. We should be careful to keep this
Fire burning, take heed of grieving, of quenching the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.

3. The Word and Ordinances are like unto Fire, Jer. 23.29. they will burn up
and consume what opposes them, Rev, 11.5. its said of the two Witnesses, that
Fire goes out of their mouths, that is, the Word of God denouncing the Wrath of
God: fiery indignation devours the adversaries, Heb. 10.27.

4. We read of fiery trials and afflictions, Luke 12.49. I am come to send fire
on the earth. 1 Pet. 4.12. Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial; the
fiery trial of Persecution by open enemies publicly opposing, the fiery trial
of Contention by false brethren secretly undermining.

6. The Fire of the Altar came from Heaven, Lev. 9.24. 2 Chronic. 7.1. strange
Fire is forbidden, Lev. 10.1.

1. Humane inventions which he had not commanded them, Lev. 10.1.

2. Carnal Wrath and Passion; this is not the Fire of the Altar, but strange
Fire, James 3.17. Wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, etc. the
wrath of man accomplishes not the Righteousness of God, James 1.20.

7. The use of the Altar in reference to the Sacrifice was to support and
sanctify it: the Altar did two things, both which Faith is to eye and look
unto both as done in Christ, and to be done in us.

1. To support the Sacrifice and bear it up: so Christ was born up by the power
of his Deity.

2. To make it acceptable: so Christ's Sufferings are so infinitely precious and
acceptable with the Lord, through the glory and excellency of his Person; there
is nothing else will bear up a Soul under sense of Guilt but this, to consider
who it was that died and suffered for us. It was the Son of God. And the reason
of many fears and tremblings of unbelief is, because the Soul looks at the
Sacrifice without the Altar, looks at the Death of Christ, but considers not
the Altar, the Deity that sanctifies the Gift.

As to us, we need both support and acceptance; eye both these in Christ, eye
Christ for them to your own Souls.

1. Support, when the heart is ready to sink, and to be overwhelmed with the
difficulties that do occur, thou art weak, but here is strength.

2. Acceptance, Isai. 56.7. their Burnt-offerings and their Sacrifices shall be
accepted upon mine Altar: thou art unworthy, but leave thy Gift upon the Altar,
and it shall be accepted: whatsoever touches the Altar shall be holy.

Use 1. See the unlawfulness, yea the abominableness of material Altars and
Altar-worship under the New Testament. For the Altar was a Type of Jesus Christ
in his Deity and Priesthood, therefore Altars are ceased. For is not Jesus
Christ the Son of God? or has God another Son to dye for us? or do we look for
another Gospel that we must build Altars to typifie the mysteries thereof?
Because it lies directly in my way, and it is one of the worst and grossest of
the Superstitions and Corruptions of Worship in our times, I may not well pass
it by: consider but two things here.

1. The Lords Table is not an Altar, ought not to be so called or so accounted.
2. The many other evils that are involved in this and go along with it.
1. The Communion Table is not an Altar, and ought not to be so called nor so
accounted. Take three arguments for the proof of this.

Reas. 1. Because the Scripture calls it a Table, but not an Altar; and we must
speak of God and of his Ordinances, as God himself does in his word. So the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.21. ye cannot be partaker of the Lords Table, and of the
Table of Devils: so Christ, Luk 22.21. the hand of him that betrayeth me is
with me on the Table.

Reas. 2. An Altar implies a Sacrifice and sacrificing Priests; for Priests,
Altar and Sacrifice are relatives, and have a mutual and inseparable connection
and dependence upon one another. But the Lords Supper is not a Sacrifice; nor
the Ministers of the Gospel Priests: therefore the Lords Table is not an Altar.
The use of an Altar is to offer Sacrifice upon: but when we come to the Lords
Supper, do we come to Sacrifice Christ again, and to crucify the Son of God
afresh? No, but we come to celebrate the memory of his Death, who dyed once for
all, Heb. 10.10. Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, Heb, 9.28.
and 7.27.

To talk of a commemorative Sacrifice is mere nonsense, and a contradiction:
for as the Picture of a man is no man: so the commemoration of a Sacrifice, is
in truth no Sacrifice.

If it were a Sacrifice offered upon the Table as an Altar, they should make
four Horns upon the four corners of the Table, and they should make a Grate for
the Fire, and they should put Fire to their Altars to burn the Sacrifice, even
the Bread and Wine.

Reas. 3. If the Communion Table were an Altar, then it should be greater and
better then the Sacramental Bread and Wine, then the Lords Supper it self, and
a means to consecrate them: for the Altar sanctifies all the Gifts and
Sacrifices that are offered upon it, and is greater then the Gift, Matthew.
23.18, 19. Hence it is said, the Altar shall be holiness of Holinesses, or most
holy, Exodus 40.10.

But the Table is not greater then the Lords Supper.

Therefore the Table is not an Altar.

It is true, some of the Ancients have called it an Altar, but unscripturally
and improperly, as they did also use other extravagant and wanton Metaphors,
calling it Solium Christi, the Throne of Christ; whereas Christ is not
represented on the Table in his Majesty, as upon a Throne; but in his lowest
humility and deepest abasement, as broken, crucified, etc.

These expressions of the Fathers,

1. They were unscriptural, the Scripture does not use such language, nor speak
of the Communion Table in such a strain.

2. They have done much hurt in the Church, unawares to those good men, and
have been inlets and occasions of much Superstition.

3. When they used this phrase of speech, the Sacrifice of the Mass, and
Priests, and much other Idolatrous Popish trash was not known nor heard of in
the world, neither were there any to be scandalized with those phrases, and to
use them to such ill ends and purposes, as the Papists and other superstitious
persons have improved them: therefore such language is worse now then it was
then.

4. Others of the Fathers have testified against Altars, even in the primitive
times; O igen contra Gelsum, l. 4.
as Origin, who lived about two hundred years after Christ; Objicit nobis
Celsus quod non habemus Imagines, aut Aras, aut Templa. He (that is Celsus)
charge the Christian Religion with this, that we have neither Images, nor
Altars, nor Temples. Arnob. l. 6. apud Quenchcole, p. 71, 72.
In answer to this Origin does not deny the Charge, but confesses the matter
of fact to be true, and defends it from the very fundamental grounds of
Religion: and so does Arnobius and others.

2. Consider the many other evils that follow and flow from this, and go along
with it: from this blind conceit that the Lords Table is an Altar, hence follows

1. Calling it an high Altar, and making steps to go up unto it, which is the
very same thing with those high places so often condemned in the Scripture,
which were indeed Altars situated in high places, or, as our men phrase it,
high Altars.

2. The placing these high Altars (as they call them) close to the wall, like
dressers or side-tables; this is a piece of ignorant Devotion and Superstition:
for the situation of Altars was ever such as that they might be compassed round
about. The Prophet Elijah made a trench round about the Altar, 1 Kings 18.32,
35. I will wash mine hands in innocence; so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord,
Psalm. 26.6. and, alluding to this situation of Altars, the Lord threatens,
Ezekiel. 6.4, 5. I will scatter your Bones round about your Altars.

So the Heathens had a custom (as some Antiquaries observe) ut sacrificantes
Aras circum currerent -- Mistique Altaria circum, Alex. ab Alex. Genial Dier.
l. 4. cap. 17. fol. 226. 227.
Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 4.

Therefore how it came into the heads of our late Innovators to think that
setting a Table with one side close to the Wall like a Dresser, is to set it
Altar-wise, I must confess, I have often wondered, and I think the best account
that can be given of it, is the profound ignorance of the Prelates and Papists.

3. The setting their Altars at the East end of the Church is another piece of
superstitious Devotion; this is a symbolizing with those old Idolaters, Ezekiel.
8.16. they worshipped the Sun with their faces toward the East. And it is a
symbolizing also with the Papists, whose Altars, versus Orientem spectant
(says Hospinian de

Having spoken of the Altar of Burnt-offering, that which comes next to be
considered, is the Molten Sea and Lavers, which I put together, because they
were the same for use and mystical signification.

And as in former Types, so in this, I shall first open to you the Type it self
as to the Letter and History of it, and then the Mystery and Spiritual
signification, which is that I chiefly aim at; only something is needful to be
spoken of the former in order unto this.

1. First then for the Type it self, this Sea of Brass. You may see the History
of it in these particulars.

1. The first Institution of it was by God to Moses, in Exodus 30.18. where
there is only one Laver appointed. But all things being enlarged in the Temple,
Solomon made a molten Sea, of a very large and vast capacity, and ten Lavers
beside, 1 Kings 7.23. the molten Sea is described to ver. 27. and the ten
Lavers from ver. 27. to ver. 40. so that the Holy Ghost imploys no less then
seventeen verses in the description of this famous Utensil, the molten Sea and
Lavers; beside 2 Chronicles. 4. ver. 2. to ver. 7. which you may read your selves.
And I note it, that you may see it is a thing of some weight and moment which
the Holy Ghost does so insist upon. Carnal thoughts are apt to despise these
portions of Scripture, and to say, there is little in them: but this is from
the darkness of our minds, and the pride of carnal reason.

2. The name by which it was called Kijor a Laver, and (...) a washing vessel;
and the great one was called a Sea, from that elegancy of the Hebrew tongue
which calls any large collection of Waters a Sea, Genesis 1.10. the gathering
together of Waters he called Sea. Some have resembled this molten Sea in the
Temple to the Caspian Sea, which Geographers speak of, and not unfitly, because
of its circular figure and entireness within it self.

3. The matter whereof it was made was Brass, Exodus 38.8. And he made the Laver
of Brass, and the foot of it of Brass, of the Looking-glasses of the Women
assembling, which assemble at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.
For the Invention of Glass properly so called, being not so ancient as those
times, they made use of bright polished Brass for reflection to see their
Faces. Solomon's molten Sea likewise and his ten Lavers were of the same metal,
to wit, bright polished Brass: so that in this Vessel the Priests might see
their spots, whether they had washed themselves clean or not.

4. The figure and dimensions of them.

As to the Laver of the Tabernacle, it is not expressed: but it was but small,
because it was portable: but the molten Sea of the Temple was larger, the
diameter of it was ten cubits, and the circumference thirty, 1 Kings 7.23.
which is not set down in exact Geometrical proportion, which was one and thirty
cubits and an half: for the Rule in Geomety is Peripheria est tripla diametri
and fere sesquiseptima. But the nearest round number is expressed instead of
the precise number, as is usual in Scripture. The capacity of it was so large,
that it contained two thousand Baths, 1 Kings 7.26. but in 2 Chronicles 4.5. it is
said, it contained three thousand Baths, which are thus reconciled; that two
thousand was ordinarily put thereinto, but if filled up to the brim, it might
contain three thousand. A Bath contained about eight gallons; by which account
four Baths make a barrel: so as this Sea could contain seven hundred and fifty
barrels of Water, and five hundred barrels full were ordinarily put into it,
Engl. Annot. on 1 Kings 7.26. the ten Lavers did contain forty Baths a piece.

5. They had several parts belonging to them, some for ornament, and some for
necessary use: as those rows of Knops, as 1 Kings 7.24. or pictures of Oxen, 2 Chronicles. 4.3. in two rows round about the brim of the molten Sea, with the
Flowers of Lillies. And the Lavers had their Borders, Ledges, Undersetters,
etc. but that which is most remarkable is the Basis, or Foot, upon which they
stood, which is expressly and often mentioned by the Holy Ghost, and seems to
have something of special emphasis put upon it.

For of the Laver of the Tabernacle it is noted, that it had a Basis or a Foot
of Brass, and this Foot is mentioned expressly as often as the Laver is mentioned,
which is five times in that Book of Exodus; the Lavers and his Foot, Exodus
30.18. and 31.9. and 35.16. and 39.39. and 40.11. and Levit. 8.11.

Of the molten Sea in the Temple it is noted, that it stood upon twelve Oxen:
these Oxen had their hinder parts inward under the Sea; but their faces looking
toward all the four quarters of the world; three toward the North, and three
toward the West, and three toward the South, and three toward the East, as 2 Chronicles. 4.4.

The ten Lavers of the Temple stood upon wheels, that so they might be removed
to any place of the Court, as occasion might require; each Laver had four
wheels.

6. The place where they stood.

As to the Laver of the Tabernacle, it is said to have stood between the
Tabernacle and the Altar, Exodus 30.18. but as to the place of the molten Sea,
thus much is clear in general; that it stood in the East part of the Court,
this is certain; but some place it in the North-east corner: so our Translators
read 1 Kings 7.39. and he set the Sea on the right side of the House eastward
over against the South, Mimmoul-negeb; but others read it not over against the
South, but toward the South, versus austrum, that is, in the South-east corner
of the Priests Court, which Ezekiels Vision seems to countenance, Ezekiel. 47.1.
the Waters came down from under the right side of the house, at the South side
of the Altar.

The Lavers were placed five on one side, and five on the other side of the
Court.

7. The use of these famous Utensils was to wash thereat, from whence called
Lavers or Lavatories. Of the Laver of the Tabernacle it is said, Aaron and his
Sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat, Exodus 30.19. It was
anointed and sanctified to this use, Lev. 8.11. Moses took the anointing Oil,
and he anointed the Tabernacle, and the Altar, and the Laver and his Foot to
sanctify them.

The molten Sea in the Temple was for the Priests to wash in, the Lavers for
the Sacrifices, 2 Chronicles. 4.6. such things as they offered for the
Burnt-offering, they washed in them, but the Sea was for the Priests to wash in.

But how did the Priests wash in it?

Not that they did go with their whole bodies into it; for neither did the Law
require them so to do, neither indeed could they; for the molten Sea was so
deep, that it would have drowned them. But the Text expresses it thus, Exodus
30.19. for Aaron and his Sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat:
the Holy Ghost does not say, they shall wash their whole bodies therein, but
only their hands and their feet thereat. And it is cleerer and more significant
in the Hebrew Mimmenu ex illa: therefore Ainsworth renders it therefrom, and
his Note is this, to wit, in the Water that is taken out of the Laver into some
vessel of the Sanctuary. They took Water out of it by Cocks, or Pipes, as they
had occasion. Vid. Engl. Annot.

Some think passages were made through the heads of the Oxen, to let the Water
out of the Sea.

Quest. But whence had they this Water that was in the molten Sea?

Answ. It was the Office of the Gibeonites to provide it, and to attend upon
all the servile work of the Temple. Jos. 9.23, 27. And Joshuah gave them that
day to be Hewers of Wood and Drawers of Water for the Congregation, and for the
Altar of the Lord, (that is for the Priests and Sacrifices of the Altar) even
unto this day, in the place which he should choose. And ver. 23. Drawers of
Water for the House of my God. Hence they came in after times to be called
Nethinims, Nehem. 10.28. Ezra 8.10. as much as to say, the people that were
given or appointed unto that use.

But whence the Gibeonites did fetch the Water, it is not much material to
inquire about that: they had it either from Wells or Springs near at hand, or
it may be there were some Springs even within the Courts of the Temple, as in
Ezekiels visionary Temple, which one calls a visionary Varnish upon an
historical groundwork. Ezekiel. 47.1.

So much for the History of this Type.

2. Now for the spiritual sense and scope of it.

1. The main thing aimed at in this typical Sea, or confluence of Waters in the
Temple, is our spiritual washing in the Blood of Jesus Christ from sin and from
uncleanness: For it is said, Revel. 1.5. He has loved us, and washed us from
our sins with his own Blood -- 1 John 1.7. the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all sin. Therefore the Saints are presented to John, after
the tribulations and persecutions of Antichrist are come to an end, as being
clothed with white Robes, Revel. 7.9. And how came their Robes to be so white
and clean? see ver. 14. These are they which came out of great tribulation, and
have washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb. Hence
the Holy Ghost does not express it under that phrase of a Sea of Blood, partly
because that Blood and a Sea of Blood is in nature dreadful and horrible, and
looks rather like an emblem of destruction and misery, and partly because the
scope and aim of the Spirit is to describe the Blood of Christ from the
spiritual efficacy of it; which is to make the Soul spiritually white and
clean. Therefore fitly presented under the emblem of a Sea, or a confluence of
spiritual Waters; because as Water washes and cleanses the Body, so does the
Blood of Christ wash and cleanse the Soul; it washes away the guilt of sin:
They have washed their Robes and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb. This
is that Fountain which is set open for the House of David, and for the
inhabitants of Jerusalem to wash in, for sin and for uncleanness, Zach. 13.1.
That great privilege therefore of Justification by the Blood of Christ,
whereby we are justified from the guilt of all our sins, seems to be the thing
primarily and chiefly intended in that molten Sea of old, and in this Sea of
Glass like unto Crystal which was before the Throne.

2. The Scripture speaks also of the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing
of the Holy Ghost; it is the Apostles phrase, Tit. 3.5. there is a spiritual
washing of the Soul in the regenerating work of the Holy Ghost upon the Soul.
As in Justification we are washed from the guilt of sin: so in Regeneration we
are washed from the inherent filth and dominion of it: therefore in Conversion
or Regeneration we are said to be born of Water and of the Spirit, Joh. 3.5.
that is, of the Spirit working and acting like water to wash and cleanse us.

3. There is a Laver of Baptism; for God has instituted such an Ordinance as
washing with Water under the Gospel, Matthew. 28.19. Go teach all Nations,
baptizing them. And as there is this general analogy in the nature of the
thing: so likewise in this circumstance; that as this Sea and Laver was placed
in the Courts of the House of the Lord, and they were to wash therein before
they went about the business and service of the Temple: so Baptism is the
initiating Seal and Ordinance of the New Testament.

4. Here is some shadow likewise of all Gospel Ordinances in general: for look,
as this vessel did contain the Water for the use of the Priests; so do the
Ordinances spiritually contain the Blood of Christ for the use of Believers.
The Laver was made of the molten Looking glasses; and Solomon's of bright Brass,
wherein as they might see their Faces: so in the Ordinances a Believer sees
Christ as in a Glass, which is the difference between the state of Grace and
Glory, 1 Cor. 13.12. for now we see through a Glass darkly, but then face to
face, as the Apostle there expresses it.

5. The Oxen under the molten Sea, are the Ministers of the Gospel, and
especially the twelve Apostles, as the number it self intimates: for there were
twelve Oxen looking toward all the 4 quarters of the world: so the Apostles
and Ministers of the Gospel carry this Crystal Sea of the Blood of Christ, and
the Laver of Regeneration and Baptism throughout the world. Ministers are often
compared in Scripture to Oxen, because of the strength and laboriousness of
that creature: as 1 Corinthians. 9.9. thou shall muzzle the mouth of the Ox that
treads out the Corn. Does God take care for Oxen? says the Apostle there. I
may say so in reference to this Type now in hand. Did God regard the shapes and
pictures of Oxen to be set under this Temple-Sea? or rather did he not set them
there altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt this was done, as the
Apostle there speaks.

The Lavers also had their Bases, with their wheels which served for the
carrying of the water from place to place, and so served for the same use
really, whereof the Oxen were but an emblem. The taking of these away is noted
as an act of audacious wickedness and profaneness in Ahaz; 2 Kings 16.17. And
King Ahaz cut off the borders of the Bases, and removed the Laver from off
them, and took down the Sea from the Brazen Oxen that were under it, and set it
upon a pavement of stones: he having as it seems no understanding at all, nor
no sense in him of the spiritual mystery and signification of these Wheels and
Oxen; nor no fear and reverence of Gods Institution, who did ordain and appoint
them.

6. The use of it being to wash in, both the Priests and Sacrifices were washed
in the water of these typical vessels, the Sea and Lavers, that they dye not,
Exodus 30.19, 20, 21. For Aaron and his Sons shall wash their hands and their
feet thereat, when they go into the Tabernacle of the Congregation they shall
wash with water, that they dye not: or when they come near to the Altar to
minister, to burn Offering made by Fire unto the Lord: so they shall wash their
hands and their feet that they dye not; and it shall be a Statute for ever to
them, even to him and to his Seed throughout their Generations. You see with
what emphasis and earnestness it is required and ingeminated.

This teaches us, that both our persons and our duties and services must be
washed and made clean in the Blood of Jesus Christ, or else we dye eternally,
that they dye not, it is twice repeated; as both the Priests and Sacrifices: so
both our persons and our services must be washed; or else the same disaster
that befell Nadab and Abihu, may befall us, of whom it is said, they dyed before
the Lord, Levit. 10.2. It is a fearful thing for men to come before God in
their sins, in their uncleanness; unwashed and uncleansed from them: They
shall wash, that they dye not.

7. The Laver was never covered, but always open, when the rest of the vessels
were folded up, Ainsworth on Numb. 4. v. 14. has this Note; It seems to be
not without mystery, that Moses mentioning Fire-pans, Flesh-hooks, and other
less things, should quite omit the Laver, which usually is reckoned amongst the
holy things of the Sanctuary, Exodus 35.16. and 38.8. and 39.39. and 40.30. And
as in Melchisedeks History, Genesis 14. he omitted his Parentage, Kindred, Birth
and Death, from which silence in the Story the Apostle reasons, as if he had
been without Parents or Kindred, beginning of days, or end of life, Heb. 7. so
here, if it may be lawful to conjecture the like, the Laver is left uncovered,
and always open to the eyes of the people, that it might be a lively
representation of Gods Grace in Christ, continuing and opened as an ever
springing Fountain, that by the washing of the new Birth, by Repentance and
Faith in the Blood of Christ, we may in all our travels at all times cleanse
our hands and feet, our works and ways, as the Sacrificers did from the Laver,
Exodus 30.19, 20. that albeit the face of the Church is sometimes hid (as the
Tabernacle wrapped up) and the Light of the Word shines not, nor public
Worship performed; yet always Gods Elect having Faith in him may wash and purge
themselves in Christ his Blood unto forgiveness of sins, and Sanctification of
the Spirit and Salvation. It may be the Holy Ghost has some allusion hereto in
that phrase, Zech. 13.1. a Fountain opened for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in
for sin and for uncleanness. Certainly this point of our washing and cleansing
by the Blood of Christ is of that weight and moment, that it was not without
cause said of it by Luther, Hic articulus regnat in cord meo, this Article
reigns in my heart; which he also styled Stantis aut cadentis Ecclesiae
articulum, the point upon which the Church does either stand or fall.

So much for the Explication of this Type.

You see how full it is of Gospel-teaching and instruction.

Nor should it seem strange that one Type should have such a various and
manifold aspect to so many several Truths at once: For it is usual, as you have
formerly seen, and it suits best with the infinite Wisdom of the Holy Ghost,
that one of his teaching signs should teach many things at once, and have many
spiritual lessons and instructions thus included in it.

And now from the Type thus explained we may gather some further light to
confirm and settle the true interpretation of the Text.

What is meant by this Sea of Glass like unto Crystal, I argued before from the
allusion that is carried on all along in the context to the Types of the
Temple: therefore this Crystal Sea in the Text is the same with that molten Sea
of Solomon's Temple, which shadowed forth the Blood of Christ for Justification.

Now to add some further arguments.

A 2d. May be this. Here are other privileges and benefits of Christ mentioned
in the context, which do accompany Justification through his Blood, and go
along with it. As in ver. 5. here are seven Spirits before the Throne, that is
the sanctifying Spirit of Christ. And again, ver. 6. here are four living
creatures. And cap. 5.11. many Angels round about the Throne. Here is the
Ministry, and a Guard of Angels, and the Spirit of Sanctification: therefore it
is not incongruous that the Blood of Christ for Justification should be also
mentioned. And this therefore seems to be intended in this Crystal Sea.

Reas. 3. From the properties and circumstan^es belonging to this Sea in the
description of it, which cannot well be otherwise accommodated, I shall mention
but these two.

1. It is said to be before the Throne: so we are said to be justified before
God; this is one of the blessed effects and manifestations of his Glory in the
Church: so Heb. 12.23, 24. we are said to come unto God the Judge of all, and
to the Blood of sprinkling.

2. It is called a Sea of Glass, like unto Crystal for pureness and excellency.
This is spoken not as by way of diminution, but to set out the Glory of it. All
which agrees well to the justifying Blood of Christ, which is more precious
than Gold or Silver, 1 Pet. 1.18. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as Gold and Silver, from your vain
conversation, but with the precious Blood of Jesus Christ.

Reas. 4. From other parallel places in this Book, where the Sea is spoken of,
where it relates to the Blood of Christ as dispensed in the Ordinances; as in
the second Trumpet, cap. 8.8. The corruption and declension of the visible
Church, when declining unto Popery, is set out by this, that the third part of
the Sea became Blood, the Worship and Ordinances were infected with deadly
corruption. And in the second Vial, cap. 16.3. when the Popish corruptions are
discovered and made to appear, it is said, the Sea became like the Blood of a
dead man, and every living Soul in that Sea dyed. Salvation is not to be had in
the Popish way of Worship, it is deadly unto Souls: instead of conveying Christ
and his Blood to save and quicken, it exhibits nothing but the Blood of a dead
man. And hence also the Saints in the Reformation out of Popery are said to
stand upon this Sea of Glass mingled with fire, c. 15.2. The Protestant
Churches and Reformers have ever insisted upon this; Justification by faith in
the Blood of Christ, and not by Works: so in like manner here in this place;
this Sea of Crystal before the Throne, is the Blood of Christ in the Ordinances
for washing and cleansing.

Reas. 5. There is no other interpretation given by Expositors, save only that
some have taken this Crystal Sea to be the World, and say, they are compared to
a Sea for tempestuousness, to Glass for brittleness, and to Crystal for
transparency. But, beside that these accommodations are more ingenious then
solid and demonstrative, it is impertinent to the scope of the place, thus to
bring in the World here: the whole design of the Chapter being to set forth the
Glory of God in the Church under Temple-images and allusions, as has been
showed.

I shall therefore now conclude with a few words, as by way of use from all
that has been said upon this Temple-Sea.

Use. 1. We have here some intimation of the Preeminence of the Gospel above
the Law, in that they had the figures of these Mysteries, but we have the
things themselves; and in that the Temple-Sea was but of Brass, but this in the
Text is of Glass, and not common Glass, but Crystal. This may intimate
something of preference and preeminence of Gospel-dispensations above the Law.

Use 2. Note here secondly the deadly corruption of the Popish Religion, and
the main difference between a Papist and a Protestant.

The Papists want this Crystal Sea; it is true, they have a Sea, such as it is:
but it is not a Crystal Sea, filled with this pure and precious and
Soul-cleansing Blood of Jesus Christ: but theirs is a Sea of dead Blood. They
use to brag and boast much of the Sea of Rome. Take it for the Seat of their
Bishop, Romana Seeds. It is but the Throne of the Beast, the Seat of
Antichrist. But the Text speaks of a Sea in another sense. And theirs is but a
Mare mortuum; no Fish can live in that Sea, no Soul in that Church, in that
Religion.

But the Protestant Churches, they have sure and firm footing upon this Sea of
Glass, as cap. 15.2. and I saw as it were a Sea of Glass mingled with Fire, and
them that had gotten the victory over the Beast, and over his Image, and over
his Mark, and over the number of his Name, stand on the Sea of Glass, having
the Harps of God.

It is mingled with Fire, the fire of the Spirit of God burning and working
effectually in them.

And there is indeed a fire of Contention also, and Divisions, and Differences
amongst Protestants; but yet here we stand safe, even upon the Righteousness of
Jesus Christ for Justification, as applied to us in his own Ordinances and
Institutions. Here we stand with Harps of God, triumphing and rejoicing in
Christ Jesus.

Use 3. Here is Direction to unclean Souls and defiled Consciences what course
to take, and whither to go for cleansing. Especially when you are to come
before the Throne, to approach into the presence of God in solemn duties: stand
upon this Crystal Sea, wash in this Fountain, make use of Christ in this
respect. You that complain, O this unclean heart of mine! how shall I appear in
the presence of such an holy God? Here is a Sea to wash in. For your your help
therein take these four Rules.

1. See thy own uncleanness and need of cleansing, Isai. 6.5. Woe is me, for I
am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a
people of unclean lips. (There Is not only personal defilements, but defilements
by contagion from others) for mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts.
Before that great and holy God I stand with such an unclean, unholy heart.
Therefore wash or else you dye, Exodus 30.20, 21. Aaron and his Sons shall wash
their hands and their feet, that they dye not.

The reason why so many Professors prove hypocrites, and so dye and perish at
last, is because they rest in a moral way of Profession, they do not live upon
Christ for Righteousness and Life. They avoid some sins it may be, and perform
some duties, but rest there. There is a neglect of Christ and of daily washing
in the Sea of his Blood, and so they dye before the Lord.

2. Know and be convinced, that no other means will do it: for though thou wash
thee with Nitre, and take thee much soap; yet thine iniquity is marked before
me; says the Lord, Jer. 2.22. you may as soon wash a Blackamoor white, as
cleanse a defiled Conscience by duties, and ordinances, and moral endavours
without Christ; yea they will but make thee worse: for the Lord will not bless
them, when carnally trusted to, and rested in without Christ. As suppose a man
were baptized or washed in a puddle, in some dirty muddy pond, he comes out
fouler then he went in: so men by their own endeavors and duties become worse.

3. This Fountain is set open; The Blood of Christ is offered, the Lord gives
thee liberty to wash thy self in this Sea. In that day there shall be a
Fountain opened to the House of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem for
sin and for uncleanness, Zech. 13.1. It is not a Fountain sealed, but set open
in regard of the general offer of the Gospel unto all.

4. Hence all thou have to do for thy spiritual cleansing is only to apply and
receive this Blood, this Soul-cleansing Blood of Jesus Christ which the Lord so
freely offers to the: washing in this spiritual Sea, is nothing else but
believing and exercising Faith in the Blood of Christ.

Do not object and say, Alas! I am defiled and unclean.

I answer. Thou have the more need of washing; the greater thy defilements be,
thou have the more need of Jesus Christ, and of his Blood to cleanse thee, and
wash thee from thy sins.

Use 4. Comfort to Believers, that wash here for sin and for uncleanness, see
Isai. 4.4. when the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the Daughters of
Sion, and shall have purged the Blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof.

Here is a fourfold ground of comfort in this Crystal Sea.

1. Here is enough of it, here is a Sea to wash in, there is Water enough in
the Sea for any man to wash in though never so much defiled: so there is virtue
enough, cleansing enough in the Blood of Jesus Christ. Thou have many sins,
many spots, many defilements upon thee; but here is a Sea to wash in: this Type
of a Sea speaks the plenty of it: here are not a few drops of Soul-cleansing,
justifying Blood; but here is an Ocean of it.

2. It will take out the deepest stains, the foulest spots; though your sins be
as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson,
they shall be as Wool, Isai. 1.18.

The Apostle instanceth in some of the foulest and blackest spots, Adulterers,
Thieves, Drunkards, etc. 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. and such were some of you; but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit
of our God. Your Robes are white, if washed in this Blood, Rev. 7.14. these are
they that have washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb.

Yea, 3. Thou art as clean in respect of Justification, as if those sins had
never been committed. You are perfectly justified, though but imperfectly
sanctified. Therefore justified persons are said to have no more Conscience of
sins, Heb. 10.2. not as though they made no conscience to commit it. No, that
were abominable; but the Conscience is discharged and set free from guilt, and
can look God in the face comfortably and with holy boldness. Men use to say,
when they have not committed such or such an evil, my Conscience is clear: yea,
but Conscience may be clear, though thou have committed it, if washed and
cleansed from it by the Blood of Christ.

4. You should therefore draw nigh with full assurance of Faith, being thus
washed; as Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of
Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our Bodies
washed with pure Water. When you stand upon this cleansing Sea, you should take
the Harps of God into your hand, as Revel 15.2. you should triumph and sing --

Quest. But how may I know that I am indeed washed in this Blood, and accepted
through this Righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Answ. This Sea of Glass is mingled with Fire, cap. 15.2. and here in the words
before the Text; here are seven Lamps of Fire burning before the Throne, which
are the seven Spirits of God, ver. 5. There is a Baptism of Fire, as well as a
Baptism of Water, the meaning is this, that Justification through the Blood of
Christ is ever accompanied with Sanctification by his Spirit: therefore if the
Spirit of God be burning and working in thy heart, fear not; thou art washed in
this Crystal Sea which is before the Throne: if sanctified by the Spirit of
Christ, thou art justified by his Blood.

THE GOSPEL of the GOLDEN CANDLESTICKS in the TEMPLE.
Hebr. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. December. 6. 13, and 20. 1668.
Then verily the first Covenant had also Ordinances of Divine Service, and a
worldly Sanctuary. For there was a Tabernacle made, the first, wherein was the
Candlestick, and the Table, and the Shewbread, which is called the Sanctuary.
And after the second Veil, the Tabernacle, which is called the Holiest of all:
which had the Golden Censer, and the Ark of the Covenant, overlaid round about
with Gold, wherein was the Golden Pot that had Manna, and Aarons Rod that
budded, and the Tables of the Covenant; and over it the Cherubims of Glory
shadowing the Mercyseat; of which we cannot now speak particularly.


OF the two Courts of the House of the Lord, and of the sacred Furniture and
Utensils of the Inner Court we have spoken; viz. the Brazen Altar of
Burnt-offering, signifying our Reconciliation unto God by the Death and Blood
of Christ, the molten Sea and Lavers, signifying our Justification by the
applying or washing in that Blood; and the two Pillars Jachin and Boyas, which
signified our perseverance and Preservation through the Power and Faithfulness
and Love of God, till we be crowned with the Crown of Glory.

We are now to survey the House it self, all the Furniture and Vessels whereof
were of Gold. And as to these I have pitched upon this Text, because it gives
us in a short compass of words the most full and complete enumeration of them,
that does occur to my remembrance any where in Scripture.

We may resolve the words into these five doctrinal Propositions.

1. That the Old Testament had Ordinances of Divine Service, and a worldly
Sanctuary. There was a Religion and a way of Worship ordained by God in those
times as well as now, though that Worship was not so spiritual and evangelical
as is the Worship of the New Testament: They had Ordinances of Worship, and a
Seat of Worship then; but they were carnal Ordinances, and a worldly Sanctuary,
comparatively carnal. But the Ordinances now are spiritual, and the Seat of
Worship spiritual: For then it was the material Temple to which God was pleased
to tie and to annex the public Church-worship and Ordinances of those times:
but now the Seat of Worship is the several Churches and Congregations of his
People. However a Worship, Ordinances of Worship and a Seat of Worship they had.

Obs. 2. There were two parts of that old legal Tabernacle, one called the
Sanctuary, and the other called the Holy of Holies; so it was in the
Tabernacle, and so in the Temple.

After the second Veil] by the first Veil the Apostle intends the Curtains and
Hangings that were hung about the Tabernacle of which you read Exodus 26. In the
Temple there was but one Veil: for instead of these Hangings were the Walls of
the Temple.

Obs. 3. That both these parts of the Tabernacle had their sacred Furniture of
several holy Vessels and Vtensils belonging to them.

Obs. 4. That the sacred Furniture or Vessels belonging to the Sanctuary were
the Golden Candlestick and the Table of Shewbread.

Obs. 5. That the Furniture belonging to the Holy of Holies were the Golden
vessels for the offering of Incense, and the Ark with its appurtenances.

We are now to speak concerning the Furniture of the Sanctuary, of which the
Doctrine is this.

That the sacred Furniture or Vessels belonging to the Sanctuary were the
Golden Candlestick and the Table of Shewbread.

There was also the Golden Altar of Incense, though that did in some respects
belong to the Holy of Holies, of which afterward.

But first of the Golden Candlestick; that this belonged to the Sanctuary, you
may see Levit. 24.3. without the Veil of the Testimony in the Tabernacle of the
Congregation shall the Lamps burn, etc. The history and first institution of
this Type we have in Exodus 25, Moses made but one for the Tabernacle: but
Solomon made ten for the Temple, 1 Kings 7.49. and the Candlesticks of pure
Gold, five on the right side and five on the left before the Oracle. It was a
sacred utensil of much spiritual use, therefore alluded to in that stately
Vision of the Prophet Zechary, cap. 4. and in the Revelation, cap. 5.1. and
cap. 11.14.

There needs not much be said for the History of it. Every Candlestick had a
foot or basis on which it stood, which though not expressly described; yet must
of necessity be supposed. Then the shaft or stalk which arose strait up out of
the foot; and on each side three Branches, adorned with Bowls, Knops and
Flowers. And then lastly the seven Lamps on the top, viz. six on the top of the
six branches, and one on the top of the shaft, and so they were seven in all.

In these Lamps was the Oil, and the Light or Flame, and some matter for the
accension of the Flame, which probably was made of twisted flax: Vide Ainsw. on
Exodus 25. and on Exodus 27.20. and on Lev. 24.1, 2.
to which our Savior seems to allude, when he says, he will not quench the
smoking flax, Matthew. 12.20.

The spiritual mystery aimed at in it, seems to lie in four things.

Here was a typical shadow of the Church, the Ministry, the Word, and the
Spirit.

1. The Golden Candlestick was a Type of the Church. For this, the Lord himself
is his own Interpreter, Rev. 1.20. the mystery of the seven Stars which thou
saw in my right hand, and the seven Golden Candlesticks; the seven Stars are
the Angels of the seven Churches, and the seven Candlesticks are the seven
Churches.

But wherein does the Golden Candlestick represent the Church?

I shall but instance in four things.

1. The end and use of the Church is to give Light, and to hold forth the
Truth, as the Candlestick gave Light, Phil. 2.15. among whom ye shine as Lights
in the world. 1 Timothy 3.15. the Church of God, the Pillar and Ground of the
Truth; the Pillar to hold it forth, and to which it is fastened, as an Edict to
be known of all men.

2. The matter of the Church. As the Candlestick was of Gold: so the matter of
the Church is Saints: therefore Churches are called Golden Candlesticks, not
Brass or Laden Candlesticks, nor gilded Candlesticks, but Golden Candlesticks
-- not ignorant and unfound and scandalous persons, but Saints, visible Saints.

3. The Discipline of the Church. For there were Golden Snuffers belonging to
these Golden Candlesticks, Exodus 25.38. and the Tongs thereof, and the Snuff
dishes thereof shall be of pure Gold: and Exodus 37.23. he made his seven Lamps,
and his Snuffers, and his Snuff-dishes of pure Gold. As these Golden Snuffers
did cut off the Snuff of the Candle: so Discipline and Censures cut off
corruption and corrupt members.

4. The Union and Distinction of Churches. There were several Branches all out
of one Shaft. And seven Lamps: therefore distinct; but all growing upon one
Shaft, and therefore one: so all Churches depend upon the same Christ, upon the
same Head, and they are all guided by the same Rule, the same Word, and
influenced by the same Spirit of Christ. Vid. Answ. in loc.

2. These Golden Candlesticks in the Temple were a Type of the Ministry in the
Church: so Rev. 1.20. the seven Stars that shine in the tops of the
Candlesticks are the Angels of the seven Churches. For as the Candlestick does
support the Lamp and the Light, so does the Church the Ministry: and as the
Lamp or Candle shines in the Candlestick, so does the Ministry in the Church. A
Church without a Minister, is a Candlestick without a Light. John is called a
burning and a shining Light, Joh. 5.37. and so all Ministers are, or ought to
be.

3. These Golden Candlesticks typified also the Light of the Word, with which
the Ministry shines; and the Scripture is compared to a Lamp and a Candle,
Psalm. 119.105. to a Light shining in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19. to Gold, and
fine Gold, Psalm. 19.10. which makes the allusion yet more full; for these were
Golden Candlesticks: so the Word is Gold, yea more precious then Gold.

4. These Golden Candlesticks typified also the Spirit of God: for this the
Text is express -- Rev. 4.5. and there were seven Lamps of Fire burning before
the Throne, which are the seven Spirits of God. That this is meant of the Holy
Ghost, the third person of the Trinity, appears by this; that John prays son
Grace and Peace from the seven Spirits of God, Rev. 1.4. but it had been
impious to have prayed to any created Spirit for them. But why is the Holy
Ghost mystically expressed in such a phrase, the seven Spirits of God? Both in
allusion to the number of Candlesticks, which were seven, in John's Vision, Rev.
1.12. and in allusion to the seven Lamps that were on the top of each
Candlestick in the Temple: and also to signify the variety and perfection his
of Gifts and Graces, and Operations in the Church, and in the hearts of his
people: for seven is a number of perfection.

But you may see the the analogy more fully in four particulars.

1. The Lamps of the Candlestick did shine and give Light: so the Holy Ghost is
a Spirit of Light and Illumination, Ephesians. 1.19.

2. The Lamps were fed with Oil, they shall prepare Oil-Olive beaten for the
Lamps, Exodus 27.20. Now this Oil is the Spirit, Isai. 61.1. Acts. 10.38. bow
God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost: fitly compared to Oil, for
the excellent nature of it: it is of a softening and an healing nature, etc.

3. These sacred Lamps were ever burning and never went out. The Institution
was that they should burn before the Lord continually; so the phrase is, Exodus
27.20. Lev. 24.3. it shall be a Statute for ever throughout your Generations.

It is a question here whether the Lamps in the Temple did burn both night and
day, or only by night.

Some think there was need of them in the day time, because the Windows of the
Temple were fifteen cubits high from the ground: for they were over the
side-chambers. Others think they were lighted only from evening to morning;
because the phrase is, He shall order it from evening to morning, Exodus 27.21.
and when Aaron lights the Lamps at even, Exodus 30.7. And in Abijams Speech, 2 Chronicles. 13.11. the Candlestick of Gold with the Lamps thereof to burn every
evening. But yet it was a perpetual Light in the fit time and season for it.
They had therefore two sorts of sacred and perpetual Fire belonging to the
Temple; the Fire of the Altar, (and this was never to go out at all, of which
you have formerly heard;) and the Fire of the Golden Lamps, which was
perpetual, at least in the season of it, that is, every night: and they were
lighted probably from the Fire that was upon the Altar.

And so it is with the Spirit of God in the hearts of his people. This is a
Lamp that never goes out. The foolish Virgins indeed their Lamps were gone out,
Matthew. 25. but in the wise it was not so. There is no falling from Grace: The
true Believer cannot fall away totally and finally.

4. The dressing and trimming of the Lamps signified those revivings of the
work of the Spirit in the hearts of his people, when it begins, or is in danger
to decay and decline: for the Priests were to light the Lamps, etc. see Lev.
24.2, 3, 4. the same thing also in Exodus 27.20. Hence is that expression, 1 Samuel 3.3. Before the Lamp of God went out in the Temple of the Lord, he had
that appearance of God toward break of day. The Priests were wont, if they
found any Lamps out, or burning dimly, to light them again; they did not leave
it to be always dark. This teaches us both the Lords Goodness and our Duty:
For Christ, Matthew. 12.20. he will not quench the smoking flax: and so we
should (...), as 2 Timothy 1 6* stir up, like a fire that is going out, the Gifts
that are in us.

Also Church Discipline and mortification are taught us hereby, Matthew. 25.7.
then all those Virgins arose and trimmed their Lamps.

Thus you see something of the mystery of these Golden Candlesticks in the
Sanctuary: how the Church, the Ministry, the Word and the Spirit was shadowed
forth thereby.

As to the Use; you see here the rise, and withal the evil of the Popish
Superstition of Lights and Candles in their Churches. This is an Old Testament
Ordinance: it is to dig Moses out of his Grave, and to deny Jesus Christ. Yet
their having Wax-candles is a swerving from the Mosaical Law, which they
pretend and seem to imitate. For Honey, as it was forbidden in their Sacrifices
and Offerings made by Fire, Lev. 2.11. and consequently Wax which belongs to
it: So we do not find that ever they did use Wax-candles to burn in the
Sanctuary; but only Lights and Lamps of Oil.

But as to the pressing and improving these things in a more practical way. It
is a copious and fruitful Subject: let me only repeat and re-inculcate the four
general heads of things beforementioned.

1. Learn to prize and see the worth and excellency of Church-society. It is no
vile thing which the Lord was pleased to represent and teach by so many
glorious Types of old. As by Noah's Ark, by the Temple, by the Golden
Candlestick, etc. And in Church Estate; look well to the matter of the Church,
that they be Golden-Candlesticks. And when in it, look to the exercise of
Discipline: a Church without the vigorous exercise of Discipline, is a
Candlestick without Snuffers: let not the Golden Snuffers be lost or laid
aside, which by divine Institution belong to the Golden Candlestick.

2. Prize the Ministry. They are Lights, they are the Stars that shine in the
tops of these Candlesticks. A dark Ministry was the Evening Star that ushered
in the night of Popery and Antichrist into the world, Rev. 8. ult. compared
with Rev. 9.1.

3. Much more prize the Word. This is the Sun in the Church, the great Light
shining in a dark place. If thy Lamp be not lighted here, all the Light that is
in thee is but Darkness.

4. Above all labor to find the Spirit burning and working in your hearts,
that you may experience the whole mystery of this Type. The Spirit in the Word,
and in the Ministry of it in the Church; the Spirit enlightening, and like Oil
mollifying and healing the Soul, abiding there, and reviving his own work
there: and remember your own Duty also in this thing: look to the trimming of
your Lamps, Matthew. 25.7.

1. Get fresh supplies of Oil, Exodus 30.7, 8. this is to dress your Lamps. This
was David's Faith, Psalm. 92.10. I shall be anointed with fresh Oil. Jesus Christ
is the Fountain, and the Holy Ghost the immediate Dispenser of it, Zech. 4.12.
and thence you are to fetch your fresh supplies.

2. Stir up that which you have, as well as take in new supplies, 2 Timothy 1.6.
Stir up the Gift that is in thee, Revelat. 3.2. strengthen the things that
remain and are ready to dye: stir up thy self to lay hold on God.

3. Snuff the Wick, Exodus 25.38. mortify corruption, cut off that superfluity
of naughtiness, James 1.23. this must be your frequent and daily work.

2. The Golden Table of Shewbread, this was another of the holy Vessels in the
Sanctuary.

The History of it you have in Exodus 25. and in Lev. 24. Moses made but one,
but Solomon made ten Tables, and placed them in the Temple, five on the right
side, and five on the left, 2 Chronicles. 4.8.

The matter of Moses his Table was Shittim-wood; the dimensions two cubits in
length, a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and an half the height
thereof, Exodus 25.23. A cubit is about a foot and an half of our measure.

It was overlaid with pure Gold, and a Crown of Gold was made round about, v.
24. There was also a Border round about, with a Golden Crown; and four Rings of
Gold in the four corners of it to put in the Staves to carry it. Moreover there
were several other Vessels belonging to it, viz. Dishes, Spoons, Covers and
Bowls, all of pure Gold. v. 29.

The use was of it was to set the Bread thereon, v. 30. And thou shall set upon
the Table Shewbread before me always. Which is explained more fully in Lev. 24.
v. 5. to the 10. Thou shall take fine Flower, and bake twelve Cakes or Loaves
thereof. Two tenth Deals shall be in one Cake, or two Omers, Exodus 16.16. that
is, about two Quarts of our measure. And thou shall set them in two rows, six
on a row upon the pure Table before the Lord, ver. 6. of Levit. 24. and a dish
of Incense upon each row, ver. 7. This is the sum of the History of this
Ordinance.

In the Explication whereof, the use of the Table being to set the Bread and
the Incense thereon, and there being several mystical and significant actions
ordained about the Bread and the Incense, we must inquire into them all, and
not consider the Table alone, but with reference to its use, and to the Bread
and Incense, and the sacred actions about them.

There was a threefold mystery in this Type.

1. The Shewbread was a Type of the Churh, which was typified before in other
respects by the Golden Candlestick, in regard of the Light that shines there;
and now in other respects by the Shewbread.

The analogy to this appears in four things.

1. In that as many Grains make up one Loaf: so many Believers make up one
Church; 1 Cor. 10.17. for we being many, are one Bread and one Body; for we are
all partakers of that one Bread. One person is not a Church -- how few and how
small a number the Church may be reduced unto, we need not here dispute: In
Noah's time they were reduced to 8 persons. The first Church, and the beginning
and foundation of the Church in all after times was, when God himself preached
the Gospel to our first Parents in Paradise, and then Adam and Eve and their
Seed were the Church of God. There must be diverse, there must be more then one
to make up a Church.

2. The analogy appears in the number; for as there were twelve Tribes of
Israel, so there were twelve Loaves. These twelve Tribes were often and diverse
ways represented: as by the twelve Stones in the Breast Plate of the High
Priest, Exodus 28.21. and by the twelve Stones which Joshua did pitch in Jordan,
and the other twelve which he took out of Jordan, and pitched them in Gilgal,
for a memorial of the 12 Tribes passing thorough, Josh. 4.9, 20. so Canaan was
divided into twelve parts, that people coming of twelve Patriarchs; to which
answers the twelve Apostles of the New Testament; and the new Jerusalem is
built upon those twelve Foundations, Rev. 21.14. so in these twelve Loaves
there is the like mystery; they represented both the Old and the
New-Testament-Israel.

3. These Loaves were to stand before the Lord all the week upon the Golden
Table. This was the chief action about them, and which holds forth the
principal scope of the Institution; therefore called Panis facierum or
Propositionis, Matthew. 12.4. which our Translators have fitly rendered
Shewbread. The Apostles phrase is (...), the meaning is, (...). Lev. 24.6.
thou shall set them upon the pure Table before the Lord. This signified his
continual eye and care over his people; they are never out of his sight, never
out of mind: his eye and his thoughts are continually upon them, from one end
of the week to another; Isai. 49.16. behold I have graven thee upon the Palms
of mine Hands, and thy Walls are continually before me. Though he seems to
forsake and forget them, yet he remembers them still; Jer. 31.20. for since I
spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still; therefore my Bowels are
troubled for him.

4. There is Frankincense set upon the Loaves, and offered up for a memorial
before the Lord, Lev. 24 7. This speaks the Lords remembrance of them with
acceptance; for the Incense made a sweet smell, a savor of rest. A man may
remember a thing with hatred and abhorrence; but the Lords remembrance of his
people is with dearest affection, with everlasting loving kindness; he has a
precious remembrance of them. These twelve Loaves, the twelve Tribes of Israel
are by Faith in Christ a sweet odor to him; as 2 Cor. 2.15. And as the Lords
eye is over upon them: so should theirs be to the Lord, and that continually.
See Psalm. 123.1, 2. As the Lord says of the Angels, Matthew. 18.10. they do
always behold the Face of my Father which is in Heaven: so the Saints even here
below, they should set the Lord always before them. And this is Happiness and
Heaven begun, 1 Kings 10.8. happy are thy Men, happy are thy Servants which
stand continually before thee, and that hear thy Wisdom. The Lords eye upon
them, in a way of constant care and love: and their eye upon him, in a way of
continual dependence. This is a blessed condition.

Thus you see the first mystery of the Shewbread, how it was a Type of the
Church.

2. A second mystery of the Shewbread is the Food and spiritual Provision that
is in the Church of God; that is, Christ in the Word and Ordinances. The Word
is compared to Bread, Amos 6.11. False Doctrine to leavened or sowred Bread,
Matthew. 16.12. It has the properties of Bread, Psalm. 104.15. Bread which
strengthens man's heart. ver. 16. the staff of Bread. This Bread is Christ: He
is the Bread of Life, as Joh. 6.48. Christ is typified also by the Manna, and
the Golden Pot thereof reserved in the Holy of Holies. But some distinguish the
mystery of these two Types thus.

That the Manna in the Oracle was the Type of Christ personal, this Bread upon
the Table in the Sanctuary was a Type of Christ doctrinal, or Christ in the
Word opened and applied to hungry Souls. The analogy will appear further in
these particulars.

1. They were to set the Shewbread upon the Golden Table in the Sanctuary
every Sabbath, Lev. 24.8. Every Sabbath shall he set it in order before the
Lord continually; that is, in the Sanctuary, which was a Type of the Church.
This then speaks thus much; That the Ministers of the Gospel are to set Christ
the Bread of Life as it were upon the Table every Lords day. There is and ought
to be a weekly provision of this Food in the House of God every Sabbath. As
every week there was new Bread, so Christ is to be afresh held forth.

2. The Priests were to feed upon this all the week after; Lev. 24.9. And it
shall be Aarons and his Sons, and they shall eat it in the holy place: so in
the Church, they that hear the Word and have Christ preached and held forth
therein, should live all the week long upon the Provision that is made upon the
Sabbath. Then the Bread is set before Lord; but in the week time it is eaten.
It is a great neglect when the Bread is not eaten; when the Word is not
digested, meditated, fed upon. But people think it is enough to come to some
good Meeting, and there to hear the Word: But do you eat it and feed upon it
all the week? do you meditate and ruminate upon it?

3. None but the Priests were to eat the Shewbread; It shall be Aarons and his
Sons, and they shall eat it: Lev. 24.9. though in an extraordinary case others
might: as when David and his Men did, to save their Lives in hunger, 1 Samuel
21.6. which Christ allows and justifies, Matthew. 12.3, 4. for ceremonial Rules
must give place to Moral. God will have mercy rather then Sacrifice. But the
ordinary Rule was, none but Priests were to eat the Shewbread. And who are
spiritual Priests under the Gospel? All Believers, they are a royal Priesthood,
1 Pet. 2.9.

This then teaches us, that none but Believers have a right unto Christ and to
the Promises, and do or can feed upon him. Unbelievers do but intrude and usurp
that which is none of theirs, when they challenge a part in him. They are but
Dogs that snatch at Childrens Bread.

4. It is the Priests that set this Bread in the Sanctuary, and they eat it. We
may here consider Priests as Ministers: for the Levitical Ministry was a Type
of the Gospel Ministry. And so the Instruction here is this; That the Priests
should feed and live themselves upon the same Christ, and the same Truths they
preach to others. 1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy Doctrine;
continue in them: for in doing this thou shall both save thy self, and them
that hear thee.

5. There was Incense set upon the Bread, Lev. 24.7. and thou shall put pure
Frakincense upon each row.

Incense was a Type of Prayer: so the Word and Prayer should go together. The
solemn Dispensation of the Word should be accompanied with Prayer. Acts. 6.4.
But we will give our selves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the
Word. It is said of the Levites, Deuteronomy. 33.10. they shall teach Jacob thy
Judgments and Israel thy Law; they shall preach the Word. They shall put
Incense before thee, and whole burnt Sacrifice upon thine Altar. Here is
Prayer, and the Administration of the Sacraments, which do succeed instead of
the Jewish Sacrifices.

6. Christ thus feeding and sustaining his Church gives us some intimation of
his Kingly Office: For he is this Bread of Life by which their Lives are
sustained and upheld.

And so look as the Candlestick points especially to his Prophetical Office, in
teaching and enlightening us; and the Altar and Vessels of Incense to that
great work of his Priestly Office, mediating and interceding for us: so the
Table of Shewbread speaks his Kingly Office, in sustaining and upholding of us.

7. A third mystery of the Shewbread is this. It seems to have been a
Sacrifice unto the Lord, namely, a Meat Offering, and consequently all the
Gospel-mysteries of the Meat Offering do belong to the Shewbread, as being one
species or kind thereof. For the Rule is this in Lev. 24.7. Thou shall put pure
Frankincense upon each row, that it may be on the Bread for a memorial, even an
Offering made by Fire unto the Lord: and accordingly it was to be eaten, as
other Fire-offerings were, by Aaron and his Sons in the Holy place. For it is
most holy unto him of the Offerings of the Lord made by Fire, ver. 9. The
Incense was burnt upon the Altar as a memorial for the Bread; or (as some
think) an handful of the Flower whereof they were made, was burnt with the
Incense for the whole.

Now the Meat Offering did purge away Sin, as typifying the Righteousness of
Jesus Christ, both his active and passive Obedience, 1 Samuel 3.14. purged by
Sacrifice, or by Meat Offering. It signified also the Persons and Services of
the Saints, and the Acceptance of both before the Lord. All which may be
applied to the Shewbread under the notion of a Meat Offering. Therefore I
shall not here insist upon these Considerations, but refer them to that place
to which they do belong, namely to the legal Offerings and Sacrifices, where
the Meat Offering comes to be considered. But as to the two former notions of
the Shewbread, to improve them a little more practically; we may apply them
both for Comfort and for Trial.

1. For Comfort. As the Church is this Shewbread, they stand before the Lord
continually, his eye is ever upon them. Though thou art one whom Man despises,
and whom the Nations abhor, as usually the best of Gods people are most hated
and least beloved in the world; yet if the Lord regard thee, what though men
despise thee? Psalm. 40. ult. I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks upon me.

Quest. But how may I know that I am one of those that are under the Eye and
Care and Love of God?

Answ. The second notion of the Shewbread speaks to this.

Do thou feed upon Christ? Is he the Shewbread, the Food of thy Soul? whom,
as a spiritual Priest, thou do feed upon by Faith. Then thou art the
Shewbread in that other notion, as being continually before the Lord, under
his eye of special Care and Love. And because all depends upon this: let me
give you a few Directions about it, some Directions in eating the Shewbread,
in feeding upon Christ in the Word.

1. Do not feed upon other things. Isai. 55.2. Wherefore do you spend your Money
for that which is not Bread? It is but to feed upon Husks, Luke 15, 16. and
lying Vanities that cannot profit. As if, through a Distemper in the Stomach, a
man eats Coals, or feeds upon Ashes, it hurts the Appetite and weakens Nature:
so in Spirituals.

2. Do not feed upon the Word without Christ in the Word: For it is not the
Letter of the Word; it is not the bare Letter of the Promise; but Christ in the
Promise that is the Food of the Soul: there be some that catch at the Promises
and Benefits of Christ; but do not close with Christ himself in the Promise,
who is indeed exhibited and manifested therein. Therefore you should labor to
see Christ himself there, to behold his Glory as the only begotten of the
Father, full of Grace and Truth: as Joh. 1.14. to see his fitness and
suitableness to all the necessities of a poor sinful Soul: and that he is a
person every way fit to be the great means of our access unto God; and so upon
that account to close with him as your Savior, having seen who and what a one
he is as revealed in the Word of Promise, by which we are first united to his
Person, and then do enjoy. Communion with him in his Benefits.

3. Never think that you seed upon Christ in the Promise a right, until you
find strength and nourishment from him. Bread strengthens man's heart, Psalm.
104.15, 16. It is a lamentable thing when the Bread of life strengthens not,
when there is no staff nor stay in the Promise; when God sends leanness into
men's Souls.

But may not true Believers complain of unprofitableness? Yes. But strength
comes at last, if they go on to feed upon this food: Therefore that which I aim
at is this; that you should never cease believing, and eating and feeding upon
Christ in every Ordinance, and at every opportunity, till at last you find
strength and spiritual nutriment unto your Souls by him.

THE GOSPEL of the INCENSE and the GOLDEN ALTAR in the HOLY of HOLIES.
Dece. 27, 1668.
Hebr. 9.3, 4, 5. And after the second Veil, the Tabernacle, which is called
the Holiest of all: which had the Golden Censer, and the Ark of the Covenant,
overlaid round about with Gold, wherein was the Golden Pot that had Munna, and
Aarons Rod that budded, and the Tables of the Covenant; and over it the
Cherubims of Glory shadowing the Mercy-seat; of which we cannot now speak
particularly.


HAving spoken of the holy Vessels in the Sanctuary, we are now to treat of the
sacred Furniture of the Holy of Holies, concerning which we formerly observed
from this Text this Doctrinal proposition.

Obs. 5. That the sacred Furniture, or the holy Vessels and Vtensils belonging
to the Holy of holies, were the Golden vessels for the offering of Incense, and
the Ark with its appurtenances.

The former our Translators render the Golden Censer: the Greek word is (...).
The difficulties upon this place are very great. Perhaps this Text may be
numbered amongst the Insolubilia Scripturae, those insoluble knots which will
never fully be unfolded in this life, and which God has left there on purpose
to confound the Wisdom of all the world, that no Flesh might glory, and that he
might exercise his people unto reverence of his Word, in those things which
they cannot comprehend. One says of it, Suspectus est mihi locus iste. I would
not say so; but this I may say, that of all the difficult Scriptures that I
have had occasion to search into, this has been one of the most difficult;
unto my own weakness one of the most difficult.

That which I would humbly offer for the interpretation of it, is only this;
That the word being (...) it signifies properly something belonging to Incense:
and I know not how to translate it more fitly, then by this Periphrasis; That
Golden Vtensil for the offering of Incense.

Quest. But then the question will be, what were those Golden Vessels that did
serve to that use, and which of them was here intended?

Answ. It is a Rule which you have often heard, and must always be remembered in
the Exposition of Scripture; That the Scripture must be expounded in the
largest and most comprehensive sense: Therefore if there were diverse sacred
Vessels of this kind, they may be all included. The Holy Ghost seems to have
used such a general expression, on purpose to include them all: and so this may
reconcile the different interpretations given by Expositors.

Now there were two holy Vessels for this use.

1. It is thought there was a Golden Censer, which was laid up in the Holy of
holies all the year till the Feast of Expiation, and that then the Priest went
in and fetched it out, and offered Incense with it in the Holy of holies. Such
a Censer is mentioned by Josephus contra Apionem, lib. 2. And though it be not
so clearly and expressly mentioned by Moses; yet there seems to be some
intimation of it in Levit. 16.12. Moreover it is no new thing in the Scripture,
that things which are more briefly and more obscurely hinted in the Old
Testament, should be more plainly and more expressly delivered in the New. The
two Testaments, the Old and the New, looking one toward another, as the two
Cherubims did over the Ark. As for instance, the Names of those Conjurers that
withstood Moses are not mentioned in the History in Exodus: but we have their
Names in the New Testament, their Names were Jannes and Jambres, 2 Timothy 3.8.
And the Contest between Michael and Satan about the Body of Moses, and the
Prophecy of Enoch are mentioned in the Epistle of Jude, but no where in the
Old Testament, as is generally conceived: though learned Junius inclines to
judge the Contest between Michael and Satan mentioned by Jude, is that which we
have represented in a Vision to Zechary the Prophet, Zechar. 3. see Junius his
Notes on Jude and his Parallels, Append, Paral. 16. and other instances might
be given.

So this Golden Censer; though not so expressly mentioned in the Old Testament;
yet it is twice mentioned in the New: first in this Text, Heb. 9.4. and again
in Rev. 8.3. and there it is conjoined with the Golden Altar. And another Angel
came and stood at the Altar having a Golden Censer, and there was given unto
him much Incense, that he should offer it upon the Golden Altar. And in 1 Kings
7.50. and 2 Chronicles. 4.22. there is mention of Golden Censers in the plural
number.

This Golden Censer was a little Pan made of Gold, with a handle to it, fit to
hold living coals in, whereon to put the Incense.

2. There was also a Golden Altar of Incense in the Temple; and it is not
likely that the Apostle would wholly omit and pass over this so great an
Utensil, when he mentions all the rest: Therefore that which we translate the
Golden Censer, many do interpret it as meant of this Golden Altar of Incense.

But here a great Objection does occur, how this is here said to stand in the
Oracle, or in the Holy of holies? for it is clear it stood in the Sanctuary;
because they were to offer Incense upon it every day; but they were not to
enter into the Holy of holies but once only a year.

The Answer that is commonly given is this; That it stood in the Sanctuary
quoad situm; but in the Holy of holies quoad usum, as to the place and position
of it, it was in the Sanctuary; but yet it belonged to the Holy of holies in
regard of the use and employment of it: which possibly may be the reason of the
alteration of the form of speech ver. 4. from what was used v. 2. The Holy of
holies had the Golden Altar of Incense, because it had a relation to that part
of the Tabernacle, though it was not seated in it, as the Candlestick and Table
were in the outer Sanctuary, v. 2.

The first Institution of it is Exodus 30. ver. 1. to 10. And Solomon made one
for the Temple, 1 Kings 6.22. And the whole House he overlaid with Gold, until
he had finished all the House: also the whole Altar that was by the Oracle he
overlaid with Gold. Here the Altar is spoken of, as having relation to the
Oracle. The Altar that was by the Oracle; as in the Text, the Holy of holies
had the Golden Utensil for the Incense.

The use of it was to burn Incense upon it. Of the Composition whereof, see
Exodus 30. ver. 34, etc.

As to the Mystery of these things. First as to the Altar, and then as to the
Incense.

1. This Golden Altar of Incense was a Type of Christ in regard of his
Intercession, that great work of his Priestly Office: as the Altar of
Burnt-offering was a Type of Christ in regard of the other part of his Priestly
Office, his Oblation or Satisfaction. See Rev. 8.

2. This Golden Altar was to be sprinkled with the Blood of the Sin-offering to
make atonement once a year, Exodus 30.10. Lev. 16.18. to teach us, that Christ
intercedes in the virtue of his own Oblation, or sacrificing of himself. And
this makes his Intercession so prevailing and powerful with the Lord; He prays
for nothing, but what he has purchased by his Death: He desires nothing from
the hand of Mercy, but what he has bought and paid for at the hand of Justice.

3. As no Incense was to be offered, or could be accepted, but upon this Altar:
so no Prayers are acceptable to God, but through the Name and Mediation of
Jesus Christ: unless offered upon this Golden Altar, neither Prayers of Priest
nor People can be accepted: without this, he that offers Incense, is as if he
blessed an Idol, as Isai. 66.3.

Now to unfold the Mystery of the Incense.

The Incense that was offered upon this Golden Altar, was a Type of Prayer, the
Prayers both of Christ, and of his Saints: Both the Prayers which Christ offers
up for the Saints, and which the Saints offer up for themselves in his Name and
Mediation. See Rev. 5.8 -- Psalm. 141.2. Let my Prayer be set forth before thee
as Incense.

You may see the fullness of the analogy more at large in seven particulars.

1. It was made up of many choice Ingredients, Exodus 30.34. so is the Spirit of
Prayer as it were a compound of many excellent Graces: There must be Faith,
Humility, Fervency, etc. and indeed all the Graces of Gods Spirit are drawn
forth and exercised in Prayer.

2. They are strictly forbidden to make another Persume of their own heads like
unto it, Exodus 30.37, 38. so we are not to make use of any other Intercessors
or Mediators but Christ only. And in like manner for men to make Prayers in the
way of stinted Liturgies, though there be many of the same Ingredients in the
Mass Book, that is, good expressions for the matter of them, and words and
notions that are found in the Scripture; yet this being not the Incense that is
instituted, it is not, it cannot be accepted.

3. These Ingredients whereof the Incense was made were to be beaten very small
into fine Powder, Exodus 30.36. This teaches us that Contrition of heart that
ought to be in Prayer, how the Soul is to be contrite and broken as it were all
to pieces by humbling meditations of its own unworthiness when it appears
before the Lord in Prayer. These are the Prayers that God regards, Psalm. 51.17.
The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O
God, thou will not despise -- Isai. 57.15. I dwell in the high and holy place,
with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of
the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. If a man come with
his heart whole and not broken, this is to offer the Incense unbeaten,
unpounded.

4. The Incense was to be set on fire, and so the smoke went up before the
Throne. Exodus 30.7, 8. This speaks that holy Fervency in Prayer.

There should be ardent affections inflamed by the Fire of the Holy Ghost, Jam.
5, 16. the effectual fervent Prayer of a righteous man avails much. We should
not come with a dead cold heart before the Lord in Prayer.

5. This burning of Incense was a Service performed every day, morning and
evening. Exodus 30.7.8. This teaches us that Prayer should be a daily work,
morning and evening. David tells us of his praying in the morning. Psalm. 5.3.
My Voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord, in the morning will I direct
my Prayer unto thee, and will look up. And also in the evening, Psalm. 141.2.
The lifting up of my hands as the evening Sacrifice. Yea both he and Daniel
used to pray thrice a day, Psalm. 55.17. Dan. 6.10. Anna departed not from the
Temple, but served God with Fastings and Prayers night and day, Luke 2.37. and
we are commanded to pray continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17 -- Praying always with all
Prayer, Ephesians, 6.18. that is, every day in the seasons of Prayer. And Paul
mentions his praying day and night, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. 2 Timothy 1.3. which may well
be understood of evening and morning. See also 1 Timothy 5.5. and Act. 26.7.

6. The time of burning the Incense was when they dressed and lighted the Lamps
of the Sanctuary, Exodus 30.7, 8. This teaches us the conjunction of the Word
and Prayer in the Church, Deuteronomy. 33.10 -- Acts 6.4. But we will give our selves
continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the Word.

7. The Smoke of the Incense ascended with a sweet and fragrant smell into the
Holy of holies before the Mercy seat, as Rev. 8.4. and the Smoke of the Incense
which came with the Prayers of the Saints ascended up before God out of the
Angels hand. It went up out of the Angels hand. This speaks, that our Prayers
come up before the Lord into his holy place, even into Heaven, before the
Throne of Grace, with acceptance through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus
Christ. Acts 4.10. thy Prayers are come up for a memorial before God. Hence
that expression, 1 Kings 8. hear thou in Heaven thy dwelling place. For the
Holy of holies was a Type of Heaven; and the Mercy-seat is that Throne of Grace
where the Lord is said to dwell between the Cherubims, Psalm. 80.1. It speaks
also that God returns gracious answers to them; as it is Zech. 1.13. the Lord
answered the Angel that talked with me with good and comfortable words.
Sometimes there is a gracious terribleness in them; I mean a mixture of Mercy
and Terror in the Lords answers and returns of Prayer, Psalm. 65. ver. 5. by
terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us, O God of our Salvation.
Thus Rev. 8.5. when the Angel cast down the Censer upon the earth, there were
voices, and thunderings, and lightenings, and an earthquake. The Lord uttering
his voice as it were from the Holy of holies in dreadful dispensations of
Providence, in the seven Trumpets: it is from the Prayers of Saints, that those
dreadful Trumpets were sounded.

But one of the strangest instances of the Lords answering Prayer by strange
and seemingly contrary Providence, is that of the Turks, Rev. 9. It is agreed
by all Interpreters, that the sixth Trumpet is the Turk. But did ever any
Christian pray for the coming of the Turk into Christendom? No, but yet they
came; and the Voice from the four Horns of this Golden Altar of Incense ushered
them in, Rev. 9.13. The meaning is this; the strange Power of God did answer
the Prayers of his people this way, it is the Prayers of Gods people that turns
the wheel of Providence as it were, and brings about all the great and mighty
revolutions in the course thereof.

Use 1. Of Comfort in five or six particulars.

This Doctrine of Christ's Intercession (which is the mystery of this Golden
Censer and Altar of Incense) is full of Comfort to poor praying Souls; thou
have an High Priest which offers up thy Prayers, and they are made acceptable
through his Intercession.

This affords Comfort, let thy condition be what it will.

1. If thou find thy self unskilful in making application of that part of
Christ's Priestly Office, which consists in his Death; yet thou may look up
to him to speak a good word for thy Soul: this work is doing still, though the
former be done.

2. In case of new sins committed after Grace received, here is this Comfort;
that as Satan puts in new Accusations against thy Soul: so Christ puts in new
Answers, 1 John 2.1, 2. if any man sin, we have an Advocate, etc.

3. Many an one is much troubled with fears of future backslidings; but Christ
prays that thy Faith fail not: he prays not only that we should come home and
be converted, but also that we be preserved unto his heavenly Kingdom. Joh.
17.15. He prays that we should be kept from the evil. Hence sometimes Believers
are kept from being tempted: But if they be tempted, they are either kept from
falling by temptations; or if they fall, from lying in their falls.

4. Suppose you meet with troubles, oppositions and persecutions from the
world. Let the world speak evil of us; yet Christ speaks well of us, or rather
for us, to his Father; and then what need we fear. See Isai. 51.7, 8.

5. Thy Prayers are full of weaknesses and imperfections: but the Prayers of
Jesus Christ have no weakness and imperfection going along with them.

Quest. But how may I know that Christ prays for me?

Answ. Thou may know it by two things.

1. If thou have a heart to pray for thy self; thy Prayers are the echo of his
Intercession: if Christ has taught thee to pray for thy self, Christ
intercedes and prays in Heaven for thee. Romans 8.27.

2. Has the Lord taught thee to prize the Prayer and Intercession of Jesus
Christ for thee? if so, it is a sign he is interceding for thee. Heb. 7.25.

Use 2. This also makes against the Papists, who plead for Mediators of
Intercession (though not of Satisfaction) beside Christ. This cannot be: for
his Intercession is founded in his Satisfaction; the Scripture makes him the
only Mediator of Intercession. Rev. 8.3. It is true, the Saints do pray, or
intercede for one another: but yet they are not Mediators; because it is not
their own Incense, nor their own Blood; but it is his Incense, it is his Blood
that makes their Prayers effectual. They do not pray in their own name, but in
his: but he prays in his own name, by the merit of his own Blood.

THE GOSPEL of the ARK and its Appertainances in the HOLY of HOLIES.
Jan. 3. 1668.
Hebr. 9.4, 5.
THe Ark with its appertainances was another of the holy vessels belonging to
the Holy of holies, and it was the chief of all their holy things; as appears
in sundry respects: as for instance.

1. It had many glorious appertainances that related to it, many other vessels
belonging to this, as the Cherubims, etc.

2. The place of it was the Holy of holies.

3. Solomon, though he made all other things new in the Temple, yet he did not
make a new Ark; but only introduced the same which Moses had made, with great
solemnity into the Oracle, the place which he had prepared for it. 2 Chronicles. 5.7.

Whatever changes and varieties there may be in other things whereby God
dispenses himself unto and amongst mankind: other utensils may be made new;
there may be new Ordinances, new Administrations; but there is no new Christ.
Never look for any new or further Administration in this respect: as there is
no new God, so there is no new Christ: but Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and
to day, and for ever. Heb. 13. It is a blind and blasphemous delusion to speak
of Christ as an Administration, that is to pass away when the Saints have
passed under it for a while.

4. In that the Providence about it were very great and glorious, and full of
teaching and instruction.

The Ark of God led them through the Wilderness. We are to follow the Guidance
of Christ through the world. It was carried with Bars; so is Christ upon the
Ministry of the Gospel, from one place to another. As the Levites did carry the
Ark; so Preachers may be said to carry Christ, to bear his Name among the
Gentiles: so Paul Act. 9.15.

Many great things were done by it. Jordan was divided by it: so by Christ all
obstacles are removed out of the way. The Walls of Jericho fell by it: so by
Christ's coming the strong holds of Satan's Kingdom are cast down. It was the
downfall of Dagon: So is Christ of Satan and Idolatry. While the Ark was
amongst the Philistines they were plagued; but Obed-Edom was blessed while it
was at his House: so Christ in the Gospel to some brings wrath being refused,
to others Salvation. Eli and his Daughter died when the Ark was taken, and the
Bethshemites rejoiced exceedingly when they saw it: so the presence of Christ
brings comfort, but his absence grief and sorrow. The Bethshemites were
punished for prying into the Ark. It is a dangerous thing to search into
inscrutable Mysteries. Be wise unto sobriety. The Ark after many travels was
brought at last to a place of rest in Solomon's Temple: so Christ after many
wearisome journies on Earth was at length taken up into Heaven, a place of rest
where he sits at the right hand of God.

But as to this glorious Utensil it self, we may observe these things.

1. The Ark was the Throne of God on which he did appear sitting on his Throne
of Grace and Glory, and from whence he spoke and gave forth Answers and
Oracles. Hence we read of a Throne of Grace, Heh. 4. ult. This Throne of Grace
is that Mercy-seat that covered the Ark on which God sat, and where he is said
to dwell between the Cherubims, Psalm. 80.1.

1. Here he gave upon special occasions visible appearances of his Glory. This
is that Shechinah which the Jewish Rabbis speak of. And they have it from the
Scriptures and the Prophets. Ezekiel. 1. last. and cap. 9. and 10. The Glory of
the Lord is said to appear, and to remove, and depart away by little and
little. There was still less and less of God among them till he was quite gone.
So Isai. 6.1. Rev. 4.2.3.

2. Hence the Lord spoke with audible voice, and gave forth his answers: so he
promised to Moses, Exodus 25.22. so Numb. 7. ult. The mystery of all which is
this, that God is to be seen in Christ, and that he speaks and reveals his mind
to us only in and through Jesus Christ.

2. The Mercy-seat which was upon the Ark, was a Type of the passive Obedience
and Satisfaction of Jesus Christ for our sins, whom God has set forth to be,
Romans 3.25. (...) a propitiation -- 1 John 2.2. he is the propitiation for our
sins.

3. The Law, which was within the Ark, is the active Obedience of Christ, Psalm.
40.8. thy Law is within my heart.

4. The Golden Pot of Manna is Christ in the Word, Exodus 16. Joh. 6.48, 49, 50,
51. He is the true Manna, the true Bread of life.

5. Aarons Rod that budded is the Ministry, blessed with success for the good
of Souls, Numb. 17.10. this was reserved before the Testimony, for a token
against the Rebels.

6. The Cherubims upon the Ark are the Angels ministering to the Lord, Ezekiel. 1.
they are there described, Is. 6.2. they look toward the Ark; they pry into the
mysteries of the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.12. held forth by the Church, Ephesians. 3.10. The
mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God being above their comprehension,
and their Subjection to Christ as Mediator being not included originally within
the Law of their Creation: therefore they learn this mystery from the Church.

7. The Chariot of the Cherubims, 1 Chronicles. 28.16. is the motions of Providence.
The Throne of God is described with Wheels, Dan. 7.9. Ezekiel. 1.16. the Throne
has Wheels, and 10.9. Some think the other two Cherubims that were beside the
Ark, stood not upon the Golden Pavement of the Oracle, but upon a Chariot and
Wheels; from whence that expression, [the Chariot of the Cherubims]. However
they are so represented in Ezekiels Vision, cap. 1. there be not only living
creatures, that is, Angels; but Wheels, that is, motions, turnings, revolutions
of Providence.

Now to open these things a little more particularly in the method and order
wherein they lie before us in the Text, we must observe that there are six
particulars here enumerated as parts or appertainances to the Ark.

1. The Ark of the Covenant was overlaid round about with Gold] that is, this
sacred Chest it self (for the Cover is mentioned afterward.) The first
Institution of this holy Vessel was in Exodus 25.10, etc.

An Ark] or a sacred Chest. v. 10. A Cubit is about a Foot and an half of our
measure; so that it was between three and four Foot long: the height and
breadth equal, a Cubit and an half.

V. 11. Overlaid with Gold] for the matter was Shittim Wood. This was an
intimation of the spiritual excellency and preciousness of the Mystery hereby
adumbrated.

V. 11. A Crown of Gold round about] for Ornament and Glory.

V. 13. It had Staves of Gold also for carrying it in the Wilderness. These
were also put with it in the Temple, 1 Kings 8.8. to teach this people that if
they did provoke the Lord, he might yet remove the Ark of his Presence from
them.

It is called the Ark of the Covenant, because the two Tables of the Covenant
which God made with Israel were put therein. Exodus 25.16. And thou shall put
into the Ark the Testimony which I shall give thee. Of which further afterward.

It was a Type of Christ in regard of his active Obedience, fulfilling the
Covenant for us. Thy Law is within my heart, Psalm. 40.

2. In it was the Golden Pot that had Manna] of which Exodus 16. Of this we
spoke among the Occasional Types.

Wherein] There be several interpretations of this word. Some refer it to the
more remote antecedent, the Tabernacle: some to the Ark, conceiving it was in
the Ark till Solomon's time; for then there was nothing in it, but the Tables of
the Covenant. 2 King. 8.9.

Or in which] may be interpreted in a larger signification: as if he had said,
About which, or belonging to which: For these things were appertainances to the
Ark, and did belong to it; as being laid up by it or before it, as Exodus 16.34.
Numb. 17.10.

3. Aarons Rod that budded, of which Numb. 17. A Type of the Gospel Ministry,
blessed with success for the good of Sou s: as also a pledge of Gods Presence
with it, and the Levitical Ministry during that Administration.

1. This Rod brought forth fruit, v. 8. And the Almond tree is a fruitful tree.
The Ministry is and should be fruitful for Conversion: and therefore it is
lawful to preach any where, to any body. Go and preach the Gospel to every
creature: and for Edification and building up such as are converted and brought
home.

2. The Almond tree is very early in its Fruit. Some Naturalists write, that it
is the first of all Trees that buds. Ministers should be fruitful to God
betimes, as Jerem. 1.5. and ver. 11. he sees an Almond tree the soonest ripe.
John the Baptist, Luke 1.15. was filled with the Holy Ghost even from his
Mothers Womb. And Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15. from a Child knew the holy Scriptures.

3. The Fruit remains, the Buds and Blossoms miraculously continued upon the
Rod of Aaron, Joh. 15.16. that you should bring forth fruit, and that your
fruit should remain. The Fruit of the Ministry is never lost; it does remain in
the hearts of Gods people, and shall remain for ever.

4. This Rod of Aaron is a Rod of Government: so the Scripture often speaks of
a Rod for a Rod of Authority and Government, Psalm. 110.2. he will send the Rod
of his Strength out of Sion -- shall I come unto you with a Rod? says the
Apostle. There is a Rod of Government and Discipline. For a Minister to lay
this aside, is the way to be popular, and to get applause amongst the largest
sort of Professors for a time: But if he make conscience to exercise the
Discipline of Christ in his Congregation, he shall be hated and laden with
reproaches and revilings; he shall hear the defaming of many on every side,
that will say, Report and we will report it. But the Lord will be with him as a
mighty terrible one. Jer. 20.10, 11. If thou distinguish between the precious
and the vile, thou shall be as my month. Jer. 15.19, etc.

5. This Rod of Aaron is laid up before the Ark in the Holy of holies. An
emblem of the neerness of faithful Ministers unto God, which is both their Duty
and their Privilege. They should be much in Heaven the holiest of all, they
should converse much with God and Christ, and the holy Angels. The Rod of Aaron
should be before the Ark.

4. The Tables of the Covenant, so called, Deuteronomy. 9.9, 11, 15. and Tables of
Testimony, Exodus 31.18. Hence the Ark is called the Ark of the Covenant, as in
the Text: so Numb. 10.33. and the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord went before
them. These were in the Ark, to teach us that the Law is in Christ's heart; he
has kept the Covenant.

5. And over it the Cherubims of Glory. The first mention of Cherubims is in
Genesis 3.14. and he placed at the East of the Garden of Eden Cherubims, and a
flaming Sword, to keep the way of the tree of Life. Some derive the word Cherub
from Rechub, a Chariot; because God is said to ride upon the Cherubims, Psalm.
18.11. He rode upon a Cherub and did fly. Though others have other derivations
of the word; as may be seen by the English Reader in Aynsworth and Lee. The
shape of them may be gathered from the Visions of the Prophet Ezekiel and
Isaiah, Ezekiel. 1. and Isai. 6. They were pictures of young men, though with four
Faces; the Face of a Man, of a Lion, of an Ox, and of a flying Eagle. They had
also Wings, in Isai. 6. six Wings: For with two they covered their Faces, with
two they covered their Feet, those parts of the body which are the feat of
shame, and with two they did fly. There were two of them over the Ark; and
Solomon made two more, which stood with their Feet upon the ground, or upon the
Chariot of the Cherubims, as some suppose, 1 Chronicles. 28.18. the Text calls
them Cherubims of Glory, or glorious Cherubims.

As to the Mystery of them, I find in Scripture phrase three things signified
thereby.

1. The Angels of Heaven who are compared to Chariots and fiery Chariots, Psalm.
68.17. the Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels: which
suits with that expression of the Chariot of the Cherubims in the Oracle, 1 Chronicles. 28.18. and with that of the Apostle Peter, who says, 1 Pet. 1.12. the
Angels bow down their heads to pry into the mysteries of the Gospel, alluding
to the posture of the Cherubims over the Ark.

2. Kings and Magistrates are called Cherubims in Scripture: so it is spoken of
the King of Tire, Ezekiel. 28.14. Thou art the anointed Cherub that covers; and
I have set thee so: thou wast upon the holy Mountain of God. It speaks forth
both their Dignity and Duty. The Magistrate is to protect the true Religion and
the Worship of God, as the Cherubims did cover the Ark.

3. Ministers are called Cherubims: so in Revel. 4. those four living Wights
are nothing else but four Cherubims, as you will clearly see, if you compare
that with Ezekiels Vision, Ezekiel. 4. But these Cherubims or four living Wights
in the Revelation cannot be interpreted concerning the Angels in Heaven:
because they are said to be redeemed by the Lambs Blood, Rev. 5.8, 9. which the
Angels in Heaven were not. And moreover the four living Wights are expressly
distinguished from the Angels in Heaven, ver. 11. therefore it must needs be
meant of a lower sort of Angels, the Angels of the Churches; that is, the
Officers and Ministers of the Church, who should be men of Angelick Spirits for
industry, and zeal, and vigilance in the Lords work.

6. The sixth and last part of the Ark here mentioned, is the Mercy seat. The
Cherubims of Glory overshadowing the Mercy seat.

The Mercy-seat was the Cover of the Ark, of which, Exodus 25.17. The Hebrew
word for it is Capporeth, from Caphar, to cover with pitch, and in another
Conjugation, to expiate, atone, appease. It implies a merciful covering of our
sins.

The Septuagint call it sometimes (...), a propitiatory covering, and sometimes
(...), a Lid or covering laid on. The Apostle applies it to the Blood of
Christ, and the satisfaction made thereby to the Justice of God for our sins,
Romans 3.25. 1 John 2.2.

Use 1. See the Glory of the visible Church, and of the Presence of God there.
For all these glorious things are in the Temple, in the Holy of holies there.
And therefore your should see God himself there, and hear his voice, though not
visibly and audibly, but spiritually; yet really and powerfully and effectually
speaking to the heart. You should see these things by the eye of Faith. When
you come to a Meeting, though the World revile and call them Conventicles, you
should see a guard of Angels and Cherubims round about you, etc.

Use 2. See the fullness of supply and spiritual relief that is in Jesus Christ,
in the Gospel, for poor lost Souls.

Here is something to answer all their cases and necessities: here is God
appearing and speaking in Christ: here is passive and active Obedience: here is
the Word, the Ministry, the Guard of Angels, the workings of Providence for the
Churches good.

There be two things which an enlightened Conscience needs, and cries for.

1. I cannot keep the Law; I want a perfect legal Righteousness to appear
before God in.

Therefore Christ has done it: Here is the Law kept in this blessed Ark of the
Covenant: He has fulfilled all Righteousness, etc.

2. But I want a Propitiation for the sins that have been committed.

But therefore here is a Mercy-seat upon the Ark, a propitiatory Covering, in
the passive Obedience of Jesus Christ, whereby he has not only kept the Law,
but satisfied for our breaking of it. Draw near to God in the faith and
meditation of this mystery.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
THe observing Reader will remember, that in the method proposed by the Author,
the Legal Ministry should have come in the next place to be treated of: But the
Author in his course of preaching handled this Head before that; which
alteration of his first designed method, and thus transposing these two heads
of the Legal Ministry and the Legal Festivals, is by himself accounted for in
the entrance on that of the Legal Ministry; and therefore no more shall be said
of it.

The Reader will also doubtless observe, his Entrance on this subject of the
Legal Festivals to be more abrupt then in the rest; of which this account may
be given, That on this head the Authors Notes which he left behind him were
less perfect then on any of the foregoing: and thence, as it cost more labor
to bring them to what is here presented: so the judicious Reader will perhaps
discern a difference between his Discourses on this and on the other heads, as
not being spun with an even thread. And we have therefore been necessitated to
use a greater liberty here, then we allowed our selves elsewhere, to insert in
their properest places, as near as we could, sundry notions which we found
noted down in the Authors broken Papers relating to this subject, some whereof
perhaps were not his own, yea it may be not according to his Judgment, (though
we do not know of any such inserted) but only noted down by him as they came
into his mind, or as he met with them in reading, to be better considered of at
further leisure: For it is certain it was his manner thus to do. Moreover, we
do find many imperfect hints of Notions amongst his Papers, which we could not
find where to insert, nor indeed, as to some of them, well tell what to make of
them, or how to express them as the Author designed; and therefore they are
lost with him.

Lastly, we may advertise the Reader, that we find the Author had thoughts of
re-assuming and going over this whole head of the Legal Festivals again, in
somewhat another method, the first rude lineaments whereof were thus drawn by
himself, viz. he designed first a brief delineation of the whole, and when
instituted; namely their Feasts, (to wit, the Passover, Pentecost, the Feast of
Tabernacles, the Feast of Trumpets, and the great Day of Expiation) their New
Moons and their Sabbaths* to wit, the seventh day of the week, the seventh
year, amd the fiftieth year. Next he designed to go over them all again, and
show how they made up a rude draught, or a dark shadow of better things; and
here he would have made the first Institution to be his Text for the several
Heads and for the Sabbath the 12, 13, 14, 15. verses of the fifth of
Deuteronomy, because the typical Reason is there annexed to the Command. And in
the last place he intended to have spoken more fully to the unwarrantableness
of Popish Holidays, and Music.

And indeed he had many years before written two brief Discourses on that
Argument, the main Materials whereof we suppose he would have brought in here,
perhaps with some considerable Additions: and therefore we have for the
affinity of the matter to this head of the Jewish Festivals subjoined, as an
Appendix those two Discourses, as they were found amongst the Authors Papers.
Farewell.

THE GOSPEL of the JEWISH FESTIVALS.
Jan. 14, and 17. 1668.
Coloss. 2.16, 17. Let no man therefore judge you in Meat or in Drink, or in
respect of an Holy day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath Days, Which are a
shadow of things to come, but the Body is of Christ.


Obs. 1. THat the Jewish Holy days were of three sorts, and may be referred to
three Heads, Feasts, New Moons, and Sabbaths.

2. That these were Shadows of things to come; but the Body or Substance is of
Christ.

3. That therefore Christians should not suffer any man to condemn them for
their not observing of these Days.

I shall handle the two first together in one, showing under each of these
legal Holy days what the substance and thing signified was, what of Christ was
signified and shadowed forth by them.

Obs. 1. That the Jewish Holy days were of three sorts, and may be referred to
three heads, viz. Feasts, New Moons, and Sabbaths.

This Distribution of them does frequently occur in the Scripture, in other
places, as well as in this Text, 2 Chronicles. 2.4. I build an House, says Solomon,
for the Burnt-offerings on the Sabbaths, and on the New Moons, and on the
solemn Feasts of the Lord our God -- Ezekiel. 45.17. And it shall be the Princes
part to give Burnt-offerings, etc. in the Feasts, and in the New Moons, and in
the Sabbaths, even in all the solemnities of the House of Israel, that is, in
their appointed or solemn Assemblies. Where Solemnities or solemn Assemblies is
the general, and this Genus is distributed into three particulars, Feasts, New
Moons, and Sabbaths: so likewise Hos. 2.11, I will also cause all her mirth to
cease, her Feast-days, her New Moons, and her Sabbaths, even every holy
Assembly of hers. The first word is Feasts, (...) in Hebrew moyed, set times,
because they came at set times of the year. This is meant of their annual
Festivals, which were in number five. The three principal were, the Feast of
the Passover, the Feast of Pentecost, and the Feast of Tabernacles; which
continued, the two former each of them seven days, the last for eight days
together; and the first day and the last day of them were holy Convocations,
wherein they were to do no servile work, but to be wholly vacant for the Word
and Worship of God.

The first mention of them is in Exodus 23.14-17. They are more largely spoken
to in the 23. chap. of Leviticus; and again in Deuteronomy. 16. and briefly
recapitulated and summed up in ver. 16. These were the principal: because then
all the males were to go up to Jerusalem; and therefore these three are so
often mentioned together.

There were also two more, the Feast of Trumpets, and the Feast of Expiation.

There are five general Rules observable concerning all these yearly Feasts.

1. That they were all to be celebrated at the place the Lord their God should
choose, which was Jerusalem, Exodus 23.14. Deuteronomy. 16.16. That which we are to
learn therein is this, that there is a Church-worship. There are some
Ordinances of Gods Worship which are not to be enjoyed but in Church-society.
As there is a personal and family worship: so there is public or
Church-worship; of this kind is the Lords Supper. If this be not an Ordinance
of public Worship under the Gospel, there is none: therefore to carry it to
private persons upon their deathbeds, as the Papists do, is unwarrantable and
superstitious.

2. It is to be observed, that they were all in the Summer time, and not in
Winter: for the Passover was upon the fourteenth day of the first month,
Pentecost was seven weeks after, and the Feast of Tabernacles was upon the
fifteenth day of the seventh month. Hence is that expression, Acts. 27.9.
Sailing is now dangerous, because the Feast was now already past, that is, the
Feast of Tabernacles.

The Instruction we are here to learn is this, namely, to see the tenderness of
God toward his people, even as to the outward man. As he will have Mercy
rather then Sacrifice: so he orders the matters of Sacrifice and Worship with
tenderness and mercy even to the bodies of his people: yea the Spirit of God
vouchsafes to dwell in their very Bodies, as well as in their Souls, and he
preserves the dust thereof as precious relics in the treasures of his
Providence, and will gather those dispersed atoms, and bring them forth again,
and raise them up to everlasting life. How great is his Goodness to us!

It shows there is a Duty incumbent upon us in reference to our Bodies; and how
great a sin it is in men to wrong and hurt their bodies, when the Lord himself
is tender of them.

3. They were not to come empty handed, Exodus 23. Deuteronomy. 16.16, 17. true
Religion is bountiful: Duties of Worship are to be accompanied with duties of
mercy and bounty: so upon the Christian Sabbath, there should be Collections
for the poor, 1 Cor. 16.2.

Hypocrisy divides these, it is willing to serve God, but in the cheapest way:
hypocrites are all for a cheap Religion.

4. Whereas there was danger of Invasion by their Enemies, when all the Males
were absent; the Lord secures them by a promise of special Protection. Exodus
34.24. Neither shall any man desire thy Land, when thou shall go up to appear
before the Lord thy God, thrice in the year.

Learn here, that while we are in our Duty, God will take care of our Safety --
the way of Duty is the way of Safety. When the Church of the Jews was gone from
God, and had crucified the Lord of Life, this protecting Providence forsook
them. For at the Passover it was, that the Romans took and destroyed Jerusalem.
This Ordinance which was at first, and ever after, a means of safety to them,
the Lord now makes it a snare to bring them all together as it were into a
pound, that the Romans might take them and cut them off. But while they abode
with God in purity of Worship and Obedience, he abode with them in his
protecting Providence.

This should be a great encouragement to us in the Work and Worship of God, to
run all hazards, and to fear no colors, but be resolute in the discarge and
performance of Duty. The Lord is with us in such a case, and then who can be
against us?

5. These Feasts (as to their end and use) were both commemorative of former
Benefits, and also prefigurative of future. It may be said so of other holy
times and holy things also; but it holds eminently true concerning these three
solemn anniversary Feasts.

The first of these yearly Feasts was the Passover, which began upon the
fifteenth day of the first month, answering chiefly to our March.

The first Institution of it is in the 12th chap. of Exodus. There were three
things which were the peculiar observations of this Feast, which do distinguish
it from the rest.

1. The killing and eating of the Paschal Lamb (with the Ceremonies thereto
belonging) which was upon the fourteenth day of the first month at even. Exodus
12. v. 6, etc.

2. The putting away of Leaven, and eating unleavened Bread for seven days,
that is, from the fifteenth to the one and twentieth of that month, Exodus 12.
ver. 15. Hence it has its denomination, the Feast of unleavened Bread, from
this Ceremony: as it is called the Feast of the Passover from the Paschal Lamb
that was eaten over night. See of this before on Lev. 7.37. upon the
Meat Offering.

3. The Sheaf of first Fruits was waved upon the morrow after the Passover,
that is, upon the sixteenth day of the first month. But of this there will be
occasion to speak further in the next Feast.

These were the special Observations and appertainances belonging to this
Feast, besides those general Rules beforementioned that do concern them all.

Now for the end and use of this Feast.

1. It was the Commemoration of their Deliverance and Redemption out of Egypt,
and from the destroying Angel there, which was the occasion of the first
Institution of the Passover. Exodus 12.26, 27. And unleavened Bread was made use
of to this end, because their departure was so hasty, that they had not time to
leaven their Bread. Hence Deuteronomy. 16.3. unleavened Bread is called the Bread of
tribulation, because they did eat it when they were in great tribulation.

2. It was a presiguration of our spiritual Redemption by Jesus Christ, who is
the true Lamb of God, Joh. 1.29. and a Lamb stain from the Foundation of the
World, Rev. 13.8. and who was actually slain in the fullness of time, at this
very season, namely, at the Passover, as you find it recorded in the four
Evangelists.

It shadowed forth Christ in five respects.

1. The Paschal Lamb it self held forth Jesus Christ in sundry of the personal
qualifications sitting him for his Office: therefore Christ is so often called
a Lamb, Joh. 1.29. Rev. 5.6.

1. The Paschal Lamb was to be a Lamb without blemish, Exodus 12.5. so Christ, 1
Pet. 1.19, 20. Ye are redeemed with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
without blemish and without spot, who verily was foreordained before the
foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you. There
was not the least spot of sin on Christ, either in his heart, or in his life
and practice; he knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21.

2. The Lamb was to be a male, Exodus 12.5. which is the more excellent and
perfect sex. This excellency might shadow forth the perfect excellency and
absolute perfection of Christ: so Christ was of the male sex, Isai. 9.6. to us
a Son is born.

3. The Lamb is a meek and patient creature: therefore Christ is compared to a
Lamb in regard of his Meekness and Patience; there was no resistance, there was
nothing in him but silent submission to the Hand and Justice of his Father in
his Sufferings. Isai. 53.7. This appeared also in the whole course of his life:
he had many provocations, but did put all up: he wrought no miracle to the
destruction of men, as some of his Servants have done: but it appeared most
eminently in his Sufferings.

2. The killing and dressing of the, Lamb, held forth the Death and Sufferings
of Christ; of which we may note four things.

1. The Lamb was to be taken, Exodus 12.5. and so was Jesus Christ arrested, as
it were, and seized upon by divine Justice, to which the Officers and Soldiers
were but inferior Instruments and Executioners.

2. It was slain, ver. 6. and so was Christ, though now he is alive, and lives
for evermore; yet slain he was, Rev. 5.6. I saw a Lamb as it had been slain,
and v. 13. slain before the foundation of the world, in regard of Gods Decree,
and the efficacy of his Death, which was accepted for the Saints of old, and
does continue still to be accepted for Believers, the Virtue of his Death
abides still.

3. The Lamb was roasted in the fire, not raw, nor sodden, v. 9. This signifies
the scorching heat and fierceness of the fiery Wrath of God upon Christ when he
bare our sins: He did not save us without suffering, nor by an easy way of
suffering. Lam. 2.4. He bent his bow like an enemy, he stood with his right
hand as an adversary: he poured out his fury like fire. Those expressions may
be here applied to Gods dealing with Christ.

4. Not a bone of it was to be broken, Exodus 12.46. This is applied unto
Christ, Joh. 19.33, 36. not a bone of him was broken. It was said of the
Paschal Lamb, and it is quoted as spoken of Christ: for the Lamb was Christ
typically, and in a shadow. There was an overruling Providence of God in it,
that the performance and accomplishment might answer the promise in the Type.

3. The time of it shadowed forth Christ's Sufferings. There was a remarkable
analogy in the circumstances of time, and this in four respects.

1. In that the Lamb was to be a year old, not the first day or week, but at a
fit age was the Lamb to be taken up: so Christ at a fit age, in the best and
fittest time; so far we may safely apply this circumstance from that of the
Apostle, In due time, Romans 5.6.

2. In that the Lamb was to be taken the tenth day: but not slain till the
fourteenth day, Exodus 12.6. so Christ entered into his public Ministry the
thirtieth year of his life, which is the tenth thrice told; and suffered not
till the four and thirtieth, Luke 3.23. he was near about thirty years old when
baptized. And in the Gospel of John there are four Passovers mentioned, at the
fourth whereof he suffered, Dan. 9.27. in the midst of the week. The week is
seven prophetical days, seven years, the midst whereof is three years and an
half. Moreover he was born on the fifteenth day of the seventh month: for that
was the day of the Feast of Tabernacles; from whence to the Passover, which was
in the first month, is half a year.

3. The Lamb was to be slain on the fourteenth day of the first month, the time
when they came out of Egypt: so Christ died at the very same time of the year,
at the Feast of the Passover: So that the time did look backward to their
typical Redemption out of Egypt, and forward to their spiritual Redemption by
Jesus Christ. It is true, it is called the preparation day, Joh. 19.31. but
that is thought to be, because the Jews had a corrupt custom, when two great
Feasts came so near together, to put off the former a day longer. But Christ
observed and fulfilled the time appointed in the Institution.

4. It was to be slain in the evening, or (as the Margin has it) between the
two evenings: for every day had two evenings, namely, the evening of the day,
which began at three a clock in the afternoon; and the evening of the night,
which began at Sunset, Josh. 10.26, 27. The Lord gave them so large a time,
because they had many other Services and Sacrifices to offer. See Ainsworth in
loc.

So Christ, Matthew. 27.46, 50. he suffered death about the hour of three a
clock, and then the evening began: for the sixth hour of the day is that which
we call twelve a clock, the ninth hour is that which we call three a clock in
the afternoon; for the Jews reckoned their hours from morning to evening, and
not as we do, from midday to midnight.

Thus you see how the time of the Passover showed forth diverse circumstances of
the time of Christ's Sufferings.

4. The Blood of the Lamb shadowed forth the Blood of Christ. See the analogy
in four things.

1. The Blood of the slain Lamb was not to be spilt upon the ground, or trodden
under foot, but kept in a Basin, as a precious thing, v. 22. What that
typified, we may gather from that of the Apostle, Heb. 10.29. they have trodden
under foot the Blood of the Covenant. This was to hold forth the preciousness
of the Blood of Jesus Christ; it is called precious Blood, 1 Pet. 1.19.
Unbelief rejects and spills this Blood, and makes it to be shed in vain.

2. It was to be sprinkled upon the lintel and posts of their doors with a
bunch of Hyssop, v. 22. This shadowed forth the sprinkling of Christ's Blood
upon the Souls of his people, that is, the effectual application of it by the
Promise. Isai. 52.15. He shall sprinkle many Nations, 1 Pet. 1.2. the
sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ.

It was to be sprinkled with a bunch of Hyssop. This intimates the means of the
application of the Blood of Christ, which are the Promises, and Ordinances, and
Faith, and the Spirit of Christ in them.

3. This Blood of the Paschal Lamb it made atonement for them, that is,
typically: so Christ's Blood does it really. Nothing we can do can expiate the
least sin: but there is atoning virtue in this Blood; he has expiated our
sins, and made Satisfaction for our offenses.

4. Hence the destroying Angel passed over them, v. 23. and the Israelites were
spared when the Egyptians were cut off: so Believers are saved through the
Blood of Christ sprinkled upon their Consciences, when Unbelievers are cut off
and perish eternally, Heb. 12. the Blood of Christ speaks better things then
the Blood of Abel.

Thus you see how the Blood of the Paschal Lamb typified the Blood of Christ.

5. Their eating the Lamb signified our spiritual seeding upon Christ by Faith,
especially in the Sacrament of the Supper. We eat Christ spiritually by Faith,
and sacramentally in the Lords Supper.

The manner of eating was very significant to hold forth the manner of
receiving Christ in the Supper, not unworthily, 1 Cor. 11. but in due order, as
1 Chronicles. 15.13.

1. They were to do it standing, with their staves in their hands, their shoes
on their feet, and their loins girt, which was a posture of readiness for
action and motion, which seems to have been a peculiar circumstance of that
first Passover; but it was very significant, showing how we ought to behave our
selves in the Egypt of this world, and of a natural condition, and of
Antichristian bondage, that we should be upon a posture of motion and action,
bestirring our selves to get out of it. Gird up the Loins of your minds, 1 Pet.
1.13. says the Apostle, that is, be at Christ's dispose, be ready to follow his
Call, to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, Rev. 14.4. Let us up and be
going, for we have a great journey before us, and this is not our rest, Mich.
2.11. here we have no continuing City, but seek one to come. Hebr. 13.14.

2. They were to eat it with sour or bitter Herbs. Christ himself was a Man of
Sorrows, and must be fed upon with bitter and dolorous remembrance of our sins,
and of his Sufferings for them, 1 Cor. 11.28, 31. the grief we have put him to,
should be matter of grief to us. Repentance and godly sorrow must go along with
the exercise of Faith. And as Christ suffered before he entered into Glory: so
all that will follow him, must bear the Cross before they can wear the Crown.
We cannot reign with him except we suffer with him.

3. They must eat it without Leaven, and have no Leaven for seven days, ver.
15. Leaven is of an infecting, sowring, spreading nature. It is put for false
Doctrine, Beware of the Leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 16.6, 12.
and the Apostle interprets it as signifying also Hypocrisy, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
Purge out the old Leaven, and let us keep the Feast with the unleavened Bread
of Sincerity and Truth. So Christ interprets it to his Disciples, Luke 12.1.
Beware ye of the Leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy. And the Apostle.
1 Cor. 5.8. applies it in particular to the sowring, swelling lust of malice.
Let us keep the Feast not with old Leaven, naither with the Leaven of Malice
and Wickedness --

As they having eaten the Passover did presently abstain from all Leaven for
seven days together: so we having once laid hold on Christ, and fed upon him by
Faith, must put away the old leaven of sin and corruption, purging our hearts
as they did their houses of it, not a day, but seven days, serving the Lord in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives. Thus we are to keep the
Feast under the Gospel.

4. The whole Lamb was to be eaten, and none of it left, ver. 9.10. so by Faith
we must receive whole Christ, and all his Benefits, Joh. 1.12. 1 Cor. 1.13. Is
Christ divided? every Believer has whole Christ to himself. Some are willing
to feed upon Christ for pardon, and to eat that part of the Lamb: but to feed
upon Christ for holiness and mortification, this they desire not.

5. It was to be eaten by the whole Family, ver. 3, and 4. and if the Family
were too little, they were to call in others: this signified both the communion
and enlargement of the Church.

It signified the spiritual communion of the Church, as being one Body, one
spiritual Family, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. the whole Church of Christ must eat and
feed upon Christ jointly, as well as severally and personally, and exercise a
spiritual and visible communion together. It signified also the enlargement of
the Church, gathering in of others, Luke 14.23. compel them to come in.

But no uncircumcised person might eat thereof, Exodus 12.48. so now, none
uncircumcised in the flesh, no unbaptized person, and none uncircumcised in
heart, none apparently unregenerate may be received to the Lords Supper. See
Ezekiel. 44.7, 9. which speaks of New Testament days in Old Testament phrases.

Their second Feast was that of Penticost, so called in the New Testament, Act.
2.1. from the Greek (...), the fiftieth, because it was kept fifty days after
the Passover.

It is called the Feast of Weeks, because they were to reckon seven weeks from
the morrow after the Passover, and then they were to offer to the Lord their
two Wave-loaves, Lev. 23.17. there was a threefold mystery in this Feast.

1. To testify their Gratitude and Thankfulness unto God for the Land of
Canaan, and for the Harvest of the Fruits of the earth: therefore they were to
present the first Fruits thereof to him at this Feast. Hence it is called the
Feast of Harvest, Exodus 23.16. and the Feast of First Fruits, Numb. 28.26. and
the Feast of Weeks of the first Fruits of the Wheat-harvest. Exodus 34.22. As in
the former the first Fruits of their Barley-harvest, so in this the first
Fruits of their Wheat-harvest must be offered to God. This was as it were the
completing of that.

There are four Instructions to be learned from hence.

1. That God must be acknowledged in outward mercies, in the Fruits of the
Earth; we must pay him the Rent of Thankfulness, as our great Landlord, and
that is all the Rent that he requires. He is in giving so liberal, that he
gives us all things richly to enjoy; but in taking so sparing, that he requires
but a Sheaf for the whole Harvest: (For, Act. 14.17. it is he that gives us
Rain and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness:) and
would it not be strange ingratitude to receive from God whole harvests of his
Benefits, and return nothing, not not so much as one Sheaf to him?

2. The second Instruction is this; this Feast instructs when it is that the
Soul becomes truly fruitful and thankful, to acknowledge God indeed, namely,
when the Blood of Ghrist has been sprinkled upon the Soul, when his Death has
been applied and not before. For they were first to eat the Passover, and so to
begin that Feast; and then upon the morrow after the Passover they were to
offer the first Fruits of Barley, and from thence to reckon fifty days to the
Feast of Weeks; so that their first expression of their thankfulness to God for
the Fruits of the earth was immediately after they had killed and eaten the
Passover.

It is that which many complain of, a carnal, dead, insensible, unthankful
frame of heart; but you see here both the cause of it, and the cure and remedy
against it. The Soul will come to own God, to dedicate it self and all it has
unto God, when first sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus Christ the Lamb of God,
but not till then.

3. They were to begin these their acknowledgments of God on the sixteenth day
of the first month, Lev. 16.10, 11. for then Barley was ripe in those climates,
at another season then in these Northern Countries. Then they were to begin
their acknowledgments of God, they were not to delay their thankfulness till
they had gotten in their whole Harvest; but they must bring the first unto God.
It is a lovely thing to see men acquaint themselves with God betimes, to give
him the first ripe Fruits: and it is but equal reddere illi prima, qui nobis
dedit omnia; that we should render the first unto him who gives all unto us.

4. As they begun betimes, so they were to proceed; as in their Harvest, so in
their Thankfulness: for they offered first but a Wave-sheaf of Barley, Exodus 16.
but now two Wave-loaves of Wheat; then but one Lamb, now seven Lambs, Lev.
23.18. far greater Offerings then the former. To teach us, that a Christians
Thankfulness and Fruitfulness should be increasing, till at last he be made
perfect. We should not sit down in some imperfect beginnings, but go forward
and make continual progress in the ways of God: as their time goes on, so
should their thankfulness.

The greater Gods Blessings are to us, the greater must our Thankfulness be to
him; as he does increase his Benefits, so should we augment and increase our
Obedience. A good Note (says one writing upon this Feast) for all them to
think of to whom God has extended a more liberal hand then to their brethren.
Many rise up early, go to bed late, and part from their beloved sleep; yet fare
hardly, eat brown Bread (as we say) and drink the Water of Affliction. Is thy
condition better then theirs? art thou fed with the finest of the Wheat instead
of their Barley? Remember then, that to whom much is given, of him shall be
required much, Luke 12.48. seven Lambs for their one, and for their one Sheaf
two Loaves.

2. A second end and mystery of this Feast of Pentecost was in reference to the
giving of the Law upon Mount Sinai. That this was one part of the mystery of
this Feast of Pentecost the time it self speaks, with other circumstances: For
they came out of Egypt to serve the Lord, and to keep a Feast to him in the
Wilderness. Exodus 5.1, 3. And they had the Law first given to them at this time
of the year: for it was in the third month after they came out of Egypt. Exodus
19.1, 2, 3.

Now they came out at the Passover, which was on the fourteenth day of the
first month; from whence, if you reckon fifty days from the sixteenth day of
the first month, it will bring you to the sixth day of the third month, in
which they received the Law at Mount Sinai, the memorial whereof was celebrated
by this Feast.

For God to give his Law and Ordinances to a people, and to reveal his Mind and
make known his Will to them, it is an inestimable mercy to be kept always in
precious remembrance, and to be celebrated with everlasting thankfulness;
especially for them who before were tied to the cruel Laws of Egyptian Tyrants
and Taskmasters, now to receive not only a Law of their own, but a Law from
Heaven, a Law from God, was an ineffable mercy.

3. A third mystery of Pentecost, was the pouring forth of the Spirit at this
time, Acts 2.1, 2, 3, 4. as at this time God gave the Law under the Old
Testament: so it pointed us to the time when he would give the first fruits of
his Spirit under the New; which he poured forth upon the Apostles, who
thereupon went forth to preach the Gospel, and to gather that which the
Prophets before had sown, reaping fruit unto eternal life, and bring Wheat of
God into his Garner.

As at this Feast he gave the Law by Moses, so at the same time he gave his
Spirit by Jesus Christ. To teach us, that under the Gospel we receive the
Spirit of Christ to enable us to (...) fulfill the Law, and do the Will of
Christ.

Unto this Feast there was added another Precept, of leaving for the poor, Lev.
23.22. teaching them, that with their Sacrifices to God, they should join love
to their brethren: and that as Gods hand opened to them, so their hands should
be opened to the poor and needy. But this was a general rule in all the yearly
Feasts, not to appear before the Lord empty-handed, as was observed before.

3. The third of their solemn Festivals was the Feast of Tabernacles, which
began upon the fifteenth day of the seventh month, the fifteenth day of
September; and it lasted eight days, the first and last whereof were holy
Convocations, or days sanctified and set apart for publik Worship.

The principal Rite and Ceremony of this Feast (to distinguish it from the
rest) was their dwelling in Booths, from whence it has its demomination, and
is called the Feast of Booths, or Tabernacles, as you have the description of
it at large in Lev. 23.34. to the end.

There was a threefold mystery in this Feast.

1. To put them in mind of their dwelling in Tents when they traveled through
the Wilderness into the Land of Canaan; they dwelled forty years in Tents, Lev.
23.42, 43. that your Generations may know that I made the Children of Israel to
dwell in Booths, when I brought them out of the Land of Egypt. That was one
thing, to keep the memorial of that great Dispensation of Providence toward
their Forefathers.

2. The second mystery was this, to instruct them that they were but Pilgrims
and Strangers here below, Sojourners as it were in a strange Land, passing
through it to their own Country, toward their own home. I am a stranger with
thee (says David) and a Sojourner, as all my Fathers were, Psalm. 39.12.

This Ceremony was strangely neglected and forgotten by them in their
observation of this Feast for about a thousand years together, till they were
taught by their deportation into Babylon to keep it better, as you find in
Nehem. 8.13. to the end, they went forth and fetched Olive-branches, etc. to
make Booths, as it is written, etc. For since the days of Joshua the son of
Nun, unto that day, had not the Children of Israel done so: a strange omission.
Some understand it only of the frame of Heart wherewith they kept it, and not
of this external Rite; but it may include both. Now they made Booths; they had
learnt now that they were but Sojourners indeed while they were here below, and
that the Land of Canaan was not the true rest, nor their own Country; but that
they were to seek and look for another, that is an heavenly, Heb. 11.16. arise
and depart, for this is not your rest, for it is polluted. Mich. 2.10.

Here then is a second mystery of this Feast of Tabernacles, to put them in
mind that they were but Sojourners while they were here, and were to seek and
expect another Country, an everlasting abode and fixed habitation in the
Heavens.

3. This Feast of Tabernacles pointed them to the time when God himself would
come to tabernacle and pitch his Tent amongst men. Therefore the expression is
in Joh. 1.14. (...) and the Word was made Flesh, and he came and did pitch his
Tent amongst us, dwelled as in a Tent or Tabernacle amongst us. Wherein he
refers to this great Institution and Feast of Tents or Tabernacles: and many
other circumstances of this Feast fall in suitably to this scope and great
Gospel-mystery of it. For it cannot be imagined that this Feast should have no
relation to Jesus Christ, especially it being so great a Feast, greater in some
respects then either of the two former, for it lasted eight days, whereas the
Feast of the Passover was but seven; the eighth day pointing us to his
Circumcision, as the first to his Birth: and it had a more wonderful and
mysterious course of Sacrifices appointed for it, then the other Feasts had; as
you may see, Numb. 29. from ver. 12. to the 40. there must be thirteen Bullocks
offered the first day, and but twelve the second day, and but eleven the third
day, and so to the end of the Feast every day less and less, till upon the last
day no more but only one; which is thought to shadow forth the cessation and
evanition at last of all the legal Sacrifices: it intimates that all those
legal external Sacrifices were to cease at last. That Covenant and that
Administration of it waxing old, and growing weaker and weaker, and decaying,
till it be vanished quite away, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 8.13.

Moreover this Feast had two other Feasts previous to it in the same month, the
Feast of Trumpets on the first day of the seventh month, and the Feast of
Expiation on the tenth day of it; and then follows, after such preparations and
introductions, this great Feast of Tabernacles from the fifteenth to the two
and twentieth.

They had also a custom (as the Jewish Writers report) of singing certain
Songs and Hymns of Praise to God when they were preparing and making these
Booths and Tabernacles, one whereof was the 118. Psalm, ver. 25. Hosanna save
now I beseech thee, O Lord, and they would say, necte Hosannam, fold or prepare
the Hosanna Insomuch that the whole Feast, the Booths, Tabernacles, and the
Feast and all came in process of time to be called Hosanna's. Now this the
people apply in their Acclamations and Songs of Praise to Jesus Christ, Luke
19. which though it was done at another time of the year; yet, as the people in
those Acclamations seem to allude to the manner and custom at the Feast of
Tabernacles: so they do ascribe it to the Messiah, Hosanna to the Son of David.
And well they might, for the Birth of Christ was at the Feast of Tabernacles:
Christ did then tabernacle in the flesh. Moreover, at this Feast of Tabernacles
was Solomon's Temple dedicated, and the Ark solemnly introduced into it, 2,
Chron. 5.2, 3, 7. which Temple was a Type of Christ's humane nature, Joh. 2.19,
21. I know it is contrary to the common account, to place the Birth of Christ
here, upon the fifteenth day of the seventh month. But consider these arguments
for it.

1. From this Feast of Tabernacles, which must needs point to some principal
thing concerning the Messiah, as well as the two former Feasts did. And in how
many particulars it suits this of his coming to tabernacle in our flesh, you
have heard.

2. From the space of time that our Savior did converse amongst us here upon
earth.

As to his private life, we find, Luke 3.23. that he was baptized, and entered
upon his Ministry as he began to be about thirty years old.

His public Ministry was about three years and an half: for we read of four
Passovers in the Gospels at which he was present, at the last whereof he
suffered.

And the Angel faith to Daniel, that in the midst of the week the Messiah shall
be cut off, Dan. 9.27. which is meant of a prophetical week containing seven
years, the half wherreof is three years and an half.

Moreover, we read in all the Evangelists, that the Death of Christ was at the
Passover in the first month.

Now if we reckon three years and an half from thence, it will carry us to the
month of September for his Baptism: so as the whole space and time of his
conversing here below was about three and thirty years and an half: his private
life about thirty years, his public Ministry about three years and an half;
whereas the common account, instead of half a year, makes but a quarter of a
year between the Feast of his Nativity and Easter.

From all which it appears that the time of his Birth was indeed in the seventh
month at the Feast of Tabernacles: and for the further confirmation thereof,
there be sundry passages and circumstances in the sacred History of his Birth,
by which it is evident that it could not be in the tenth month, as is commonly
supposed.

1. Augustus his taxing all World, and ordering them to repair to their own
Cities for that end, Luke 2.1. it is not likely that the Emperor would enjoin
all his Subjects to travel in the depth of Winter to their own Cities. An
observable Providence, and the rather for its falling out in this juncture of
time. The Scepter was gone from Judah, when they were compelled by a foreign
Power to neglect the Feast of Tabernacles, and to travel to other places
instead of going up to Jerusalem.

And therefore now it was full time for Shilo to appear, according to that
Prophecy of old Jacob, Genesis 49.10.

2. The Shepherds were abroad watching and keeping their Flocks by night, Luke
2.8. but it is not probable they were so in the depth of Winter.

3. John was baptizing in Jordan at that time of the year thirty years after,
Luke 3.23. but it is not likely that he would choose out the coldest part of
the year for that work; though those Climates were hotter in the Summer then
this; yet they were also cold in the Winter. The Winter even in those Climates
was but a hard time to travel in, or to watch in Matthew. 24.20. pray that your
flight be not in the Winter. Yea, so cold that at the Passover they needed a
Fire within doors, Joh. 18.18. and surely in the depth of Winter it was much
colder.

Quest. But then how arose this mistake to place the Birth of Christ in the
very midst of Winter?

Answ. They reasoned from that passage of Zacharias offering Incense, Luke
1.5-11-36. They did reason thus, that John Baptist was conceived at the end of
September, and Christ six months after, which falls out about the end of March;
from whence they reckon his Birth nine months after, toward the end of
December.

But in this whole Argumentation there is a Concatenation of manifold mistakes,
absurdities, and incongruities, besides many uncertainties.

For 1. Zacharias was not the High Priest. For he was of Abia's Course. Luke
1.5. But the High Priest was of no Course: for he was above all the Courses.
And Zacharias is called a certain Priest of the Course of Abia; a Style too low
for the High Priest.

2. The Incense he offered was not the yearly Incense-offered on the tenth day
of the seventh month, but the daily Incense.

3. The Angel did not appear to him in the Holy of holies, but in the
Sanctuary: for the Altar of Incense stood in the Sanctuary.

4. If there were none of these manifest and palpable mistakes in this
argumentation; yet it is wholly bottomed upon many suppositions and
presumptions which are altogether uncertain, and without any ground in the
Scripture.

As for instance, it supposes first, that as soon as Zacharias came home,
after the days of his Ministration were ended, his Wife Elizabeth conceived.
And secondly, that this was that year on the seven and twentieth of our
September. And thirdly, that there was six months, to a day, between the
Conception of John the Baptist and the Angels speaking to the Virgin Mary; When
as the Holy Ghost speaks in a greater latitude; and

As to the first says thus, after those days his Wife Elizabeth conceived,
Luke 1.24. but whether it was presently after, or a month, or two months, or
three months after, he says not.

And as to the third, the Angel says only, that it was on the sixth month,
ver. 26. and that it was the sixth month of her being with Child, v. 36. but
whether the beginning, or middle, or end of it he leaves wholly in the dark.
Whereas this Opinion makes it to be just at the expiring of the sixth, and
entrance of the seventh month.

To which might be added, as a fourth groundless and uncertain presumption,
that if it were certainly known to a day what time Elizabeth conceived, yea and
what day the Angel spoke to Mary; yet the same uncertainty still remains, how
long after the Angel Gabriel's speaking so to the Virgin Mary it was before the
power of the most High came upon her, and she conceived of the Holy Ghost: it
might be some days or weeks after, for ought that can be proved to the contrary.

And lastly (to add yet a fifth uncertain groundless supposal that is presumed
and proceeded upon in this vulgar computation) if all these forementioned
particulars were precisely declared in the Scripture; yet what assurance have
we that the Virgin Mary went neither more nor less then two hundred and seventy
days, or nine solar months of thirty days a month, after her Conception before
the Birth of Christ? For though he was in all things, except sin, made like
unto us; yet it is well known, that according to the Experience of Women, and
the Judgment of Physicians, there is a considerable variation and latitude in
the time of Women's going with Child, it being sometimes more, sometimes less,
differing (at least in different persons) not only sundry days, but sometimes
some weeks, yea months.

But then the second of the first mentioned uncertain supposals (which I cast
into this place, because I would speak a little more largely to it) namely,
that Zacharias's Ministration ended that year, precisely on the seven and
twentieth of September, is as undemonstrable and uncertain as any of the other.

For first, though there were four and twenty Courses of Priests before the
Captivity of Babylon; yet how will it be proved that there continued just the
same number ever after through all the calamities, and concussions, and
confusions that the Jewish State and Worship underwent? how can it be proved
that none of these four and twenty was utterly extinct before that day by
Death, or Apostasy, or Exclusion, or some other way?

And secondly, if that could be proved; yet how will it ever be made out that
they continued in an uninterrupted order of Succession, as they were
distributed and ranged in David's days? 1 Chronicles. 24. why might not one lot,
suppose that of Abijah, through some occurrence or other fall into the week of
the lot of Hakkor, or of Jeshua? there is no prohibition of it by God but that
it might lawfully be done in some cases: and though it might not; yet we find
there was introduced as great and a greater variation and swerving from the
first Institution and Ordinance of God concerning the continuance of the High
Priesthood. For it appears in the Evangelist to be anniversary, at least
mutable, about the time of Christ's Death, Joh. 11.49, 51. Act. 4.6. when as by
the Law of God it ought to have been during life unchangeable.

And thirdly, if both these were granted, or could be as firmly proved as they
are strenuously supposed; yet we are still in the dark, unless we can certainly
and demonstratively fix the beginning of our reckoning of the Succession of the
Courses of the Priests both to a year, and to a month, yea to a very day
precisely. But whether this Computation of the Succession of the Courses of the
Priests must begin from the first ordaining of them in the later end of David's
Reign, or from the finishing and Dedication of the Temple in Solomon's, or from
the erecting of the Altar at the first return from Captivity in Cyrus his
Reign, or from the re-building of the Temple in the Reign of Darius, or from
the cleansing and new Dedication of it, after its Pollution and Profanation by
Antiochus, of which we read in the Maccabees, is still subject to endless
undeterminable Controversy and Dispute.

Fourthly, if we could attain convincing clearness in all the former; yet there
will arise a further unresolvable Question touching the Rule of the proceedure
of this Computation; namely, whether it must begin with the lot of Joarib,
which came out first in David's ordering of them, and doubtless at their first
entering on the execution of their Attendance by courses was the first, or
whether it must begin where at the interruption it left off; or whether at the
course to which it would have fallen at the restoration, had no such
interruption intervened.

Lastly, if all these snarling intanglements were extricated unravelled and
made plain; yet we are never the nearer to our business of finding out the time
of Zacharias Ministration either as to month or year, much less as to the day,
unless we could certainly make out, how many years there are from the time that
we begin our reckoning at, to the year of that Ministration of Zacharias. But
this lies involved under so much darkness and so many perplexities, that the
most learned Chronologers, who have set themselves with greatest industry and
most advantages to make out the year of the Birth of Christ, have given so
little satisfaction to others, that there are almost as many several years
fixed on for it, as there are Chronologers. Some have reckoned up forty several
Opinions of learned men about it, and perhaps more might be added. Mr. Perkins
places it about the three thousand nine hundredth year of the World. Others
seven and twenty years later. Yea several years between that and the four
thousandth are fixed on by several Chronologers. Others again go beyond the
four thousandth year, some one, others two, others forty, others fifty years;
yea there are that bring it down below the five thousandth year, and some below
the six thousandth, yea near to the seven thousandth year of the World.

Yet must all these things which are so altogether uncertain, and left by God
in such a latitude, be punctually determined, and taken for true and certain,
if the grounds of this vulgar Opinion concerning Christ's being born on the five
and twentieth of December have any strength in them. A consideration this is
which does sufficiently show the non-cogency, invalidity and utter weakness of
that reasoning which some learned men use from the Courses of the Priests to
find out the time of Christ's Nativity; a way of reasoning it is which has so
little of evidence and strength in it, that several learned men make use of it
to establish their several different Opinions in this point.

Some there are that do from hence argue for the five and twentieth of December.

Another makes use of the same way of arguing to prove that Christ was born on
the sixth of January.

Others take the same course of arguing to cast the Nativity of Christ on the
later end of September or beginning of October; and there is a very learned man
who uses the very same way of reasoning to prove the Birth of Christ fell on
the Ides, that is, on the thirteenth of November. An ingenious and elaborate
way of arguing this must be confessed to be, in the making out of the whole
Contexture whereof several Authors have shown a great deal of useful Learning.

But nevertheless by what has been briefly hinted, it is apparent that there
are so many weak parts and uncertainties throughout the frame and contexture of
the argumentation, that the whole of it is rendered uncogent and unsatisfactory
to one that looks for firm and solid footing to build his Judgment on, from
such strength of Reason, and clearness of Evidence, as may constrain assent.

Use. See the unwarrantableness of the Observation of these Festivals amongst
Christians.

The Passover is that we commonly call Easter, Pentecost is that we call
Whitsuntide, and for the Feast of Tabernacles the Pope has ordained Christmas.

If these days were shadows of good things to come, and that the Body is of
Christ, (as the Text is express) then now the Substance is come, these shadows
are ceased and vanished away; the Substance being come, the shadow must needs
fly away and vanish.

Moreover, these Feasts, these days and times, since the abrogation of them,
have not been attended and accompanied with the Blessing of God, but rather
with the visible tokens and expressions of his dislike and displeasure. For as
there is a Blessing of God upon his Ordinances: so he is wonted to imprint his
Curse upon the Inventions of men. Easter was the first Ball of Contention that
ever was amongst Christians; the Eastern and the Western Churches contending
sharply about the time of it for above two hundred years together: so that
Victor the Bishop of Rome excommunicated many Churches for not observing Easter
at his time. The thing in difference was, whether to keep it on the fourteenth
day of the first month (the day on which Christ began his Sufferings) or on the
next Lords day after, viz. the day of Christ's Resurrection. The Eastern
Churches observed Easter on the fourteenth day of the first month according to
the time of the Passover. The Western Churches on the contrary said, this was
to Judaize, and it was more Christian-like to celebrate the day of his
Resurrection, etc. and this Opinion carried it. For in the Council of Nice it
was concluded that it should be kept on the day of the Resurrection. This was
the fruit of Gods Displeasure against the Observation of such a time, when he
had testified in his Word, Let no man judge you in respect of Holy days, etc.

And as to Christmas they have greatly mistaken in their computation of the
time (as has been showed) partly through the ignorance and unskilfulness which
God was pleased to leave them to, as it were to rebuke them for their
Superstition; and partly through their carnal compliance with the Pagans; which
made the Bishop of Rome take the old Saturnalia and Bacchanalia of the Pagans,
and to disguise them with a new Name, that those Festivities which had been
kept before in the Devils name, might now be kept in Christ's own name to his
greater dishonor.

Besides there is little probability that the true time of Christ's Birth is
stumbled upon, and many learned men confess there is a mistake as to the time,
and that it must needs be at the Feast of Tabernacles, and not in December.

Moreover, God usually gives men up to more sin then, then at other time; which
is a further evidence of his Displeasedness with the Observation of it.

It was Latimers complaint of old, in the days of King Henry the eighth, That
Christ was more dishonored in the Twelve Days, then in all the whole Twelve
Months besides. Ye observe days, and months, and years, I am afraid of you,
that I have labored in vain, says the Apostle in Gal. 4.10, 11. it is a sign
the preaching of the Gospel has been very much in vain among the people, when
they retain the Observation of such times; the Apostle speaks of the days and
times that men have invented, not of days that God has instituted to be
observed.

It is said of Jeroboam, 1 King 12.33. that he offered upon the Altar which he
had made in Bethel the fifteenth day of the eighth month, the month which he
had devised of his own heart, which he had lied or feigned, quem mentitus est.
The Lie of it appears in this, that they pretend to do it to the honor of
Christ, when indeed they do it to his dishonor: and therefore it is as a brand
set upon him on this account, which he lied in his own heart: so it is but
lying, for men to keep days of their own invention; and the Lie appears in that
they pretend to do it for the honor of God and of Jesus Christ, whereas they
unspeakably dishonor him thereby. It is the framing of a Lie in men's own
hearts when they keep such days.

Obj. But should we not celebrate the memorial of our Redemption by Jesus
Christ? why should we forget the memory of these things? should we not remember
how Jesus Christ suffered, and has sent his Spirit amongst us, and came to
tabernacle in our Flesh?

Answ. Yes, but the Lord commands us to celebrate the memory of it once a week,
and for us to put him off with once a year, is to put him off with less then he
requires; to give him a day in a year, when he requires a day in a week, for
the memorial and celebration of this thing.

Moreover, there is a way whereby people may keep the Passover, and Pentecost,
and the Feast of Tabernacles; that is, we should keep them under the Gospel
every day. As some say, every day should be a Christian Sabbath. But that is
not true; for a Sabbath is a day set apart from our Callings: but six days
shall thou labor, says the Commandment. But we should make every day our
Easterday, every day our Pentecost, etc.

Obj. But why should not Christians be as holy as the Jews, and therefore keep
these Feasts as well as they? how should we keep them every day?

Answ. We are to keep them in a spiritual and Gospel way, but not legally and
literally: for the Letter kills, but the Spirit is Life. The Apostle exhorts,
let us keep the Feast, 1 Cor. 5.8. Now if you would keep the Feasts of
Fassover, Pentecost and Tabernacles aright, it consists chiefly in three things.

1. To be much in the exercise of Faith, in the acting of a true and pure and
lively Faith upon the Death and Sufferings of Jesus Christ as the true Lamb of
God. I say, in acting Faith, or drawing nigh with a true heart in full
assurance of Faith; and this is the true Passover, and the true keeping of that
Feast, Heb. 10.22. Let us keep the Feast, 1 Cor. 5.8. without the leaven of
Hypocrisy, of seeming Faith, and seeming Holiness, with the unleavened bread
of sincerity and truth. That is the right keeping of the Passover, when men
live not upon their own Righteousness, trust not in their own Duties; but being
sensible of their sinful, undone, wretched estate, act Faith, and exercise
their thoughts upon the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ: this is the
right keeping of it indeed.

2. Be ye filled with the Spirit, get a great and large measure of Gods Spirit;
this is the true Feast of Pentecost, Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with Wine
wherein is excess, (as the Holiday-keepers use to be through the Justice of
God, because they observe their own inventions,) but be ye filled with the
Spirit. Do not sit down with common Gifts, and common Graces, and common
Workings, but get and labor after the saving work of the Spirit; and be not
content, nor sit down satisfied with some little beginnings of a special saving
work, with saving Grace in truth and in sincerity in little measures and
degrees: but labor after a great degree and measure of the Spirit of Grace;
after strength and growth of Grace, as well as truth of Grace; be ye filled
with the Spirit, etc.

3. Behold and see the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. This is the
true Celebration of the Feast of Tabernacles. Get a real sight of God, so as to
behold his Glory as he is manifested in the flesh, and as God dwells in our
Nature, Joh. 1.14. the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt amongst us, came and
pitched his Tabernacle among us, and we beheld his Glory. We cannot see God in
himself, he dwells in Light and Glory inaccessible: as we cannot look upon the
Sun in its own Brightness; but we may see it in a pail of Water: so we may see
the infinite Majesty and Glory of God in the Flesh of Christ. The Tabernacle of
Jesus Christ is a thing to be beheld by Men and Angels, to see more into the
Glory of God, (...) get acquaintance with the mystery of the Father and of
Jesus Christ, as the Apostle speaks, Col. 2.2, 3. that ye may be knit together
in love and comforted, and unto all riches of the full assurance of
understanding, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of the Father,
and of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. But
beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the
Tradition of men, after the rudiments of the World, and not after Christ: ver.
8. for in him, ver. 9. dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

Labor therefore to see God in Jesus Christ: we are not able to behold that
infinite Majesty, but only through the veil of the Flesh of Jesus Christ, as
shining in his humane nature. And this is the mystery of the Feast of
Tabernacles, and the right and Gospel way of celebrating of it. Consider what I
have said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

THE GOSPEL of the FEAST of TRUMPETS.
Jan. 21. 1668.
Coloss. 2.16, 17. Let no man therefore judge you in Meat or in Drink, or in
respect of an Holy day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath Days, Which are a
shadow of things to come, but the Body is of Christ.


THere are three Doctrines in the words.

1. That the Jewish Holy days are of three sorts, or may be referred to three
general heads; Feast days, New Moons, and Sabbaths.

2. That these their holy seasons were shadows of things to come, but the Body
is of Christ.

3. Therefore no Christian should suffer any man to judge him or condemn him for
not observing these Jewish times and seasons.

We are endeavoring to open the substance of these shadows, and what were
those things to come, those things about Jesus Christ and the Gospel which were
shadowed forth in them.

We began first with their Holy days, or their Feast days, that is, their
annual Festivals, whereof we heard they had five. (1.) The Passover. (2.)
Pentecost. (2.) The Feast of Tabernacles. (4.) The Feast of Trumpets. (5.) The
Feast of Expiation. These three, the Passover Pentecost and the Feast of
Tabernacles, were the three great Festivals which were more solemn then the
rest; because then all the Males of Israel were to assemble together out of the
whole Nation, and to appear before the Lord in the place that he should choose,
in a general Church Assembly.

We heard something that these things pointed to. The Passover did point them
to the Death and Sufferings of Jesus Christ, as the true Paschal Lamb, who
fulfilled this Type even as to the very season and holy time it self; for he
suffered at the Passover. The Pentecost pointed at the time of the effusion of
the Holy Ghost after his Ascension. The Feast of Tabernacles pointed them to
the Birth and Nativity of Jesus Christ, when he should come to tabernacle and
pitch his Tent in our Nature.

We heard indeed that this was the time of Christ's Birth, and not as it is
commonly computed to be in December, in the depth of Winter. It is not like the
Shepherds would be watching their Flocks all night then, and that Augustus
would command his Subjects to travel to their own Cities to be taxed at such a
time, and that John would choose that time to baptize in.

There be two more of the Jewish Feasts to be spoken to, which were great and
solemn Feasts; yet not so great as these three; because the people were not all
bound to come up to Jerusalem to the Temple; namely, the Feast of Trumpets and
the Feast of Expiation: they were both in the seventh month, as was also the
Feast of Tabernacles; the Feast of Trumpets on the first day of it, the Feast
of Expiation on the tenth day, and the Feast of Tabernales on the fifteenth
day, and from thence to the two and twentieth day, which is therefore accounted
the greatest of all their Feasts, being in the seventh month, which was also
the first in their old account, the chiefest of all the months in the year, and
called by some the Sabbath of months, as the seventh day is the Sabbath of days.

4. This month began with the Feast of Trumpets, which was upon the first day
of the seventh month. The first Institution of it we have in Lev. 23.23, 24,
25. and the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, etc. It was celebrated as a Sabbath,
they were to do no servile work therein. This Feast also had its peculiar
Sacrifices appointed for it, as in Numb. 29. the six first verses. It was also
solemnized with the blowing of Trumpets, which being the special Rite of this
Festivity, it had its Name from thence. Here therefore the old legal Music may
fitly be considered, this being as it were their Feast of Music. The
Institution of these Trumpets we read in Numb. 10. the ten first verses,
mentioned long after as a very solemn Ordinance in Psalm. 81.3, 4 The first
mention we have of Musical instruments in the Worship of God, is in Exodus
15.20, 21. where we read that Miriam used Timbrels, and they praised God
therewith, and they sang the Song of Moses when they were delivered from
Pharaoh. And Miriam the Prophetess, the Sister of Aaron took a Timbrel in her
hand, and all the Women went out after her with Timbrels and with Dances. And
Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously;
the Horse and his Rider has he thrown into the Sea. Moses afterward by order
from God appointed these Trumpets to be made, and we read of a further increase
of such Instruments in after times. As to the use and signification of them,
there be many Gospel Instructions to be considered in this legal shadow; we
shall mention seven.

1. The general scope of them was to signify and shadow forth the sound of the
Gospel, the blessed sound of the Gospel, which is called the joyful sound,
Psalm. 89.15. the Gospel is called glad tidings, it is a joyful pleasant sound
indeed. Hence the Ministers of the Gospel are said to lift up their voice like
a Trumpet, Isai. 58.1. the Tongue of the just is as choice Silver, Prove. 10.20.
(these Trumpets were of Silver;) the faithful discharge and execution of their
Office is expressed by blowing of the Trumpet, Hos. 8.1. Ezekiel. 33.3, 4, 5. it
is said, in the day when the Jews shall be converted, in that day the great
Trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were ready to perish, etc.
Isai. 27. last. when God shall gather them one by one, ye shall be gathered one
by one, ver. 12. in that day the great Trumpet shall be blown, etc that is
(says Calvin) the Silver Trumpet of the Gospel, to the conviction and
conversion of the Jews. God will have his Church instructed not by sight only,
but by voice, not by the eye only, but by the ear. Even under the Law the Lord
would not have his people always to look for miraculous and immediate Guidance,
but they were to order themselves according to the sound of the Trumpet both in
War Peace, according to the rule of the Word: so according to the rules of the
Gospel, according as that Trumpet sounds, so are you to act. This is the first,
namely, the joyful sound of the Silver Trumpet of the Gospel.

2. The Joys and Graces of the Spirit of God is another thing intimated by this
Trumpet and instrument of Music, that spiritual melody of the Joys and Graces
of the Holy Ghost in the hearts of Gods people, Psalm. 98.6. with Trumpets and
sound of Cornet make a joyful noise before the Lord the King. Ephesians. 5.18, 19.
There is a melody and joyful voice in the Consciences of Believers, the Spirit
of God both sanctifying and comforting of them, so the Apostle, Col. 3.16.
Grace and Joy the fruit of Grace: so this Music remains in the Antitype of it,
the heart strings of Believers making melody suitable to the profession of
their Lips, and to the gracious and peaceable conversation of their lives, that
is the true Gospel-Musick.

3. These Trumpets and other musical instruments were used in time of War, and
appointed by God so to be, Numb. 10.9. the Trumpets were to sound to prepare
and call them forth to the War, to encourage their Faith in it, that they
should be remembered before the Lord, and have success over their enemies;
sometimes visible success attending this Ordinance: as in Jehosaphats time, 2 Chronicles. 20.21, 22. they sounded the Trumpet, praising the Beauty of Holiness,
and when they began to sing praises, the Lord set ambushments against Ammon,
and Moab, and Mount Seir, and then they were smitten.

4. It was the Office of the Priests to sound these Trumpets, as in Numb. 10.8.
the Sons of Aaron the Priest must do it. To show that the public Dispensation
of the Word and Gospel belongs to, and is entrusted chiefly with the Sons of
Aaron, the Ministers of the Gospel, they must sound the Silver Trumpet of the
Gospel in the ears of the world.

5. The matter they were made of, some were of Silver, and some of Horn, Numb.
10.1. and in 1 Chronicles. 15.28. The Cornet, that is an instrument of Horn: so in
that 98. Psalm. 6. with Trumpet and sound of Cornet make a joyful noise before
the Lord the King. And Rams Horns did beat down the Walls of Jericho, Josh. 6.
If God institute the Rams Horns, they shall be as powerful as the Silver
Trumpets. To teach us that the meanest Gifts of any Godly Ministers if sincere
are accepted, and may be blessed of God for the good of Souls, for the casting
down of strong holds, and for success and victory against our spiritual
enemies; Rams Horns may do it as well as Silver Trumpets.

6. Their number at first was but two, Numb. 10.2. that is, for the two Sons of
Aaron, Eleazar and Ithamar the Priests, Numb. 3.4. but in process of time David
added many other musical instruments, but he did it by authority and direction
from God. For so was the Commandment of the Lord by his Prophets, 2 Chronicles
29.25. 1 Chronicles. 16.42. 2 Chronicles. 7.6. And in Solomon's time we read of one
hundred and twenty Priests that did sound with Trumpets at the Dedication of
the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 5.12. Also the Levites, which were the Singers, being
arrayed in white linen, having Cymbals, aad Psalteries, and Harps, and with
them one hundred and twenty Priests sounding with Trumpets. And those
Instruments of Music which David made, they are called the Instruments of
Music of the Lord: for he made them according to the direction of the Seer.
All which shows the enlargement of the Church and its Joy, and the improvement
of the Worship of God in Gospel times: here is one hundred and twenty Trumpets
now, whereas there was but two at first. And as the number of Priests, and
Trumpets and musical instruments was much increased in Solomon's time above what
it was in the time of Moses: so shall the Church and their spiritual Joy in the
days of the Gospel under Christ, who is the true Solomon. They are increased
now, and shall be more and more in the later days, Isai. 60, and 61 chap.

7. And lastly, but why was this Feast of Music and Trumpets upon the first
day of the seventh month, why is that the appointed season for it?

Many accounts there are given by Interpreters, which do all center in this;
because of the many great occurrences and dispensations of God in this month,
some whereof were past, and were now to be remembered, and some future, which
were now to be proclaimed and prepared for. The World was created in this
month, which was at first the first month in the year, until the account was
changed upon occasion and in memorial of their deliverance out of Egypt. This
month shall be to you the beginning of months, it shall be the first month of
the year to you, Exodus 12.2. intimating that it was not so before. There was
approaching the Feast of Atonement upon the tenth day of this month, which is
thought to relate to the Golden Calf, and the Lords pardoning that Idolatry:
also the Feast of Tabernacles on the fifteenth day. The Temple of Solomon was
dedicated in this month: and now also was the Birth of Christ; at this time God
assumed and appeared in our nature, pitching his Tabernacle or Tent in our
Flesh. All which things put together gives some account of the season of this
Feast, and of the solemnity of the blowing of Trumpets on the first day of this
seventh month. And so much for the fourth of these annual Festivals, namely,
the Feast of Trumpets.

Now take this inference, namely, the unwarrantableness of Musical instruments
in the Worship of God now under the Gospel. You see of old there was an
Institution for it, there is not so now. 22 ae q. 91. 2. 4.
It is a very late invention of the Church of Rome: Aquinas speaks against them
as not used in the Church in his time, saying, they are legal, and prefigure
something of Christ; therefore are not continued under the Gospel.

Consider these three things.

1. They were a Type, that is evident; and hereby is typified the Music and
melody of the Joys and Graces of the Holy Ghost in the hearts of Gods people,
and many other Gospel lessons and instructions were held forth by this ancient
legal Ordinance. And Types you know are ceased, and Shadows are vanished now
that the Substance is come: look therefore after the inward music of a good
Conscience, and the witness of the Holy Ghost there; this is the Gospel-musick.

2. If we could not find out the mystery and the direct signification of them,
which has been cleared to you; yet however these things were a legal burden,
and childish rudiments, therefore not becoming the mature estate of Believers
under the new Testament, though they might be a fit solace for the childish
estate of the Church under the Law.

3. This Cathedral Music introduces into the Church of God a Rabble of
Church Officers which the Lord never appointed, and which never came into his
heart, the Choristers and Singing men, etc. and that is a very great evil. It
is not in the power of men, but it is the great Prerogative of Jesus Christ to
appoint Officers in his Church, who has appointed none but Pastors and
Teachers, Elders and Deacons.

5. And lastly, the Feast of Expiation or Atonement, and this was on the tenth
day of this seventh month, the Rules and Rites whereof are set down at large in
Levit. 16. which because they are many, and very significant, and full of
Gospel-mysteries: therefore I purpose (the Lord assisting) to speak to it more
at large in a distinct Discourse by it self, having here only mentioned it in
its place to which it does belong.

Quest. Were these then all their yearly Feasts? had they no more but these
five under the Law, viz. the Passover, the Feast of Pentecost, the Feast of
Tabernales, the Feast of Trumpets, and the Feast of Expiation?

Answ. They had no more of Gods appointment that were perpetual and religious
Feasts. It is true, we read of some others both in Scripture and in the Jewish
Writers; but either they were not perpetually recurring every year, but merely
occasional upon present emergencies of Providence; or else they were not holy
and religious Feasts, but only civil and political; or else lastly they were
sinful and unwarrantable: as,

1. There was Solomon's Feast, that solemn Feast at the Dedication of the
Temple, as in 2 Chronicles. 5. but this was extraordinary and occasional, and not a
standing yearly Festival.

2. They had also those Fasts of the fifth and of the seventh month which are
mentioned in Zech. 7.3-5. but these also were but temporary and occasional;
upon occasion of the calamities of their Captivity in Babylon, the Land being
laid desolate, Jerusalem taken, the Temple destroyed. Hence they had these
Fasts only during the time of their sorrow, but they ceased and were turned
into rejoicing.

3. There was the days of Purim mentioned in Esther 9.21, 22. that they kept in
the month of Adar, on the fourteenth and on the fifteenth day of the month
yearly: for then it was turned from sorrow to joy, and from mourning to a good
day. This seems not to be a religious, but a political constitution; so our
Divines conclude against the Papists, who plead this for their Popish Holidays.
For there were peculiar Sacrifices appointed for all the holy Festivals, Numb
chap. 28, and 29. but there was none for this: and there is nothing mentioned
but civil rejoicing, days of Feasting and Joy, and sending portions to the
needy, ver. 22. Of this nature is our fifth of November. Not but that there may
and ought to be upon such times holy rejoicing in God, as upon any providential
occasion: but there ought not to be a religious abstinence from the works of
our Callings (as upon the Lords day, and upon occasional days of Fasting or
Rejoicing) that ought not to be on any such days. Had they been religious
Feasts and days wherein they were bound to abstain from the works of their
Callings, after the nature of religious Feasts, we then are to suppose that
Mordecai, Nehemiah, etc. had instruction from God about it, else they durst not
have done it, they that had such Light and Holiness.

4. We read of two Feasts more appointed in the time of the Maccabees, one for
the Dedication of the Altar, 1 Maccab. 4.56. so they kept the Dedication of the
Altar eight days, offered Burnt-offerings with gladness, and offered sacrifices
of deliverance and praise. And the other for the Purification of the Temple, 2
Maccab. 1.18. we are now purposed to keep the Purification of the Temple upon
the five and twentieth day of the month Chesleu. Now if these had been only
particular and occasional Feasts, these things God had left with the Church to
appoint; but seeing the Jews say, they were yearly Feasts, they were
thererefore superstitious and unwarrantable things; for they had no such
extraordinary persons amongst them that could give them authority from God for
such a thing.

Thus we have gone through the first word [Feast days] their Holy days or Feast
days.

Their holy times we referred to three heads, their Holy days, New Moons and
Sabbaths.

Now a word concerning their New Moons. Let no man judge you in respect of the
New Moons.

2. New Moons.
2. The second word in the Text is New Moons, of which we read in Numb. 28.11.
in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a Burnt-offering unto the Lord,
etc. and Numb. 10.10. in the beginnings of your months ye shall blow with the
Trumpets over your Burnt-offerings, etc.

To open this a little, that so you may understand the mind of the Holy Ghost
in it; you must observe that their computation of the year was not as ours is,
merely Solar, but partly Lunar: for their month always began with the New Moon,
and the days remaining to fill up their Solar year, which are eleven, they were
wont to intercalate at the appointment of their High Prests and Rulers at the
years end: Or (as some write) after the second or third year in an
intercalatory month which they called Veader, consisting of eleven, or one and
twenty, or three and thirty days. Their month still began with a New Moon, and
the Lord did appoint that it should be a season religiously observed by them;
you shall offer such and such Sacrifices, ye shall blow with Trumpets, etc.

There were four things observable in the solemnizing the New Moons: for they
did solemnize this season with such religious Rites and Observations as these.

1. A holy Convocation and abstaining from the works and business of their
Callings: Therefore in Amos 8.5. they are brought in as saying, when will the
New Moons be gone, that we may sell Corn, etc.

2. By repairing to the Prophets for Teaching and Instruction, to inquire of
God, and to hear his Word. 2 Kings 4.23.

3. With sounding or blowing of Trumpets every New Moon, as well as the New
Moon, of the seventh month, Numb. 10.10.

4. With peculiar Sacrifices, yea a greater number of Sacrifices then on the
Sabbath day: They had peculiar Sacrifices then to be offered on the first day
of the month, Numb. 28.11.

Some add (fifthly) the keeping solemn Feasts of Love and Amity, 1 Samuel 20.5.6.

Now this Solemnity doubtless had some Divine mystery in it, it aimed at some
good thing to come, something of Christ in the Gospel: for the Text says
expressly, they were a shadow of things to come. And the Worship of God in
Gospel Times is expressed under this phrase, Isai. 66.23. -- from one New Moon
to another -- so Ezekiel in his Vision of the Temple-worship under the Gospel
speaks of it under the name of New Moons, Ezekiel. 46.1, 6.

But what then did it signify? what was the meaning of all these things?
Doubtless they were written for our Instruction, there was a Gospel-mystery in
these legal Institutions. In these things principally lay the substance of
these shadows.

1. Their acknowledgment of God in the Creature, that God must be acknowledged
in the renovation of the Creatures in the course of Providence: as when the
Moon begins, increases, and is renewed, then Gods Providence is acknowledged
and taken notice of: he renews the course of nature and every mercy we enjoy.
There is no Light to be seen at first in the Moon, but it increases till it
come to the full Moon. Thus God renews every creature and every comfort in the
way of his Providence, Psalm. 104.30. thou sendest forth thy Spirit, and they
are created, and thou renewest the face of the earth. They must not bless God
in this Solemnity for the Moon when it was at the full; then more of the
Creature is seen: but when there is least of the Creature, then God must be
owned even in the least of mercies.

2. The Renovation of the Church in a way of Grace, as well as the Creature in
the way of Providence; we must own God in that, and depend on him for it: for
the Church is compared in Scripture to the Moon, Psalm. 89.37. it shall be
established for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful Witness in Heaven. Cant.
6.9. Who is this that looks forth fair as the Moon, etc. As the Moon borrows
her Light from the Sun: so the Church borrows her Light from Jesus Christ, who
is the Sun of Righteousness. As the Church is compared to the Moon: so Christ
to the Sun; for so he is called, Mal. 4.2. but to you that fear my Name shall
the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in his Wings. The Church borrows
her Light from Christ the Sun of Righteousness, as the Moon does from the Sun
in the Firmament: for Christ is compared to the Sun, as well as the Church to
the Moon. As the Moon borrows her Light and Luster from the Sun, and is renewed
by the aspects and influences thereof: so the Church by influences from Christ,
who is indeed the Sun of Righteousness, renewing the state of the Church
especially under the Gospel.

And therefore all those Duties which were to be performed on the New Moons, so
far as they are perpetual, ought to be more plentifully and more abundantly
performed under the Gospel: as abstaining from servile works, from sin, the
worst of servitudes, seeking instruction, and attending upon the Ordinances for
that end, the sounding of the silver Trumpet of the Gospel, abounding in
spiritual Sacrifices, and agreeing in love and amity, eating their Bread in
singleness of heart.

3. Here seems to be likewise some intimation of that great mystery of the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ, I mean his Conception of the Holy Ghost in the
Womb of the Virgin Mary. For this aimed at Christ, as all the other Ceremonies
of the Law and holy times and seasons did. And some have gone about to make it
out, thus; That look as Christ fulfilled other great Types and Ceremonies of
the Law in other things: so he did in this. As the Feast of Tabernacles pointed
to the time of his Birth on the fifteenth day of the seventh month: so if from
thence we reckon thirty eight weeks backward, it will carry us to the change of
the Moon, at which time is a great conjunction or union of those two great
Luminaries the Sun and the Moon. Here they think may be some dark and weak
shadow of the conjunction or union of the two Natures of Christ in one person;
when he became (...), which he did, as in the whole state of his Humiliation:
so especially when he was conceived in the Virgins womb.

4. The New Moon is put for every thing beneath Christ, Rev. 12.1. the world,
which in respect of the changeableness of it, is like the Moon, the world and
the glory thereof passes away, never standing at the same stay. This should be
frequently upon our hearts and thoughts.

5. They were to observe the first day of the month, not the fifth or sixth
day: so also their morning Sacrifice was to be offered early in the morning;
and the Passover celebrated the first month in the year. To teach them, that as
ever they expected the Blessing of God upon the rest of their time, they must
be careful to set apart the first and best of all their days and hours unto his
service.

6. They were to observe the first day of every month, one as well as another,
which checks that superstitious conceit, as if there were lucky and unlucky
times: whereas God has sanctified every month and every time to his people: as
on the contrary to the wicked the most lucky times prove disastrous: as among
the Papists that famous year 1588. crowned with so many Astrological
Praedictions of ensuing happiness, and Victory proved quite contrary to their
expectations: so that Fulke Pref. Rhem. Test. says it, Octogesimus Octavus
mirabilis annus
Clade Papistarum faustus ubique piis.
No month to a godly man is of it self evil, but let a wicked Haman cast lots
from the beginning of the year to the ending, he shall find no month good.

So much for the mystery of their New Moons, the second sort of their holy
times: the first was their annual Feasts, the second their New Moons, the third
is their Sabbaths.

3. Sabbaths.
Let no man judge you in respect of the Sabbath. A word to that, and so we
shall finish the Text at this time.

This is the third sort of holy times and seasons under the Law.

The general notion of a Sabbath is a time of Rest.

They had three sorts of Sabbaths, their weekly Sabbath, every seventh day;
their yearly Sabbath, every seventh year; and their great sabbatical year,
reckoning seven times seven years, which was their Jubilee every fiftieth year.
In every one of which was something of a shadow of things to come, the Apostle
is express, these things are a shadow of things to come.

Quest. Wherein?

Answ. 1. The Sabbath of the seventh day, their weekly Sabbath on the seventh
day of the week; this was partly moral and perpetual, considered as a seventh
part of weekly time sanctified and set apart by God from common use, for man to
rest from the works of his weekly Calling, in imitation of God, and in
remembrance of the great work of the Creation of the world.

But though the Sabbath be partly moral, and it must needs be so, seeing it is
one of the Ten Commandments, otherwise there would be but nine moral Commands,
and the original ground of a Sabbath is not a ceremonial Institution, nor the
sin and fall of man, but a particular Calling; and therefore Adam in his
innocent and sinless estate needed a Sabbath; and God sanctified this day
before the fall of man, Genesis 2.1, 2, 3. but yet the Jewish Sabbath was in some
respects Ceremonial, and therefore it is abrogated, and the Christian Sabbath
substituted in stead thereof: and therefore the Holy Ghost here in the Text
reckons the Jewish Sabbaths in the same rank with their New Moons and yearly
Festivals amongst the shadows of good things to come; for it had some typical
respects and uses, some ceremonial Rites and Observations annexed to it. I
shall instance in two things wherein it is typical.

1. For the Commemoration of their typical Redemption and Deliverance out of
Egypt. Therefore though the fourth Commandment, as it is recorded in Exodus
chap. 20. is grounded upon the Labor of a particular Calling, and upon Gods
resting from the work of Creation upon the seventh day; (which are moral
grounds) yet in the fourth Commandment, as it is repeated Deuteronomy. 5. one of those
moral considerations is omitted, viz. the work of Creation; and there is a
typical consideration substituted in stead thereof, viz. their Deliverance out
of Egypt. Deuteronomy. 5.15.

2. As there was in the Jewish Sabbath a Commemoration of that typical
Redemption out of Egypt: so secondly it was a typical Prefiguration of the Rest
of the Body of Jesus Christ in the Grave that whole day, which was indeed the
only whole day of his resting or cessation from the actions of a bodily life:
For he was in the Grave only some small part of the sixth day, and of the first
day; but he rested the whole Jewish Sabbath. So then, as they had other legal
days and times that pointed them to other things about the Messiah: so the
Sabbath points to his resting in the Grave, And he did not only rest in the
humbling of himself under the guilt of our Sins, but in his Resurrection from
the dead. The day of his Resurrection was the day of his entering into his state
of rest from his Sufferings; but on the Sabbath he rested from the actions of
his bodily life: therefore the seventh day Sabbath is abrogated, and the Lord
has substituted the first day of the week; for the Sabbath is moral. And there
is a ground too for the changing of the day, that there should be one day in
seven to attend on the Worship of God, this is moral and perpetual: that it
should be the last day in seven, this is by Gods Institution made legal and
typical.

Christ entered into his rest of Glory, into the state thereof at his
Resurrection; and into the place thereof when he ascended into Heaven; but his
resting in the grave was on the seventh day.

From all which you may see the morality of the Sabbath considered as in
general, together with the shadowy nature of the Jewish Sabbath of the seventh
day, having these typical respects and relations annexed to it: and so therein
you see the grounds of the abrogation of it, and of the substitution of the
Christian Sabbath instead therereof.

And so much may serve for the typical respects and use of the Jewish Sabbath.

Now as for the Rites and Observations thereof.

1. There were more Sacrifices that day then upon other days, Numb. 28.9, 10.
The reason was because there were more Mercies given and commemorated that day,
as the Creation, their Deliverance out of Egypt, and their Sanctification by
the Spirit: It shall be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I
Jehovah do sanctify them, Exodus 31.13. Ezekiel. 20.12, 20.

Here learn, that the more Blessings God gives to any people, the greater
thankfulness he expects again.

It reaches also that special Holiness that should be upon the Sabbath; more
exercise of Grace, and duties of Worship to be performed upon that day then
ordinarily upon any other day: there should be that among us on the Christian
Sabbath that should answer their double Sacrifice upon their Jewish Sabbath.
But in Ezekiel. 46.45. there is appointed for the Sabbath six Lambs for one under
the Law; to teach us that there should be more Holiness now under the Gospel,
then there was under the Law.

2. They might not kindle a fire on that day, Exodus 35.3. as some think, to put
them in mind of their absolute freedom from their Egyptian Bondage and the
fiery Brick-works there, or from the fire of Gods Wrath in the world to come,
when entered into, that none of these fires should ever be kindled upon them or
hurt them; though others think that restraint respected only kindling a fire
for the building of the Tabernacle nor is it unlikely.

3. They were to abstain from building the Tabernacle that day, Exodus 31.12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and 35.2. to teach them that the six days, that is, the
time of this life is the only time wherein God will build the Tabernacle of his
Church: this life is the only day of Grace and opportunity of Salvation.

4. They might not gather Manna on that day, Exodus 16. In this life Christ is
offered, but in the Sabbath of eternity no Manna, no means of Grace, no offers
of Christ then: none could have Manna upon the Sabbath, but they that had
stored it up upon the week day: so none can have Christ in Heaven, but they
that have stored him up in their hearts on earth.

These things show the rigor of the Law as to Sabbath-rest; but the Pharisees
being deeply possessed with the spirit of the Law, did strain it a peg or two
higher, that to do a miraculous work of mercy, or works of necessity was
unlawful.

2. They had also a Sabbatical year, viz. every seventh year, a Sabbath of the
seventh year: every seventh year was a Sabbatical year, as every seventh day
was a Sabbatical day. Exodus 23.10. Deuteronomy. 15.9.

This was celebrated by letting the Land rest from its usual culture and
husbandry. Levit. 25.4, 5.

Some allege a political and philosophical reason for this, that the Land by
resting one year might be the more fruitful the other six; quod caret alterna
requie durabile non est.

This Sabbatical year was celebrated by giving rest unto the Land from tillage,
and manuring the hungry ground.

This was a shadow of things to come, this signifies something of Christ and
Gospel mystery, in which observe four things.

There was a fourfold Instruction in this Sabbatical year.

1. This Sabbatical year told them plainly that both they and their Land was
the Lords, Lev. 25.23. For the Land is mine.

2. This taught them to depend upon Providence, without worldly care, and
trusting to the Creature for supply and support. For they must not now sow nor
till the Land this year: for the sixth year was to bring forth the Fruit of
three years, both for the seventh year, and for the eighth, and for the ninth
till the Harvest time. See Lev. 25.20, 21, 22. and ver. 6. the Sabbath of the
Land shall be meat for thee. The Land of its own accord that year was to
produce sustenance enough both for man and beast.

It is not enough for us to depend on the ordinary course of means; God can
overruled them and over-work them, as he does here.

3. The Lord hereby teaches them and us that great Gospel-lesson and duty of
mercy and bounty to the poor, Exodus 23.10, 11. the Land must rest, that the
poor may eat, and Deuteronomy. 15.1, 2. Creditors must release their Debtors every
seventh year, Lev. 25.5, 6. there is an Equity, a Chancery, a bountiful
condescension to the necessities of the poor, that men exact not their own
right in all things; but rather remit and abate something thereof. Not but that
men may take their course, and use means to get it, especially when persons are
able and wilful; but in case of poverty, there should be mercy showed in such a
case.

4. This Sabbatical year was a special season and time of instruction in the
Law of God, Deuteronomy. 31.10, 11, 12. the Lord would have them instructed and taught
to know his Mind, and the true Religion, and the ways of his Worship: Therefore
he appointed so many times and seasons for it, weekly and monthly and yearly,
and moreover one year in seven, as you see. Beside the mystery of spiritual
rest by Christ, of which further in the next particular, viz.

3. The Jubilee. There was also a third Sabbath, beside the weekly Sabbath, and
the seventh year Sabbath; they had likewise a Sabbath of seven times seven,
that is the Jubilee. This was their great Sabbatical year; for they were to
reckon seven times seven years, and then to observe a Sabbatical year. Lev.
25.9.

This also was a Type of Christ, as appears in three things, that were done in
this year of Jubilee.

1. There was Redemption and Release, every one set at liberty, every bondage
released, and every yoke broken.

Here is a shadow of the spiritual and true Redemption by Jesus Christ, who of
spiritual slaves by nature makes us the Lords Freemen by Grace. Christ has
proclaimed Redemption to sinners, and Deliverance to poor captive souls. Isai.
61.1.

2. There was the Trumpet of the Jubilee to proclaim it. The Gospel is this
great Trumpet, the proclaiming of the Jubilee is alluded to, Isai. 61.1, 2 --
Isai. 27. ult. in that day the great Trumpet shall be blown. The great Trumpet
is the Gospel, Calv. in loc.

3. Some have observed further, that the coming of Christ was at the Jubilee,
that Christ came at the time of the Jubilee.

I know there is some difference amongst Chronologers about it; but sure it is,
it fell thereabout: some placing the Jubilee upon the preaching of John Baptist,
who did proclaim the Lords coming: but others place it as seems more exactly
upon the very year of Christ's Death, by which we were redeemed and set free
indeed.

They began the account of their Jubiles from about anno mundi 2560. for they
came out of Egypt about the year 2513. they were forty years in the Wilderness,
six or seven in conquering and dividing the Land of Canaan. Then began their
first Sabbatical year; from thence to the Death of Christ there were eight and
twenty Jubiles, his Death being about the year of the world 3960.

So you see something of the Gospel-mystery of these Sabbaths of the Jews, the
three sorts of Sabbaths; every week, every seventh year, and every fiftieth
year: and thus also you see how these legal holy times and seasons were all
shadows of good things to come.

Take some general Uses from the whole.

Use 1. See and remember the unlawfulness and unwarrantableness of the
Observation of these Jewish times and seasons under the Gospel: for they were
typical. Amos 5.21.

The Papists observe the Passover, which they call Easter; Pentecost, commonly
called Whitsuntide; and instead of the Feast of Tabernacles they keep the five
and twentieth of December for the time of Christ's Birth; all which we retain.
And they have also added a Jubilee, which because it is a profitable time to the
Popes Purse, he has ordered it to be kept every five and twenty years instead
of fifty.

These are Errors of dangerous consequence, for they do implicitly deny that
the Substance is come.

If these things were shadows of things to come, the retaining of them now, is
an error of dangerous consequence: For to retain any of these dark and legal
shadows is an implicit denial that Christ the substance is come. These things
were more fully spoken to the last time.

Use 2. See and observe the burthensomness of that old legal Dispensation, as
also our Christian liberty now under the Gospel. The Lord requires no day of us
but the Lords day, and occasional days of Humiliation or of Thanksgiving upon
emergencies of Providence calling thereunto. Stand fast therefore in the
Liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, Gal. 5.1. and be not again
entangled in the yoke of bondage.

Use 3. And lastly, see wat clear and plentiful evidence the Jews had
concerning Jesus Christ, that he was the true Messiah; and how true this of the
Apostle in the Text is, that they are a shadow of things to come.

Put all these things together, and you will see these Jewish days made up a
rude draught or dark shadow of the good things that were to come under the
Gospel in sundry particulars relating to the Body, which is of Christ.

As for instance, they lead to the time of his Conception by the Holy Ghost on
the first day of the month.

To the time of his Birth and Nativity, being born on the first day of the
Feast of Tabernacles, and circumcised the eighth.

He suffered at the time of the Passover.

He lay and rested in the Grave on the Jewish Sabbath.

He poured forth his Spirit at their Feast of Pentecost.

The Jews might have found the Body by these shadows, had they been attentive
to mind the things belonging to their peace: they might have thought when they
saw such a conjunction, surely this is he that comes speedily to redeem Israel.
And you, though you have a conviction of the truth of the Gospel; yet get a
further and fuller conviction of it from this, that Jesus Christ was so plainly
shadowed forth to us by all these ancient Dispensations.

THE GOSPEL of the GREAT DAY of ATONEMENT.
Levit. 16. the whole Chapter. Jan. 24, and 28. 1668.

THis Chapter is wholly taken up in declaring the Feast of Expiation or
Atonement upon the tenth day of the seventh month.

It is more properly and indeed a Fast, but yet commonly called a Feast, as
taking the word in a more lax acceptance for any set or solemn time.

And though it was indeed a day of afflicting their Souls, yet there was joy in
the end of it: for their peace was made with God, and the Jubilee proclaimed
this day.

It was, with all the Services and Administrations of it, the most full and
complete shadow of the great work of our Redemption that we meet with under the
Law; the High Priest representing in all he did, that which Jesus Christ the
true High Priest was to do indeed in the fullness of time.

I shall endeavor to explain it a little to you, as God shall enable me,
following the method of this Chapter, and so you will be able to read it more
understandingly and with edification.

Wherein the first thing that does occur is, the occasion of the Institution,
ver. 1. viz. the Death of the two Sons of Aaron, when they offered before the
Lord and died, which Story is recorded Lev. 10.1, 2.

Some add, that Man fell upon this day; but this is not likely. It seems more
probable from all the circumstances of the Story, that he fell upon the seventh
day.

For that he was not fallen upon the sixth day appears by this, that in the
close of the sixth day God approves all his Creatures that they were good, Genesis
1. ult. therefore sin had not yet spoiled them.

And if he had stood out the whole Sabbath day, it is probable he had been
confirmed by eating of the Tree of Life. For it is probable that upon the
Sabbath he should have enjoyed all the Ordinances of God; and consequently that
the Sacrament of that estate should have been the concluding Ordinance: as
under the New Testament they were wont to break Bread every Lords day. And in
the primitive times the Sacrament was the concluding Ordinance. But Man did not
eat of the Tree of Life; for then he had been confirmed and lived for ever,
Genesis 3.22. therefore it is not likely that he stood in his integrity to the end
of the Sabbath.

And as to the time of the day wherein he sinned, it seems to have been about
eating time, at dinner, about noon; eating what they should not, being the
thing wherein they sinned.

And after his Fall it is said, that God came and spoke to them in the cool of
the day. Genesis 3. ver. 8. This seems to have been about that time of the day
which the Scripture calls the ninth hour, which is after our reckoning about
three a clock in the afternoon. So long they were in darkness, and under guilt
of their Sin, before the Promulgation of the Gospel to them. Wherein some have
observed a congruity, in that Jesus Christ was under those his infinite
Sufferings upon the Cross the same space of time, from the sixth hour to the
ninth, Matthew. 27.45, 46.

And it being thus, Man in his first sin and fall did break all the
Commandments at once: as he brake all the rest, so he sinned upon the Sabbath
day.

This seems by all the circumstances of the Story to have been the time of his
Fall.

But to think that he fell on Tuesday, the tenth day from the Creation, there
is nothing in the History to evince it.

Others think, this Fast on the day of the seventh month was appointed in
remembrance of the great Sin the Idolatry of the Golden Calf, Exodus 32.

But we may rest in that the Text mentions as the occasion of this Ordinance,
viz. the Sin and Death of Nadab and Abihu.

And there is a threefold Instruction we are here to learn.

Obs. 1. Here we are taught first, That there must be holy fear and reverence
in approaching to God in his Ordinances, an holy fear and dread of sinning in
the manner of his Worship: and that it is a dangerous thing to worship God
otherwise then he has appointed. Men should take heed of it, that they die not
as Nadab and Abihu did for this sin: they incur the danger of Death, both Death
temporal and eternal.

Though God does not usually smite men with visible Judgments, but when they
are first in any transgression; yet there is a spiritual fire and wrath upon
their spirits for it, which is worse then outward Judgments.

Obs. 2. The Lord takes hold of the saddest occasions to bring in Dispensations
of the greatest good and mercy to his people, Light out of Darkness, Heaven out
of Hell, good out of evil, to those that he has set his Love upon.

Obs. 3. When some are slain, and die in and for their sins, the Lord provides
for the Salvation of others, that they die not.

Now to come to the thing it self.

Moses is to charge Aaron that he come not into the Holy of holies at all
times, nor in any manner, but at Gods appointed times, and in such manner as he
requires. This manner is here described at large. It consists chiefly in three
things. (1.) His washing himself. (2.) His holy Garments. And (3.) His
propitiatory Offerings.

1. That the Priest must wash before he put on his Garments, and before he
present his Offering, is an intimation of his Purity and Cleanness. Hence that
expression of the Apostle, Heb. 10.22. Having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
Conscience, and our Bodies washed with pure water. This is the first thing he
is to do.

So Christ, Matthew. 3.16. was baptized before he entered upon his Ministry; and
he was perfectly holy and pure, not having the least defilement of sin upon
him, though he had taken on him our Nature, and all the other Infirmities of
it. Vid. On the Priests Consecration Exodus 29.

2. As to his Attire, here be two sorts of holy Garments mentioned in the
Services of this day; the holy Garments, ver. 4. and other holy and most costly
Garments, ver. 23.24. Some call the former his White Garments, and the other
his Golden Garments.

1. This Priestly Attire was an emblem of spiritual clothing, Psalm. 132.9. Let
thy Priests be clothed with Righteousness, and let thy Saints shout for joy:
and ver. 16. I will also clothe her Priests with Salvation. Job 29.14. I put on
Righteousness, and it clothed me: my Judgment was as a Robe and a Diadem.

This then speaks the Grace and Holiness that was in Jesus Christ, and ought to
be in Ministers, such Garments Ministers should be clothed with.

2. Those two sorts of Attire, the White and the Golden Garments, signified the
different estate and condition of Jesus Christ; when he performed the great
work of our Redemption, and made atonement for us; he did it in much meanness
and abasement, Isai. 52.14. his Visage was marred -- he was without external
Pomp and worldly Glory, in the form of a Servant, made himself of no
Reputation, Phil. 2.7. though with Holiness and Purity, and Innocence: He had
white Garments on, though they were but plain.

But as there is a clothing of Grace: so there is a clothing of Glory, 2 Cor.
5.2, 4.

And after his Resurrection, when he had been in Heaven and returned again, and
arose and appeared from the dead, he did change his Raiment: He wore the
garments of Holiness here; but when he entered into the holy place, even into
Heaven, he did put on garments of Glory.

These were the holy Garments on this day of Expiation.

Now the third thing is, the Offerings of Atonement; and they were of two
sorts, for the Priest, and for the People.

1. For the Priest himself, and for his own House, ver. 3, 6. This teaches us
the insufficiency and imperfection of the legal Priesthood, Heb. 5.1, 2.3. we
need a better High Priest, and we have one. Heb. 7.26, 27, 28.

The Priest was first to make atonement for himself and for his own sins, that
so he might be fit, as a figure of Christ the true High Priest, to make
atonement for the people. They that lie under unpardoned guilt themselves, are
not fit to be Mediators and Intercessors for others.

The Priest had three things to do in reference to his own Sacrifice.

1. He was to kill it, and so to make atonement with it, v. 11.

This was a Type of the Death of Christ the true Sacrifice.

2. He was to offer Incense in the Holy of holies, v. 12.

This is a Type of the Prayers and Intercessions of Jesus Christ in the virtue
of his Satisfaction.

Here are four particulars observable.

1. As the High Priest did this before he sprinkled the Blood in the Holiest of
all: so Christ prepared his own way into Heaven by his Prayers and
Intercessions. Joh. 17.

2. The Incense was beaten small, to intimate the anguish, and contrition, and
brokenness of heart wherewith Christ prayed and interceded for us; those
agonies of spirit in his Prayers before his Death, which he offered up unto God
with strong crying and tears, Matthew. 26.37. he began to be sorrowful and very
heavy, and ver. 38. then says he unto them, my Soul is exceeding sorrowful
even unto death: and ver. 39. he fell on his face and prayed, saying, Oh my
Father, if it be possible let this Cup pass from me. Luke 22.44. And being in
an agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his Sweat was as it were great drops of
Blood falling down to the ground. Hebr. 5.7.

It speaks also the Contrition and brokenness of heart that is in the Prayers
of the Saints.

3. He took a censer full of burning coals of fire from off the altar, to
kindle the Incense. It is the fire of the Altar, the Spirit of God that
inflames the Affections in Prayer, that sets the heart on fire, and makes the
Incense flame, sets Grace on work: and as the Spices whereof the Incense was
made, are the Graces of Gods Spirit; and the beating of them small is the
Contrition of the heart: so the Incense must be set on fire with sacred fire;
the Spirit of God inflaming the heart with earnest desires and ardent
affections after God.

4. The Cloud of Incense must cover the Mercy-seat; that the Cloud of Incense,
that is, the Smoke thereof, may cover the Mercy-seat, that he die not. ver. 13.

There is much Instruction in this.

If we think to behold the Mercy-seat without the Cloud of Incense, we die. It
is the death of many a Soul, that in the day of Atonement, when they are
afflicting their Souls for sin, they think that God is merciful, and they cry
to God for Mercy: But they do not behold the Mercy of God in the Son of his
Love, they do not look up to the Mercy-seat as covered and clouded with the
Incense of the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ: and therefore they die and
perish even in the day of Atonement, when they come before the Mercy-seat.

3. The Blood must be sprinkled upon the Mercy-seat Eastward, that is, upon the
forepart of it. ver. 14.

It teaches us, that as the High Priest went into the holy place not without
Blood: so Christ with his own Blood, Heb. 9.7, 11, 12. has entered into Heaven
for us, to make way for us to come thither also, by the merit and virtue of his
own Blood and Satisfaction. Heaven therefore is called the purchased
possession, Ephesians. 1.14. because purchased by the Blood of Christ: We have
boldness to enter into the holiest by the Blood of Jesus. Hebr. 10.19, 20.

4. The Blood must be sprinkled upon the Mercy-seat seven times. A mystical
number often used in the legal Services, and has been formerly explained.

It is a number of perfection; God having created the World in six days, and
resting upon the seventh. It therefore notes a full and perfect cleansing and
applying of the Blood of Christ for that end. And it presupposes a copious and
liberal effusion; but it implies directly a plenteous and effectual application
of the Blood of Christ.

Get the Blood of Christ effectually applied unto thy Soul, or else thou can
never look God in the face with any comfort or acceptance: take this Blood of
Christ, apply it by Faith, see how it atones God.

It is true, the Blood of Christ does not make God merciful, but it makes way
for the exercise of his Mercy: it does not cause the attribute of Mercy to be
in God, but it makes way for the putting of it forth.

Now then let us put both these together. The Mercy-seat must be both clouded
with Incense and sprinkled with Blood, or else there is no approaching for
Sinners into the presence of God, none but through the Prayers and
Intercessions, and through the Blood and Satisfaction of Jesus Christ. Non
solum periculosum sed horribile est de Deo extra Christum cogitare. It is not
only dangerous (says Luther) but it is an horrible thing to think of God out
of Christ. Do not think to make use of Gods Attributes in an immediate way, but
by the Intercession of a Mediator; there is no Mercy in God for Sinners out of
Christ.

Thus much of the Priests Offerings for himself.

2. The second sort of Offerings upon this great day of Atonement were for the
People; and these are two Goats for a Sin-offering, and a Ram for a
Burnt-offering. ver. 5.

The Rites and Ceremonies of these two Goats are full of the Gospel. It is pity
that choice portions of Scripture, which have so much in them, are commonly so
little understood by us. Let us in the help of Christ inquire a little into the
mystery of these things.

Of the Burnt-offering there is something said, but it is not much, the common
rules of the Burnt-offering being here to be observed. But the Sin-offering of
the two Goats, there be many very significant Rites and Ceremonies about them.

This Sin-offering is first generally, and then severally and more particularly
spoken to, and the several actions about them more particularly opened.

1. In general, ver. 7, 8, 9, 10.

The first thing that they had to do which was peculiar to it was, that these
two Goats, they were to cast lots upon them. Now a Lot is a referring of a
thing by an appeal to the determination of Providence, Prove. 16.33. the Lot is
cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. There is a
special hand of Providence in a Lot: so it is said of Christ, Acts 2.23. Him
being delivered by the determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye having
taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. The Lot in this business
was to determine which of the Goats should be slain, and which was to escape.

But why were there two Goats, one to die, and the other to escape? The reason
was plainly this; Because that one alone was not sufficient to represent the
Mystery intended and aimed at. For Christ was both God and Man, he both died
and rose again; but the same Sacrifice could not both die and live again
without a miracle. Therefore these two Goats were appointed to represent more
completely the whole mystery of our Redemption in all the concernments of it;
to shadow forth Jesus Christ in both his Natures, and in both the states he
passed through, both in his Divinity and in his Humanity, both in his
Humiliation and Exaltation. As in like manner there were two Birds appointed in
the Purification of the Leper. See of the cleansing of the Leper, Lev. 14. page
398.

So here two Goats, a flain Goat, and a escape Goat; the one to shadow forth
Christ as dying and slain for our offenses, the other as rising again for our
Justification. The slain Goat represented Christ as he was put to death in the
Flesh, that is, in his Humane nature: the escape Goat represented him as
quickened by the Spirit, that is, by his Deity raising him up again from death
to life. This in general. Now,

2. In particular, the sacred Rites and Ceremonies about these Goats are
severally spoken to from ver. 15, etc.

1. He begins with the sacred actions about the slain Goat, and then speaks

2. Of the escape Goat.

1. The sacred Actions and Ceremonies about the slain Goat were such as these.

1. The sprinkling of the Blood thereof upon the Mercy seat and before the
Mercy-seat, etc. ver. 15.

This represents the Blood of Jesus Christ, which made way for him and us into
Heaven, into the presence of God: as the Blood of the Bullock for the Priest
beforementioned was, ver. 14. where the meaning of this Rite was opened.

2. The Priest hereby must make an atonement for the holy place, for the
Tabernacle, because of the uncleanness of the Children of Israel. ver. 16.

This teaches us, that the very Ordinances of God, and our holy Services
therein have a secret defilement cleaving to them through our being exercised
in them. If the Tabernacle be pitched in the midst of an unclean people, the
Tabernacle it self must be atoned. How should this beat down our being proud of
Ordinances, and haughty, because of Gods holy Mountain, as the Prophets phrase
is, Zeph. 3.10. those carnal boastings that we are subject to, such as those of
theirs that said, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these.
Jer. 7.

If the Ordinances were not sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus Christ, they
could never be accepted, they could be never be effectual for good unto us. Not
that Duties and Ordinances are unclean or impure in themselves; but we defile
them by the mixture of Corruption that is in us.

3. The Priest must enter alone into the holy place when he does this. ver. 17.

So Jesus Christ was alone in the work of our Redemption, and purging away of
our sins. Heb. 1.3. He by himself purged our sins.

It is an horrible and dreadful error of the Papists that join other Mediators
with him: this is to send others to go along with the High Priest when he
atones the holy place.

4. He must go out from the Brazen Altar of Offerings to the Golden Altar of
Incense, and atone it by putting the Blood of the Sin-offering upon the Horns
thereof. ver. 18, 19. There are many things here.

1. That Christ's Intercession is founded in his Oblation: for the Golden Altar
is a Type of his Intercession. Now this must be sprinkled with Blood; to teach
us, that by the virtue of Christ's Death and Blood, his Prayers and
Intercessions are available and effectual with God.

And look whom he died for, those he prayed for.

To separate his Death and Intercession, is to divide what God has joined. To
think that he died for some, for whom he does not pray, is as if the High
Priest should neglect or forget one part of his Office, which requires not only
that he kill the Sacrifice, but that he sprinkle the Blood of it upon the Altar
of Incense. Therefore if Christ has shed his Blood for Reprobates, he will not
forget to sprinkle it upon the Golden Altar for them. If he has died for them,
he will pray for them. But it is confessed, he does not pray for some, and
himself asserts it, Joh. 17.9. therefore he did not die for them.

2. This teaches us, how it is that our Prayers come to be accepted; it is
because sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, they need cleansing and purging:
the Incense Altar must be atoned. Lava lachrymas meas Domine. Lord wash my
tears.

3. The Horns of the Altar of Incense sprinkled with Blood denotes the efficacy
and strength of Prayer when sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, both his
Prayers for us, and ours also in his name. Hence Revel. 9.13. we read of a
Voice from the four Horns of the Golden Altar which is before God, that is,
answers and returns of Prayers from the power of God awakened and improved by
Prayer.

But this third particular belongs rather to the Altar of Incense, as the
proper place to which it should be referred.

2. The Rites and Ceremonies of the Scapegoat, whereto some other things also
are annexed from ver. 21, etc. I shall put them altogether in seven
particulars, some concerning the escape Goat, and some other Rules and
Observations in this day of Expiation, most of them mentioned in this Chapter.

1. The Priest must confess their sins over the head of the escape Goat. ver.
21. This escape Goat was a Type of Christ, God laid on him the iniquities of us
all, Isai. 53.6. and we are to do it by Faith, confessing our sins with an eye
to him, as being born by him in our stead. Many of the damned have confessed
their sins, but not over the head of a dying Savior.

2. The escape Goat carries their sins afar off into the land of Oblivion, ver.
21.22. far from the sight and presence of God in the Temple. A most lively
shadow and representation this is of that great mystery of the Pardon and
Forgiveness of Sin: for so Christ carries our Sins away into the land of
oblivion, Psalm. 103.12. As far as the East is from the West, so far has he
removed our transgressions from us: that though they be sought for, they cannot
be found. Jer. 50.20. If Conscience seek for them, it cannot find them: for
Conscience is pacified when sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus Christ. If Satan
seek for them, he cannot find them: for they are gone and lost in the
Wilderness. Yea, if Justice it self seek them, yet they cannot be found: for
Justice is satisfied by the Death and Blood of Christ.

3. The High Priest is now to go into the Tabernacle, and there to change his
Raiment, and there to wash himself, and to come forth and offer the
Burnt-offering, and burn the fat of the Sin-offering according to the
Ordinance. ver. 23, 24, 25.

I put all these together, because they have all been formerly opened in the
several places to which they appertain: and therefore it may suffice now only
thus to bind them up together, as it were in one bundle, for the help of
memory, and so pass on to the next. The mystery of the Priests Attire was opend
on ver. 4, and 23, 24. The Burnt-offering on Levit. 1. page 244.

The burning of the Fat on Levit. 3. in the Peace Offering, page 285. where
this Rite is first mentioned. It was there showed how it signifies the giving
unto God the best of our Spirits and Services: and in another accommodation of
the metaphor; the consuming and burning up of sinful Corruption. See p. 299,
300.

4. He that carried away the escape Goat must wash his Clothes, and so come into
the Camp. ver. 26. And the like again ver. 28. He that is the Minister of these
holy actions must wash himself, as having contracted guilt; which denotes not
only the imperfection of the Levitical Priesthood, but also it may instruct us
in the iniquity of all our most holy actions. See of this upon the Sin-offering
on Lev. 4. page 323.

5. The Sin Offerings, buth the Bullock and the Goat, must be burnt without the
Camp. ver. 27.

This also is explained upon the Sin-offering, Lev. cap. 4. page 321, 322. that
Christ suffered without the City as a Malefactor, with whom we also should
suffer, bearing our reproach, and being content to be accounted as Malefactors,
yea as the (...), the offscouring and sweeping of the world.

6. On this great day of Atonement was the Jubilee to be proclaimed by sound of
Trumpet. Lev. 25.9.

This speaks, that after the performance of the whole work of our Redemption by
Jesus Christ, he did cause the Trumpet of the Gospel to sound, to publish and
proclaim the glad tidings of our Salvation throughout the world, Isai. 61.1, 2.
so that this day of Atonement is like that famous week prophesied of by Daniel
cap. 9. He shall confirm the Covenant with many for one week. In the midst of
the week Messiah shall be cut off. This week is interpreted by some concerning
that seven years, the first part whereof Christ preached, suffered in the
middle of the week: and in the other three years and an half the Apostles
preached at Jerusalem, after which they were dispersed by persecution, and so
the Gospel published to all the world.

It is the performance of the work of our Redemption, that was the foundation
and groundwork of the preaching of the Gospel: the Jubilee is proclaimed upon
the day of Atonement.

7. And lastly, this day of Atonement is a day of Humiliation and afflicting
their Souls, by an everlasting Ordinance. ver. 29, to the end.

Days of Humiliation are days of Atonement and Reconciliation. Not that our
Humiliation merits or deserves any thing: it is not the afflicting our Souls
that does make atonement; but it fits us to receive the Atonement. Humiliation
prepares the Soul for Christ, and makes it capable to receive the Mercy and the
Pardon that Christ has purchased, and that God is willing and ready to bestow
upon all that will receive it by Faith.

THE MANIFOLD SINFULNESS OF THE POPISH HOLY DAYS, Discovered in sundry Reasons
against them, and the most material Objections answered.
AMongst the several ways wherein the Superstition of the hearts of men works
out and vents it self, this is one, the observing of Days and Times, wherein
the Church of Rome has abounded, filling the Calendar with superstitious Holy
days, many of which are still retained and continued by the Church of England.
But let these Reasons against them be considered.

Reason 1.
Nothing can be holy to the Lord, which is not made holy by the Lord: but God
the Lord of time has not sanctified nor set apart these times. We find indeed
before the Ceremonial Law was instituted, yea before the Fall of Man, that God
blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, Genesis 2.2, 3. and therefore the
Observation of a weekly Sabbath one day in seven is moral and perpetual. But
other Holy days are things which the Lord never commanded, and which never came
into his heart, and of which he will say at the great Day, who required these
things at your hands. The strength of which argument will appear the more, if
we consider what miserable poor shifts it puts the Patrons of these Holy days
to, when they go about to grapple with it.

1. Sometimes they are so confounded in themselves, as to deny, that they place
Holiness in these days: the Church keeps them (they say) not as more holy and
sacred then other days and parts of divine Worship, but only for Order and
Policy. So Bishop Lindsey, Perth. Ass part. 3. p. 5. But the rest of his
Fellows have dealt more truly and more sincerely then he in this particular:
for not only Bellarmine (tom. 2. de Cultu Sanctorum, lib. 3. cap. 10. prop. 2.)
asserteth, Festa Christianorum non solum ratione Ordinis and Politiae, sed
etiam ratione mysterii celebrantur, suntque dies festi vere aliis sanctiores
sacratiores and pars quaedam divini cultus. But Hooker (Eccles. Pol. lib. 5.
sect. 69. page 375.) also says they ought to be, with all men that honor God,
more holy then other days. Downham (in Praec. 4.) refers them to the fourth
Commandment, and will have them consecrated as Sabbaths to the Lord. Bishop
Andrews (in his Holiday Sermons on Luke 4.18. on Matthew. 12.39, 40. apud
Gillesp. Eng. Pop. Cerem. part. 3. cap. 1. page 15.) has found out many
profound mysteries in them, yea in the very order of them, and distances of
time between them: as, there be fifty days between Easter and Pentecost,
because fifty is the number of the Jubilee; one day between Easter and the
Resurrection, because Jonas was but one day in the Whales belly; with many
other pretty tales, which are not worth transcribing. And the thing it self
speaks: for why do they call them Holy days, if they put no holiness in them?
nay, why do they prefer them above the Sabbaths of God?

2. Sometimes they labor to escape in the mist of blind distinctions: so when
Bishop Lindsey (Perth. Ass. part. 3. page 28.) says, that the Holy days are
not consecrated to holy mystical uses, but to holy political uses. Wherein, as
Mr. Gillespy (Eng. Pop. Cer. part. 3. cap. 1. page 7.) well observes, he does
but labor to plaster over his Superstition with the untempered mortar of this
quidditative distinction and uncouth speculation, of which, I dare say, the
Bishop himself comprehends it not.

3. Sometimes they say God has sanctified them, by the great works he has
done upon them. Thus Bellarmine (de Cult. Sanct. lib. 3. cap. 10.) Christus
nascens consecravit locum, id est, praesepe, moriens consecravit Crucem,
resurgens consecravit Tuntulum unde exivit; cur non etiam consecravit Tempus,
id est, Dies illos quibus natus, vel passus, vel rediturus fuit nobis devicta
morte? Which his Disciple Rich. Hooker, a most Papistical Writer, borrows from
him, and thus expresses it, ( Eccl. Pol. lib. 5. 69. p. 375.) No doubt, as
Gods extraordinary presence has hallowed and sanctified certain Places: so
they are his extraordinary works that have truly and worthily advanced certain
Times, for which cause they ought to be, with all men that honor God, more
holy then other days. Thus he.

But it is not merely the extraordinary works of God that will sanctify a day,
for then all the six days of the week should be holy: for God created the World
in six days; so that there is not one day of the week wherein there was not
some work of wonder wrought. It is rather the Lords resting from his works,
then his working that sanctifies Time and makes it holy; as Genesis 2.2, 3. Exodus
20.11. Upon this ground the seventh day was sanctified in old time, because on
that day God rested from the work of Creation; and upon the same ground the
first day of the week, being the Rest-day of the Lord our God from the great
work of Redemption, his former Rest being disturbed and spoiled by the Fall and
Sin of Man, is our Christian Sabbath. But these Popish Holy days are not the
Lords resting days, nor is any such thing pretended.

4. They commonly put it upon the Church, and say, the Church has set apart
these times; but this is not enough to make them holy: for all that the Church
can do toward the sanctifying of any time or thing, is only to present it and
offer it to the Lord; but if the Lord do not accept them, but refuse such
Presents, and cast them down as dung in their faces, they are not Holiness to
the Lord, but an abomination to him. As suppose the Church of the Jews had
offered Swines flesh unto God, would this have made Swines Flesh holy? no
verily, because the Lord not did not accept it. So here, the Church dedicates
these days to the Lord, but there must be some Word of God to evidence his
acceptance of them, or else they are not indeed holy times, but superstitious
times, of which the Lord will say at the great day, who required these things
at your hands? whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. Isai. 1.12. Romans 14.23.

Reason 2.
There is not only no warrant in the Scripture for them, but clear and sharp
reproofs and testimonies against them. It was one part of the Superstition of
the Pharisees in our Saviors time, to fast twice a week, Luke 18.12. Those old
Papists the Pharisees, and our new Pharisees the Papists, being men of the same
Spirit, and acted by the same Principle, and walking in the same ways of
Superstition. And it was the brand set upon Jeroboam, 1 Kings 12.33. that he
ordained a Feast unto the Children of Israel upon the fifteenth day of the
eighth month, even the month which he had devised of his own heart, which he
had lied or feigned, as the word signifies, asher bada millibbo, quem mentitus
est de cord suo: And though it was like unto the Feast that was in Judah, v.
32. and though he pretended the Glory and Worship of that God, that brought
them up out of the Land of Egypt, as well as the ease and accommodation of the
People, v. 28. yet all this would not excuse him. And what is Christmas and
Easter, and all the rest of them, but days which the Jeroboam of Rome has
devised of his own heart?

And the Pope had them from the Jews and from the Pagans; for what is Christmas
but the old heathenish Bacchanalia? It is kept at the same time of the year,
and after the same profane manner, only the Pope has varnished it with a new
name. But how ill it becomes a Christian to keep the Pagan Festivals, hear what
Tertullian (de Idol. cap. 14.) says. Nobis (says he) quibus Sabbata extranea
sunt and neomenia and feriae aliquando a Deo dilectae, Saturnalia and Januariae
and Brumae and matronales frequentantur, munera commeant, strenae consonant,
lusus convivia constrepunt? and is not this as lively a description of
Christmas, as if it had been purposely intended for it? but thus he inveighs
against them; O melior fides nationum in suam sectam, quae nullam solennitatem
Christianorum sibi vendicat, non Dominicum diem, non Pentecosten, etiam si
nossent nobiscum non communicassent, timerent enim ne Christiani viderentur,
nos ne Ethnici pronunciemur, non veremur. We that do not own nor observe the
New Moons, and other Jewish Festivals appointed of old by God himself, do we
keep the Heathenish Bacchanalia, and other Winter and Summer Feasts of theirs,
feasting and revelling, and making merry as the Heathens do? O how, much more
true are they to their Religion, then we to ours; For they do not observe any
day that Christians observe, as Pentecost or the Lords day; for they would be
afraid lest they should seem to be Christians in so doing: but we are not
afraid lest we be pronounced to be Heathens. Thus he. It is true, he allows
Pentecost as a Feast observed by Christians in those times; but how this can be
defended, and all the rest of the Jewish Feasts cashiered, let the Christian
Reader judge.

The Apostle makes no difference, but condemns the observation of all the
Jewish Festivals alike, one as much another. Col. 2.16. Let no man judge you in
meat or drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the New Moon, or of the
Sabbaths, which are a shadow of things to come. Judicare hic significat culpae
reum facere, vel Religionem injicere ita ut amplius liberi non simus, says
Calvin in Col. 2.16. Such weak and rudimentary Instructions were fit for those
darker and weaker times of the Churches nonage, when under the Tutorage and
Pedagogy of Moses before the coming of Christ. But now after that ye have known
God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye back to the weak and beggarly
elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage? ye observe days, and
months, and times, and years. I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon
you. labor in vain. Gal. 4.9, 10, 11. It is a sign the preaching of the Gospel
has had but small success in such a place, and in the hearts of such a people.
And whereas it is objected both by Papists and Prelates, that the Apostle
speaks here only against the Jewish Festivals, loqui ibi Apostolorum de
Judaeorum tantum festis: so Bellarmine de Cultu Sanct. c. 10. the Rhemists
Annot. in Gal. 4.10. and Bishop Lindsey Perth. Ass. part. 3. page 43. This will
not take off the force of these Texts. For,

1. The Armory of Christians against Heresies and Errors should be quickly
empty, i^ the Weapons which are hung up in the Scriptures should serve only for
the persons, places and times wherein and against which they were used of the
Prophets and Apostles: and therefore your shift, that the Apostle speaks only
against the Jewish Feasts and Fasts is vain, says Mr. Cartwright in Col. 2.16.

2. Some of the Popish Feasts are originally Jewish, yea, which is worse,
Paganish.

3. These Texts do condemn the Popish Feasts as much, and in some respects more
then the Jewish, as Hospinian observes against Bellarmine; and Mr. Cartwright
(in Gal. 4.10. and in Romans 14.5.) gives the same answer to the Rhemists. If
Paul (says he) condemn the Galatians for observing the Feasts which God
himself instituted, and that for his own Honor only, and not for the Honor of
any Creature; the Papists are much more laid open to this Condemnation, which
press the Observation of Feasts of Men's devising, and to the Honor of Men. For
do you think it likely that God should by Christ discharge his people of the
yoke of the Law of Moses, to bring in another yoke of Man's Ordinances? and is
there any likelihood that he should abrogate the Festival days consecrated to
himself and to his own Majesty, to bring in those that are consecrated and set
apart to the Honor of Saints? and that the Lord should ease his people of the
burden of a few Festival days, to lay upon them an heavier burden by a
greater number of them? So that we see the Scripture does abundantly and
clearly condemn and testify against these superstitious observations of days
and times.

Reason 3.
Consider further the deep dishonor that is done to God by these days every
manner of way. The common pretense is, that they do it for the Honor of Christ;
but it is not good Intentions that will excuse bad Actions. Jeroboam pretended
very good Intentions, 1 Kings 12.28. so did they in Exodus 32.5. they proclaimed
an Holy day to Jehovah, though they kept it in a rude manner: but what says
the Lord to them, even after all the Prayers of Moses for them? ver. 34. in the
day when I visit, I will visit their sin upon them. He will not regard their
vain pretenses; for the truth is, these days are celebrated rather in
dishonor, and as it were in despite of Christ, then for any Glory to him. For,

1. They are a dishonor to his Holiness, as if Christ were a God that
delighted in Profaneness and Wickedness: for he is dishonored (as some have
well observed) by letting the reins loose to all manner of Profaneness, as much
in the twelve days, and in some respects more, then in all the twelve months of
the year beside. Hence Mr. Perkins most truly and justly complains, that the
Feast of Christ's Nativity, commonly so called, is not spent in praising the
Name of God, but in Revelling, Dicing, Carding, (...), Mumming, and in all
licentious liberty for the most part, as (...) it were some Heathen Feast of
Ceres or Bacchus. Perk (...) Creed Art. of Christ's Birth, apud Gillesp. Engl.
Pop. Cerem. p. (...) cap. 9. page 48.

2. It is an unspeakable dishonouour to his blessed Sabbaths, for men to set
their Days by his Days, their Posts by his Posts, their Altars by his Altars,
as Jeroboam devised a Feast of his own heart, like unto the Feast that was in
Judah, 1 Kings 12.32. yea, as Dr. Ames observes, they were from their first use
not only equalled unto, but extolled above the Lords day. Fresh Suit, part 2.
p. 84. Those Prelates, says Mr. Gillespy, that will not abase themselves to
preach upon ordinary Sabbaths, think the high Holy days worthy of their
Sermons. Engl. Pop. Cerem. part. 3. cap. 1 page 13. Yea they can write Books
against the Sabbath, as Heylin, White, Pocklinton and others have done, to
pluck away that Crown of Glory and Preeminence, which God has set upon that
day which he has chosen, and they set up their own devised days in stead
thereof. Common experience proves (says Reverend Mr. Dod on the second
Commandment, p. 68.) that all they which stand most for superstitious Holy
days, are greatest profaners of the Lords Sabbath, and contemners of his Word.

3. They do dishonor the Wisdom and Word of Christ: for Christ the Lord of
Time and the Lord of the Sabbath has sanctified and instituted the first day
of the week, whereon he arose from the dead, for the Commemoration of the great
work of our Redemption by him, and what can the man do that comes after the
King, and in those things that have been already done? as Eccles. 2.12. It is a
bold and deep reflection upon the Wisdom of Christ, to add thus to his
appointments, as if the Lord Jesus Christ himself were not wise enough to
appoint days and times sufficient to keep his own Nativity, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, and all the great things he has done for us, in
everlasting remembrance in the hearts of his Saints, but the Devil and the Pope
must help it out. It is therefore in plain terms a profane speech of Dr.
Hammond, that when the Festivals are turned out of the Church, it will not be
in the power of weekly Sermons on some head of Religion to keep up the
knowledge of Christ in men's hearts. View of Direct. and Vindic. of Liturg. page
31. What are not the Institutions of Christ powerful to attain his own blessed
ends, unless they be pieced out with the additions of men's Inventions? surely
there is no Christian that has found the experience of the saving Power and
Blessing of Gods Ordinances to his own Soul, but will detest and abhor to
entertain such base and vile thoughts of them, unless he has forgotten that he
was purged by them from his old sins.

4. These superstitious Holy days introduced and brought in many other
corruptions along with them, as bad or worse then themselves, like the unclean
Spirit with seven Devils more, sundry whereof are thus expressed by Dr. Ames,
Fresh Suit against Cerem. part. 2. page 84. They were (says he) from their
first rise not only equalled unto, but also extolled above the Lords day:
Easter brought in a superstitious Lent to attend upon it, made Baptism wait for
her Moon, and conformed our Lords Supper to the Jewish Passover in unleavened
Bread. It was the first Apple of Contention amongst Christians. (The Latin and
Greek Churches striving and contending fiercely about the time of it, and
Victor Bp. of Rome desperately excommunicated those that were not of his
opinion in this frivolous Question. So that) it was the first Weapon wherewith
the Bishop of Rome played his Prizes against other Churches, and after slew so
many Britains with, by Austin the Monk. Holy days devised by men in honor of
Christ invited and drew on Holy days to Saints, with many other mischiefs more
then can be now numbered up. And therefore upon all accounts God is dishonored
by them. And so much for that third Reason.

Reason 4.
The true yearly time for the Celebration of these Festivals is not certainly
known, but much disputed among Chronologers and Divines: so that
Holiday-keepers cannot affirm that they do commemorate opus diei in die suo,
the Lord having hid it, as he did the Body of Moses, to prevent Idolatry.

The fierce contention for the space of two hundred years or thereabout between
the Greek and Latin Churches, about the time of celebrating Easter is famous in
Ecclesiastical History: the Eastern Churches kept it on the fourteenth day of
the first month, when the Jews kept their Passover; from whence they were
called quarto-decimani. But the Western Churches kept it upon the Christian
Sabbath in commemoration of Christ's Resurrection, who rose upon the first day:
and both sides pretended Apostolical Tradition for their different practice.
The difference grew so hot, that Victor Boshop of Rome, being full of the
spirit of Antichrist, excommunicated all the Asian Churches, as being
Fourteeners, and as Judaizers. Afterward Constantine the Great called the
Council of Nice to compose these differences in the Churches, who thought it
best to keep it upon the day of Christ's Resurrection; but they had done better,
if they had utterly abolished it; as the great reforming Parliament did in
England. But thus we see what a bone of Contention Easter has been.

And as for Christmas, it has been clearly evinced by many learned men, that
there is a wide mistake in the common account, which places the Birth of
Christ upon the five and twentieth of December. Mr. Allin (Chain of Scripture
Chronology, Period. 7. Number. 60. page 233.) gives these Reasons against it. 1.
Because it is not probable that the Shepherds were abroad all night long,
keeping of their Flocks in the very deep of Winter. Luke 2.8. 2. Neither is it
like that Augustus would by his Decree enjoin all his Subjects to travel at
that time of the year to their chief City to be taxed. Luke 2.1. Nor 3. is it
probable that John did go into the River Jordan with the People that were
baptized of him in the very coldest part of the year; for he baptized in Jordan
when Jesus was entering upon his thirtieth year. Luke 3.23. It is therefore much
more probable that the Birth of Christ was in the month of September. So
Scaliger (de Emend. tempor.) conceives, for which he reasons from the
Conception of John the Baptist. And Mr. Allin also is of the same Judgment,
which he gathers from the half week which the Angel, Dan. 9.27. seems to hold
out to be between the Baptism of Christ and his Death: for if there was just so
much between them, his Death being just at the Passover, which was about the
end of our first month, called March; then his Baptism must needs be about the
latter end of September. Thus Mr. Allen, ubi supra. Which argument indeed to me
is very satisfying, being grounded upon such clear Testimonies of Scripture.
For that Christ was baptized and entered upon his Ministry at thirty years old,
we find recorded, Luke 3.23. and that he preached three years and an half;
besides other arguments may be gathered from that in Dan. 9.27. in the midst of
the week shall the Messiah be cut off; which is meant of a Prophetical week
containing seven years: therefore there must be half a week, that is, half a
year above the three and thirtieth: whereas the common account makes but a
quarter of a year between the Nativity and Easter. Of which much more might be
said; but this is enough to show that the Festivals are grounded upon a very
mistaken and uncertain foundation, which is a further evidence that they are
not of God.

Reason 5.
It is a great infringement of our Christian Liberty, when God has given us
six days wherein to serve him in our Callings; Six days shall thou labor; for
men to contradict the Lord, and say, thou shall not labor six days. Why may
they not as well control the other part of the Command, and say, thou shall
not rest upon the Sabbath day? For, as Mr. Cartwright (First Reply, p. 152.)
has well observed; If the Church may restrain the Liberty that God has given
us, it may take away the yoke also that God has put upon us. But as it is
profaneness to call that common, which God has sanctified and made holy: so on
the other side it is tyrannical Superstition and Presumption, to make that
holy, which God has made common. And this is one of the Apostles arguments in
this very case, Col. 2.16, 20. Let no man judge you in respect of an Holy day,
if you be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the world, why as though
living in the world are ye subject to Ordinances? so likewise Gal. 4.9, 10. ye
desire again to be in bondage, ye observe days and months and times and years.

Si quisquam mortalium (says Calvin in Col. 2.17.) judicis officium hac in
part sibi usurpet, ne obsequamur, quum Christus legitimus Judex nos absolvat.
It tends to no good policy, nor wealth of the people, or preservation of good
order, that there should be so many days wherein men should cease from work,
being a thing that breeds idleness, and consequently poverty, besides other
disorders and vices which always go in company with idleness, says Mr.
Cartwright (First Reply, p. 155.) And upon this account King Henry the Eighth
did abrogate sundry of them, as Mr. Fox shows in the Book of Martyrs. Act and
Mon. vol. 2. p. 386.

Obj. But then days of Humiliation and Thanksgiving, as also weekday Sermons
and Lectures are unlawful.

Answ. It follows not; for there is clear Scripture ground and Warrant for
occasional days of Humiliation or Thanksgiving, when there is any present
emergency of Providence calling thereunto: For Jehosophat proclaimed a Fast, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. so did the King of Nineveh, Jonah 3.7. Joel 1.14. and 2.15. From
whence some have not unaptly said, that God has left as it were a Warrant
dormant with the Magistrate and with the Church for such days: neither indeed
could all the particular causes and occasions and times thereof be particularly
set down in the Scripture, because they are infinite. And Christ allows also
private Fasts, Matthew. 6.17, 18. and so the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.5. but there is no
colorable consequence from such occasional days, to these annual stated Popish
Festivals, for which we have neither a general Warrant in the Scripture, nor a
particular Call of Providence. And as for weekday Lectures, they are most
impertinently objected, seeing as some have well observed, ( Re-exam. Art. of
Perth, page 144.) These are not hours sanctified or consecrated to Gods
Service, but only the most convenient times when most may resort to the hearing
of Sermons, so that time is only designed occasionally, not dedicate or
sanctified. Time is made to serve Gods People, and not Gods People made to
serve the Time, or to serve God because it is an holy time. Ministers do not
then preach with any respect at all to the time, as more holy then other times;
that were superstitious. The work is not done for the times sake, but the time
appointed for the works sake: They do not preach with respect to any supposed
holiness of the time; but appoint the time so as may be most convenient for
doing the work

Obj. 2. Some object the days of Purim, which were anniversary Festivals. Esth.
9.

Ans. This has been 700 years since objected by Papists unto the Waldenses, as
Amesius (Fresh Suit, part. 2. p. 315.) observes, and since by all Papists that
have written against Protestants about Ceremonies, as Gregorius de Valentia,
Bellarmine, Suarez, and we need not seek for new Answers about it; for that
which our Divines have answered to the Papists is sufficient in two words.

1. That it cannot be evinced, that those days of Purim were religious Feasts.
Junius (in Bell. de Cultu Sanct. lib. 3. cap. 10.) says, Praeceptum fuit
politicum, they were only days of civil rejoicing, and, as another learned
Writer ( Re-exam. Art. Perth, page 191.) observes, They are only called the
Days of Purim, not the Holy days of Purim, they are not called Chaggim. No
peculiar Sacrifice was appointed, nor any holy Convocation of the people
enjoined; the Ordinance required but Feasting and Joy, and sending of portions
to one another. The Rest mentioned, Esth. 9. was only from their enemies: so
much Work as might stand with a Feasting day was not forbidden. Bishop Andrews
(Sermon. on Esth. 9.31.) his Arguments to prove that they were holy days, and not
days of civil joy and Solemnity only, are fully answered by Mr. Gillespy,
(Engl. Pop. Cerem. part. 3. c. 6. p. 99, 100) who shows, that the most of them
are merely grounded upon the Corruptions of the vulgar Latin Translation, which
the Bishop chooses to follow. And for that one argument from the Hebrew, that
they took it in animas, verse. 31. from whence the Bishop infers, they made a
Soul matter of it, the Hebrew word nephesh has no such emphasis, but signifies
corpus animatum as well as anima, and is commonly taken not for our souls, but
for our selves; as Gen 46.26. all the souls that came with Jacob, that is, all
the persons. Yea, that it may appear how far the word is from any such emphasis
as the Bishop would put upon it, it is often used even for a dead carcass, as
in Numb. 9.6. Hagg. 2.13. and in sundry other places.

2. Neither can it be evinced that this Feast of Purim was merely of human
Institution, if we suppose it to be a religious Feast. Mordecai did it, says
Dr. Whitaker, (de Sacram. p. 206.) God inspiring him, and peradventure by order
from some Prophet; as we find in Zech. 8. they changed their Fasts into Feasts
by the mouth of the Lord by the Ministry of the Prophet. And though we do not
read expressly, that the Lord gave Commandment to them by any of his Prophets
for this Feast of Purim; yet forasmuch as it stands approved in Scripture,
there is no doubt, says Mr. Cartwright, but it was done by warrant from God.
Rest of second Reply, page 193, 194.

Obj. 3. The Feast of Dedication, Joh. 10.22, 23.

Answ. This also has been objected from the time of the Waldenses. But.

1. It is not certainly known what Feast of Dedication this was, and whether
merely of human Institution: some take it for that which Solomon appointed,
others ascribe it to Ezra, others to the Maccabees. See Ames Fresh Suit. part.
2. p. 318. And it is observed by learned men concerning those declining times,
that the latter Jews appointed many Fasts and Feasts, as may be seen in their
Calendar, which they had no warrant for out of the Word of God. So Mr. Weems,
vol. 1. concern, the Scripture Prolegom. cap. 3. page 60.

2. Neither is there any evidence that Christ approved this Feast of
Dedication. The Text only says, that he walked then in Solomon's Porch, which
he might do without observing or approving the Feast. Those circumstances of
time and place being noted by the Evangelist for evidence to the Story, as Mr.
Gillespy (Engl. Pop. Cerem. par. 3. cap. 6. p. 103.) well observes, and not
for any mystery. If this Feast was nothing but a Tradition of the Elders, we
may be sure that Christ, who testified against other Inventions of men, did
never observe this.

Object. 4. The Apostle (say some) seems to speak of it, as a thing indifferent
and lawful to regard a Day to the Lord. Romans 14.5, 6.

Answ. The scope of that place is not to assert the truth of their Opinion, who
made a difference of Days and Meats: (for it is evident from many Scriptures,
that they were in an error;) but to forbid and reprove an unbrotherly spirit
one against another, for such differences of Opinion; which Reproof falls heavy
upon the greatest Patrons and Assertors of these Popish Holy days; for they
have used much unbrotherly Violence against Dissenters. Moreover, there was a
greater latitude of Christian Charity and Indulgence due to the weak Jews in
their adherence for a time to Moses, then can be claimed by such as adhere to
the Church of Rome.

Object. 5. Some distinguish between the Superstition and the Hospitality of
Christmas, and the superstitious part they condemn, but plead hard for the
hospitable part, as they call it.

Answ. The Feasting and Sporting is an appendix to the Worship, or rather to
the Superstition, and therefore stands or falls together with it. The Apostle
therefore calls them Idolaters even for their Feasting and Sporting, 1 Cor.
10.7. neither be ye Idolaters, as were some of them, as it is written, the
people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. And if we read the
Story of that Idolatry of the Calf, Exodus 32. we shall find that it was
celebrated much after the same manner that Christmas is, or rather somewhat
better; for they rose up early on the morrow, and offered Burnt-offerings and
Peace Offerings: so that it seems they went to Church and said their Prayers
most devoutly in the morning, and then they sat down to eat and drink, and
rose up to play, v. 6. and there was shouting, and singing, and dancing, and a
great deal of mad mirth amongst them, v. 18, 19. Sober mirth, and the temperate
use of the good Creatures of God, is lawful at any time of the year, and there
never was any Minister that preached or spoke against that. But to have better
cheer upon a Popish Holy day then at another time, merely upon this account,
because, forsooth, it is an Holy day, this is superstitious. And the revelling
and rioting and luxury, which is usual at those times, is every way an
hinderance to Hospitality, and not a furtherance to it, that which might and
ought to be bestowed in a way of liberality to the poor, being misspent and
lavishe'd away in vain prodigality and luxury.

Obj. 6. I meet with one who disallows those days that are dedicated to Christ,
but has a better opinion of the Saints days. His words are these; Nor for my
part (says he) do I make any scruple to keep a day in remembrance of any
eminent Servant of Christ or Martyr, to praise God for their Doctrine or
Example, and honor their memorial: but the hardest part of the question is,
whether it be lawful to keep days as holy, in celebrating the memorial of
Christ's Nativity, Circumcision, Fasting, Transfiguration, Ascension, and such
like. Mr. Ric. Baxt. of Chapter Gov. and Wors. disp. 5. p. 413.

Answ. This learned man is very singular in this Opinion, as well as in many
others, and it is contrary even to the common Sense and Reason of most
Christians, yea of most men, to think the days dedicated to Saints more
allowable then those in remembrance of the actions of Christ himself. Our
Divines against the Papists condemn the Saints days, as much more intolerable
and inexcusable then the other. Si pium and bonum esset (says judicious Ames
Bell. Enerv. tom. 2. l. 6. c. 10. these. 12.) instituere dies fest^s, tota haec
pietas melius collocaretur in tot commemorationibus factorum Christi quot
Ecclesia far posset, quam ut ad Sanctos iretur Dicare diem Deo in memoriam
hominis, ne Judaei quidem in sua paedagogia docebantur, ne dum convenit
spirituali cultui novi Testamenti. If it were (says he) a good and pious thing
to appoint Holy days; this Piety were better employed in so many Commemorations
of the actions of Christ, as the Church could bear, then in turning aside to
the Saints. To dedicate a day unto God in remembrance of a man, is a thing
which the very Jews were never taught to do in those weak and childish times,
much less does it agree to the spiritual Worship of the New Testament. And
though it were lawful (says Mr. Cartwright First Reply p. 153.) for the Church
to ordain Holy days to our Savior Christ, or the blessed Trinity; yet it is
not therefore lawful to institute Holy days to the Apostles and other Saints,
or to their remembrance.

As to that pretense of honoring their memorial, I remember this is alleged
by Bellarmine for the keeping of Relics, and Dr. Ames (Bellarm Enerv. tom. 2.
l. 6. c. 6. these. 25.) his answer to him, De istiusmodi conservatione nihil
traditur in Scriptura, ubi tamen omne genus honoris virtuti defertur, may be
applied here; this is such a way of honoring the memorial of Saints departed,
as the Scripture knows not, wherein yet all due honor is given to virtue and
holiness. For as we reason against the Popish Purgatory (says Mr. Cartwright,
First Reply p. 153.) that it is therefore naught, forasmuch as neither in the
Old Testament, nor in the New, there is any mention of Prayer at any time for
the Dead: so may it be reasoned against these Holy days ordained for the
remembrance of the Saints; that forasmuch as the old people did never keep any
Feast, or Holy day, for the remembrance either of Moses, or Daniel, or Job, or
Abraham, or David, or any other, how holy or excellent soever they were. Nor
the Apostles nor the Churches in their time never instituted any, neither to
keep the remembrance of Stephen, or of the Virgin Mary, or of John Baptist, or
of any other notable and rare personage: that the instituting and erecting of
them now, and this attempt by the Churches which followed, is not without some
note of presumption; for that it undertaketh those things which the primitive
Church in the Apostles times, having greater gifts of the Spirit of God, durst
not venture upon.

And what though some of these Corruptions crept in some what early? they are
but old sins, and grey-headed errors.

That Antichristian violence of Victor Bishop of Rome for Easter was about the
year of Christ one hundred ninety eight, but Christmas is not so ancient.
Pezelius refers the first establishment of it to the Council of Constantinople
in the year of Christ five hundred fifty three. Celebrata est (says he)
Constantinopoli Synodus Oecumenica quinta circa annum Christi 553. In eadem
Synodo dies natalis Christi and dies Purificationis Mariae primum sunt
instituti ut solenniter quotannis celebrarentur. Pezel Mellific. Hist. par. 2.
Justinian. 1. page 326. But be their antiquity more or less, they have been
abundantly testified against by the faithful Servants of Christ both in former
and later times.

Socrates, who wrote the History of the Church above twelve hundred years ago,
has a whole Chapter concerning Easter, wherein he has many notable arguments
against those that contend so much for it. He says, that as many other things
crept in of custom in sundry places, so the Feast of Easter prevailed amongst
all people of a certain private custom and observation, seeing not one of the
Apostles has any where prescribed any thing about it.

He shows also that the Apostles have set the Churches free from the yoke of
bondage, by their Letters to them, Acts 15. But some neglecting these things,
account of Fornication, as a thing indifferent; yet they contend about Holy
days as it were for life and death, they despise the Commandments of God, and
establish them Canons of their own, they set at naught, they make no account of
the Law published by the Apostles, but raise a foul stir about Days and Months,
etc. Thus Socrates Hist. lib. 5. cap. 22. Which Testimony of his is so plain
and punctual, that Bellarmine knew not how to rid his hands of it, but by
flying out upon Socrates, and calling him a Novatian Heretic, ( Bell. de Cultu
Sanct. l. 3. c. 10.) which is but a poor shift, instead of answering his
Arguments, to reproach his Person. But the Book he has written, I mean his
Ecclesiastical History, is evidence enough for him, that he was a man of an
excellent spirit.

It was one of the Articles held and owned by the Waldenses, as Mr. Fox
shows, five hundred years ago, Constrained and prefixed Fasts bound to days
and times, difference of Meats superfluous Holy days, and all the rabblement of
Rites and Ceremonies brought in by Man, to be abolished. Fox Acts and Mon. vol.
1. p. 300. art. 6.

It was Luthers desire no less then seven score years ago, in his Book de Bonis
Operibus set forth anno 1520. that there were no other Festival days amongst
Christians, but only the Lords day. Beza says, Superstitiosum esse docemus,
arbitrari unum aliquem diem altero sanctiorem, Bez. Confess. c. 5. art. 41. And
Reverend Mr. Dod condemns it as Idolatry against the second Commandment, either
to pray unto the Saints, or to swear by them, or to dedicate set days and times
to the honor of them, either by Fasting or Feasting. Dod on the second
Commandm. p. 67, 68.

In Scotland they were laid aside in the first Reformation, and have been
witnessed against by the Godly there ever since. They were revived indeed by
those backsliders in the Assembly of Perth in the year 1618. For one of the
five Articles of that Assembly was concerning Festival days; but they found
little acceptance with such as adhered to the Reformation of Religion, as
appears by the Books and Writings of many godly learned men against the Acts of
that Assembly. Yea, King James himself before his Apostasy bore witness
against them. Right excellent was that Speech of his to a National Assembly in
Scotland anno 1590. He praised God that he was King in the sincerest Church in
the world, sincerer then the Church of England, for their Service was an ill
said Mass in English; sincerer then Geneva it self, for they observed Pasche
and Yoole, that is, Easter and Christmas; and what warrant, said he, have they
for that. I find this Speech of his recorded in Didoclavius his Altar
Damascenum, page 666. and in the Book entitled Perth Assembly, the
Proceedings, the Nullity thereof, etc. printed 1619. page 64. and in the
Re-examination of the five Articles of Perth, printed 1636. page 340. How far
he did sin against these enlightenings and convictions, and how the Bishops did
poison him, and pervert his Spirit in his declining times, it is needless here
to discourse. But these were his Principles in his first, which were his best
times.

In England, besides the frequent Testimonies of the Martyrs against them,
Authority has smitten them once and again, the Lord usually carrying on the
work of Reformation by degrees. The first blow they received by public
Authority was by the Injunctions of King Henry the eighth, in the year 1536. in
the Preface whereto, he reasons thus against them; Forasmuch as the number of
Holy days is so excessively grown, and yet daily more and more by man's
devotion, yea rather Superstition, was like further to increase, that the same
was and should be not only prejudicial to the Commonwealth, by reason that it
is occasion as well of much sloth and idleness, the very Nurse of Thieves,
Vagabonds, and diverse other unthriftiness and inconveniences, as of decay of
good Mysteries and Arts profitable and necessary for the Commonwealth, and loss
of man's food many times, being clean destroyed through the superstitious
observance of the said Holy days, in not taking the opportunity of good and
serene weather offered upon the same in the time of Harvest; but also
pernicious to the Souls of many men, which being enticed by the licentious
vacation and liberty of these Holy days, do upon the same commonly use and
practice more excess, riot, and superfluity then upon any other days, etc. See
Mr. Fox Acts and Monum. vol. 2. page 386. whereupon he abrogates a number of
them, and especially such as sell in the Harvest time. And thus the work was
begun.

But the total extirpation of them was a work and honor reserved by God for
the great Parliament, who in their Directory page ult. have declared, that
Festival days vulgarly called Holy days, having no warrant in the Word of God,
are not to be continued. And in their Ordinance of June 8. 1647. they do
utterly abolish them in these words; Forasmuch as the Feasts of the Nativity of
Christ, Easter and Whitsuntide, and other Festivals commonly called Holy days,
have been heretofore superstitiously used and observed, be it ordained by the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that the said Feast of the Nativity
of Christ, Easter and Whitsuntide, and all other Festival days, commonly called
Holy days, be no longer observed as Festivals or Holy days within the Kingdom
of England and Dominion of Wales. Any Law, Statute, Custom, Constitution, or
Canon to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. See Mr. Scobels Collection
anno 1644. cap. 5^. and anno 1647. cap. 81.

And now to see these and other abominations by the Prelatick party conjured up
again from the Grave, and from the bottom of Hell, after such a Funeral, he
said well, who said it is almost as prodigious and as ghastly a sight, as to
see a dead Ghost walking up and down with his winding sheet about him; but God
will shortly bury them again, and seal the Tombstone upon them, never to rise
more: For he has said, I hate, I despise your Feast-days, See Calv in Amos
5.21.
I will not smell your Holy days, Amos 5.21. wherein, as the most judicious
Interpreters observe, he does not only reprove their Hypocrisy in reference to
his own blessed days, but also their Idolatry and Superstition in observing
days of their own. Oh! that God would set home this Text by the power of his
Spirit upon the Consciences of Holiday-keepers to convince and humble them. How
dreadful are these words! I hate, I despise your Feast-days, I will not smell
your Holy days; that is, I will never accept them.

THE SUPERSTITIOUS VANITY OF THE POPISH MUSIC IN THE WORSHIP of GOD.
THis is such a strange superstitious Vanity that it is generally accounted in
these knowing times, as it was of old by Justin Martyr (Quest. and Resp. 107)
childish and ridiculous, insomuch that it does expose the Papists and their way
of Worship to much contempt and laughter: and therefore I should have thought
it needless to speak much against a thing so generally exploded, but that Mr.
R. B. has discovered and declared himself for it, as a thing in it self lawful
and warrantable. His words are these; For Organs or other instruments of Music
in Gods Worship, they being an help, partly natural and partly artificial, to
the exhilerating of the Spirits for the Praise of God; I know no argument to
prove them simply unlawful, but what would prove a Cup of Wine unlawful, or the
Tune, and Meeter, and Melody of Singing unlawful: but yet if any would abuse
it, by turning Gods Worship into carnal Pomp and Levity, especially by such
non-inteligible singing or bleating, as some of our Choristers used, the common
people would have very great cause to be weary of it, as accidentally evil.
Thus he, Disp. of Humane Cerem. p 412. But Bellarmine has said more then this
for it in fewer words. Cum and habeamus (says he) exemplum Testamenti veteris,
and experiamur devotionem per eam excitari and taedium minui, Bell. de Missa.
lib. 2. c. 15. and he gives as grave and learned Counsel against the abuse of
them. In ipsis Organis (says he) non nisi res sacras and pias sobrie and
graviter exprimendas, neque enim leve peccatum est, siquis lascivum aliquid
Organis ludat and audientium animos non ad pietatem, sed ad amorem mundi
accendat. Bell. de Bon. Oper. in particul. lib. 1. cap. 17. The answering of
which objections and pretenses will sufficiently discover the vanity and
groundlesness of this Superstition, and that it is more then accidentally evil.

And first to that plausible Objection of Bellarmine from the use of them in
the Old Testament, to begin with the strongest Argument first: for this is the
most specious, and has the greatest seeming weight. But though the Jews had
Musical Instruments in the Worship of God under the Law, yet that they are no
part of Gospel Worship: these Considerations may evince.

First, There was then a clear word of Institution for them. The Trumpets of
Silver and Cornets of Horn were instituted by the hand of Moses, Numb. 10. in
the ten first verses, and Levit. 23.23, 24. we read also in Moses his time of
Timbrels used in the public Praises of God by Miriam the Prophetess, Exodus
15.20. and in David's time we read of Organs also, and ten-stringed Instruments,
and Cymbals of Brass, and Harps, and Psalteries of fine wood, 2 Samuel 6.5. Psalm.
149.3. and 150.4. 2 Chronicles. 16.4, 5. and these Musical instruments were not
brought into Gods Worship by David of his own head, but by Authority and
Direction from God. For so was the Commandment of the Lord by his Prophets,
says the Text, 2 Chronicles. 29.25. and therefore they are called the musical
instruments of God, 1 Chronicles. 16.42. and instruments of Music of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 7.6. with relation to God as the Author and Institutor of them. For the
Lords Name in the Scripture phrase is never set upon things of Humane
invention, but only upon things of Divine institution; as the Lords Supper, the
Lords Day, the Lords Feasts, the Lords Altar, etc. so here the Lords
Instruments of Music. And indeed had there not been such a Stamp of God upon
them, they had been abominable; and those words of God by the Prophet Amos,
5.23. might justly have been applied unto them, Take away from me the noise of
thy Songs, for I will not hear the melody of thy Viols; or of thy Organs, as
some translate that word, vid. Tarnov. in loc. For the Lord rejects with
loathing whatever he has not commanded, respuit quicquid non praecepit, as
Calvin observes upon that text: A text which condemns the mutterings of the
Mass-Priests, and the bellowings of the Friars and Nuns, wherewith the Churches
and Chapels in the Papacy echo; to use the words of the learned Lutheran
Tarnovius upon that place.

But there is not one word of Institution for them under the Gospel, neither
expressly nor by Consequence: but on the contrary, they are clearly cashiered
and excluded out of the Gospel Worship, by that general Rule which the Apostle
lays down concerning all the parts of Gods Worship, 1 Cor. 14 26. let all
things be done unto edifying, with ver. 15. I will sing with the Spirit, and I
will sing with Understanding also; and verse. 11. If I know not the meaning of
the Voice, he that speaks shall be a Barbarian to me. From all which the Rule
is evident, that no Voice is now to be heard in the Church of Christ, but such
as is significant and edifying by signification, which the voice of Instruments
is not. Mr. Cott. of Singing Psalms cap. 1. page 6. The Chaunters and
Choristers are (to use the Apostles phrase) Barbarians to all the people; for
they play and sing no body knows what: the understanding cannot edify by it,
being not an articulate voice.

And therefore those Comparisons of Mr. B. when he parallels the use of Organs
in Gods Worship with a Cup of Wine, and with the Tune, and Meter, and Melody in
Singing, are most incongruous and unmeet comparisons. For what communion has
Light with darkness, and what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? So
when Bellarmine (de Bonis Operib. partic. lib. 1. cap. 1.7.) mingles the
Question of Organs with that of Singing Psalms, handling them both together in
one; It is too much boldness thus to confound and parallel the Inventions of
men with the Institutions of Jesus Christ. We know there is an Institution of
Chist for the use of Bread and Wine in his Worship, in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, as also for the singing of Psalms, to which the Tune and Meter
are as necessary as Cups and Vessels for the Bread and Wine: But where has
Christ appointed Organs and Cathedral Music? who required these things at your
hands?

The time when this Corruption was first invented and introduced into the
Church is not certainly known, neither is it much material to dispute. Certain
it is, that they are a very late Invention. They were not used in Justin
Martyrs time, who lived in the second Century; and it is generally thought by
learned men, and not without ground, that that Book, though it bear his Name,
was indeed much later then his time, where they are thus witnessed against; the
Testimony is very plain and punctual, and therefore let us hear it in English;
Singing (says he) in it self is not a childish thing, but to sing with
instruments of Music, and with Dancing, and Timbrels. And therefore in the
Churches the use of such Musical instruments, and other things fit for
Children, is laid aside in their Songs and Praises, and nothing left but only
singing with the Voice. Justin Mart. Quaest. and Resp. 107. Neither were they
used in Chrysostoms time, who lived in the fourth Century; for he says,
Judaeis fuerat permissum propter infirmitatem cordis sui, It was permitted to
the Jews because of their weakness. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 150. Platina refers the
original of them to Pope Vitalianus about 690 years after Christ, or as others
770, others about 820. Zepper. Pol. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 13. page 106. But that
they are much later then any of these, Aquinas his Determination against them
is a sufficient evidence, ( Aqu. secund. secundae Qu. 91. art. 2. ad 4.) who
durst never have condemned them as Jewish, and typical, and carnal, if they had
been generally received in the Church of Rome in his time, who lived about 400
years ago: And it is Cajetans observation upon him, Nota quod tempore Divi
Thomae Ecclesia non utebatur Organis. Cajet. in Thom. And Bellarmine himself (
de Bon. Oper. in partic. l. 1. c. 17.) confesses, in Ecclesia sero admitti
caepisse, the primitive and purest times knew them not; so that they are a very
late invented Superstition. And this is the first Consideration against them,
There was a clear word of Institution for them under the Law, but not so, but
the contrary under the Gospel.

2. We do not find that these Musical instruments amongst the Jews were a part
of their Synagogue-worship, which was moral and perpetual; but rather of their
Temple-worship, which was ceremonial, and is now vanished away.

We find in the Scripture, that they had in their Synagogues the public moral
Worship of God, as reading and expounding the Law, etc. every Sabbath day, Luke
4.16, 20, 21. Acts 13.15. and 15.21. Some think they used Trumpets there also,
to call the people together; but if they did, this was a moral use of them, for
which we use the ringing of a Bell. But the Scripture is clear and express,
that their instruments of Music were appointed to be used in their
extraordinary solemn Feasts, as in the year of Jubilee in the day of Atonement,
Levit. 25.9. and continually before the Ark, 1 Chronicles. 16.4, 5, 6. And the
Singers and Trumpeters stood at the East end of the Altar at the Dedication of
the Temple in Solomon's time, 2 Chronicles. 5.12. And in Hezekiahs time, when the
Burnt-offering began, the Song of the Lord began also, with the Trumpets and
with the instruments of Musik ordained by David King of Israel. 2 Chronicles. 29.27,
28. But therefore seeing Christ is come, and has caused the Sacrifice and the
Oblation to cease, and the City and the Sanctuary being both destroyed, as Dan.
9.26, 27. All the Appendices thereof, all the Worship that was affixed thereto
is ceased with it. Are the Sacrifices of the Temple, the Priests of the Temple,
the Altars of the Temple, and all the other parts of Temple-worship ceased, and
does the Music of the Temple continue?

3. There was a typical signification in them. And upon this account they are
not only rejected and condemned by the whole Army of Protestant Divines; as for
instance, by Zuinglius, Calvin, Peter Martyr, Zepperus, Paraeus, Willet,
Ainsworth, Ames, Calderwood, and Cotton, (Zuingl. Act. disp. 2. page 106.
Calvin in Psalm. 33. Pet. Mart. in 1 Cor. 14.7, 8. Zepper. de leg Mos. lib. 4 c.
9. p. 346. de Pol. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 13. p. 106. Paraeus in 1 Cor. 14.7.
Willet Synops. Papis. p. 593. Ainsworth on Psalms, p. ult. of Music in Temple,
Ames Fresh Suit against Ceremonies part 2. cap. 4. sect. 6. page 405, 406.
Didoclav. Altar. Damasc. cap. 8 p. 490, 491, etc. Cotton of Singing of Psalm. c.
3. p. 12.) who do with one mouth testify against them, most of them expressly
affirming that they are a part of the abrogated legal Pedagogy; so that we
might as well recall the Incense, Tapers, Sacrifices, New Moons, Circumcision
and all the other shadows of the Law into use again. But Aquinas himself also,
though a Popish Schoolman, pleads against them upon the same account, quia
aliquid figurabant, and says, the Church in his time did not use them, ne
videatur judaizare, lest they should seem to judaise. Aquin. secund. secundae
Qest. 91. Art. 2.4. Yea Tilenus himself, before his Apostasy; for what his
Judgment was afterward in this particular I do not know, but in his first,
which were his best times, he says, Instrumenta inanimata sive ea sint (...)
sive (...) quicunque in Ecclesiam revocant, Synagogam pridem sepultam hac in
part ref^diunt; operosum illud machinamentum quod Antonomastice vocant Organon
Vitaliani Papae inventum ac donum illis arrideat qui magnae meretrici
supparasitari, quam Christianae simplicitati studere malunt, non absimiles
Ethnicis quos Lactantius ad Templa ventitare ait, non tam Religionis gratia
quam ut videant and audiant quod oblectet, lib. 2. cap. 7. and quibus
publicorum Conventuum finis non est (...), sed (...). Syntag. part. 2. disp.
49. these. 49, 50.

What it was, that was the thing intended and signified by these dark shadows,
is not without some obscurity and difficulty to determine. But yet it may be
found out, as in other Types so in this, by considering the nature of the thing
it self, and by diligent observing the hints and intimations that are given by
the Spirit of God in the Scripture. For the meaning of the Types is seldom
fully and explicitly declared and held forth, but for the most part briefly and
obscurely hinted, and so left by God to be collected by the Christian Wisdom
and Industry of his people.

The Silver Trumpets then are conceived to hold forth the Promulgation of the
Gospel, the preaching of the pure Word of God by his Messengers. See Ainsworth
on Numb. 10.
For which, as there is a clear and fair analogy and proportion in the things
themselves, so there be some hints of Scripture that seem evidently to look
this way. As when Solomon says, the Tongue of the just is as choice Silver,
Prove. 10.20. so the Messengers of God are said to lift up their voice as a
Trumpet, Isai. 58.1. set the Trumpet to thy mouth, Hos. 8.1. And in Ezekiel.
33.3-6. the faithful discharge and execution of their Office is expressed by
blowing the Trumpet. So when it is said in that great Prophecy concerning the
Restoration of the Jews, Isai. 27.13. that in that day the great Trumpet shall
be blown, it is understood by Interpreters concerning the sounding of the
Silver Trumpet of the Gospel throughout the world. So Calvin in Isai. 27.13. of
whose Renown for a spiritual and solid Interpreter we need not speak; Tubae
spiritualis nempe Evangelii clangor, etc. So the Dutch Annotators in Isai.
27.13. understand by this great Trumpet in a spiritual way the Trumpet of the
Gospel, whereby God has called and gathered unto himself a Church out of all
People and Nations of the World. So Mr. Davenport of the true Messiah, p. 21.
The sounding of Trumpets to give notice of the Jubilee typed out the preaching
of the Gospel, which began in John's Ministry, and Christ seconded it. Luke
4.18.22.

And both these and all the rest of their Musical instruments were expressions
and signs of Joy, Psalm. 89.15. and 98.6. Blessed is the people that know the
joyful sound, with Harp, with Trumpets, with sound of Cornet make a joyful
noise before the Lord the King. They were therefore fit Resemblances to shadow
out that heavenly Music and inward Melody of the Joys and Graces of Gods
Spirit in the Hearts of his people. The Apostle therefore exhorts us to sing
unto the Lord; but instead of calling upon us for Musical instruments, he
requires the Spirit of Grace in the Heart, and Melody in the Heart, Ephesians.
5.18, 19. Colos. 3.16. The making a joyful noise with Instruments continues
not, (says Mr. Cotton of the singing of Psalms, cap. 3. p. 12.) save only so
far as it is kept alive in the Antitype, the affections of our Hearts, our
praecordia making melody with the songs and professions of our Lips, and with
the gracious and peaceable conversations of our Lives. Yea so clear and obvious
are these significations of the Jewish Music, notwithstanding some some little
obscurity, that Tilenus himself, though dark enough in other things, could not
but see it, such is the evidence of the thing it self. Festum clangoris (says
he) continuam and spiritualem laetitiam Evangelici praeconii tuba excitandam
denotabat, the Feast of Trumpets denotes those continual spiritual rejoicings,
raised in the heart by the pleasant sound of the Trumpet of the Gospel. Syntag.
par. 1. disp. 52. these. 61.

4. But suppose the signification of the Jewish Music could not be found out,
as indeed it is an hard thing to find out the meaning all their Types and
Ceremonies: Yet nevertheless we are delivered by Jesus Christ not only from
their Types and Ceremonies, but also from all their yokes and burdens, and
from all such Ordinances and Observations as did befit them and belong unto
them, as in that estate of infancy and childhood. Junius therefore upon the
History of Miriams praising the Lord with Timbrels and with Dances,
distinguishes thus; Eorum quae lege imperata sunt, alia ad rei futurae
praesignificationem pertinuerunt, alia singularem illius Ecclesiae habuerunt
significationem. Quaecunque res futuras praesignificaverunt, ea post
Complementum in Christo usurpare est impium; quae Ecclesiae illius fuerunt
propria vel singularia, eadem nunc usurpare est ridiculum, Jun. in Exodus 15.20.
which overthrows that deceitful Rule of Bellarmine, which he repeats and makes
use over again and again, when he says, Ceremoniae Judaeorum propriae, sunt
illae quae ad aliud futurum significandum erant institutae. At Ceremoniae quae
fundantur in Ratione naturali, ut genua flectere and similes non sunt propriae
Judaeorum, atque ad hoc genus pertinent instrumenta musica; porro talem esse
Templorum Dedicationem apparet, etc. Bell. tom. 2. de Cultu Sanct. lib. 3. c.
5. and tom. 3. de Missa l. 2. c. 15. and tom. 4. de Bon. Oper. in partic. l. 1.
c. 16. where besides the impropriety of expression (for kneeling in Prayer is
not so fitly called a Ceremony, being an outward gesture, which both the
Scripture recommendeth and Nature teaches and directs to) his Distinction is
lame and defective, and his Rule false. For it is not natural Reason but Divine
Institution that is the foundation of religious Ceremonies, as is most apparent
in the two Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper. Does natural Reason
teach these? neither will his Rule stand, that nothing is proper to the Jews,
but only such Ceremonies as signify some future thing. For a plenteous
Induction of instances might be given, in sundry legal Burdens and Ordinances
of those times, which we all account our selves delivered from, though we do
not well know what typical signification to assign unto them. It will be hard
to demonstrate what typical signification there was in that restraint of the
initiating Seal precisely to the eighth day; or in that Law that a man shall
marry his deceased Brothers Wise, to raise up seed unto his Brother, with many
other things of the like nature, which yet are not now in force.

And upon this account also, this instrumental Music is rejected by many
judicious Writers, as being a burden laid upon the Jews, or an Indulgence
allowed unto them in that estate of infancy; but now the time of Gospel Freedom
is come, Galat. 4.4, 5. Judaeis fuerat permissum propter infirmitatem cordis
sui, says Chrysostom in Psalm. 150. Quia populus erat magis durus and carnalis,
Aquin. secund. secundae qu 91. art. 2. ad. 4. Veteri durae cervicis and
stupidae mentis populo Deus olim indulsit. Pareus in 1 Cor. 14.7. Suppose
(says Mr. Cotton) singing with Instruments were not typical, but only an
external solemnity of Worship, fitted to the solace of the outward Senses of
Children under age, such as the Israelites were in the Old Testament, Galat.
4.1, 2, 3. yet now in the grown age of the Heirs of the New Testament, such
external pompous solemnities are ceased, and no external Worship reserved, but
such as holds forth simplicity and graty; nor is any Voice now to be heard in
the Church of Christ, but such as is significant, and edifying by
signification, 1 Cor. 14.10, 11, 26. which the Voice of Instruments is not. Mr.
Cotton of singing of Psalms cap. 1. p. 6.

5. If that Institution under the Law be binding to us in Gospel Times, I do
not see how it will be avoided, but it will bring in the whole Jewish Music,
as well as some part of it. And then why should we not have Trumpets in the
Worship of God as well as Organs? for the Jews had Trumpets also. And why must
we have them only in Cathedral Churches, and in the Kings Chapel, seeing there
is no preeminence or difference of places under the New Testament? If Organs be
too dear for every poor Parish; yet, as Mr. Calderwood observes, they might get
Citherns or Bagpipes. Haec instrumentalis Musica (says he) si apta cultui
divino in Ecclesia Christiana, cur denegatur singulis paraeciis and conceditur
tantum Cathedralibus Ecclesiis and Sacellis Regis? si sumptuosum sit Organon,
sufficient Tibia utricularis aut Cythara. Didoclav. Altar. Damasc. c. 8. p. 494.
Or they might follow the example of some superstitious Christians at Jerusalem,
mentioned by Sir George Sandys, who instead of Musical instruments have Sawcers
of Brass, which they strike one against another, set about with Jingles. Sir G.
S. Relation of a Journey in 1610. lib. 3. page 173. And would not this be very
grave and solemn Worship? And why should there not be Dancing in the Worship of
God as well as Piping? for those old Idolaters in Exodus 32.6.19. of whom these
in our times are the genuine offspring and posterity, did not only shout, but
also danced and played before their Idol: or if they like not that example,
which nevertheless they imitate and follow, they may read of David's leaping and
dancing before the Ark, and that with divine acceptance and approbation, 2 Samuel
6. as also Miriam the Prophetess, Exodus 15.20. which if they think it was not a
precedent for Gospel Times, let them give any reason for it, which may not be
applied as well against the Jewish Music.

6. I need not say what a troop of Church Officers this kind of Worship
introduces, of whom the Scripture is wholly silent, and has left no Direction
to us, how they should be qualified, how called, how maintained, nor what the
work and duty of their Office is.

Those Musicians of old among the Jews, as Mr. Hildersham observes, were all
Levites, and had a special Function and Calling in that Church by Gods
appointment, whereupon they were wholly to attend, and whereunto they were
enabled by special Gifts received from God. Hild. on Psalm. 51. lect. 1. p. 3.
Of their diligent attendance upon the work see 1 Chronicles. 9.33. And these are the
Singers, chief of the Fathers of the Levites, who remaining in the Chambers
were free, for they were employed in that work day and night. And 2. for their
gifts and abilities see 1 Chronicles. 15.22. Chenaniah he instructed about the Song,
for he was skilul. And 1 Chronicles. 25.7. the number of them that instructed in the
Songs of the Lord, even all that were cunning were, 288. Yea 3. they had also
special Maintenance appointed and provided for them, hence we read of a certain
portion for the Singers due every day, Nehem. 11.23. and all Israel in the days
of Zerubbabel and of Nehemiah gave the portions of the Singers and the Porters
every day his portion. Nehem. 12.47.

But Christ has left no direction to us about any such Officers in the
Churches of the New Testament: we read of Pastors, Teachers, Elders and
Deacons, but of Choristers and Singingmen nothing. And if we say the Church may
appoint them, this will open a gap for all humane Inventions, Prelates, Popes
and Cardinals came in at this door. And being not appointed by Christ, they
must needs be a great burden to the Church. Hence Erasmus justly complains,
Operosam quandam and theatricam Musicam in sacras aedes induximus, tumultuosum
diversarum vocum garritum, qualem non opinor in Graecorum aut Romanorum
Theatris unquam auditum fuisse. In hunc usum magnis salariis aluntur puerorum
greges quorum omnis aetas in perdiscendis kujusmodi gannitibus consumitur.
Tantis sumptibus oneratur Ecclesia ob rem pestiferam, etc. We have brought
(says he) a tedious and theatrical Music into the Church, a tumultuous noise
of many voices, such as I think was never heard in the Greek or Roman Theaters.
For which purpose whole flocks of Boys are maintained at a great charge, whose
age is wasted in learning this gibble gabble, (as Dr. Ames renders it) such
Charges is the Church laden with for such a pestiferous thing. Erasm. in 1
Cor. 14. apud Ames Fresh Suit part. 2. cap. 4. p. 405.

But this may suffice to that first Objection from the use of them under the
Law. These six Considerations may suffice to show that nevertheless they are no
part of Gospel Worship.

Now for that other Objection from Experience. If none but Bellarmine had told
us that they excite Devotion, and make the Worship of God less tedious, we
might altogether pass it by, as being but the experience of a Jesuit; but
seeing a better man affirms the same thing, and pleads that they are an help
partly natural and partly artificial to the exhilerating of the Spirits for the
the Praise of God, we must briefly consider this Objection also. Now the Answer
to it is in two words; If it be meant (as it seems to be) of true spiritual
Delight and Devotion, the Assumption is false, viz. that Organs in the Worship
of God have any such virtue. But if it be meant of mere natural Delight, the
Consequence is false and feeble, viz. that therefore they may be used in the
Worship of God.

1. The truth of this Assumption, viz. the efficacy of Organs in the Worship of
God to excite Delight or Devotion may justly be denied. Chrastovius questions
it, Vtrum autem promoveant vel taedium minuant nescio: Chrastov. Prax. de
Cerem. and Can. Miss. these. 42. apud Didocl. page 493. But Zuinglius thunders
against it. Ecclesiasticum illum Cantum and Templorum Boatus, ab ipsis quoque
Sacerdotibus non intellectos, abusum stultum and inanem, imo pietatis verae
remoram perniciosissimam esse constat. It is most apparent (says he) that that
same Church-chaunting and those bellowings in our Temples, which also the very
Priests themselves do not understand, is a most foolish and vain abuse, and a
most pernicious let and hindrance to true Piety. Zuing. Act. disp. 2. page 106.
apud Ames Fresh Suit p. 406. So that he accounted it not an help and
furtherance of Devotion, but a most pernicious hindrance.

Aquinas observes, which is also quoted and approved by the judicous Ames,
Aquin. ubi supra. Ames ubi supra.
Magis animum movent ad delectationem, quam ut per ea formetur interius bona
dispositio, they do rather stir up the mind to delight, then frame it to a
right disposition, they raise natural rather then true spiritual joy. And so
that intelligent and learned Gentleman Sir Edwin Sandys observes, concerning
the Popish Worship, that being not understood by the people, it is not able to
hold them with any spiritual content, their Service being no other then as a
Lamp put out, which brings no Light at all to the understanding, can neither
bring any due warmth to the affections, the one being inseparable from the
other. And were it not that their Music, Perfumes, and rich Sights did hold
the outward Senses with their natural delight, surely it could not be but
either abandoned for the fruitlesness, or only upon fear and constraint
frequented. Sir E. S. of the State of Religion in the Western parts, page 7, 8.
We see then, that in the Judgments of all these learned men, Musical
instruments in the Worship of God tend rather to affect the Senses and tickle
the Ear with natural and sensual delight, then to edify the Soul and raise the
Heart, unto any true spiritual delight and rejoicing in the Lord.

And whether their witness be not true, let the Scriptures of Truth judge. For
Experience must be brought to the Scripture, as the Example to the Rule, and if
it swerve from that Rule, it is but the corrupt experience of a deceived heart.
But that experience that Bellarmine alleges, of Devotion raised by Musical
instruments in the Worship of God, is conrary to the Scriptures. For it is an
everlasting Scripture-truth, and a Rule as sure as Mount Sion, that the
Inventions of men are sit for nothing but to deaden the heart and quench the
affections, but they will never raise them, nor kindle one spark of any true
spiritual affection in the Soul. The graven Image is profitable for nothing,
Isai. 44.10. In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of men, Matthew. 15.9. Hence when a blind Papist weeps over the
Crucifix, and his heart is melted into Tears, he does but bedabble it with
carnal tears, as some have well expressed it. For what God has not appointed
he does not, he will not own and bless. But this instrumental Music in the
Worship of God is an Invention of Man; it is such an help to Devotion as God
has not appointed: therefore it cannot raise the heart, nor kindle one spark
of true devotion and spiritual affection in the Soul: So that the Assumption is
utterly false.

2. The Consequence also is false and vain. For although there be a civil use
of Music for lawful delight, to exhilerate and refresh the Spirits, about
which there is no controversy; for I know none that questions it, and that
this use of it, and refreshment by it, ought to be improved to the Glory and
Praise of God, is a thing beyond all dispute; yet this is no sufficient ground
for the use of it in the Worship of God. For all the lawful Enjoyments and
Comforts and Contentments of this life, are in this sense helps for the
exhilarating of the Spirits to the Glory and Praise of God, whatever ye do,
whether ye eat or drink do all to the Glory and Praise of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. so
when we rest and sleep, a gracious Heart knows how to do every thing for this
great end; but does it therefore follow that men may sleep at Church? I hope
not. To see Boys and Girls playing in the streets of Jerusalem, will doubtless
much exhilerate and awaken the spirits of their godly Parents to praise God,
when that Promise shall be fulfilled, Zech. 8.5. but does it therefore follow
that Boys may play at Church? So here, the application is easy. And therefore
Pareus having showed that the end of Musical instruments is vel delectare vel
excitare animum, he thus preoccupates this Objection, But it is a simple thing
(says he) for any man to think, from this to defend the use of Organs in the
Worship of God. For the Soul is to be raised up to God and spiritual rejoicing,
in the Church and public Assemblies not by Pipes and Trumpets, which God
indulged of old to that stiff-necked people, but by the preaching of the Word,
the singing of Psalms, etc. Hinc vero Organorum usum in Templis velle defendere
ineptum est. In Ecclesia enim excitandus est animus ad Deum and laetitiam
spiritualem, non Tibiis, Tubis, Tympanis, qaod veteri durae cervicis and
stupidae mentis populo Deus olim indulsit, sed sacris Concionibus, Psalmodiis,
and Hymnis.

Those solemn Caveats therefore beforementioned against the abuse of this
Cathedral Music, are to as much purpose as the washing of a Blackamore to
change his color. For who can bring a clean thing out of that which is
unclean? The thing it self being sinful and unlawful, it is not capable of any
Regulation, but requires an utter Extirpation and rooting out. Such Counsels as
these, against abuse of that which is sinful, are not unlike the Laws made by
King Henry the Second, in the times of Popish Profaneness and Darkness, for the
Regulation of Stews and Whorehouses, as that no Stewholder should receive any
man's Wife, nor keep any Woman against her Will, if out of remorse of Conscience
she would leave that lewd life, etc. upon which a late Historian well observes,
that such Canons and Constitutions could not make them who were bad in
themselves to be good, though they might happily keep some who were bad, Dr.
Fullers History of the Church, book 5. page 240.
from being worse. For though natural Poisons may by art be so qualified and
corrected, to make them cordial; yet moral Poisons, viz. things sinful of
themselves can never be so ordered and regulated, but that still they will
remain sinful and unlawful, the only way to order and amend being to remove and
extirpate them. And therefore King Henry the Eighth did utterly suppress those
Brothel-houses. And the like course those two and thirty grave learned men, who
were chosen in King Edwards days to reform Ecclesiastical Laws and Observances,
thought fit to take with this superstitious Music, which the Church of Rome
has gone a whoring after. Vibratam illam and operosam Musicam quae figurata
dicitur auferri placet. It likes us well (say they) to have this quavering and
curious kind of Music quite taken away. De Divino Officiis ca. 5. apud Amesium
ubi supra. And the reformed Churches abroad have laid it aside with one
consent, as has been showed; whereby it is evident, that they did not account
it a good thing abused, but a thing sinful and evil in it self. So likewise the
great Parliament in their Ordinance of May 9. 1644. in Mr. Scobells Collection,
Anno 1644. Chapter 38. thus reject them. The Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, the better to accomplish the blessed Reformation so happily begun,
and to remove all Offenses and things illegal in the Worship of God, do ordain
-- that all Organs, and Frames or Cases wherein they stand, in all Churches and
Chapels shall be taken away and utterly defaced, and none others hereafter set
up in their places -- whereunto all persons within this Kingdom whom it may
concern are hereby required at their peril to yield due obience.

I have now examined all that I can meet with, that has been objected in this
Cause, and I know not what can be objected further, unless, being driven from
all their other holds, they will fly for refuge to the Authority of the Church,
as their manner is; which if they do, we may easily retort the Argument upon
themselves, and beat them with their own weapons. If I held any Opinion
according with the Church of Rome, but contrary to the concurrent Judgment and
Practice of all the choicest Saints and purest Churches, I would even desire
the Lord to write it in Stars and Sunbeams. But such is the Music now in
question. It is borrowed from the Church of Rome; and they who write for it
borrow their Arguments from Bellarmine, who disputes for it against Peter
Martyr, as has been showed; so that Papists and Semi-Protestants are almost
the only Sticklers for it; but the reformed Churches have cast it off; which
though it is not in it self a demonstrative or cogent Argument, neither do I so
intend it, fot the Scripture is the only infallible Judge; yet it is enough to
confound and stop the mouths of such Objectors, as pretend the Authority of the
Church for this Chaunting Idol-Service. For they take part with the Church of
Rome in this particular against all the Reformed Churches.

To the Reader.
WHereas the Author in the foregoing Discourse asserts that the Reformed
Churches have with one consent laid aside Instrumental Music in the Worship of
God, that word Reformed Churches is not to be understood as including either
the Lutheran Churches abroad, or our Prelatick ones at home. And moreover the
Reader must consider that he therein speaks according to the declared Judgment
of the chief and generality of their Writers. For though it appears by learned
Voetius, Pol. Eccles. part 1. l. 2 tr. 2 sect. 1. c. 3. that some Churches in
Holland have Organs; yet the Reader may there find the Judgment of the
Netherland Synods to have been against them, and that they were brought in
among them but of late, and that too not by any public Authority, but only on
the private affection of some particular persons here and there; besides a
great cloud of witnesses against them, not only from amongst Protestant
Writers, but many of the very Papists themselves, and some in the elder ages of
Christianity. Moreover this Discourse of our Author was written in or near the
time of his unhappy leisure after the memorable Bartholomew 1662. and therefore
before that Book of learned Voetius came forth. Moreover it is certain that
this Music in the Worship of God is a much later Invention then many other
Popish Corruptions are: An Organ was long unknown in France or Germany, the
first of them being brought to King Pipin by Stephen Bishop of Rome and other
Ambassadors from Constantinus Copronymus, as that excellent Historian and
Antiquary Aventinus has it, Res adhuc Gallis and Germanis incognita, Organon
appellant. Annal. Boior. lib. 3. page 300 Edit. Ingolst. 1554. which is
seconded by Amoinus; who adds, that afterward one George a Grecian Presbyter
undertook to make one for Lewis the Emperor. His words are these, Adduxit vero
Baldricus Domino Imperatori Presbyterum quendam Georgium nomine, bonae vitae
hominem, qui se promitteret Organum more posse Graecorum componere. Quem
Imperator gratanter suscepit, and quia Deus illi quae ante se inusitata erant
Regno Francorum attribuebat, gratiarum actiones reddidit, ac Tanculfo sacrorum
scriniorum Praelato commendavit, publicisque stipendiis curare jussit, and ea
quae huic operi necessaria forent praeparare mandavit, de Gest. Franc. lib. 4.
cap. 64 and cap. 114. This is placed by Calvisius in the year 826. and that
sent to Pipin was about threescore and ten years before. Though withal I know
some Writers give them somewhat an older standing. The Centurists of Magdeburg
have these words, Cent. 7. cap. 6. Tandem anno 666. in pleno numero Bestiae
Apocalypsis 13. cantum latinum cum Organis Ecclesiae a Vitaliano Pontifici
susceperunt, missamque deinde, etc. At last in the year 666. in the full number
of the Beast in the 13th of the Revelations, the Churches (they speak of the
Churches in England) received Latin Singing with Organs from Pope Vitalian,
and thereafter began to say Latin Mass, and set up Altars with idolatrous
Images; from whence followed both Prayers to the Dead and Exorcisms, and other
prodigious practices of the Papists. For which they there cite Bale. For my
part, I suspect they and he were therein deceived, both because of what is
before mentioned from Aventinus and Amoinus, and also because of Aquinas his
Judgment of Instrumental Music in Gods Worship, Secund. secundae Quaest. 91.
by whom it sufficiently appears they were not then in general use; and Durandus
(Ration. Div. Off. l. 4. c. 34.) who lived and wrote for them about the same
time or a little before, says that in his time Organs used to creak in some
Churches, in quibusdam Ecclesiis Organa concrepare solita, which he pleads for
from the Practice of David and Solomon: to which Reason of Durandus, Aquinas
answers, as the most learned Dr. Reynolds judges, Cens. lib. Apocr. tom. 2.
prael. 187. And moreover the Romish Synagogue it self in the presence of the
Pope uses not Organs, as Voetius ubi supra, informs us from Navarrus, Molanus
and Cardinal Cajetan, he forsooth being in this tenacious of the primitive
simplicity. So far do those among us vary from the Pope, who have introduced
them not into Cathedrals only, but into their Parish Churches: though they have
neither Injunction from the Kings Majesty, nor Statute of Parliament, nor Canon
of their own Convocations or Synods, nor any countenance thereto from any
Rubric or syllable in their own Books, that I can call to mind. But these men
who glory in their own Conformity to the public Establishment can thus
notoriously transgress it themselves, and their Lordships the Bishops can
connive thereat in such an instance as this. When any of the Conforming Clergy
shall be as forward to swerve from the public Establishment on the other hand,
in a way of departure from the Popish manner of Worship, as they are in this,
to transgress against it in a way of approach to the Papists mode: we shall see
whether their Lordships the Bishops will be as indulgent toward them or not.
In the mean time, we may take it for granted that the King and Parliament never
intended the Act of Uniformity should be violated in compliance with the
Papists manner of Worship, and serve as an Engine to bring affliction upon
great numbers of other loyal, peaceable and useful Subjects, who from
Conscience, (though supposedly weak and mistaking) dare not conform to it in
those things wherein it injoyns Conformity with the Papists. And what wonder is
it, if many be strengthened in their Nonconformity, when the zealous Pleaders
for Conformity shall give instances neither few nor small of their little
regard to their own avowed Rule?

THE GOSPEL OF THE LEGAL PRIESTHOOD.
Hebr. 4.14. Jan. 31. 1668.
Seeing then that we have a great High Priest that is passed into the Heavens,
let us hold fast our Profession.


THe perpetual Statutes of the Ceremonial Law we referred to five Heads. (1.)
The initiating Seal of Circumcision. (2.) The Legal Sacrifices and
Purifications. (3.) The Temple, with all the Vessels and Utensils thereunto
belonging. (4.) The Legal Administration. (Lastly.) The Legal Festivals, or
legal times and seasons. Four of these five Heads we have spoken to. The last
was that of the Festivals, or Jewish Holy days, which we spoke to before this
of the Priesthood, because of these superstitious times yet continued amongst
us, which we borrow from the Jews, all whose Ceremonial holy times are
abolished and ceased.

The fifth thing remaining to be spoken to, is the Priesthood, or the whole
Legal Ministry.

Of the Priesthood and Legal Ministry we may consider.

1. The several sorts or kinds of them. 2. Their Maintenance.
1. As to the first, there were three sorts and degrees of Temple-Officers. 1.
The Priests, the chief of which was the High Priest. 2. The Levites. 3. The
Nethinims.

Now first of the Priesthood.

Three Doctrines are obvious before us in the words.

Doct. 1. That Jesus Christ the Son of God is the great High Priest, of whom
the Priests under the Law were but types and shadows.

Doctr. 2. That he is passed into the Heavens, as the High Priest of old did
into the holy places made with hands, so Christ into Heaven it self.

Doctr. 3. That our having such an High Priest under the Gospel, should be an
effectual motive to Believers to hold fast their Profession.

As times of Prosperity to the Church use to produce many Hycrites: so times of
Persecution commonly produce many Apostates: as it was formerly so it is now in
this regard. Therefore a great part of the scope of this Epistle is, to
persuade them to hold fast their Profession.

It is the first of these we are to speak unto.

That Jesus Christ the Son of God is the great High Priest, of whom the Priests
under the Law were but types and shadows.

We shall endeavor to open this a little, and give you the meaning of this
Type, the Priesthood under the Law, and that under two heads.

1. What of Christ was typified by the Priests, and especially by the High
Priest of old.

2. How or wherein did the High Priest typifie and shadow forth these things.

Quest. 1. What of Christ was typified by the Priests, and especially the High
Priests under the Law.

Answ. Take it in three things, the legal Priesthod was a Type,

1. Of Christ himself, in his own Person. 2. In his Ministers. 3. In his
Members. All which I shall endeavor to make out unto you, with what evidence
of Scripture Light the Lord shall enable me; when we come to the particulars
wherein the High Priest did typifie and shadow forth Christ, there will be
occasion to accommodate them all these ways, both to Christ, to himself, and
his Ministers and his Members.

1. The Priest was a Type of Christ himself in his own person: therefore Christ
is so often called a Priest, and an High Priest, especially in the Epistle to
the Hebrews And he does appear, and is presented unto John as officiating in
the Office of a Priest, Rev. 8.3. and another Angel came and stood at the
Altar, having a Golden Censer, and there was given him much Incense. This Angel
is Jesus Christ the great High Priest of his Church, who stands with the Golden
Censer, having much Incense given him, that he should offer it up before the
Throne. Here is Jesus Christ doing that great part of his Priestly Office,
namely making Intercession for us. For the Incense was a Type of the Prayers
and Intercession of Jesus Christ, as we have heard. This is the first thing
typified by the High Priest, the Priest was a Type of Christ himself.

2. The Priests were Types of Gospel Ministers, we read Mal. 3.3. He shall fit
as a Refiner and Purifier of Silver, and he shall purify the Sons of Levi,
etc. It is spoken concerning Jesus Christ, when he should come, what he should
do, and the meaning is, he shall set up a pure Gospel Ministry. In the last
Chapters of Ezekiel, as the holy City there, is the Church of God under the
Gospel: so the Priests and Levites are the Ministers and Officers of the
Church. And in that famous Prophecy of the Conversion of the Gentiles, Isai.
66.19, 20, 21. as the converted Gentiles are here called a Meat Offering to the
Lord: so Gospel Ministers are called Priests and Levites, ver. 21. See the
Geneva Notes e, f, g, h. on the place.

Quest. Here then it may be demanded, whether Gospel Ministers may be called
Priests.

Answ. In the Popish sense they may not: for the Papists call them Priests,
because, they say, they offer a propitiatory Sacrifice in the Mass for quick
and dead. But there is no such Sacrifice under the Gospel, but that one only
Sacrifice which Jesus Christ offered when he offered up himself once for all.
Therefore their calling Ministers Priests on such an account is erroneous and
abominable. And hence it is, that the word Priest is justly become a word of
contempt and reproach, as the word Baal, which at first was and might be used
for the true God; but becoming in common and ordinary speech the name of Idols,
the Lord refuses that Title, Hos. 2.16. thou shall no more call me Baali, my
Lord, but thou shall call me Ishi. Or as the word Bishop, which is a Scripture
word, and signifies an Overseer, any Elder of a Church; but having been so
long abused to signify an Antichristian Order of men, and spiritual Usurpers
in the Church of God, it is now justly become a word of contempt and reproach:
and therefore it is not sit to call a Gospel-Minister a Bishop. Of the same
nature is the word Catholic, which in its proper signification, and its first
use, might be innocent and inoffensive: but being become the name of
distinction, whereby the Papists do distinguish themselves from other
Christians that are more reformed then they; therefore we do not call our
selves Catholics, as they do.

Some allege, that the word Priest comes from the Saxon Preister, and that
from the Greek Presbyter, and so signifies no more but an Elder. But the
signification of words is not ruled by the Notation or Etymology of them: and
therefore suppose this word Priest had some good sense at first; yet being in
common speech used to signify one that offers Sacrifice; it is therefore not
sit to be used concerning Gospel Ministers, unless with some limitation and
explication, as if we call them Antitypical Priests, or the like.

The analogy lies chiefly in this; That as the Priests of old did minister to
the Lord in his House under the Law, so do Gospel-Officers under the New
Testament in his Church.

3. The Priests were Types of all Believers, Rev. 1.6. and he has made us
Kings and Priests to God and his Father: so likewise 1 Pet. 2.9. where he
speaks to all Believers and says, But ye are a chosen Generation, a royal
Priesthood, etc. all Believers are holy Priests unto God. The analogy lies
chiefly in this; that as the Priests of old did offer legal Sacrifices, so
Believers offer up spiritual Sacrifices under the Gospel: the Apostle so
explains it, 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye also as lively stones are built up a spiritual
House, an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God
by Jesus Christ. These spiritual Sacrifices are Prayer and Praise and
Thanksgiving, and universal Obedience to all Gods Commandments. These are
spiritual, acceptable Sacrifices, by Jesus Christ, which Believers offer up
now, as the Priests did typical Sacrifices under the Law. We see then that the
Priests under the Law were Types of Jesus Christ, of Gospel Ministers, and of
all Believers under the Gospel.

Quest. 2. How or wherein did the Priests typifie Christ etc?

This is a large field. I shall endeavor to show how and wherein the Priests
under the Law did shadow forth the things relating to Jesus Christ under the
Gospel, and that in four things.

1. In their personal Qualifications, and other ritual observations belonging
to this Rank and Order of men. 2. In their Apparel. 3. In their Consecration.
4. In their Priestly Ministrations in the House of God.

1. In their personal qualifications and special observations belonging to that
Order of Priesthod, some whereof did fit them for the Office, and the rest were
Rules to be observed by them in their Office. There were sundry legal and
typical qualifications and observations required in those Ranks and Orders of
(...)* There were certain common and moral qualifications, which it is not
necessary to seek a typical accommodation of; as that they should be knowing
and godly men, as Gospel Ministers ought to be. But there were sundry other
qualifications, which had a typical respect, which were partly to fit them for
their Office, and partly the Rules to be observed by them in that Office and
Order. I put them all together for the greater plainness and brevity sake,
though they might be ranked under two distinct heads.

1. The Priest must be taken from amongst his Brethren. 2. He is subject to
common infirmities. 3. Yet free from gross deformities and blemishes. 4. Called
of God, he must be called to this Office. 5. He must abstain from Wine, he must
drink no Wine. 6. He must not marry a Widow. 7. Nor mourn for the dead. These
things did point out something relating to Jesus Christ and Gospel Ministers.

1. The Priest must be taken from among his Brethren, from among the Jews: so
the Apostle speaks and applies it, as having something of mystery in reference
hereunto, Heb. 5.1. For every High Priest taken from amongst men is ordained in
things pertaining to God. He was to be taken from amongst themselves. And truly
so was Jesus Christ: He is not taken from among Angels, but from among men; he
took not on him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. This
is one thing; and it is a shadow and an intimation of Jesus Christ his being of
our nature, of humane nature: For otherwise he had not been a fit Mediator
between God and Man, if he had not partaked of our nature, he could not have
redeemed us.

2. As the Priest was taken from amongst his Brethren, so he was subject to the
common infirmities of his Brethren: he had (as is said of the Prophet Elijah)
the same passions and infirmities that his Brethren had. This is applied to
Jesus Christ, who took upon him not only our Nature, but the sinless
infirmities of pain, hunger, weariness and other sufferings which we are
obnoxious to: so the Apostle speaks, For we have not an High Priest which
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points
tempted as we are, yet without sin, Hebr. 4.15. the next words after the Text:
so in Heb. 5.1, 2. For every High Priest taken from among men is ordained for
men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both Gifts and Sacrifices
for Sin, who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of
the way, for that he himself is also compassed with infirmity -- having
experience and sense of the same infirmity in himself, he knows how to have
compassion on others. This relates to Jesus Christ, who is a merciful High
Priest exposed to the same temptations and passions with us, though without sin.

3. The Priest must be free from gross deformities and blemishes, though he was
subject to common humane infirmities, Lev. 21 17. Say unto Aaron whosoever it
is that has any blemish, let him not approach to offer Sacrifice; for
whatsoever man it is that has any blemish, he shall not approach, a blind, or
lame, or broken-footed, or broken-handed, etc. he shall not come to offer the
Offering of the Lord made by fire, he has a blemish, he shall not come nigh to
offer the Bread of his God. These natural infirmities which the Priests under
the Law must be free from, taught us the absolute freedom of Jesus Christ from
moral infirmities, there is no blemish, no spot found in him: He wants no
parts, no gifts or sufficiency to discharge his whole Office and Function. For
such an High Priest becomes us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from
sinners, and made higher then the Heavens, Heb. 7.26. as they were to be free
from those natural blemishes and defects: so is Jesus Christ free from all
sinful defects and blemishes. That is a third Rule as to the qualifications of
the Priests.

4. They must be called unto this Office, and must not intrude and thrust
themselves into it. The Lord said unto Moses, take Aaron and his Sons with him
from among the people, that they may minister unto me in the Priests Office.
Exodus 28.1. The Apostle applies this also to Jesus Christ, Heb. 5.4, 5. he does
not take this honor to himself; as no man should take the honor of the
Priesthood to himself, but he that was called, as was Aaron: so Jesus Christ
was called of God the Father to this Office, as the Priests were by Moses to
their Levitical Ministry. Christ glorified not himself to be made High Priest,
but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son.

5. The Priest must abstain from the use of Wine and Strong Drink when he is to
do the Service of God in the Sanctuary, and to minister before the Lord, Lev.
10.9. And the Lord spoke unto Aaron, saying, do not drink Wine nor Strong
Drink, thou nor thy Sons with thee, when ye go into the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, lest he die, etc. so it is said in Ezekiel. 44.21. neither shall any
Priest drink Wine when they enter into the inner Court. The end of this was,
that they might be sure to administer and execute their Office aright, lest
they drink and forget the Law, Prove. 31.5. lest they should err through Wine,
and be out of the way through Strong drink, and stumble in Judgment. Isai.
28.7. Whoredom and Wine, and new Wine take away the heart. Hos. 4.11. Thus they
were to abstain from the use of Wine and Strong drink.

This represents that undisturbed Sobriety and Wisdom of Jesus Christ in the
whole execution of his Office, as the great High Priest of his Church. He was
never forgetful of, or unready for any part of his Office, but he had clearness
of Judgment and Wisdom at all times.

So the Ministers of the Gospel, there is a secondary application of these
things to them, though first and chiefly it is applied to Jesus Christ himself.
Whatsoever is set forth concerning Jesus Christ, does secondarily point at
Ministers and Christians, in whom the Graces and Excellencies of Jesus Christ
appear. The Ministers of the Gospel must be sober, and not men given to Wine,
1 Timothy 3.3. A Bishop must not be given to Wine, no striker, or given to filthy
lucre, etc. and the Apostle requires it also in other places, that they should
take heed of that sin, they must be sober and watchful in all things, 2 Timothy
4.5. But watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an
Evangelist, make full proof of thy Ministry.

So all Believers likewise, (for it belongs likewise to them) they should be
sober, and watch to the discharge of their Christian duty: Be ye therefore
sober, 1 Timothy 4.7. and watch unto Prayer, 1 Pet. 5.8. be sober, be vigilant;
because your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking
whom he may devour.

It is a woeful thing and a shameful thing, when Ministers are given to Wine and
Strong drink; these are not Gods Ministers, these are such as do not correspond
with the Type. And it is the fruit of the Wrath of God upon a people; when he
sets up such Ministers among them, Mich. 2.11. If any man shall prophecy of
Wine or of Strong drink, he shall be the Prophet to this people, Isai. 56.10,
11, 12. his Watchmen are blind, they are ignorant, etc. come, say they, we will
fetch Wine and fill our selves with Strong drink, and to morrow shall be as
this day, and much more abundantly. It is usually the prologue and introduction
to great Desolations or Land-devouring Judgments, when they have Priests that
love Wine and Strong drink, it brings Land-devouring Judgments. And that is a
fifth Rule concerning these Levitical Priests, that they must abstain from Wine
and Strong drink when they were to minister before the Lord.

6. The Priest might not marry a Widow, or a divorced Woman, or a Harlot, but a
Virgin of his people. This is another peculiar observation required of men in
that Order under the Law, Lev. 21.13, 14. And he shall take a Wife in her
Virginity: a Widow or a divorced Woman, or profane, or an Harlot, these shall
he not take, but he shall take a Virgin of his own people to Wife, etc. The
same thing is spoken also in Ezekiel. 44.22. neither shall they take to wife a
Widow, etc. What is the meaning of this? it cannot be a moral precept. It is
not unlawful for a Minister to marry a Widow. Therefore look at the High Priest
herein. The Spouse of Jesus Christ ought to be a Virgin, chaste and undefiled,
whose first and best Love is to be bestowed on him, 2 Cor. 11.2. I am jealous
over you with godly Jealousy, for I have espoused you to one Husband, that I
may present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ. And in Matthew. 25. we find that
Professors in some respects, they are all Virgins, though there be foolish
Virgins as well as wife: but it is especially applied to the sincere, to the
wise Virgins -- Rev. 14.4. These are they that are not defiled with Women, for
they are Virgins; these follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. Purity and
Holiness is the property of true Believers: an entire dedication of themselves
to Jesus Christ alone. The Virgins love thee. Cant. 1.3.

7. The seventh Rule and Observation about the Priesthood was this, that he was
not to mourn for the dead, no not for his Father and Mother; nor to attend
their Funeral, or to go out of the Sanctuary to intermit his Ministry, Lev.
21.10, 11, 12. And he that is the High Priest among his Brethren, he shall not
uncover his head, nor rent his clothes; neither shall he go in to any dead
body, nor defile himself for his Father or for his Mother: neither shall he go
out of the Sanctuary, nor profane the Sanctuary of his God, for the Crown of
the Anointing Oil is upon him, I am the Lord. What is the meaning of this? he
shall not defile himself for the dead? Doubtless natural affections were not
forbidden, the Priests were not to be Stoics and brute Beasts. But it teaches
us, that the Priest was to have more regard to the duty of his Function, then
to any natural passions or affections whatsoever, Exodus 33.9. This was
eminently fulfilled in Jesus Christ, who did not lay aside any due or
seasonable respect to his natural Relations. A respect he had for them, as
appears by his Care of his Mother when he was on the Cross committing her to
John; but this was no unseasonable respect or regard of her: But we find also
that he was disputing in the Temple, Luke 2.48, 49. attending on the work of
his Ministry, and not attending on his Father and Mother; and in Matthew. 12.46,
etc. his Mother and Brethren (or Kindred) they stood without, desiring to speak
with him: But he answered, should not I be about my Fathers business? who is my
Mother and my Brethren, etc. whosoever does the will of my Father, the same is
my Brother and Sister and Mother. He would not so attend on them, as to neglect
the discharge and execution of his Office: He did not at any time uncover his
head by any weakness, or inglorious passion or affection: He did not defile
himself by familiar communion with defiling sinners at any time; he did
converse with them sometimes, but not so as to contract any pollution to
himself: He is separated from sinners, he never touched any dead body with any
defiling touch. And this same spirit of neglect of natural respects to
Relations the Lord requires also of others, even of his Ministers, and of all
Believers in some cases, and in some measure and degree. They must regard the
work of God more then the comfort and sweetness in the dearest relations.
Follow me (says Christ) and let the dead bury the dead. He that loves Father
or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me. A man must hate Father and Mother,
Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea and his own Life also, else he
cannot be Christ's Disciple. Luke 14.26. So Paul, Henceforth we know no man
after the flesh. 2 Cor. 5.16.

Obj. When then is respect to Relations to be laid aside?

Answ. The Rule is this; when God by his Providence orders things so, as that
it stands in competition with the duty we ow to God; when it is so, we are then
in some sense called to hate, that is, not to regard Father or Mother, Wife or
Children, when our respects to them stand in competition with the duty we ow to
Christ. Every Believer is to do all this, as well as Jesus Christ. So we see
the ancient Observations and Rules belonging to the Order of the Priesthood of
old; they had respect to the Mystery of Christ and his Saints and Ministers
under the Gospel.

The Priests also were Types of Christ in their Clothes and Apparel, and
Consecration to that Office. But of these things hereafter.

THE GOSPEL of the PRIESTS HOLY GARMENTS.
Levit. 8.7, 8, 9. Febr. 7, 11, and 14. 1668.
And he put upon him the Coat, and girded him with the Girdle, and clothed him
with the Robe, and put the Ephod upon him, and he girded him with the curious
Girdle of the Ephod, and bound it unto him therewith. And he put the
Breast Plate upon him; also he put in the Breast Plate the Vrim and Thummim. And
he put the Mitre upon his head; also upon the Mitre, even upon his forefront
did he put the Golden Plate, the holy Crown, as the Lord commanded Moses.


THese words (beloved) contain an enumeration of the Priestly Garments, in the
order in which they were put on at the Consecration of Aaron to his Office; and
so to sum up the words in one doctrinal proposition, it is this.

Doct. That there were nine holy Garments instituted and appointed of God for
the High Priests of old, namely, the holy Coat, the Girdle, the Robe, the
Ephod, the Girdle of the Ephod, the Breast Plate, the Vrim and Thummim, the
Mitre, and the Golden Plate.

Note these three things in general concerning them, and then I shall come to
particulars.

1. The general end and use of these Garments was to be for Beauty and Glory,
Exodus 28.2. as betokening an higher Glory and Beauty then merely outward, even
the Beauty of Holiness; as a shadow of an higher spiritual Clothing (for the
Scripture often speaks of a spiritual Clothing) the taking away the guilt of
sin, and clothing the Soul with Christ's Righteousness, Zech. 3.4. Take away the
filthy Garments from him, and unto him he said, behold I have caused thine
iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with change of Raiment.
Psalm. 132.9, 16. Let thy Priests be clothed with Righteousness, and let her
Saints shout for joy -- I will also clothe her Priests with Salvation, and her
Saints shall shout aloud for joy -- Job 29.14. I put on Righteousness and it
clothed me; my Judgment was as a Robe and a Diadem.

They are called holy Garments, Exodus 28.2 -- and often elsewhere: but a Garment
is not capable of inherent Holiness; therefore it must be meant in regard of
their use and signification. The Lord did put a stamp and a relation of
Holiness upon them, by instituting and appointing them for sacred use in his
Worship.

2. The materials whereof they were made, were these five, Gold, blue, purple,
scarlet, and fine Linen. Exodus 28.5. Some of them had all these ingredients;
there was none of them, but had some of these. Gold is costly and sumptuous,
Linen is a white and clean clothing, the rest have something of a bloody
color: all of them together are thought to represent, and to be a dark umbrage
of the preciousness and glory of the true High Priest, both in his Sufferings
and in his Graces.

3. For the number and order of them, they are reckoned up and described at
large in Exodus 28. and cap. 39. And being so largely spoken to, almost two
whole Chapters spent upon them by the spirit of God, beside other briefer
mention of them in other Scriptures; we may safely conclude, that there is much
of spiritual use and mystery, and meaning in them. For it cannot enter into a
Christian heart to think or imagine, that the Holy Ghost would employ two
Chapters of Scripture in a thing of naught.

In Exodus 28. ver. 4. the Breast plate is named first, according to the order of
Dignity, that being the chief of all. But in Levit. 8. they are mentioned in
the order of putting them on, and here there are nine mentioned: in Exodus 29.5,
6. there are seven: but in Exodus 28.4. there are but six. Which various
enumerations of them are easily reconciled, because some Garments are sometimes
implied and included in others; as the Urim and Thummim in the Breast Plate, the
Golden Plate in the Mitre. And whereas there were two Girdles, the one of them
is sometimes omitted, they being both the same in use and signification. I
shall speak to them as they are set down in this 8th of Leviticus, because
there I find the most complete and explicit enumeration of them all
particularly and distinctly. And there are nine particulars here enumerated.

1. The first is the embroidered Coat of fine Linen, of which Exodus 28. ver.
39. called the embroidered Coat. It was not of plain Linen, as the rest of the
Priests, but of Linen curiously wrought. We translate it embroidered, or
wrought Diaper-like, with Chequer-work, or some such adorning. This embroidered
Coat was a long Linen garment, it came down to his feet. That which Antichrist
retains and uses under the name of a Surplice, is taken from hence, if it have
its rise from any thing in Scripture: though some think the original of it is
from Paganish Superstition, the Egyptian Priests using such a Garment. Perhaps
the Devil brought it in among the Egyptians, in a devilish imitation of this
Institution of Gods. However at best to fetch our Surplice from hence is as
foolish, as if Ministers should hang Bells at their skirts, because Aaron did
so.

Persons of eminent worth and excellency were wont of old to be clothed in fine
Linen; as Joseph upon his advancement, Genesis 41.42. Pharaoh arrayed him in
vestures of fine Linen. Christ appears in such an habit, Rev. 1.13. and in the
midst of the seven Candlesticks I saw one like unto the Son of man clothed with
a Garment down to the foot, and girt about the Paps with a Golden Girdle. It is
an evident allusion to the Garments of the High Priest. He has a Vision of
Jesus Christ as the great High Priest of his Church walking in the Sanctuary;
(for there stood the Golden Candlesticks,) and clothed and apparelled in
Priestly attire. The mystical signification of this Garment is the
Righteousness of Christ, not only in regard of his own person, but also
wherewith he clothes Believers. Christ being in this and other places described
not so much in what he is absolutely in himself, but what he is relatively to
and for his people. vid. Brightman on Rev. 1.13. Therefore the Saints
themselves are described and presented in the like habit, Rev. 7.9, 13, 14 --
These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their
Robes, and made them white, in the Blood of the Lamb, that is, the imputed
Righteousness of Christ. It is yet more expressly explained, Rev. 19.8. and to
her was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white,
for the fine Linen is the Righteousness of Saints. There is a twofold
Righteousness, both which may be here included.

1. There is a Righteousness inherent in Christ, and imputed to Believers. This
is the Righteousness of Justification.

2. There is a Righteousness inherent in Believers, but derived from Christ:
and this is the Righteousness of Sanctification. Some have called them the
upper Garment of Justification, and the inner Garment of Sanctification. They
are both mentioned, Psalm. 45.13. the Kings Daughter is all glorious within, and
ver. 14. she is brought to the King in a Garment of Needle Work: the meaning
is, the upper Garment of Justification, and the under Garment of
Sanctification. Beleivers therefore who are spiritual Priests, they should not
clothe themselves with the filthy rags of their own Righteousness, nor with the
rotten Garments of counterfeit Graces, as Hypocrites and Justiciaries do; but
get on this Priestly attire, seek it of Christ, Rev 3.18. it is promised --
Rev. 3.4, 5. your Faith should rejoice and triumph in it. See Isai. 61.10.

2. A Girdle, Exodus 28. ver. 39. and thou shall make the Girdle of Needle Work,
Exodus 39. ver. 29. and a Girdle of fine twined Linen, and blue, and purple,
and scarlet of Needle Work, as the Lord commanded Moses: So Christ, as the
great High Priest, appears, Rev. 1.13. girt about the Paps with a Golden
Girdle: And Believers have a spiritual Girdle, Ephesians. 6.14. having your Loins
girt about with truth. This legal shadow the Popish Priests retain, and call it
a Canonical Girdle. The Girdle imports three things. (1.) Truth. (2.) Strength.
(3.) Readiness for action. All, both in Christ and Christians.

1. Truth, Ephesians. 6.14. Truth should sit close to the heart, like a Girdle
about the Body: so Christ, Isai. 11.5. Righteousness shall be the Girdle of his
Loins, and Faithfulness the Girdle of his Reins. Many Professors when the Truth
comes to be persecuted, they do not gird it close to them, but their Girdle
hangs loose about them, they are not valiant for Truth upon the earth. Jer. 9.3.

2. Strength, Isai. 22.21. I will clothe him with thy Robe, and strengthen him
with thy Girdle. Prove. 31.17. She girdeth her loins with strength. Therefore
Isai. 5.27. their Girdle shall not be loosed; that is, God will strengthen them
to be the Executioners of his Wrath upon a sinful people; None shall be weary
or stumble amongst them; none shall slumber nor sleep, neither shall the Girdle
of their loins be loosed. It signifies therefore the Strength of Christ, and
of Believers through him. They are weak in themself, but strong in Christ,
being girded with his Strength.

3. Readiness for action, and expedition, and perseverance therein for they
using long Garments when they went about any business, they were wont to gird
them up under their Girdle. Hence it is said of Elijah, 1 Kings 18. ult. and
the hand of the Lord was on Elijah, and he girded up his loins and ran before
Ahab, etc. and therefore the Angel says to Peter, gird thy self, and bind on
thy Sandals, Acts 12.8. and follow me. And the Master says to his Servant in
the Parable, Luke 17.8. gird thy self and serve me: Christ is always in
procinctu, girt about with his Golden Girdle, as ready for the work of his
Office, to serve his Father, and to defend and mediate for his Church and
People. And so should the Saints, Luke 12.35. let your Loins be girded about,
and your Lamps be lighted; that is, as Servants ready to serve and wait upon
their Master, as it follows, ver. 36. and ye your selves like unto men that
wait for their Lord, be in a ready posture -- 1 Pet. 1.13. wherefore gird up
the loins of your mind, be sober and hope to the end. As Christ was, so
Ministers and Christians should be always in readiness to go about any business
the Lord calls them to; they should have their Girdle about them.

3. The Robe, called the Robe of the Ephod. Exodus 28.31. because it was girded
with the Ephod which was put next upon it; so Junius and Ainsworth in loc. This
was made all of blue, ver. 31. it was not so long as the fine Linen Coat
beforementioned; for that came to the feet, but this to the knees, to the
gar^ering place or thereabout. Of the superstitious Garments retained by
Antichrist, that which seems to come nearest to it, is the Canonical Coat, as
they call it. The Jewish Writers say of this Robe, that it had no Sleeves, but
was divided into two skirts, from the end of the neck unto beneath, after the
manner of all Robes, and was not joined together, but about all the neck only.
Ainsworth on Exodus 28.32. It had a strong binding or a welt about the neck, in
Hebrew called a Lip, that it might not be rent. Exodus 28.32. But that which is
most remarkable in it, is the Golden Bells and Pomegranates that were upon the
skirt thereof at the bottom of it, Exodus 28. ver. 33, 34, 35 -- that the sound
of the Bells may be heard --

Let me speak a little in the help of Christ to the mystery of these sacred
Bells, and then to the Pomegranates.

1. The Bells of the holy Robe. There be two things that seem to be clearly
intimated and held forth thereby.

1. The Voice of Christ in his Prayers and Mediation for us, which is heard of
God, Hebr. 5.7. and 7.25. when he goes into the holy place, the sound of these
Golden Bells is heard of God.

2. The Voice of Christ in the Gospel, which is heard of his Church, the sound
thereof rings in his Church, yea throughout the world, Romans 10.18. their sound
went forth into all the world. And we may apply it in a secondary way to the
Ministers of Christ, those Antitypical Priests. They should be furnished with
Golden Bells, the voice of Prayer, and the voice of Preaching; as the Priests
of old, if the noise of these Bells was not heard, they dye, Exodus 28.35. so it
is spiritual death and destruction to the Soul: there is no hope of the
Salvation of that Minister under the Gospel, that cannot, that does not pray
and preach. 1 Cor. 9.16. Necessity is laid upon me, woe is unto me, if I preach
not the Gospel; either preach or dye.

2. The Pomegranates of the Robe; that is curious works upon the border of it,
resembling that fruit, and being an emblem thereof. The Pomegranate is a fruit
sweet and pleasant to the taste, and fragrant and delightful to the smell.

Therefore it seems to shadow forth the sweet refreshing fruits and effects of
the voice of Christ, both in his Mediation with the Lord, and the Preaching of
his Gospel in the Church. His Mediation is not only shrill in the ears of the
Lord; but also fragrant in his Nostrils Ephesians. 5.2. And the Gospel of Christ
has not only a sweet sound, but a savory smell, and cordial refreshing virtue
to refresh the heart. 2 Cor. 2.15, 18. The Gospel produces such fruits, as are
sweet and savory: therefore the Church is compared to an Orchard of
Pomegranates, Cant. 4.13. she delights Christ with them, Cant. 8.2. they are
delightful to Christ himself. It should be thus with all the Ministers of
Christ, and in all the Churches of Christ; there should be not only the sound
of the Golden Bells, but the pleasant fruits of an holy life and conversation;
else what good will the sound do, if there be no fruits appearing, the Bells
without the Pomegranates --

And whereas there was an hole for the head to be put in, like the hole of an
Habergeon. (An Habergeon is a Coat of Male, a piece of defensive Armor, made
of Iron Wyres woven and twisted together, that it be not rent.) Christ is said
to put on that Garment, Isai. 59.17. for he put on Righteousness as a
Breast Plate, or as an Habergeon.

Some accommodate it thus; That in the Coat of Christ there should be no Rent,
Joh. 19.23, 24. but an unity of Doctrine, and good works, and fruits of
Righteousness amongst his people. Though I confess this Metaphor of rending the
seamless Coat of Christ, has been weakly used and applied by those, that
having nothing but the Coat amongst them (as the Soldiers) for their own ends
would not rend that, but make no scruple to rend and crucify his blessed Body,
no more then Papists do to martyr and burn his Members, for which Luther in a
just and holy scorn calls them Tunicastres. But as to this typical Garment such
an allusion may be made.

4. The Ephod, of which the expression here is, And he put the Ephod upon him,
Exodus 28.6. It was made of five materials, of Gold, blue, purple, scarlet and
fine twined Linned. The Gold was first beaten into Plates, and then cut into
Wyres, and then wrought and woven into, and among the other materials, Exodus
39.3. and they did beat the Gold into thin Plates, and cut it into Wyres, to
work it in the blue, and in the purple, etc. The word Ephod is from the verb
Aphad, superinduxit, cinxit, to clothe, or fitly to encompass with a Garment;
from whence comes the Greek word (...) to fit. The Septuagint renders it (...),
the vulgar Latin superhumerale, a Garment upon the shoulders. Some render it
Pallium: from whence came the word Pall, a Garment, taken as it seems from
this, which the Pope was wont to send to an Archbishop for his Consecration, or
Installment into his Office, as being the High Priest over all the Priests in
such a Province or Kingdom.

This Ephod was (say our Annotators on Exodus 28.4.) a short Coat without
Sleeves, put upon his other Garments ^o keep them close together -- It reached
from the Shoulders to the Loins.

There were two sorts of Ephods used among the Jews, a common and a sacred
Ephod.

1. There was a common Ephod, which was not peculiar to the High Priest only,
but to other Priests also; yea to others also that were not Priests: so 1. Sam.
22.18. Doeg fell upon the Priests and slew that day eighty five persons that
did wear a Linen Ephod. Yea it was not peculiar to Priests only, but common to
others also who were not Priests: so we read of Samuel, that when he was a
Child he wore a Linen Ephod, 1 Samuel 2.18. though he was no Priest by Birth,
but only a Levite. And David, 2. Sam. 6.14. was girded with a Linen Ephod. But,

2. There was a sacred Ephod, which was peculiar to the High Priest only. The
differences between this and the common Ephod were such as these.

1. That was made of Linen; but this of sundry other materials, Gold, blue,
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined Linen.

2. This sacred Ephod had a peculiar Ornament belonging to it, viz. the two
Onyx stones upon the shoulder pieces of it, of which by and by.

3. None might imitate this, or make one like unto it, though of other matter,
and for ordinary use they made Garments of that name and shape commonly called
Ephods. It was the sin and the fall of Gideons House, that he made one like
this, not an Ephod for ordinary wear, but a sacred ministering Garment, Judge.
8.27, 33.

As to the spiritual mystery of this Garment, this holy Ephod of the High
Priest, it appears chiefly in this. There were two shoulder-pieces belonging to
it, in which were placed two Ouches of Gold, with two Onyx stones set and
fastened in them. Two Ouches] that is, hollow Circles, two hollow places in
which the stones were set like Diamonds in a Ring. Onyx stones] white stones,
not unlike the white of a man's Nail. The Hebrew word is Shoham. It is, I know,
otherwise rendered by some: but the Onyx being a large stone, as it was
requisite that these should be, that there might be space enough to ingrave six
names in a stone, (besides other circumstances) we may rest in this Translation.

The use of these precious stones was for the writing of the names of the
twelve Children of Israel in them, that the High Priest might bear them upon
his shoulders for a memorial before the Lord. See Exodus 28.9, 10, 11, 12. Now
the Priest being a Type of Christ, and the people of Israel a Type of the whole
Church of God; their being born thus upon the shoulders of the High Priest
clothed with this sacred Ephod, intimated three things.

1. The Lord Jesus Christ his supporting of his Church and people, and bearing
them up, as upon the shoulders of his Power and Grace and Government, Isai.
9.6. the Government shall be upon his shoulders: so he is said to do with the
lost Sheep, Luke 15.5. Isai. 46.3, 4. hearken unto me, O House of Jacob, all
the remnant of the House of Israel, which are born by me from the Belly, which
are carried from the Womb, and even to your old age, I am he, and even to hoary
hairs I will carry you, I have made you, and I will bear; even I will carry,
and will deliver you.

2. His presenting them to the Lord, to be in everlasting remembrance before
him; that he cannot look upon the High Priest, but their names appear upon his
shoulders for a memorial before the Lord: their names are engraven in his
sight, that he cannot look from off them -- Mal. 3.16. A book of remembrance is
written before him for them that fear the Lord, Ephesians. 5.27. that he might
present it to himself a glorious Church.

3. He bears their names before the Lord in this curious and costly Ephod: as
representing his own perfect Righteousness, wherewith he stands clothed before
God, in the glorious merit whereof he appears for his people. For men to
trust to their own works and merits, is to have their names born before God in
an Ephod of their own weaving, which God abhors; by which sin both the Jews and
the Papists perish. Romans 10.3. But the Saints dare not appear before God in
such filthy Garments, but confess as Isai. 64.6. All our Righteousness is but
as filthy rags, etc.

5. The curious Girdle of the Ephod; of which the words of Text are these; And
he girded him with the curious Girdle of the Ephod, and bound it unto him
therewith, Exodus 28.8. so that this Girdle of the Ephod is thought not to be a
distinct thing, separable from the Ephod; but to have been as it were a piece
of it. Mr. Ainsworths Note out of the Rabbis is this; The Ephod had as it were
two hands or pieces going out from it in the weaving on this side, and on that,
with the which they girded it: and they are called [Cheseb] the curious Girdle
of the Ephod. This curious Girdle of the Ephod was tied upon his heart under
the Breast Plate. This differs from the other Girdle [Abnet] which is after
spoken of in ver. 39. and by reason of the Gold in this, which the other had
not, it is called the Golden Girdle. Some have doubted whether there were two
Girdles; but the Text is clear for it, Levit. 8.7. He put upon him the Coat,
and girded him with the Girdle. This is the Linen Girdle. Now it follows, and
he clothed him with the Robe, and put the Ephod upon him, and he girded him
with the curious Girdle of the Ephod, and bound it unto him therewith. And they
are called by two several names, Abnet and Cheseb. The reason why there was
two, was, because his Garments did require two.

As to the mystery of this second Girdle, it is the same with the former. It
signified the truth and strength and readiness for action that is in Christ,
and should be in all that bear his name: so I need say no more upon it.

6. The sixth piece of the High Priestly attire, and indeed the chief of all,
was the Breast Plate, of which the Text says, and he put the Breast Plate upon
him.

Concerning this holy Pectoral or Breast Plate there be four things declared in
Exodus 28. from ver. 15. etc. to ver. 29.

1. The Materials of Gold, Blue, etc, the same with the Ephod, ver. 15.

2. The form and shape, apiece, a span in breadth and length, ver. 16.

3. The twelve Stones, with the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel set
therein, ver. 17, to 22. And thou shall set in it settings of Stones, even four
rows of Stones, etc.

4. The fastening of the Breast Plate to the Ephod by four Golden Rings in the
four corners of it. In the two upper Rings of the Breast Plate there were two
Chains of Gold, by which it was fastened above to two Golden Ouches in the
shoulder-pieces of the Ephod; and in the two lower Rings of the Breast Plate
there was a blue Lace, by which it was tied to two Gold Rings in the sides of
the Ephod, ver. 22, to 29. that so the Breast Plate might not be loosed from the
Ephod, ver. 28. which may help in the understanding of that place, 1 Samuel 23.9.
where David says to Abiathar the Priest, Bring hither the Ephod; that is, to
consult with the Lord by Urim and Thummim (says the Geneva Note upon the
place): for by the Providence of God the Ephod was preserved and kept with
David the true King; that so he might have the means of consulting with God in
all his dangers and distresses: and the Breast Plate wherein was the Urim and
Thummim, by which they inquired of God, was fastened to the Ephod, and not to
be loosened from it: so that David called for the Ephod, because of the
Breast Plate that was fastened to it, and because of the Urim and Thummim that
was in the Breast Plate.

Quest. Why is it called Pectorale Judicii, the Breast Plate of Judgment? so
Exodus 28. ver. 15, 29, 30.

Answ. There may be a twofold account given of this. 1. Because the High Priest
was to wear this upon his Breast, when he gave forth a Sentence and Judgment
from God unto such as came to him to inquire of God by him. 2. The Judgment of
the Children of Israel may be understood to signify the Concernments of their
Good; for Judgment is not always put for Wrath and Punishment, but for a wise
and accurate and exact Administration of things; saepe per nomen Mishpat
Scriptura significat quicquid been and rite ordinatum est -- Hoc Epitheto
commendatur rectus and omni vitio purus Ordo, Calvin. in Exodus 28.4.30. So Joh.
9.39. For Judgment am I come into this world, that they that see not, might
see; this is no act of Punishment, but of Mercy; yet called Judgment: so it is
prophesied of Christ, Isai 42.3, 4. that he shall bring forth Judgment unto
truth, and shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set Judgment in the
earth, that is, he shall not faint nor be discouraged, till he has gone
through with the work of their Salvation, and set in order all the concernments
of it; that wise and prudent and judicious administration of things by Jesus
Christ, whereby he rectifies, repairs and sets in good order the confused and
collapsed estate of his Church and people: insomuch that all the concernments
of their eternal good are set strait, brought to their best constitution, and
carried on in a most exact and regular manner, with admirable and infinite
Wisdom --. That as they, Mark 7. ult. were beyond measure astonished, and they
said, he has done all things well: so shall all the Saints say, when they
understand and review the ways that Christ has walked in for their Salvation.
Aaron did here represent this typically, in this Pectorale Judicii, this
Breast Plate of Judgment: But Christ has performed, and done it really and
indeed.

To unfold the mystery of these things a little more particularly,

1. The Precious Stones, with the Names of the Children of Israel, signify all
the Saints, the whole Church and people of God. Israel was a typical people:
therefore the whole Church of God is called Israel, Gal. 6.16. As many as walk
according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy, and upon (or even upon) the
Israel of God. Hence the same Apostle distinguishes of outward Jews and inward
Jews, Romans 2. two last. And Christ calls Nathaniel an Israelite indeed, Joh.
1.47. And the Saints are fitly represented by Precious Stones, because they are
indeed precious, and excellent with a spiritual excellency, and that in the
sight of God, though despised of the world, Isai. 43.4. Since thou wast
precious in my fight, thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee;
therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life -- Psalm. 16.3. the
Saints (...) that are on earth, the excellent in whom is all my delight. Lam.
4.7. Her Nazarites (and that religious Order was typical, as you have formerly
heard) were purer then Snow, they were whiter then Milk, they were more ruddy
in body then Rubies, their polishing was of Sapphire. As these precious Stones
in the Breast Plate were diverse and various, there were twelve of them, yet all
of them precious and excellent, and useful: so the Saints are indoed with
varieties of Gifts and Graces, yet all useful and excellent. And as these
Stones were set in exact and comely order in the Breast Plate of Aaron: so there
is an insition of the Saints into Christ, and a comely order amongst themselves.

2. Look as the High Priest did bear the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel
in his Breast Plate, for a memorial before the Lord: so does Jesus Christ bear
the names and the concernments of his people upon his heart before the Lord,
that is, in dearest Love and Heart-affection. See Exodus 28.29. As he bore them
upon the shoulders of his Power in the two Onyx-stones upon the shoulder-pieces
of the Ephod, of which before: so now here he bears them upon his heart in
dearest Love and Favor. See Isai. 49.15, 16. Therefore the Church prays, Cant.
8.6. set me as a Seal upon thine Heart, as a Seal upon thine Arm. These Stones
were engraven like the ingravings of a Seal, or of a Signer.

3. The fastening of this Breast Plate of Love to the shoulder-pieces of the
Ephod, speaks the inseparable Conjunction of the Love and Power and
Righteousness of Christ in the great work of our Salvation. For the Ephod being
an holy and glorious Garment signifies (as the rest do) the glorious
Righteousness of Christ the true High Priest, as has been formerly showed. The
shoulders are strong to support: the Pectoral betokens Love: therefore that the
Pectoral is fastened to the shoulders speaks, that Love and Power are united
together in Jesus Christ for our Salvation: and all this upon the Ephod, the
Garments of his glorious Righteousness, wherein he appears for us, and bears
our Names for a memorial before the Lord continually.

How should Faith triumph in this! Is not our High Priest in the Sanctuary? Is
he not clothed with Garments of Salvation and Righteousness? and does he not
bear the Names of his people upon his shoulders, and upon his Breast before the
Lord? Thy particular concernments (if thou art a Believer) are written upon his
heart with the Pen of a Diamond, in such lasting Letters of loving kindness as
shall never be blotted out.

7. The seventh piece of these Sacerdotal Vestments was the Vrim and Thummim,
of which the Text says, Also he put in the Breast Plate the Vrim and Thummim,
and Exodus 28.30. and thou shall put in the Breast Plate of Judgment the Vrim
and the Thummim, and they shall be upon Aarons heart, etc.

There is more of Difficulty and Controversy upon this, then upon any other
piece of all the Pontifical attire. I shall speak but briefly to it in these
four heads.

1. Whether they were any new Materials in the holy Garments. 2. What kind of
Materials they were. 3. What was the end and use of them. 4. What
Gospel-mysteries were aimed at therein.

1. Whether the Vrim and Thummim were visible and external materials in the
holy Garments, yea or no. For some think they are only an expression of the end
and use of the Breast Plate, and not another distinct piece of attire: But there
are these Reasons against this.

Reas. 1. Because the Text seems to speak of them as Materials; for it speaks
of them in the same course and tenor of speech as it does of other things. As
here in the Text for instance: all the rest of these three verses are only
enumerations of the holy Vestments; He put on the Coat, girded him with the
Girdle, put on him the Breast Plate, all this is external material things;
therefore why not also the next clause? and he put in the Breast Plate the Urim
and Thummim.

Reas. 2. Because we have an intimation of the loss of them in the Captivity of
Babylon. Ezra 2.63 -- Nehem. 7.65. If the Vrim and Thummim had been no other
material, but the Breast Plate it self, with the Precious Stones therein (as
some think) they might have consulted with God, and received answers from God
by it as formerly. For the Ordinances of God are blessed of God, to such as use
them sincerely for those ends for which they are appointed. Therefore so would
the Breast Plate have been for Counsel and Answers to them, if that had been the
Ordinance appointed for that end. For they did not want the Breast Plate; for
they might and ought to make that according to the Rule in Exodus 28. but they
having not the Vrim and Thummim; therefore that way of Oracular Consultation
was ceased.

Reas. 3. If there was any mystery in the Vrim and Thummim, they must needs be
Materials: for we must not separate and take away the outward sign from the
thing signified in the Types, no more then in the Sacraments. This is the sin
and error of the Papists in the Lords Supper, whereby they do destroy the true
nature of the Sacrament. But those that seem to scruple whether the Urim and
Thummim were any new Materials added to the Breast Plate, do yet inquire and
seek after the mystery and meaning of them: therefore there was an outward part
in this, as in all other Types, a visible and external sign, as well as a
spiritual mystery signified and shadowed forth thereby.

Quest. 2. What kind of Materials they were?

Ans. The Vrim and Thummim were not things prepared by the Workmen as the rest
of the holy Garments were; but some choice and secret Monuments given
immediately unto Moses by God himself.

This appears by this consideration, that there is no direction given for the
making of them in Exodus 28.30. where all the other Garments are treated of: but
of these it is only said, thou shall put them in, ver. 30. and accordingly
there is no mention of these in that other Chapter, Exodus 39. ver. 21, etc.
where the History of the making all the other Garments is recorded. Therefore
we may concur with those who say, this Ornament was non humano artificio
factum, sed Divinitus Mosi datum.

As to any further inquiry, we can no more determine the matter of them, then
we can define what kind of Stones those were on which the Law was written by
the Finger of God; or what substance the Manna was, which was melted by the
Sun, and hardened by the Fire; or of what substance the holy Fire was, that
came down from Heaven and consumed the Sacrifices. Therefore we can go no
further in determining the nature of the Vrim and Thummim; but that it was some
glorious thing given by God to Moses, and put into the Pectoral.

Quest. 3. What was the end and use of it?

Answ. To consult with God by it, and to receive answers from him about the
affairs and concernments of his people, Numb. 27.21. Joshua must stand before
Eleazar the Priest, who must ask counsel for him, after the Judgment of Vrim
before the Lord. Magistrates and Rulers should depend on Christ for teaching,
and seek direction at his Mouth: so David did 1 King. 23.9. and again 1 King.
30.6. And that this was no unusual thing, but frequent and ordinary with him,
appears 1 King. 22.15. where Ahimelechs Apology for himself is, Did I now begin
to ask of God for him? implying that he was formerly wont to do it.

Quest. But how was God wont to answer by it?

Answ. It seems to have been sometimes by audible voice, 1 Samuel 23.11, 12. Will
Saul come down? and the Lord said, he will: will the men of Keilah deliver me
into his hand? and the Lord said, they will -- Numb. 7.89. God spoke to Moses
by an audible voice, and it seems that this was the way that God was ordinarily
wont to use with Moses, Exodus 33.11. Numb. 12.7, 8. and Deuteronomy. 34.10. Some think
Gods speaking by Vrim and Thummim, was by the shining of the Stones, which did
appear bright, if God would have them do the thing of which they inquired, but
did appear dark, if the answer were negative. But as there is nothing of this
in the Scripture; neither could this way answer all kinds of Questions that
might be put: so it is more probable, that God answered by such ways and
manners as the Scripture makes mention of; either by speaking from off the
Mercy-seat with an audible voice to the Priest appearing with Vrim and Thummim
before him: or else by immediate inspirations and irradiations upon his Spirit,
the Lord giving an inward revelation of his Will to the Mind of the High Priest
thus inquiring of him.

Quest. 4. Now if you ask what did this Oracular dispensation by the Vrim and
Thummim signify and represent?

Answ. The words Vrim and Thummim signify Lights and Perfections. The mystery
and meaning of them you may see in four particulars.

1. Some interpret them thus; Vrim or Lights, that is, clearness of
Apprehension; and Thummim, Perfections, that is, exact and perfect Judgment.
Those two great parts of the Wisdom of God, in the frame of Reason; where there
is a conjunction of both these excellencies in the height of them, this is the
highest degree of Reason. This is Angelical and Seraphick Understanding. Some
men are slow and dull of Apprehension, a man cannot beat things into them, Luke
24.25. O slow and dull of heart to understand! Some that have Wit enough, and
are apprehensive enough; yet they cannot judge of what they see, of what their
mind sees, and so they call Darkness Light and Light Darkness; they call Error
Truth and Truth Error. Thus some apply it to the two parts of Reason: and I
would not exclude this, as being partly intended, because the Scripture speaks
of Christ under these notions; as quick in discerning, and accurate in judging
of things, Isai. 11.3. and Solomon speaks it of his own Sermons, that he both
sought out; here is ready Invention, or quick Apprehension: and he took heed;
here is accurate and careful Judgment, the other part of Solomon's Logic: and
he set in order many Proverbs; here is Method, which is the issue and result of
both the former, as the Cream of the Milk. Eccles. 12.9. And he took some pains
in the Rhetoric too, as well as in the Logic; in the Oratory, as well as in
the Reason of things, ver. 10. the Preacher sought to find out words of delight.

2. It may be applied to the two faculties of the Soul, in regard of the
virtues belonging to the faculties, as well as to the two parts of Reason thus.
That Vrim Lights, imports a sound Faith; and Thummim, Perfections, a perfect
heart and life. For, as clear Apprehension and exact Judgment are the two parts
of true Reason: so Faith and Holiness are the two parts of true Religion. You
know Light is the excellency of the Mind of a Christian: Holiness is the
Perfection of his Will. Of the former Paul speaks, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. that the
God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the spirit
of Wisdom and Revelation, in the knowledge of him: the eyes of your
understanding being enlightened, etc. Of the other Hezekiah speaks, Isai. 38.3.
I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, etc. so when
Moses prays for the Tribe of Levi, and in them for all godly Ministers, Deuteronomy.
33. Let thy Vrim and thy Thummim be with thy holy ones; that is, give sound
Minds, and holy Hearts: sound Minds in a quick discerning, and exact judging of
things; and holy Hearts appearing in a holy and good life and conversation.

3. All this pointed them to, and was most eminently fulfilled in Jesus Christ
the only true High Priest, in and by whom alone God speaks his mind, and works
his Image in us. In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col.
2.3. and he is holy and harmless and separate from sinners. Heb. 7.26. For such
an High Priest became us who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from
sinners. He wears the true Vrim and Thummim always upon his heart:
Illuminations and Perfections, Lights and Graces in the highest. And we have
nothing of either, but what we have from him. Our Lights are from him, 2 Cor.
4.6. Matthew. 11.27. our Graces are from him, Joh. 1.16. of his fullness have we
all received Grace for Grace. For the Law was given by Moses, ver. 17. these
legal shadows of terror and darkness; but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ,
Grace instead of legal terror and rigor. Truth, that is, accomplishments and
performances instead of shadows and promises, came by Jesus Christ. It follows,
ver. 18. no man has seen God at any time, that is, by any Light, or Grace, or
Power of his own, but the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him. The true Vrim and Thummim is in the Pectoral of
Jesus Christ; all our Illuminations and Perfections are in him.

4. Whereas this Vrim and Thummim were lost in the Captivity in Babylon, and
wanting in the second Temple, Ezra 2.63. Nehem. 7.65. They wanted this as they
did some other vessels and monuments; as the Golden Pot of Manna, Aarons Rod
that budded; some think also the Ark, and the two Tables of Stone were wanting
in the second Temple: but as to the Vrim and Thummim those Texts seem clear for
it: nor had they the Cloud of Glory, as in the Tabernacle, and in the first
Temple; or Fire from Heaven. The end of all this Dispensation was, to teach
them to look and long the more earnestly after Jesus Christ, the true spiritual
Glory of the Temple and Church of God, whose coming was now approaching and
drawing on apace. These abatements of that former outward Glory were
preparations for more spiritual Dispensations under the Gospel, wherein those
outward Glories were not to be expected: and in the mean time they had the Law
of Moses, and the written Word of God in the Old Testament, which they were to
cleave and stick close unto. Mal. 4.4. But when Christ came, he restored to his
Church in a more glorious manner the true Vrim and Thummim; Light and Grace was
poured forth abundantly, even upon such, who, by reason of the long
intermission of those extraordinary Operations of the Holy Ghost, had not so
much as heard whether there was an Holy Ghost or no. Acts 19.2, 6. The Jewish
Writers have a saying and a tradition amongst them, that after the latter
Prophets, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachy, the Holy Ghost went up, and departed
from Israel. They mean, in those extraordinary operations of it: and they
reckon Vrim and Thummim as one of the degrees of the Holy Ghost, inferior to
the Spirit of Prophecy; but superior to that Bath-qol (as they call it) the
Daughter of a Voice, or an Echo from Heaven, which was heard sometimes in the
second Temple, and which (they say) took place in the second Temple when
Prophecy and Urim ceased. We read of such Voices from Heaven to Jesus Christ,
Matthew. 3.17. Joh 12.28, 29. -- 2 Pet. 1.17, 18. and he adds in the next verse,
we have a more sure Word of Prophecy.

This Bath-qol, or Voice from Heaven, it was a Prologue and a Preface, and
Type, as it were, of that true Voice of the Father, the eternal Word of God
Jesus Christ, who came down from Heaven; by whom God has in these last days
spoken to us, who at sundry times and in diverse manners spoke in former times
unto the Fathers; but now only by his Son, Heb. 1.1, 2.

8. The eighth piece of the holy Pontifical attire, was the Mitre, of which the
Text says, And he put the Mitre upon his head. And it is said, Exodus 28.39.
thou shall make the Mitre of fine Linen. This was one of the last Garments
that was put on: therefore Zechariah desires this in the clothing of Jehoshuah,
as the perfecting of the Mercy, Zech. 3.5. and I said, let them set a fair
Mitre upon his head, so they set a fair Mitre upon his head.

As to the shape and fashion of this Garment, it was not unlike that which the
other Priests wore, and is called a Bonnet. It was made of Linen Cloth,
wrapped about the head, in a round and high-crowned fashion, after the manner
of the East. Some compare it to the Turkish Turbants or Tullibants: some
translate it a Hat.

As to the outward form and inward mystery of it, there is little difficulty:
For a Mitre, or a Hat upon the Head was an Ornament of Authority and
Superiority over others, Ezekiel. 21.26. Remove the Diadem. Job. 29.14. My
Judgment was as a Diadem; in which places is radically the same word as here in
Exodus 28. The Mitre therefore was an Ornament and Ensign of illustrious sacred
Eminency and Superiority in the High Priest over others. It points us to the
Princely Dignity and Kingly Office of Jesus Christ: He is the great High
Priest; and indeed both Priest and King of his Church; the true Archbishop, the
chief Shepherd, as Peter calls him, 1 Pet. 5.4. Believers are called a royal
Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. but Christ is so much more: He is not only a Priest,
but a Prince and a Prevailer with the Lord on our behalf.

9. The ninth and last piece of the holy Priestly attire, is the Golden Plate,
of which the Text says, Also upon the Mitre, even upon his forefront did he
put the Golden Plate, the holy Crown.

It is called, Exodus 39.30. the Plate of the holy Crown; so called, for that it
was made (say some) somewhat like a Crown. Compare Exodus 29.6. The use and
nature of it is described fully in Exodus 28.36, 37, 38. The Inscription Quodesh
la Jehovah, may be rendered more emphatically, the Holiness of Jehovah. It
speaks three things.

1. The Royal, yea the Divine Holiness of Jesus Christ, that absolute Holiness
whereby he sanctifies both himself and us, Joh. 17.19. wherein he does that
really, which Aaron did typically. He is indeed the Holiness of Jehovah --
Jehovah tsidkenu, the Lord our Righteousness is his Name. Jer. 23.6. Hence he
often appears with a Crown of Gold upon his Head, as Rev. 14.14.

2. His bearing our iniquities, and taking away our sins, which are found even
in our holy things, Exodus 28.38. There is a mixture in the best we do. Many
Believers are apt to be discouraged about it. My Prayers are so full of
unbelief, and deadness, and wanderings, they deserve abhorrence and not
acceptance. Well, but the High Priest here bears the iniquities of all the holy
things of the Children of Israel.

3. His causing us to be accepted of the Lord, Exodus 28.38. Ephesians. 1.6. He has
made us accepted in the beloved. Though we and our best works are vile; yet the
Lord, looking upon the Forehead of our High Priest, sees Holiness engraven
there: looking upon the Face of Christ, he there also beholds it for us, and
becomes well pleased with us, and we in the Faith thereof persuaded and assured
of our acceptance with the Lord through the Faith of him. Thou that say,
there is nothing but sin in me, sin and vileness in all I do. I answer, it is
true, the Lord can see nothing but sin in thee; but he cannot look upon the
High Priest, but there he sees holiness, yea the holiness of Jehovah there.

Thus you have seen something of the holy attire, which the Lord ordained and
appointed for the Priests of old. I shall conclude with two or three general
words as by way of Use or Inference from the whole.

Use 1. We may here see the evil of the superstitious Garments retained from
Antichrist for the Ministers of the Gospel. It is to transform Gospel Ministers
into legal Priests, yea into Popish Priests. The Priests under the Law had a
long white Linen Coat: hence Antichrist has a Surplice. The Priests of old
were girded with a Girdle: hence is the Canonical Girdle, as they call it,
which by many is now commonly called a Circingle, by way of contempt, and just
and righteous scorn. The Priests under the Law had an holy Robe: hence is the
Canonical Coat. They had an Ephod: hence is the Pall, which the Pope was wont
to send to Archbishops, for their Consecration, or Installment.

Lastly, the High Priest of old had a Mitre: hence is the Bishops Mitre. And
Ribera quotes a place out of Josephus, where he says, that the High Priest
wore a tripple Crown, from whence he thinks St. Peter did the like, as the Pope
now does; that so the Verity might be answerable to to the Figure, that Christ's
High Priests might wear that which the High Priest, the Figure of Christ, did
wear. Ribera de sacr. Vest. cap. 14. apud Willett on Exodus 28. Controv. 4. But
Dr. Willett answers him (beside many other just and rational answers, as that
the Scripture does not say, it was a triple Crown) I had thought (says he)
that Aaron had been a Figure of Christ, not of the Pope; and temporal things do
not prefigure temporal, one triple Crown another, but that outward Crown
shadowed forth the spiritual Kingdom and Regal Dignity of Jesus Christ. But
against all these Popish Garments in general, observe two things.

1. That these things were typical and shadowy: therefore now that Christ the
true High Priest is come in his Divine Glory, this external pomp and splendour
of bodily Apparel is ceased, and vanished away with all the rest of the
Ceremonies, by the appearing of the Sun of Righteousness. The Papists therefore
in this matter, they do judaize.

The Priest among the Papists, when he comes among the people, he comes forth
just like a Priest of the Ceremonial Law, as if he were going to offer
Sacrifice. Though withal, it is to be observed, that some of their
superstitious Garments are not borrowed from the Jews, but either from the
Pagans, or invented of their own heads. For they have a rich Wardrobe of
superstitious Garments; as the Crosier Staff, the Albe, the Chimere, the gray
Amice, the Stole, with such like: some of which, for my part, I know not well
what they are, nor whence they had them, nor is it worth the while to make much
search in Histories and Fathers after them: but as in some they judaize, so in
others I doubt they paganize.

2. Observe this, that the false Priests of old were much given to this kind of
Superstition: and not only they, but sometimes good men were a little tainted
with it, who abhorred the more open sort of gross Idolatry. Judge. 8.27. Gideon
made an Ephod, a sacred ministering Garment: but he intended no hurt, Good Man;
for he was no Papist, he had broke down the Image of Baal; but yet this did
offend the Lord, and became a snare to Gideon and to his House. Suppose men be
against the gross Idolatry of the Papists, as our reforming Magistrates in
England were, in the first Reformation; yet if they retain any of these
Priestly Garments, it may offend God, and be a snare to them. But we have a
grosser instance in 2 King. 10.22. in Jehu's time, who said to him that was
over the Vestry, Bring forth the Vestments for all the Worshippers of Baal. It
seems they had not only Worshipping Vestments, but such a number of them, that
it required a special Officer, to keep them, and look after them.

There are but two Objections commonly alleged for them.

Obj. 1. It is decent.

Ans. Decency in Clothing appears in common use and custom, and is regulated
thereby, and by the Light of Nature: and therefore those Habits that men do not
wear in common use are accounted uncomely and ridiculous. And thence, though in
old time they were wont to were white, and in those hotter Climates they did
much use Linen; yet now in aftertimes people having betaken themselves to
darker colors, as being graver, and not requiring such continual washing; as
it would be ridiculous, altogether ridiculous, for a man to wear a white Shirt
on the top of all his Clothes: so to do the like in the Worship of God, is a
direct and manifest breach of that rule of Decency, 1 Cor. 14. ult. and so far
from decent, that it is ridiculous and absurd, God having not appointed any
such thing.

Moreover the meaning of that Scripture is not that men should institute and
invent decent things; but only that they do administer the things of Christ,
which he has instituted in a decent manner; and further than this that Text
gives no liberty; nay it restrains men from meddling further, then only to see
that the Appointments and Ordinances of Christ be administered in a decent and
orderly manner: But there is no decency in wearing a Surplice; for then the
want of it would be undecent, which common sense tells us it is not. Nor did
Christ or the Apostles worship God undecently, and yet they never prayed or
preached in a Surplice.

Obj. 2. Better do it, then not preach: I had rather preach in a Fools Coat
(said one) then not preach the Gospel.

Ans. We must not do evil, that good may come thereof, Romans 3. and therefore we
may not preach in a Fools Coat: for it is not decent. The plain truth is, that
this pretense which so many have abused themselves withal, that they had
rather preach in a Fools Coat, forsooth, then not preach the Gospel, it is a
weak and sinful speech. The first that spoke it, as I have heard, was a French
Protestant, who being made a Prebend by King James, was content to accept of
it, and made this excuse, he not understanding, or not rightly considering the
English Controversies that were then on foot about it: as if a man should say,
he had rather lie, or steal, or whore, or be drunk, or kiss the Pix, or bow to
an Idol, or go to Mass, then not preach the Gospel. For I beseech you consider,
either it is a sin, or it is not a sin. If it be not a sin to preach in a Fools
Coat, or in a Surplice, prove this, and then use it, and wear it in the name of
God: But if it be a sin, it is not a supposed good intent to save a Soul, that
will justify an evil action, though it be not so foul an evil as some others.

If a Minister would fain do good to Souls, and therefore is very loath to be
silenced, let him observe this rule; let him take heed of conforming, lest God
silence him; lest God stop his mouth, or blast his endeavors, that he shall
never speak with any great evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, nor with
any great success for the good of Souls: For I see but few Surplices or
Circingle men that do much good.

Use 2. To confute the Popish Allegorizers, who tell us the literal sense of
these Garments is such as this; namely, That the disposition and frame of the
World is expressed in them, and that the High Priest did thereby profess
himself the Minister or Servant of the Creator of Heaven and Earth. For of the
significations of these holy Garments thus they descant, (see Aquin. 1. 2^ ^st.
102. art. 5. ad 10. and Becan. tom. 3. Opusc. 7. cap. 5. q. 1.) (...) lintea
significabant terram, ex qua linum nascitur, Balceus Oceanum, qui cingit
terram, the Linen Breeches signify the Earth, out of which Flax grows; the
Girdle the Ocean, because it compasses the Earth like a Girdle. Tunica
hyacinthina Aerem, quia hyacinthini coloris est, the sky-colored Coat the Air,
because it is of a sky-colour: The Golden Bells of it, the Thunder in the Air:
The Pomegranates, the Lightenings: The Ephod, the starry Heavens: The two
Onyx-stones, the two Hemispheres, or the Sun and the Moon: The twelve Precious
Stones in the Ephod, the twelve Signs in the Zodiac: The Mitre, the Empyrean
Heavens: The Golden Plate, God the King of all.

This they call the literal account of these holy Priestly Garments.

Well, then they come to the mystical sense, and there they tell us; That the
Linen Breeches signify Chastity, the Linen Coat, purity of Life; the Girdle,
moderation of Discretion; the Mitre, a right Intention; which they say are
virtues necessary for all Ministers: over and above which, Bishops, they say,
must have four others, which they fancy to be signified by the other Garments
of the High Priest. But these are too vain to insist on a large Confutation of
them.

As these Interpretations and Applications of theirs have no footing in
Scripture, nor the least countenance given them from thence: so there is a
profound silence concerning Christ therein, passing him over wholly, when as
indeed He, and his Performances and Endowments are the great thing taught and
shadowed forth by them all.

Use 3. See and behold in these holy Pontifical Vestments the spiritual Glory
of Jesus Christ the true High Priest. For all this did represent plusquam
Angelicam Splendorem, Calvin, that more then Angelical Splendour of Jesus
Christ, who is clothed indeed with Glory and Beauty.

Let me but briefly run over, and recapitulate the heads of things according to
the Explications given.

1. Here is the white and pure Linen of his perfect Righteousness, imputed to
us in Justification: For that is one great thing intended by it, as well as the
Garments of Holiness and Grace inherent.

2. He is girded with Strength, and with Truth and Faithfulness, for our
Salvation, and is always ready to do us good.

3. He has a glorious Robe, the Golden Bells whereof have sounded in the holy
place; and their sound is gone forth into all the earth; and the Fruits thereof
are sweet and fragrant as a Garden of Pomegranates.

4. He wears a glorious Ephod, in the shoulders whereof he does support his
Church; and lifts up them and their concernments out of the dust of death, and
sin, and misery; and bears them up before the Lord, as upon the shoulders of an
infinite and almighty Power.

5. He has a Breast Plate of Love upon his Heart continually; our Names and our
Concernments are written there, even upon the Heart of Jesus Christ, like the
Names of the Children of Israel upon Aarons Breast Plate.

6. Here is the true Urim and Thummim; all Divine Illuminations and Perfections
in the Heart of Jesus Christ, and Emanations of Light and Holiness from him to
us.

7. He has a Mitre upon his Head; He is a Royal Priest, both King and Priest;
He reconciles us effectually, and intercedes with Power, as a Prince prevailing
with the Lord.

8. And lastly, he wears a Golden Crown of Holiness upon his Forehead before
the Lord.

And having such an High Priest; Is not all this enough to strengthen Faith,
and to encourage you not only to believe, but to rejoice in believing, even to
rejoice and triumph in Jesus Christ?

THE GOSPEL of the CONSECRATION of the PRIESTS.
Exodus cap. 29. ver. 1, etc. to 38. Feb. 21. 1668.

THe Contents printed in your Bibles give you the true Analysis of this
Chapter, for there be three things in it.

1. The Consecration of the Priests, to ver. 38. 2. The continual
Burnt-offering, ver. 38, etc. 3. The Lords Promise of his gracious Presence
with the Children of Israel, ver. 45. It is only the first of these, viz. the
Consecration of the Aaronical Priests unto their Office, that we are now to
speak unto.

There be four things wherein those Priests of old were Types.

1. In their Priestly Qualifications and other Rites and Rules observed by
them. 2. In their Apparel. 3. In their Consecration to their Office. 4. In
their Priestly Ministrations. The two former of these, viz. their Priestly and
ritual Qualifications, as also their holy Garments have been spoken to. That
which follows next, is their Consecration to their Office, which is declared at
large in two places, almost two whole Chapters of holy Scripture. The Direction
of it in this 29th of Exodus, and the Execution of it in the 8th Chapter of
Leviticus.

This Consecration was the solemn Investiture of them in their Office, which
was done by sundry sacred and mystical Rites and Ceremonies ordained and
appointed of God for that end. They were chiefly these four, all mentioned in
both these places, Exodus 29. and Levit. 8. 1. Washing them. 2. Apparrelling
them with the holy Garments. 3. Anointing them with the holy Oil. 4.
Sacrificing, and so sanctifying them by Blood. All which I shall put together
in one general Proposition, or point of Doctrine, which will indeed contain the
sum of this whole Chapter, as far as to ver. 38.

Doctr. That the Consecration of the Priests of old was done by washing them,
and by apparrelling them with the holy Garments, and by anointing them with the
holy Oil, and by sacrificing, and so sanctifying them by the Blood thereof.

When all this was done, they might officiate in the Priests Office all their
days. And all these things did point unto something of Christ represented by
these Performances, and may be applied in a secondary and inferior way to
Ministers and Believers, but first and chiefly unto Christ himself, For as the
Priests by this Consecration became Priests all their days, Exodus 29. v. 9. and
the Priests Office shall be theirs by a perpetual Statute; for thou shall
consecrate Aaron and his Sons: so the Son of God is consecrated a Priest for
evermore. Heb. 7.28. Confer. v. 27. This Consecration of Jesus Christ is the
Commission of the whole work of our Salvation into his hand by God the Father.

But in the Rites of the Consecration of the Priests of old there was (as of
necessity there must be) a disparity between the Type and Antitype; there was a
great disproportion between Christ and them, sundry of those Rites not agreeing
to them both, in the same direct manner; sundry Purifications which they used,
were rather to make them become fit Types of Christ, then that they signified
such parallel actions to be done by Christ. The Priests by means thereof
represented that Purity which is in Christ without those means. They were
purified, but Christ was pure: so that in Purity there is an agreement between
Christ and them; but in the manner and means thereof, there is a difference.
See Heb. 7.26, 27. And therefore when any such actions are ascribed unto
Christ, as when he says, I sanctify my self, Joh. 17.19. it is to be
understood rather in regard of the effect, then of the action, rather of the
thing it self, then of the means: but such active expressions are used partly
in relation to the Type, the Priests of old, and partly in relation to the
Church of Christ, the Members, whereof he is the Head: whatever is done to
them, being first done to him their Head, so far as the incommunicable
properties of either will permit. He is therefore pleased so to speak of
himself, as being consecrated, and sanctified, and the like. Not as though
there had been any defect of Holiness in him, but as representing them in
himself. Moreover, we must remember that these things are not to be looked upon
by us as terminated in the person of Christ himself; but as relating further to
his Church and Members, for whom he is an High Priest and Mediator with the
Lord. Meminerimus, quae de Consecratione dicuntur, non subsistere in ejus
persona, sed referri ad totius Ecclesiae utilitatem. Calv. in Exodus 29.6.

Now to come to the particular Ceremonies of their Consecration, they were
those four, as beforementioned.

1. The first part of their Consecration was their washing with water, Exodus
29.4. Levit. 8.6. This intimated and hinted two things.

1. The perfect Purity and Holiness of Jesus Christ, Heb. 7.26. who is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and such an High Priest as behoved
us to have. For we needed an holyer Priest then those of the Aaronical Order.
They were typically holy, and some of them really, but Christ infinitely.

2. This pointed also at the Baptism of Christ at his first entrance upon his
public Ministry, Matthew. 3. Thus this great High Priest was consecrated and
initiated by washing with water. The first thing he does to his people, is, to
wash them. He finds them in a wretched and lothsom condition, polluted in
their own Blood, Ezekiel. 16.9. then washed I thee with water, yea I thoroughly
washed away thy Blood from thee, and I anointed thee with Oil: and so they did
to the Priests of old, Rev. 1.5, 6. He has loved us, and washed us from our
sins with his own Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his
Father. Therefore sinners are exhorted unto this, as the first thing they have
to do, Isai. 1.16. wash ye, and make ye clean.

2. The second Ceremony of Consecration was, the apparelling of them with the
holy Garments, Exodus 29.5. Levit. 8.7. These Garments are described at large in
the precedent Chapter, viz. Exodus 28. they were therefore spoken to under a
former Head. You have heard how they did betoken all those spiritual Graces and
Excellencies which our great High Priest is furnished and adorned with. And the
next work of his Grace upon us, after the washing away of sin, is to clothe the
Souls of his people with the Garment of Holiness, and so to make them every way
beautiful. See that eminent Scripture, Ezekiel. 16.9. and what follows, ver. 10. I
clothed thee also with broydered work, and shod thee with Badgers skin, and
girded thee about with fine Linen, and I covered thee with Silk. See also the
next following verses, viz. 11, 12, 13.

3. The third Ceremony of consecrating, was the anointing them with holy Oil,
Exodus 29.7. Lev. 8.12. The Composition of which sacred Ointment is instituted
and directed in Exodus 30.23. As to the mystery and meaning of it.

1. This holy Oil signified the Spirit of God, and anointing therewith, the
Communication of the Spirit in the saving Graces, and in the Divine Joys and
Consolations of it: so Isai. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, the Lord
has anointed me -- Act. 10.38. He anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy
Ghost.

2. The anointing of the Priests signified the anointing of Jesus Christ with
the Spirit beyond measure, Psalm. 45.7. Joh. 3.34.

This is called the Resting of the Spirit upon him, Isai. 11.2. as upon Elisha,
2 Kings 2.15. and upon Eldad and Medad, Numb. 11.26. so 1 Pet. 4.14. the Spirit
of God and of Glory rests on the Members of Christ, especially when in
sufferings, it being derived unto them from him. Hence he is called the Messiah
(...), the anointed one, because he chiefly is anointed with the Spirit.

3. As this holy Oil stayed not upon Aarons head, but descended and ran down
upon his Beard, and to the skirts of his Garments, as is observed, Psalm. 133.2.
so the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Christ distills, and is diffused from Christ
the Head unto all the Members of his Body, so as the meanest Saints have this
anointing in their measure, 1. Joh. 2.20, 27. and do receive of his fullness,
even Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.16. hence they bear his name, and are called
Christians, as being partakers of his anointing.

4. The Tabernacle, and the Altar, and all the holy Vessels were anointed with
the same sacred Oil, when he anointed Aaron, at the same time also he anointed
them, Lev. 8.10, 11, 12. The mystery of this is evident. It teaches us, that
all Ordinances and Performances profit not, unless they be anointed, unless the
Spirit be in them, with the power and presence of his Grace. This makes them
most holy and effectual for good, Exodus 30.29. and if he breath in them,
whatsoever touches them is holy.

5. This holy Oil might not be put to any common use; upon man's flesh it shall
not be poured, Exodus 30.31, 32. which plainly intimates thus much; That carnal
and unregenerate men have not the Spirit, that there be some who have not the
Spirit, viz. all carnal men, Jude 19. Joh. 14.17. Romans 8.1, 6, 9. 1 Cor. 2.14.

6. Nor might any be made like unto it, Exodus 30.33. Men are not to imitate and
counterfeit the Ordinances of God, or the Graces of his Spirit. It is the brand
set upon Jeroboam, that he devised a day of his own heart, like unto the Feast
which is in Judah. 1 Kings 12.32.

4. The fourth and last part of their Consecration was, by sacrificing, and
sanctifying them by the Blood thereof, Exodus 29.10, etc. Lev. 8.14, etc.
signifying how that Christ should put away sin by the sacrifice of himself,
Heb. 9.26, and ver 12.

Quest. But then here a question presently arises; How comes this in here in
Consecration? For the death and sufferings of Christ seem to belong rather to
the Execution of his Priestly Office, then to his Initiation and Consecration
thereunto.

Sol. To this there may be three Answers given.

1. That there is in this a disparity between the Type and the Antitype, as the
Apostle intimates, Heb. 7.27, 28. this is some part of an Answer, but this is
not all; for it would be harsh in this so main a part of their Consecration,
not at all to resemble Christ. Therefore for a further Answer.

2. That Christ was consecrated to the full execution of his Priestly Office by
his death and sufferings. He could not officiate as Mediator and perform the
whole work of his Priestly Office; he could not save them to the uttermost that
come unto God by him, till he had suffered death. It is true Christ was a
Priest before; but he was but a Priest in a state of abasement and humiliation:
but he was not capacitated to execute the triumphing part of his Priestly
Office, till he had first humbled himself unto death: therefore he is said to
be consecrated through sufferings, Heb. 2.10. This word (...) is used by the
Greek Interpreters for Consecration in Exodus 29. and Lev. 8. and elsewhere, and
so rendered by our Translators, Heb. 7.25. see Heb. 2.10. and Heb. 5.8, 9. being
consecrated, which we render being made perfect, (...), that is, though he were
a Son; yet having learned obedience by the things he suffered, and so being
consecrated, he became the Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey
him. He could not become such an Author till consecrated by his sufferings, or
made perfect. Christ must first dye, and so put away sin, before he can appear
in the presence of God in Heaven for us, which is a great part of his Priestly
Office. Christum oportuit Cruce inaugurari in suum primatum, Calvin. in Heb.
2.10. vid. Calv. in Exodus 29.16. He was a Priest in the form of a Servant
before; but he was not a Priest in glory, till consecrated thereunto by his own
Blood.

3. Some apply it to the Gospel Ministry thus; That the Gospel Ministry was
consecrated by the Blood of Christ. For though it is true, the Ministry is the
immediate fruit of Christ's Ascension into Glory; as Ephesians. 4. yet his
Exaltation being sounded in his Death: here therefore is the foundation of the
Church and Ministry. How great is their sin, who despise their Office, who
reject their Message, and so despise the Glory, yea also despise the Death and
Blood of Christ.

Now concerning this part of their Consecration, viz. by Sacrifices, there be
diverse things observable. There were diverse Rites and Ceremonies particularly
required in these Sacrifices of Consecration, which were common to all the
Sacrifices; as the killing them, pouring out the Blood, burning them upon the
Altar, etc. which I shall not handle in this place, but rather refer them to
the head of Jewish Sacrifices, as their more proper place to which they do
belong; and where they have been spoken to. See before page 248, etc. therefore
at this time I shall only mention such special Rites and Ceremonies as are
peculiar to this business of Consecration. And of this kind there are four
Rules here observable.

1. They were to offer all sorts of Sacrifices, a Sin-offering, ver. 14. a
Burnt-offering, v. 18. and a Peace Offering, v. 28. to teach not only the
special Holiness that ought to be found in them; but the deepness of the stain
and guilt of Sin: that there must be Expiations of all sorts to cleanse them
thoroughly from it: tantae molis erat: so great a work it was to cleanse the
Soul from sin. And to show the complete and perfect cleansing and expiation
that is in the Blood of Jesus Christ: we are perfectly clean through him: He is
both Sin-offering, and Burnt-offering, and Peace Offering, and all in all.

2. The method and order of these Sacrifices is remarkable: for they were first
to offer the Sin-offering, then the whole Burnt-offering, and then the
Peace Offering. This is to be interpreted by the consideration of those
peculiar respects which each kind of Offering had: though they did all aim at
the same general scope, the purging away of sin; yet if we consider them
distinctly. The Sin-offering speaks Pardon of Guilt; the Holocaust, or the
whole Burnt-offering, the dedication or giving up our selves to God, to his use
or Service by the fire of his Spirit; the Peace Offering, our Thankfulness in
the sense and assurance of Peace between God and us. The rest could not have
been accepted if the Sin-offering had not gone before, and made way for them.
Hence the Instruction is, that till sin be done away, all Sacrifices and
Services are abominable. Make that thy first work, thy great and prime request
to God, to get Pardon of sin.

3. A third remarkable Rite about these Sacrifices of Consecration is this,
that the Blood was to be put upon the tip of the right ear, and upon the thumb
of the right hand, and the great toe of the right foot of Aaron and his Sons,
ver. 20. To teach and signify that the work of Gospel-Sanctification does
extend to the whole man, to all the parts and members of the Body, and to all
the powers and faculties of the Soul: so the Apostle implies in that Prayer of
his for the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. the very God of Peace, Sanctify you
wholly, aad I pray that your whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body be preserved
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. There should be in
spiritual Priests a sanctified ear to abhor corrupt communication, and to
receive readily holy and spiritual Instructions; the hand also should be
sanctified for acting, and the foot for walking in the ways of God.

It may further intimate, that the external application of a sacramental sign
to some principal part or parts of the Body, is significative enough of
universal cleansing. Vid. Engl. Annot. in loc.

4. Moses was to fill the hand of the Priests with some parts of the
Sacrifices, ver. 23, 24, 25. This interprets and lets you see the reason of
that expression, why Consecration is called filling of the hand, Lev. 7.37. so
Exodus 28.41. and here cap. 29. ver. 9. It is because some parts of the
Sacrifices were put into his hands at his Consecration, as a pledge or symbol
of putting such a business, and intrusting such a work in his hands. No man can
or ought to undertake this or any other Trust, or Office, till the Lord fill
his hand with it, and commit the work and business to his trust. A man can take
unto himself nothing, except it be given him from Heaven, Joh. 3.27. they are
the words of John the Baptist, and he says of Christ, that the Father loves
the Son, and has given all things into his hand, ver. 35. of that 3d. of John.

Now the Use of all these Rites of Consecration lies in such things as these.

1. They were an external sign and representation of the Dignity of the Office;
therefore there were so many solemn and sacred Ceremonies in setting them apart
thereunto: and yet these Priests were but shadows of Jesus Christ, our great
and true High Priest, whose Office is of incomparably more surpassing
excellency and Dignity. See 1 Cor. 3.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

2. All these Rites of Consecration had this use to the Priests themselves, to
be Monitors or Remembrances to the Priests themselves; that they might remember
how pure and holy to the Lord they ought to be. And the like Instruction they
hold out to Believers, who all are made spiritual Priests unto God, that they
ought to be holy to the Lord.

3. From the people they bespeak reverence and regard to the Priests, and that
for their works sake, they having such Honor and Dignity put upon them in such
a solemn Consecration to their Office. Thus the Apostle in the New Testament
charge the Thessalonians, that they should know them that labored among
them, that were over them in the Lord, and admonished them, and to esteem them
very highly in love for their works sake. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.

4. We may learn also this from these sacred Rites of the Consecration of the
Priests, that under the New Testament there should be no Gospel Ministers, but
such as are called and consecrated by God to that work; see Heb. 5.4. It Is set
as a Brand upon that wicked Jeroboam, that he made of the basest of the people
Priests, even whosever would, he consecrated him: but this thing became sin to
the House of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face
of the earth; as the Holy Ghost expressly tells us, 1 Kings 13.33, 34.

THE GOSPEL of the MINISTRATIONS of the LEGAL MINISTRY.
Feb. 28. 1668. Morning and Afternoon.
Numb. chap. 18.
THere were three sorts of Officers in the old Legal Ministry. 1. The Priests.
2. The Levites. 3. The Nethinims. Of the Priests you have heard four things
propounded. 1. The special Rites and Qualifications of that Order of
Priesthood. 2. Their Priestly Apparel. 3. Their Consecration. 4. Their
Priestly Ministrations in the House of God. This last remains to be spoken to;
for which this Chapter may be the Text and foundation of our Discourse.

The Chapter consists of two parts. 1. The Work of the Priests and Levites. 2.
Their Maintenance.

1. Their Work and Office to ver. 8. The several Work of the Priests and of the
Levites is here exactly distinguished, their several Offices bounded and
disterminated by the Sovereign Wisdom and Authority of God, setting each their
limits, which they might not on highest penalties transgress and violate. The
charge of the Sanctuary and the Altar, with the things appertaining thereunto,
was committed to the Priests: the charge of the Tabernacle to the Levites, ver.
7.

1. For the Priests, their work was the charge of the Sanctuary and the Altar,
and the holy Vessels and Services thereof. These they must look to, and of
these God would require and expect an account at their hands. And the Lord said
unto Aaron, thou and thy Sons, and thy Fathers House with thee shall bear the
iniquity of the Sanctuary, and of your Priesthood, ver. 1. that is, the guilt
and punishment of whatever is done amiss in these matters. The Stranger that
comes nigh shall be put to death, ver. 7. the Stranger here is not meant of
other People and Nations only, as in other places; but any other Family beside
the Family of Aaron, the rest of Israel, yea the Levites themselves were
Strangers in this sense.

There are many particulars comprised under this general head, of the Charge of
the Altar and Sanctuary; in each of which I shall but briefly show, how they
had an eye to Jesus Christ the Priest and Minister of the true Sanctuary.

1. First then, this includes the holy Vessels, and all the hallowed things
thereof, ver. 7. so Numb. 4.5-15. and ver. 16. In like manner has God
committed the whole Church of God, and all the mysteries of our Salvation to
the trust, and care, and charge of Jesus Christ; for the Tabernacle is the
Church. All the concernments of his people, all their Graces, and Duties, and
Comforts meet in him, and are under his special care and trust: therefore they
are said to be given to him by the Father. Joh. 3.35.

2. The offering Sacrifice, and ordering that whole matter is here also plainly
included, as being part of the Charge of the Altar; the Priest was to kill and
dress the Sacrifices, and sprinkle the Blood thereof, and to manage and dispose
of that whole affair, Lev. 1.5. and he, that is the Priest, shall kill the
Bullock before the Lord; and the Priests, the Sons of Aaron, shall sprinkle the
Blood, etc. Heb. 5.1. Every High Priest taken from among men is ordained for
men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both Gifts and Sacrifices
for Sins: and the same Apostle applies it expressly to Jesus Christ, Heb. 8.3.
For every High Priest is ordained to offer Gifts and Sacrifices. wherefore it
is of necessity, that this man, that is, Christ, have somewhat also to offer,
that is, himself, his own blessed Body and Humane nature. This is the Sacrifice
he offered. And so he himself was both the Sacrifice and the Priest; the Priest
in regard of both his Natures, and the Sacrifice in regard of his human nature;
see Heb. 10.10, 11, 12. No other can offer any expiatory Sacrifice to make
atonement with the Lord, but only he -- He trod the Wine Press alone in this
respect, and of the people there was none with him, as Isai. 63.3.

3. The Priests were to light the seven sacred Lamps of the golden Candlestick,
Exodus 27.20, 21. Lev. 24.2, 3. This shadows forth Christ the true Light, Joh.
1.9. shining forth and enlightening his Church by his Spirit in the Ministry of
the Word: For the Golden Candlesticks are the Churches; the seven Stars, or
Lights in the tops of the Candlesticks, are the Angels or Ministers of the
Churches, Rev. 1.20. yet the Ministry considered barely in it self does not
enlighten, but as illuminated by the Spirit. Rev. 4.5.

4. The Priest was to burn sweet Incense upon the Golden Altar when he dressed
the Lamps, Exodus 30.7, 8. this is Prayer and Intercession, and this is Christ's
work: he prays, and he perfumes the Prayers of his people with the sweet
Incense of his own Merits and Mediation: and as they are daily praying; so
Christ is daily interceding for them. Rev. 8.3, 4.

5. The Priest was to set the Shewbread upon the Golden Table before the Lord
every Sabbath, Lev. 24.8. Every Sabbath shall he set it in order before the
Lord continually: so does Jesus Christ present, and set the whole number of his
Elect before the Lord continually, as the Shewbread upon the Table, where his
favorable Eye and Face is always upon them.

6. The Priest was to bless the people in the name of the Lord: and well he
might; for blessed indeed are such a people, who have such an Altar and
Sanctuary, and such a Sacrifice offered for them; amongst whom the Lamp of God
shines, whose Prayers ascend and come up before him, as Incense upon the Golden
Altar out of the hand of the true High Priest, the Angel of the Covenant, and
who stand before the Face of God, and under the Eye and Care of God
continually, Numb. 6.23. and so on to the end; and accordingly they did so,
when they had performed their other Ministrations, Lev. 9.22, 23. and God
ratified it. For the Glory of the Lord appeared unto all the people: so 2 Chronicles. 30.27. Then the Priests the Levites arose and blessed the people: and
their voice was heard, and their Prayer came up to his dwelling place, even
unto Heaven: so does Jesus Christ bless his people, Luke 24.50. and that most
really and effectually, Acts 3.26. These were the Priestly Ministrations.

Objct. But now it may be demanded, wherein then differed the High Priest from
the other ordinary Priests, these Ministrations belonging to them, as well as
him?

Answ. There were three things peculiar to the High Priest, wherein he was
advanced by God above his Brethren.

1. He had a superiority of spiritual Power and Jurisdiction over all the
Ministers of the Sanctuary, both the Priests and Levites, Numb. 4.19. also ver.
27. see Deuteronomy. 17.12. and so Aaron was the Archbishop, or Primate as it were, to
oversee and order all: so is Jesus Christ in the Church of God; He is the
(...). 1 Pet. 5.4. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a
Crown of Glory that fades not away. He only is the chief Shepherd.

2. The High Priest was clothed with peculiar Garments of Glory and Beauty,
Exodus 28. The inferior Priests, the Sons of Aaron, had but four Priestly
Garments; Linen Drawers, and Coats, and Girdles, and Bonnets, Exodus 28.40. but
Aaron the High Priest had a Breast Plate, and an Ephod, a Robe, a broydered
Coat, a Mitre, and a Girdle, with the Urim and Thummim, and precious Stones in
his Breast Plate, and on the shoulders of his Ephod, and a Crown or Plate of
Gold upon his Mitre, Exodus 28. ver. 4. and so is Jesus Christ fairer then the
Sons of men, more beautiful then any other, Psalm. 45.2.

3. The third Prerogative of the High Priest was in his glorious Ministration
upon the great day of atonement, when he went into the holiest of all, to make
atonement there before the Lord, Lev. 16. which none but he might do. Thus
Jesus Christ is entered not into the holy places made with hands, which are the
Figures of the true; but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of
God for us, Hebr. 9.24. Neither by the Blood of Goats and Calves; but by his
own Blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
Redemption for us, ibid. ver. 12.

Here note, as a Corollary, the wickedness of the Bishop of Rome, who calls
himself the High Priest amongst Christians, as Aaron was amongst the Jews. His
judaizing antichristian wickedness. And all other such Archbishops and Primates
and Prelates fall under the same condemnation; who differ not specie, but only
grad^, not in kind, but only in degree, from the Usurpations of that Man of Sin.

I know no other High Priest, no other Archbishop, or chief Shepherd of our
Souls under the Gospel, but only Jesus Christ. Some thus understand that of
Paul, Acts 23.5. I wist not that he was the High Priest, I acknowledge not that
there is an High Priest. Vide Beza in 1 Pet. 5.4.

Against this Primacy which the Pope usurps, consider,

1. The High Priest in this preeminence above his Brethren was an express Type
of Jesus Christ; of whom it is said, that he was the firstborn among many
Brethren, Romans 8.29.

2. This Ecclesiastical preeminence amongst Ministers is expressly forbidden
under the Gospel. How often does Christ reprove his Disciples for it; for
striving who should be chiefest, Matthew. 18.1, 2, 3, 4. and Matthew. 23.8, 10, 11.
and Matthew. 20.25. and Luke 22.24, 25, 26. And it is the brand set upon
Diotrephes, 3 John ver. 9. that he did (...), that he affected the Primacy.

3. Tho the Priests Power was ecclesiastical; yet the Pope exercises a temporal
power; and this, not as a Commissioner from and under the Civil Magistrate, but
distinct from the Civil Magistrate, and without dependence on him, yea indeed
superior to him: and so do the inferior Prelates too, not only a Civil power
derived from the King, as other Barons of the Realm, or Justices of the Peace,
or the like civil Dignities; but they make the Clergy a Fountain of Power to
themselves, even of temporal Power, (wherein they entrench upon the Prerogative
and just Rights of the Civil Magistrate) as well as of Ecclesiastical Power,
having never received any such Primacy of Office from Jesus Christ, but
usurping it to themselves: and so they do entrench both upon God and the King,
showing themselves therein to be the true and natural Children of their Father
the Pope, the great Antichrist of Rome. But you see how remote this is from the
Spirit of the Gospel, and that it is indeed a Judaizing, for Ministers to
assume a disparity and superiority of Power, and Ecclesiastical or Spiritual
Jurisdiction over other Ministers. So much of the Priests, and of their
Priestly Work and Ministrations.

2. The second sort of Temple Officers were the Levites, of whom four things
are worthy to be considered.

1. Who they were; they were the whole Tribe of Levi, excepting only Aarons
Posterity, who were preferred to an higher Office of Priesthood; yet they were
Levites, but all Levites were not Priests. The Priests were Levites in regard
of their Birth and Extraction out of that Tibe; but they were not Levites in
regard of their Office: nor were the Levites Priests.

2. The occasion of their Separation to this Office. And there are two or three
occasions of it noted.

1. The Lords passing by the firstborn of Israel, when he slew the firstborn
of Egypt, Exodus 13.2. on which occasion the Lord challenged the firstborn to
himself, and required they should be sanctified to him. But afterward the Lord
was pleased to take the Levites from amongst the Children of Israel, instead of
all the firstborn. See Numb. 3.11, 12, 13. Therefore the Levites shall be
mine, says God, because all the firstborn are mine.

2. The Faithfulness of the Levites in a time of great Apostasy and temptation;
the Story whereof you have in Exodus 32.28, 29. and it is afterward remembered
by Moses before the Lord in his blessing of them. Deuteronomy. 33.9.

3. The later Rebellion of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, with the lamentations, and
self-condemning complaints of the people upon that occasion. Compare cap. 17.
of Numbers, the two last verses, with the first verses of this 18th chapter.
That Complaint of the people; Behold we dye, we perish, we all perish, is an
earnest deprecation of the danger: for they were under the sense of the dread
and Majesty of the dreadful presence of God in his Tabernacle, and thereupon
they thus spoke.

From all which we may observe, that such as God calls to any Work and Office,
he does usually give many visible intimations of it: he does design and prepare
them to it by many fore-running Providence.

3. The Rites and manner of their Separation and Consecration to their Office.
This is recorded and declared at large in Numb. 8. where you will find it was,
by sprinkling them with Water, by shaving their Hair, by washing their Clothes,
and by offering Sacrifices for them. And lastly by the Children of Isreal's
laying their hands upon them. But I shall not speak to these things, though it
would be worth the while; Because there has been occasion to speak to sundry
of these Rites in other places formerly.

4. Their Work and Office which they were thus separated and set apart unto,
which was in general to be adjoined, as subordinate Ministers to the Priests,
in the outer Services and Ministrations of the Temple: so here, ver. 2. that
they may be joined unto thee: alluding to the name of Levi, which bears that
signification, though the name was given upon another occasion. I say [outer]
because they are excluded from the Ministrations of the Sanctuary and the
Altar, ver. 3.

Their Work might be distinguished into Synagogue-work and Temple-work; into
temporary, or occasional, and standing work. But I shall put all together in
seven heads.

1. They were to bear the Tabernacle, and all the holy Vessels, Numb. 4.15. so
Christ supports and bears the Church: but this work was but temporary and
occasional, while the Tabernacle was in that ambulatory posture; but when the
flitting moving Tabernacle was changed into a fixed Temple, then this part of
their Ministration was at an end.

2. The Levites were to assist the Priests in offering Sacrifices, 1 Chronicles.
23.28-31. 2 Chronicles. 29.34. and 2 Chronicles. 30.16. to burn them on the Altar, and
sprinkle the Blood, was peculiar to the Priests: but the Levites might help in
killing them, and other preparatory Administrations.

As to the Gospel of this, you know the true Sacrifice is Christ, and he is the
Priest and the Levite too; he did all himself alone without any (...)
assistance.

3. The Levites were to teach the people in the Law of the Lord: therefore
scattered and dispersed in their habitations up and down among them, Deuteronomy.
33.10. they shall teach Israel thy Law -- Mal. 2. ver. 7. the Priests Lips
should keep Knowledge, and and they should seek the Law at his Mouth, for he is
the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8, 9. Jehosophat sent
Levites to teach. It is the Magistrates duty to provide for the teaching and
instructing of his Subjects in the good knowledge of the Lord. This Christ
does, and this Gospel Ministers also do; they should teach the people, what the
Lord has taught them.

4. They were to judge of Causes, and to determine Controversies among the
people, Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9-12. the supreme Judgment lying in the High Priest, ver.
11. Amaziah the Priest in those things which belong to God shall preside. 2 Chronicles. 19.8, 10. so there is spiritual Judgment of Discipline in the Church
under the Gospel, Ezekiel. 44.23, 24. 1 Cor. 5.12.

5. They were to sing the Songs of the Temple. That business of the
Temple-Musick was committed to them, partly, as to the Psalteries, Harps and
Viols, though the Priests were to sound the Trumpets, 1 Chronicles. 15.16, 17. 2 Chronicles. 5.12, 13. That which answers this, is the inward melody of the Joys and
Graces of Gods Spirit.

6. Others of them were Treasurers, 1 Chronicles. 26.20, 22, 24, 26, 27, 28. there
is a Treasure also in the Church of the New Testament, for which the Lord has
appointed Deacons whom he has entrusted with it.

7. Others were Porters to keep and watch the Gates of the House of the Lord,
which they did both by day, to keep back unclean persons that they might nor
enter into the Temple: so we find in Jehoiada's time, 2 Chronicles. 23.19 -- Ezekiel.
22.26. and Ezekiel. 44.7, 8. and by night, Psalm. 134.1. These seem to have been,
as the Priests and Singers were, divided into four and twenty courses, 1 Chronicles.
23.4, 5, 6. 2 Chronicles. 8.14. so the Gates of the Gospel-Churches should be kept
and guarded, that enemies and unclean persons may not enter in, Rev. 21.27.

3. The third sort of Temple-Officers were the Nethinims or Gibeonites, Josh.
9. for the servile work of the Temple, ver. 21, 23, 27. And Joshua gave them
that day to be Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water, for the Congregation, and
for the Altar of the Lord. Hence they are called Nethinims, from Nathan, dedit.
They were afterward methodized by David for the Temple-service, Ezra 8.20. and
had Lodgings near the Temple, Nehem. 3.26. though their dwellings were in their
own Towns and Cities, Nehem. 7.73. the Nethenims dwelt in their Cities.

Their coming to the Israelites was to save their own Lives, a lawful end; but
the means they used was very evil: for they came with a Ly in their mouths, as
you all know the Story, Josh. 9. And as their means was bad: so the motive was
but low; for they were under a legal work of fear and terror, and under guilt
and guile of Spirit, as indeed guilt is usually accompanied with guile and
deceitfulness of heart. Yet out of this legal principle, this legal fear and
terror, they came to make their peace, I may call it in a sense, their peace
with God; for it was with the people of God, with the people of the true God:
and God by his Providence did so order it, that their Lives were preserved; and
not only so, but they were devoted, though in a very low and mean way, to the
Service of the Tabernacle of the true and living God. Joshua and the Princes
(as some allege) might have banished them, being engaged by their Oath no
further, but to the saving of their Lives: but they suffered them still to
dwell in the Land, and devoted them as the first Fruits of the Slaves or
Servants to the Lord. Their work was to provide and bring in Water to the
Lavers and molten Sea, and to provide Wood for the Fire of the Altar of
Burnt-offering. The time when they did this their service, seems to have been
early in the morning, and late at night; before the Morning Sacrifice, which
was at nine a clock in the morning, and after the Evening Sacrifice, which was
not till three a clock in the afternoon. But by this means having such access
into the Courts of the Temple, they came to see and know something of the
Worship of the true God. And, as David says, Psalm. 84.10. better be a
Doorkeeper in the House of God, then to dwell in the Tents of wickedness;
better be but a Gibeonite to the Worship of the true God, then the High Priest
of Baal or Apollo.

These Gibeonites, or Nethinims, were so incorporated into the Commonwealth of
Israel, that as they were carried away to Babylon with the rest of Gods people,
so they returned with them, and accordingly are several times mentioned in Ezra
and Nehemiah.

This we may learn from the whole History of them; that it is much better for
men to seek after God, though they do it merely out of legal fear and terror,
as these poor creatures did, then wholly to neglect him. The Lord in the
bringing home of his Elect, usually begins with legal works, and then by
degrees carries it on further in such as belong to the Election of his Grace.

And now you have seen the several kinds of these Temple-Officers. The next
thing to be spoken to, is their Maintenance. For you may ask,

Quest. How was all this large and numerous Hierarchy of Temple-Officers
maintained?

Answ. There was a large and plentiful provision made for them, which is the
second part of this Chapter, from ver. 8. to the end; no less then five and
twenty verses are employed upon this, beside which, if you will have a full
account of it, we must borrow Light from other Scriptures. Their Maintenance
consisted chiefly in these eight particulars, the three first whereof are
mentioned in this Chapter.

1. All the Offerings and Sacrifices that were given to the Lord, the Lord gave
part thereof to these his Ministers: so here, ver. 9, etc. Hence the Apostle
says, Do ye not know, that they that wait at the Altar, are partakers with the
Altar, and they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the
Temple. 1 Cor. 9.13. The Meat Offerings, Sin Offerings, Trespass-offerings,
Heave-offerings, Wave-offerings were theirs, the right Shoulder, and the
Wave-brest was theirs, the two Cheeks and the Maw, Deuteronomy. 18.3. and in the
Burnt-offerings the Skin.

2. They had the first Fruits of all things, and that of the best: so here in
Numb. 18. ver. 12, 13, 15, 16, 17. of Corn, Oil, Wine, of men and Beasts,
whereof men, the firstborn of men, and of beasts that were not clean for
Sacrifice, were redeemed with money, five shekels a head, Deuteronomy. 18.4. and they
had three sorts of first Fruits. 1. Of the first ripe Ears of Corn offered at
the Passover, which was Barley; because that was first ripe in that Country,
Lev. 23.10. Lev. 2.14. 2. First Fruits of Bread at Pentecost, and this of
Wheat, which was then ripe, Lev. 23.15. 3. First Fruits of all the other Fruits
of the Earth, of which Numb. 18.13. Deuteronomy. 18.4. and Deuteronomy. 16.2.

3. They had the tenths of all the Increase of the Land, ver. 20, etc. the
tenth of which tenth went to the Priests, ver. 26.

4. They had Gleab-lands, forty eight Cities with their Suburbs, for
themselves, and their Cattle. The Institution whereof is in Numb. 35. the eight
first verses. The Performance is recorded in Josh. 21. throughout the Chapter,
whereof thirteen were given to the Priests, the rest to the Levites, six of
them were Cities of Refuge.

5. They had voluntary Presents and Contributions at the three solemn Feasts,
Deuteronomy. 16.16, 17.

6. They had Poll-mony, of a half shekel at every general Muster of the people,
and of the third part of a shekel yearly. Of the former you have the Ordinance,
Exodus 30.12-16. it is there said to be for the Service of the Tabernacle; which
shows that the Levites had it, though withal the Lord there puts another
respect also upon it. The ordaining of the latter you find, Nehem. 10.32.

7. The Restitution-mony for Trespasses and Injuries, often fell into their
hands; which was the principal, with a fifth part superadded, Numb. 5.8.

8. They had a privilege of exemption from all public Taxes and Assessments,
that were laid on others, granted them by Artaxerxes, Ezr. 7.24.

All which put together amounts to a very large and ample Maintenance. Some
have observed, that though the Levites were not equal in number to the one and
fortieth part of the people; yet their Revenue and yearly Income was above four
times as much, as fell to the lot of the richest Tribe in all the Land of
Canaan; and that the Temple, and these sacred Officers of it, had above a third
part of the Income of the whole Land.

The Instruction which the Apostle teaches us out of all this, is the
Maintenance of Gospel Ministers. He disputes the point at large, 1 Cor. 9. as
from arguments of all sorts, so from the equity and reason of this old
Temple-ordinance.

Object. But what necessity is there that Ministers should be maintained by
others? For, can they not follow some other honest Calling, and yet preach too?

Answ. For a man to follow another Calling, and yet to be a constant Preacher,
is neither lawful, nor possible ordinarily.

1. It is not lawful; because it is the Ordinance and Appointment of Jesus
Christ, that the Ministry should be a particular Calling; that is, that
Ministers should employ their whole time upon it, 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15. Be thou
wholly in them, give thy self to reading, etc. To think otherwise, argues a
secret contempt of this Calling; and blindness of heart concerning the nature
of it. Is it such a small thing in your eyes to preach the Gospel? that this
must be done as a (...), as a work upon the by, which is of so great weight and
concernment, that it requires the whole man, and the utmost improvement of all
his abilities, and of all his time and talents for the right discharging of it.

2. As it is not lawful, so it is not possible ordinarily: as no man may preach
constantly, so no man can preach constantly, that follows another Calling.

Object. But they may, by the immediate assistance of the Spirit, say some.

Answ. I answer, the Spirit of God does not give any such immediate assistance
in these times: and therefore it is presumption to expect it. I say, it is not
Faith, but presumption to expect it: for Apostolical Gifts are ceased. A
Minister that is called to that work, and is diligent in reading and
meditation, and in Prayer to God, may expect assistance from the Spirit in this
way: for God has promised it. But he cannot expect it in the way of immediate
Revelation, because there is no such promise. Now then, seeing God has
ordained, that the Ministry be a particular Calling, so that it is not lawful
for men that follow their Callings, to take upon them to be constant Preachers:
and it is not lawful for one that is a constant Preacher to follow another
Calling. It follows, that Ministers either must be maintained, or else they
must starve.

Quest. There is also another Question concerning the way and manner of
Maintenance, whether it may be in any of these ways that were used under the
Law, or whether they be not all ceased and abolished.

Answ. To this the Answer is easy; that seeing the Maintenance of the Priests
and Levites under the Law, was raised all manner of ways; the Maintenance of
Gospel Ministers must be in some of these, or there can be no Maintenance at
all. For if Ministers do receive Maintenance by the Free-will-offerings and
voluntary Contributions of the people: so did the Levites under the Law. If
Ministers have Houses to dwell in provided for them, the Legal Ministry had so
too: If Ministers have it by the Edict of the supreme Magistrate, so had the
Levites too, Ezr. 7.24. If Ministers have their Maintenance settled by Law, by
the consent of the people, as by Act of Parliament. This way was used under the
Law likewise, Josh. 21.1, 3. Nehem. 10.32. If Ministers under the Gospel
receive Tithes, so did they also under the Law: only concerning Tithes it is
observable, that the most of the other ways were not used till first instituted
under the Law; yet Tithes were paid long before, as a Due to God, and to his
use, long before the Aaronical Priesthood, or Levitical Ministry was instituted
and appointed: For Abraham paid Tithes to Melchizedek, Genesis 14.20. and Jacob,
Genesis 28.22. resolves, of all that thou shall give me, I will surely give the
tenth unto thee.

Such ways and parts of their Maintenance, as were inseparable appendants to
the Types, as their parts of the Sacrifices, must needs be ceased, because
there are no such Sacrifices under the Gospel. But for the other ways of
Maintenance, which were not of such a nature, they may be lawful still, for
ought I know to the contrary. Thus I have gone through the Temple-Officers,
both their kinds and their Maintenance.

And now to wind up all, I shall but briefly recapitulate and gather up the
heads of things, and so conclude.

All these old legal Types and Shadows may be ranged into these seven Classes,
or general heads.

1 Personal Types, sundry individual persons before the Law, such as Adam,
Enoch, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph.

There were diverse also under the Law, such as Moses and Joshua, Sampson, David
and Solomon, Elijah, Elisha and Jonah, Zerubbabel and Jehoshuah.

And besides these individual persons that were Types, there were also typical
Ranks and Religious Orders of men under the Law, such as their Nazarites, their
Prophets, Priests and Kings.

All these were personal Types, and this is the first Classis.

2. Occasional Types, such things as Jacobs Ladder, Moses his burning Bush, the
Pillar of Cloud and Fire, Manna, and Water out of the Rock, the Brazen Serpent,
the Pool of Bethesda.

And beside such typical things, there were typical actions and dispensations
of Providence, as their deliverance out of Egypt, their passing thorough the
red Sea, and thorough the Wilderness, and thorough Jordan, and possessing the
Land of Canaan, and their Captivity and Deliverance out of Babylon.

And there were not only such typical Mercies and Deliverances, but typical
Vengeance and Destruction upon Enemies, the Flood, Sodom and Gomorrah, Egypt,
Jericho, Babylon, Edom, were Types of Rome and Hell.

This is the second general head of Types, these transient and occasional Types.

3. The third is, that initiating Seal of the Old Testament, Circumcision; that
famous Ordinance which stood in force about two thousand years, much longer
then the Temple and Temple-Ordinances.

4. The fourth is, the holy Places; as the Tabernacle and Temple, with all the
holy Vessels and Utensils belonging to them, the Brazen Altar of
Burnt-offering, the molten Sea and Lavers, the two Pillars of the Temple, the
Golden Candlestick, the Tables of Shewbread, the Golden Altar and Censer of
Incense, the Ark, with all the glorious appurtenances thereof -- This is the
fourth Classis of them.

5. The fifth is, the Priesthod, with all the Legal Ministry, and all the
concernments thereof, the Rules of these Religious Orders, their holy
ministering Garments, the Ephod, the Breast Plate, the Urim and Thummim, the
Mitre, the holy Crown, their Consecration to their Office, their
Administrations in their Office.

And to the Priests belonged (as subordinate to them) the Levites, who were
Porters, Singers, Treasurers, Judges. And lastly the Nethinims.

6. The Legal Sacrifices and Purifications; Their Burnt-offerings,
Meat Offerings, Peace Offerings, Sin Offerings, Trespass-offerings; the
Purifications of unclean Touches, unclean Meats, unclean Issues, and chiefly
the Leprosy; both the Signs and Indications, and likewise the Purifications of
it, they were all typical.

7. The seventh and last is, the Jewish Festivals, or holy times and seasons;
as the Passover, Pentecost, the Feast of Tabernacles, the Feast of Trumpets,
the Feast of Expiation, their New Moons, their Sabbaths, weekly every Saturday,
as also every seventh year, and every fiftieth year, seven times seven, which
is the Jubilee.

These are some of the general heads of things, which you have heard spoken to,
and the Gospel-mysteries included in them briefly opened and unfolded.

This is the proper and genuine method and order of them, which to have thus
rehearsed may a little help and refresh your memories.

There are three things more which must needs be added and annexed unto all
that has been said, each of which might have deserved a distinct Discourse by
it self. But I shall but name them, because I would conclude at this time.

1. That all this typical Dispensation is expired and abolished by the
exhibition of Jesus Christ the truth and substance and scope of all; these
Shadows are vanished away by the rising of that Sun of Righteousness; this is
that which the great Apostle does expressly assert, Col. 2.14. He has blotted
out the handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to
us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross. This the Jews do not
believe.

2. The Gospel Dispensation does succeed, and is substituted instead thereof:
so the same Apostle, Heb. 1.1, 2. God, who at sundry times, and in diverse
manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last
days spoken unto us by his Son. Instead of Moses the Servant of the Lord, we
have Christ himself the Son of God; instead of the Law and the Prophets, we
have the Gospel and Evangelists, who give us an History instead of Prophecy:
they tell us that Christ is come; whereas the Law and the Prophets only said,
he shall come. The Jews do not believe this neither: as they adhere to the
Law, so they reject the Gospel.

3. This Gospel Dispensation is far more glorious then that old legal
Dispensation. For is not the substance better then shadows? The Law from Mount
Sion is more glorious then the Law from Mount Sinai: the Spirit is better then
the Letter, 2 Cor. 3.6. to ver. 11. The Letter there is not the written Word,
and the Spirit the Enthusiasms of a deluded fancy, (as some have understood
it;) but the Letter is the Law, and the Spirit is the Gospel, as the whole
Context shows.

And look, as the Jews do not believe the two former: so the Papists and other
superstitious Christians do not believe this third; and therefore they seek to
add an external legal Pomp and Splendour, which is carnal, to the Worship of
the Gospel, to the spiritual Majesty and Glory of the Gospel, and
Gospel Ordinances, which their carnal eyes are not able to see and to discern.

Remember these three things, and carry them along with you.

The Abolition an Expiration of the Law, with all the Types thereof.

The Succession and Substitution of the Gospel.

And the preeminence of Glory in the Gospel above the Law.

And now blessed be God, who has carried me through this Subject of the Types
and Shadows of the Old Testament; a Subject in it self useful and edifying,
were it handled according to its worth.

I must confess, I have found some experience of assistance and help from God,
since first I entered upon it, much beyond my own weakness and unworthiness, I
hope, through the influence of your Prayers, and through the Grace of Christ
shining into a dark heart.

But I have been but brief in diverse things, which have deserved a much larger
and better explication. If you can say concerning any part or portion of holy
Scripture, that now you understand it something better, and that you see a
little more into it then you did before; if you have found any refreshings by
what you have heard, any enlightenings and increasings of Gospel Light by it,
live up thereto, and bless the Lord, who has taken off the Veil from off
Moses's Face, and the Veil from off your Hearts.

FINIS.

