THE Judgment Of Several Eminent Divines OF THE Congregational Way. Concerning
A PASTORS POWER. Occasionally to Exert Ministerial ACTS in another CHURCH,
besides that which is His Own Particular FLOCK

Boston Printed by Benjamin Hurris, and are to be Sold by Richard Wilkins. 1692.

WE have carefully perused the following Discourse, and Judge it to be, not only
agreeable to true Congregational Principles, but also needful for the
Information, and sufficient for the Conviction of such Churches as have been,
or may be for any considerable time without the advantage of a Settled Minister
among them, that they may not be unnecessarily deprived of the Enjoyment of
those Ordinances the Dispensation whereof is so much to be desired: we do
therefore Recommend it to the serious Consideration of such as Love Zions
Prosperity.

James Allen. Samuel Willard. Michael Wigglesworth. Cotton Mather. Nehemiah
Walter.


QUESTION.

WHether the Pastor of a particular Congregation may at the Desire of another
Church Exercise Ministerial Acts, and in special Dispense the Seals to them
that are not his peculiar Charge?

ANSWER.

I Incline to the Affirmative; for,

1. The Ministerial Power, which a Pastor has received from the Lord Christ, is
not so confined to his particular Flock, as that He shall cease to be a
Minister when he does Act in the Name of the Lord elsewhere.

I cannot in this concur with the Opinion of the Refuter of Dr. Downham's
Sermon, and some others, that a Pastor of a Church, Preaching in another
Congregation, Acts only as a Gifted Brother, and not as a Minister of the Lord.

I am as to this particular, fully of the same Judgment with the Learned Doctor
John Owen, in his Judicious Treatise concerning a Gospel Church, (p. 100, 101.)
where he has these words: Although we have no concernment in the Figment of an
indelible Character accompanying Sacred Orders, yet we do not think the
Pastoral Office is such a thing, as a man must leave behind him every time he
goes from Home. For my own part, if I did not think my self bound to Preach as
a Minister Authorized in all places, and on all occasions when I am called
thereunto, I think I should never Preach more in this World. Thus speaks our
Famous Owen. A Pastor does Preach as a Minister, and Bless in the Name of the
Lord, as a Minister of His, wherever he may be occasionally called thereto. And
if he may, by virtue of his Office, Exert these Ministerial Acts of Preaching
and Blessing in other Congregations, why may He not Dispense the Seals? sure he
may, unless he performs the other Acts not as an Officer, but as a Brother
only. It is true; A Pastor has not that Rule and Authority in another Church,
which the Lord Jesus has given to him over that Flock, to which he is specially
related. Nevertheless, when another Church does desire him, he has Potestas
precaria, Power conferred on him for that Time and that Act. Whatever the Rule
requires as necessary in order to Dispensing the Seals is here to be seen! E.
G. The Dispenser must be set apart to act in the Name of the Lord in Holy
Administrations, and he must by a Church of Christ be Chosen to Administer to
them; all which is true concerning the Pastor of whom the Question is.

2. If the Pastor of a Church may Administer the Sacrament to the Members of
another Congregation, and so to the whole Church in case they shall come to the
Church, whereof he is Pastor, and desire such occasional Communion; He may upon
as good Grounds go to the Town where the other Church dwells, and at their
Request Minister to them: For neither the Place, nor the Presence of his own
Flock, can make that which is in it self contrary to the Rule of the Word
become a regular Act. This Argument seems not easy to be answered, and
therefore acute Mr. Hooker instead of solving it, does plainly cut it in
pieces. For in his Survey of Church Discipline (which is an elaborate and
accurate Piece) Part 2d. page 65. in answer to that Allegation, That Members of
one Congregation may partake of the Sacrament in another, and then they Receive
it from one who is not their Pastor; He replies thus, It has been a course
which I have ever questioned, and against it many years have alleged many
Arguments, and therefore could readily ease my self of the Argument, by
professing the Course unwarrantable, etc. But now there are few or none amongst
us, who scruple the Lawfulness of admitting Members of other Churches to their
Communion. It uses to be said, they are Transient Members of the Church, where
they Partake: And why may it not with as good reason be affirmed, that the
Minister who Dispenses the Seals in another Congregation is a Transient
Pastor) for ought that I can discern to the contrary, there is as much Ground
in the Scripture for Transient Officers, as there is for Transient Members.

Whereas it is objected, that the Pastor of another Church has no Authority by
his Office to require them of another Church to Receive the Sacrament, as he
may those of his own Flock; It may be replied, he has as much Power to do that,
as he has to Enjoin one of another Congregation occasionally to receive, where
he is not a Member. The Request of the Persons concerned does sufficiently
Empower him pro hac vice to Exert a Ministerial Act toward them.

3. In the primitive and pure Times of the Christian Church, not only the
Apostles, but ordinary Pastors of Churches did occasionally Dispense the Seals
in other Churches, besides those wherein they were fixed. It is the Opinion of
very Learned Men, that Polycarp was the Angel of the Church in Smyrna, unto
whom the Lord Jesus directed that Epistle in Revolations, chap. 2. So Paraeus,
Estius, Tirinus, Men^chius, etc. He was the Apostle John's Scholar: And (as
Hierom, Eusebius, and other Ecclesiastic Writers, Testify) was by the Apostles
themselves Ordained the Pastor of that Church. This Holy Minister is not (as
most Officers in the Seven Asiatick Churches were) blamed or reproved for any
Fault. Yet did the Pastor of that Church (if Polycarp was he) occasionally
Administer the Lords Supper to the Christians in Rome, where there was in those
Days a pure and a true Church. There was some Difference in Opinion between
Anicetas the Pastor of the Church in Rome, and Polycarp Pastor of the Church at
Smyrna, who undertook a long Journey from Smyrna to Rome, to Assist in
composing the Differences about small matters, which in those early days
threatened the Churches. Anicetas, only to Testify his Love and Honor to
Polycarp, requested him to Administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to that
Church, where not Polycarp but Anicetas was the Pastor. Jrenaeus (Lib. 3. cap.
1.) says, that Polycarp always taught the Churches to observe those things,
which he Learned from the Apostles, and nothing else. If that be so, were the
Apostles here, they would allow Pastors occasionally to Exercise Ministerial
Acts in other Congregations, besides those where they are fixed. See Mr. Foxes
Martyrol. Vol. 1. p. 57.

4. Eminent Men amongst those of the Congregational way, have been for the
Affirmative in the Question before us; Indeed, Rigid Separatists, Mr. Can,
and such like Brownists, have stiffly maintained that a Pastor may not Exert an
Official Act, except among his own peculiar Flock. But they that are truly
Congregational have declared themselves to be otherwise persuaded. That the
First Elders in New England were of this Judgment, I conclude from their
Platform of Discipline, chap. 15. Sect. 4. Their words are these. The Members
of one Church occasionally coming unto another, we willingly admit them to
partake of the Lords Table, it being the Seal of our Communion, not only with
Christ, nor only with Members of our own Church, but also with all the Churches
of the Saints; in which regard we refuse not to Baptize their Children
presented to us, if either their own Minister be Absent, or such a fruit of
Holy Fellowship be desired with us. In like case such Churches as are furnished
with more Ministers than one, do willingly afford one of their own Ministers to
supply the place of an absent or sick Minister of another Church for a needful
Season. That Platform of Church Discipline was in a peculiar manner the
Composure of the Reverend Mr. Richard Mather, the Famous Teacher of the Church
at Dorchester in New England. That he was for the Affirmative in the Question
before us is manifest from what yet remains, and is to be seen written with his
own Hand. The Renowned Mr. Thomas Hooker of Hartford in New England, desired
that some of the Ministers in the Massachusetts Bay (and particularly Mr.
Mather) would communicate to him their Apprehensions concerning this Position:
viz. The Entreaty of one Congregation does not give an Officer of another
Congregation Power of Office to Administer Seals to their Assembly. Mr. Mathers
Answer in a Letter Dated, Nov. 6. 1645. was in the following words. 1. It seems
an Officer of a Church may lawfully Dispense Seals in another Church at their
Entreaty and Request. The Reason is because there is a Communion between
Churches, as Sisters; by virtue of which they are to take care, and do for one
another, as each ones occasion and necessity may require. Cant. 8.8. We have a
Little Sister, and she has no Breasts: what shall we do for her? Now if
Churches must do Offices of Love and Helpfulness to one another, as each ones
Occasions shall need, they must also afford their Help in this particular, of
Lending their Officers to Minister the Seals in their Assemblies. This
particular will follow from the General aforementioned, unless there be some
particular Command from God prohibiting the same.

2. By this Communion of Churches it is lawful for a Pastor, upon the Request
of a Member of another Church, to Administer the Seals to that Member being
present when the Pastor is Administering to his own Church. And if this be
lawful, why not the other also? If Christians may hold Communion one with
another in the Works and Duties of each others Members Receiving the
Sacraments; why not also in the Works and Duties of each others Ministers
Dispensing the same? For as the Minister stands in special Relation to his own
Church, as a Minister, so a Member stands in special Relation to his own Church
as a Member. If therefore the Member may be received into Communion in another
Church for a time, or for one Act, as a Member, and yet his Memberly Relation
to his own Church not be violated thereby; it seems as rational also, that a
Minister of one Church may in like sort be received into Communion in another
Church for a time, or for one Act as a Minister, and yet his Ministerial or
Pastoral Relation to his own Church not be violated thereby; for it is hard to
conceive how such an act of the Minister should be prejudicial to his Relation
to his own Church, as a Minister, any more than the Act of the Member be
prejudicial to his Relation, as a Member. Besides, in the one case, a Minister
does what he does only at the Request of one Member, but in other there is the
Request of the whole Church. And if the one may be done by the Request of one
which is the less; why not the other, at the Request of the whole Church, and
which is greater?

If it be said, in the one Case a Ministers own Church is present, but not in
the other.

The Answer is;

1. That the Members Church had as much need to be present, when the Member
does the Duty of a Member in Receiving the Seals, as the Ministers Church, be
present, when he does the Ministers Duty in Dispensing the same.

If therefore a Member may do an Act and Work of a Member in the absence of the
Church, whereto he belongs; why may not the Minister also do an Act and Work of
his Office, as a Minister in the absence of that Church, whereto he most
peculiarly is a Minister? I do not yet perceive how the presence of the
Ministers Church is requisite in the one case, any more than the presence of
the Church in the other.

2. I want a good Reason for this, that this Act of the Minister to Members of
another Church should be lawful in his own Churches presence, and unlawful in
their absence. If consent be requisite, that may be had, though they be not
corporally present at all. But if the thing be unlawful in his Churches absence
it is not (for ought I know) his Churches presence that will warrant or excuse
him therein; no though his Church were all present, and though the Act he now
does to others, be to no more but only to one Member of another Church. Thus
Mr. Mather in his Letter to Mr. Hooker.

Mr. Norton who was many Years an Eminent Teacher of the Church in Ipswich, and
after that at Boston, his Answer to Apollonius is by Hornbeck and Others,
Esteemed the most Learned Book that has been Published in defense of
Congregational Principles. Now in that Book (Page 80. 81, 82.) he affirms, that
though a Pastor cannot Authoritatively perform the Ministerial Acts of his Office
in another Church, as he may in his own, nevertheless that Charitatively he may
do it, Provided that the Exercise thereof be duly qualified, that is to say,
that the Church where he does Minister shall request him to perform Ministerial
Acts among them, and that the Church be necessitated to that request which is
the case (says he) of an Inorganick Church with respect to the Administering of
Sacraments* The exercise of Ministerial Power thus qualifyed is no way
repugnant to the Liberty or Summity of a particular Church.

Mr. Thomas Shepard, the first Pastor of the Church at Cambridge in New
England, and Mr. John Allyn, Pastor of the Church at Dedham, in their defense
of the Nine Positions (Printed in the Year 1648) in answer to Mr. Ball
acknowledge that though a Minister has not such power in another Church, as he
has over them, that are his proper Flock* nevertheless that he may
charitatively put forth an Act of his Office to those in another Church of whom
he is no Officer. Page 132. 133. and again 134. in Answer to that Question
Whether a Minister may Administer the Seals in another Congregation? Their
words are; We will not deny but that occasionally being called thereunto by the
desire of the Church, he may Lawfully do the same. This was the Judgment of Mr.
Shepard of Cambridge and Mr. Allyn of Dedham, both of them famous in
New England.

Dr. Tho. Goodwin has truly stated and asserted the Congregational way, as it
differs from Presbyterianism and Brownism. Now that that great Divine was for
the Affirmative in the Question under Controversy, is well known, and in a
Letter of his to a Minister at Boston in New England, Dated March 25th. 1679.
(which was not long before he was Translated to Glory) His words are these; A
Church beginning to become a Church may have Liberty while without Elders to
receive in or cast out, as occasion is, yet I do advise that they should hasten
to Choose Elders to those Ends, or if they do not, that they may take the
Elders of another Church, whom they confide in, and Electively Choose for that
purpose, they may make use of them, he or they having Power conferred on them
for that Act by the Brethren. This being my private Opinion that an Elder, one
set apart for that Office in any Church is truly a Minister occasionally to
Exercise Ministerial Acts, as he is called thereunto; and this though it seems
to warrant a constant Presbytery over other Churches, yet is clear a different
thing; for such a Presbytery is of a settled ordinary course, and will
challenge the Power; not so here in this Case, it being Elective, and the power
of choosing whom and where arbitrarily remaining in the Church as they shall
judge Ita sentio, ita sensi: and so I have practiced in ordaining those worthy
Ministers, Mr. George Griffith, and Mr. Lee to their Churches, being by them
called thereunto; and thus our Elders do practice to this day. Every true
Minister actually such to his own Church is medium applicabile a Means and
Instrument that may apply to any Ministerial Act out of his own Church in any
other Church if he be called thereunto by them. Thus Dr. Goodwin, a man never
to be mentioned without Respect and Honor. By these things we see what has
been the Judgment of the most Eminent Ministers of Christ amongst those that
are called Congregational men. What the Sentiments of those named Presbyterians
have been, is needless to mention. Blessed be the Lord Jesus Christ, in that
there is cause to hope that those Names of distinction are now at an end; since
at London, and through out England they are become United Brethren.

To conclude, I doubt not but that when a Sister Church has no Teaching
Officer, and consequently no instituted Ordinances in a stated way administered
amongst them, for them to request their Neighbors to dispense the Seals to
them, provided this shall not retard their Settlement under a Pastor of their
own, will be more pleasing to God, than for them to live from year to year like
Pagans without any Sacraments, and perhaps multitudes of their Children not to
be Marked for the Lambs of Christ; and that Churches (Pastors and Brethren) in
a Vicinity may and should in this way manifest their Brotherly kindness and
communion. Canticles 8.8.

FINIS.

