New England VINDICATED, From the Unjust Aspersions cast on the former
Government there, by some late CONSIDERATIONS, Pretending to Show, That the
Charters in those Colonies were Taken from them on Account of their Destroying
the Manufactures and Navigation of England.
WE shall pretermit what the Considerators have in their Scandalous Libel
related concerning other Plantations, and only take notice of what concerns
New England. And in the first place they affirm,

That hundreds of Ships have been Employed to transport thence Tobacco, Sugars,
Wool and other Materials for Manufactures, into France, Holland; and to import
thence into New England, Linen, Woollen and all other Manufactures.

This at first View will appear a great Untruth to all that know New England;
for that Country can hardly expend the Goods that are yearly Exported from
hence thither, the Number of the People considered; nor have they any other way
to vend so great a quantity of Goods as such a Number of Ships must necessarily
Import: Nor have they Commodities to Export fit for those parts, nor could they
(all things considered) purchase Goods thence on so easy terms as they may
have them from England. And they have made a Law against Exporting of Wool,
not having a twentieth part of what is necessary for their own Use. The most of
their Shipping is employed in transporting Lumber, Horses and Provisions to
Jamaica, Barbados, and the Caribbee Islands, without which those Islands cannot
well subsist: And many Vessels are built there upon Account of Merchants in
London, sent home, and by them often sold or employed here: And to prevent
Illegal practices, they made in the Year 1663. a Law, That the Act of
Navigation should be strictly observed; and their Governors have been careful
to see it Executed, and are yearly Sworn so to do; nor can it be proved, that
the least Breach of it was ever allowed by the Government, which is not to be
blamed for the private Transgressions of some few particular persons.

As for what the Considerators report, concerning the Manner of Vacating the
Charter of the Massachusetts Colony, the Matter is by them fallaciously
represented. When a Quo Warranto was in the Year 1683. issued out against them,
with the Notification thereof: By the then Kings Order were sent over one
hundred Copies of the proceedings against the Charter of London, and two
hundred Copies of a Declaration, to be dispersed among the People in
New England, discharging the Inhabitants from all Rates and Contributions
toward the Expense of the said Suit, and enjoining those particular Persons
mentioned in the Quo Warranto, to make their Defense at their own particular
Charge, without any help by a public Stock.

Nevertheless the Governor and Company appointed an Attorney to Answer to the
Quo Warranto in the Court of Kings Bench; where it was let fall, and a new Suit
Began by Scire Facias in Court of Chancery, and Judgment entered against them
for Default in not Appearing: Whereas, considering the Remoteness of
New England from Westminster, it was impossible for them to Appear in the time
allowed, and so by a Surprise their Charter was taken from them.

As to what is objected about Coining, many Goldsmiths in London can testify,
that the Money coined in New England is as good as that of England, and not of
a baser Allay, (as is suggested.) It was formerly customary for private Persons
in England to Coin Farthings for their own Use, and the Coining in Massachusetts
Colony was little more than that, and with Design to prevent the great Injuries
Merchants and others sustained by base Spanish Money: And the Mint was set up
in 1652. when there was no King in England, but the Government out of Course;
and when the ancient Government of England was resettled, and the Kings mind to
the contrary signified to them, they resolved to comply therewith, though many
ways disadvantageous to themselves. Was not the Value of Coin altered in
Pensilvania? Did not the Lord Baltimore in Maryland, Coin Money with his own
Image on one side, and his Coat of Arms on the other? Did not the East India
Company? But when they understood there Error, they petitioned the King for
liberty of Coynage, and pardon of what was past, and it was granted them? Why
then should New England be esteemed more criminal than other Plantations?

The Considerators go on, and complain, That in New England they have Imposed
Taxes upon Shipping and the Manufactures of England coming into those parts.
There has been none Imposed on Shipping but Powder-Money, and not half so much
as is done in the other Plantations, nor any upon the Manufactures of England
particularly, but only one penny upon Twenty shillings Value of all
Merchandises whatsoever, as on all other Estates in the Country; and since
Charters were taken from them, the same and more has been levied by the
present Governor, besides six times the Fees upon Shipping more than was paid
formerly: All which has been done by him without any consent of the People, or
their Representatives, which the former Government never practiced.

Whereas it is maliciously insinuated, That the Massachusetts have Imposed an
Oath of Fidelity to their Commonwealth, we shall only in Answer Insert the
Copy of the Oath, as it is in their printed Law-book.

The OATH.
WHereas I [A. B.] am an Inhabitant within this Jurisdiction, considering how I
stand Obliged to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, by our Charter
and the Government Established thereby: Do Swear accordingly by the great and
dreadful Name of the Ever-living God, that I will bear Faith and true
Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors; and that I
will be True and Faithful to this Government, and accordingly yield Assistance
thereunto, with my Person and Estate, as in Equity I am bound.

And will also truly endeavor to Maintain and Preserve all the Liberties and
Privileges thereof, Submitting my self unto the wholesome Laws made and
established by the same.

And farther, That I will not Plot or Practice any evil against it, or consent
to any that shall so do; but will timely discover and reveal the same to Lawful
Authority now here Established, for the speedy preventing thereof. So help me
God in our Lord Jesus Christ.

Nor know we that they have (as is asserted) Encroached upon their Neighboring
Colonies in a hostile manner, except it be meant of their Assisting with
Volunteers when King Charles the Second sent to take Monhatas, now called
New York; or of their Concurrence in taking from the French, S. John's,
Penobscot, Port Royal, which were put into the hands of those that were then in
Power in England.

Nor have they (as is alleged) Affronted the Commissioners of King Charles the
Second; whose Commission (as to the legal part of it, not by them duly
observed) was in some particulars Illegal and Arbitrary, and Empowred them to
Hear and determine all Causes (not by Law, but) according to their sound
Discretion; which could not be submitted to by the Massachusetts, without giving
up at once their Charter and Privileges.

Neither have they made Laws against all Opinions in Religion, excepting those
of the Congregational Churches, and more especially against the Church of
England. It must be acknowledged, that there have been some severe and
unjustifiable Laws there, in matters (...) long since sensible; yet what is
here affirmed, is untrue; for Presbyterians have equal Encouragement with those
of the Congregational persuasion: Nor are there any Laws against the Church of
England, as is falsely and maliciously pretended. Let them prove if they can,
that any number of Men inclined to worship God, in the way of the Church of
England, were denied by the Government in New England liberty so to do. The
Magistrates there have often professed, that they would not hinder any that
were so principled from practicing what they did most approve of.

As for their Treating ill the Captains of the Kings Ships for desiring
Permission to recruit themselves with Men and Victuals; and as to entertaining
of Pirates: These things are like the former. If any Commanders of Ships have
behaved themselves Insolently, and violated the Laws of God and the Land, it
became the Government to testify against them; but malice it self cannot deny,
that the People of New England have been extremely Civil to Strangers, and
especially to such as the King has put any mark of Honor upon; and they have
sometimes relieved, and that Gratis, the Kings Ships distressed through want of
Provision: And if any Pirates have been entertained, it has been because they
were not known to be such; for they made a particular Law against Piracy,
agreeable to the Law of England, on account whereof some have been there
Executed.

The Considerators tell us, that the People of New England are free from all
Taxes, and Contribute nothing to the Crown, nor their own Protection or
Support: Whereas they are no more free than other Plantations, for they pay
Customs in the Plantations for the Goods they fetch thence into New England;
and when those Goods are brought into England, they pay the same a second time;
so that they Contribute not a little to the Crown. Before the change of their
Government, they never did put the Crown to a penny Charge for their Protection
or Support: but since that, have been very chargeable, and less beneficial to
the Crown.

It is strange, that the Considerators should have the Impudence to publish to
the World, That the People of New England in General, are better satisfied with
the present Government there, and do not (...) among whom there is not one
known Papist, excepting some now in Government there.

All the Charters of New England, one only excepted, are still in force; there
having been no Judgment against them, nor Surrender of them made or Recorded;
and by their Charters they have Power to choose their own Governors and
Magistrates, as much as any Towns Corporate, or Cities here in England, have
Power to choose their own Mayor and Aldermen. Besides, must those Colonies in
New England, be the only ones excepted from Indemnity, and all other
Corporations supposed to have been without fault? And must they alone remain
sorrowful for the loss of what is so valuable to them? who at their own vast
Charges, and great Hazards subdued a Wilderness, and with the loss of many
hundreds of their Lives, have maintained and defended it, to the enlargment of
the Kings Dominions; hoping, as in Reason they might, that their Posterity
should enjoy the benefit thereof? So that to deprive them of their Charters, is
to deal more hardly, than to do the like with any Bodies Politic in England.

As to the other Pamphlet newly come forth, called, An Abstract of Laws in
New England, not agreeable with the Laws of England: The first Law they take
notice of, is a Fiction of their own, the rest were most of them long since
repealed; yea, all that were inconvenient, or esteemed repugnant to the Laws of
England; and the Considerators (whom we must needs suppose to be the Authors of
the Abstract) if ever they read the New England Laws, could not be ignorant
that the Word Commonwealth, so much complained of, was repealed and
obliterated, and the Word Jurisdiction inserted instead of it.

As for the Remarks which they make thereon, they are nothing else but the
Ebullitions of a spiteful Spirit, and so notoriously false, as that we think it
not worth the while to recite, much less to refute them.

FINIS.

