Fax Nova Artis Scribendi: OR, AN INTRODUCTION (By way of DIALOGUE) To the best
FORMS and PROPORTIONS of all LETTERS, in each Hand most useful; and excellent
for all business both in Clerkship and Trade.

To which is added, RULES for SPELLING and POINTING.

AS ALSO, A TABLE of Abbreviations, so large that it will facilitate both the
Writing and Reading of any business at Common or Civil Law. Together, with some
Directions which may be beneficial for a CLERK in the progress of his whole
Clerkship.

-- Peragunt Linguae Charta manusque vices. By JOHN MATLOCK, of the City of
Lichfield, Philographer.

LONDON, Printed by John Leake, for the Author; and are to be sold by Luke
Meredith, at the King's Head, at the West End of St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXXV.

THE PREFACE.
THE devising and finding out of Letters has ever, by the Sage and Prudent of
all Ages, been adjudged as one of the rarest, and most heavenly Inventions of
all that are in use in Humane Society, both in respect of its excellency in
contrivance, and also for the extensiveness of its benefits. For the excellency
of its contrivance; it is almost a Miracle, that a Mean could be invented,
whereby Words and Sounds, which naturally be the Objects of the Ear, should be
made the Objects of the Eye. This is indeed a most admirable Invention, that
Sounds and Voices should by the power of certain Characters (as it were by
charms) be stolen away, from their own proper sense, and conveyed into another
by Leger-du-main, and so made an object of the fame. This, I say, is a very
wonder, and among all the Senses not to be found in any other: No Invention
ever yet could make the object of Seeing the object of Hearing; nor the object
of Hearing the object of Smelling; nor the object of Smelling the object of
Feeling: only the object of Hearing, by this Invention of Letters, is made (in
some sort) the object of Seeing. And as it is excellent for its Contrivance, so
it is no less for its Benefit: For by Writing we have the comfort of God's Holy
Word continued to us; which from Writing receives its denomination, in being
called Scripture; which is nothing else but Writing: By this we have the
Monuments of Ancient Times communicated unto us, and all good Arts and Learning
derived unto Mankind. By Writing, we may give direction for our Foreign
business, though we stay at home; and for our Domestic, though we be abroad.
By Writing, we may confer with our absent Friend as freely as with a present
Neighbor; communicating all our counsels as secretly and closely, as if we
should whisper in one another Ears, though we be divided many Miles asunder:
By this, we are furnished with invincible Arguments, to fight against the
Factious and Seditious Enemies of Church and State; these, and infinite like
Blessings are conveyed unto Men, by the benefit of Writing. The only motive
that encouraged me to this trouble, was, my being wearied through a long travel
after exact Writing, in those many ways chalked out by Penmen both Ancient and
Modern; which being many, cannot all be excellent; for Perfection is single,
and cannot consist in plurality of ways, to one and the same end. This ^ngle,
and best way, both in respect of the form of Characters, and also in the manner
of making them, ^as never yet been demonstrated, either by Rules, (...)
Examples. The best Rules to Handwriting have ^een published by Mr. Cocker, and
these are many, and very excellent. But their full extent is too ^ort, to
regulate the Errors that may happen in ^^y one Character: He having given by
them, no ^mpleat proportion of any Letter: And its impos^^le to have a right
understanding of the proportion (...) any Superficies, without a true knowledge
of ^^e length and breadth of each part thereof: And ^ere can be no Extreme,
where there are no Rules ^^r a Mean. Now if Mr. Cocker, or any other Mo^rn
Penmen, have published such Rules as will cor^ct the Extremes, that may be
committed in the ^riting of any Hand, I shall willingly submit that ^ese my
Papers be Burnt, and my self pointed at. and that it is absolutely necessary,
to have a true knowdge of the due, and just proportions of Letters, ^order to
the attaining of an excellency in Wri^^^g, I judge, I need not go about to
prove: ^^ker, and the best of Penmen, having acknow^ge it. Therefore, I hope,
the following Tract, ^ll be entertained with a kind acceptance: where^is
chalked out a way single, short, and easy, to (...) best way of Writing, in
laying down Three undeniable Principles; and from thence branching o^ such
Rules as will prove and regulate every pa^^ and particle of all Letters, in
each useful Hand which may serve as an Ax to cut off the unnecessar^ young
Suckers, and also the old withered Branche. By which husbandry, I doubt not,
but that Hand Writing will thrive to a greater perfection. And (kind Reader) it
was not the desire of being see in the Press, that moved me to this public
Work but my Favor, and kindness to the Art and Artist who have been not a
little abused by Engrave^ (for so I call them, rather than Penmen) who ha^ made
it their business to burden this Kingdom wi^^ almost an innumerable number of
Copy-Books (some of them being as useless and ridiculous (...) Dr. Donn's
Sun-Dyal in a Grave) which ha^^ made such a confusion, that its difficult to
distingui^^ between good and bad; They being like Moc^ guides, that point to a
Traveller twenty ways once, never constant, but ever changing. Now wish, that
you may take as great delight in the p^^ctice of these things herein contained,
as I to^^ pains in the Composing of them; so shall the bour be well bestowed by,

Your Friend, JOHN MATLOC

TO MY HONORED FRIENDS, THE BROTHERS OF THE QUILL.
THE Devil Calumny (says the Learned Erasmus) does so rage against all Men,
and all Things, in these Days, that it is not safe setting out any thing
unguarded. If Integrity of the End may plead for my Vn^rtaking, I may presume
you will not deny it Patronage: Its ^ief Defign being to free both the Art, and
You the Artists, ^om the erroneous Judgment of Irregular Phancies; and to taken
the lazy Drowsiness of Others, that are loath to be row^d out of Phancy's
pleasing Dream: There being a sort of ^elancholy, and drowsy Scribes, that can
fancy nothing but ^entaurs, and Minotaurs; and the best of Characters by these
^hancy-Mongers, are condemned as Flat and Stiff, if they are not set off by
some of their monstrous Fictions. But let the^ delight to guild their baser
Metal, whilst Gold shines in i^ Native Luster. Writing is, by the Learned,
acknowledged for an Art, though, I think, it was never yet proved; and by some
(who are reckoned for Masters of Writing) only for a Fancy: judge, these last
can never be thought, by well-grounded Artists Masters of that Art they deny
the Method of; and especially, (...) the following Lines be well considered:
Wherein is first proved That Writing is an Art; and then showed, how far Fancy
(...) to be considered therein. The First, That Writing is an Art I prove thus:
The Practice of a certain Method, that is a^ Art. But Writing is the Practice of
a certain Method; Ergo^ Writing is an Art. Of the Major, or First Proposition,
Anstotle, in his Sixth Book of Ethics, calls that an Art, which is the
Practice of a certain Method. And Velcurio, in his Comme^tary upon the
Universal Philosophy of Aristotle, Lib. I. cap 9. thus defines Art: Ars est
habitus animi intellectu a^ quisitus, constans ex certis Regulis, per
Experientiam pr^batis, and exercitationem Cognitis. And for the Minor, (...)
Assumption, it is clear, the several Forms of Characters, b^ing only legible,
and distinctly known by their certain Use an^ Form. Also, observe, that every
thing is performed by A^^ Natural Power, or Habit. First, By Art, when the
Acti^ prosecutes a certain Method. Secondly, By Natural Pow^ when it is
performed merely by the Instinct of Nature. Si^ Luscinia secundum Naturalem
potentiam non secundum A^tem, tamen optime canit. Thirdly, By Habit, when it
only by Custom and Exercise. Sic mediocriter periti numrant, loquuntur sine
Art adjuti Exercitatione. No M^ can be Master either of Natural Power, or of
Habit: Not Natural Power, for that is the Gift of God alone, as Ovid: Est Deus
in nobis: agitante callescunus illo
Sedibus Aethereis Spiritus ille venit.
Not of Habit different from Art; for every Habit consists either in the Mind,
or in some Member of the Body: And what is performed by Art, is according to
the Intellective Habit of the Mind; as Velcurio: Artis vocabulo utimur pro
habitu animi intellectivo, secundum quem, homo facilius and melius potest
aliquid intelligere, agere, and praesertim facere, vel fabricari. And the
Members of the Body are incapable of Instruction. Quod nemo didicit nemo docere
potest. Now then, it must follow; No Art, no Writing; No Method, no Master.
And, Arts being different, it will not be amiss to give you the Definition of
the Art of Writing.

Writing is an Art, which, by the Exercise of the Pen, makes Words legible.
Now, every Art consists of Two Parts, (viz.) of Method, and Practice: 1. Of
Method, in a compendious, and certain way and means of Art, delivered by Rules,
Precepts, and Institutions. 2. Of Practice, in an Exercise and Use of the same.
The next to be considered, is Fancy; wherein you may observe, That there is
nothing in the Understanding, except it be first in the Sense: for as common
Sense judges of Shape, from the outward, sensible, material Shape; and Fancy
not only conceives the same material Shape, but also feigns and imagines like
Idols, or such Shapes of the Intentions. So the Understanding receives the
perceived Shapes, or devised by Similitude, from Fancy altogether immaterial;
and feigns and judges them more significantly and clearly, whether or no they
be Good or Bad. As every Letter or Character is first conceived in the Sense,
and feigned and imagined, before it ^e made by the Pen; so the Understanding
judges of the Character, when it is made into an outward material Shape: So
that, from hence may be observed, That Understanding is the Judge of Fancy;
and then, consequently, Fancy cannot be Judge of Writing. Fancy has one more
Office considerable ^n the Art of Writing; which is, more deeply to impress
upon it self the Shapes offered from common Sense, in the Absence of the
Object: as after the viewing of an excellent Letter, a deep Impression of its
Form remains upon the Fancy, in Absence of the Copy.

Now, these Premises being granted, and my self being the First, who not only
has proved Writing to be an Art, (and so, consequently, to consist of Method
and Practice) but have also prescribed such a Method, as will regulate every
Character of each useful Hand: I am not afraid to challenge my Priority, nor to
conclude with my Anagram;

Calamus est mihi honos.
Fax Nova Artis Scribendi. IN A DIALOGUE Between the Master and Scholar:
Teaching the ART and USE OF WRITING.
Scholar, SIR, my Address to you is, to desire your assistance, in Teaching me
to Write.


Master, I am ready to assist you, or any other person, who desires my
Directions, to the utmost of my ability.


Sc. I shall think my self obliged in an infinite Gratitude, and will pay you
to your content.


Mr. It very much rejoices me to have the good fortune to meet with a Scholar
that promises so well; and I doubt not, but that your love to the Art will
appear in your diligence to acquire it. The truth is, for a Man to Write well,
it is very necessary to be in good Humor; of a serene and cheerful Spirit, and
not overcast with clouds of Melancholy; Fancy being no less eclipsed with the
unquietness of mind, than Beauty with the indisposition of the body. What
employment are you intended for? I ask you, because I would make choice of such
proper Hand, or Hands, as may be most requisite.


Sc. I am uncertain of that yet; therefore I desire to learn all useful Hands,
that thereby I may be fitted for any business.


Mr. Now I know your design, I shall proceed with you in such a Method as will,
doubtless, lead you to your desires. And that you may the better understand
what you are to Learn, and I to Teach, you are to observe, That Writing is an
Art consisting of two parts; Method, and Practice: and as Method without
Practice avails nothing, so Practice without Method avails as little;
therefore, I shall in the first place instruct your Hand with such precepts as
may give you the true knowledge of your desires: that thereby you may
understand how to guide your Hand. And then, and not till then, I think it
convenient to let you imitate, or Write by a Copy. For to begin to Write after
a Copy before you know how to manage both your Hand and Pen, your success is
like to be equal with that of the Pilot at Sea, who is furnished with
Instruments fit for his Navigation, but is altogether ignorant as to their use;
and you cannot but judge, but that a Voyage under the Conduct of such a Pilot
is very hazzardous. Therefore, in the first place, learn how to Sit to Write,
and Hold your Pen. Sit so high that you may with ease place your Elbow close to
your Body, and your Hand straight from you, so that you may, without daubing,
give every stroke naturally its perfect full and small: Then observe to sit
upright, and not writheing your Body, but straight, bearing your Breast from
your Desk, or Table whereon you Write. Then hold your Pen between your two
Fore-fingers and Thumb; your Fingers being almost extended to their full
length, and your Thumb-joint bent outward; your other two Fingers bent inward,
and upon the end thereof rest, and move your Hand; your Pen also being rested
upon the end of your Second Finger close to the Nail thereof. Your Pen and Hand
being thus held, you may make any stroke of a reasonable length, without moving
your Hand either upwards or downwards, only by the motion of your two
Fore-Fingers and Thumb: for if your Thumb be bent outward in the joint, you may
extend your Pen upwards and downwards, at least an inch, to the making of any
stroke without moving your Hand. So that you need move your whole Hand no way
but straight forward, toward the end of the Line. These Rules being observed,
you will also soon learn to Write straight.


Sc. An Acquaintance of mine holds his Pen between his Fore-f^inger and Thumb
only, and prefers that way before all others.


Mr. That way of holding the Pen was Used and Taught by Frisius, a French
Master, who only wrote Italian Hands ^o. And I judge this way of holding the
Pen in Writing those Hands best, by reason that way of Writing is the ^ightest,
and with the least obstruction; but in the wri^ing of our English Hands it is
not so; they requiring a heaier ^oize of Hand, which is not so well performed
by one Fin^er and Thumb.


Sc. I will submit unto your judgment, and will endeavor ^losely to treasure
up all your directions.


Mr. Let this also be for your Encouragement, that the Principles of this Art
do not dernand an endless Labor; but are contained in a few easy Documents of
meet Proportions, which will present unto you an open and ready Access unto the
most inward Secrets of the Art.


Sc. These Words much encourage me; for I have much doubted the Attainment of
the Art of Writing, upon the account of the great Number of Copy-Books extant
by Mr. Coeker and Others.


Mr. Many lively Spirits have been overwhelmed in the misleading Labyrinth of
the confused Examples of Mr. Cocker, and other Modern Penmen; who have invented
or altered a vast number of Hands, very useless and insignificant; which will
appear by the ensuing Discourse: And by their Rules, no Man can judge which is
best of their Works, their Rules not reaching the Proof of any one Hand; they
altogether neglecting the chiefest, and most excellent Principles, viz.
Firmness, and Expedition; and having only a general Respect to Beauty.


Sc. I have heard much in the Commendation of Mr. Cocker's Works; and in One he
writes himself, ENGLAND's PENMAN.


Mr. I have had as great an Esteem for the Works of Mr. Cocker, as for the
Works of any Engraver: And I judge, that he might have, in his Time, as great
Skill in the Art of Writing, as any other Person whatever. But I also judge,
that if his Rules had been more copious and certain, and his Examples fewer, he
might have given a Greater Light than he did, into the Knowledge of Writing.
You will, I imagine, be more discerning to judge of Mr. Cocker's Works, and
Others, before You and I part, if you well weigh the following Discourse.


Sc. I am incapable of Judging, as yet; what I may be, I know not: But this I
know, that there is but one Best; and, if so, I may be sure, that there must be
a great de^^ of Rubbish amongst so much Variety.


Mr. In this you err, saying, That there is but one Best Hand; for as there is
variety of Business, some requiring a shorter, and others a longer Continuance;
so it is absolutely necessary, that there be Hands also of a greater, and
lesser Firmness. And likewise, it being judged convenient, that the several
Courts, ( viz.) the Courts of King's- Bench, Common Pleas, and Chancery, should
use distinct Characters for their Records: So that, from hence you cannot but
conclude, as it is absolutely requisite to have several sorts of Hands for
several Uses; so there may be a Best of each sort.


Sc. I am very well satisfied with what you have said: But pray then ( Sir)
inform me, how many Hands are requisite for me to Learn, to quallifie me for
the best Writing of any sort of Business?


Mr. There are but Five Best in use for a Man, and One for a Woman.


Sc. But Five! If this be so, surely Mr. Cocker, and Others, have taken great
Pains to small Purpose, to publish so ^any.


Mr. That you may be the better satisfied of this, I will ^cquaint you with the
Use of Writing in general; and then ^ive you the Use of each particular Hand.
Of the Frist:

Writing is the Recording in legible Characters, any Pro^eedings at Law,
Evidences of Land, Book-Entries, and ^pistles. All the Records of Courts, and
Evidences of Land, ^ight to be wrote in a Firm and Substantial Hand; so that
^ey may remain Legible for ever: for what is of a perpetual ^oncern, requires a
perpetual Duration. Book-Entries, as ^op-Books, and the like, being of less
Duration, they ^ight to be wrote in a Hand of a lesser Substance. And, (...)
for Letters, they requiring no longer Duration almost ^an their Reading, they
cannot be written too small or faint, Legible.

And now I have given you the Use of Writing i^ general; together, with the
Reasons of Firmness, or Faintness of Hands, according to my promised
Prosecution; it remains, that I give you the Use of each Hand in Particular: In
order to which, I will inform you what Hands are used for the Engrossing of all
Records; which are Court, Chancery, Set, and Text. All the Proceedings both in
the King's- Bench, and Common Pleas, are, or ought to be, Recorded in
Court-Hand, either Great or Small. And, as this Hand is of great Antiquity,
without almost any Alteration; so it is most excellently designed for its Use:
For no Hand is gracefully wrote so close; therefore its the more fit for Writs,
and such close Ingrossments: nor no Hand more Firm, and Substantial. The whole
Substance of each Character requiring the flat Application of the Pen, for the
Performance; therefore the more durable; and so, consequently, the more
Excellent for Records.

The next Hand that takes place, is Chancery; which is, I think, of no less
Antiquity than the Former: And for its Firmness, for the same Reason alleged
in the Court, is as Excellent. But it is not written gracefully, so close as
the Court. This Hand is called Chancery, by reason tha^ all Chancery
Proceedings are, or ought to be, written in it; no Court, besides it, using the
same Character.

Now the Set-Hand is thought fittest, and best for Engrossing all Evidences of
Lands, as Bargains, and Sales, Feosments, Joyntures, Leases, Wills, and all
other Deeds, where by any Lands are conveyed; it being also a very Substantial
Hand; and being used so frequently, is thereby becom^ Legible to all that can
read any Manuscript.

Text-Hand is most properly used for Ornament, and for Marks; whereby any Part
of a Deed may be discovered b^ a sudden Inspection; and, if well written,
answers its en^ as for its Beauty, exceeding well; no Hand admitting (...) more
Beautiful Proportions: And, for its other End, it is ^^ry Excellent, its
Character being far larger than the rest of the Writing. It points out the
Premises, Habendum, Tenendum, and each particular Covenant; so that, if you
have a long Deed before you, you may look to any Part you desire, without
reading any more than the Part looked for.

And now I have done with the Four Hands, used for Ingrossments: It remains yet
to speak of Hands fittest, and best for Book-Entries.

Hands, said I? There you might oppose me, and answer, That there is but one
Best: For two Superlatives, cannot accord with several Operations to one
Effect. And seeing there cannot be but one best for this Business, I will
inform you, from Three undeniable Principles of this Art, what sort of Hand is
Best.

That Hand is Best, that is as Firm as the Duration thereof requires; and also
is the most Expeditious, and Beautiful. These Three Principles are the only
Touchstone, to try all Hands.

So that, if you be to judge of a Piece of Writing; first, Observe whether it
be written so Firm, that it may endure so long as the Business therein written
requires. Then observe the Expeditiousness of the Hand: And then the Neatness,
or Beauty thereof. And let your Judgment ever pass for that Hand, that comes
the nearest these Three Principles.


Sc. You have, I thank you, enlightened my Judgment very much, in these Three
Principles, or Fundamentals. But it will be a very difficult, and tedious
Search, to find out the best Hand for the Use last beforementioned, if I were
to search it out amongst the almost innumerable Engraven Hands extant:
Therefore, pray be so kind, as to let me know the Name of the Hand?


Mr. If I should tell you Secretary, you would nevertheless be very much
puzzled to find out the Best for your Use; there being so great a number of
differing Hands, called by the name of Secretary. But if you were so great a
Critic, as to find amongst the Hands extant, whether it were Secretary, Mixed,
or Italian, or any other the very Best of all amongst them, for your use: yet,
let me tell you, That it will fall short of answering these Three Principles
beforementioned: For neither Mr. Cocker, nor any other Penman, either Ancient
or Modern, ever reduced Writing to any Certainty, either in respect of Firmness
or Expedition, before my self, (I think, I may truly say.) Therefore, for your
Satisfaction, I will show you a Hand of my own ordering, according to the Three
Principles aforementioned, for Book-Entries, or any other Business, excepting
Ingrossments; and I would advise you to make use of That, till you meet with a
Better. And now I have (I hope) sufficiently proved, That there are but Five
Hands Best, for the Writing of all sorts of Business.


Sc. I am very well satisfied; and I desire I may Write these Five Best, and I
care not who Writes the rest. But, Sir, seeing you have been so kind, as to
inform me with the Fundamentals, or Principles, pray let me also know, wherein
they consist?


Mr. I will insist upon them very plainly, and fully; for in them consists
the whole Marrow of Writing; they being the Basis, upon which the whole
Structure is built.

For the First, which is Firmness; I Answer, That Firmness consists in the
Fullness of Strokes: So that, that Hand is most Firm and Durable, whose
Characters are, in their several Differences, performed by the Full of the Pen.
And how Firm each Hand ought to be, I have already proved.

For the Second, which is Expedition; I say, That the lesser Compass the Pen
does move in performing any Letter, that it is the more Expeditious. And that
the taking off the Pen, in the making of any Letter, or in the joining of
Letters; and in the making of Letters that require an extraordinary Poize of
Hand; and also, the turning of the Pen from any Part of a Circle, to a straight
Line or Angle, or from a straight Line or Angle, to a Circle; makes the Hand
more slow: And the Reason of this last will plainly appear, if you do but
consider the great Contrariety that is between a straight Line, and a Circle;
or the great Opposition that every thing meets with, that is upon a swift
Circular Motion, in turning to a straight Line or Angle.

For the Third, which is Beauty; I Answer, That it is impossible to prescribe
satisfactory Rules for this Excellency, the Opinions and Phancies of Men being
so various, that there are scarce Two of one Judgment concerning it; one
deeming that Beauty, which another condemns for Deformity. Notwithstanding, I
will give you my Judgment herein, which will extend to every Part of Writing,
wherein Beauty may be considered.

Then First, I conclude, That every Letter ought to have its Natural Full and
Small; (I mean by Natural, such Strokes as are made at one Motion.)

Secondly, That every Letter in a Hand, stand alike.

Thirdly, That all the Letters without Stemms be of one height and depth, and
that all the Letters with Stemms be of one height and depth, provided the Form
of the Letters will admit of it.

Fourthly, That every Full bear one proportion of Fullness; and that every small
Stroke be as fine as is possible.

Fifthly, That all Letters, or Parts of Letters of one kind or name, do, in all
their Dimensions, remain the same.

Sixthly, That all the Letters, or parts of Letters within the Ground, and
upper-lines of those Hands that depend upon the Circle, and Perpendicular Line,
be of the same Breadth with their Height; and then all their Whites will be
alike: Which will much add to the Luster of an Hand.

Seventhly, That the White of the [o] be observed between Letter and Letter,
and the double thereof between Word and Word. These Three Principles being thus
considered, they give you a certain Method for the making of every Character.


Sc. Now (Sir) I thank you. I understand what it is that makes an Hand Firm,
Expeditious, and Beautiful. But, methinks, Firmness and Expedition are
inconsistent with each other: For you say, That the larger the Hand is, it is
the more slow. Therefore, Firmness and Expedition cannot accord.


Mr. I shall very easily Answer this Objection, if you will but consider,
first, the Use of the Hand; and if it be for Perpetuity, then the Character
must (as I have said before) be so Firm, that it may continue Legible for ever:
So that, in such like Hands, ( viz. Hands of Ingrossments) Firmness is the
chiefest Excellency. But notwithstanding, that Hand is Best, that is most
Expeditious, and Beautiful; and yet answers the end of Firmness. But my Rule
for Expedition, is; The lesser Compass the Pen does move, in performing any
Letter, it is the more Expeditious: But from thence you gather a false Notion.
For though you say true, in saying, The larger the Hand in Compass, the more
slow: Yet it does not follow, that Expedition does oppose Firmness. For the
Firmness of an Hand does not consist in the large Compass of the Hand; but in
Firmness of Stroke, as is before alleged.


Sc. I confess, I was under a Mistake; for which I crave your Pardon: and I
have received a great deal of Satisfaction from your Three Principles, together
with their Existences; and, I hope, I have a right Understanding of them. But
(Sir) Has the Scribe Liberty, by these Principles, to change or invent
Characters for Hands, as he pleases?


Mr. No: But he may alter any useful Hand, to make it accord with the said
Principles; provided his Alteration do not render the Hand more illegible. I
will now proceed to give you the Knowledge of the best way of Writing, and
according to the fore-recited Principles, in each particular Hand: And I think
it most convenient to begin with the English-Ingrossing-Hand, commonly called
Set-Secretary. And that I may not do and undo, I will (First) set down the
General Branches considerable in each Hand: Which springing from the said Three
Principles of this Art, and being followed perfectly, will reduce Hands to
their highest Excellencies.

The Rules founded upon these Three Principles, have Respect either to the
Proportion, or Forms of Letters. As for the Proportion of the several
Characters of this Hand, I have already proved, That they must be so Firm, as
that they may endure Legible for ever. But how Firm this Hand ought to be, that
it may thus endure, it remains yet to be considered: And that I may not give
you the Proportion too small, which would prejudice the End of its Use; nor too
full, which would render it the more slow; I have considered this, That Hand
which has endured Firm and Legible for several Centuries, will endure Legible
for ever. Now, how Large and Firm those Hands are that have thus continued, may
be seen both by Printed Authors, and Ancient Writings.


Sc. Sir, There are several sorts of Prints, and those of several Proportions.


Mr. The Smallest of any sort will endure for ever, if it be well Printed;
which does not only appear by the duration of Books extant in the smallest
Prints, published both for the Instruction of the present and future Ages: but
we may also see these Books thus Printed, an hundred Years or more after their
Publication, to remain Firm and Legible as they were the First Day of their
Printing.


Sc. There is a great Difference between that which is Printed, and that which
is Written.


Mr. As to the Manner there is; but as far as it concerns that which I here
argue for, there is no Difference; a Stroke of the Pen being altogether as
durable, as a Stroke from the Press; they bearing both one Fullness.


Sc. But that which is Printed seems more firm than that which is Written.


Mr. The Print is the blacker, because it admits of no Hair-strokes; but this
is Nihil ad rem, if you consider, First, That the Difference of Letters in this
Hand depends upon a full Stroke: Secondly, That their several Forms by which
they may be known, depends also upon a Full.


Sc. I observe from hence, That as all Letters are known by some Difference; so
that Difference must be made by the Full of the Pen, that the Difference may
remain.


Mr. It Is well observed. Now, if the smallest Print be judged of a sufficient
Firmness for perpetual Duration, sure an Hand as full again cannot be thought
too small. Now, that I may give you the right Proportion of every Letter in
this Hand, and of every thing that has relation thereunto; First, I will set
down in what particulars Proportion is to be considered in this Hand.

I. It has respect unto the Length and Breadth of every part of a Letter, both
Great and Small.

II. In the joining of these Letters, viz. In the distances between Letters and
Words.

III. In the Ruling, viz. The distance of Lines.

For the First, (viz.) The Proportion of Letters; You are to observe, That some
Letters are made with Stemms, and some without: Those without Stemms, are those
Letters that are wholly made within the Ground, and upper-line. And I chose the
rather to give you, first, the Proportion of these Letters within these Lines,
because those with Stemms take their Proportions from thence.

First then, Observe to make these said Letters One Fourth of the Third of an
Inch (or One Fourth of a Grain, which i^ all one) in Height; and the Breadth (
viz. The White and two-side Lines of each of these Letters) must be equal to
their Height: All the Letters of this Hand depending upon a Circle, and
Perpendicular Line.

Secondly, Observe, that the Length of each Stemm must be longer by one half,
than the other Letters within the Lines; excepting [q], whose Stemm must be
equal in Length to the Minnum Strokes; and [p], which must be but One Half of
the Minnum Strokes: and the Compass of each of these Stemms must be equal in
Compass with the other Letters within the Line; except [h] and [k], which must
be as wide again.

Thirdly, Observe, that the Fullness of each Stroke be equal to One Fourth of
the Wideness.

Fourthly, Observe, the White of the small Letters for your Distance, between
Letter and Letter, and the double thereof between Word and Word; except Two
Circular Letters come together in a Word; and then those Letters must be joined
closer by One Half.

Fifthly, Observe, that your Lines be ruled distant from each other, the space
of One Third of an Inch; which will prevent your Stemms from falling into each
other.

Sixthly, Observe, that you set all your Letters upright; this being the best
way for all English Hands. And by reason this Last thwarts the Opinion of Mr.
Cocker, I will inform you what were the Reasons, that induced me thus to
contradict him.

I have observed, That the Hand naturally and freely will tend only that way,
that it is most accustomed to; and that is the cause, that when any accustom
themselves to write Court, which ignorantly, of late, has been leaned toward
the Left Hand, they lean all the other Hands alike; which is no small Prejudice
to them: And therefore, upon good Reason, it is my Opinion, That all our
English Hands are ^est, when set upright; which will not, in the least, be to
their Prejudice, but very much to their Advantage.


Sc. Pray, (Sir) How do you judge the Sett-Hand was wrote before Mr. Cocker's
Time?


Mr. Before Mr. Cocker, our English Hands were all set upright, as it appears
by the Manuscripts of Mr. Davy's, written Anno Dom. 1590.


Sc. It Is strange, Men should be thus forward to vary, unless their Alterations
were for the bettering the Hand altered.


Mr. I judge, that the Alterations of Hands was intended for the bettering of
them; though, in many things, their Design miscarried: And it was impossible,
it should be otherwise; for they never prescribed to themselves any certain
Principles of Writing, (which would have reduced their Writings to a Certainty,
as Standards to examine their Writing by) but invented and altered every Hand,
according to their own roving Phancies. And what was newest among them, was
deemed Best; as appears by the Words of Mr. Cocker, in his ARTS GLORY.

And I wonder what Handwriting would have been reduced to, if others, who were
as capable of making Alterations as Mr. Cocker, had burdened this Kingdom with
as many Copy-Books as he has done? It is to be feared, we should then have been
confounded in our Artificial Tongues, as the Babel Builders were in their
Natural. Mr. Cocker's Alterations of Hands, I cannot compare to any thing more
pat, than School-Boy's turning of Verses, who only respect Variety.


Sc. I hope, it is now Time for me to begin to proceed to an Imitation of this
Hand, seeing you have been pleased to give me a full Understanding thereof.


Mr. You are too short in that, yet; for an Hand is a certain Number of
Letters, sufficient for the proper expressing of any Words or Sentences: Now,
no Sentence can properly be wrote without one or more Great Letters; therefore,
the Capital Letters are absolutely necessary to make a complete and proper
Hand. So that a Piece of Writing cannot be said properly to be a Hand; unless
it contain the Twenty Four Chracters, Great and Small. But, notwithstanding, we
may say, That a Piece of Writing is wrote in such and such an Hand; although
the Piece of Writing be not a complete Hand; the Part being put for the Whole.

Therefore, in the next place, I will inform you of the Capitals used in this
Hand: Which being called Capital, it appears from thence, that these Letters
must exceed the other in Magnitude; but this Magnitude must not exceed the
distance of Lines in Height; nor in Depth, the longest Stemms, except it be in
the Beginning of a Piece of Writing. Great Letters are only useful for the
Beginning of every Sentence, Proper Names, and Remarkable Appellatives; and
therefore, I need not give you any other Rules for their Proportions, than what
I have already laid down in my Three General Principles; that Form of Capitals
being best, that is most Firm, Expeditious and Beautiful: Which I shall give
you a Copy of, when I see it convenient for you.


Sc. Your Discourse of the Proportions of Letters, puts me in remembrance of a
Line I once read in a Book of Mr. Cocker's; Proportion is the Quintescense of
Art: And I am as careful to remember these Words of Yours; The Art of Writing
is contained in the Documents of meet Proportions.


Mr. Truly, Mr. Cocker said well; and he might have done well too, if that he
had set down the right Proportions of each Hand: But he was so far from doing
this, that he never did, in any of his Public Pieces, give the Proportion of
one Letter, unless in his Examples; and those were so various, that he never
Engraved Two Pieces of One Hand alike: And therefore, How was it ever possible
to gather any true Proportion from him? So that, he which Writes in imitation
of Mr. Cocker, is like a Carpenter working without his Rule.


Sc. Now (Sir) you having given me the Quintescence of the Hand, (as Mr. Cocker
calls it) pray, What remains now?


Mr. These due Proportions be rightly ranged into Order, that is, into Twenty
Four known distinct Characters, both Capital and Small, they make up a Complete
Hand, fit for its intended Use. And, as the distinction of Things must be known
by some Difference; so it is also absolutely necessary, that the Twenty Four
Characters have all their several Forms, that thereby they may be distinctly
known.

Therefore, this leads me, in the next Place, to treat of their Forms; which
cannot be so well expressed by the Tongue, as discerned by the Eye, whose
proper Objects they are: Therefore, I here present you with a Copy for your
Imitation. You must be sure to give your Letters their true Fulls and Smalls,
according to your Copy: And for your more facile Performance thereof, observe,
That when your Hand and Pen is held according to your Directions, all the Fulls
and Smalls will naturally be performed without any Artificial dawbing; the
Pen's Edge tending naturally to an ascending, or cross-Line; and also the flat
to a downright descending Stroke.

Note, That the Pen naturally falls but once to a right Flat in any Circle or
Oval: So that, when you see in an Oval or Circle, a Full answering a Full, you
may conclude, That one of those Fulls is Artificial; and that is ever
Artificial, that is performed last. All double Strokes, as in the Top of a
small [o], are naturally Full.

Now, I have given you the Knowledge of Writing in General; and also, in this
one particular Hand; I shall breathe awhile: Only this I say, Be careful that
your Head and Heart attend your Hand.


Sc. Sir, Pray, how do you approve of This?


Mr. I fear, you have Written too fast, to do well.


Sc. I hoped, that you would have commended me for doing so much; for in your
Directions, you commend Expeditious Writing.


Mr. In my Directions I commend an Expeditious manner of Hand; which must first
be obtained by Writing very slow: and when you have attained to the Writing of
it well, then it will be made Swift by Practice. But observe these Directions,
and you need not fear Writing too fast: That is;

First, When you begin your Copy, endeavor to get the perfect Knowledge of
each Character, before you begin to imitate them: And when you have thus
Written your First Line, then before you begin your Second, observe the Faults
of each Letter, by comparing them with your Copy; and then do your utmost
Endeavor to mend what you observe to be amiss: And prosecute this Course
throughout every Copy, and you need not fear, but that you will learn to Write
both Well and Fast.


Sc. Sir, This is an hard Lesson.


Mr. I wonder why? Is there any thing enjoined you, which a Child of Six Years
old cannot do?


Sc. I have heard some say, That a Child is not capable of learning to Write,
until he arrive to Twelve Years of Age.


Mr. That Is a great Mistake; for I have taught some of Nine, Eight, Seven, yea,
Six Years of Age frequently; and to Write Well, in a small time.

Now, go your ways, and do as I have told you.


Sc. Sir, Pray, how like you This? I doubt not, but that I have Wrote slow
enough now; for I have not Written above Four Lines in an Hour.


Mr. Now, you have quit your self well: And, I doubt not, but that by my
prescribed Method of examining each Line by your Copy, you have much improved
your Judgment. In the next place therefore, for the Exercise thereof, Write me
these Lines out of this Book without a Copy; and thereby I shall also discover
how far you understand my Directions.


Sc. I was very much pleased with your Commendation of my last, and I should be
no less now; which I am sure it must, if your Praise be equal to my Endeavor.


Mr. I like your Writing well: But, I perceive, you are very ignorant in the
Rules of Orthography.


Sc. My Master was very negligent of me, as to this Particular; for he never
Exercised me in this Subject: But if you will be pleased also to instruct me in
This, I shall think my self very much obliged.


Mr. I will do my endeavor, in assisting you herein: But, doubtless, you might
have been better instructed in your Grammar School in Orthography; which is one
of the Essential Parts of Grammar, and fittest to be taught there. Orthography,
the First Part of Grammar, teaching the Art of Writing, is to be considered,

I. In the invention, and devising of Letters.

II. In the right ordering, or placing of these Letters invented.

The First Part of Orthography, viz. The Forms of Letters, are to be considered
in every Hand; which I have already treated on at large, and shall farther
handle as I shall see occasion for it, in each particular Hand.

The Second has these Two Parts, viz. Spelling and Pointing.

For the First, Observe the difference in the Sound of each Letter, that
thereby you may know what Letters are to be wrote, to make up a distinct Sound
in any one Syllable: For in every Syllable that is pronounced as its wrote,
every Letter is sounded in that Syllable in which it ought to be wrote. And
when you can spell a Word of one Syllable, it will be no difficult Matter to
spell Words of many, if you know how to divide them: Which that you may do,
observe, That every Syllable in a Word has a different Sound; as this word
[fol-low-ing], which cannot be spoken without giving it Three several Sounds,
and every Sound makes a Syllable: The First is [fol], which Sound or Syllable
cannot be wrote with any other Letters, than [fol]: and so of the Second and
Third.

In the next Place, observe, That no Syllable can be sounded, or wrote without
a Vowel, [a, e, i, o, u, or y]: [u] is sometimes a Vowel, and sometimes a
Consonant. It Is ever a Consonant, when it comes before a Vowel in the same
Syllable. Sometimes Two Vowels are sounded in one Syllable; and then they are
called Dipthongs; which are Five in number [ae, oe, au, ei, eu]: The two former
are both pronounced like [e].

Observe to pronounce every Word rightly; for there is nothing a greater Enemy
to Spelling, than false Pronounciation, being settled by Discourse. There are
many Syllables of one Sound, that must be diversely wrote; which are to be known
by the Radix of the Words, or Supines of their Verbs. There are also some
Words, that are not pronounced as they are wrote; and some that are pronounced
alike, but wrote diversely: And therefore, it is best for you to make an
Observation of these Words, when you meet with them.

Write the First Letter in a Sentence, all Proper Names, as the Names of
Heathenish Gods and Goddesses, Men, Women, Rivers, Months, Winds, Cities,
Countries, and Islands, remarkable Appellatives, and I per se, with great
Letters.

Words pronounced long, must have an [e] in the end: But [e] must not follow
[g] in the end of a Word, unless [g] be sounded like [j] Consonant: [s] is
never written after [x]. So much of Spelling.

Secondly, In Pointing you are to observe, That there are Fifteen distinct and
proper Points.

The First, A Comma [,] used at the End of every Sentence.

The Second, A Semi-Colon [;] used properly betwixt the Comma and Colon, as the
Sense admits; it being a Mean between them.

The Third, A Colon [:] used properly betwixt the Comma and Colon, as the Sense
admits; it being a Mea^ between them.

The Fourth, A Period [.] used at the end of a Perfect Sentence.

The Fifth, A Parenthesis [()] used when one Sentence is put within another;
which yet may be left out, and the Sense not destroyed.

The Sixth, A Note of Interrogation [?] used when a^ Question is asked.

The Seventh, A Note of Exclamation [!] used when we express any thing with
Wonder.

The Eighth, A Subunio [=] used, 1. When Two whole Words are united. 2. When
one part of the Word is wrote at the End of the Line, and the other at the
Beginning of the next.

The Ninth, A Dialysis [..] used when a Dipthong is parted into Two Syllables.

The Tenth, An Induction [^] used to bring in a Word interlined.

The Eleventh, An Apostrophe ['] used when a Letter is cast out.

The Twelfth, A Note of Quotation ["] used in the Margent, when we quote a
Sentence out of an Author.

The Thirteenth, An Acute-tone ['] used to distinguish doubtful Quantities.

The Fourteenth, A Grave-tone ['] used to distinguish Adverbs from other Words.

The Fifteenth, A Circumflex-tone [^] used over, 1. Ablaives Cases of the
First; 2. Genitive Cases of the Fourth Declension. 3. Words syncopated, and
contracted.

Now, prepare your self for the Writing of the most Firm, Expeditious, and
Beautiful Hand of all yet invented for Cur^ry Business.


Sc. I suppose, this is the Hand mentioned amongst your Five Best, being best
for Book-Entries and Epistles.


Mr. This is the same; and it deserves to wear the Lauel, before all Hands of
the same Use, whether they be French, or Italian: And for the Reasons
following, this I am the more consident to assert. Our English Hands having
received a public Assault by A-la-mode-Secretary to the French Formulae, I
thought it might be no dishonorable Adventure, to maintain the Honor of our
English Hands: And ^hereupon, knowing our Secretary Hands to be Counter-Buff,
(...) undertook therewith to engage A-la-mode; drawing my Secretary-Band upon
Three Hills, Firm, Expeditious, and Beautiful: And having thus ordered them, I
sent to A-lanode, to prepare for Battle. Whereupon, in some space of Time, I
received his utmost Force: Which being Answered with a greater Strength than he
was able to resist, in the next place, he sounds an unwilling Retreat.


Sc. I understand, you contended only for the Honor of our English
Secretary-Hand.


Mr. I took the Advantage, with Sertorius, who by the Hairs of his Horse-Tail,
has proved to be very important; that beginning with a Part, it is no matter
of difficulty to overcome the Whole. And I doubt not, but if all our English
Hands were Written according to the Rules herein delivered, they would excel
all Foreign Hands whatever.


Sc. I wonder how Foreign Hands have got such Esteem amongst us of England?


Mr. They have been esteemed amongst them that have valued Writing only for
Variety: But they never took amongst the Judicious; as appears by our Records,
which are Written in no Hands but our English.


Sc. Are the Records wrote in no Hands, but some of those Five aforementioned?
Then surely, it must needs be very prejudicial both to Law and Justice, to
alter them.


Mr. Records would become illegible, if their Characters were not maintained by
Practice: And if so, you cannot but conclude those to be Wise Writing-Masters,
who will tell you, That the Secretary-Hand will be unknown in a few Years.


Sc. Wise Masters! If they understand no better the Writing of Hands, than they
do of their Use.


Mr. I shall now, in the next place, proceed to give you the Proportions of
this Hand; which being intended only for a Cursory Hand, or for Business of the
least Duration, it cannot, without difficulty, be wrote too small; the several
Forms of Letters, in this Hand, receiving their several Differences by the Flat
of the Pen. And there is also a great Convenience in this Hand, it bearing the
same Form of Letters with the Ingrossing-Hand: So that, he who can write the
One, may quickly write the Other. And besides this, the Running-Hand begets a
great freeness and readiness in those Letters, in which it is composed:
Therefore the Ingrossing-Hand must needs be bettered by the Conformity it holds
with this Hand.

In giving you the Proportions of this Hand, I shall prosecute my former Method:

First, Observe, That the Height and Breadth of the Letters of this Hand, are
best when they are made One Eighth of a Grain.

Secondly, That the Length of each Stemm be longer by One Half, than the
Letters within the Lines.

Thirdly, That the Wideness of each Stemm be equal in Wideness to the Letters
within the Lines; except [h] and [k], whose Stemms are best when they are
double to the Wideness of the other Stemms: And that the Stemms below the Line,
be double in Length to the Minnums.

Fourthly, That each Stroke be equal in Fullness, to One Fourth of the Wideness
of each Letter.

Fifthly, Observe the White of the small Letters, for your distance between
Letter and Letter; and the double thereof, between Word and Word; except as is
before excepted.

Sixthly, Observe, to rule your Lines distant from each other, One Sixth of an
Inch: And this is sufficient, I having already proved what Capitals are best,
in my Discourse of the Last.


Sc. You have been short in your Directions, methinks, for your last Hand.


Mr. They are the better in being brief, if they be complete and full. And that
you may be satisfied, that there is not any thing wanting to prove each Letter
in this Hand; observe, That Form and Proportion are all that may be considered
in an Hand. For the Forms of Letters, you may call to mind the Rules delivered
in General for all Hands: And there you may plainly prove, what Forms of
Letters is best. And for the Proportion of any Letter, you have here a most
plain Theorem.

Now, I shall proceed to give you the Proportions of our English Text. But,
first, consider the Use of the Hand, which I have already proved in the
Precedent Discourse; and then you will be more capable of judging of the
following Proportions.

First then, observe, That the Height and Breadth of the Letters, within the
Lines, be One Half of a Grain.

Secondly, That the Length of each Stemm be equal to the Letters within the
Lines.

Thirdly, That the Compass, or Breadth of each Stemm, be equal to its Length.

Fourthly, That the Fullness of each Stroke be equal to One Fourth of the
Breadth of each Letter.

Fifthly, Observe the White of the small Letters within the Line, for your
distance between each Letter; except Two Circular Strokes come together, which
must be joined close; and the double thereof, between Word and Word.

Now I shall proceed to the Court-Hand; which will admit of Two several, yet
most useful Proportions.


Sc. How, Sir? Two several Proportions of One Hand, and both in the Superlative
Degree? According to your former Rules, this cannot be.


Mr. Scholar, You are mistaken: Therefore, call to mind what I have said. I
imagine, you ground this your confident Assertion, upon these Words; Two
Superlatives cannot accord with several Operations in one and the same Effect.
But better consider of the Words, and then tell me, Whether or no Two several
Proportions of One Hand, for Two several Uses, may not all be best in their
single Use?


Sc. Pray ( Sir) pardon my Confidence, and inform me with the several Uses of
this Hand.


Mr. Court-Hand is used in the Exemplifying of Fines: And also, as Text is used
in our English-Ingrossing-Hand; so is the Exemplifying-Court used in the Small.
The Small Court is either used for the Engrossing of Records, or as a Cursory
Hand, for the Entering of Precedents, for Writs, Declarations, Pleas, etc. or
any Cursory Business of the Courts wherein it is used.


Sc. If the Small Court be firm and large enough for Ingrossments, what need is
there of the Exemplifying Hand?


Mr. First, (as I have said before) It Is convenient in supplying the Use of the
Text-Hand: Secondly, Deeds that are wholly Exemplified, are generally very
short, and of great and weighty Concerns; and the Clerk's Fees also great:
Therefore, that they may appear the larger, and more graceful, they are
Exemplified. If a Fine were wrote in a small Court-Hand, it would look more
like a Writ, than a Deed.

Now, prepare your self for the best Proportions of the Exemplifying Court-Hand.

First, Observe, That the Letters within the Lines are best, when Written One
Fourth of an Inch in Length.

Secondly, That the Whites of each of these Letters, be equal in Breadth to the
Minnum Strokes, or One Sixth of a Fourth of an Inch; except [c] and [t], and
those Parts of Letters, that bear the Form of [c] and [t]; which are best when
they are Two Thirds of the Fourth of an Inch in Wideness; and the [e] Seven
Eighths of the Fourth of an Inch.

Thirdly, That the Length of the tallest Stemms, viz. of [b, h, k, l, and w] be
One Fourth of an Inch; and the Stemms of [d, f, and the long s,] Three Fourths
of the Fourth of an Inch: And the Stemms of [a, c, s, and t] One Half of the
Fourth of an Inch. Notes of Abbreviation, and [i] in the end of a Word, equal
in Height to the tallest Stemms, or One Fourth of an Inch.

Fourthly, That all the Stemms below the Line, be equal in Length to the
tallest Stemms above Line, or One Fourth of an Inch; except the Stemm of [h],
which is best Three Fourths of the Fourth of an Inch.

Fifthly, That the Wideness of all the Stemms, both above and below the Lines,
be Three Fourths of the Fourth of an Inch; except the Stemms of [d, f, g, and
s,] which are best One Half of the Fourth of an Inch.

Sixthly, Observe the White of the Minnums, for your distance between Letter
and Letter; except they follow [a, b, c, h, k, w, x, y], or come before, or
follow [e, y, o, s]; and then they must be joined close: And the Space, or
Wideness of the [n], for your distance between Word and Word.

Seventhly, Observe for your distance of Lines, Three Fourths of an Inch.

And now I have given you the Proportions of the Exemplifying-Hand: I will, in
the next place, give you the Proportions of the Small Court; fittest, and best
for Records; which, in its several Proportions, is the same with the
Exemplifying-Hand: Only, this must be wrote by a Lesser Scale.

And, if wrote true, they will answer each other, as Face answers Face in Two
Glasses of different Magnitudes: Therefore, I shall only give you the Height
of the Letters within the Lines; which are best One Sixth of the Third of an
Inch; and leave you to proportion each Letter, upon this Basis: Only observe,
That whereas in the Exemplifying Court-Hand, the Breadth of the Minnum Strokes
are but One Sixth part of their Height; but in This they must be One Fourth.
And thus much for Court-Hand.


Sc. You spoke of a Cursory Court-Hand a little before.


Mr. Well remembered. To make a Quick, Expeditious, or Cursory Hand, Two things
are absolutely necessary:

1. A right Form of Letters, viz. A Form agreeing to the Rules of Expedition,
so far as the Characters both in Shape and Use will admit.

2. A frequent Use, or Custom in the Writing of the same.

Court-Hand may be made far more Expeditious, than it is commonly wrote, (and
yet vary but a very small matter from the Original; and not, in the least, the
more illegible or infirm) by avoiding some Cutts prejudicial to the making of
Letters: And also, these Cutts being many, and the most difficult Parts of
Letters, they must retard the Motion of the Hand. This will plainly appear,
when you have Written a few Lines by this Copy of the Twenty Four Letters;
wherein the Pen must not be taken off, in the performing any Letter, except in
the making of an [x].


Sc. I judge this last Form of Letters better for Use, than the Other.


Mr. It Is better for common Business than the Other, because it is far more
Expeditious; but for Business of extraordinary Concern, the Sett-Court is best,
it being the most Beautiful: Besides, it is very convenient, that the Sett-Court
be very well understood, before an Imitation of the more Cursory Hand; for the
more like the Cursory Hand is to the Set, the better: For though the Letters
may be altered to a Cursory Form; yet, notwithstanding, the Form of each Letter
must be, in a great measure, like the Original; otherwise it cannot be Court.


Sc. Pray ( Sir) then, What will you call That, that is one part Court, and the
other Secretary?


Mr. What will you call that Person, that is both Man and Woman?


Sc. Those are called Hermaphrodites; and pass for Men or Women, as the Sex
prevails.


Mr. So you may call these Miscellanies, Court or Secretary, as the Form
prevails.

Now, I shall proceed to the Chancery-Hand, the last of the Five
beforementioned Best, for the Writing of any Clerk-like Business whatsoever;
whose Proportions are as follows:

First, The Letters within Line must be One Fifth of the Third of an Inch in
Height.

Secondly, The Wideness of these Letters must be equal to their Height.

Thirdly, The Stemms of the Letters must be equal in Length, to the Letters
within the Line; except the Stemms of [a, s, and t], which must be lower by One
Half than the other Stemms.

Fourthly, The Wideness of these Stemms must be equal to their Height.

Fifthly, The Fullness of each Stroke must be equal to One Third of the Height
of the Letters within Line.

Sixthly, The White of the Letters, or One Third of their Breadth, must be your
distance between Letter and Letter; and the double thereof, between Word and
Word: Except Two compass Letters come together in one Word, then they must be
joined close.

Seventhly, The Distance of Lines must be Three Fifths of the Third of an Inch.

Your Desires of Writing Well, and my Endeavors to fulfill the same, being now
accomplished; there remains nothing of my Profession, that may be any way
serviceable.


Sc. I have received a Letter from my Father; wherein is signified his Infinite
Thanks, for your more deserving Favors: And I am thereby informed, That he has
provided a Lawyer for my Master. And I doubt not, but that you will advise me,
how to demean my self so, as that I may not only please my Master; but also,
may most advantage my self in his Service.


Mr. I Will tell you what pleased my Master; and, I doubt not, but that will
please Yours.

First then, Observe to write all Business in a good Character, clean and true.

Secondly Observe to dispatch your Business in due Time; and to have every
thing in readiness, when he calls for it.


Sc. Truly ( Sir) this is not long in wording: But many times, a short Demand
requires a long Performance.


Mr. Many times, a long Payment is made by a good Forecast; which I advise you,
to be ready at: In order to which, take these following Directions:

First, Be sure to Write always up to the Character you have learned; and then,
move your Pen as quick as you can. This Course being observed, Practice will
not only make you Write Quick, but Well also.

Secondly, Observe to keep your Study clean and neat; and let every thing
therein be laid in its proper Place.

Thirdly, Be careful to Write true; avoiding thereby the razing out, and
interlining of Words; which is very disgraceful, and may be of ill Consequence,
if it happen in any material Part of a Deed. But if it unluckily so happen,
that, either by your Master's Amendment of what you are to Transcribe, or by
your Negligence, you are forced to alter any Word after its written; if on
Parchment, then, after it is perfectly dry, scratch out the Word with the Point
of your Penknife; being careful therein to scratch away as little of the
Parchment as you can, for fear of scratching through, or making it so thin,
that it will not bear Ink: Then smooth it with your Pummis-Stone. And if you
interline any Word, or Sentence, be careful to place rightly your Point of
Induction. Write no material Word too nigh the Edge of your Paper, that being
the soonest prejudiced either by fretting, or tearing. When you have any
Business of your Master's, be careful to employ every moment of your Time
therein: And be sure to admit of no Recreation, till your Hands be freed of
Business.

This Course being followed through the whole Progress of your Clerkship; I
doubt not, but that you will please your Master, and bring Honor to your self.


Sc. Sir, I thank you; and I Will do my Endeavor, to prosecute your Directions.
Pray, Sir, be pleased also to give me some Directions, how to employ my spare
Minutes.


Mr. Procure you Two Precedent Books; the One a Folio, the Other a Quarto: Page
them both, and Margent them with Red Ink. At the End of your Books, Rule Ten or
Twelve Leaves down the Middle on both sides, with Red Ink, for your Table;
which make Alphabetically: And in these Books, enter your Precedents: In the
Folio, enter your Precedents for Conveyancing; and in the Other, your
Precedents for Pleading. And be sure to let nothing that is new to you, pass
your Hands without a Copy. And if it chance, that, through the haste of
Business, you have not an Oppertunity to take a Copy, unless you become Master
of the Morning an Hour or two sooner than you were wont; let neither
Drowsiness, nor Sloth, be any Impediment. And you will also do well, to spend a
good part of your leisure Hours in reading some profitable Books of the Law:
And when you Read, endeavor to apprehend the Reason of Things; otherwise you
will never be able to apply what you Read to your Practice. Sit when you Write;
but Stand when you Read.

I shall now take my Leave, in hopes of your diligent Practice of those Things
I have been so free in disclosing; which will free you from the Disgrace, that
most justly attends those that cast off all the Business they can possible; and
what they are forced to do, is performed in an impapatient and slovenly Hurry:
And when their Five, or more (thus ill employed) Years are expired, with the
loss of, it may be, an Hundred Pound, they set up for themselves, with no more
Knowledge, than what will just serve the turn to promote an Action: And all the
rest of the Proceeding, they leave to the secret Management of another; for
which, it is to be feared, the Clyent pays very dear.


A TABLE OF Abbreviations.
SInce the Marks for Abbreviations cannot rightly be made by the Printer, you
are to observe, That those Letters placed after the Full-Points, must be
written a little higher, than the other part of the Words: As, in the writing
the Word Accepimus, there the s must be written above the m, and a little
forwarder in the Line. And over the other Abbreviations, make a little Dash
with your Pen: But if the Abbreviation be in the end of a Word, then turn your
Dash of Abbreviation from the ending of the last Letter.

A.
ACcepim.s accepimus Aia anima Auctem Authoritatem Als aliis A.o Anno Arlorum
Articulorum Adio Administratio Archini Archi-diaconi Archi Arch-Angeli Attach
attachiatus Attorn Attornatum Ald alias dictus Assign assignatis Angl Angliae
Assias assisas Al alia Ar Armiger
B.
Bacc Bacchalaurius Bre breve Be Beat Ballia Balliva Bar Barronettus b ber
C.
Cathi Cathedrali Canoice Canonice Com Comitatus Con.ri Consistorii Can.cis
Cancellariis Capcoe captione Cu cum Con.ria contraria c' cer Caa causa Con.m
Conjunctim Con.a contra Clico Clerico Cois communis Cer.o certificatorio Cry
crimine Cio citatio Cribus criminibus Captlo Capitulo Canss causis Cur Curia
Cogn cognovit Cons consuetudinem Coron coronam Ca Catalla
D.
Dioc Diocesia Dia Divina Dco dicto Div.m divisim Defunct defunctus Dni Domini
Dilco dilecto Depto deputato Dic dicit Dimid dimidium Dampn damnum Debm debitum
Def defendens Dirci directi Dign dignitatem Delibacoem deliberationem
E.
Eccliae Ecclesiae Effcm effectum Epus Episcopus Eor eorum Exit exhibitus ee
esse Excoicaco Excommunicatie Exhibico exhibitio Epale Episcopale
F.
Fco facto Fidelr fideliter Firmr firmiter Frm fratrem Fuer fuerit Flo falso
Felon felonia Franc Franciae Fac Facias
G.
Gra Gratia Grnalem generalem Gaol gaolam Gen generosus
H.
Hita habita Humoi hujusmodi Het habet Hoies homines Hens habens Hend habendum
Huit habuit Hibniae Hiberniae
I.
Informacoe informatione Ibm ibidem Igr igitur Instrum.tu instrumentum Ipo ipso
Jurisnis jurisdictionis Jux juxta Illi.mi illustrissimi Inven.ry Inventory Jur
Juratores Justic Justitiariis Ill illa Io ideo Injur injuriam Intellco
intellecto Inspco inspecto Inperpm inperpetuum Indict' indictatus Irrotlat
irrotulatum
L.
Lras literas Lia lientia Littime Legitines Lilo Libello Leglis Legalis Libe
Libere Lco Lecto Libtat' Libertatem
M.
Mie mininte Mronia Matrimonia Mr Magister Ma.ti Majestati Millnio Millesimo Mo
modo Magri Magistri Mil Miles Mia Misericordia
N.
Nra nostra Noie nomine Norio Notario. Necc.ria necessaria Narr Narratio
O.
Oem omnem Oibus omnibus Offilis Officialis Octogmo Octogessimo Oiodas
omnimodas Obl Obligatio Occone occcasione Omit omittas
P.
Paroch Parochia P'r pre P.rdcus praedictus Personalr personaliter Ptate
potestate Prone Patron Permioe permissione Pntes praesentes Pubce public Pr
pater Paroli Parochiali Pr.cures procuratores Possonem possessionem P'pue
praecipue Popli populi Pr.onus Patronus Priam Patriam Plito placito Pertin
pertinentiis Produc producit P.t post Propr propria P.rfat' praefatus Pet petit
Periclo periculo Proclam Proclamationem Praec praeceptum Pros Prosecutor.
Q.
Quoth quod Quatus quatenus Q.o quo Quolt quolibet Quer querens
R.
Rcor Rector. Rone ratione Rhdus Reverendus Reverendmo Reverendissimo Regr
Register Rs Regis Rondend Respondendum Retoru retornatum Rotlorum rotulorum
S.
Saltm salutem Spualibus spiritualibus Sacrm Sacramentum Scdm secundum
Sexcen.mo Sexcentessimo Spicats specificatis Spialitr specialiter Soleizari
solemnizari Scaecii scaccarii Successss. successoribus Sci Sancti Scrut
scrutinio Sum summonitus Sequen sequentem Scilt Scilicet Sile simile Spec
specificatim Seiam seseinam Scoc Scotiae Surr Surrogatus Sabti Sabbathi
T.
Testam.to Testamento Tot totam Titlum titulum Tnsgr transgressio Tenta
Tenementa T test Tli tali Tm tam Tles tales Tmio termino
V.
Vrae Vestrae Vbilet ubilibet Vic Vicarius Venlis venerabilis Val Valentiam Vic
Vicecomes Visn Visenenetto Vill villa Vx Vxor.
W.
Westminster Westmonasterium
X.
Xpo Christo Xaru Decimarum
Anthus Antonius Aug.tus Augustus Barthus Bartholomeus Clens Clemens Edrus
Edwardus Edmus Edmundus Francus Franciscus Galfrus Galfridus Hencus Henricus
Humfrus Humfridus Herbtus Herbertus Johes Johannes Luicus Ludovicus Michis
Michaelis Matthus Mattheus Nichus Nicholaus Phus Philippus Ricus Richardus
Robtus Robertus Radus Radulphus Randus Randulphus Rogus Rogerus Theophus
Theophilus Willus Gulielmus Xpian Christian Xpopher Christopher Zathas
Zacharias
FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Luke Meredith, at the King's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
RHetoricae Libri Duo: Quorum Prior de Tropis and Figuris, Posterior de Voce
and Gestu praecipit. In usum Scholarum postremo recogniti, infinitisque paeni
mendis expurgati. Autore Carolo Butlero, Magd. Artium Magistro.

The Songs of Moses and Deborah Paraphrased; with Poems on several Occasions.
Never before Published. To which is added, A Pindarick on Mr. L'Estrange.

A Dialogue between a Pastor and his Parishioner, touching the Lord's Supper.

Two Treatises: The First, Concerning Reproaching and Censure^. The Second, An
Answer to Mr. Serjeant's Sure-Footing. To which are annexed, Three, Sexmons
Preached upon several Occasions; and very useful for these Times. By the late
Learned and Reverend William Falkner, D. D.

An Introduction to the Old English History, comprehended in Three several
Tracts: The First, An Answer to Mr. Petyt's Rights of the Commons Asserted; and
to a Book, Entitled, Jani Anglorum Facies Nova: The Second Edition very much
enlarged. The Second, An Answer to a Book, Entitled, Argumentum
Antinormanicum; much upon the same Subject: Never before Published. The Third,
The Exact History of the Succession of the Crown of England: The Second
Edition, also very much enlarged. Together, with an Appendix, containing
several Records, and a Series of Great Councils and Parliaments, Before and
After the Conquest, unto the End of the Reign of Henry the Third. And a
Glossary, expounding many Words, used frequently in our Ancient Records, Laws,
and Historians. Published for the Vindication of Truth, and the Assistance of
such as desire with Satisfaction to read, and truly understand the Ancient
English Historians, and other Pieces of Antiquity. By Robert Brady, Doctor in
Physic.


