THE Unlearned Alchymist HIS ANTIDOTE.

OR, A more full and ample Explanation of the use, Virtue and benefit of my
PILL, Entitled, An effectual Diaphoretick. Diuretic.
purges by Sweating Vrin.


Whereunto is added Sundry Cures and Experiences, with particular direction
unto particular diseases and Distempers; with a Catalogue of peoples Names,
with their dwellings which have used and known the use of the same: Also sundry
plain and easy Receipts which the ingenious may prepare for their own health.

By Richard Matthew, and are to be had at his house by the Lions Den at the
Tower, next Gate to the By-Ward.

London Printed, for Joseph Leigh, at the upper end of Bazing-hall street, near
the Naggs-head Tavern, and are to be sold together with this Pill, by Giles
Calvert at the Black-spread Eagle at the West end of Paul's, And Livewell
Chapman at the Crown in Popes-head-alley, 1660.

To all that are sick, under Pains, Aches, Gripings, diverse diseases,
Surfeitings, Obstructions, Consumptions, of what kind soever and whosoever, but
more especially unto all such of them that fear the Lord in truth and
^^rightness, and of these especially such as are poor and have no money, Ric.
Matthew, your brother and companion in the Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ,
humbly Dedicates this his little book, together with his work and labor, with
what is his devoted to your service.

IT is meet of good right that this my Book should be Dedicated unto you, who
daily finds the power and virtue of my Pill whereof I have spoken; let all the
world set themselves against it as they please, I know your experience will
vindicate it, and verily if my Pill have not deserved it from your hands, I
will speak not a word for it, but what ever in this book has past me, let it
for ever stand for nothing, and I do attest not only to you all, but all the
world, that if I he deceived concerning the true worth and power of my Pills,
verily it is you that has deceived me, my conscience bearing me witness I have
not added unto these reports which you have brought me, but have with much
sobriety left out much which would have heightened the power and worth of my
Pill, but I am assured from my own knowledge and daily sight and hearing, that
things of like nature are done by it daily, blessed be God, and therefore I
know there is no deceit in the matter: Receive then I pray you this little book
into your protection, and speak as you have found, and speak that which is
true, I desire no more, I know that is sufficient, for the truth is strong,
and no force can keep him in bonds whom truth acquits; it were better I were
not then it were not my portion.

It is neither power nor greatness, nor humane Art, nor Learning that I fly
unto for Patronage, only the clear and unbyased witness of truth, which can be
in no other mouths then such of you, the authors of all those several reports,
cures, and wonders I have set down in this book, most of which my own eyes were
spectators, and consequently witnesses of their verity and truth, neither am I
unfurnished of as many more which here is not set down, but these have spent
much paper for me to write, and much of your patience to read, and he that will
not believe at the sound of this Trumpet, but shuts his ears, resolved not to
hear, this man will not hear if I had set down five times as many.

But unto the two second sort unto whom I tender this dedication, viz. the
faithful that are yet on earth, but their treasure in heaven, and their hearts
where their treasure is; that at the present if need be are in heaviness through
many fold temptations, sicknesses, pains, aches, and weaknesses of body I do in
a more especial manner dedicate my book, self work and labor of love unto you,
who is your brother and companion, and with you have born the chastening of the
Lord, I know your happiness and feel it and am made and infranchized a Citizen
and fellow servant with you, and have labored through Christ and have not
fainted, and now knowing your happiness do rank my self with you as being made
partaker of like precious faith, and indeed desire above all other to be made
manifest and known unto you? I know although I am a stranger unto you as to
this body and this world, yet I have spiritual feeling and feasting with you,
in and from that abundance of endless joys freely bestowed in the blood of
Christ, and truly our fellowship is with the Father and with that Son of his
love, whose blood cleanses us from all our iniquities, and blessed be God who
has helped me through all kind of snares and temptations, to the end I might by
experience know his salvation, his power and goodness; and this is my
triumphing joy, that my father is pleased to let me live to comfort and help
many, and thanks be given unto him, there is but few days pass me without the
happy tidings of saving the life of one poor creature or other, I speak as a
man, and in this judge by man's reason. And now my beloved brethren as I have
freely received so I freely give, you above all other I thirst to serve both in
body and spirit, my master has returned upon my head the fruit of my labor,
which indeed has been much and long, and wherefore have I been always beaten
down by sickness and weakness of body, but that I might be improved (as I have
been improved) for your service and advantages, of which indeed you may make a
bold challenge, and require the same as your just right and propriety.

But unto the third sort now I speak, viz. you which fear the Lord in truth of
heart, and are under his fatherly chastening of pains, sicknesses, and bodily
pressures, and are poor as to the things of this world; and wherefore is it but
that in being here you might not be to your selves as men or to this world as
this world, you are not poor, but you are rich, riches that faideth not away,
made rich through him that became poor that he might make many rich; my brethren
be without carefulness or fear, because it is your fathers pleasure to give you a
Kingdom, a Kingdom that remains to eternity, eternally in the heavens, you will
possess it at that his appearing when you shall appear with him in heaven,
glory that cannot be shaken; and if your earthly tabernacle perish daily, is it
not the Minister of joy, forasmuch as it tends to no other end but to have you
to rest; now is the time of your labor, labor in fruit-bearing, herein is your
Father glorified (that in and against the strongest wrestlings of this world
and of your own corruptions, and Satanical tentations and delusion) that you
bring forth much fruit, to the end his fruit may remain in you, and his power
rest upon you; you know in all your griefs and ailes, he is Joy, Peace, Rest,
get then to rest, cease from man, for wherein is he to be trusted, you self and
all selfness, your own works as God did from his, enter the blessed rest, holy
Sabbath through Christ's atonement, through whom and in whom we are complete and
perfect, for shame be silent, the Lord comes into his holy temple, your bodies
are the temple of the living God, his house and habitation you are, he daigns
to supp and dine with you, and is with you and in you, stand fast then in that
liberty wherewith he has made you free; take heed of harkening to flesh and
blood, be not entangled with the yoke of bondage to fear again, if you touch
your burden with your arm, you must needs faint, but if you throw it on him he
will sustain you; he bore our sicknesses, the chastisement of our peace was
upon him, and by his stripes we are healed, be like him who opened not his
mouth, although the Lord laid on him the iniquity of us all; sicknesses and
poverty is not the greatest of evils, nay they in their depth with devine love
and presence are joyous and glorious; I never found greater joy and peace, and
consolation then when I was in the greatest pain and bitterness, when as to
this world there was little hope of life, then was their life in beauty and
strength, you of all other are most blessed and happy, because the eternal
crown and weight of righteousness and glory is prepared for you.

What shall I say unto you my dearly beloved brethren with whom life and glory
dwells. O my heart is pained for you, yea my soul and spirit within me is set
on fire with love, care, desire, endeavor how I might be most manifested unto
you, to bear all your distresses if it were possible for me, but alas it is a
small thing I am able to do, but I will tell you Jesus Christ will make his
cross and yoke easy and light unto you, go to him he is the fountain, all
fullness is in him, and he freely distributes without upbraiding, yea he is
perfectly able to save all that come to God by him; and as for me his poor
servant, I beseech you pray that I may be found faithful in my Stewardship,
improving his manifold gifts unto his ends, and therefore in his name and fear,
and in discharge of my duty unto him, and out of faithful and true simpathy and
fellow-feeling with you; I do therefore in his name and fear invite all that is
poor, having no money and fears the Lord in truth of heart, and is sick, and in
pains and Aches of body that they would come and receive at my hand this Pill,
or what else the Lord has given me for their health freely for Christ sake
without money or reward, prove I pray you and assay whether I be the man or no
that I here would be taken to be, yea come once and again as your distress
requires, only as I am a man hide not your self and condition from me, and I
hope still in him in whom I have always hoped I shall not be left without
either a heart or wherewith to refresh them, that in the name and fear of God
come unto me, entreating you to join with it your faith and prayer for a
blessing; looking on it as means of Gods ordaining for your help and comfort,
then do I not fear a good and blessed success in the use of the means which the
Lord has put in my hands for your ease, healing, and benefit.

Certain choice Receipts contained in this Book.
The true preparation of the Oil of Amber three several ways. The Oil and
Ballsom of the Pine Tree, commonly called Tar. An unvaluable purge universal of
Antimony and Scamony of Cream or Christals of Tartar, with their Correction
preparation, dosse and use. The true preparation of Crocus Martis. The
preparation of Sugar of Saturn. The true preparation of the Essence of Venus,
or Ens Veneris. The true preparation of the Salt of Mars. The true preparation
of the Sympathetical powder lately treated of by Sir Kenelm Digby. An Antidote
against all diseases, Surfeits and infections. To make and prepare the drink
now in use called Coffee. To make a choice Cordial Sirrup of Black-Cherries.
Courteous Reader,
THou art desired to look with a favorable eye upon those faults which thou
may meet with in this Book, and to Correct them with thy pen. If there be any
that does make the sense seem harsh to thee, thou art courteously required to
amend them.

An effectual Diaphoretick Diuretic
purges by Sweating Urine.

THis Pill is a Corrector of all Vegetative poisons. This that I have written
is true, although some there are which takes it in foul scorn that I should
profess that power, as to Correct opium and they themselves cannot; but let
such contentious Doctors know, that the Gentleman is yet in very good health
that drank 200. grains of opium at one draught, which was of my correcting, So
that if it be taken after any portion vomative or laxative, it will not work at
all; or when any portion works over violently, it forthwith stops it by reason
of its corrective power: This also as far as my experience has taught me, is
true, and if any list let them make further proof; In like manner it Corrects
all poisons in man's body from head to feet; By constant experience we find its
working so various and strange that we can believe no less, for although to all
appearance people that are alike troubled, yet will it vomit some, purge
others, and make others sweat out of measure, and others purge strangely by
Urine, and others as strangely send forth Rhums and Fleam at the mouth; and
some others it may be none of all these, but will break out all over, and
sundry other ways as nature has provided to great wonder, which people when
they are well, tell us how strangely it wrought with them. Unto God only be
given all the praise for his mercies, it suffices that people find relief in
their distress; so that indeed we do clearly see it does ransack whole nature
of what temper, complexion, or constitution soever, and finding out what it is
that is noctious unto it, finds out one way or other as nature is most prompt
to administer relief, and according unto our experience it is ever constant
unto a constant mind, and most certain it is that many foolishly out of a fond
conceit, because this Pill has operated contrary unto what they before hand
have supposed, have left its use to their great hurt and damage; and at this
day (out of some such fantastical humor neglecting it) languish in their pains
and griefs, these lending their credulous ears unto the envious which neither
know nor understand the thing they speak evil of, but thou which wilt believe
thy experience, will find that if thy grief lies in thy head, any part of it,
thou shall be sure to find it awakened, nay often times when men does not think
that their grief lies there by reason it may be that thy illness proceeds of
some old Cold or Surfeit, or Bruise, so as thou have forgotten it, this Pill
will begin at the root of thy grief, and if of Wind, it strangely follows it
up and down the body of man till it be turned out; or if it be some inward
breach or soreness, or Imposthums it by reason of its power from fixed Salts
does break, and by reason of its Balsamical virtue, does heal above belief, so
that as people inform us of great pains and grief they have had for some years,
till by this Pill sometimes stinking Matter, and sometimes stinking blood has
been sent forth which has been infinitely beyond my skill to help, but God
has blessed the use of this Pill to save the lives of many so grieved blessed
be his name, and if the defect be amongst the Uritures, Kidnes, Rains or
Bladder, then the effects by Urine is as admirable much beyond our reason, for
it sometimes sends out stuff of diverse colors, and sometimes but of one
color like snot and like jaggs of cloth, jaggs of paper, and of diverse
colors mixed together, and sometimes swiming on the Surface, and sometimes
lying in the bottom; and so also has brought out many Stones, many of which we
have to show, which people that voyded them upon the taking of the Pills have
brought us; also Gravel in abundance, both red and other colors, which it
does by its power from fixed Salts, and the true preparing the Spirit of
Turpentine, and I do attest to all men, that I am six months in preparing the
Spirit of Turpentine for this Pill; and let all men know assuredly, it is not
nor cannot be ripe for this Pill under, and therefore thus duly prepared, I do
believe a higher Ballsom is not in the world both inwardly and outwardly; God
grant I may use it to his glory and peoples good, for we find it so potent in
cleansing all Windiness, Sliminess, Stone, or Gravel, and in case of Flux of
blood, running of Rains, and the like, or Flux of scouring, I think the like is
not to be found, for by reason of the mixion of forceable Vegetatives, it does
so sweetly stop all bleeding beyond belief, although it be either by Fundament,
or by Urine, or by Mouth, as in Consumptions, or at Nose, it forthwith stops it
as soon as it is warm in their Bellies; if it be grief of the Joints, Ach of
Bones, Pains of the Feet, as the Gout in the Feet, or the running Gout, or that
which is called the King's Evil, by that time a Pill can be warm in their belly,
the patient will be sensible of ease, and to the praise of God I speak it, many
of every Sex and Age that have not been able to feed or help themselves, or
stir a limb in their beds, with the use of this Pill are now in health and set
at liberty; there would be no end of speaking, and yet but what is true, the
wonderful wonders that God has done by this Pill both inwardly and outwardly,
and if those take it who have Consumptions with sore Coughing, also those that
wheese with shortness of Breath with Coughing; I say there are many of these
alive thanks be given to God who comfortably enjoy themselves, which to the
appearance of man would never a held out, and many of these perfectly cured and
so remain, which indeed is more then in reason we might have expected, for
according to the opinion of the ablest in Physic, these distempers proceed
from a debelity in nature, and therefore not cureable, but God has showed his
power and goodness to many, that there does not appear the least sign of a
distemper, so that in a reasonable time both Cough and Rhume is quite gone and
Breath at will: I am loath to recite particulars, and yet give no more but the
very truth, because I know many will hardly believe it (and yet I am
constrained here to give some instances) for I speak not this without witness,
thanks be to God, many hundreds about London will give testimony of the truth
written, with thanksgiving unto Almighty God who has strengthened and opened
their Breasts when they were almost brought unto the gates of death, God
blessing this Pill to them for their reviving, thanks be given unto God for all
his unspeakable gifts. I had a Maidservant that from a child had a sore Cough
in such extremity, and I feared often she would never get Breath again, it had
such violence upon her; and she said it would never be cured, it was natural
unto her, and that her mother died thereof, I caused her to take of these
Pills, as well for my own quietness as her cure, she did so disturb me in the
night season; I gave her but little ones and gave them time, she never lay hour
for them, but rose every morning all Winter, and did perform her duty in the
house without interruption, and I think it was half a year or near before it
was quite gone, and in that time it took it so perfectly away, as to my
knowledge I heard her not Cough in half a a year more, nay not while she was in
my house.

A man so afflicted with shortness of Breath and Coughing, as did exceed most
that I have heard of, and he sends to me for Pills, which he took, and with his
own mouth tells us, that for seven years he was so grievously afflicted
therewith, that he could not all the Winter season lie down in his bed, and if
he had assayed to do it, then he should strangle, and of a sudden start up and
stretch up his arms above his head to get passage for his Breath again, which
with difficulty he recovered; said he unto us the first Pill that ever I took
of yours, I laid me down and slept sweetly all the night, at which I and my
Wife greatly admiring, praised God, as also we did with him, and that it seemed
more strange, he said he Coughed not all the night, nor was he sensible of any
straightness of Breath all the night; and this man remains so well, that to my
knowledge he does not spend so much as one quarter of an ounce in a quarter of
a year. It grieves my heart as I go up and down the streets to hear the people
Cough and wheese, holding their sides with short breathing, when God has put
in my hand so great a blessing for mankind, and ye will not make use of it many
that have knowledge of it, and if I should go about to persuade them to it, ye
will imagine I do it for my own advantage; there are some that have much to
answer for dissuading well-minded People against it to their hurt; I pray God
forgive them, it is evident that they themselves can do nothing in this case,
but are just like the dog in the manger, that will eat no hay himself, nor
suffer the horse to eat it; notwithstanding a a volume might be written of its
power and efficacy which is true and real touching its present help in the
cases aforesaid.

Likewise for all kind of Scowrings and Fluxes whatsoever, and therefore it is
truly said, that it is a Corrector of all poisons within man's body from his
head unto his feet.

And helps the patient to cure, except it be over long decocted that it
became Cronical, yet then it gives perfect ease; The cures which has been
performed in this four or five years last past, are too many here to recite; I
shall give you a few instances, such as came at the present into my mind as I
was a writing, by which the rest may be the better guessed at.

A woman that is now well and in health (ready to bear testimony if there were
occasion) comes to me and pressed me to consider her condition, which indeed
was very lamentable and sad, for one of her legs was all out or very near as
bigg as my wast, with sundry stinking Fistulad Ulcers running in it, which I
was not able to look on, this leg in growing into this condition, she told me
was ten or eleven years, and all that time she could get no help but had spent
what she was able in vain; I gave her of my Pills at a small rate considering
her condition, and willed her to prove whether there were likelihood of help by
them, to apply nothing outwardly, but to wash it with her own water or with
Brandewine, she accordingly did, keeping it warm as she ought to do, and so
gave my Pills time, which she accordingly did, and at first they did not only
sweat her out of measure, but did throw out abundance of filth out of measure
at the Ulcers that did greatly wet her bed in the night; she began to be
fearful and I persuaded her to patience, whereon she continues her order, and
when they had thrown out all that was fit to be thrown out, then began the
bigness of her leg to abate, and so with abundance of ease sweetly took down
her leg and healed those Ulcers one after another unto her great wonder, and
when she was near whole, and had but one hole in her leg open, and the
greatness of it gone, and that leg no bigger then the other, some of her
Gossips persuaded her, if she did not keep one of the Ulcers open, that she
should dye; I think she was near six months in bringing her leg unto this
condition, and then she left off, that so the hole left might run still, and so
it did, and by degrees her leg begun to swell again, and I on the other side
wondered what was become of my customer, for my council to her was, that if the
Pills healed them all perfectly she was a happy woman and ought to give God
thanks for it; and further that if they were all whole she would yet continue
taking of them for at least three months, that her nature might get strength
and find other purgers then at her Ancles, considering for how long time her
nature had been debelitated and other emantuaries found which nature did not
ordain, but she forsaking this advice as is above said relapsed, and finding
that her leg began as fast to go back as when she used the Pills it did to
heal, she fell to work again and followed the taking of the Pill as she ought
and through Gods mercy perfected the cure, as is to be seen at this day, and now
it may be she sends for a quarter of an ounce in three or four months, unto
God who shows mercy to the poor that put their trust in him, be all praise
and glory for ever amen.

There came unto me two or three men of good quality, and brought with them a
Country man about twenty four years old extreme lame and weak of the Palsy, so
sore that he could not button himself, nor put on his clothes nor seed himself,
I gave him six Pills with a little Oil of Amber of my own drawing, he never
came again so much as to return thanks (I hope he was thankful to God) a while
after I met one of the Gentlemen that brought him to me in Abchurch-lane end in
Cannon Street by mere accident, he gave me many thanks for my love unto his
friend, and told me that he was gone down into the Country again very well
about his business, and had strength and use of his hands and limbs, to his
great joy and comfort, praised be God.

I will now recite you hear another, I think as strange a cure as any has been
done in this latter age of the world; and truly had I not done it my self as a
weak instrument, I should very hardly believed it, and truly I will not vary
one tittle from the naked truth to the best of my understanding and knowledge,
and it was upon a Inns of Court Gentleman, that was once of the Kings Army a
Colonel, he being desperately sick of a very foul and desperate disease, and
had took many Pills, wherein much Quicksilver as is supposed had been put, but
procured nothing but signs of death, that his messenger told me he never looked
to come off his bed, a bold woman came to me without any guise or color, and
told me plainly how it was with him, and I not much caring for such kind of
Patient, gave her about six Pills and sent her away, and bid her as he liked
them to send to me again, but she soon came again with these words in her
mouth, the Gentleman says that he never meet with a honest man till now, and
does entreat you that you would not slight him in this sad condition, but go
forward with him, by what you have done already he is of good hope of sudden
cure, for by and by after one of your Pills were in his belly, the sore racking
of limbs, and knawing of his Bowels did cease, and that he is greatly refreshed
with them, I sent him more of the same, with order how to use it more
effectually; shortly after she came again for more of the same, and then she
did assure me that my Pills and drink which he took, had such wonderful effects
upon him which did almost fright them, but that he was hearty and eat his meat,
they should have feared, for all his hair came off from all parts of his whole
body, and also his whole skin came off all over his whole body, and also all
his nails, both on his hands and feet came off from him without any violence
fell off of themselves; I do protest as in the sight of God what is said is
true, to the best of my understanding, and about three weeks after I began with
him or thereabout, this Gentleman came to me and showed me his naked body,
which I was loath he should, and not one hair upon him, but a fresh skin as of
a young child, indeed he looked shotten and wan, as one that had been sick,
and so he had; he told me he was as well as ever he was in all his life, and
that which made me more to wonder, was that the nails of his hands did then
begin to peep out like the little white that is at the root of our nails. I may
not handsomely say any more, I bless God that has guided me to speak what is
very true, and nothing but what is true.

Over long cocted that it become cronical: Through length of time that humor
commonly called peccant, or Acrimonious, or Tartarous, although its beginning
may be but some ordinary cold, yet being long neglected, and many noctious
humors thereby engendered through long circulation 'twixt heart and brain; these
two being the extremities of heat and cold, I say with subjection that these
humors 'twixt heat and cold, the heat of the heart which causes them to
ascend, and the coldness of the brain causes them to descend; this work
continued, those Rhums must needs grow fixed, and considering that the salt of
nature willingly joins, as salt would be in water as his proper vessel; hence
arises those gross diseases, called Cronical, so called because they are out
of the reach of Gallenecal Physic; every common Chimist does know that long
sublimation or circulation does fix the subject, so that diseases of this
gender are for the most part uncurable: and let all be warned betimes, when
their head and teeth ache, and Rhums in their eyes, they slight it because they
to appearance do amend, and many indeed does, and too many fall into this gulf
which does not so appear it may be in seven years after, by that time their
Rhums get a crown upon their head, they grow surly and appear in diverse
manners, as first sore pa^ns in the head, then the evil in the eyes, beware of
blindness, then out goes the teeth with great pain, or else when this humor
becomes more gross, then out they go with the Scurvey; then beware the Lungs,
it is now grown sharp and corroding, then look unto the Region of the Bladder
and Kidnes, and all the griefs that attend them; but if it do escape these,
then look well to your hips for the Sciatica, and if you escape that then
beware the feet: I know well that Paracelsus prescribes a fourfold ground or
Radix of all diseases, but it does not bend with my brain, I think it all lies
hear and touch one and touch all, and let that Medicine be produced in the
world, and appear that is like unto my Pill that will both ease and cure these,
some and all of these, at least consider what I have said and what further
shall be said concerning it, it has pretty well spoke for it self.

There are hundreds other diseases which all hang on this root, for as all
diseases take their beginning of a Surfeit of one kind or other, so do they all
finish in a Consumption, called death of one kind or other, and their
variations are from the several complections and temperatures of men and their
mixture, as Sanguin, Choler, Melancholy, Phlegmatic, their temperature
whether hot, cold, moist, or dry, and the several compoundings of these, all
which passes my brains, I do not know them for my self, and therefore
undoubtedly cannot know them for any other, neither do I take it upon me, but
my work teaches me to know that long circulation does produce fixing, and when
fixed, its effects are more or less strong or weak, much or little according
unto the degrees thereof.

A man is therefore truly called Microcosme, a little world, a world indeed of
wonders; Solomon says speaking of man, God has set the world in his heart,
and who can find it out? And in his Book of Wisdom, where he promises to teach
us all wisdom, and the beginning of it, and whence it is, he tells us
something of his one beginning that he was born of a woman as all others are,
and more he teaches but of that nature, wherein he whispereth that man is the
seat or subject of true wisdom, which you may read at your leisure.

A late but expert Philosopher tells us in one of his Riddles, that he had
been all his life time sailing twixt the Artick and the Antartick Poles, which
in another place he calls his mouth and his belly; and who is so wise as to see
the mystery of hunger, and what is it that has power to satisfy its draught
or atraction, and when hunger is satisfied, what the operation of nature is,
until it came unto the Antartick or Expulsive Pole, how forcibly nature will
throw out the feculence, after curious nature has drawn and elaborated the
subject, and separated the quintesence; so that this little world hangs up on
the two Poles, atractive and expulsive; now then if there be a man in the world
that knows himself, then would I ask what that man is ignorant of; but if
thou could as it were go out of thy self, and could diligently converse with
thine one Intelligences, and the opperation of the threefold world in one, viz.
Celestial, Intelligable and Terrestrial or Beastial, mixed with infernal through
the fall of man. I say the vast Latitude and extent of man in all respects,
thou would find him such a mystery as has whole nature contained in him, and
consequently the variety of his Ailes are accordingly, whence very many take
their root from the mind, and very many from secret Sympathy and Antepathy,
which with a witness shows the presumption of Pispot Doctors, nay that man or
hundredth man may be truly called wise that is able with their tongues to give
a true Character of their one Ailes which I speak it boldly, not one of a
hundred is able to do, and God knows they are administered to accordingly; all
which duly considered, thou will see reason and cause why the Ancients spent
their time in searching out Medicines Universal.

I have therefore from the serious consideration of the premises, wholly set my
self unto the study of Hemetick Physic, and that is wholly set on two things,
Universality for safty when wisly administered and universality in opperation;
and let it not seem to thee as a new or strange thing; this is evident in the
Books of the Ancients as the height of their skill, and nothing more frequent
in all their writings then receipts of Medicin Universal, as all that read can
bear witness, and if I should give you their receipts, it would swell this
little Book unto a great Volum.

I do affirm unto all men that there is nothing contained in all the three
kingdoms of nature, viz. Mineral Vegetative and Animal, but that it does
contain in it self Medicin universal; suppose what you will in the world, if he
grant that which no man can deny, viz. That all things created by the blessed
Trinity are made of three, Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, then take I pray you what
individual you please, suppose it to be a Vegetable any Herb of any kind for
the Arcanus or Spirit of Life, is the same in all things, and separate by a
natural process, these three substances, give them their due cleansing, viz.
for the Salt give a natural calcination, then disolve filter coagulate, and
again calcin repeating these so long until they will yield unto thee no more
fecis; but be sure thy calcination do not excite too much, for thy Salt does
consist also of three sorts, a fixed Salt, and a Nitrous, and a Volitil, and if
thou stir him too much be sure thou will give wing unto the Vollotil; this
wisely prepared is a great treasure, be as careful and as natural in the
cleansing and rectifying of thy Sulphur, and likewise of thy Mercury, each one
according unto his kind and being cleansed according to Art, then conjoyn them
according unto the poise of nature, then feed them by Vulcans hand, but let not
his Bellows be to bigg until all reunite again, and do fix and make it lively;
this work being finished, I do demand of all men what this wants of a
universal Medicin or fifth essence: Now that Salt, Oil, and Water will really
become a body, is evident for the mediation of Oil, or Fat, or Sulphur binds or
brings together the two extremes, viz. Salt and Water, the one being fixed of
kind, and the other being Volitil, the sweet Mediation of Sulphur brings these
extremes into unity, and this is apparently seen in a vulgar working of soap,
and although that working be violent and unnatural, yet is there such a
conjugal embracing each other performed and that in few hours as would pusle a
good Artist to undo truly for some months, if it can ever be done at all, it
is not sables I speak of, nor scraped out of books without reason, but is the
daily work and labor of my hand with reason upon experience that enforces me
to believe this matter, and I have spoke the more unto it, because many that
want not ignorance do laugh at a universal Medicin, but I am upon good grounds
bound to believe that all and every thing in the world has it, yea the most
despised creature, that the most high God has created and made, and further I
freely grant the least or worst of things that have being, does carry so much
of the Wisdom of its Creator in it, that the more I have and do labor to know
its extent, the more I am at a loss, yea indeed I become the more a fool,
confessing freely that I know nothing as I ought to know it, and if of
creatures thus to speak in general, then what shall we say of the most choicest
creature, man; this then I do certainly take also for granted, that there is no
sickness or Aile attends the body of man, but his cure is of and from his one
body, he always has it with him if he knew how and what and when to apply it
to himself, either of his substance or of his excrements.

From hence may the miserable estate of poor man be discerned, who of all
creatures when he is sick is the most helpless, miserable, full of tormenting
pains, and as ignorant of his one cure or what should cure him, for men in
health think not on sickness until they be sick; but spend their time in the
beastiality and sordid covetings after the things and pleasures of this life,
blinded in sin and drenched with Surfeiting, either abusing Gods creatures or
themselves in inordinate desire after them, so that they neither know God in
his word nor in his works, nor themselves, or what is good to help them; one
word further which sets out man's misery, and I hope may awaken some to
amendment of life, I would ask, why is it a man suffers such intolerable pain
in sickness and death more then a beast: I will give two reasons for it, first
the intireness of natures composition together with the length of time in his
maturation, for things where in nature has but a weak and short time of
coction admits of a easy and sudden dissolution or separation, every one in
every thing discerns this, but man has the most perfect composition of any
thing that has a animal life with sense and feeling, and add to that the great
time he requires before he come up unto his full strength, this must needs
require some hard knocks in the dissolving as well as it did receive time and
strength in cocting. Secondly, that which is more then this, is the force of
his imagination and apprehension both of death and of Gods displeasure for sin,
all which does make him so mightily sensible that the terrors of death is often
born before it come, as in Agag King of the Amalekites, a word to a wise man is
sufficient, because this is not my proper discourse intended in this place.

What has been said, let it admonish all men as they tender the welfare of
body or soul, not to be unfurnished for either, assuring that they will not be
hurt by true knowledge, and do therefore conclude that the Medicin that
strengthens and comforts the Vital Spirits, fortifies the heart, and purges
and cleanses the blood, is a Universal Medicin, for what temper or quality
abounds and exceeds the poise of nature, that is, he an enemy unto, as if a
man have a Feavor, that I suppose will be granted to be too much fire, he is a
perfect enemy of that, or if Wind, drives away that; these things are common
with me performed with my Pill, judge of it as you please, and I shall count it
sufficient through Gods rich mercy and goodness, frequently to cure and
frequently to ease pains and Ailes counted uncureable.

It being tak^^ (...) granted that all diseases for the most part proceed from
a poisonous quality Hetrogenial to nature: If any man list to deny or dispute
this, I would gladly he informed by him.

For Agues, if this Pill be taken in reasonable doss two hours be ore the fit,
and a glass of Sack or Ale drank after it, That is to say, so much as the
Patient finds by good experience that they can bare and observe this order two
hours before the fit comes, take two Pills, and in the intrim of fits take one
Pill.

The Patient being put into a warm bed disposed for sweat, at three tim^s
taking it for the most part, is absolute cure, let it be never so malignant,
The Pill working by sweat principally in this disease, requires a warm bed, and
that two hours before the fit, because by that time the Pills will contribute
their virtue all over the body, so that instead of having a cold and shaking
fit, the patient will be a sleep and in a fine sweat, provided that you have
given a right doss, that is so much as the strength of the patient can bare,
and the disease does require, it has fallen out often that one Pill alone has
cured an Ague, and it falls out that some that are compounded with other
diseases, will not be cured with twenty, yet all do feel their benefit at the
very first taking of it, which will give them encouragement sufficient to
persevere and give it time, if it be so that the disease require it, for you
may take notice that the Ague is but the beginning or forerunner of many other
diseases, far worse then it self, as Dropsy, Scurvy, Jaundies, and ofttimes
Consumptions, yet through the bounty of God, I have helped many far gone with
all these with this Pill, and very little other things to help; it is also to
be noted how irregular many are in the use of means which will neither give
themselves time nor rest, but finding their fit at the first and second taking
to be gone will no longer be ruled, and will take no more, and thus in six or
eight days their fits come again whereas indeed they had need to take them at
least fourteen days after the fits are gone, that nature may get strength, and
the blood thoroughly purged, and some that will not be ruled, have come again and
again, and urged their business permitted them not, but some of these by that
time the Winter have come unto its depth, their business has permitted them to
dye, I do make mention of this to second my admonition, and I do warn and
charge, that although the first Pill that you take to your thinking, has
conquered your Ague, that you notwithstanding expect it, as soon as the power
of the Pill is wrought out, except you supply with another, and that for
sometime you may fear its coming again; there is not any case wherein people
have more abused themselves and me in my credit and my Pill, then in this
business of Agues, all which might be easily helped if people would follow home
as they should, but let him that is disposed to play with his Ague, assure
himself his Ague will not play with him; neither let him think that it will be
set going with one violent portion, for experience tells those that so doing
they do but drive themselves into the Dropsy, as extreme vomitting with
unknown powders, not but that a vomit is rational and necessary with other
means; there would be no end for me to write particulars the cures have been so
many, for many hundreds have been cured herewith, and many have helped their
friends with my Pills, whose faces I never saw, and they are a living testimony
of the power of my Pills.

The like for all kind of Feavors, only in stead of Sack drink white wine, but
if the Feavor have got head before this Pill be taken, and the patient weak and
wants the benefit of nature by siege, there is a proper Glister to be taken
to cleanse, open, and cool the patient, but upon their life not to neglect the
taking of the Pills. As to Feavors, through the bounty of Almighty God, I think
greater wonders have hardly been seen; how speedily and effectually this Pill
in few hours does overruled the disease, and in a little time does cure them,
as may appear by the instances following, One of my neighbors comes unto me,
and brings another with her, and desired me to visit her daughter which lay at
the point of death, about eleven or twelve years of Age, her sickness was a
high Feavor accompanied with extreme shortness and want of breath, lest of a
very honest and able Doctor, who told her Father and Mother, that if she
desired any thing, they should give it her, for he would not prescribe or give
any thing more unto her; and further, that she could not live until the morrow
morning; she also said that she would desire me if I thought good, to give her
any thing, if she should dye, yet it would be no discredit unto me, for they
all looked upon her as dead, although she were alive, I went with her and took
of the extract of my Pill, and truly I never saw in all my life greater
weakness and yet live; at her mothers entreaty I gave her half a spoonful of my
extract in White wine and Sugar, and said if it please God that she do sleep
and sweat (for neither of them she could not be brought unto) I do not much
fear b^t that she may yet recover, while we were speaking a very little while
her mother telling me the manner how she fell sick, she turned her ^elf about,
said she, I think my child is a sleep already, I wished her to feel one her
sorehead, and it was a little moist, I caused all to depart the room, and I
went home, this was at four in the afternoon, and just about eight the neighbor
that came with her mother came in great have, and told us that she had slept
and sweat all that while, and now she was awaked, and called for meat, and they
desired to know what they should give her; I will say no more of of this, what
is said is true, and will speak for it self; it is sufficient through Gods
wonderful blessing upon the Pill as the means this child is in perfect health,
as far as I am able to judge; neither do I doubt but this with other instances
will stand in the face of envy it self, praised be God who gives me many such
like witnesses, whose record is true and will stand on my behalf both in heaven
and earth.

Another instance I will give you more strange then this, a Gentleman well
known comes to me with a grave Gentlewoman with him, and he told me he had a
only son of about thirteen years old, who had laid sick of a Feavor about
seven days, and that he neither did eat, sleep, nor sweat, but did burn as if
he were one fire, and that for want of rest he did talk idle, and that he had
used means uneffectual and did much fear his life, desired me to give something
that might do him good, I gave with him a little bottle of the aforesaid
extract of my Pill, and willed them to make have and presently give him one
spoonful in two of White wine and Sugar, which as it appears they did; I told
them as I did unto the other, that if it did produce sweat and sleep, I did not
doubt the recovery of his son (in an ordinary way of Gods providence) and that
I had daily experience in like cases; and I further willed them to give him the
like portion every half day until he was well, if they thought good to follow
my advice (which advice cost them nothing) about two days after the ancient
Gentlewoman comes again with the same bottle, and I am sure I did hardly miss
one spoonful, in so much that I would have forced her, if I could, to have
taken all her money again, but I could not; and she said that they made haste as
I bad them, and what was wanting they gave it him at that time, and he
presently fell asleep, and also into a gallant breathing sweat, and so he lay
asleep in his sweat six hours (for nature having ease, the patient will soon
sleep) and then he waked and called for meat, which they gave him, and it did
well agree with him, to all their exceeding joy and comfort, and said she he is
very well, and does continue sleeping well and orderly, and also eating his
meat, and I give you a hundred thanks, and have brought you your bottle again,
it may please God it may save the life of another, for he never took it but
once; now I do assure you, God Almighty the faithful and true witness knows
that to my best knowledge, I have not erred, no not in one tittle as to the
substance of the relation; unto him therefore be all obedience thanksgiving,
praise and glory forever Amen.

The general rules that I follow in giving this Pill, whether it be in a Pill
or in a extract is to begin with little enough at first, wherein is both
pleasantness and safty, for some have foolishly flung off at once taking,
because they it may be have sleeped a hour or two longer then they expected,
and it may be sweat more then and longer then they were willing, these it is
evident complain of ease, yet is there own fault for taking it it their own
way, and not after my direction.

It helps all Headache and Toothach, Experience which is the truest informer,
speaks aloud in this matter also, for if a little Pill be applied unto the
Tooth, it (while one can tell forty) gives ease, and often times never
troubles more for that time. I was once with two or three friends in cold
weather, drinking a pot of hot Purle at the corner of Broadstreet, the maid of
the house almost mad with her Teeth, and her Mistress said she was ready to
knock her brains out for madness, I gave her about four grains in a little
Pill, and bid her lay it to the aching Tooth which she did, and presently went
to draw us drink, who came presently up again laughing, my friends thought I
had conjured, they could hardly believe her that her Teeth did ach, she
affirmed they were well and all her pain gone. I gave her a Pill to take when
she went to bed to make all sure, which it did perfectly so that her teeth
ached not while she staid in that house; many such like I might relate, but
because I suppose belief in this must be granted, it is so common that many do
much help this way as I never hear of in all parts of the City and Country, but
my advice is to take it in a good doss and go to bed, and if they could be
great to take three or four, so it will do thee many good offices besides the
help of the Toothach, for if the defluction of Rhums be high, and there appear
unto their present seeling, nothing but pains of Teeth, yet if they make not
use of good means to stop and dry up that humor, they may expect the Scurvy,
Consumption or Dropsy to follow, whereby their lives will spend out in misery
and have them to death; and for the Headache it is as ready help, and all kind
of pains in the Head, I never knew any grief of the Head stand with it but one,
and the Gentleman said it was called a Virtego, what that is I am not so wise,
but this I know, that the party grieved, said he always was pained with a
scalding twixt the skin and the skull of his head; and I think but that I durst
not to be so bold with him, if this Pill had been applied unto the skull of his
head it would have reached it better, but for any other pain or grief, although
never so bad or of long standing it does overruled it, It dries up dropping
Rhums, Catarhs which destroy the Lungs: Blessed be God I speak it with joy, the
many which this Pill has helped both in City and Country, which have been left
of great and able men, and some of them so weak that they have not been able to
come to me; at this instant one man Northumberland-Alley, a lost man in all
appearance, and in his and his wives judgments, even at once is a living
monument of Gods mercy and the Pills power and efficacy; I do verily believe I
might have Certificates of hundreds of this grief only, if I would desire them
under their own hands, with their place of dwelling, I do know well that the
more good I am an instrument to do the more some will envy; I may not look to
speed better then he that was without sin.

Presently helps any cold Cough or Surfeit, which is also true, that although
a man's Cough were never so violent, yet shall he not Cough that night he takes
a Pill till toward morning a little, then it may be he may Cough a little to
cast forth his Rhums thickened, for lying twixt Head and Lungs defends the one
and sends up sweet vapon* in to the other that there is no Coughing; many
people of great age at the gates of death to their thinking, God blessing this
Pill unto them are revived, and comfortably in joy themselves and are at ease
in joying their breath in good order, which before was ever ready to strangle;
I do perswad^ my self that the world never enjoyed a more substantial help for
all griefs of this kind, and let m^ tell thee plainly and freely if the first
Pill tha^ thou shall take do not sufficiently speak for it self* I do assure
thee that I desire to say nothing, neither will I persuade thee to take a
second.

There is in London a Agedand honorable Alderman which for some years was much
trouble with a Distillation or Defluction of Rhums from his head, this
Gentleman spent and took mu^^ for the same of sundry of the greatest note, but
to no purpose as he informs me himself, the first Pill of mine that ever he
did take, although but a little one, did stop his Distillation, that he did not
Cough all that night, unto his great wonder, and I thank him he did in my
vindication send unto those whose things before proved uneffectual, and let
them know what one small Pill of mine had done, which did win me and my Pills
great credit; there would be no end of writing of particulars, we hardly pass a
day without experiences of this kind thanks be to God; and for such kind of
colds as carry the symptoms of Ague or Feavor with them, if you take it betimes
and in reasonable quantity as the Patient may bear, it is seldom but that one
Pill brings you off master, but if not (for it is according as the strength of
the infection is) yet continue and with small patience all will be overcome; I
speak by experience, for I have often in cold and foul weather come home with the
apparent signs of both Feavor and Ague, and then I have to bed, taking one Pill
just presently, for every minuit would be to loss; and about four or six hours
after I took another, always having by me a bottle of good Strong Waters, that
in case of faintings I may refresh my self with a spoonful or two thereof,
either by it self or mixed with Ale or Beer; and keeping this order that fever
nor one in ten stays with me above twenty four hours, or to keep me in a doors
all the next day, if the weather be favorable, and for any Surfeit either of
diet, drink, or labor, or any other way, it is as ready help as possibly the
nature of the disease will permit; but if the Surfeit be by meat or drink it
will work variously, sometimes by vomit, and most frequently, and sometimes by
purging only, and sometimes by both, and if the Surfeit be long taken, it will
work higher then by Sweat and Urin, and will cause the patient to break out
more or less according as the nature and degrees of the patient is, whereby
through the blessing of God, it has eminently saved the lives of many, as I
will give you here a few instances.

A lusty and strong young man upon strong labor being both hot and dry, met
with small Beer, and he drank freely, which did chill his fat and blood within
him, he suddenly was sensible and betook himself unto his bed, where he lay in
a desperate condition, none expecting his life could be saved, his wife comes
to me for him, making great complaint that they had spent all that they had,
and words to that purpose, I gave her Pills and heard no more of her: about
three or four months after by a mear accident I was with some where also this
man was in company, I knew not him, nor he knew not me, till by the discourse
of the company, he gained knowledge that it was I who gave Pills at the Tower,
and he did there before them all, make a relation of his long sad condition,
and that his wife found favor, said he, with this Gentleman, who gave me freely
a small pot of stuff to make Pills on, and the first Pill, said he, that ever I
did take, I did find my spirits revive within me, and I never had more; and Sir
I crave pardon for my unthankfulness unto you, and now give you a hundred
thanks, for under God you saved my life, etc. this man is always ready to
speak to the full height of what I have said, and much more both of himself and
friends.

Another man coming up from Manchester in cold weather, a man that use to be
much in the fire, and also to keep company, by that time he got unto London,
his spirit was spent, having got Surfeit upon Surfeit, and being both perverse
and also covetous, resolved to dye rather then fall into any Doctor,
Apothecary, or Surgeons hand, his brother and sisters persuasions were all
in vain, he being resolved to lay his bones here, as he said, at last his
brother thought of me, and said unto him, that he would bring a man to him that
was neither Doctor nor Apothecary, then he began to hearken a little, but what
was I then? an Alchimist (which he understood as well as Wallthams Calf) I was
brought (for I could not say my friend his brother nay) and found him in a
lumpish heartless temper, and burning in a Feavor, he regarded little what I
said, neither would be persuaded to take any thing, till I having made three
little Pills, and first I took one my self, then his brother took the second,
and when he saw that, he for shame took the third, it did vex me, and yet it
was some pleasure to see the hoggish temper of the man; I hasted and made two
and left them for to take at other nights if he liked the working of that in
his belly, and the all that I made was but little ones, partly because of the
man's exceeding timorousness, and partly because of my self being from home, I
willed him to have to bed and be kept warm; I came the next morning to to see
my patient, he coughed and told me he was much better, gave me many thanks, his
brother protested that they heard him break wind in the night (as he and his
wife lay in the Chamber over him) as if he would have blowed the bed from under
him; and also when he came down to see him that his Rugg with which he was
covered, did stand all on a dew, his sweat coming through all the bed clothes,
he got up while I was there, and did eat a little of a Neck of Mutton the first
meat that he did eat at London, and as I stood talking with him, I thrust the
two Pills together, and made up the number out of my box which he did not
perceive; but the first had done the work, for they both did not near work so
high with him as the first did, and in three days time this man was as well as
ever he was in his life, and as cheerfully went about his business; unto God
whose commandment gives healing, be all praise and glory for ever, I confess I
did receive too much respect, being but a poor weak instrument of so great and
miraculous a work, considering the time of its performing, and I was as
thoroughly rewarded, for when he returned to Manchester, he sent me the best
Cheshire Cheese he he could buy for money, as he promised me for my cure. I have
given you the particulars with their circumstances in this and in diverse other
instances for good reason, which is, that the ignorant thereby, together with
my punctual direction might be well instructed, how in all cases they order
themselves in making use of this Pill, for by experience I find, both say and
write what I will for direction many forget, and many will do what they list,
but I hope all will hold me excused, having afforded rules in abundance for
direction, viz. be sure aat first to take little enough and by little and
little come on in quantity as you can bear it, and as your condition requires
it (a wise man will cut his meat with his knife, but it may be that a mad man
will cut his throat therewith, yet notwithstanding the knife is good and
necessary.)

One instance which comes now to my mind, I will tell you, A very good friend
of mine well known amongst Trades men, were feasted by his Landlord at the time
of paying his rent, with Venison and Respass wine, and being free and merry did
eat and drink freely thereof, but did not at all digest the same, this one
Saturday morning, he found himself indisposed, and not well all the day, and
grew worse and worse; at night he took one of my Pills (always having them in
the house ready upon all occasions) and goes to bed, in two hours time he begun
to vomit, which he did very much with much illness, and as it may be supposed,
wanted the most part of the benefit thereof (in that case I would advised to
have took another) notwithstanding he vomitted and drunk much all night with
great violence, and he burned inwardly and was most unsatisfiedly dry (his
drinking was out of measure) but still inwardly burned worse and worse, and
being spent grew very weak and feeble, in so much that his wife and friends did
despair of life; and I being locked up in the Tower could not be spoke with
till betwixt six and seven in the morning; being sent for I hasted and took
with me one gill of my Antidote, for Pills I knew they had in the house, and
when I came to him, he was so weak he could not speak unto me, his face and
nose, his hands and feet was all as cold as earth, I had little hopes of his
life, for contrary unto these his stomach did burn like fire, which indeed
caused him to pour into his belly so much small Beer, and by this time had no
strength to evacuate it again, that his Surfeit now was double as well from
unreasonable drinking of small Beer, as of Respass wine and Venison, with his
wives good liking I gave him three spoonfuls of my Antidote in four spoonful of
Treacle water (praying for a blessing, yet much feared his life) it gave him a
little ease as we conceived by his quiet lying, I hoped all vomiting had been
staid, thinking that to have been the best for him, he lay still while one
might tell treatably half a thousand or thereabout, then he began to stretch
out himself and turned up the white of his eyes, we all that were spectators
was sorely distressed for him, expecting nothing but that his last breath was
going from him, but contrary unto our expectation he gathered up his seet and
twisted himself about and start up, a great Basin much like a Barbars basin
being ready, which he had used in the night, and there at once comes up such a
full torrent as his mouth could admit, which quickly filled the great Basin,
such a vomit as I never beheld in all my life, and am persuaded never shall
again, and in the end of it comes his Respass wine, and his Venison unwrought
on by nature, for it is evident, that all the former vomitting did not reach
the root of the matter, this vomit being over, and another Basin ready, he gave
again another easy strain and brought up again my Antidote just as he put it
into his belly, both for quantity and color, as near as we could guess; look
you said his wife unto me, here is your stuff again, well said I, blessed be
God for this stuff, he has done well for this time the Lord make us thankful;
I would not for more then I will speak of, your husband had dyed, you would
have thought ill of me and my Antidote, through the goodness of God this man was
about his business in two days time; this my friend with all the rest present
are ready to witness what I have said, and more touching this matter, unto God
eternal immortal Lord of life and death, be praise and honor and glory for
ever Amen, for he takes the strong and hardy, and casts them unto the dust
of death according to his will; and again he takes that which is ready to dye
and restores it to life at his good will and pleasure, and who is he of the
hardiest of men that can withstand God.

It removes pains of the Breast, trembling of the Heart, cleanses the Blood. I
have not known any pains stand before it, but in Feavors, or any other grief
wherein is great crying out of pains and oppressions of the Breast, but the
first Pill gives relief; there is a very aged woman by me on Tower Hill, hard
by the Scaffold, who was almost off of her legs with extreme trembling and
aching of her Heart, which was occasioned through a fright and much grief and
she took this Pill for almost or altogether this three years, and thanks be to
God is now lusty and for stronger and better then when she began to take it at
first; that it is a forcible cleanser of the blood it is evident by its
universal sweating and purging by Urin.

It helps sudden fits of Sounding and Convulsions. A young man much troubled
with fits, and often would fall down and foam in his fits; I do not know what to
determine them to be, and with the use of this Pill and my Oil of Amber, found
present relief, which he thankfully acknowledged beyond expectation, and very
many of each Sex and Ages frequently have received the like benefit.

It drunk with whit-wine, cleanses the Reins and Kidneys of Gravel, opens
the Vrany passages, drive^ out the stone, if it be not coagulated, and often
times at Urine sends forth like jaggs of cloth of paper of sundry colors. Of
its power in cleansing the Reins, Kidneys and Bladder, many has plentifully
found by good experience, to their exceeding joy and comfort. A good friend of
mine going to Colchester, finds a kinswoman very sick and near death of the
stone and Gravel, he gave her two or three, I am not certain, but he brought me
home five or six stones of considerable bigness full of sharp spikes as pin
points and three square which I have reserved, they also seemed as if they had
been hung upon a string, many more there were which we have not, but through the
goodness of God this woman, although near eighty, at once recovered hereon,
praised be God.

A man that came from Ireland who had married a Irish whore who had a husband
of her own Countrymen, did poison this English man three times, the last time
wrought so strongly that it took him off his business, his hair and nails came
off; this man very weak came to England in hope of relief; this man had a
perpetual thirst, and did drink without measure, but could not Urin it out so
that he was swelled ready to burst, and all means which could be gotten could
not help him until God so ordered it that I heard of him, for a very good
friend of his did desire my charitable assistance, I sent him six Pills which
wrought such happy effects, that after one of them given him, he fell a making
of water, so out of measure that he filled what was by him for that service and
then had no retention but let all go in his bed, his friend had for him one
quarter of an ounce more; I never saw the man nor never heard more of him, but
what I have said is the true and faithful relation of his friend as near as I
am able to give it you.

A very old man in Ducksfild-lan^, lay at the point of death with the Stone,
and could make no water for many days and nights together, so that in the
judgment of his neighbors there was no hope of his life, one of his neighbors
which did know the worth of my Pills, came unto me and desired me to administer
unto him, I told her that she knew well enough that I never did undertake any
thing, and that she knew well enough the power and force of my Pills, and if
she should venture to give it him, I would give her some, but to give it him by
my advice, I would give none, blaming her for letting it be drove so far, and
the old man near death, she replied the case was desperate and other means was
uneffectual, and she would give him a good Pill although he did dye, for there
was no way else but that for him; I gave her Pills with her, she gives him a
good Pill, the old man by reason of pain had not slept for many nights and
days, he presently falls a sleep, and slept four or five hours, and when he
waked calls for a pot, and did so Urine, that they had hardly things to receive
it, and of a sudden this man was up and about his business, blessed be God for
all his unspeakable mercies.

A loving friend of mine who lives at present at Chattam who knew well the
worth and safty of my Pill, by much experience he had made, having a friend of
his that was much, troubled with the Stone and difficulty of making water, my
friend gives him a good Pill, and the next day as he stood draining against a
Brick wall to make water, at last there flew out a stone from him and snapt
against the Brick wall where he stood, of an incredible biggness to be of a
man's voiding, upon which this man was wonderfully released to his great
comfort, which Stone my friend bring; to us and we have it at this present by
us; unto God Almighty be all thanksgiving for ever.

A man comes unto me in behalf of his wife, a young woman that was desperately
afflicted, but none could tell her what her grief was, notwithstanding the
woman was weary of her life; her pains and knawing at her Breast was so
exceeding much, and the most conceived she had the foul disease (it was indeed
a foul disease) and I did also mistrust it, and I think the woman did likewise,
but notwithstanding made many protestations for her self, I let them have Pills
for their money, not doubting but they would make a discovery what the matter
was and so it was that my Pills did provoke strong vomiting, and at last comes
up (as her husband tells me) a thing that either was a worm or like a worm,
but it had a strange ugly head, and was at least twelve or fourteen inches in
length, I did not see it, nor could hear any more of it.

A woman at Richmond, a long time grieved, but knew not what her grief was, but
fore oppressed at her Breast, a neighbor of hers gives her one of my Pills
which caused her to vomit in a strong and violent manner she brought forth at
her mouth clots of putrified blood, and matter of diverse colors that hung
together that it might be drawn out betwixt ones hands, and like jaggs of
linen, cloth, or paper, through Gods blessing it, did preserve her, and she in
good health at this day praised be God for his rich mercy and goodness.

A very ancient Gentleman well known in the City of London, being much
afflicted with the Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys, riding unto his Country
house, received a very gentle fall from his horse upon the sand, notwithstand
it did stir him too much, insomuch as that his Urin was all blood, and as might
be guessed in reason that the Stones in the Vessel wherein they were bred being
sharp pointed, pricked the Kidneys which might produce bleeding; this Gentleman
being careful of himself, caused a Coach to be that night sent for and hasted
to London, where in reason help might be attained, and such was his care, that
when the Coach came in hard and stony way, he got out of the Coach and went
gently one foot, he applied himself unto the best means for help, as in reason
were to be attained, but still in vain, in so much that he did much fear his
life, by reason of his much bleeding, and as near as he could guess, he had
lost above two Gallons of blood and watter, a friend of mind visiting him,
persuaded him to take some of my Pills, which he did, and with good and happy
effect, for it did both stop his bleeding, and yet also brought away handfuls
of Gravel; this Gentleman came unto me for more of my Pills, and this is the
true relation as near as I am able to remember, and through Gods mercy is ready
to attest above what I have written, praised be God who gives life from death
at his good will and pleasure.

An Aldermans wife of this City being also grievously wasted with a flux of
blood, that her condition was very doubtful, a woman that I am persuaded fears
the Lord in truth, she desired to speak with me to take my Pills, and in two or
^^ree days finds great relief, and in a day or two more perfectly healed, and
she was about her business, blessed be the God of all our mercies.

A woman by Bishops-gate, newly brought to bed but very sick of inward griefs,
takes one of my Pills, which did bring a Stone I might guess as bigg as my
great finger end, but long and one end much bigger then the other, her little
daughter lighting one it, did bite off, as she said the bigger end, and if
true, then was it bigger then I have spoken, she brought it us and left it for
some months with us; further she tells us that this Pill did bring from her
by siege a thick hard congealed matter discolored, and like Orange Pills, at
which they did more wonder then at the former; this woman did recover and enjoy
much ease and health long after it; the most high who dwells with him that is
of a humble heart and trembles at his word, be all praise and glory for ever
Amen, for I am persuaded this woman did truly fear the Lord, and put her whole
trust in him.

A gentlewoman that was rich, but of adiscontented Spirit, being near the point
of death heard of my Pills; she took of it, but not according to my rules, but
did mix it with stuff of her own; she lived about twelve months after she did
be-begin with them, but got no ground but grew weaker and weaker, till at last
she took the Pills alone, and when she was so weak that she would take no
earthly thing, neither bread nor broth, nor any Cordial either of her own or of
any other bodies she would take a little of my Pill, and that alone did keep
her alive, and sustain her for ten days, to the great wonder and astonishment
of all about her, and had the use of her fences so far as to be much troubled
at her kindred about the dividing of her estate, for she had no child and was
rich; this is a true relation, which the Nurse which was always with her does
give me.

A very old man near death and bedridden for a good while meets with my Pill I
know not how, and did revive exceedingly; his Son in law being accidentally in
my company, told me how it did lift up his father from the grave beyond all
expectation; I willed him to be careful of him, and told him that if he did
neglect him one night it would endanger his life; about three months as I do
remember, I met him again, said he to me but that I know you are an honest man,
I should have thought you had been a Witch, for said he, we forgot to send for
Pills till it was too late, and the next day my father dyed, then I remembered
what you said.

Another old man near fourscore being lame in his limbs, and also greviously
afflicted with a Rupture, was bedridden and could in no wise help himself not so
much as to Button his Doublet, and to all demonstration was very near his end,
this man with the use of my Pills did begin to feel his arms and limbs, so that
he could do some necessary offices for himself, and continuing began to stagger
upon his legs, and to feel himself upon his, Cruches, and in short time this
man first threw away one Cruch and then another, so that now at this time this
old man will go from Ratcliff to to Westminster, and back again in a day, on
his feet about his business, with only a little short stick in his hand,
praised be God.

A very old man upward of fourscore, lay two years bedridden meeting with my Pill
did so recover, that as his servant tells me that the last Summer he did buy
him a horse to take his pleasure in the Country withal.

A Knight lay bedridden and lame of all his limbs in the Kings Bench, in such
sort as that he could not scarcely stir one finger, but his hands and fingers
pulled on heaps, this Knight received six Pills which had so happy effect on
him as at once untied and set him at liberty, he sent for me, I did not make so
much have to come at him as he desired, my friend from whom he had the Pills,
goes to visit him, and he had took horse and was gone about his business,
thanks be always given to God.

Also upon Tower Hill does live another old man aged fourscore and six years,
who for some years lay bed rid and past hope, as to this world, this man with
the use of my Pill does now comfortably enjoy himself, and rules over all his
pains and A^les, and does rise up and walk up and down the house and keep the
fire side warm, and prevents his kindred of their expectations, to his great
ease and comfort; to God alone who commands and it is done, be all praise and
thanksgiving for ever more Amen.

In Coleman-street also lives a very aged woman, who for a long time went to
Fish-street to setch sewing work, and through much weakness made five or six
restings by the way with very great pain and grief; in a little time making use
of my Pills does now go it with ease and without any stop or turn, for which
the old woman does return all hearty praise and thanks unto God. I solemnly
protest that I do in my conscience believe that I do receive more strength and
nourishment by a good Pill, then from the best meals meat that ever I eat in
all my life, and therefore the madness of those do appear which through their
ignorance do charge my Pill with destroying Nature, but the best is, those that
so do, are such as never took any of it, they may better be allowed to spend
their verdict, both old and young that use it find the contrary by good
experience; for I do not commend a thing in the air, or beyond Sea, but a thing
that near or altogether one quarter of a pound is taken every night, and
certain things concerning it may be attained; and I do wonder at the shameless
slanders and forgeries of some, that one would think should a little more
respect their credit, but it is best for me to let them forge on till they are
weary; I am persuaded their lying is the way to make me thrive.

Sometime since I met a very good friend who was not well, I gave him six large
Pills fit for his own taking, but they being all run into one by that time he
came home, his wise made the six up into nine, and that night she took six of
the nine, regarding not rule or order that I had given and indeed any of the
six had been a portion sufficient for her to take; this woman about twelve a
clock in the night began to vomit and so coutinued till ten the next day; and
much foul matter it brought from her, and after she had gained rest and
received meat she found her self well and much eased of her oppressions; a
while after I met her husband, who thanked me for working a wonderful cure upon
his wife, I replied I negave her any thing, then he told me what his wife had
done, and said, that although he was afraid that she had killed her self, yet
it proved very happily, for said he, your Pills have not only cured all the
pains and illness of her body, but likewise they have cured all her ill
conditions too, at which I and some friends with me fell a laughing; why said
he it is true, for before she took your Pills she was so apt to be angry and
peevish, I could please her in nothing, but since she took those Pills, she is
the lovingest woman that may, and so pleasant that I give you thanks for them
for my wise, for I my self took none of them; although this story is matter of
laughter to those that heard it, and a Proverb unto this day, and it may be as
ridiculous to you that read it, yet if you please to consider that it is pain
that oftentimes makes peevish, the ease of pain does remove away such
peevishness.

A woman comes to me sorely afflicted along time in all her limbs, and her
torment was such as is not to be credited; the woman I perceived was exceeding
sensible, and in most grievous extremity cried out, I hasted and gave her of my
Pills, she comes the next day and did so load me with thanks and praise that my
heart did ache within me, least God should be dishonored; this poor woman giving
so much to me.

A Lady of an honorable family in this Nation, was sorely tormented all over
her body accompanied with shaking of joints, was held sixteen weeks under no
small means, but to as small effect, she sends for me in great haste, she
desired my help, I presented her with such things as I had, whereof my Pills
was chief; the first Pill that she took, took off her great pains, and when I
came there about two days after, her pains was not only gone, but her joints
lay as quietly together as my own did, for when I first took her by the hand,
her bones did start and tremble, as if they would never came near each other
again; I say no more, God will requite every one according as his work shall be.

It also sends forth by vomit or otherwise clods of blood, breaks inward
Imposthums to astonishment, and effectually eases pains got by Surfeits, cold
or bruises, whereby many secret and hidden griefs are cured which otherwise
could not be discovered. A Plummers wife in Bishopsgate-street, having five
years before received some wrong in her delivery of two children, in which time
of five years she was sorely afflicted with sundry griefs and pains, and fits
of falling and swounding, in so much that this woman was very weary of her
life, and whatsoever means she used it proved uneffectual to her, but her pains
and griefs did still increase upon her, and by accident I met with her husband
at a friends house, who speaking of his wives misery withal said, as poor as he
was he would give ten pounds for his wifes help, I replied and asked him if he
would give ten groats: I gave him six Pills with him, and before they was spent
she sent me word she was in a new world, and that she, for ought she knew, was
as well as ever she was in all her life time, that the Pills through Gods
blessing had sully freed her from her griefs, and that they did so handle her,
that by vomit she did bring up such clods of blood, congealed matter, that she
was fain with her thumb and fingers to pull it out of her mouth; and further
that they did send forth by Urin as strange matter to great ease and comfort,
although to her great wonder and astonishment, this woman remains in health to
this day, and will not spare to give testimony hereunto, thanks be given to God.

Another woman being left for a dead woman, took one of my Pills which caused
her to vomit up a pint of matter as if it came out of a sore which no doubt but
it did; she sent for an able Chyrurgeon to see it, who said it was better in
her basin then in her breast; she kept it two days for me to see it, but I saw
it not; it pleases God thus wonderfully to bless its use, for many grieved
some years together and cannot tell what they ail, and all that they do advise
with are in several tales concerning what they ail; this Pill when taken
assaults it, and by the grace of God continuing with it, and if curable does
cure it.

A very old man upward of fourscore, being very weak with loosing his blood at
Urin, for above three years together, meets with my Pills, presently found
ease, and in a little time quite stopped his Urin of blood, but brought way by
Urin abundance of Gravel and Skins like jaggs of paper, for sometime; this man
has used my Pill for this three years unto his great comfort, and at this day
is very hearty, cheerful and in health, and his Urin clear as any other bodies,
blessed be God which takes away youth and renews old age at his good
pleasure, and indeed it is wonderful to hear the happy tidings which people do
bring us every day, and many who have affirmed to us that they sold and pawned
what they had, and spent it in seeking for help but in vain have here either
for nothing or for a small matter found cure, and does fill our ears with the
large acknowledgements of Gods good hand in blessing this Pill; and truly my
spirit is much more refresht to hear such returns, although it be not a penny
advantage unto me more then the receiving of money where I have truly deserved
it, unto God alone I desire with my whole heart may be ascribed all praise and
thansgiving for all his wonderful mercies which he is pleased to show unto the
poor and needy who put their trust in him.

Further more this Pill helps the French diseases (commonly called the Pox or
French Pox) if it be efectually used. Before I come to show its effectual use
as to this disease, I must crave leave to speak a little, but tenderly to two
or three sorts of people, for ordinarily this disease comes not without
abundance of wickedness, and I tremble to think of it, much less to set down
his cure without protesting one Gods behalf against those accursed ways that
brings men into it, and indeed were it not for the sakes of many good men and
women whom I do judge in my conscience to be chaste, and are infected through the
wickedness and unfaithfulness of their yoke fellows I durst have said nothing
of it at all, and although these are but few in number comparatively, yet far
be it from any honest mind to deny them help; Solomon in his Proverbs says,
Stolen water is sweet, and bread in secret is pleasant; but they consider not
that death is there, and that those steps lead down to hell, and such is the
ahborring of my soul against this wickedness whereby this disease is for the
most part gotten and come by, that it is a sore fear least I should be a means
to help any miscreant to sudden cure, that is resolved to persevere in this
abomination, and double his sins against the God of mercies; and forasmuch as
the righetous judgments of God overtake the wicked plaguing them even in the
force of their lusts; shall I be an instrument of their relief yet to sin, God
forbid it, but for those that truly repent and show it by a chaste
conversation, I should think it a happiness to be a healer, an easer of the
pains and sores of all such; yea I profess my self the servant of all such; but
as I said Gods just severity is most conspicuous upon these who sport, and as
they imagine pleasure themselves, striving to satisfy and fulfill (but in vain)
their beastiality; and were they not left and given up of God unto a sordid
slavery unto the fullfilling the desires and Iusts of their concupisence bond
slaves to hell and the devil, they would easily discern they labor altogether
in vain; for can the ocean, the gulf or grave, say it is enough, or what man
laboring to fulfill his desire is not ten times further off by being vassallaged
more thereunto, can desire be ever satisfied or filled; and so always is the
quiver of a Whore always open and cannot be filled, but like the grave ever
craves give, give, and he that is appointed to perdition is taken by her; the
wise King tells that a Whore is a deep pit, and the abhorrd of God do fall
therein, a dreadful precipe, God grant ears to hear it while the day of hope
lasts, and it is my hope to admonish by this unto the preservation of many,
and how light soever this unclean wickedness is accounted, yet let all the
guilty know their names are accounted amongst those that shall not inherit
eternal life, but for ever receiving their portion in the blackness of
darkness, from the presence of the Lord for ever; O thou adultrer and adultress
would God thou could hear; but thou, O thou who already have received the
beginning of torment* how miserable of mankind art thou above all other, and to
thy further judgment know that when thy now rotting body is destroyed, thou
again shall receive a spirituous body capable of bearing and receiving a flood
of wrath, and as then thou have received a body spirituous that shall remain
unto eternity, so will the vengeance of God be powered out against all
ungodliness; now thou have but a taste, and yet O how thou roarest out as thy
limbs rot, but what is that to that ocean or expansion of wrath prepared; let
this awaken thee, if thou be not past feeling, to repentance, to break off I
say thy sins by true and timely repentance; God Almighty open thy eyes to see
thy redoubled misery, that so thou may inquire after mercy, then the blood of
Christ will be precious unto thee, but woe is upon us who are born in a giddy
drunken age, drunk, but not with wine, and here also I cannot get forward, but
must crave leave to trace this a little, and you will be sensible that it lies
consentrick with the former, and now I come to speak unto a second sort of
people, amongst whom I believe there are many that have received in their souls
the power of endless life; I speak of those that have showed great zeal and
forwardness in building Tabernacles for God to dwell in, who have posted into
Churches, and rushed upon all Ordinances, which things are good if performed
with clean hands and pure hearts, but woe is me when I consider the works of the
unwary, the headdiness and presumptions of many, and in my time and observation
within this twenty five years passed, having been an eye witness of the
beginning, rise, and fall of many; I cannot but speak a word (although Gently)
unto these, and am forced to speak it aloud, because I by woeful experience have
found them dull of hearing, for many amongst them puffed up have miserably fallen
into this pit, many of whom I fear have not yet repented, or if they have, yet
bear with me, it is not yet to me evident, sure I am this Pit is not for Saints
to fall into, not many returns, Although your way if returning is broad and
easy, yet I much fear not so with God, it were well if justice in this case
went hand in hand with mercy, that those that sin not might he admonished and
fear, which is one principal end of rejection, but these alas with ease find
entrance, but not so with others in other cases less material, it were well if
you were clean every whit, notwithstanding the feet must be washed, the
iniquity of the heel strove against, many lift their head on high, and I pray
God keep them from falling, it is a dangerous thing for men to make idols of
Ordinances, to put more in the dipping of water then in the regenerating of the
spirit, there is a golden mine, he is happy that finds it and walks therein,
there is a promised spirit to direct when we turn to the right hand, and when
we turn unto the left, to too many neglect or despise visible Ordinances, and
too many plant their Religion in them, and in diverse forms will prepare
Tabernacles for the God of Israel, but unto us there is but one God, and one
rule of righteousness, men will at all rates have a covering, but the woe
belongs to them that cover not by and with his spirit, let me in much
soberness inquire of you, and it would be a joyful tune if indeed you would
consider whether your rash and hasty zeal running upon Ordinances not spirited
from on high, have not been an occasion of stumbling and of falling unto many,
for having no sealing presence, but rather a barrenness which from thence as
in your hands may be called presumptious; I say this discovers that men seeing
no beauty to enliven them, faint; How many have you with sighs complaining that
they are filled with deadness in your assembling, but at home when they
exercise their mediations on the riches of free mercy in Christ, then filled
with consolation.

You may note, that at this time and in his place I would say no more then to
awaken you to consider how you have been an occasion of stumbling to many from
the aforesaid grounds, I freely spare you, coveting rather to cover then to
discover; neither would I charge all for the faults of some, but this I must
say, it is like to go ill when the ruling spirit is the spirit of this world,
when the whole head is sick and the heart heavy; what should I say to make you
hear and yet cover you all over with love, the most high cover you when he
makes inquisition for blood, when his dead body shall live, when his
righteousness shall arise, when he has purged Jerusalem with the spirit of
fire, and with the spirit of burning, then will he be a defense upon all your
glory, and not till then, but evident it is your glory he stains, neither is he
any defense upon it; an account must be given who required these things at your
hands, when many shall say we have done these and these things in thy name, it
will be said, I know you not, it will be then woe unto the sinners in Sion, fear
shall surprise the hypocrit^, that generation of men at this time will be to
seek which say stand further of I am more holy then thou; those I speak of
which are pure in their own eyes and is not washed from their filthines^^,
those who separating themselves from those from whom Jesus Christ does not
separate himself* those which make dipping the ground of the^ communion and not
union with Christ, it is a wonder to look back and consider the fiery zeal of
^^ny, and whereunto it has tended; God grant the rest may be admonished to
pray and wait u^till the Temple be opened in heaven and a live^^ Vision of the
Ark of his Covenant, the presumptions of men now in this dark and smoky day^ to
be wondered at, but it is evident no man can enter till the appointed time, and
indeed it is evident that excepting those Ordinances which are granted in
common, which indeed are spirited; the other whereby they will be known and
distinguished, art without life, and is in their hands a carcass: (...) I have
to say further, is, I beseech you in the bowels of Christ Jesus consider, how
far you have been an occasion of stumbling, or wo^^^ unto the gender of this
third generation of men whereof I come now to speak unto, for when men, as I may
say, have found little but pollotick workings as men, and have not either
discerned tha^ beauty as does of good right belong unto Gospel Ordinances, or
when men dishonoring God use Gods Ordinances for earthly ends, it is just with
God to give them up unto a spirit of slumber to believe a lie, because they did
not receive the truth in the love of it, nay too many designedly do get into
Churches one purpose to heal their gauled consciences (little thinking what is
required of them there) and shroud under a cloak of Religion, gain being to
them godliness; Mark by how much these approach or do essay to come up unto the
Primitive pattern, assure thy self so much the more will the severity of the
highest be revealed against thee, whose fiery eyes of beauty and glory will not
bare thy hypocrisy, remember Ananias and Saphira; therefore I have observed
well what has brought people to desire to get into this or that fellowship,
whether to serve as Christ did, or to be served, to perform their own duty in
humility, or only clamor upon their privilege, for you shall perceive quickly
who sent them thither, O how forward these will be, apt of tongue, confident in
opinion and fears, sensorious, and this lasts a very little while and by and
by he is beyond them, and now he is beyond the Scripture it self, and will have
it no judge of his spirit, but will judge it by his spirit; have I not seen
these fall off by companies, what then think not thou that I speak against the
commandments and Ordinances of the new testament (I had rather my tongue should
be for ever cut out of my mouth) or against the Christian and conscionable
administering the same; but this is to show how they have been and may be
abused, in doing of which a most accursed gender of hell is born into the
world, which otherwise could not be, and I am constrained to unvail as wisely
as God inables me this mystery of iniquity, that you whom it concerns may
beware, and if the glory of God nor eternal salvation will not prevail, yet
that long life and health of body may prevail with thee, thou may, know that
the higher thou arivest in the profession of Christ, the fiercer wi^^ thy fall
be when not supported, if that ligh^ which is in thee prove darkness, how great
(...) that darkness? and if thou be a builder look (...) thy self that thy
foundation be the true Rock, otherwise great will thy fall be, and know the
returning evil spirit does bring with him seve^ worse then himself, and worse
will be thy latte^ end; my heart bleeds within me when I call (...) mind how
many great lights or stars have bee^ thrown from heaven, saln from the pinnacle
of the Temple down to hell, from most fiery rigidity unto all abominations;
think not that I am unfurnished of a catalogue, measurable it is the re^ are so
blinded as not to lay it to heart, so to hea^^ as again to take up their way,
and whole wall* and that with trembling and set straight steps unto their feet,
least that that is halting be turn^^ out of the way also; I will at this time
abrevia^^ this discourse for the truths sake which you have yet a pretense
unto. I know there are a few na^^ amongst you which have not defiled their
garments, for their sakes I should count it a happiness to serve you. I will
conclude with relation of one of you, which I know is remembered of many of you,
A fierce zealot which was very conformable, as indeed did exceed, and I must
needs say from one word I once heart him speak, I had good hope that the truth
had (...) some rooting in him, viz. that he was so sensib^^ of the
deceitfulness of his heart, that he durst (...) look upon a woman, this man
takes in th^^ general tenet of all destruction* viz. that the Scripture was a
dead letter, this man with the rest of his accomplices was soon inspired from
the King of pride, that they had in themselves the spirit whereby they knew all
things, and judge all things, and also, the Scriptures themselves, so that now
their spirit shall not be judged by the text, but shall judge the text, this
infallible man was restless, and quickly threw of all duties both public and
private, for a season they must not speak till their spirit moved them, but
their spirit soon moved them to make use of, and abound in their pure or rather
impure liberty, that is to glut and satisfy themselves in uncleanness; this
wretch being strong held out sometime, but abusing himself in all blaspheamies,
riot and excess, in due time the rot or the Pox over-took them, but I speak of
this one man, his torments grew strong upon him, and to me of all men he would
not come or send, what he used as means was to weak; and thus for a long time
he lived blaspheaming God and roaring out of his torment, at last he and his
wife using the mediation of another sent to me, I could not deny her things for
her money, he was then past coming himself; she said his heart was as whole and
as sound as ever, and that he would eat as good a meals meat as ever, and
digest it as well, but except he had one of my Pills in his belly, he did lie
rocking his limbs and roaring out of his intolerable pain, and the next week
as she came to me this Strumpet with impudence, said she should dye of no
disease but the Pox; and her friend that came with her told me that as this man
was sitting by himself, his nose fell of from his face with mear rottenness; I
conclude with most serious admiration of Gods righteous judgments upon these
who in the prime of their days are taken a way, and are gone unto their own
place for ever to receive the fruit of their doings, and that which does much
heighten my astonishment, is that the highest does to wonderfully punish this
wickedness in this life, that they live some years in bitter torment, and yet
hearty and stout while they rot away by pieces, their vitals and senses quick,
as I may say, as prepared of God to suffer abundance of pains while in this
world, and before I come to give you the way of cure of this ugly disease, I
must crave leave to speak this third sort of people commonly called Ranters,
for so they are, and these are of two sorts, the one like unto this that I have
named, and the other which is the worse and more dangerous, hold yet in
appearance somewhat of preaching and prayer, and would be thought to excel all
others in spirituals; I say these are the worse, for by how much the more any
thing that indeed is evil and does hide it self under the cloak or mantle of
Religion, it is so much the more dangerous and pernicious, most apt to leaven
and delude the simple minds, till they also by a smoth Satanical subtilty are
drawn in and become hardened, and then the high Rant or black devil does not
all affright them, being before hand prepared and spirited there unto, for the
high Rant counts all illegitimate that cannot range in the depth of all
abomimation, swear, drunk, whore out of measure, yea study to excel in
execrations and blasph^^my, and do all this without the least remorce or sign
of remorce, but this other sort for their credit sake, and also because of
increase of their advantage in their Callings, and also preferments in the
Commonwealth, will not avow this plainness, yet do account it their pure
liberty, and that is there pure liberty for all of them to live holding
community of women, and all to abide in their pure Adamical freedoms, pleasing
themselves in all things, and some of these to my own knowledge who both speak,
and hold, and practice (except they belie themselves) are of their forwardest
and I think their eminentest Preachers, which would seem to those that hear him
as if he were caught up into the holy mount, accounting themselves above all
Ordinances, these surely are the worst sort of men that ever breathed upon the
face of the earth, for these have not only been hoised upon the highest
pinnacle of the Temple, but are miserably thrown down unto hell, in their own
imaginary they are far higher then the highest pinnacle, conceiving themselves
far above all instituted Ordinances, and do bitterly hate, despise, and
persecute all those that do in the fear of God practice, walk, and live in them
with a manifest wrath, which is indeed a manifest token of their perdition, for
many of them have in their own guiddy headed and unstable minds run through all
Religions that they might both hate and persecute all; the God of mercy put
into the hearts of our Rulers to preserve us from the rage and fury of these
whom the Apostles of Christ, Peter, and Jude does most lively set out in their
proper colors, and yet these would not be accounted to be Ranters, although
as is said seven fold worse, I will hear give a true relation of some passages
concerning one of their chief teachers.

A good woman whose husband is at Barbados, having occasion of business
concerning trade in behalf of her hu^band, was desired to except of half a pint
of wine, this good woman looking upon hum to be eminent in godliness, and her
self at that time stood need of refreshing, went to the Tavern with him, by and
by he changed his behavior, and showed himself what he was, and by his light
scurrilous language, declared himself to be what he is, and in plain words and
deeds would needs have been abusing her body, and many arguments he used to
draw her thereunto, as I have them from her mouth, that she was sick for want
of a man, and why would she not use her liberty; and for his part he knew (...)
his wife looked on, she would not be offended with it; nay further that it was
his salvation that he had done it, his wife looking on, and that (...) he had
not used his liberty, his purer liberty, as he called it, it had been dead long
ago, and named other persons, some of great quality, that husband and wife gave
each other liberty, and with his might invyed against Ordinances, and refusing
him in his filthiness, he called her whore, and much to that purpose, for
submitting her self to forms, as he called them; the relation of his
beastilness expressed by him, I was ashamed to hear and cannot write, but he
highly commended the beastly openness and nakedness of the Moors and Heathen in
the Indies that they was without shame, he esteemed it a high virtue which did
excel us here; and speaking of the Quakers, he said that he knew them very
well, and that he did know that their principals and theirs were one and the
same, and that the most strictest of them would soon come up and live in the
pure liberty as well as they (I think what he says in this may well be
granted, as was most evidently seen in James Nailo^, and the pack of whores
that always hung on him; I my self being at Nottingham did sit almost a Summer
afternoon, hearing some of their own company relate the vicious and filthy
life, and unclean coversation of George Fox, whose whoredoms and filthy life is
notoriously known in the North of England) but to return unto this praying or
prating Rantor this filthy man or man of filthiness without shame after God had
delivered this woman out of his hand, was set on again and again by him, and
when he saw that he could not draw her unto his filthy lust, then inquired if
she had told any body, but if she had, yet it was not matter of shame unto him,
and indeed I think I should have done good service to the Commonwealth, if I
had here named him, its pity all such has not a brand on their forehead that
they may be known who they belong unto; I speak with grief of heart I have
known this Varlet the worst of men, I say I have known him a giddy professor of
Religion above this twenty years, and I have heard him my self when we have
been speaking of the Scripture, for he asked me seriously if I did use t^ read
them, I told him yea with joy and gladness and they were to me more then my
life, he replied, so could not he, neither did he read any book, he hearkened
only to the voice of the spirit within him, and that while he made conscience
of reading and expounding of Scripture and of family duty, and going to hear
Sermons and repeat them, he all that time was without peace, but now he had not
for some years done any of those things and that he was at rest in himself. I
have in all this spoke the least of this vile person, and you may by him truly
take a view of the rest that fraternity what they are, and where they will
Center, and in what; I hope this relation will he matter of caution to many,
not always to credit or be too apt to give heed unto the smoth delusive tongues
of men, these study to obtain hardness of heart, impudency of face that they
might commit wickedness with greediness; and therefore do deride at the
torments of hell, nay one of this company has put out a book in print, wherein
he does a vow there is no hell but what is in a man's self, so that indeed by
their doctrines, if they can but stifle their own consciences, they have
freedom, and sin is no sin, for so they affirm; my soul is pained within me
when I think of these, and of the just vengeance prepared of God for these
which does withhold the truth by their unrighteousness; O wretched and most
miserable of mankind! How is it that Satan has thus filled your hearts, and
the filth of your flesh thus deluded you, you begun well, who has hurt you,
what has Jesus Christ and his Gospel of peace done unto you; How is it that
you will be made perfect in the flesh? What good things have you found in your
selves, that comparing your selves with your selves, you now worship your
selves, nay your accursed lusts and beastliness; how imaginable is it that man
endued with common reason should thus be seduced; I know there is not one of
you but do feel the flashings of fire in your consciences; what will you do
when you shall appear with your works following after you? when God that cannot
lie will set your sins in order before your face; I know you labor to stiflle
such thoughts as these, O beast of men! O most devilish whilst men! How is your
vengeance hightening? have you professed the fear of God many of you to end in
this accursed Apostasy, for whom the blackness of darkness is reserved for
ever? O that there were thoughts of returning in you! hell beneath has
enlarged her self to receive and meet you at your coming. O miscreant of man,
how long do thou think to wallow in thy lusts, serving evil concupisence,
drinking iniquity like water made fat for slaughter? I ask whether these be
not they for whom supplication is not to be made? Alas, alas my heart bleedeth
within me when I confider that some of you have not only professed the name of
Christ long, but also suffered both imprisonment and fled into far Countries
out of a zeal for his name, and now have spewd up all at once, and returned
unto your old lusts (from which you were purged) as a dog unto his vomit, or a
sow that was washed unto her wallowing in the mire, receiving the just
recompense of your error, viz. seven hellish spirits far more worse then the
first, that you might fall into the damnation of hell and be damned together,
even the condemnation of the devil, be not deceived, God is not mocked, as a
man sows so shall he reap; and of these I speak aloud expecting nothing but
plague and pox to follow them, the reward of their labor, I know it boiles
amongst them already.

I know some will wonder why I have spoken so much of these, and of this
disease; and why I have spoken unto good people with these, therefore this thou
may know. First, I speak unto all men and all sorts, and ranks of men to
admonish them all. Secondly, a clean heart is not hurt nor will be offended at
any thing I have said. And thirdly, I could not break this order with the
discharge of my conscience. And fourthly, without this that I have said both in
whole and in part I dare not give thee the true and clear way of cure of this
detestable disease, and all roots from this ground the difference twixt this
disease and most other this with abundance of wickedness and sin; first against
God; secondly against thy one body which ought to be the Temple of God,
preserved in holiness unto him, and not given to a harlot; thirdly against thy
relations, who has power over thy body, but other diseases which are common to
man, proceed from sundry other causes which is not in themselves sinful, and
for these causes I have thus spoken, and hope thereby to be an instrument in
the hand of God to pull some poor soul or other out of the fire; and indeed as
I said at first had it not been for the sakes of some who are clean but
bestowed with some such beast or bruit of mankind which has polluted them, I
should have said nothing of this disease at all; but I do judge it much better
that many of the worst partake of the blessing with the best, then that one of
the best should languish in the torture of the first, and therefore I do set
down the most safest way, speediest, cheapest and freest of pain and torture, I
verily believe that is in the world.

Rec. Take two ounce of my Pill, and lay it thin upon a well glazed dish, set
it out of the Sun and it will quickly be fit to bring to powder, drive it
through a Lawn or Hair five, put this powder into one quart of White Wind, or
that which is better, viz. make a Lixivium or strong lie of Chalkes Vive, or
White wine, for this is most slately and operates very potently both by sweat
and Urin, as is much proved everyday, and is although despised, a great
blessing; and moreover I assure thee from knowledge is chief with some as
universal, who have a vulgar same in Physic; use which thou will I do by
experience commend this last to excel, let this be done in a glass bottle,
shake it often, and in twenty four hours it will be fit to use but longer is
better, dispose thy self a part if thou would suddenly be well, and thy
illness require thee, and have warm accommodation, and a good tender and careful
Nurse, eat and drink the bed that can be got for money, and always have ready
good wine and Strong-water by thee, because of a sudden will a windy fainting
come upon thee, and of a sudden gone, at such a time a spoonful of a good
cordial water is necessary for thee; see that thou sweat by day and not in the
night, when thou may have good tendance; sweat not with this extract, but
every other day, and then do it to purpose as thou finds thy strength; if thou
be of a middle strength, the first time begin with six spoonful in six
spoonful of Whitewine, and then observe by that how thou do bare it, and
increase accordingly; so also in all cases begin with little enough and come on
with discretion; but know in this disease thou must charge home to the end, it
may accomplish thy desire, and at once as it were it will whirle all thy
disease into thy in skin, the superfices or most extreme parts; and in the
other night the day that thou do not sweat thy greatest sweat, take at night
a good Pill of 16 or 20 grains if thou find thou art able to bear it, and
that will maintain and keep what the other has gotten, for thou must know that
thou do take the strength of at least eight or ten Pills when thou do take
the extract thereof, for thou art not not able to bear this earthly body, it
would suffocate the, but being only his more subtle and spirituous part it
works safe and miraculous, not only in this disease but in many or all other
diseases; and when thou have it all in thy skin, fear not, but go on the same
way, and if any part break and run, fear it not, it will not fail thee, if thou
do not neglect thy self, but it will both throw all out and heal it when it is
out, as thou may perceive by the instances set down in this book, only use
thy self to great carefulness in the time of thy cure, and always sweat and be
hot till thou art well, for there is no danger but in taking cold, which thou
may easily prevent if thou be careful of thy self, and follow while thou art
in the way, and all will be done at an easy rate, for I have deserved twenty
pounds when l have not had twenty shillings, I never undertook any cure in my
life, nor never mean to do, yet have helped many at small rates at ten
shillings, at five shillings, the most that ever I had of any was three pounds
five shillings for my things only, and I think a notabler cure is seldom done,
as some of good quality can bear testimony; a young woman comes to me pained in
her throat, head and bowels of this disease as all supposed, and she her self
did much fear, because her husbands first wife were noted for a light huswife;
this good woman almost killed her self with grief, and for two years ran up and
down amongst Doctors and Chirurgions, but in vain, and the Surgeon made
holes in her throat by lancing it, and such like foolish things, at last she
comes to me, and I gave her of these Pills, and by that time she had spent one
shilling, she told me she was as well as ever she was in her life, and I am
confident in three years time, I did not take five shillings of her money, but
she continues in perfect health, I could not have believed it till time has
made it evident.

Cures some kind of Gouts, eases the most malign, brings the patient unto
quiet rest. A woman lame eight years of a Gout, which did disable her in all
her limbs, that she could neither stir hand nor foot when she sent to me, her
joints was very much knotted; the first Pill she took, being in a kindly sweat,
both she and her husband told me this story, she began to stir her fingers,
which was very strange to her, and a while after she could get her hand unto
her mouth, to be short, in three days time she could go about the Chamber,
which she could not do in two years before that time.

A Gentleman removing her dwelling into Lime-street, got an extreme cold and
Surfeit as she does report, I do suspect it to be otherwise, how ever so it was
that she could neither stir hand nor soot, but was perfectly useless to her
self, only as by main strength of two o^ three which was always ready did
list her, and this uselesness of Limbs, accompianed with extreme pains; this
woman in a matter of three weeks time, using only my Pills, although it was
cold weather, was perfectly well unto all demonstrations, and I by accident saw
her go along the street, and truly although an ancient woman, yet she did hold
up her head, and went as straight and as nimbly a good lusty pace, as any young
woman whatever, and although she sen^ me word the was well, yet it was far from
me to think she had been so well, and that in frosty weather; it is to be noted
when I sometimes say they have nothing but my Pill, I do includ the extract of
my Pill, and also the Oil of Amber, with which often times I do anoint, and all
is but my Pill.

A woman in Saint John's street, was so sorely afflicted with the Gout and
Sciatica, that in her extremity she did roar out in such a hideous manner, as
did much disquiet the neighbors, and no ease or cure could be attained, her
husband come to me with such pitiful moan for his wife, as did much exceed; I
was much troubled for him, and gave him of my Pills and sent him away, and told
him that by that time the Pills was warm in her breast, that she would have
ease and her pains would sease, and that she would go to rest; he did as I
ordered him, and when he came again, he said that by that time his wise had
taken a Pill, in one quarter of an hour she did find such case as if she had
been in heaven, and truly this man in the name of his wife did so load me with
thanks as if I had done it; I bless and praise the God of heaven who has saved
my life and brought me through great pains and sickness for this happy end, even
to be a poor instrument in his hand for ease and refreshing of many; and
further as I take it about three weeks or a month, I am not certain which, this
poor woman comes from Saint Johns-street unto the Tower to me to fetch for her
self more Pills.

A little boy having four of his fingers out off of that disease called the
Kings Evil, this boy at the place where his fingers was cut off, did always
stand with a drop of water upon them, but next day after the taking the first
Pill, there was no drop of water as formerly, at which the parents did much
wonder, and the boy grew extreme quick and lively in what ever he did, that
they was very sensible of his real benefit.

Another Boy lame of his Limbs and Feet from a child, so that he could not go
to stool nor hold a pen in his hand, and by that time he had taken three of my
Pills, he was grown so strong that he ran up a pair of stairs before me, and I
made him hold a Tobaco-pipe in form of a pen, and he then held it as stedily as
I or any in the room could do, which indeed was far more then was to have been
expected in so short a time.

And many that have been troubled with one arm shorter then another; and with
great pains in particular joints, this Pill through Gods good-ness have proved
ready help unto them.

An old man belonging unto the Charterhouse many years troubled with Tisick,
straightness of breath, that with great difficulty he went about, also one arm
begun to shrink and grow stiff, so that he could not make use of his pocket as
formerly he had done, with a little use of my Pill did receive his breath at
length and his Arm at length also; and as he and I was going together along the
walk before the Charterhouse, said he to me, look you how I go, and what pace I
go, I could not have done so before I took your Pills, but I must have stood
and gaped like a Camelion for breath, I do not know how often in going the length
of this walk.

A virtuous Gentlewoman of good note, and my very good friend, whom it has
pleased God to visit with much sickness for a great many years, and now lately
it sell out to be very sore in her head; this Gentlewoman having made use of
the ablest Doctors, but her grief could not be helped, in so much that this good
woman almost in a despair, did much fear her senses, and all that could be done
could not bring her head to purge until she met with my Pills, which did most
powerfully accomplish her desire, and did set her head a purging at her ear,
and shortly, very sweetly cured it to her exceeding great joy and comfort, with
the joy of her family.

A Gentlewoman that lives at Westminster, that well knew the use and worth of
my Pills, went with some other Gentlewomen to Barnet, where she drank water in
abundance but without judgment, she presently fell into a extreme scowring, she
sends with what have could be to me for half an ounce of my Pills, the use and
virtue of which she very well knew, but before they could come at her she was
far spent and had entertained a Doctor, whose advice she was forced to follow,
such was her weakness of a sudden; but so it was that this lusty young
Gentlewoman in a matter of six or seven days was brought home in a Hors-litter
hard put to it for life; this Gentlewoman lay under the Doctors hands for two
months, and was brought unto such extreme weakness as is not fit for me to
relate, nothing but death expected all this while, my Pills was too low for
them, and the Gentlewoman had abundance of other things forced on her, but in
vain; at last she beseeched her husband if he loved her to fend for me,
otherwise she was a dead woman, pleading her conformity to him in using all the
while what means lie and their friends thought good; this Gentleman being
touched with pity to her, at her request sends a letter to the Tower, but I
was in the Country, and he straight sends a letter unto Wansor, where I was,
and I not hearing any thing from the time her messenger came unto me from
Barnet, much wondered that she should suffer so long sickness, and I not hear
thereof; at my coming she was glad, and I was much surprised to see so stout
and lusty a woman so strangely reduced to nothing, in so much as had it not
been that I was sent for in her name, I could not have known her, I took with
me Pills and Antidote, I gave her two spoonfuls of my Antidote, which did
answer my expectation, for it put her into a breathing sweat, and also she
slept a matter of four hours I stirred not my foot till through the blessing of
God, I had very good signs of her recovery, but when I saw the surly behavior
of all, as well the servants as kindred through the whole family I did not
wonder I was not called sooner; the Gentleman himself I never saw all the time
of the cure; the gentlewoman could trust no creature with my things, I was fain
to give with my own hands as much as possibly my business would permit, till
the Gentlewoman got strength and kept the Pills always about her and and had
regard to her self; it was an unusal time before this Gentlewoman could get
abroad, the reason all may discern, was the withholding from her that which did
her good; and in stead of it give her that which did no good, and being of a
good nature, in this case proved to her great hurt; but blessed be God she soon
did attain health, and so remains using my Pills now and then to keep her in
health as she has occasion.

For Small Pox which generally does light on children and young people, this I
say upon good experience that my Pill is always good and profitable whenever
it is taken at any time of the disease, either in the beginning of them, or the
middle of them, or the latter end of them, it can never be taken a miss except
you give such a dosse as is not proper for them that take it, for it always
strengthens the vital spirits, cleanses the blood and fortifies the heart, and
if the small Pox be struck in again, this Pill does forthwith throw them out
again, with great safety, as we have much experience hereof, but if it be taken
before they appear, that nature be able, it will relieve them by working the
Surfeit out by vomit, or by siege, or sweat, or Urin, all the ways that nature
has to friend, but if the Surfeit have got strength enough that they cannot be
prevented, then does it throw them out in a most gallant easy manner, so that
the patient being freed of all Feavorish symptoms, and always lying in a
breathing sweat, is so sweetly disposed, as he does hardly fail of a meals meat
all the time he has them upon him, but suddenly will recover with great
strength and freedom.

A lusty young man having got many Surfeits one upon another, felt himself not
well for two or three days together, but not knowing what sickness was, would
not yield unto it while he was able to hold up his head, and being in my
company much complained how ill he was, and that he doubted he should be able
to hold up his head no longer, I gave him presently a little Pill about four
grains, which now he is well one six fold so big would hardly fur him, but as
soon as it was well down his throat, he fell into a vomiting with extreme
violence, I could tell him his breast was full of poison, but what was the
matter further with him I did not know, for the present he had some ease after
his vomiting; I gave him a Pill at least 18 grains to take when he went to bed,
which he did, and that in like sort set him a vomiting most of that night and
most of the next day, it also purged his gall of diverse colors, but the woman
where he lay would let him take no more; the two that I lest for him she threw
them in the fire, and cries out against my Pills for making him sick; but that
night the Small Pox appeared all over his skin, and being overruled was not so
happy as to continue with my Pills which had drove them from his heart into his
skin, and for want of more the disease grew extreme upon him, and he all over
covered with them and in flux extremely, and was for a time stark distracted
and talked idle of he knew not what; they employed two called Doctors but to no
purpose, indeed it was beyond all men's judgment that he did escape withlise;
but as soon as he was master of himself, he called for mare of my Pills which
he had, but did not vomit any more, he says, and I believe will say while he
lives, that nothing that ever he took did him any good but my Pills which did
free his heart of them, and as means did save his life, which is undoubtedly
true, and I am confident if they had been given to seconded that which I did
give him his sickness would not have been above the tenth of what it was, for
such is our experience that if it cannot altogether prevent them, yet it does
so dispose them that they are not like the disease, for some that in reason
would have been as bad as any, yet by their constant and through use of my Pills
all the time of their being ill have hardly missed one meals meat, but quickly
with strength and vigor have been restored.

It helps the shaking and trembling of the joints, strengthens the brains
and increases memory. I have already spoke enough of the Palsy or shaking of
the joints, and for strengthening of the brain and memory, I say, I am through
Gods rich mercy and goodness a living monument and testimony of its true
virtue, power and effect, for they are at this day far better then when I was
but seventeen years old, and my sight as good as ever since I had them for any
thing I can perceive, and that is as good as any I think in the world, and
although there is a sleepiness or dullness the next day in many that takes it,
which is not used to it, they find it seldom so the third day, but instead of
heaviness, all for the most part do find a wonderful lightness of heart and
cheerfulness of body all over, that they think themselves as if they were in a
new world, and yet it must be granted that if any ones grief lies in their
head, that then it will he nimble and accute both to search it out and help it
if it please God to permit, for it is evident it works most where most cause
is; many again does find it fully to answer their ^^^^ctation, and yet never
find it to work in ^^e^r heads at all, although they have taken it in great
quantity, and let one thousand take it, and they will all tell of several
effects as every one differs in one kind or other; also their ailes and their
different judgments upon those ailes, for very well we know let all speak and
judge as they will, that the whole of it to all intents and purposes in all the
operations of it, is to strengthen and fortify nature from head to heel, and
many which have and do take much of it have confidently supposed, that I have
not made it so good at one time as at another, because they find often times
contrary effects and operations, as sometimes to be dry, and sometimes not, and
sometimes sweat much, and sometimes not at all, and sometimes break wind much,
and sometimes not at all; and so in many other cases it is indeed daily
evidenced, for as is said as a man's ailes is so will it work, it is they that
alter, the Pill is the same. Note, therefore that you may know I cannot make
such alterations in the making of it, because I do give none but what took his
beginning three years and upward ago, yet I must confess it is wonderful to
observe that sometimes it will have a double effect to what it will have at
another time, as in cases of colas and Surfeits and the like, or some evil
quality is gotten in the stomach, it will abide no such thing but will assault
that that assaults nature what ever it be.

Revives and comforts the heart. The like reviver I think for a creature of
God, I do from my heart believe, and by experience I find (as much occasion as
I have had in the world) the world never enjoyed the like with it; and let me
now bless and praise the most high, who only bears rule in heaven above and
in the earth beneath; the time has been, and that a long and tedious time to me
many years together, I have been so oppressed and laden with pains and
feebleness of heart, as if I always carried a quarter of an hundred weight
perpetually in my chest or breast, and I went always as if laden, that it has
made me make a wrinkled face to stir out of my way to give place either to
horse or Cart, as for men I always would be sure to give them room enough; I
ever going with pain and anguish, and full of sighing; and truly although I
was poor, yet was I then filled with such pain as I should have hard-have
stooped to have took up a penny; but now through mercy (that which is true will
hardly be credited) I find my self set at liberty, that to my own feeling I do
not weigh upon my shoos, as I go up and down, not one ounce, my heart is so
light, freed from all oppression, my body so clean and nimble; and whereas I
was grown stiff, that I did sensibly perceive that through much weakness I began
to stride short; now my legs are at liberty, that to my thinking I can never
tread wide enough, and at this instant of writing, I took my right foot in my
right hand, and did lift my heel to my mouth without the help of the other
hand, and all over my whole man without any exception; God by this Pill has
thus renewed me, I do with joy and laughter give my enemies leave to charm
against my Pill, what is spoke is no fable, it is apparently discernable,
especially of all those that in times past did know me, and many with me, who
with weakness and old age have strided short and narrow, their silver cords as
it were tied together, so that they stride little, and that with stagering,
have received their legs again with the use of this Pill, and are amongst us
which bear testimony, who themselves are se^cht off their languishing beds and
in joy their limbs with comfort.

In women it brings them to due Courses, whether they want or abound. So is our
experience for the most part, and this may be easily discerned for opening all
obstructions.

One maid of about twenty eight years of age, being obstructed about five or
six years, in so much as she grew very diseased and troubled with strange fits,
and one of her legs grew as bigg as three legs, and did also break and run;
this maid was weary of her life, her racking pains was such, as she did roar
out in such hideous manner as was sore oppressive unto her friends, help she
could get none; she meets with my Pills and over charging her self, threw them
away as being afraid of them, that which she had taken working a little higher
then she would have had it; about a year after she comes to me with her sister,
and makes lamentable complaint, and showed me her leg with stinking Ulcers in
it; she followed my Pill with more discretion then at first, it was not above a
month, but it freed her of all her fits, brought her into an orderly and
monthly Flux, took down her leg and made it no bigger then the other, and
healed the Ulcers; she enjoyed so much health as she marries a husband, and
lived comfortably with him, and buried him, and married another; all this to my
knowledge, and what is become of her now I know not: these confirmations I do
not want, neither do I wish any man more harm to himself, then to think so ill
of my Pill as not to use it in his need; but for me, the master that I have
always served has confirmed his mercy in blessing it to me and to many; unto
him alone be all the praise and honor for ever Amen.

It is present help for any Flux or Scowring of blood, or otherwise, and stops
them incontenantly. Although it be the Gomorha, or running of the Reins, or
issue of blood, either at Urin or at Fundament, or any other Flux or Scowring,
it is the most sovereign help I think in the world, for if need be, it will as
well purge as bind, and is frequently proved, but it will overruled the grief
and stop it by degrees as may be for the patients advantage; and if this Pill
be laid open upon a well glazed dish, and dried and mixed in conserve of red
Roses, it is very proper on this occasion, and this has helped when Crocus
Martis would do nothing, nor the Sugar of Saturn, all which are as forcible,
almost as art, I have proved it, for if these have stopped, they have thrown
the patient into intolerable pains and rackings, beside fever but this so
pleasantly, so gently and sweetly that it is the desire and joy of the patient
to have a Pill in his belly.

A lusty man a Trumpeter, who had been at the East Indies, brought such a Flux
home with him, that could not be staid by what means soever could be used to
that end, and his weakness is not to be credited and yet live, and after he
came home in this condition it was one year and a half or two years before he
applied himself unto my Pill, and although his constant manner was to purge six
or eight times in the night, the first Pill stopped him and eased him, and that
in a wonderful manners; I shall not want the benefit of this man's prayers while
he and I do live together; and as is said my Pill did not violently stop him,
but by degrees naturally, and when through impatience he had got some violent
astringer as those above, he was all torn in his limbs and glad to take my Pill
to withstand their force; but because this fiery Accrimony had cut asunder all
retention through length of time, his water for the most part going that way; I
for my part did despair of his cure, for he would even affrighted one to
behold him, yet it has pleased God to be so favorable unto this poor man, as
that he is now in health, and does sound a Trumpet in Colonel Riches Regiment,
and who list to speak with him shall hear much more then I have said, to Gods
glory and your wonder, whether friend or enemy. I see the blessing, of God
which he has afforded unto poor people, for they will come and ask find help;
this is Gods blessing, the rich often ask and pay large, and go without help,
this is a sore evil under the Sun; some cries out against it as a great binder
or shutter up of theirb dies, if it be so to any, I am sure it is to their
great benefit, in taking off from them windiness, also Feavorishness, or those
other distempers they take them for, I am also sure that there is not one in a
hundred, but that although it does bind them a little at the beginning, but
that they find it to purge at at the latter end; I do grant some bodies to be
drier then other, and for these when they have a necessity to use it by reason
of weakness, let them use it with Sirrope of Roses, in such quantity as does
make it friendly with them, or that which is for some better, take equal parts
of Scamony called Diagredium, or make it so as to suit their constitutions, but
my advice is in this matter not to do it but with good advice, and that there
do appear an apparent necessity for it, it will frequently astring for three,
four or five days, and afterward keep you loose while you take it, if the
cause continue for which you take it, you may thus deal with it, otherwise if
you have need of it in its strength, then suffer it to follow its own law, and
you will not repent your self, be of what temper you will; there are some such
whom it has purged the most of all, which otherwise have been most astringent;
no man knows how it will work with him till he have proved it; I my self have
gone four or five days without any stool, and have wondered what would become of
all I have put into my belly, for I did eat my meat all that time as heartily
as ever I did in my life, and was as well indeed, I may say in a new world, for
it was at first when I took it, and all that time I did break wind freely,
neither had I the least fumes or swelling, or any thing like unto oppression,
nor any heat which made me wonder, and indeed may, for it is much against
common experience; nay further all that four or five days I could have laid my
belly to my back, so free was I from any kind of swelling, then at four or five
days end (I confess I have forgot whether) all went in a light stool, which did
lie above like a Cork, and after that it did ever bring me belly to an orderly
course once every day, and rather purgative, and so I remain with much health
through the blessing of of God, and can make my self purge when I will with
pleasure, but I dare not purge, all is well, I have no need, this Pill always
does, as I may say, watch over me, and often does find matter sometimes to purge
by siege, and sometimes by Urin, and some times by sweat; I do observe these
changes, but the reason and cause of it I do not understand; I know my Pill is
the same, but change of all things with me, does sometimes work a change in my
Pills operation; it is for the most part a constant rule with my Pill to purge
men or women of gross corpulent bodies, but people of spare and thin bodies not
so; if any by good experience do find that it does bind them, and that also
they find that that binding is indeed hurtful above that which is imaginary,
for I know many complain for no cause, but that their custom is broke, and that
it does not follow the order as they would have it, but I say if it do indeed
in this case offend, a glister then may be necessary for them, only this you
must observe either in glister or in purging Physic, to keep as far off the
taking of the Pill as you can, least it should not suffer the portion to work,
that is, take the purging Physic at least two or three days after the Pill is
taken, or else you may expect that that portion will not work, for you must
know that the purging quality in the portion is from a poisonous quality,
otherwise it could not purge, and that quality my Pill does so perfectly
correct, as you may expect it do nothing, but I do much rather wish you if
there be cause indeed, then to use a safe glister of milk from the Cow and
Sugar only which will produce no evil effects; you may note that as its
correction is less, so its force is less, therefore if you with the Pill add a
purger, as Scamony or Sirrop of Roses, or some other, it may be it may fute
your body, and all this discourse is to please thee as it were a single person
and is endued with goodwill and has need of it; but I do certainly know the
poise of nature is most happy and blessed for man, for the generality of them,
and therefore cannot be altered, and if thou did know it, as it may be
hereafter thou may, thou will see nothing in it can be wanting, and also that
additions would be vain, yet for thy sake I have spoken, if it so fall out that
the disposition of thy body should so far differ from others; I observe the
general opinion of all, that is, if they be not in good order as you call it,
then do they cry out of fumes, and it may be pairs in their head, and I grant
that usually it is so where this Pill is not, bur I assure you where this Pill
is, is the clean contrary, for although they go not to stool for six or eight
days, yet all that time there is no vapors nor sumes not in one of an hundred;
I confess if any will strive thovow ill decorum toward themselves and tempt
God, it is just these should be answered accordingly; it is further for these
to note, that if they take this Pill and let it come to powder out of the Sun,
as that it will soon be, and then heat it to fine powder, and infuse it in
White Wind, and so drink the extract of it, that then it does not astring the
half as it does when you take the Terra with it, and you will also find it more
spirituous in effect; such as have no need of it, may at a cheap rate let it
alone: But again, those that have need of it, had best be well advised how they
neglect it for small and impertinent matters; we have experience enough of its
just power to be both to bind and to loose according unto natures law; thou
that snufflest at it because thou have took two or it may be but one, it may be
by fits more, do thou know if thou will use it and grow friendly with it, thou will find a contrary effect in its working, for it will now bind and by and by
purge.

It strengthens and opens the Spleen, and tares away wind in a uncredible
manner. This is the constant experience of all that take it, and I think not
one of an hundred but will acknowledge it; but by my own experience I do add
further, that although I have not been made sensible of a violent breaking of
wind downward, yet before morning I have found all oppression gone, my self set
free and lightsome, and I have not known which way, but my reason tells me,
that lying in a gentle breathing sweat, the Pores of my body being thereby all
set open, wind has thereby found secret and insensible passage, and sometimes
I have sensibly perceived it go by Urin, but his ordinary working is mightily
downward as all in general find it to do.

Dries up Hydroppical humors. Things not to be credited it has done in this
distemper.

An ancient man troubled with this distemper took it but in reasonable doss for
one month together, the weather indeed was warm, it did sweat him, as he told
me, every night so mightily, that his maid said it went through the Featherbed
whereon he lay every night, and wrought as strongly by Urin, and I do protest
this man at the months end was fresher and fairer, and stronger to his labor,
then when I began with him, and is at this instant in good health, and this was
three years agone from this present writing.

I shall write here a strange and wonderful, but accidental cure, I think, as
has been heard of in this age; A young woman having languished for a long time
under very many diseases, the worst that usually may attend an honest woman's
body, as the Dropsy, Stone, Consumption or Tisick, shortness of Breath, fore
fits of the Mother, Jaundies, as I did clearly fee by her eyes; this woman
having spent much for a long time but in vain, she grew worse and worse, and
did despair of help in this world, she was scarcely able to stand or breath, at
the entreaty of good women of our country, I went to see her, she being born
within a mile where I was, I should hardly have gone to her but that we were
School-fellows at Nottingham, I sound her in this sad condition; I durst
promise nothing more then this, If I did her ho good I would do her no harm, I
made her five or six small Pills, with order to drink White Wind after them,
and to take each night one, and as she liked them, so let me hear from her; she
accordingly takes them, the third day her husband comes to me with words of
wonder and abundance of thanks, and told me that his wife was finely recovered,
that she had breath in good length and order, and slept well and began to eat,
and that he had brought some of the Stones which she voided with him to show
me, and said he, what shall I say, your Pills have done more then possibly
might have been imagined, I praised God with him, he took half an ounce of my
Pills more with him, and because of the fits of the Mother, I willed him to
take half an ounce of my Oil of Amber, and give her three drops in a spoonful
of White Wind, and then drink a glassful of White Wind, after it he went home,
and the next morning gives her two spoonfuls of this Oil, the woman faints
with heat, as needs she must, her heart being suffocated with fire, and the
next morning he gives her the rest of the half ounce, so that he gave her as
much at twice as should have served two hundred times or near it, it is indeed
a miracle that this woman was not destroyed, but orderly taken a better thing
could not have been given to have helped and assisted her Pills against those
fits of the Mother, this woman receiving this half ounce into her body
extremely fainted, her husband comes not to me, but runs unto a wise Doctor
which could not see the power of Oil of Amber, but clatters hard against me and
my Pills, but would give her nothing, but plentifully bestowed the Gallows upon
me for killing her, and without shame as a man that had but one ear, never
searching the truth, meeting me, and near before a dozen people which stood by,
charged me with killing this woman, and before them all threatened me with
holding up my hand at the Bar; I gave him not a word, it was neither time nor
place, but listed up my heart to God, knowing my own innocence, and was sorry
he should do himself so much wrong, and of all men living I had deserved better
things at his hand; I did wonder to hear this charge, for I had not heard one
word, neither did I, but what came from him till three months after; it pleased
God that with what good this woman had received from the Pills she took before
(for this Doctor did so fright them, that they thought it was my Pills that
wrought so with her as that she took no more; I say) altogether proved happy
for the woman, for at once she was released of all her diseases, and being well
and about the street, an ancient Gentlewoman, Mistress Tuching in Beadlam, calls
to her and said; you but the other day as it were was ill of many diseases, and
now you are so well of a sudden, you have got one good Medicin or other, I
pray you let me have some of it; she replied that she had a Country man at the
Tower gave Pills and that they had cured her, but they liked to have killed
her, and that she had the rest of them at home but durst not take any more of
them, come said Mistress Tuching give them me, I will take them, which she did,
and when she had spent them she calls to her and told her that she must bring
her to the man, for she must have more of those Pills, and this was near three
months before either I or the woman did know what it was that did hurt her;
this ancient Gentlewoman with my Country woman comes to my house, I not being
at home, this woman asked for the Oil I sent her to take by spoonfuls, my maid
told her that I had no Oil that I gave by spoonfuls; I had indeed an Antidote
which I did give in spoonfuls; to be short, this woman soon found the Bottle by
its scent, and so she and we came to know how she came well as God has ordered
it, and she has remained well for this two years if not more, and has born a
child or two since; this is a true and faithful relation to the best of my
remembrance, as I have it from their own mouths, and thanks be to God who has
kept me and will keep me in his way notwithstanding the envy and rage of my
enemies, so that through mercy I care not for it; yet notwithstanding this
Doctor in the fury of his malice has took off those good we men, and not a few
more from the use of my Pill, which I know well will all turn to his perpetual
shame, I pray God forgive him with my whole heart, I am taught by him to take
heed of making men idols.

In fine I know no disease that it does not either perfectly ease or perfectly
cure. Although this Bill has now been made public above this four years, and
I had both reason and experience then enough to avouch it in my conscience
before Almighty God, and experience enough to avouch it before men; there has
been added every since a daily load of experiences, which as a cloud of
witnesses confirm what I have published, for such are indeed the wonders of God
daily brought to our ears, some of which I have related unto you, and indeed as
I may say the happyreturns of prayer in the administering of this Pill does
abundantly balance the bitterness of envy, and the false lies and forgeries of
the wilful ignorant and by the constant meetings together of a catologue of
mercies upon mercies, all of them pleading my just cause against the proudest
contemner; I do therefore with joy submit to reproach, knowing that reproach
shall be the portion of the happy in this life, and if the Lord whom I serve
did not by his constant presence and blessing upon my labor, give vigor and
life unto my just and honest endeavor for the good of mankind, I should have
been charmed and frighted off from this my employment the highest has called
me unto, but putting my trust in him, shall proceed in his name with joy, fear,
love, and trembling, not doubting but he that is able to keep that which in his
name I have committed unto him, who has and does keep me in all my ways, will
never fail me of his blessed protection and assistance in well-doing; and such
has been my care and indulgence toward all always, that except people
desperately presumptious, both to abuse themselves and me, they cannot lightly
hurt themselves; and while I am now writing I will give an instance or two
which comes into my mind, which will make good what I now drive at. A woman a
Nurse keeper comes to us for one quarter of an ounce of my Pills, which my wife
weighed her; another staying for another, she having her own caught up the
other out of the scale and popt it into her mouth and swallowed it all at once,
and away she goes; I had a friend with me by the fireside, my wife being
frighted cried out the woman would kill her self, we wondered to see her skip
away so fast, but did not well conceive the matter, about fourteen days after
my maid met her in Tower-street, asked her how she did with that quantity of
Pill at once in her belly, she told her that she was well, and that she sat up
all that night with her child which she did Nurse, only it did make her
headache a little; this relation is true, but not to be followed without
danger, I neither knew her name nor her dwelling, to administered any thing to
have overruled it; I do think this propostorus act of this woman may show unto
all men its safty, if there be any reason used in the administering of it; and
whereas I say, I have taken it my self twelve months, it is true that I have
taken it now almost five years, and have not I am sure missed it in all the
time from first till this present it me not twenty nights, neither shall I miss
it except it should please God to grant me a better (of which I now have little
hope) and the effects through divine goodness are with me blessed; I always have
need of it as of a strong cordial although I do not always use the same
quantity, for I never weighed one for my self in all my life, but I make them
bigger or lesser as I find my self to have more or less need of them; and when
I am as well as I could wish, I do take a little one to keep me so, but if I
get cold or ought else that troubles me I do then take one bigger, and this I
find by constant experience, and I do assure you it is no more then what is
true, that it never failed me, but always comes with fresh strength and
reviving as truly and effectually as when I took it at first, and not like
other things which with much use will loose their virtue, power, and effect,
but my Pill is ever the same, working higher or lower as it finds cause, and
according unto the quantity that is taken, so that what change is, is not in it
but in me; and I do further confirm what I formerly said as to the in joying of
my health and cheerfulness through many weaknesses, for such is the clearness of
my body, and freeness from any obstructions, that I have run from the first
step of my house unto the highest step upon the leads on the house top and
never draw my breath; also such ease and cheerfulness of heart, that as I go
along the street it is as if I did not tread on the ground, and as I have often
said, so I do say again, that to my thinking I do not weigh one ounce upon my
shoo-heels. Now my sleeve for the most part is full of pins that I gather from
the ground, but when I hung upon my Doctors sleeve, I always was so oppressed
and filled with pains, and so sore oppressed and laden at my Breast, that
although poor, yet should hardly have stooped to have taken up a penny, and if
I had stooped upon any occasion, I did not know how to get up again without
great pain and difficulty, and with the help of my hands upon my knees; I
further found and do find my limbs to lengthen or set at liberty, which before
was stiff as if they were shrunk, now I can leap run or any such like thing
with refreshing, which before was far from me: What shall I say, I am through
mercy a living monument of his mercies and of Gods blessing upon this Pill, for
near this five years I have not used any other thing but it and my Antidote,
and sometimes of my Oil of Amber, and if these should fail me, as I know not
how soon they may; I suppose I should hardly send over the threshold for what
is elsewhere to be gained for money, yet I will deal freely and truly with you,
I have been put so to it upon extraordinary occasions of Feavors, colds and
aguish infections to take four Pills of good bigness, betwixt eight at night
and ten the next day, allowing three or four hours betwixt each Pill, and I do
the rather report this, because I know it will be exemplary to many, for such
has been my weakness that if I did not take a Pill in the time aforesaid I
should faint, besides the help of high cordial waters and burnt wine, and in
stead of cold mortal Julips, in a Feavor I make use of these comfortable things
not fearing my Feavor, if I can but hold up my vital spirits, and let my Pill
and Feavor try the mastery; I know according unto Gods appointment it shall be
but for so many years through twenty Feavors which have been apparent thus have
I been helped, for if one Pill will be to weak it must be assisted with
another, and if two be too weak it must be assisted with a third, and if three
be too weak it must be assisted with a fourth; thus far I have gone with it my
self, and seldom it is that a Feavor staid with me twenty four hours, or hardly
ever to keep me in a doors all the next day, but by afternoon likely I am
master of it; and let all take notice that it is far better to take a little
and often, that is to say, four hours asunder, as I did and do my self if there
be occasion, so will it work sweetly and powerfully with ease and delight; and
whereas I spoke of the stopping of some of my Organical parts, they were my
ears and nose, my ears so opened, that when I held my breath and blew, the wind
would fly through both my ears, I could perceive it by making my hair fly on
both sides, and indeed they are both as good as ever since they were mine,
which before the use of my Pill were weak and defective; I do therefore always
renew my thanksgiving unto God for so great a mercy bestowed upon me now in the
latter end of my days, for as I have said often, such has been my continued
pains and anguish for above twenty years that I have not known the hour in all
that time wherein I have took so much pleasure in my life as to desire to live
it out; I joyfully acknowledge unto the praise of my master which I have served
from my youth up with an upright and perfect heart, that in all that time the
joys of a better life were always set before my face, with the lively beams
thereof always kept alive in my heart, and through mercy I durst not complain
nor say my burden was too heavy for me, I ever abhord such thoughts as too
ignoble for a Christian that puts his trust in Gods free mercy in Christ; I
perpetually cried aloud for strength to bear and suffer his will, and it was
enough for me, the master that I always have served never suffered the cross to
be two heavy and burthensom to me, I know well it crossed nothing but an
unbelieving, corrupt, and carnal mind. I have often wondered considering my
apparent weakness, wherefore I did live or had life permitted me, forasmuch as
I could not discern which way I was likely to perform service, either unto God
or unto man, more then this that it was for my Lord and Masters power to rest
upon me, and to manifest his glory in my great infirmity, but now I am apt to
think that I am preserved, as with joy I do find, to be a blessing and a
refreshing unto many, and truly the poverty and sickness, rejection of friends
and relations which has past me, does not (as it does with too many) set me on
to take hold on riches or make have to be rich, or fill my self with the
profits and pleasures of this life, but much rather if it were possible for me,
such is the burning desire of my heart, I say, I would if possible bear the
sickness and bitterness of all men, and frequently with joy and tears when I
have heard the returns of those poor which by my hand as a weak instrument; I
say when they have told the great things ^he Lord has done for them, my soul
within me has revived with praise and thansgiving that I am and have been
spared unto so great and blessed a work as the Lord imploys me in; I see also
and perceive why I my self have been trained up in affliction, to the end I
might learn of the true pattern of all obedience, Jesus Christ, who came not to
do his own will, but the will of him that sent him, who speaking of those that
are his and have interest in him, as of sons and children, that he took part
with them, to wit, flesh and blood, the nature of Abraham, not Angels, and was
tempted as a man, that he might succor those that are tempted and learn to be a
merciful Savior; and let me speak further, whether my heart deceive me God
knows, it is my perpetual supplication that I might rather dye and sease,
then that this my rejoicing should be made void, but that I may truly and
faithfully do likewise unto the utmost of my power always ready to join my
shoulder unto him that is ready to fall, supporting, comforting and assisting
according unto what I have received extended always unto him that is sick and
feeble of heart; and through mercy there is a good witness for the time past (I
doubt not) recorded in heaven; and I further hope to increase it through the
blessed assistance of him who shows mercy unto the poor and needy in their
distress.

Directions how to take this Pill aright.
LEt it be understood that each one according unto his age, strength, or
weakness is to take a portion severally.

The ordinary dosse is the biggness of a gray pease swelled, or twelve grains,
or ten, or fourteen grains to twenty grains where is strength, but to a child
new born no more then a pin-head, and not a great one neither, but about one
quarter of a grain. My advice and council is to all both old and young that
they be sure they take little enough at first, and in so doing there is great
safty, always having regard to the strength and condition of the patient, and
forasmuch as the thing in its one property is a mear cordial, and a great
fortifier of nature, too much you may take without safty, as a man may drink
too much wine, but too little you cannot take as to safty, so that the least
grain is profitable to whole nature, and not in the least prejudicial;
therefore I do warn and charge that you begin with little enough, and that you
do increase afterward as you find by good experience the patient can bear it,
unto a child of ten or twenty hours old give as much as a small pins-head, and
so increase with care as you shall find it to work, it at once brings them to
rest, causes them to eat and suck lustily, and drives out any thing amiss in
them; and for a child a year old give as much as a great pin-head, still
increasing as you do perceive strength to bear it, but it is better to give it
either to old or young a little and often, always taking it when you are going to
bed or in bed, and you must allow twelve or fourteen hours unto its working, and
above all things take heed of colds, but if you should get a cold, haste to
bed, take a good Pill, it is gone, it will do no hurt, if you find your head to
be giddy and unsettled, and also your stomach to be heaving, it is best to give
it time and repose by sleep, least you be very sick and vomit, which you will
not do if your stomach be not very foul; note that it is not in its strength
till four or five hours taken; there is no observation of diet, but for men and
women to keep a wholesome open and clean diet, avoiding all things that is cold
and windy in operation, but always keep your stomach warm with that which is
good and wholesome; also always drink a wine-glass of the best Beer, Ale or Wine
after the taking of the Pill; it is to be noted that if a man's head and breast
be well he may rise at any time; I my self do frequently rise after the taking
my last Pill about two hours, this is in hot weather, not but that I must sleep
after again; you must further give what time you will, if your stomach be foul
and poisonous you will vomit, I do in the Winter time frequently when I am
abroad and find my self not well, take a little Pill of four grains or a grain
or two more, as I like my self, and drink a cup of good Beer after it, this
does raise me up beyond all belief, its common operation is by sweat and Urin
which you may increase as you please, you shall find that a double portion will
have a double effect, so that you may do what you will with your self; it is
further to be noted, that after three or four days this Pill will purge your
body but with have and pleasure; generally it does purge, you will also find a
fiery sharp humor to go away, and although it make you a little sore for the
present, yet will you have cause to give thanks to God for its discharge,
although with pain; you will do well to let it take its own course and follow
natures law; it often appears most by Urin, I know many because of its strange
working have slighted it, and left it, and spoke ill of it through their own
fears, unto their own hurt, and yet at last it has been their last and best
refuge, these are not a few in and about London, and now who shall commend it
like these; it is no new thing to have the best substances thrown by, if they
do not in all things appear according unto received circumstances, I do wish
all that are weak to do as I do my self, to use this Pill more or less as they
find occasion, and always have within their reach a cup of the best, a spoonful
of good cordial-water is good in cold weather; my Pill does hate all small
drinks that are fomented or wrought with yeast, which fills with Wind and
Rhums, keep ever your stomach warm with wholesome meat and drink, and care not
for being a little hot, let it suffice thee that my Pill although hot, yet does
it kill all unnatural heat whatever; I have always by me a bottle of a rich
cordial-water, and a pot of strong Beer, or Ale with Sugar, or of the Sirrop of
black Cheries, which after my way of making does excel, and sometimes I do use
these apart, and sometimes together, as I do find my self, and sometimes none
of them all, but of any drink whatever it be, be not to free with it at one
time, but rather a little and often; you will find this Pill to coarse and follow
wind up and down from head to heel, as a dog follows a Hare through every
hedge and bush, and in this working you will of a sudden find a little
faintness, then a spoonful of that which is best is acceptable and well
applied, at that time besure to keep your head on your Pillow, and while one
would tell forty it is gone; and thus it will do till it has found some
natural purger for his enemy, but if thou do not break wind by a sensible way
of evacuation, yet thou shall find it gone thou know not which way, thou
may observe that thy Pores are set open all over thy body, and by secret
breathings at those little Pores, it will often make his way, and sometimes by
Urin it will follow natures law, and use those purges which is most apt and
spontaneous; and what pains soever thou have old or new will give way and thou
at ease, as if thou ailedst nothing, for the most part it is so, but if thou
find it rake too high upon an old grief, know it is in order to heal and cure
it; therefore I say, condescending unto thy weakness and unbelief, prove it
first with a little and increase with judgment, as you find strength and
courage to bear it, thou may know that it has power, if thou have wisdom to
apply it.

It falls out often upon surly griess, as Sciatica and Gout in the feet, that it
will nibble at them more strongly then thou would, therefore mark what I have
said to thee.

In my first Bill I did not commend it to women with child, both because my
Pill is not now as then, neither had I experience, but now I do commend it to
them above any thing in the world for the health both of mother and child, and
if young women would avoid green and hurtful fruits and windy things, and
instead thereof keep a good and wholesome diet, and now and then, if cause, to
use of these Pills, we should not have so many miserable weak children; but
women will so palpably inslave their own healths and lives and their infants
unto a foolish lust, to that which proves pernicious unto both, observing
neither what is for their own or their infants health and welfare.

I will relate one story of a woman with child, one that lived about
Safoxus-mills in Southwark, and this woman was extremely tormented, but did not
know what it was that troubled her, she had took diverse things but to no
purpose, and so it was that her pains^ did exceed, that she was weary of her
life; this woman meets with one of my Pills, but how I did not know till
afterward, and without leave takes it at a venture, and contrary unto its usual
course, it set this woman a purging, and gave her above twenty stools, and then
brought from her an abortive or false conception, whereat she was well and so
continued (...) the month that she had to go, and in her season was delivered
of a lusty boy very well, and so both mother and child continue well for any
thing as ever I heard, praised be God, and after we heard of this woman, we
likewise heard of others which did take it in the very hour of travel with
happy success, and with much ease, more then ever they brought child into the
world before, and now lately it is grown common with women that know it and use
it in the time of being with child, to take it in their extremity, and also to
give it their child as soon as born, if they discern cause.

I will now give you one instance or two of some that have used it
presumptionsly, and have took too much of it, it may be such like experiences
will admonish the unruly to use a good thing to a good purpose and not abuse
themselves thereby.

About a month ago I chanced to light into the company of a man that lives near
London Bridge in Theams-street, he said he lay one night with a Gentleman which
lay at his house, this Gentleman having of my Pills in a silver box, took one
himself, and left his box on the table and went to bed, this man he takes as
much at twice as would have made five or six (he compared it to to his thumb
end) the least of which would have been enough for him, this portion did begin
to work very high upon him, and he fell into a strong vomitting in a strong
sweat, and after a while he needs must go to stool, he in his sweat goes down
two p^ir of stairs to the house of office, and he protested to me that as he
s^t upon the stool the sweat did drop off him upon his feet; thus twice he went
down two pair of stairs to purge, and very ill by fits, it made him that he
thought he should have dyed no other death, but says he, I will never take more
of your Pills: this man is old enough to have seen his error and my Pills
benefit, yet this is his conclusion, hence let all be admonished to follow
direction given, for his resolution was as rash as taking the Pills was, and
carries so much folly in it, as it does stand more need to be pitied then
answered, for who sees not but that if he had taken a portion fit for him how
profitable it would have been to him.

A child in Saint Martins being presently helped of Rickets and ill digestion
of meat and such like griefs; another of their next neighbors comes in great
haste for another child in like condition, I gave her Pills as the other had,
and showed her by making a one or two what quantity she should give the child,
she follows my order the first day, and she did sensibly discern such a mighty
change in the boy, both as to his breath and cheerfulness all the next day as
did much delight her, and said she, if so much as this little thing do my
child so much good, I will give it more, and that will do it more good (and
indeed so it proved for it cured the boy) and she gave it what she thought
good, I shall never know how much it was she gave him, but the next day the
child was very sick and would eat nothing but often fainted and vomitted much,
she sends to me in great have and said she feared I had killed her child, I
asked her sister whom she sent if they had followed my direction, she assured
me that they had to a tittle; in the afternoon I went to see what was the
matter, and by that time the boy was very well and had broke through it, and the
woman then told me what she had done, and her sister who affirmed that they had
strictly followed my rules, said, did not I tell you you would kill the boy by
giving him too much, thus you may see how I am dealt with, and I know in this I
am not alone if this child had died, I should have been called the killer of
it, neither should I ever have heard what the mother had done to it.

While I am writing, at present came a man to me fit to be remembered, although
out of place which for two years was sore troubled with a sharp eating Rhum
falling from his head, that he was almost lost, he looked blackish, yallow,
wan, his eyes dull, he was almost starved for want of meat, he could neither eat
nor sleep, he could get no help, Gods good hand direct him to me in a time of
need, his throat and palate of his mouth almost eat away, I looked into his
mouth at his request, there was a hole eat out I could have turned my finger in
it, it was sad to see; I did somewhat suspect what disease it should be, but
indeed I think both he and his wife fears God and is innocent and chaste in
their lives; I gave this man one quartern of Pills, he came again in five or
six days so altered, as I scarce knew him he did look so cheerful, fresh, his
eyes quick, his throat almost well, so much more set him quite well, and so he
continues and he it may be spends one quartern in one quarter of a year upon
him self; I confess I never in my life, as I can remember knew the like, what
the man ailed I cannot tell, it is sufficient through Gods blessing even at
once, as water would quench fire, so effectually did my Pill administer healing
unto him, which did quickly make him pull out the stuff wherewith he had stoped
it with.

To conclude I think I need not speak more to my Pill or how to use it, for
what is related in the several examples or experiences, will be as land marks
to guide each one how and when to make application to themselves and friends
with comfort and fasty, so as they need not to trouble themselves or me for
further direction how to use it, and for such as are not therewith satisfied I
do heartily desire they would let it alone, and I do assure them, that if they
have no need of my Pills, that my Pills have no need of them, and further I add
that from my heart I do entreat all who and whatever they be that have a half
persuasion to take and try my Pills, that if that they be not so well persuaded
of them as to think of them to be proper means for their health, so as to pray
for Gods blessing upon their use, that all such whatever they be would let them
alone. I know the Atheistical profaneness of many which laugh when persuaded to
join faith and prayer in its use, their wickedness and folly needs no answering.

Here follows a Catalogue of names with their dwellings, of such as have used
or knows the use of my Pill, of whom you may inquire.
Mr. Henry Bonner, Fish-street-hill, at the Katherinwheel. Mr. Gibert Branden
at the Swan and Bridge, at Bridge-foot. Mr. Tho. Isgate, Bridge foot. Mrs.
Hudson Martins-lane, old Swan. Mrs. Mardin Angel-alley by Cole-harbor. William
Hawkins Butcher Eastcheap. Mrs. Jones Ducksfilld lane. Mrs. Fellkin, Mark-lane
by Tower-street. Mrs. Bargman, Tower-street. Mr. Nicholes, Tower Hill. Mr.
Robinson, by the Scaffold on Tower Hill. Mr. Nuttall, by the Postern
Tower Hill. Mrs. Leine alias Green, Cater-lane. Mrs. Roles by the Iron-gate.
Mr. Barham Manister of Saint Tellins. Mrs. Laugham, Saint Tellins. Mr. Liggon,
Whit-hart-court without Bishopsgate. Mrs. Prosser, Half-Moon-alley little
Morefields. Mrs. Lewis, Priest-alley Tower-street. Mrs. Thornton, Mint Tower.
Mr. John Renals, Say master Tower his maid-servent. Mr. Nathaniel Marsh, Monier
in the Tower. Mrs. Hunt, Gravel lane Starch-maker. Mr. Andrews, Coopers Alms
houses Ratcliff. Mr. Crainton, Ratcliff-cross. Mr. Roe, Ratcliff-cross. Mr.
Gibson, Ratcliff-cross. William Hornbe, Woollwich.
In Lime house.
Mr. Tho. Coasts. Mr. John Hostin. Mrs. Ann Eliot. Mr. Edmond Harman. Mrs. Ann
Pope. Mrs. Elizabeth Coats. Mrs. Joan Pirkins. Mr. Tho. Hastin. Mrs. Sarah
Skenes. Mrs. Alice Hughes. Mrs. Mary Thomson. Mrs. Prudence Persall. Mr.
Ravins. Woollwich. Mr. Packwood, Woollwich. Mr. Hance Woollwich. Mr. Barton
Woollwich.
In Ratcliff.
Mr. John Smart. Mrs. Mary Smart. Mrs. Mary Andrews. Joseph Barker. Elizabeth
Hadwine. Ric. Dean. John Dean. Adam Hair. Mr. Coppin, Mrs. Stanton. Joan
Reares. Mr. Kendal of Chattham. Mr. Booth, Woollwich. Mr. Comfort. Mrs. Bishop,
Mase Southwark. Mrs. Harris, Barnesbe-street Southwark. Mr. Stevens,
Barnesbe-street end. Mr. Caskue, Battle-bridg. Mr. Sharp, Saint Thomas
Southwark. Will. Whitlock, Saint Thomas Southwark. Mr. Vere, Houndsdich Currier
yard. Tho. Dennis at the Bell Southwark. Tho. Hakelion, Bank-side. Mr. Brooks,
Maiden-lane Southwark. Mr. Clemant, Bank-side Southwark. Mr. Tench, near
Falkeon Southwark. Mr. Morgin, Bankeside. Mr. Kettel, Barber in Tho. Southwark.
Mr. Nic. Parcks, New-street near Shoo-lane. Mr. Pittman, Meal-market Southwark.
Mr. Chapman, Gravel-lane Houndsdich. Abednego Child, Mileend. Tabitha Eliat,
Whitechapel Churchyard. Mr. James Hill, Coleman-street George-alley. Sarah
Tailor, Northumberland-Alley. Mr. Bavin, Northumberland-alley. Mr. Smith,
Northumberland-alley. Mr. Barber, Further Tower Hill new building. Mrs.
Sillito, Tower-dock. Mr. Hussy, Thumberland-alley. Mr. Deadman, Halfinoon,
Cornhill. Mr. Smith, Cock at Longlane end Aldersgate Street. Mr. Smith, Graver
Gutter-lane. Mr. Weaver, Clock-maker at the Pumpe, Broad-street end. Widow
Smith at the A^chor in Coleman-street. Mr. Barton, Nags-^ead-alley,
Bishopsgate-street. Mr. Fromantell, Clock-maker at the Millel Duck-lane by the
Hospital. Mr. Prime, Angel-alley at Thumberland-alley end, Allgate. Mr. James
at Mr. Fromantells. Mr. Lomes, Clock-makey (...) at the Mermaid. Mrs. Burrows,
at the three Cocks Lothberry. Mr. Loddinton, Barber Lothbery. Westminster.
Edward Batterbes, Ti^^^^-street. Joh. Fells, Kings-street. Law. Dibes,
Kings-street. Simon Clesbe, Mill-bank. Mrs. Barnes, Petty-France. Mrs. Alerige,
Tuttle-street. Mrs. Kellsall, little Wood-street. Captain Robinson,
Tuttle-street. Mr. Jos. Sprige, Whirehall. Mr. Seal, Brasier Cat-eaten-street.
Mrs. Heassell, Checker Wa^lin-street. Mr. Roberts, Lower end of Broad-street.
Mr. Barber in Fire-ball-court Hounsdich. Mr. Hamon, lower end of Broad-street.
Mr. Jesseries, in fireball Court Hounsdich. Mr. Ward, Excise Office. Mr.
Barnard, Excise Office. Mr. Boulstrod, Surgis-hall. Mr. Esterle, Excise Office.
Colonel Potter of Richmond. Mr. Prichit of Richmond. Mr. Bacon, Controler
Ely-house. Mrs. Rawbone, New Bridewell. Mrs. Cuttler, Charter House. Mr.
Hawood, Seven stars Lamber-street. Andrew Dancy, Abchurch-lane. Mr. Lashle
Barbar, Colledge-hill. Mr. Williams, Nelins court Blackfriars. Ric. Andrews,
Whitechappel. Mr. Loveday, Spittlefeils. Mr. Clement, Silkman Cheapside by the
Bull-head. Mr. Richards, Basing-lane. Captain Johnson, lower end Bow-lane. Mr.
Mellish, Trinity-lane Baker. Mrs. Mountague, three Tim-alley London wall. Alice
Ruse at Mr. Hudson Martins-lane. Mrs. Brooks at the same Mr. Hudsons. The Baker
Martins-lane end old Swan. Cap. Cellke Pewterer Burchin lane. Mr. Hatten,
Winsforth-street. Mr. Penny, Excise Office. Mr. Pearpoint, Douins alley
Bishopsgate-street. Mr. Ellis, Sherbone-lane Tailor. Mrs. Freeman at Mr.
Cutlers Charter House. Mr. Neal, Cheapside. Mrs. Seeton in Saint Thomas
Southwark. Mrs. Broom, Frying pan Cheapside. Mrs. Winfeild, Hellin down by
Vxbridge. Mr. Preston, Swan-alley Coleman-street. Mrs. Tart, Bell alley
Coleman-street. Mrs. Taverner of Hillindoron. Mr. Brade Schoolmaster Crutchet
friars pumpe.
I have set down a few names with their dwellings, to the end thou may here
what they will say, and this I will assure thee that they all have cause to
speak well, and so indeed they have done, and I think will do, otherwise thou
may believe I would never have set their names here; and if it were a thing
necessary it were a small matter for me in a little time to give thee ten for
one; but these being scattered over the Town and at once come to mind while I
am a dispatching this little book, I am willing without carefuness to abide by
their testimony, knowing well what I have commended whether men speak well or
ill in this matter, yet I must tell thee that some of these at Westminster, and
some at Limmehouse I do not know, but their neighbors names them to me while I
am a writing, others that I do know, and I do entreat thee to believe that it
is no part of my labor to trouble my self with names and peoples dwellings.

Now I will in as plain words as I can deliver unto you some choice Receipts
which I think have not seen the light, easily wrought, almost by any vulgar
hand, which will be acceptable unto such as are endued with love and goodwill,
and do desire the good of their neighbor.

To draw the true Oil of Amber, the sam which I have used for many years with
wonderful effect and benefit to the users, and the same of which I have spoken
in this Book.
TAke the Scruff of Amber what quantity you please (which you may buy at the
Druggist) and beat it in a Mortar grossly, then take a good new Brick, and beat
it to powder likewise, of these equal weight, and mix them well together one a
table, it is ready.

Take a good Retort of glass and put on it a good coat of strong lute made of
blood, lome, hair, and sharp sand, and moisten them with strong Brian, lay it
on all over the thickness of two half crowns, let it dry in the sum, when its
dry look well, and purge what is a miss and it is ready, fill this three parts
full of thy Brick and Amber, and it is ready to put into thy Furnace, make a
Furnace with a grate, and lay a cross bar of Iron eight inches above thy grate,
set thy retort in an earthen Dish of ashes or sand upon this bar, let the nose
stand inclining so as what condenceth may run out, build up about thy Retort
and keep an inch distance or more, and just at the top of thy Furnace, leave a
vent so bigg as an egg may go in at it; note if thy vent be too strait thou
will be puzzled, but if too big then may with tile shird make it less by
laying it on the top, lay to it a receiver as bigg as the retort, see that all
be dry and well fixed, then with a gentle fire of Charcole under thy grate make
fire for twelve hours, thou will perceive thy work to sweat, and a white
waterishness to cleave unto the neck of thy Retort, and in thy Receiver,
continue this degree of fire under thy grate in the ash-pit for twelve hours or
longer, till thou perceive it to slack its working, then begin with final fire
upon thy grate, govern thy work with care that it work not too fiercely, for
then thou will endanger all thy work and break thy vessels, and keep that heat
till thou see that it will work no more, and that as thou perceivest there
comes nothing, increase thy fire a little for three hours, and if thou
perceive that it begin to send forth white fumes, keep that degree for six
hours, and by this time thou may be sure that all the Fleg^ is come off, then
put in a Sea-cole finder or two, and so by degrees leave Charcole, and bring ^a
thy fire with Sea-cole, it is for thy profit so to do, and by this time there
is no great danger, the Oil is drunk up into the Brick, and thou with a little
increase of fire will make him discharge o^ spew it out again and yet keep it
from flowing, so that thou will receive now a thick, black, or deep red Oil,
thou may in twelve hours more setch off all thy Oil without fear, for it does
require good and strong fire, and with a tile give vent at the top which thou
laidst on in the beginning of thy work, let all cool together as it stands, and
then take off thy Oil and have a clean retort ready and pour it thereinto, and
if thou will make a retort thy receiver which is better, then let it stand till
thou art ready for it, take out the retort with the Capud, and clap into thy
Furnace an Iron Kettle, and let the bottom seat upon the Iron Bar, and leave a
large vent so bigg as a small fist way be put down it; note this Furnace will
stand in any Chimney-corner (how little soever it be) and with Lime and Hair
fix the same handsomely, let the Kettle incline a little that it may c^s^ the
Oil the better; set into sand thy Retort with the Oil, let the nose incline
that the Oil may descend or drop, let it stand half an inch in the bottom of
sand under the retort, fill about with the same sand so high as the Oil in the
retort is, let not the sand be either too sharp or too fine, but of a middle
greet, break the neck of another retort to go over this, if it be two inches
wide, then if need not go over above one inch, but if it be but one inch wide,
it had need go over three inches, lute it fast about with Starch and paper; do
thy work neatly like a work man, make a Sea-cole fire under gently until all
the Phlegm be come over, and after increase thy fire, Note, that if thou have
wr^^g^^ well in thy fir^ dr^^ght, (...) p^und of (...) thou will (...) of ^y^
and (...) thi^^^ (...); repeat the ^a^e^^^ ^n the second time; then h^^t thou
attained unto that Oil as (...) constantly sell for four shillings the ounce,
and sometimes unto Gentlefolks, and sometimes for nothing: thou may note that
I have of the (...) which ^^^h been thus rectified ab^^e ten times, that I
never sold any of it under twenty shillings the ounce. Thus I have given thee
without any knot, the tree and plain way of my own work, which I have done of
my self without any guide or teaching, but as God has taught me, and therefore
know not what way other men take, accept them at my hand, therefore whereunto I
have attained, with as much love as I tender it unto thee.

Many conclusions I have tried, thinking to advance the worth of this Oil, but
it proved otherwise; note that with fire thou can not wrong it, but
therewith thou must seed it, and on fire it does seed as naturally as thou
feeds upon thy meat; many that would be accounted wise we choice in their fire,
and dare not stir it up least all theirwork should be spoiled, but I am sure
they are fools and spoil their work for want of fire, for its clearness must
not come with gentle fire but with often rectifying, for if thou will take from
him his fetid sent, know that he is worth nothing fit for Ladies to play wish,
but not to do them good, and because many will disdain me in this matter, I
will take in one more with me, viz. Radolphus Glover, who says as much; note
that it is best to keep this Oil upon the Flegma as its one mother, neither
will the Oil sower so soon: I do think in my conscience this Oil comes the
nearest unto a Medicin universal, if strongly rectifyed ten or twelve times,
and the opperator have judgment to keep and hold his Spirituousness with
strong Lute, of any Oil in the world, I have found it so and therefore so speak.

But because many would fain make this Oil, who live far off and cannot get
vessels, I will show them a clownish way or two, that they may make a shift as
I have done; but first note, I do protest I do not know out of my own hand
where this Oil can be had for money; I have tried again and again that which is
sold for it, but I find little of the truth there, I do not doubt but it is in
diverse hands to be had for money, but where out of my own hand I know not, but
that which is trade stuff is fetched more out of the Firr-tree then out of the
Scruff of Amber.

Let the Country gentleman that lives far off, and loves them that God loves,
viz. the poor, and would fain do them good, let him attend to what I say, take
a long neckt jugg, the longest you can get, and cover it well with a strong
lute as I appointed thee to cover the retort withal, put in thy Ambe^ confect
therein, lay thy jugg upon thy Iron bar within thy Furnace, let the nose lie
out about one inch, let not the nose incline, but look a little upward, set to
another jugg whose mouth will go over his mouth, lute them fast together,
proceed in all points as formerly, and thou haft thy desire; and if thou
would rectify those vessels, be sure that they be very well burned and
glazed, otherwise thou may go seek thy Oil, or thou may very well make thy
first drought in Gawbers first Furnace if thou have any of them, or any Potter
will make thee of them.

I will yet commend unto thee another way, which is no sable but what I have
wrought with my own hand and of my own invention, which I am sure no ingenious
man will despise.

Take a large Funnel of Crooked-lane-plate, or of thin brass, as my own is of
that I have used the same way and for the same purpose; and cut so much of its
small end off as thou may turn thy thum in it, get a Plate of thin Iron or
Brass, and fit it unto the top of thy Funnel so artly that it may lie a straws
breadth within the rim of thy Funnel, and if thou can not get a Plate
conveniently, take an old Drying Pan bottom; if none of these, then an earthen
dish, but it will require a stronger fire upon i^, be careful that whatever it
be that it fit thy Funnel or Tunel, then take another earthen dish about two
inches deep, or a little less, and let it be almost as wide as the Funel, put
it into the Funnel, and take three or four six penny nails, put them betwixt
the dish and the Funnel side, that there may be a straws breadth or a nails
breadth betwixt the Tunnel and the dish, for the vapor to go down by, put thy
Amber grossly beaten into the dish, but be sure that thy plate above do reach
within an inch or inch and half at farthest; then lay over thy plate, then take
a live Charcole and lay thereon which may warm the Plate, have ready chalk
beaten to fine powder, and a strong lie made of Bay salt, and thereof make thin
stuff as if thou would make Pancakes, and with thy knife lay this lute upon
the edge of thy Funel which will bind fast the plate and the Funnel that
nothing can vapor that way, take thy Funnel and set it into a large glass with
a narrow mouth, and lute it well with a Iinnen cloth and some of thy lute, and
set thy glass where thou will in thy window or one thy table; it is great
pleasure to behold this working, thou may govern it as thou will by thy
increase or decrease of fire; this I have done and it is speedy, easy, and
delightful, and almost without charge, only note thy Oil comes very thick;
clean all thy vessels with warm water and soap, and then thou may rectify
therewith; thou must take heed to blow away the ashes, that the heat may take
the Iron plate under it more aptly, the gentlier thou do fire, the better
will thy work be.

Of this Oil if a vollum were writ of its power and virtue, it would be short
of what is contained in it; I will content my self with giving thee two or
three instances, leave thee to judge of it as it seems good unto thee.

At the beginning of these unnatural wars, I think about seventeen or eighteen
years ago (for so long I have used it) I my self being extreme week even as
water, languishing by degrees, after a sore fit of sickness, which held me from
Bartholmew-tide unto Shrove-tide; and for near seven years, passing my days in
as great affliction as might be and go upright, nothing that I could take doing
me any good, able to digest no wholesome food; and if I had gone the length of
Tower-street, it was pains enough for me to lie on the bed all the day after
it, indeed having inward peace I did long for death, but it fled away as God
would have it; I knew not what I ailed, only whole nature wasted and spent,
and being deaf I employed a man to serreng my ear, I founded under his hand
four times, that they thought I should then have dyed: the man told me I was
the weakest man that ever came under his hand, willed me to get good Oil of
Amber, and drink three or four drops in the morning fasting, and he would
warrant my recovery, I inquired what it was, and till I came unto Hans Honger
in White-chappel the Hungarian, I could not learn its virtue, he commended it
as one of the most absolute things in the world, he prepared me one ounce, for
which I gave him ten shillings (and if I had given him ten pounds he had
deserved it) I took three dtops as I was directed, and two mornings it purged
and no more, but brought me to a right order, viz. once in a day, but before I
had I know not how many stools in a day, and also made water almost at ever
post through weakness, but in three weeks or a months time I was renewed from
head to heal, and was like a boy of fourteen years old no ground could hold me*
even at once released of all the sore burdens and oppressions that I lay under,
which did much amaze most that knew me and I told them with what, although few
would believe it; this relation is true, praised be God for this Oil as a
blessed instrument thereof, for presently I broke wind, began to feel an
appetite and digest that which I did eat which was happy effects to me, that
for some years knew I not what it meant, and God so ordered it, that at that
very time I fell in with a French Emperick which was servant unto the Prince of
Orringe, and from the time I have labored in this art of Alchimy.

A child being near death with Convulsion-fits, its father, mother, grandmother
coming into the Country where the child was at nurse intending to bury it
before they went home to London, the child having had thirty fits, some black
and some white, nothing could interpose; I desired them to anoint the breast
with some of this Oil, and indeed it was the first draught only, it stopped the
fit coming, and the child had no more fits while she had it to nurse, unto
their great astonishment, the Nurse said to me, that if I would have asked at
that time five pound a drop, I might have had it, but eighteen pence did serve
the turn.

Another time I did use to go often unto a friends house where one lay sick of
the Pestilence, I fancied with my self not to be afraid, neither can I say I
was afraid, but so it was that I felt something rise and swell under my right
arm, I let it alone two or three days, till at last it was so bigg that I could
not get my arm unto my side as I was wont, and to my thinking it was as bigg as
an egg, and begun to be sore; I then had two sorts of Oil of Amber, one that
was fine to drink, and another sort that was course to anoint; I drank my
portion of the best, and then I called for my courser sort as I was in bed, and
with my left hand anointed under my arm, and while my hand was upon it, it did
avoid the place and fell under my short ribs, I followed it with Oil upon my
ribs, and while my hand was on it, it leaped up under my arm again, I to it
again under my arm with more Oil, and while my arm was on it, it went I know
not whether, the next morning I felt a little pain upon the contrary shoulder,
and thus it went away and I heard no more of it, blessed be God for his
goodness and mercy unto me.

I was once almost forced to visit a Gentleman who was lame of the Gout, I
left him Pills, and gave him of this Oil to anoint his feet; this man
neglected his Pills, only anointed with this Oil, he told me the next day he
was in ease, and his foot and leg all alike sore; this man with one or two
Pills and this Oil was so well as I observed him he ran after me to open his
door to let me out, and so at once was well of his lameness; this is true, I
have related.

Many by drinking this Oil only have voided many stones and much gravel when
drunk is White Wind; I do use in Feavors to rubb my self all over with this Oil
and drink it inwardly, and do find the ready way to cure with my Pills, and
although it be fire, for so is my Pills, yet do they quickly extinguish an
unnatural fire, as all find that use them, thanks be to God for it.

I never knew Convulsion stand with it, but it is ready help, as far as I have
proved, and as profitable for any ach of limbs wherever, nay I have known when
able Doctors have concluded of nothing but death, where extreme vomiting and
tearing of limbs have been, being left, I have then caused the patient to be
rubbed all over with this Oil with a warm hand, which instantly has caused
cease of pain, and such breaking wind as is not to be credited, and forthwith
health hat^ followed, this I have seen with my eyes, blesse^ be God for it. I
leave it to Gods blessing in thy hand; I think to speak no more of it, this
book having already exceeded my intention, you may safely anoint a little
child of a month old or younger if you have the true Oil; yea as soon as it is
born without danger, and I have known it given inwardly at sixteen weeks old
without danger, it is altogether discorsive and not contractive, and therefore
safe and profitable for women that have Cankers in their Breasts, as I have
known some cured with my Pills and this Oil, praised be God for it; but I am
weary of writing being very burden some unto me. I cannot but further add that
till I knew my Pills I never knew the like for all griess whatever that took
their root from wind and Rhums, it break wind apparently sensible twenty four
hours from off the stomach.

I will also here commend to the another which I am persuaded may truly be
accounted brother unto the Oil of Amber, for I have much used it, and found it
for all inward applications no whit inferior unto it; this thou may, know,
for it is not any part of my design to deceive thee, that I have found that if
I did drink Amber above fourteen days or three weeks, then its virtue would be
gone, then have I left it off and drank this Oil I shall now speak of as long,
and then the Oil of Amber would come fresh as at first in strength and virtue,
thou may note also that the Oil of Amber if you take too much of it in hot
weather will produce faintings, which this will not, further note, I never
durst use this Oil outwardly, but the Oil of Amber with great fasty.

Of this Oil I never read in all my life, nor ever heard of any that ever did
make any use of it but my self, and my one reason led me to it contemplating
one the subject, could not but believe, there was real worth in it, as I by
experience have truly found, and this Oil I call the Oil or Spirit of Pine,
for so indeed it is, for Tar is made of the Pine Tree, as Johnson reports; I
know nice noses will snuffel at this Oil as a thing most detestable; I do is
this as in other things admire the depth of the wisdom and goodness of God, who
puts honor upon those things men most despise, but I being all my life put hard
to it for the preservation of my health have laid fantastical humors aside,
and seriously searched into the blessing of God hid and covered even in
despised things; and truly I cannot say I have labored in vain, and indeed the
benefit of this one as to health makes amends for an hundred abortives or
errors.

Take therefore in the name of God what quantity of Tar thou please, and put
it into a retort w^ll lut^d* ^^d take like quantity of Bay Salt, put it into a
new earthen vessel, make a good fire of Charcole about it, which is called a
Wheel-fire of S^^^^tat^^^ and let thy Salt stand meanly red till it will crack
no more, and that is called Decrepitating, beat this Salt to powder while it is
warm in a stone Mortar, and then with a wide Funel power it upon thy Tar which
thou put into the Retort, let all together fill thy retort two thirds, set the
retort in the palm of thy hand, and mix them well by shaking of them together,
place this retort upon the Iron bar eight inches above thy grate in a dish of
sifted ashes, as is taught in the drawing of the Oil of Amber, proceed with it
in all points as with the Oil of Amber, only at the last give violent fire for
twelve hours, thou shall receive three substances, viz. in the bottom of thy
glass thou shall receive a white Balsom, which is of unknown worth and virtue,
as to my self I speak, the least heat disolves it, but I never made no
experiment with it, but gave it to a friend which used to handle hard tools,
and he had a corn for diverse years in one of the joints of his finger which was
a daily grief and pain unto him; he anointed it with this balsom, and it did
swell and rise, he took a sharp knif and did cut off what did rise up, and then
did anoint again, it made it to rise again, he cut it again, and then did
anoint again, and it did swell and rise again, this labor he continued till
the corn came perfectly out, and so remains unto this day, which is now at
least this seven years; I know no wise man that considers what I have said but
will grant that which has power thus to work, can also go further when a wise
man has it in hand; above this Balsom thou will receive a sour Phlegm, I do not
know any thing it is good for, and above that thou will receive a deep red Oil
which separate from this Balsom and Phlegm, and that rectified once in ashes,
and a second time in Balneo Maria; thus far I went with it and no further for
my own use, and I found it precious above gold. There came a fat man to me once
that was troubled with strange fits and would beat himself and foam at mouth,
and when any thing did over charge his spirits, he would fall into those fits;
I gave him some of this spirit of Pine, and willed him to drink four, five or
eight drops and more as he found it work, and that he could bear it, in a weeks
time or a little more he sent me word he was cured, I willed him to proceed for
sometime however, and one morning after he had drunk this Oil, going among his
neighbors, they smelt a strong smell, at last they said it was like Tar, he
fancied I had given him somewhat made of Tar, was angry with me, choosing
rather to have his fits still, rather then take any thing of Tar; I think it is
very fit this man should keep his fits still, only I am afraid he has some
fits more then does him good; the abundant mercy from heaven is manifest in the
freedom of nature to all men, which offers her treasures free without price,
and God gives wisdom to men to search it out, and happy is that man whose heart
is set open and free to do good imitating God and nature in their bountuous
gifts; and as palpable is that man's folly who deprives himself of those
blessings freely offered unto him; and thrice more wretched is that man who
withholds those mercies from mankind, unto whom the highest has freely granted
them, for what have I or another that we have not received, and wherefore have
we received, but to fulfill the ends of the giver, miserable is that man that
wants that witness in heaven and in his own conscience; the blessing that I
have received in the taking of my Pill and in the giving it to others has
hindered me from making through proof of this Oil and Balsom, I have given thee a
plain receipt, and leave thee to Almighty God in the use of it, I know no more
but to drink it in the morning two hours before meat, it break wind upward all
day and causes appetite, digesteth meat, and where these are there will not
want strength, so I write, because so I have found by good experience; note,
drop it upon a spoonful of Ale or Beer and handsomely throw it down that thou
touch it not, nor let the spoon touch it, so will you smell of it either not at
all or very little, and the like for oil of Amber, but when you belch you will
taste it, hardly else; I know the scornful will not touch it, but the pained
will be glad to use those things that does them ease.

Now I will plainly give thee a plain receipt which has been kept up as a great
treasure, and so indeed it is, as I thing no man of any judgment but will so
judge it, I cannot speak of my own knowledge much of it, but my good friend from
whom I have it has been for many years relieved by it, when other means failed
him, and he being satisfied with my pressing desires to do good, freely gave it
me to that end, and I freely give it you, it will speak for it self, it is of
very inconsiderable preparation and yet of great effect, and thou may prepare
as much in few hours as will contain one thousand dosses, I know there are many
good Gentlemen and Gentlewomen which desire to do good unto their poor
neighbor; I entreat them attend, to this, I have done it, it is so easily done,
as it deserves not the name of a Chemical preparation: I also have known it
safe and profitable, and works so sweetly as indeed it is a Medicin to be
desired.

To prepare Antimony.

Take one part of Antimony, and six parts of the best India Salt-peeter, pound
them together and serce them through a hair sive, take a strong crusible three
square, and let it stand clean in a strong sire of Charcole (have a spoon tied
unto a stick) put in a spoonful and it will burn, but in more and more as it
burns till the crusible is full, take a clean Tobaco pipe with the little end
stir it well, let it boil and stir that till you are sure it will sparkle no
more, have a Brass or Iron Mortar clean stand by you, and with your Tongues,
take up your crusible and empty it into the Mortar, set it again in the fire,
and go on as at first, until you have done all that you intend to do for that
time, have a care to keep strong fire, it should be upon a grate that it may be
strong bring this unto sine powder, and sear it through a Lawn five, and it is
prepared for your use. Note, that if it do not fire as you do expect, touch it
with a live coal and set it on fire.

Antimony thus prepared, is depurated of all its fecis and poisonous qualities,
loosing utterly its malign heat; it purges copiously without trouble and
molestation, all gross, cold and Tartarous humors, and opens all stopped
passages.

To prepare Scamony.

Take of the best Scamony what quantity you please and beat it to powder, and
serce it, have ready a Tobacco drier, and put upon it a spungy thin brown
paper, take your Embers and strew in Brimstome into the fire, hold over the
Scamony, so that the fumes of the Brimstone may take through the paper, and when
you perceive that it sticks unto the Paper but as thick as a half crown or
shilling, cast off the rest upon a clean Paper, and with a spoon scrape off
what sticks upon the paper for it is prepared, then put on again the powder of
Scamony, and cast into your fire more powder of Brimstone till you perceive
that some does stick unto your paper, then cast off the loose powder and scrape
off with a spoon as formerly, and this work you must repeat until all your
Scamony have been scrapt off in like manner, then is it all prepared, but you
must be sure to take it off as soon as your can, least your Scamony quite loose
all its virtue, as it will if you sum it too much with the Brimstone.

Scamony thus prepared, is good against chollar and all thin hot humors, having
in it neither savor nor smell, and purges very easily and without pain, which
is corrary unto all other preparations.

The preparation of the cream of Tartar is ordinary, or the Crystals of Tartar
to be had at any Drugist used in this Portion.

Note that all these three is to be kept close in fine powder severally in
glass-bottles.

The greatest dosse for men; Antimony ten grains, Scamony fourteen grains,
Tartar eight grains.

The ordinary dosse for men; Antimony nine or ten grains, Scamony eleven or
twelve grains, Tartar six grains.

The lesser dosse for men; Antimony fix grains, Scamony nine grains, Tartar
five grains.

For children betwixt seven and fourteen; Antimony seven or eight grains,
Scamony five or six grains, Tartar three grains.

For sucking children and under seven; Antimony two or three grains, Scamony
four or five grains, Tartar three grains.

To children give it with Sugar or some sweet liquor, but to others as you
please, if the Ague or disease cease not at the first time, give it again four
or five times, ever diminishing the quantity, because the humors being once
stirred they are the easier carried out; or if this portion do little the first
day, then add more with discretion.

This Powder you may use in all diseases where humors do offend, either simple
or compound, hot or cold, thin or gross, clammy or windy, worms or extention
above nature, it helps the stopping of the Flowers, the extention of the
belly, the Dropsy in the beginning, Tertians, Quartans, and all sharp Feavors,
Choler, ill appetite, watching, thirst, unquietness of mind; i^ helps the
small Pox and Plurisie, it is not to be given where is great evacuation, but
explition and fullness, it is much better then letting of blood.

As for this portion of Physic rightly prepared and applied, I do believe
considering the inconsiderableness of the preparation, the world never had any
better, and I trust in God I have done good service unto my Country in bringing
it to light, but if any be envious and is disposed to cavil at it, all that I
desire of him is, that he would let it alone.

The true preparation of Crocus Martis.

Take the filings of Steel, what quantity you please, which you may buy at the
Druggist, and put it in a broad earthen well glazed dish, and sprinkle it twice
a day with strong Vinegar, set it in the hot Sun, or cover it with another
dish, and let if stand upom Embers the night time, do this for one month, now
and then stir it up and again give it Vinegar till thou perceive it is all
become rusty, dry it well and beat it to sine powder, then take a large glass
body, and put it into it, and pour upon it distilled Vinegar (which must needs
be so, otherwise thou will be as much troubled with the fecis of the Vinegar,
as the thou will be with the damd Terra of the Crocus) let it be covered with a
blind head (but first stir it well) set it in a Furnace of ashes, or in Balneo
Maria for four or five days, look that the Vinegar be deeply colloured red, if
not shake it well together and let it stand in the fire till it is, then cast
off the clear into a clean vessel, and put on more Vinegar, and this repeat
till thou see that it will ting no more, take all thy Vinegar, and filter it
through a double Cap paper (it will through by reason of the sharp penetration of
the Vinegar) then in a clean glass vessel vapor all the Vinegar away, or with a
head and receiver draw off thy Vinegar, and in the bottom thou will receive a
fair red Crocus, but if thou will take the pains to repeat this labor again,
that is, to dissolve it in fresh Vinegar after thou have taken it out, and put
in a clean new earth vessel, and let it be gently calcined for four or five
days; and again desolved, filtred, coagulated, thou will have a Medicin of more
worth then gold; God be merciful to men and women, which in stead of this have
only the rust of Iron put into their bellies; this Medicin is vast in its
effects, but most omninous in all kind of Fluxes, let it content thee for this
time I have given thee a true receipt.

To prepare the Sugar of Saturn.

Take what quantity of lead thou will, and in a Iron Kettle melt it, and with a
ladle of Iron stir it, this continue till all the lead be turned into an Ash
colloured powder; if thou, wilt (as I have done) add Bay salt, and continue it
over a strong fire till thou perceive it begins to attain a red color, let it
cool, put it into a clean vessel not greasy, and wash out all the Salt well,
and be sure thou take all the Salt taste away as by thy tasting, the last water
thou may perceive, then dry it well in a clean vessel, then grind it well
upon a Pursry with distilled Vinegar fit for to be used with a pensill, put it
into a clean glass, cover it six fingers with distilled Vinegar, put on a blind
head, and let it stand in ashes or Balneo Maria three or four days, let all
cool, thy Vinegar will be as sweet as Sugar to thy taste, cant of the clear,
put on more distilled Vinegar, proceed as before, till it will yield to thee no
more swee tness; filter all as before of thy Crocus, vapor away till thou see a
scum arise upon the top, let all cool, set it in a cool place or seller and it
will shoot into most transparent Chrystals which is called the Sugar of Saturn;
note if it do not shoot into Crystals thou have not vapored it enough away,
when thou have took out those Chrystals, vapor the rest and it will shoot
Chrystals afresh, but if thou will take these Chrystals and calcin them again,
and then disolve filter, congeal as is said above it will yet excel, I have
done it five or six times over; I cannot tell thee what this is good for; I
know it is a great astringer, it is no part of my endeavor to make my self
wiser then I am, let it suffice thee for this time that I have given thee a
true receipt, for I dare not write beyond the labor of my hand, if thou can
believe me, there is no deceit in what I commit unto thee; thou may as I have
done also work this out of Red-lead, hut it did like me better to work it out
of lead it self.

I will now give thee a true and plain Receipt of one of the most potent
stateliest Medicines that I think is attainable in the world.

The true preparation of the essence of Venus, commonly called Ens Veneris.

Take from the Dunghill at the Refiners his dead head, commonly called Caput
mortuum, that which is left of his Aqua Fortis, the blacker it is the better it
is, for that is most burnt, put it into clean water and it will disolve, stir
it, let it fine cant off that water; but on fresh water, this repeat till you
by taste find no more sharpness in it, keep that water together, dry well the
red earth, take of this red earth what quantity thou will of Salt Armoniake
equal parts, grind them well together, put them into a sublimatory of good
glass (note it may be done in earth) set it in sharp sand, begin with gentle
fire, leave the hole open at the top only, stop it with Cotton-wooll, that the
wily Spirits of the Armoniak may go, else thou would break the vessel; after
twelve hours moderate fire, stop close the hole above, increase fire, thou
may with thy hand on the vessel know well whether thou give fire orderly;
note that after twenty four hours, or thirty hours, thou can not hurt it with
fire, let all cool, and with an Hares foot cleanse off thy sublimation, which
will almost be on the color of gold, take that which is sublimed, and weigh
its weight of fresh Ens well ground together and sublime it again, and this
work thou must repeat four time always upon fresh Ens, before thy work be
perfect; if thou dealest honestly with this preparation, which thou may do in
a matter of 10 or 12 days; there needs little other Physic, three or four
grains drank in white wine or in any proper Vehicle, always ballancing a
proportion by the strength and weakness of the patient; this is a true receipt
as I have done it, let if speak for it self; but I did not pass all the
sublimations at once, having no present occasion for it, I have seen this so
glorious as to my thinking it has exceeded gold; God Almighty prosper that man
that strives to excel in well-doing. Now take all thy water and filter it very
clean and vapor it away, and thou will receive a considerable quantity of fixed
salt white and good, put it into a strong crusible, and calcine it in a
reverberatory for six hours, have care that thy heat do not make it flow, but
let it be meanly red hot, then dissolve it in distilled rain water, filter it,
vapor away the water, it is abundantly fairer then it was at first; note thy
water must be twice distilled which is best done in quantity in a Copper Still
with a Serpentine Refrigetory; in this work let dirt sooner fall into thy eye
then into thy work, then calcine again a third time and proceed as above, thou
have a Medicine of great force, but if thou will repeat this work till thy Salt
will yield unto thee no more Fecis, I dare not tell thee what I think it will
do, I know thou art hasty with me, and demands what this fixed salt is good
for, and my answer is as ready (go look) I cannot tell, but if thou will know
what a fixed Medicin is good for look amongst the Cronical of fixed diseases
which the Gallinist counts uncurable, thou can not knock down an Ox with a
small Mallet, the remedy must over balance the disease. Note, aster this order
you may almost gain the Salt of any thing, I therefore have write this.

Undoubtedly no greater pleasure can be had on earth in earthly things, then to
be busily employed in the curious pursuing of these things* I do therefore
account my self most happy, whose good hap it is next to the true fear, love,
and serving of God, to be swallowed up in the daily pursuance hereof; above all
things see that thou adict thy self to be neat and cleanly in thy work; if thou
know any thing in Alchimy, thou must know that with patience thou must work
to take a few grains of the excremental parts, out of an ounce of the
substantial parts, and it may be work long, and throw all away and begin again,
and this without change or reluctance of mind, being fully resolved to work
ever if thou ever meanest to speed, its profitably miscarried, if thou thereby
art humbled, else thou will not be taught, God resists the proud, but gives
grace and teaches the humble; therefore give time with patience, for that is
of God, but have and unpatience is of the devil, the greatest mastery is the
well governance of the regiment of fire, besure that thou have Vulcan well
yoaked in his own fetters, and see well that his bellows be not too big, only
study to make Volatile that which is fixed, and to fix that which is Volatile, and
all this after due cleansing, if thou can so deal with this salt thou will
find bread; thou will never want matter if thou have this power, he only is
happy whom God teaches, his true fear is the beginning of wisdom, them he
teaches the way they shall go^ be not curious beyond nature. I my self for
some years past have much exceeded, following the Chimaerais of my own head,
soar not to things too high and beyond thee, remember the saying of one of the
chief Pillars in Physic; Art is long, life is short, know God is in heaven,
and thou on earth, thou can not fathom his depths in the least natural thing;
how can thou then comprehend him who fills all things? Be not offended
because I am bold with thee, it is because I love thee; I cannot but improve the
tallent bestowed, and so I shall leave it with thee, if thou counts me a fool,
I care not for if, I know it well, I am contented, if I add a tittle to thee it
is that which I desire, no man's goodness can add any thing to God, he already
is perfect therein, perfect harmony, perfect silence and rest for ever in
himself, to whom nothing can be added, but our goodness may be extended unto
the men on the earth, to them that excel in virtue, I strive thereafter as I
receive help, some of these receipts cannot be wrought by unpracticed hands; I
can but give as I have received, good will excits and moves this offer, let it
work likewise in thee to accept in what I have done weakly, be thou more ready
to mend then find fault, if I have deserved rebuke, I will accept it from thee
in any language with thanks.

I will now deliver thee in as plain words as I can, a most stately Receipt,
which I have wrought and given many scores of times with great success

The preparation of the Salt of Mars, salt of Steel, so called.

Take what quanity of Oil of Vitriol thou please, and put it in an open
Glass, or in a well glazed vessel, set it upon a stool in a Chimney, put into
it for each pound of Oil one ounce of Salt Jem or Stone Salt beaten to fine
powder, take the filings of Steel, and with a spoon sprinkle upon the Oil, and
it will foam, boil and fret, have care thou be not too hasty, for then will it
boil over, continue this shaking in of the powder of Steel so long that thou
perceive it to be all dry and hard, and will foam and fret no more, then set it
in a sand Furnace and dry it very well, that it be hard, and like a stone
almost for hardness; bring this to fine powder, have a good quantity of water
warm, and sprinkle this powder thereon, and keep it stirring with a stick,
otherwise it will knit to a stone in the bottom; filter this water, put on
more, repeat this putting on of water till it be no more sharp, let all be
clean filtred, and vapor away the half or above, and it will shoot into
transparant green Chrystals very fair Vitriol, vapor yet again and it will
shoot again, if thou have vapored enough of it away, take all the Chrystals or
Vitriol, and lay it abroad on a well glazed dish, and set it in a stove or in
the Sun in his strength, and it will break into white powder; then put it into
a clean distilled water, and it will dissolve, filter it again, coagulate it
into Chrystals, it will shoot into far more fairer Vitriol then the first; this
ought to be repeated so often till it will ^et no more fecis, but at this twice
it will be in a very honorable condition, and so far I have gon^, dry it well,
it will be a white yellow powder, and keep it close ^^opt in a glass for thy
use; of this powder ten or twelve grains in the morning, and so for a week
toge^he^, ^is profitable to bring the Flowers, if drunk in good white wine, and
stirring upon it, it sometimes causes vomiting, sometimes purging, and
sometimes neither; it eases the breast of stopping, helps Rickits and kills
worms, give to children three or four grains according to their strength, it is
a choice Medicin as I have proved.

If thou would draw the Oil of Vitriol thy self take good Copperas, and in a
new earthen pan boil it dry; beat it to powder, put it in long necks, lute fast
and draw it with judgment, as much as the Oil of Amber is, some calcine it
red first as I have done my self, but for this work it need not so be done.

A true Receipt of the powder of Sympathy, or the Sumpathetical powder, made of
Roman Vitriol, lately commended by Sir Kenelme Digby, but no plain Receipt given
which I here perform and freely give thee, knowing that there is none better.
Take what quantity of Roman Vitriol thou will, dissolve it in rain water, but
put no more water then will dissolve it, always leaving some undissolved in the
bottom, filter it as clean as possible (let thy water be milk warm in thy
dissolution) put it in a clean glass-body set in sifted ashes, and give it
gentle heat, so that it never exceed the heat of thy belly, and in that heat
let it vapor away till thou see it covered with a Catecula or thin scum or
cream, then withdraw thy fire, let it sland unmolested for three days, covering
it well that nothing fall into it, then with a glass spoon or wooden spoon,
take out the coagulated Vitriol which is shot into fair green Chrystals, then
kindle thy fire again, and with like degree continue till it be covered with a
scum, withdraw thy fire again, let it stand other three days, take up again
with a wooden spoon the coagulation; this you must repeat until thou have the
substance of thy Vitriol again, but freed from much of its filth; take all thy
Vitriol which thou have gathered, spread it on a glass or well glazed dish in
the heat of the Sun, or in defect thereof a clean stone of equal heat with the
scum, and take heed thou do not exceed, for then will thou leese its vital
parts which are quickly volatile and subtle, neither will thou attain any more
greenness on thy Vitriol which when thou perceivest, begin again, all is lost,
understand thy degrees of fire better, but if you give it its dew heat then
will it break into a white powder, and the greenness which is its life will
obscure and hide it self, then take it again, and in rain water distilled
twice, dissolve it as at first. Now mark, I bring thee again to thy beginning,
and there I leave thee; for this work thou should repeat so often and so long
till it set no more fecis to thee, but conclude when thou will, thou see what
Sir Kenelum Digby does write, viz. The Ancients did use this Vitriol in its
gross body beat to powder. I have here given thee so true away as I know none
better, for in this thou bringst it beyond what is fit to be written, and does
hold, preserve and keep all its power, both spiritual, sympathetical, fixed and
Volatile.

If thou have ears I have said much, what is wanting unto thee, consult with
Van Helmount, Aswall Groby, Mr. Boulton, and Sir Kenelme Digby.

Being moved fully with good will, I will here give thee one receipt more, the
like I confidently affirm never saw the light for the good of mankind, and
whosoever will be persuaded upon my faith and credit always to have it truly
and faithfully prepared, may with much confidence cease from all other things
in the world, and quietly commit themselves and relations into the hands of
Almighty God in the use of this with quietness and rest, and I speak boldly if
this prove short, to correct thy Feavor and heal thy disease, and has not
power to purge thy blood, and throw all out that is noxtious unto thy vital
Spirit, let thy ailes be what they will, look not for it to be done in this
world; I pity thy fugitive mind and pray for thee when I see thee hunt from
one man to another, and from one Medicine unto another, which is indeed the
harbinger of death; but if thou art admonished from thy vain worshipping of men
to fall off, and with a quiet mind pray and use this and therein rest waiting
upon God: I am sully possessed and persuaded in my conscience it is sufficient
for thee, and if thou as blind as Bayard cry out of the strong poison of the
subjects, viz. Poppey and black Hellebor, thou snarling fool cease and first
learn the power of Salt of Tartar, and do not bewray thy folly and ignorance
till thou have proved its power, least thou give just occasion of perpetual
laughter unto those whom experience has taught and informed, I do confess I
can exempt no Medicin in the world but my Pill and Antidote, whose receipts I
may not at present here give thee; and this I protest unto thee, that if thou
have made a right use of this that I have here in full and plain words taught,
I should have small hope with any thing I am made Master of, to help and cure
where this cannot; and therefore as thou have respect unto thy life consider
what I now teach thee, I say I teach thee under God, for I have not had the
least light or guide from any breathing, or from any book, but God Almighty my
Lord and good Master has been my guide, and therefore I with joy do ascribe
unto him all praise and thansgiving for ever.

Rec. Take one pound of the best White Rhennish Tartar, and one pound of India
Salt-peeter, bring them to powder in a stone Mortar and serce them through a
Hair Sive, take a Pipkin that was never used, and set it upon Charcole, let the
bottom heat as the coals do kindle, put in a spoonful of this powder, if the
bottom be read hot it will burn, put in one spoonful after another till all be
burned, it is then for this work prepared, and if thou have wrought well thou will have of a white Salt but yellowish, seventeen ounces again of thy two
pounds. Take half a bushel of White-lime, put it in a clean tubb, and put on it
fair water, that the water may cover it four inches, let if stand all night,
take two gallons of this water and put in it thy salt, and it is prepared for
thy work, then take one pound weight of Poppe-leaves good and red, newly
gathered as near as thou can, stamp them and put them into thy prepared
water, take also one pound of Juniper berries, and do likewise also take one
pound of black Hellebor which thou may buy at the Druggist for a small
matter, beat it grossly and put it into the rest, stir all very well, let them
simper upon a fire twenty four hours in a glass-body, or in a Tin vessel or
Pewter, but let it be close covered, then drive all through a Hipocris bagg and
its prepared for thy use, drink of this three or four spoonful in White Wind
and Sugar, but give more or less as the patient is strong or weak, to weak
children half a spoonful or a spoonful with Wine or Sugar; note thou may do
what thou will with this if thou know how to apply it for thy health; I
desire thee whatever thou art to praise God for this, the like I believe is not
made manifest for the preserving of thy health against all diseases,
infections, Feavors, Surfeits, this will not fail thee of relief let thy pains
be what they will, nor of cure if God permit; if thou have patience and will
give it time, I have from my conscience spoke my belief grounded upon reason
and experience, and freely give it thee, beseeching God to bless it to thee and
enlarge thy heart as mine is enlarged, that is, that thou may do for thy
neighbor as I now do for thee, presenting nothing in this or any thing about it
but the labor of my hand, and what I daily put into my own belly; and let me
further tell thee I had much wrestling with my self as in the presence of God,
before I could prevail upon the gainsaying that was in me, to draw so nigh
thee for thy unvaluable benefit, for if thou considerest the things are easy
attained, every ditch offering the some of them, and the preparation so
trinial, that there is as much art to make a mess of pottage; in this above all
other I have deserved well at thy hand, if thou have a heart to improve it,
neither do I doubt, although many will be angry and snatter at it, but this
entrance which I have given in this receipt will stand while the world indures
and get strength, and my memory held in honor, for so good service in it. This
book has swelled beyond my intention, yet I am constrained to give thee one
receipt or two more in few words, and so I for this time shall rest, praising
God who helped me before I go out of this world to perform some real service
for the good of mankind in general.

To make the drink that is now much used, called Coffee,

The Coffee Berries is to be bought at any Drugist, about three shillings the
pound, take what quantity you please, and over a Charcole-fire in a old
pudding-pan or drying pan, keep them always stirring until they be quite
black, and when you crack one with your teeth, that it is as black within as it
is without, yet if you exceed, then do you wast the oil which only makes the
drink and if less then will it not deliver his Oil which must make the drink,
and if you should continue fire till it be white, it will then make no Coffee,
but only give you its salt; the Berry prepared as above beaten and serced
through a Lawn Sive is then fit for use.

Take clean water and boil one third of it away what quantity soever it be, and
it is fit for use.

Take one quart of this prepared water, put in it one ounce of your prepared
Coffee, and boil it gently one quarter of an hour and it is fit for your use,
drink one quarter of a pint as hot as you can sip it; note that instead of
Coffee, take English Wheat and thou will find it in all points as good and as
profitable for thee as I have wrought and proved it, and speak it from
knowledge, and I do from my heart bear witness to this drink as the best and
safest for the health of man's body; and further I do know that it does abate
the fury or sharpness of the Accrimony which is the gender of those diseases
called Cronical, and although it does want fermentation, yet has it the true
strength of the grain if be well prepared, and does in no wife sum to
intoxication for that it is unfermented, and undoubtedly those which loves
health will love this drink, and is an absolute enemy unto natures enemies, I
had thought to have spoken much and from good grounds of the worth and benefit
of this drink, but being already enlarged beyond intention, I am constrained to
leave it for this time.

I have wrote many things which will have an ungrateful taste, yet of mighty
force for thy health I cannot conclude this book but I must give thee one
receipt more, which will be acceptable unto thy foolish fancy, that in truth
thy appetite never tasted a more stately thing or higher cordial for health,
and yet cheap and of very easy and vulgar preparation, as follows.

Take twelve pound of Black-Cherries that is full grown and sweet, break all
their stones in a mortar, put them in a Limbeck or in a small common Stillers
Still, put to them one gallon of fair Spring water, distill off again one
Gallon or on gallon within a point; this water does far exceed that which is
commonly sold for black-Cherry water, take all out and run it throw a Pulpring
sive, and wash with clean water the still or the Limbeck, and what runs through
the Sive of it self, keep to make thy Surrup of, the rest drive through the Sive
by force, that nothing be lest but skin and stones, and that keep by it self,
for thy Surrop take the first that is thin and run through the Sive of it self,
put unto it for each pint two pound of sweet sented Lisborn Sugar, and put into
one quart of Rose water, and one quart of Sparmint water; boil all at least
eight hours; Note that if from first to ^^st the matter be not boiled twelve or
fourteen hours it will not answer thy intention, but if thou will feed it with
fire twenty four hours, thou therewith may do wonders; I have so wrought it and
baked it over and over several times, and thou may know that a Black Cherry
is a substance unknown, and cannot by fire be made dry, but as soon as it is
cold, it will draw to it self a moist air, and will relent do what thou can,
yet I have so fired him, or fed him with fire, that I could not touch it with
my teeth, such has been its mighty force, and for obstructions all have flown
before it, and when I would, taking but a little more then ordinary it would
loose my belly, and give a stool or two, but if thou will make a Surrup of it
without this extreme firing it will not then be worth an half penny, but will
be only toothsome as other ordinary Sirrops is. I leave thee to judge of it as
thou will, I know for my self many years ago it was precious in its effects
unto me, and from that experience I had of it, I now moved with goodwill,
commit it unto thee.

FINIS.

