Certain MATERIAL and USEFUL CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT The Laws Positive, AND Laws
of Necessity, RELATING To the unhappy DISTRACTIONS of the present TIMES.

2 COR. XIII. Verse. 8. We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth.

1 THESE. V. Verse. 21, 22. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good;
abstain from all appearance of Evil.

JAM. III. Verse. 17, 18. The Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits,
without partiality, and without hypocrisy.

And the Fruit of Righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace.

Printed at LONDON, in the Year 1680.

TO HIS REVEREND FRIEND THEODIDACTUS.
HAving been much troubled, even to restlesness in my Thoughts, about the
tender and dangerous Distractions of these Times, I have often and earnestly
besought Almighty God in my Prayers that he would assist me with his Spirit,
that I might honestly set my self to seek the Truth, so seeking that I might
find it, and finding it, may cheerfully embrace it, and constantly cleave unto
it, in what Case or Danger soever I should find it.

To this end I tasked my self to the saddest and severest Meditations my weak
Body and Intellectuals could undergo, which being, I trust by the guidance of
God, resolved into these ensuing Hypotheses, I commit to your judicious and
most impartial Censure, being not so fond of mine own fancies, but that I can
endure to see them stripped stark naked; and if they prove not the Issues of
Truth, to disinherit them from ever having farther possession of my Thought: I
see not many things, and hear not all, living so remote from any Town where the
Tide of Books and Reports flows in; some Pamphlets there are walking about with
as much confidence, and finding as good entertainment as Truth it self needs,
and with a great deal of less Modesty than it uses to do Pleas, Appeals,
Reasons, etc. which, beg the Question I look they should prove, left me more
unsatisfied (rather) than they found me: I have hitherto (perhaps through
fondness) more contentment from these Conceptions of mine own, which I entreat
you to examine with all Faithfulness and Severity, as knowing you cannot do your
self or me greater injury than to flatter me in falsehood, who am come (praised
be God) so far toward Wisdom, as heartily to thank him who rebukes me in Love,
and lovingly to thank him who refutes me with Reason.

PHILALETHES.

1. ALthough the King and Parliament assembled together are the most Honorable
and Supreme Court of the Kingdom, from whom there is no humane appeal, yet they
are still to be looked upon as a Company of Men, subject to Infirmities,
Passions, and Errors, as other men are, and therefore may (even were they
concur) determine things Evil in themselves. Or else we must grant that no
Parliament Acts were ever Evil in themselves, and so needed no Abrogation, but
only inconvenient for Time and Occasions, and so needed but suspensions, 'till
fit Seasons reinforceing them might return; and if the whole may err in their
Determinations, much more may the parts severally, and alone.

2. In so great a Number, it is probable there still will be (as it is certain
now there are) some of green Years, slender Parts, and small Experience, little
or no Learning either in Arts or Law; and I may add (from the Censures of some
part of that Court upon the other) of (at least) suspected Integrity, who as
they are Chosen by popular Voices, (wherein sinister references oftentimes bear
no small sway) so are they probably led in Voting by popular Arguments tending
most to Liberty, being incompetent Judges of the Methods and Mysteries of
State-Government: Whence it will follow, that where the number of Voices, and
not the depth of Argument, carries it; the fittest and justest Propositions may
often be overborn by Number, which cannot be confuted by Reason.

3. As it is true, that no Evil ought to be imagined of the Parliament, so it
is as true, that none ought to be imagined of the King; and yet it is not
untrue, that where there is none, the greatest Evil may be suspected; and the
greatest may be, where none is imagined.

4. Though no Evil ought to be imagined in the Parliament conjunctim, and in
the Lump, viz. That what the King and both Houses shall fairly and freely
conclude, and Enact, will prejudice no man; yet in regard of the particular
Members, when I know Evil by them, I may suspect Evil from them: Else, why does
one part of the Parliament, not only suspect, but say so much and so great Evil
of the other, whilst they mutually repute each other Enemies of the State,
which of all civil Evils is the greatest.

5. Where there is a noise of Extreme danger (which all men fear) and as
earnest an undertaking for prevention (which all men desire), it is easy to
conceive how ready men will assent, without a due Examination, either of the
imminency of the danger, or lawfulness of the prevention, especially men of the
weaker sort, not able so well to judge of either.

6. When it is possible, that no one in either House of Parliament may be
Learned in the Law, since Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, and Townsmen,
(of which they consist) are not necessary to be so, nor one more than another:
I see not how the judgment of the Law can fully and properly reside in them,
especially when the King consents not. And so much seems employed by the setting
of the Judges in the Lords House, who (for ought I hear) have no other Office
there, but to advise, or advertise in point of Law.

7. When it is said, the Judgment of the major part of both Houses is the
judgment of the whole Parliament, and consequently of the Kingdom, I conceive
it is not rightly affirmed; for besides, that the Judgment of the Clergy is not
(so much as in a shadow) there represented (who are a considerable part of the
Kingdom, and should be presumed to have as good judgment, and be as good men,
as others.) I resign not my Judgment, but promise Obedience to the Parliament,
not barely to the Burgesses of my own Town (whom perhaps I think very unfit)
and who were chosen against my will, but to the Result and Determination of
both Houses, and not to them only neither, but as all are allowed, confirmed,
and perfected, by the King's assent. For I am represented in the Commons but as
subordinate to the King, and to join with the King, and with the Lords (not
with, or against both, or either of them) to make Laws for the good of the
Kingdom. So that when the Act is made by the concurrence of all the three
Requisite Consents, then (as I suppose, and not till then) it becomes
Obligatory, and (as a peaceable Subject) I must obey it, if it be lawful before
God, though my judgment be still free at home, and I do think it inexpedient,
as the Negative part of the Votes do, for it is impossible, and against Reason
and Nature, that any understanding Man's judgment, backed with strength of
Argument, should be led Captive by two or three Votes.

8. The major part of the Houses being the part which exceeds the other but by
three or four Voices; shall not that Law, which is concluded only by the
advantage of those Voices without the King's consent, be a Lesbian Rule, or
Nose of Wax, which upon a second Vote may pass the contrary way upon a casual
absence, or presence, of so small a Number? The Law is a straight Rule, and
always like it self; if such and such a thing be Law after it was so Voted by
the major part of the Houses, it was Law before it was so Voted (unless an
absolute Power of Lawmaking be in such a Vote) and then may be put in Execution
without new Voting, only the Law ought to be produced. If the major part of the
Votes of both Houses be only Declarative of the Law, then in reason the first
Voting should stand, or else this would be a very uncertain Rule, and so the
case of ordering the Militia should not be according to Law, because that was
first (and twice) Countervoted by the House of Lords. Such broad and obvious
exceptions ought (in matters of so high concernment) to be fully cleared and
removed.

9. When the Question is, who shall be Judge of the Law, I suppose it must be
meant, either of the sense of particular Laws, or of the Latitude and scope of
the Laws in general. If of the first, I conceive the sense will appear, 1.
Either by the clear Light that it has in it self (as the Sun shows his own
Light). Or, 2. By reference to other Laws or Clauses touching the same
Argument, which are more perspicuous. Or, 3. By the usage and practice, which
is the life of the Laws. If none of these can make it plain, in my judgment it
becomes no Law, but is Obsolete until a full sense be agreed upon again, by the
full Authority that first made the Law. Otherwise I see not any Rule for
declaring of the Law, that can be always absolutely determinative; for (besides
that the same thing is at diverse times diversely Voted) if Votes of either House
should chance (as possibly they may) to be equally divided, and the major part
of both Houses severally, be necessarily required to determine, where shall the
Determination be, when the Votes of One at least be equally balanced? Unless
we fly unto a third way, viz. That the major part of both Houses in Gross,
where the exception lies as full, because they may chance to be equal also. If
it be understood of the second, then that Latitude ought to be evinced from
some Terms in the Law expressed (which terms are to be produced) and not from
the pleasure of any that shall say, That is lawful which seems so to them,
especially when they make themselves the sole Judges, both of Law and Equity.
For whether will not such a Liberty reach? A Transition is so made a Genere ad
Genus, from Positive Law, to the Law of Reason, and that being various,
according to the diversity of Apprehensions, cannot be imposed upon all, where
the full Legislative Power is not concurrent. And I conceive it is not properly
said, That in extreme danger, I may by Law do that, which otherwise I may not
do. But, in such a Case, I may do that, and be excused, which by Law I cannot
do. As in an Assault, I think the Law does not say, You may kill a Man, or take
away his Weapon, but if you do it, the Law will not punish you; because it is
against all Reason, that where the Law affords me no help, it should not hold
me excused for helping my self, when Necessity (which has no Law) is so
pressing, that otherwise I must perish.

10. When Necessity and Extreme Danger, are made the Grounds for (otherwise)
doubtful and dangerous Undertakings, it were meet those Terms were rightly
defined, that so we might clearly see the soundness of our Warrant. I conceive
that to be, when a Man is so presently distressed, that he can make no possible
use of any positive Law to help him; and so becomes in a sort disobliged from
it, and left free to the Law of Nature, which permits every things to seek the
Preservation of it self. This Necessity dispenses with ordinary Duties, both to
God and Man; but we must be sure of the Necessity before we assume the Liberty.
If a Man steal, and plead Necessity, he shall not be excused, because the Law
has not left him remediless in his Wants. I may not take another Man's Sword
from him, because I have reason to fear he will hurt me; nor the Sword I have
lent one, though he have threatened to kill me, so long as he draws it not upon
me, because I have a Remedy yet by Law, and may bind him to the Peace, etc.
(Then much less may I wrest His that has sworn to defend me.) When Necessity
is but supposed, that there is no simple and absolute Necessity is confessed; and
therefore no Law is (under pretense of Necessity) yet to be violated. The
Kingdom may be in danger, and the Danger not extreme, nor any Necessity such,
but that it may be preserved by ordinary Defense; or if the Danger be urgent,
we may not seek to prevent that without Law, which by Law is well provided for
already. In great Dangers, (such as are now supposed) the Kingdom is to be put
into a Posture of Defense, against Invasion, domestic Rebellion, or Tumult: By
Law and Custom the King is to order it: And so much is acknowledged by the
present Parliament, in their Reply to the King's Answer the 29th of January,
(if it be theirs) when speaking of the Forts and Castles of the Kingdom, they
have these Words, viz. We confess the Nomination of any Person to those Places
so principal and inseparable a Flower of the Crown, vested in You, and derived
to You from Your Ancestors by the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, You may
reserve to Your Self. And anon after, speaking of the Militia, they say, Which
Militia also We acknowledge by the Law is subject to no Command, but of Your
Majesty, and of Authority derived from You. Now he carefully applying himself
to it, I see not what Necessity or disobliging Extremity can be alleged to
dispossess him of it. When he is not convinced to have failed in his Duty; to
doubt that he will, is not to prove that he has, but rather that he has not
done it. If the Enemies were landed, and the Subject assaulted, (which are many
degrees beyond the Dangers when this fell first into Debate) the Ordering of
the Defense would be still in the King, (unless where particular Outrages
enforce particular Places, for the Defense of themselves, by the Law of
Necessity, which out-weighs other Laws:) But if the King be regardless of his
Trust, and their Safety, and lets the Enemies graze along his Kingdom: Or if
any of his Ministers prove false to the State, and either take part with a
Foreign, or become themselves a Home-Enemy, and the King strive not to suppress
them, or (all which far be it to imagine) do animate and invite them to dispoil
his good Subjects; then (and, for ought I know, not till then) is the Danger in
Extremity, and then is the first Plea for the Laws of Necessity, which do not
only enable the State in common, but every Man in particular, to seek the
Preservation of himself and his Country, by all such ways as stand not in
opposition to the Laws of God.

11. When I protest to defend the Powers and Privileges in Parliaments, it is
but so far as lawfully I may, and so far as I know them, or ought to know them,
being easy to be known, viz. such as by Custom and unanimous Consent have
obtained, as unquestionable; not such as are questioned amongst themselves,
some claiming, and others gainsaying; nor such as are challenged without or
against the King, whom, being Head of the Parliament, ought to have Consent in
the concluding of Privileges, much less ought he to be unprivileged, without
his Consent, whose Privileges are protested for (as well as, and) with the
rest, and the Defense whereof sworn to in the Oath of Supremacy; where we swear
to our power to assist and defend all Jurisdiction, and Privileges, and
Preheminences, and Authorities, granted or belonging to the King's Highness,
his Heirs, etc. If the disposing of the Forts, Navy, Magazines, and Militia be
(as it is confessed they are) by the Law of the Land the Privileges of the
King, there can be no distinction (to my apprehension) imagined upon any Fears
or Jealousies whatsoever, (when no Evils by him are actually practiced, and all
Intentions of Evil are absolutely abjured) to warrant any Men (few or more) in
Parliament or out of Parliament (who have taken that Oath) to dispossess him of
them, or detein them from him, in what manner soever he shall come to demand
them: For the Oath is peremptory and unlimitted, and non est distinguendum, ubi
Lex non distinguit. To say they are detained for him, (not from him) might have
some color, if the King were either a Child, distracted, or weak-minded; but
to an adult and understanding Prince, such a pretense is an higher derogation,
as disparaging his Wisdom and Fidelity.

12. Where Power is invested in any, and by Custom and free Consent is made
Hereditary, I conceive it cannot afterward be limited with other Conditions
than at first was agreed on, without the Consent of him that has it.

13. That which is certainly lawful, and but doubtfully dangerous, is to be
chosen rather than that which is not certainly lawful, but is doubtfully
dangerous. When a Man offers no Violence, though (upon good reason) I fear he
will hurt me, to let his Sword alone is certainly lawful, though doubtfully
dangerous; but to wrest it from him, when he offers no Assault, is not
certainly lawful, but rather certainly unlawful, and but doubtfully safe, or
rather undoubtedly dangerous; for by that occasion a Quarrel is made, and Blood
shed, which might otherwise (possibly at least) have been saved. Would the
Application were not easy.

14. If a Man being illegally dispossessed of his Right, do (in Heat of
Contention) use some illegal Means for recovery of it, that is not to be drawn
into Argument to justify the Illegality of the first Usurpation. If a Man
unassaulted wrest my Sword from me, and I afterward beat him, he may not draw
mine after-beating into Argument to justify his taking my Sword from me.

15. When the Envy of Not yielding to the Advice of his Great Council, is cast
upon the King, it is first fit to set the Cause upon its own Legs. It seems by
many passages in these Observations, and other Books, and by more than
Book-passages, that the King is esteemed a Tyrant over his People; for what
else is implied in distrusting and vilepending of his Oaths, Obtestations,
Imprecations? in imputing the Attendants, and Company he has about him, (whom
he owns and protects) Enemies to the State? in raising (at least defensive)
Arms? in seizing his Navy? shutting the Town-gates against him? and the
possessing of his Forts and Magazines against his Command? For will a Man wrest
another's Sword from him, if he dod not presume he will draw it upon him? Nay,
is it lawful to take any Man's Sword, (if not every Body's, then not His) 'till
it be drawn upon him, or some violence offered him? If it be said, then it is
too late; it may as well be said, 'till then it is too soon. Now then, when
they are so opinioned and jealous of the King's Love and Fidelity, how can it
be imagined, that he should look on them as ingenuous and equal Counselors,
and not be as distrustful of the Sincerity of their Advices? For, how shall I
persuade another to be directed by me, as his Friend, when I give him to
understand, that I take him for mine Enemy that intends Mischief against me?
Especially where the Matter is not of ordinary Concernment, wherein each one's
Rights are left free and untouched, but such as trencheth deep into his
Majesty's Prerogative, and tends not only to the restraining his Power, but
mainly also to the quenching of his Honor, whilst by yielding to such Advice,
he must tacitly confess that he is not fit to be trusted, and (by consequence)
openly proclaim that he is not worthy to be King.

16. If the (so called) Malignant Party should chance to be the prevailing
Party in the House, (as the King puts the Case in his Answer to the Declaration
of the 26th of May, page 8.) and should allege, That through the precipitancy
of some Men's pretended Zeal, the Kingdom were like to run into confusion, (for
such a Case may be, and Conspiracy for pretended Reformation was the Title and
Argument of a Book many years since) must these be safely secured? And
presuming the King favors that side, and the other Party not liking the course
that he will take to secure the Kingdom, should vote it lawful for them to do
it themselves without him, must this presently be concluded to be the Judgment
of the whole Kingdom, and to be according to Law, when no Law can be produced?
and the King to be ill affected to his best Subjects? or to be mislead by evil
Counselors, to undo Himself and his Kingdom, by not yielding to the Advice of
his Great Council? Or, Will the adverse Party take it well to be reputed
Enemies to the State, a Malignant Party, etc? And if not, it were but meet,
that the substantial Differences of the Case were so well opened, that they
that desire to know what is Just and Right, might tell where to find it: And
that all Men (of moderate Capacity, Judgment, and Ingenuity) might see clearly
the Infallibility of One Party, and the Hypocrisy of the Other.

17. When the Forts, Navy, Magazines, Offices, etc. are said to be entrusted in
the King, or the King entrusted with them for the Good of the Kingdom, the
sense of the Word [Intrusted] in this place would be well to be cleared. Not to
question, Whether the King have those things by way of Trust from the People?
it will be of all granted (as it is by the King himself) That God and the Law
have trusted him with them, and that for the good of the Kingdom; and so / to
employ them, he is further tied to by his Oath: But there is a twofold Trust;
one, that is absolute and unlimitted, otherwise than that the End is specified,
supposed, or presumed; (the End not so much limitting the Trust, as the Trust
denoting and implying the End;) and there is a Trust conditional, or
circumscribed in such sort, that to fail in the performance is to forfeit the
Trust. The first gives a Man Right to the Thing entrusted, the second gives
only a Right to the Trust of the Thing. I conceive the King's Trust is of the
first kind; who being presumed to mean all Good to his People, according to the
Maxim in Politics, No Evil ought to be imagined by the King, has these things
frankly and absolutely committed to his Government and Disposing, and howsoever
he shall order them, I suppose he is accountable to no Man, nor questionable by
any, unless he clearly, and publicly, and undoubtedly dispose of them to the
Ruin of his Kingdom, and so puts the People to an evident Extremity, or lawless
Necessity. If there be any Limits, the Law should express them, for he being
Supreme, there is no other Power to impose them. Neither are the Actions of his
Ministers to be censured, unless by them the known Laws have been violated.

If this Trust should be Managed or Regulated by Both Houses of Parliament,
first, That Power should be made appear to the King and People; and then there
must be either a Standing Court of Parliament, or else the Parliament must be
called so often as the King shall have occasion to send out Ships, take in, or
put out Powder and Ammunition into his Magazines, choose any Officers, etc.
which were absurd to conceive.

If any Man, having confidence in his Friend, should say to him, Sir, I will
freely give my Estate into your hands, only you shall swear you will be a
Father to my Children: Here is an Implication of a Trust, yet a clear Right in
the Thing; so that he may Let or Set, Build or Pull down, Give or Lend, and yet
be accountable to none, nor falsify his Trust, so long as the Children want
nothing. Yea, and if he fail of the Trust, perhaps some Court of Conscience may
relieve them; but I believe no positive Law can control him.

The Case is other with Feoffees, or Executors in Trust, who have a Right only
to the Trust, and none to the Thing entrusted, which is only the Heirs, the
Poor's, or Legatories of him by whom it was bequeathed.

18. The King's and Subjects Interests are mutual, he refers to every Subject,
and every Subject to Him, as the Line from the Center to the Circle; and what
Interest he has in One, he has in Another, and in All, as well as in Any; and
His Interest in them is of a higher Alloy, more Noble, (as Command is, than
Subjection,) the Interest of Protection is mutual, the Odds is, that All the
People are not more worth than the King, but the King and People more worth
than either.

19. Personal Differences of Wisdom or Folly, Weakness or Strength, Courage or
Cowardice, Meanness or Excellency of Parts or Arts, make no Difference in the
Right of the King, though they show a great Difference in God's dealing with
the Kingdom.

20. When a King plays the Tyrant, or Usurper upon his People's just Liberties,
I conceive it must either be, first, by a violent Suppression of Old Laws and
Customs yet in force; or secondly, by a wilful Obstruction of Known Laws by
force; or thirdly, by wicked Oppression by force without Law. When therefore
Tyranny is imputed to, or implied in a Prince, (of whom we ought not slightly
to think any Evil) it will become Christians thoroughly to examine upon what
point he is convinced, and not take up such Reports upon wholesale, and in
gross.

21. If the King have not a Negative Voice, he seems not to have so much Power
in Parliamentary Acts as a Common Burgess; for if the Votes be even before, His
may be the Casting Voice of the House, and I see not so much as a Vote allowed
His Majesty.

22. When the King shall think it fit, not to give his Consent to what the
major part of the House shall agree upon, He is not barely to be considered as
One Man against so Many; for (besides His Privy Council at hand, Men accustomed
to, and experienced in Matters of State, and besides, that possibly a very
great Number of Both Houses are also of the King's Mind) we are to consider the
King, as One best acquainted with the Rules and Mysteries of Government, being
as it were the Trade to (and in) which he has been born, bred, and brought up,
and therefore is presumed to see farther into it than many others together, not
so acquinted with the Mystery: For (besides that God has a special way of
communicating Wisdom to Kings, in which regard, A wise Sentence is said to be
the Lips of the King, Prove. xv. 10. and The Heart of a King is unsearchable,
Prove. xxv. 3.) Histories make it plain, that there are Arcana Imperii (and
Militiae) which the King (and Captains) apprehend, which a thousand do not, and
which perhaps may not be fit for all Men (nay, not for any Man else) to know.
When an adult, and a prudent Prince shall own, and approve of, and protect such
and such persons, as his tried Friends, and known Counselors; if any, under
what pretense soever of their supposed suggesting evil Council (when no evil
practices are apparent, yea, when such Practices and Councels are utterly
disavowed and abjured by the King) shall presume not only without the King's
consent, but against his express Commands to take up Arms, and to destroy and
take off such persons, though no Evil be intended against his person (and yet
who can tell what is in his mind that comes toward a Man with a drawn Sword in
his hand?) I see not what distinction can help, but that such Arms are taken
(not for, but) against the King: Otherwise how can any thing be said to be
Against God? Who being inviolable in his Person, cannot otherwise be resisted
than by the blaspheming of his Name, breaking his Commands, rejecting his
Motions, prosecuting and persecuting his Servants, etc.

23. When it is said, the King was made for the People, and not the People for
the King; (besides, that the Comparison is as idle, as that of the Members
Against the Belly, in the Apologue, and the Apostle has met with it, 1 Cor.
xii. It is also not absolutely true, for The King was no more made a Man for
Others, than They for Him, not made a King more for the Good and Safety of the
People, than They were put into such a posture of Obedience, and Order, that He
might be safe, as well as they; yea, rather than Any (if not than Many) of
them, as being supposed the Chiefest amongst them.) The sense, in which it
seems best to hold, is, That the King was made for the need, and necessity of
the People, and not They for His, viz. He can more securely be no King, than
They can be without a King. And he takes the Surrender of their Power, with
their dependances and consequences, not as a kindness from Them, but as doing a
kindness to Them, as is implied in the Refusal of the Vine, Fig Tree, and
Olive Trees, in Jotham's Parable, Judge. ix. 7. etc. and the Story of Jeptha,
Judge. xi. 4. etc. for, on Him they unload their Cares and Fears, who foregoes
His own Ease and Quiet, that He may procure it for His People: Himself taking
Care that All Men else may live without Care. Now, on Whom the necessity lies
most, on them lies the Greatest Obligation and Respect, Therefore St. Paul
requires Giving of Thanks for Kings, 1 Timothy ii. 2. So we may say of a Captain,
a Pilot, a Schoolmaster, a Physician, that they were made for the need of
their Correlates, which should render them more Honorable, and rather draw
Respects to them, than Challenge Greater Observances from them.

Judge Righteous Judgment.
FINIS.

