An Instrument From that little Stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, to
help to break in Pieces, that Great Image which Daniel mentions, Chapter 2. whose
Feet was part Iron and part Clay.

OR, A few Queries written to satisfy the chief Preacher in the Independent
Church in Bedford, who desired the Author to write unto him, what Proofs he had
for a Woman's speaking in the Church. He being concerned that so many of his
Hearers should leave him to go to hear Margaretti Everard declare what God had
done for her Soul, the 17th day of June last at my dwelling in Bedford.

Published for the Information of all Professors in Religion, that are part
strong and part weak (as the feet of the said Image) that is, part strong in a
good Belief of what Christ Jesus in mercy suffered for all Mankind.

But weak in Faith, in not believing that Christ by his sufferings purchased a
measure of his grace in every Soul, that brings Salvation to as many as are
faithful thereto, Tit. 2.11.

That they may no longer (like the hardened Jews) expect another Grace or
Savior, (that is) a restraining Grace that shall force them out of their Sins.

Poor Hearts! who has taught you, that God will except of forced Love, when Men
does not esteem such Love each to other.

By WILLIAM MATHER, A true Lover of every Soul.

LONDON, Printed for Sarah Howkins, in George-Yard in Lombardstreet, 1694.

FRIEND.
WHereas, Thou bid me write unto thee, my proofs, for a Woman's speaking in the
Church; and because Men's speaking there, relates thereto, I shall add somewhat
of it also; therefore to satisfy thee (if I can,) I think best to do it by way
of Query, (the fewer words) that I may give occasion to none to say I go about
to teach thee, who art a Teacher to so many People.

1. Did St. Paul write, That a Woman should not be permitted to speak in the
Church? Will thou not suppose, he meant the should not speak, so as to ask
Questions to raise Disputes? Thou wile acknowledge, she ought to come to
Church, and not learn only of her Husband at home? If not, how must the Widow
do to learn? If it had been as thou supposes, That a Woman was not to speak at
all in the Church, Paul would not have said, That (...) -man, that prays or
prophesies with her head uncovered, (...) her head, 1 Cor. 11.5. And was not
Phillip's sour Daughters Prophetesses, Acts 21.9. and wherein is the difference
between Prophesying and Preaching?

2. Is it not recorded in the Book of Martyrs, that after William White, a
Preacher, was burnt for the Truth, his Wife followed his Steps, fowing abroad
the same Doctrine, confirmed many in Gods Truth, wherefore she suffered much
trouble and punishment, whether or no, did the Church then do well to let her
teach?

3. Do thou own the Church of England's Catechism, in which is written, That
Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord are Signs of an inward and spiritual Grace?
Now whether any in these days need to use the Signs that witness the Substance,
(that is,) The Inward and Spiritual Grace, to cleanse their Souls from Sin.
Answer, yea or nay? Seeing this grace, that came by Jesus Christ, brings
Salvation to all that obey it, Tit. 2.11. 1 Cor. 12.7. Romans 1.19.

4. Whether or no, may not a Woman as well as a Man declare in a Congregation,
the Experiences she has had of the power and virtue of this inward and
spiritual Grace in her Soul, and how that by the alone help thereof, she has
forsaken the Devil and all his Works? If she did not speak this to people God
would condemn her. Do not Women speak their Experiences in your Church and Sing
Then not always silent.
? Then Woman may speak in the Church; and whether man's wisdom that preaches, be
not the Woman, that should not be permitted to teach in the Church, yea or nay,
1 Cor. 2.4.13.

5. Whether or no, are not both Men and Women, Intrudors that do teach in a
Religious Meeting other things than what they experimentally witness of the
work of this inward and spiritual grace in their Souls? Bring Scriptures only
as a proof, when divinely inspired, (by Gods grace) so to do; for Paul would
preach, of what God had wrought in him, 2 Cor. 10.15. Romans 2.21.

6. Do thou believe, that this inward and spiritual grace is a witness
against all Sin, in every Soul, and that People now are to have no other
Teacher in this the day of Christ's spiritual appearance, or second coming in
Spirit to cleanse the Soul from Sin, And that Man is no more to be accounted
of, no further than to encourage others to come and obey Christ's Grace in
them, a Teacher that cannot be removed into a corner, Isa. 30.20. Joh. 6.45.

7. Do thou believe that this spiritual day of Grace is dawned? And that
there are thousands of Souls in this Nation, that do witness God's promise
fulfilled in their Souls, (that is,) of teaching his people himself, Joe l
2.28. by his inward and spiritual grace; that they need not the teachings of
Man (as many of us witness, 1 John 2.27.) Peaised be the Lord for it.
Yet, it is a great comfort to us, to hear a Man or Woman declare what they know
of God, and also to read in the holy Scriptures, the Saints Warfare and
Experiences; though none of these things will do a Soul good, except he turn in
his Mind, so as to obey this inward and spiritual grace: For nature is dark as
to the things of God, almost as a Beast, without applying to God's Grace for
help; the alone Armor of a Christian to keep off the Darts of the Devil.

8. Did thou ever know a Man, that sinned every day, and did believe he must
do so as long as he lived, that ever turned one Soul to God, We must sin every
day, says this Preacher unto me, June 18. -- 94.
(that is) to obey God's grace faithfully? If thou did, Then one Sinner can
convert another, and before a man is converted, he can strengthen his Brethren;
Is not this impossible?

9. Did not Jesus come into the World as born of a Virgin to save all people
from sinning here, Matthew. 1.21. If they will obey his Talent of Grace in them?
and I also ask whether a man is any further saved by Christ, than he is saved
from Sin? For if he is not sanctified, or saved from committing of Sin, the
fault is not in God's Grace, which is always ready to give power to resist all
Temptations, except such as have sinned out their days.

10. Whether all that have a form of Godliness, and deny the power thereof, are
not to be turned away from? And whether all those that believe, that the inward
and spiritual grace in all men, will not or has not power to cleanse the Soul
from Sin (if obeyed) do not deny the power of Godliness, and are yet in
Babylon, Rev. 18.4.

11. Did not thou affirm to me, that the Light of Man in us was darkness,
when it is a Light from Christ in the Soul, whereby the Soul may see its way to
please God, John 1.4.? It is called also Grace, Spirit, Word in the heart, The
anointing, etc. 1 John 2.27. If thou hates this Light, thou hates Christ. lis
true, that all hate the Light, that love their evil deeds, Joh. 3.19.20.21.

12. What Scripture Proof have thou for reading a line in verse for the people
to sing? And whether people can sing to the praise of God, whose Souls are not
raised out of the Grave of Sin? Seeing the Apostle says, If the dead rise not,
preaching is vain? And whether God is not as really worshipped by praying by a
Book, as singing by a Book.

13. What Scripture Proof have thou for taking a verse in the Scripture, and
studying a long discourse from it? And whether the peoples hearing such long
Sermons or Speeches be God's Worship? And whether God can be worshipped any
where but in the Center of the Soul? And whether Persecutors or Informers could
ever disturb God's spiritual Worship? And whether the first that speaks in the
Church, is not to hold his peace, if any thing is revealed to another that sits
by, that he may speak also, 1 Cor. 14.13?

14. Did not thou affirm to me, that there are Three persons in Trinity or
Godhead? I hope thou will answer that with thy Scrpture-proofs, as the other
above in Love, as in Love I write this at thy desire.

Concluding with this caution, That thou take heed, that thou speaks no more
evil of a people, that thou know not, (that is) The Christian Quaker;
because I am sure thou caust not know them, except the said Inward and
Spiritual Grace was thy only Teacher. Now, that it may be thy guide, that by it
thou might be empowered to turn many to it, that thereby, they may receive
strength to walk in the path of righteousness to please God, is the Prayer of
him that loves all people.

June 22. -- 94. W. M.

TO the Queries above, I do not hear that he intends me an answer in writing;
the best answer I desire is, That he make choice of Christ's inward and
spiritual Grace, for his only Teacher, then may he be enabled to prevail with
many of his hearers to obey the same. This indeed would be a happy day which I
have long hoped for.

The truth is, since he had the Queries above, he has in his Pulpit advised his
Hearers, To cleanse their Souls from sin: Alas! what does that avail, together
with his telling them of the Torments of Hell, except their minds are turned
into the Center of their Souls, there to Worship God, in his inward and
spiritual Grace, for nothing else can cleanse their Souls from Sin, and make
them become Worshippers of God in Spirit and in Truth; silently waiting (out of
their own thoughts:) A strange thing to this Preacher, John 4. who has already
derided waiting in silence upon God; for he can preach, pray and sing when he
will, contrary to the Primitive Christians

One of this Preachers hearers (whom I sent the Queries to him by) told me, he
did believe he was not yet satisfied, that a Woman should be permitted to speak
in the Church, caused me to add the Queries that follows, (otherwise I think I
had writ no more) yet hoping he may turn in his mind to Christ's Grace in
himself, so may he turn many to a righteous and holy Conversation; then will he
shine as a bright Star in the Firmament of Truth; he having such a fair
opportunity to win Souls to God, (having such a great number of Hearers.) Oh!
happy is that man that turns one Soul to God that is) to obey Christ's inward
and spiritual Grace faithfully! Oh! that God in mercy would be pleased to show
him in what he trusts, but God's time is the best time for him and the Turks
and Jews to see their blindness: God's will be done.

Lastly, God knows my heart, I do not write the following in Enmity to any
Person or Persons whatever, but only in what I can incline my Readers to choose
God's Grace in themselves to be their Armor to keep off the Snares of the Devil
and develish Men.

And that none that reads these Lines, may any longer reject the Chief corner
Stone, the said Grace or Light in them, that beams (...) the Sun of
righteousness in their Souls, whereby they may plainly see all the crooked
bypath of the World, the Flesh and the Devil, that leads to everlasting
misery after Death; and also may see by that Light from Christ in them, how to
walk safely in the strait and narrow, but delightful Path, that leads to God's
Kingdom to have a Life of endless Joy with God for ever, so be it, Amen.

The second part of Queries: which, I hope, will fully satisfy this
Independent Preacher, That a woman may speak in the Church, when moved by God's
Grace so to do.
15. Have thou not read, that the ancient Jews was not for permitting Women and
Children to ask Questions in the Church, and was not Paul of the same mind?

16. Is not Male and Female all one in Christ, and whether any but Deceivers
will limit God, that he shall not send a message by a Woman.

17. Did not God send a Woman among your persecuting Brethren in New England,
with her face blackt, as a sign to them for their wicked lives, that the
Black-Pox should come upon them, which accordingly came to pass? See Geo.
Keith's Visible Church in New England.

18. Do thou believe that Paul ever forbid any Woman to speak or teach in the
Church, that was moved thereto by the Spirit of Christ? And whether a woman was
not a fellow labourer with Paul in the work of the Gospel?

19. Whether Paul ever forbid any other women to speak in the Church, except
those talkative women in the Church of Corinth, who troubled the Church with
their unprofitable questions?

20. Have thou not a strong zeal against a woman's preaching found Doctrine? I
wish thy zeal was as strong against thy women Hearers, who are now so
stiff-necked as to carry the Devils Towers on their heads, whilst thou art
teaching them to leave pride: And the men that are so proud as to wear women's
Hair that was baked in Pyes to make it remain in Curles, and must be powdered
too. Is not this abomination? Look back to your ancestors called Puritans,
whose short Locks, little Bands, and plain modest Apparel became a Cross to the
vain World? But you as well as all other religious Professions, have
degenerated from their first Innocence; and how many of thy proud hearershast
thou admonished for their pride at their own houses, as is thy duty, if a true
Preacher?

21. Was not that woman that Jesus met at Jacob's Well, Joh. 4. a Preacher, who
declared to the men of the City, Come, see a man that has told me all that
ever I did, is not this the Christ? Can any man now preach better Doctrine? and
was it not a woman that published Christ's Resurrection?

22. Did not Luther affirm, That every good Christian, (not only Men, but even
Women also) is a Preacher?

23. How dare thou preach against pride, when most of you seek as much as you
can to promote pride; for do not you uncover your heads, bow and bend oftener
to a fine long Tower or Topknot, than to God? Does not such worshipping Images
make the proud hearts more puff't up with pride, making those Idols deck
themselves the finer next time (if they can) that they may be the more
worshipped and bowed unto? You calling men frequently Sir, Sir, at every turn,
to flatter them though mean in the world,) and the women Mistresses to flatter,
when you have read Joh. 5 44. How can you believe, that receive honor one of
another? and against flattering Titles, Job 32.21, 22. 1 Thessalonians. 2.5. And to
call no man Master, that is not really your Master. But you can twist these
Doctrines of Christ to serve self-interest, as you do that Doctrine of not
swearing at all, Matthew. 5.34. James 5.12. and others, being out of the true
Faith, that is without respect of persons, James 2.1, 2.

24. Was Franciscus Lambertus in the right or no, who writes, But above all
things be careful thou follow not the manner of Hypocrites, who have written
almost more by word, what they are to say, as if they were to repeat some
Verses upon a Theater, have learned all their Preachings, as they do that act
Tragedies (or Plays) and afterward when they are in the place of Prophesying,
pray the Lord to direct their Tongues, but in the mean time shutting up the way
of the holy Spirit, they determine to say nothing but what they have written. O
unhappy kind of Prophets, yea, and truly cursed, which depend not upon God's
Spirit, but upon their own Writings or Meditations? Why prayest thou to the
Lord, thou false Prophet, to give thee his holy Spirit, by which thou may
speak things profitable, and yet thou repellest the Spirit? Why preferrest thou
thy Meditation or Study to the Spirit of God? otherwise, why committest thou
not thy self to the Spirit. Again, (says he) The Sheep of Christ seeks
nothing but the Voice of Christ, which he knows by the Holy Spirit, wherewith
he is filled, he regards not learning Tongues (or Languages To make a Minister,
for that avails not.
) or any outward thing, so as therefore to believe this or that to be the Voice
of Christ his true Shepherd, he knows that there is need of no other thing
but the Testimony of God's Spirit, etc. Tract. 5. Prophecy, Chap. 3.24. And
does not Dr. Everard, an Independent, write the only method that holy Men of
old observed, was to speak as they were moved by the Holy Spirit?

25. Whether or no, are not such Teachers gross Hypocrites, that at the end of
their Worship say to their Hearers, I commit you to God's Grace, when they
intend no such thing; for if their Hearers choose God's Grace in themselves for
their chief Guide and only Teacher, and by the help thereof come to forsake the
Devil and all his Works, the Pride and Vanity of this wicked World, throwing by
those hellish Towers from the Women's Heads? These vain Teachers will be the
first that will mock them, and it may be tell them, you are going to be a
Quaker, and that they think is the odiousest name they can give them; little
considering what these Teachers forced poor Men and Women (calling them
Godfathers and Godmothers) to Promise and Vow for Infants, that they shall
forsake the Devil, and the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, which
brings to a state of perfection, and yet these Teachers will deny that
Perfection is attainable on this side the Grave, contrary to Scripture, Matthew.
5.48. and 11.29, 30. Joh. 1.8. Genesis 6.9. 1 John 5.3. and 1.10.8.5. and 2.4. and
36. Rev. 22.14. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.

26. Is it not great Hypocrisy in thee, to bid thy Hearers when thou art in thy
Pulpit, To cleanse their Souls from Sin; and out of thy Pulpit say to me, We
must sin every day as long as we live? And also to tell them in thy Pulpit for
Doctrine, The reason why so many die in sin eternally, is because they will;
and at other times tell them, That a certain number of Souls are elected and
the rest reprobated to Eternity before they have done Good or Evil, (is not
this Mystery Babylon in one of her sinest dresses?) Alas! none are reprobated
before they have acted much Evil; nor are Infants that know not Love, Romans 4.15
and 5.13. as full of Sin, as a Toad is full of Poison, as a Member of thy
Church said in my hearing; The Election is in Christ the true Seed, and all
that joins to him are entering into the Election, and continuing faithful comes
to be chosen.

The reprobate Seed is the Devil, who rules in the Hearts of wicked People that
obey not Christ's Grace in them so, by a continual Resistance of the Reprooss
of God's Grace comes to be in a reprobate State.

27. Has not many poor Souls been almost (or quite) distracted about, your
Sin-pleading Notions, and the frothy Lives of too many of you, but most chiefly
about a Notion you are said to hold, That God bids men believe, and be saved,
and not gives power to do so?

And have you not said to such poor bewildered Souls, Your Distraction is in
order to the work of God upon your Souls? fear not, if you die, you shall go to
Heaven; for once in Grace ever in Grace, contrary to these Scriptures, Ezekiel.
18.26. Joh. 15.6. Romans 11.20. 1 Cor. 9.27. 2 Pet. 1.10. Heb. 3.12, 13. and 4.
11. and 6. 4, 5, 6. and 12.15. 2 Timothy 4.3. and 4.10. and 2.17, 18. 1 Timothy 1.18,
19. and 4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 3 5. 2 Pet. 2.14.13.18.22. And remember how by your
judging young Whit^man, late of Cardington, you brought into distraction. See
somewhat thereof in p. 218. of the 4th Edition of the Young-man's Companion.

28. Has not those of thy Church lost Christian Charity, that said (as I am
informed) that if the Quakers should have one Meeting in your Meeting House (I
once desiring it one day when you might spare it,) They should never after
think to go into it again? Fie, fie, pray no more for the Conversion of the
Jews and Turks, what would you have them to convert to? For what can they
expect from you, that has so little Love for your Fellow Christians that truly
worship the same God, as you say you do, owning Christ Jesus, a Patron of
Meekness and Lowliness, and that his Followers should be so.

But for brevity sake I shall now pass by several of your Actings; yet to a
little mind you of your want of good example, in bringing Boys with you to the
Meeting, and let them play at the Door in Sermon-time by making of Noises,
throwing Hats at each other (with thy He cannot be a true Teacher, that has no
authority to rule his ouin Family well.
Be^rders) and into my Orchard adjoyming, and also throwing Stones into the
middle of my Orchard to sp^^^ my Trees, that I verily believe the Boys have
thrown Cart loads of Stones from your Meeting-yard into my Orchard within these
5 years last past, thy Hearers laughing or smiling to see them, and yet you
will order no man to keep good Orders in the time of your Worship, though the
Magistrates have often told you of it; yea one of the Magistrates told me, that
be said to some of you, It was a shame you kept (...) Discipline and that it
was more like a Playhouse, than a place of Religious Worship; yet though I
have been often wronged by these things, I bear no Enmity to any of them.

Now considering that some of those People that have seen the first part of the
Queries in writing, begin to consider that there is no true satisfection to the
Soul in h^^^ing man's wisdom preach, Act. 2.4. 1 Cor. 1 17, 20, 21. and 2, 3,
4, 5. 2 Cor. 2.17. tho they have been learning of Man 30 or 40 years, and
neglect the Teaching of Christ's inward (...) my heart to publicsh them in the
fear of God and true Love to all; hoping they may be of some service to these
who have not yet chosen Christ's inward and spiritual Grace for their Teacher.

To (...) I am very sensible, (...) are a few (...) Hearts amongst this People,
whom my Soul dearly loves. I (...) after Righteousness, that God might (...)
them therewith, and that Righteousness might fill the (...). Hearts of all Men
and Women. These, I say, truly loves all People, yea their very Enemies.

These, and all such as these, wherever they are walking at present, (and of
different Forms of Worship at this time) are of the true Seed of Sion, of whom
glorious things are spoken of in the Holy Scripture, and which the Lord loves
above all the Dwelings of Judah, above all the Outworks of formal ways of all
Professions, it is they that honor the God of Heaven, and makes his Name to be
loved in the Earth.

These truly noble self-denying Souls will not go to any place to preach before
God has sent them; and if sent, will be of Paul's mind, To work with their
hands rather than to make the Gospel changeable. And in the mind of Prosper, an
ancient Protestant, who says, That he that takes any thing for Preaching, and
is able to live of himself, loath it not without Sin. Oh that many more might be
raised up, that delights in a holy Conversation to please God, that the Name of
the Lord may be magnified in the Earth, is the Prayer of

William Mather.

For these worthy and renowned Souls will not (to get Money for preaching) shut
up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, by telling them, (as too many Teachers do
now) That the small Talent of Grace, that troubles you in your Conscience when
you do evil, is not the Key to God's Kingdom.

A Testimony.
SELDOM, the greatest Scholar and Antiquary of his time, one who had taken a
diligent Survey of what Knowledge was considerable amongst the Jews, Heathens
and Christians; at last professes this toward the end of his days, (in his
Conference with Bishop Usher,) That notwithstanding he had been so laborious in
his Inquiries, and curious in his Collections, and had possessed himself of a
Treasure of Books and Manuscripts in all ancient Subjects, yet he could rest
his Soul on none save the Scriptures; and above all, that passage lay most
remarkable upon his Spirit, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. For the Grace of God
that brings Salvation, has appeared to all men, Teaching us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world, looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of
the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he
might reedem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all
authority. See W. P. No Cross, no Crown, p. 388. and the Character of a true
Christian, in p. 54. in my Young Man's Companion.

BEDFORD, Aug. 20. -- 94.
THE END.

