THE Righteousness of God THROUGH FAITH UPON All without Difference who believe.

In Two Sermons on Romans 3.22.

By NATHANIEL MATHER, Preacher of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Hiller at the Princes-Arms in
Leaden-Hall-Street, over against St. Mary Axe. 1694.

To the READER.
I Must acknowledge that when I was called to Preach in that Audience where
these Sermons were delivered, I had some Debates rolling in my Mind what kind
of Subject I should pitch upon. There were enough offered to my Thoughts wherein
I might have more gratified, or at least have less displeased our Neonomians,
as they are lately named, but as truly and justly Semisocinians, as the ancient
Church and all Posterity since, has called the offspring of Pelagius his
Heresy Semi-Pelagians. But I saw with grief and detestation the Blessed Gospel
of our Salvation craftily and insolently assaulted by them in the very Vitals
and Fundamentals of it. In publico discrimine omnis homo miles est. Every
Christian, much more every Minister is set for the defense of the Gospel,
especially at such a time when the Truth labors under guileful and impetuous
opposition. I doubted my Quiet would be attempted, and my Doctrine and
Reputation would be angrily reflected on. As to the last, though I value it,
and believe I ought to do so, yet I can truly say convictions, that I ought to
sacrifice both that and my Quiet to the service of the laboring Truth of God
had their weight with me. My Heart has been long fixed in this Principle, that
Reputation is little to be valued, save only so far as it may be of service
unto Christ; and if he have any use to make of it, he will preserve it while I
walk before him in Integrity. With him I have thus left it, and having so done
my Heart is secure and at rest about it. As to my Quiet, I confess I do prize
and love it, as remembering Prove. 17.14. and 18.6. but to Maintain and Preach
that Precious and Saving Truth which the Churches of Christ have been in
possession of ever since the Reformation, is not entering into contention;
especially when some abandon it, and others endeavor to wrest it from us: And
there is a contending, and that earnestly, for the Faith once delivered to the
Saints, which is a Duty. Besides I am not far from that place, where the weary
are at rest, and the wicked cease from troubling; the thoughts whereof I
confess are sweeter to me, because I have very sadning apprehensions of the
portendency of that apostasy from the Truth which has invaded so many of the
rising Generation, not among Conformists only but Dissenters also. As to my
Quiet I have this relief, that it is not in the power of any mortal to
interrupt or disturb my inward composedness of Spirit, or to lay me under any
law of unquietness within my self. I know and am assured, that a due exercise
of Faith, Meekness, Self-denyedness, and such like Graces, will establish my
Heart in a just and holy unconcernedness, though such representations should
still be made of me for these Sermons sake, as to fill my Friends in other
Lands, to whom I am known, with trouble and consternation. I use the very words
of a Letter wherein I am informed that such Reports have been sent even so far.

As to the Doctrine delivered in these Sermons, it has been of use to me for
the direction and guidance of my Heart in transacting with God about Pardon and
Acceptance to Eternal Life. I hope it may be so unto others. My Hope, my Life,
my Salvation, my All is therein. I have not delivered any thing but what I know
and am assured is according to the Eternal Truth of God, and wherein I have
going before me as great Lights as any that God in these latter Ages has set
up in his Church. How little, or rather nothing, I have varied in what is
Printed from what was delivered in Preaching, I must leave to those that shall
read and did hear them. I have heard of two Passages that have been taxed: Of
them therefore I have in a short Postscript given a further account.

As to the Publishing of them in Print, if the Doctrine delivered in them be
the Truth of God (as I believe it is) I need not make any Apology. Many that
know me know my backwardness to appear in Print. Nevertheless in thus
Publishing these Sermons my Heart condemns me not; knowing that I have therein
only endeavored to communicate in a more diffusive and enduring way that
Truth, the Faith whereof I have received, and wherein I have many Years lived,
and in which I hope and am persuaded I shall dye; and which it is of
concernment to have preserved and propagated. The Blessing of him whose Truth
it is, go along therewith.

London, this 14th of the 2d Month, 1694. Nath. Mather.

ERRATA.
PAge 20. line 3. for in is read is in, l. 9. a fine r. 1 John 2.1. l. 6. a
fine f not, p. 21. l. 7. a fine r. comprizing under them his Graces, p. 25. l.
4. put the comma. after is, p. 26. l. 2. dele of, p. 27. l. 4. a fine r. 2 Pet.
3.11. p. 31. f. namely r. only. p. 36. l. 9. a fine f. John 15.19. r. John
15.9. p. 39. l. 14. their r. there, l. 10. a fine f. they do not r. they who do
not, p. 42. l. 16. r. ^.28. p. 43. l. 7. f. might r. weight, f. Psalm. 88.8. r.
Psalm. 88.7. p. 59. l. 20. r. Phil. 3.12.

ROMANS 3.22. Even the Righteousness of God which is by Faith of Jesus Christ,
unto all, and upon all them that believe; for there is no difference.


IN the first five Chapters of this Epistle, the Apostle sets himself to
declare and clear up the great Doctrine of Justification. And he first speaks
to it Negatively, showing and evincing, that by the deeds of the Law there
shall no Flesh be justified in the sight of God; which is the conclusion and
sum of all his foregoing Discourse, as you may see at the 20th. Verse of this
Chapter. Having made out that neither Jew nor Gentile can ever be justified by
the Deeds of the Law, he declares affirmatively in the Verse before the Text,
and so onward, how it is then that men may be Justified: and he shows that it
is by the righteousness of God manifested without the Law, yet witnessed to by
the Law and by the prophets, that is, by the Books of Moses and the rest of the
Old Testament. But how come men to be justified by this Righteousness
manifested without the Law, and thus witnessed unto? This the Apostle declares
in the words of the Text, telling us that this righteousness is through faith
upon all that believe, and that without difference.

There is no need in order to what I intend, to say any thing for explaining of
the meaning of any of the words of the Text. The Doctrine which I design to
speak to from them is plain and obvious and it is this.

Doctrine, There is a righteousness of God which through faith of Jesus Christ
is without difference unto all and upon all who believe.

Here are these six things which offer themselves to be spoken unto, for
clearing this Doctrine, and making way for the Application of it.

1. What Righteousness is this, and why is it called the Righteousness of God?
2. How is it upon those that believe? 3. What is the meaning and import here of
that Expression, without Difference. 4. What is this Faith of Jesus Christ, and
why is it so called? 5. What reference has Faith unto this Righteousness's
being unto and upon Believers. 6. How comes all this about, and whence is it,
that there is this Righteousness provided, and that it is through Faith upon
all without difference which believe.
Quest. 1. What Righteousness is this, and why is it called the Righteousness
of God?

Answ. To have this matter rightly stated in our thoughts is very useful and
needful both for the direction, guiding and fixing of our Faith to its proper
Object in its acting and exercise, and also for the establishing of our Minds
in the Truth of God in this Point, lest darkness and mistakes herein should
occasion our stumbling and the overturning of our Faith. I shall therefore
proceed step by step; and deliver my self about it in five Propositions, in
which, put together, I shall endeavor a clear and just stating and declaration
of this Matter.

Proposition I. This Righteousness is the Righteousness of Christ, and not our
own. So the Apostle uses those Expressions setting our own Righteousness in
Opposition to this Righteousness, Phil. 3.9. though there be a sense wherein
this Righteousness may be said to be ours. When I say it is the Righteousness
or Christ, I mean, it is the Righteousness whereof Christ is the original,
first and native Subject; it is the Righteousness which he brought in, as the
word is, Dan. 9.24. a Phrase taken from the Old Testament Ordinance wherein it
was commanded that the Priest should carry the Blood of the Sacrifice which was
shed at the Altar of Brass without the Tabernacle, into the Holy of Holies, and
there present it unto God.

And this Righteousness of Christ is justly called the Righteousness of God,
both because it is a Righteousness of Gods ordaining and providing, or
devising, as her word is, speaking of this very thing, 2 Samuel 14.14. and also
because Christ. whose it is primitively and originally, is by Nature God over
all blessed for ever. And I think the Apostle delights to set forth this
Righteousness by that Epithet, that it is Gods, and of God, the more to commend
it to our Consciences and Hearts, as that which beyond all comparison is to be
preferred before, and rather chosen by us to stand in, than that Righteousness
which he calls our own.

The best of our own Righteousness is inherent in us, or wrought out by us, we
are the original Subjects of it, though it be in us from God, and by his Grace.
But this Righteousness of Christ as it is called the Righteousness of God in
another Sense, and on another ground than our own Righteousness can be said to
be Gods, or of him; so this Phrase is used of it for this end, namely to denote
such a transcendent Excellency in it, (it is an usual Hebraism, to add the
Epithet of God, to set forth a surpassingness in things, thus we read of the
Wrestlings of God, the Mountains of God, the Cedars of God) that in comparison
of, and in competition with this Righteousness, the Righteousness of Men and
Angels is to be despised and abhorred by us.

Now that this Righteousness in the Text is the Righteousness of Christ, all
the Circumstances of the Text do evince, every thing which is here said of this
Righteousness, agreeing to the Righteousness of Christ which is brought in by
him for us. It is a Righteousness of God, it is manifested without the Law; for
the Law, that is the Covenant of Works tells us nothing of it, yet it is
witnessed unto by the Law and the Prophets, and though it was heard of in the
Old Testament times, yet it was veiled under many shadows then; but now in the
days of the New Testament it is very clearly revealed and manifested. It is a
Righteousness which is unto all and upon all without difference who do believe,
and the way of its being on them is through Faith. It is that Righteousness in
which we stand justified freely of Grace, it is that Righteousness which
contains a price of Redemption, and which has Propitiation or Atonement in it,
and whereof the Blood of Christ is a part; all which are true of the
Righteousness of Christ and of no other; and lastly, it is either the
Righteousness of Christ or our own, the Scripture mentions no other
Righteousness that is upon us but one of these. But it is not our own
Righteousness, for our own Righteousness consisting in our Conformity to the
Law, that being to us the Rule of Righteousness, we should then be justified by
the deeds of the Law, which the Apostle here tells us no Flesh shall, for by
the Law is the knowledge of Sin.

Proposition II. This Righteousness of Christ which through Faith is upon all
that believe, is the Mediatory Righteousness of Christ, viz. That Righteousness
which he as Mediator does bring in for us and present unto God, and therefore
in which he acts as Mediator between God and us. I mention this because I would
set by and seclude the Essential Righteousness of Christ, from being any part
of this Righteousness, which is upon us by Faith. By his Essential
Righteousness, I mean that perfection of the Divine Nature which we commonly do
also call Holiness and Justice; and this belongs to Christ as he is God
coequal with the Father and the Holy Ghost, being one of the blessed
Perfections of the Divine Essence. But this Righteousness cannot be said to be
upon us through Faith: For then we might be said to be justified by the
Righteousness of the Father and of the Holy Ghost as we are by the
Righteousness of Christ. Atonement or Reconciliation with God is not made for
us by this Essential Righteousness of Christ, nor is it brought in before God
for us, nor are we said to have it, nor do we stand accepted in it, nor is it
imputed to us, all which the Scripture speaks of this Righteousness of Christ
in the Text. I conclude therefore, it not being the Essential Righteousness of
Christ as God, it is his Mediatorial Righteousness, that Righteousness which
Christ as Mediator, and by Virtue of his being clothed with that Office, does
bring in before God for us.

Proposition III. It is that part of Christ's Mediatorial Righteousness which
belongs to his Priestly Office, and is brought in by him as a Priest. Christ is
Righteous as a Prophet, and as a King, and that for us, that is, for our good
and benefit: But this Righteousness of his in the Administration of these his
Offices, is not the Righteousness here spoken of; for it is not unto and upon
Believers, that is, it is not imputed to them, nor is it upon them through
Faith. Christ administers his Prophetical Office righteously, namely according
to the Law thereof, the command given him by his Father. He discovers to us
what he has seen with, and received of his Father for that end. So he did when
on Earth, Joh. 1.18. and 3, 32, 34. and 5.19. and 8.38. and 12.49, 50. And now
he is in Heaven, he goes by the same rule in revealing his Fathers Counsels to
us, Rev. 1.1. Both in Heaven and on Earth he speaks in righteousness, Isa.
63.1. Christ does administer his Kingly-Office in Righteousness; he gives
Righteous Laws and Ordinances, and Executes Righteous Judgments, and
Administers all the Affairs of the World, and of his Church most Righteously,
Isa. 32.1. He is a King that reigns in righteousness; Psalm. 145.17. All his
ways are holy, and all his judgments just. Rev. 15.3. and 16.5, 7. The
Judgments which he executes on his Enemies, and for his People, are Holy and
Just, and he is True and Righteous in executing of them. But this Righteousness
of Christ in his Administering his Prophetical and Kingly Offices is not the
Righteousness which here in the Text is said to be upon us. For in his
Prophetical and Kingly Administration he acts from God toward us, but in
bringing in this Righteousness which is upon us, through Faith, and wherein we
stand justified, he acts toward God for us, which is the proper work of his
Priestly-Office, as the Apostle expressly declares and asserts. Heb. 5.1. and
Heb. 8.3.

Some there are who say, That the Righteousness of Christ which is upon us
through Faith is his Mediatorial Righteousness; but either they therein do mean
the Righteousness which as a Priest he brings in before God for us, or it is
too wide an Expression: None that I know of but Socinians or Semisocinians (who
do really deny the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, though they seem
in words sometimes to own it) do speak of the Imputation to us, of any part of
the Righteousness of Christ's Administering his Prophetical or Kingly Offices.

For the same reason for which I limit this Righteousness which is upon us
through Faith to the Righteousness brought in by Christ as a Priest, I conceive
the Incarnation of Christ (taken precisely as abstracted from the Condition
that attended it all the days of his frailty is not a part of this
Righteousness. If any will needs call it a part of this Righteousness, inasmuch
as he therein did according to the Will of his Father, and according to his own
undertaking, I would not much contend with them, though the Expression be both
unaccurate and insnaring. But I can by no means grant it to be a part of this
Righteousness. For it is no part of the Humiliation of Christ, or of his
Satisfaction, or of his Obedience to the precept of the Moral Law; not of his
Humiliation, (by his Humiliation, I mean that Abased State of Christ which is
contradistinguish'd and opposed to his Exaltation) for his Humiliation was of
the Whole Person in both Natures, and the ground of it was our Sins being upon
him as our Surety, and allied in Blood to us, and all the while he was in a
State of Humiliation he was under the Curse. But certainly Christ is not now
under the Curse, and yet he does now dwell in our Nature in his State of
Exaltation: Nor is Christ's Incarnation a part of his Satisfaction: For
Satisfaction, to speak properly, is made to the Justice of God, and the Demands
thereof, by Virtue of the Moral Law, and not merely to the Just and Righteous
Will of God the Lawgiver. Satisfaction is a repaying and making amends for
Wrong done, and not barely a pleasing of the Will and Mind of him to whom
Satisfaction is made, and thence Satisfaction is the Fruit and Effect of
Punishment. But Christ's dwelling in our Nature is no part of the Punishment of
Sin, for then the Divine Nature only is punished, and not the Humane at all,
nor the Person. Besides, it may as justly be said to be a part of his
Exaltation as of his Humiliation; for the Humane Nature subsisting in Personal
Union with the Divine, has an higher and better subsistence then any it could
have had in subsisting by it self. Nor Lastly, Is it a part of his Obedience to
the Precept of the Moral Law: For the Law took not hold upon him, he was not
under it before his Incarnation, and therefore could not be bound by it to
become Incarnate. For these and such like reasons, Divines of very Subact and
Accurate Judgments have denied the Assumption of the Humane Nature to be any
part of the Satisfaction or Humiliation of Christ. So Bradshaw of Justif. chapter
17. Sect. 7. and Ames Med. Theol. l. 1. c. 20. Sect. 4.

And I do the rather note it, and desire it may be observed and taken in by
you, because some who have looked upon Christ Incarnation as a part of his
Humiliation, have also denied any other manner of Imputation of his
Righteousness than what agrees to, and may be affirmed of his Incarnation;
Namely, that it is for our behoof and benefit, and that the Effects and Fruits
of it are communicated to us, but his Righteousness it self is not upon us
according to them, and is not imputed to us at all. I will issue this point
thus, which also further clears it up. There is a difference in the Nature of
the things, and distinction therefore to be made in our thoughts, between the
Incarnation of Christ, and the Condition or Form of a Servant, in which he did
come and appear in our Flesh from the first moment of his assuming it until he
entered on his estate of his Exaltation. The assuming of our Nature was an Act
of Love and Grace to us ward, and great Condescension in the Son of God, and it
belongs to the Constitution of his Person as he now is, and is one thing
wherein consists his Fitness for that work of Mediation, to which he was
called, and which he had undertaken; But his subjection to the Law, and his
fulfilling it in the form of a Servant is that Righteousness brought in by him
for us, which is upon us through Faith.

Proposition IV. Among the performances of Christ as a Priest, this
Righteousness is his Sponsory, Fide-jussory, or Suretiship Righteousness, viz.
That Righ eousness, which as our Surety, he was obliged to bring in for us, and
did so. I do thus bring down and confine this Righteousness of Christ which is
upon us, unto his Suretiship-righteousness, (which is somewhat narrower than
the whole of Christ's performances as a Priest) because there are some things
which Christ did as a Priest, which yet cannot be said to be any part of this
righteousness which is upon us. As for instance, Christ passed through all
those visible lower Heavens, Heb. 4.14. and ascended far above them all, Ephesians.
4.10. and this he did as a Priest, (though not only as a Priest) for it was
prefigured and foretold by the Priests going daily from the Altar of Brass
which stood without the Temple, up unto the Altar of Gold for Incense, which
stood within the Sanctuary before the Vayl, and by the High Priests going once
a year in the great day of Atonement, up from the Brazen Altar before the door
with the Blood of his Sacrifice, and with Incense also into the Holy of Holies
unto the Mercy-Seat. But Christ Ascension or going to Heaven is not a part of
this righteousness, nor upon us through Faith, as this righteousness is.

Again, (to give another instance) Christ does intercede, and in his so doing
he fulfils the Law of his Priestly Office; For it was Typified by the Priests
offering up Incense, and by his bearing the Names of the Twelve Tribes on his
Shoulders, and on his Breast Plate. But the Intercession of Christ cannot be
said to be any part of this righteousness which is here said to be upon us.
Though it be of precious and effectual avail for us, and does procure all our
saying Mercies, yet it is not imputed to us, it is no part of his
Suretiship-Righteousness which he has brought in for us before God.

Proposition V. This Suretiship-Righteousness of Christ which is through Faith
upon Believers, is his perfect Conformity to the Moral Law in all that which
the Justice of God did by virtue thereof demand in behalf of the Elect from
Christ as their Surety; that they might not only in a way of Grace, but in a
way of Justice, be brought to that Eternal Blessedness and Glory whereto God in
his infinite love had appointed them.

The ground of Christ's bringing in this righteousness, is his being our Surety:
So he is made by God the Father, and by his own undertaking; in that Covenant
between God and him was he constituted a Surety. So he is called expressly, Heb.
7.22. and the thing wherein Suretiship does consist, is abundantly affirmed of
him in the Scripture. Some indeed who would not be accounted Socinians, wrangle
against and reject this Counsel of God against themselves, and thence would
have it understood either metaphorically, So Trum. gr. propit. page 88, 100. or
of his being Gods Surety to us, to assure to us his performance of his
Promises, See Mr. B. Script. Gosp. def. p. 76, 78. But the thing is plain. He
who is obliged to pay another Debt, or any part of it, is properly and in
strictness his Surety. Now so it is between Christ and us, he was obliged to
pay our Debt, and has done it accordingly. His name was put in, into the
original bond, in which we by the Law and Covenant of our creation were bound.
Herein as God has in his Infinite Love and Grace consulted well for us, so he
has acted according to his own blessed Supremacy, and adorable Wisdom, without
any the least impeachment of his. Justice or his Truth in his Law. For though
the Law name only us, and do directly, firstly and immediately bind us as the
principal Debtors, yet God in substituting his Son to be our Surety, does not
in the least recede from his own Truth, or from the equity and justice of the
Law. For as in Contracts between man and man, the end and intendment is that
the debt be paid, whether by the original Debtor himself who contracted it, or
by another for him, it is all one as to the rights of the Creditor, they are
justly preserved and provided for either way. So it is here. The highest end
and main intendment of the Law is the preserving and securing unto God the
honor of his Supremacy, Wisdom, Holiness and Justice. And this is not departed
from but provided for and pursued (and that with much advantage unto Gods glory
as well as our good) in his constituting Christ our Surety. And therefore in
Gods calling Christ unto the work of bringing in this righteousness for us, he
does neither revoke nor make void the Law, nor recede from his own immutable
Truth and Holiness shining in it, but establishes it, as the Apostle declares,
Romans 3.25, 26, 31.

The rule of this righteousness, by which it is measured, is the Moral Law, and
the demands of the Justice of God in our behalf according to it: Hence, God by
this righteousness of Christ does magnify his Law and make it Honorable, as
Isa. 42.21. When I say the Moral Law is the rule of this righteousness of
Christ, I would not be understood as excluding his observing the Ceremonial
Ordinances from being a part of his Righteousness. It is of Moral Obligation
that the positive Ordinances of God should be observed, and Christ himself
speaks of his observing that positive Ordinance of Baptism, as a thing that was
incumbent on him, that he might fulfill all righteousness, Matthew. 3.15.

The end of this Suretiship-righteousness of Christ is, with reference to us,
that we might; and its attainment is that we must and shall be brought in a way
wherein Justice as well as Grace is glorified unto that blessedness to which
God in his Infinite Love has fore-appointed us. Hence it appears that Electing
Love is not the effect or fruit of this righteousness, but is indeed the cause
and spring of it, Election is not procured by it, but the bringing in of this
righteousness for us is ordained by the Electing Love of God to us. So the
Scripture speaks Joh. 3.16. and 1 John 4.9, 10.

God in his Electing us, appointed us unto an higher bliss and glory than was
proposed to the first Adam in his Covenant, or than he could ever have brought
his Seed unto. He was of the Earth Earthly, Christ is the Lord from Heaven, 1
Cor. 15. and the Elect are appointed to be married to the Son of God, made
members of him, and coheirs with him, and to be Sons of God, as in Christ
their Head, to whom they are predestined to be conformed in their Dignities
and Privileges, as well as in their qualities, spiritual Principles, and the
frame of their Hearts, Romans 8.29. They are to judge the World, yea, to judge
Angels at the great day, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. and in the mean time while they are
here they are to be served and ministered unto by them, Heb. 1.14. And at last
there will be a day when the love wherewith the Father has loved Christ shall
appear to be in them, and Christ in them, and the World shall know that the
Father has loved them as he has loved Christ, Joh. 17.23, 26. These are
things higher than Adam or his Covenant would have brought them unto. Yet unto
these things must they be brought in a way wherein not only Grace but Justice
also shall shine forth and be glorified. And therefore God in setting a Crown
of Glory on their heads exerts his Justice as well as his Grace, his
righteousness as well as his Mercy, 2 Timothy 4.8. it is a Crown of Righteousness
given by the Lord the righteous judge. And as in our being glorified, the
righteousness of God is exerted and shines forth, so it is likewise in our
being justified, 1 John 1.9. Romans 3.25, 26. and indeed throughout the whole of
our Salvation, he is a just God and a Savior, Isa. 45.21.

Hence appears the Necessity of this Suretiship-Righteousness of Christ. It
must be provided and brought in that God may be Just in showing Mercy, and
appear Righteous in extending Grace unto us, and saving us with that great
Salvation, to which he has appointed us. For it is the unchangeable
Constitution of the unchangeable God, to glorify the one Attribute as well as
the other, Justice as well as Grace in our Salvation.

Of this Suretiship-Righteousness of Christ there are two parts, without either
of which, it would not be complete and perfect, and would not serve our turn:
And the reason thereof is, because Christ being our Surety, is thereby under an
Obligation to pay our Debt, and we owe a double Debt unto the Moral Law; viz. a
Debt of Satisfaction, by suffering the penalty, as transgressing guilty
Creatures, and a Debt of Service and Obedience to the Precept as rational
Creatures constituted in the way to our Everlasting Condition. Hence there are
two parts of Christ's Suretiship-righteousness. This is that which the Apostle
says, and on which he puts so much Remark and Emphasis, 1 John 5.6. This is he
who came by water and by blood, Jesus the Christ, not in water only, but in
water and in blood. The Language and Phrases are Levitical: Conceive the
meaning of them thus. The first Adam came by Water, in a Spotless Cleanness,
and Purity, as to all that the Precept required of him: But Jesus Christ came
not by Water only, not only in such Purity and Cleanness as fully answered all
the Demands of the Precept of the Law; but he came by Blood also, (which
neither Adam nor Angels did) Jesus Christ the Son of God came in a way of
satisfactory Sufferings to Expiate and make Atonement for the Sins against the
Precept which we were guilty of; this he did by his Blood. The reason is, he
was made our Surety, his Name was put not only into the Covenant of Works, but
into it as a broken Covenant.

1. His subjection to and suffering of the penalty of the Law. This is commonly
called the Passive Obedience or Righteousness of Christ, because it consists in
his Suffering the penalty or curse of the Law. The Scripture calls it the Blood
of Christ, Ephesians. 1.7. and the Death of Christ, Romans 5.10. under that eminent
part including and intending the whole of his Sufferings. And also Christ's
being made Sin. 2 Cor. 5.21. and being made a Curse, Gal. 3.13.

The ground and reason of this Suffering of Christ under the Curse of the Law
is because our Guilt, our Sins were upon him, and thence he suffered in our
stead for them, Isa. 53.5, 6. God the Father with his own consent put upon him
the Garments of us Sinners, and then awaked his Sword against him, even the
Sword of his Revenging Justice, and ran him through, and poured out his Blood
as if he had been a Sinner, Zach. 13.7.

The end of it with reference to God is the restoring to him the Honor of his
Authority and Supremacy over us, and of his other perfections which shine forth
in the Law, which we by disobeying him had robbed him of, Psalm. 69.4. With
reference to us, the end and attainment of it is reconciling us to God, Romans
5.10. Thence Christ is said to reconcile us, and make peace between God and us
by the blood of his Cross, Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16. Colos. 1.20, 21.

The necessity of this part of Christ's Suretiship-righteousness being brought
in for us, arises partly from the glorious Holiness and Justice of Gods
Nature, whence he cannot but maintain his own Supremacy, and the Rational
Creatures Moral dependence on, and subjection to himself; which being violated
by Sin, can no way be re by satisfaction, nor satisfaction be made, but by the
suffering of Punishment; and partly from the veracity of God in his threatening,
wherein he has in Wisdom and Justice established a connection between Sin and
Death, and made the latter to be the wages of the former, Genesis 2.17. Deuteronomy.
27.26. Insomuch as in regard of the Sanction of the Law, that of the Apostle,
Heb, 9.22. takes place, and holds true, without blood there is no remission.

2. His subjection to, and fulfilling the precept of the Law is also a part of
Christ's Suretiship-Righteousness. This is commonly called Christ's active
obedience, and by the Apostle his Obedience, Romans 5.19. viz. Obedience not only
in Suffering, but Obedience to the precept of the Law; as Adams Disobedience,
to which it is there opposed was a violation of the precept. By Christ it is
called his fulfilling all righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. and his doing the will of
God, Psalm. 40.8. Heb. 10.7, 9.

The reason and ground of Christ's obligation to bring in this part of
righteousness for us, is, because he is our Surety and we owe this Debt to the
Law of God.

And there is a necessity of it, because God will magnify his Law, and make it
Honorable in his being well pleased in Christ with us for his righteousness
sake, Isa. 42.21 And because it is the unchangeable constitution of God that
all the saying Good and Blessing which shall be given us, shall be given not
only from Free Grace, but by the hand of Justice, and in the way of being
purchased for us by a just price. Thence, as in the former part of Christ's
Suretiship-righteousness, God's vindictive justice appeared and was glorified,
so in this part of it his remunerative justice shines forth and is exerted. For
by this part of Christ's righteousness he has obtained for us in a way of
purchase or merit, by paying down a just price, Salvation and Eternal Life,
Heb. 9.14. Ephesians. 1.14.

Under this Obedience or Conformity of Christ to the Precept of the Law, I
include both all the course of his Holy walking, and also the habitual created
inherent Holiness of his humane Nature; for the precept of the Law requires
Holiness both in heart and Life, and therefore Christ paid both, Heb. 7.26, 28.
Isa. 53.9. 1 Pet. 2.22. and 3.18.

I mention this in the second place after the other part of his
Suretiship-righteousness, because though that was completed and finished at
his Death; and his Active Obedience to the precept of the Moral Law was yielded
in his Life, yet the consideration of them, and the Natural order of them as
availing and accepted for us, is, that suffering under the penalty goes before
Obedience to the precept, because there is no room for merit or purchase till
satisfaction be first made. As among Men you cannot purchase of another till
your Debt be paid and former Arrearages, into which you have run with him, be
satisfied and cleared.

Nevertheless you must not so understand this, as if these two parts of this
Suretiship-righteousness of Christ were brought in at several times, and did
not co-exist together: For they did concur and meet in many, if not in all the
passages of his Life in the Flesh, during the whole course thereof. For though
his Incarnation be not any part of this his Suretiship-righteousness as you
heard, yet the form of a Servant, or that abased Condition wherein he was from
the first moment of his Conception, and wherein he acted all along his Life, is
a part of his Humiliation. And on the other hand there was Active Obedience in
his Death and Sufferings, because his own Will was in it: For he offered up
himself, and he laid down his own Life, and this in obedience to the command
which he had received from his Father, Joh. 10.17, 18. Joh. 14.31. Ephesians. 5.2.
Heb. 9.14. Gal. 1.4.

Thus I have gone through the first thing proposed to be spoken to, namely,
what this righteousness of God is, which is through Faith upon all that
believe, and you have seen that,

1. It is the righteousness of Christ. 2. It is his Mediatorial righteousness.
3. It is the righteousness which is brought in by him as a Priest. 4. It is hi^
Suretiship-righteousness. 5. This Suretiship righteousness of Christ is his
perfect answering in behalf of the Elect as our Surety all the demands of the
justice of God by virtue of the Moral Law, that they might, in a way of justice
as well as grace be brought unto that happiness whereto they are appointed, and
it contains both his bearing the Penalty, and his fulfilling the Precept of the
Law.

Let us now proceed to the remaining Enquiries, wherein I shall be briefer.

Quest. 2. How is this Righteousness unto and upon those that believe?

Answ. As to these words unto and upon (...) and (...) there is somewhat a
diverse account given of them. Some conceive they are here used by the Apostle
in a different sense; as if the first referred to the designment, the second to
the actual Donation of this Righteousness, or as if the one were used and meant
of the tender and promise, the other of the actual giving and transferring of
this Righteousness to and on Believers. Others conceive the sense and
intendment of them both is much what one and the same in this Text. as it is of
by and through v. 30 and consequently that the Apostle here uses both these
words that he may more fully and emphatically express our Interest in, and
Benefit by this Righteousness of Christ. And I confess I do rather incline to
this latter account of these two Prepositions, the reasons whereof I need not
now to insist on; but shall hasten to declare how this Righteousness is unto
and upon Believers and I shall express it in four words only noting first that
that being upon us of this Righteousness which the Apostle here speaks of, is
unto Justification of Life; as appears from the whole Context: See ver. 20. and
ver. 24. and ver. 28. and ver. 30.

1. This righteousness it self is upon Believers by the free and gracious gift
and imputation of God. The Holy Ghost uses both these expressions in this
matter. You read of the gift of Righteousness, Romans 5.17. and of the imputation
of Righteousness, Romans 4.6,11. With respect to us it is wholly free and
gracious, for those to whom it is given and imputed do no more deserve it than
those who never shall be interested in it: Though with respect to Christ it is
just and equal that it should be imputed to us; in as much as he did bring it
in for us, and that under an Expectation and Assurance built upon God the
Fathers Covenant with him, that it should be accepted, and of avail for us, and
given and reckoned to us. By being imputed, I mean that it is looked on by God
as belonging to us, in order to our being judicially dealt withal according to
the merit thereof. This is the Notion of Imputation in the general, be the
thing imputed good or evil, be it originally our own or another. And hence it
appears that it is this Righteousness of Christ it self, which is imputed, and
not only the Effects or Benefits of it which are procured by it communicated to
us; for this is in truth no Imputation. It cannot be said in any Congruity or
Truth either that Justification and Adoption are imputed to us, or that the
Intercession of Christ in Heaven is imputed to us. Yet the former are
communicated to us through the imputation of this Righteousness, and of the
latter we do receive the benefit. None that I know of ever said that the
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ are imputed to us; yet are we made
partakers of the Effects and benefits of them. To deny that Christ's
Suretiship-Righteousness it self is imputed to us, is to fall in with the
Socinians, and the very thing which they contend for. And indeed the thing is
plain, that in our being justified, either this Righteousness of Christ it
self, or a Righteousness of our own must be imputed to us. For there cannot be
Justification without the Imputation of a Righteousness, any more than there
can be Condemnation without the Imputation of a Crime; and besides, the
Scripture speaks so much of Imputation in the Business of Justification, that I
know not any who would be called Christians that have denied all Imputation in
that matter. And thence it is, that those, who have either out of Darkness, or
out of Hatred against standing in the Righteousness of Christ denied the
Imputation of that very Righteousness it self unto us, have all of them
substituted another Righteousness, even a Righteousness of our own for us to
stand in before God, and be justified in.

2. This gracious Imputation is valid and effectual to constitute Believers
righteous. So the Apostle tells us most expressly, Romans 5.19. As by one man's
disobedience many were made Sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be
made righteous. The word which the Apostle there uses, and is rendered made,
signifies constituted, and points to Imputation, as the way how we are made
Righteous. And besides, he tells us it is in the same manner, as we are
constituted Sinners by Adams disobedience, so in like manner we were made
Righteous by Christ's Obedience. But the former, namely our being made Sinners
is by the Imputation to us of Adam's disobedience, by it Judgment was, or
Criminalness came upon all Men to Condemnation, as ver. 16. and ver. 18. and
therefore by the free gift and gracious Imputation of this Righteousness of the
Second Adam does Justification, even Justification unto life come upon us. Such
a validity and efficacy there in is Gods Gift and Imputation, that by this
Righteousness of Christ it being imputed to them, Believers have a Title and
Right to pardon, to the Favor of God, to Adoption, and to Eternal Life. On
account of this Righteousness being thus made theirs, it is, as I conceive,
that they are said to be Worthy, Rev. 3.4. to walk with Christ in white; worthy
of Joyful Communion with Christ, not in themselves, but as in him, and having
his Righteousness upon them, in whom they are made the Righteousness of God.

3. This Righteousness is upon Believers not only for the change of their
Estate at first from a State of Wrath and Condemnation, to a State of Favor
with God and Justification, but also for the continuing of them in that Estate
for ever. This is that which the Apostle says, Romans 5.21. Grace reigns
through Righteousness unto Eternal Life. So that Believers stand before God in
this Righteousness, having it upon them all their Life, as well as at their
first believing, and being translated into a justified Estate. It is in this
Righteousness in which they stand justified, and not in their own Graces of
Sanctification, or in any of their own new obedience. Thus the Holy Ghost
teaches us to judge and believe when he says, 1 John 2.12 If any man sin,
(that is, if any Believer sin, for of them he speaks) we have an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is, no only was or has been,
but he is a propitiation for our sins. And 1 Job. 1.7. If we walk in the light
as God is in the light, the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all
Sin. Our walking in the Light has no influence at all to cleanse us from the
filth contracted by the least Sin that is found with us. This I take to be one
reason why it is called Everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9.24 The Righteousness
of the first Adam in which he was created was not so, no, he sinned and
forfeited, and lost it, it lasted no longer than while he continued in all
things contained in the Law to do them. But it is not so with the Righteousness
which the Messiah brings in, if it be once upon us through Faith, it is upon us
everlastingly. Thence Believers are said to be b fore the Throne of God without
fault. Rev. 14.5. which is much too high an expression to be used of the best
Saint under Heaven on the account of his Obedient and Holy Walking; nothing but
the Righteousness of Christ being upon them can set them before the Throne of
God without fault. Of this mind was the Holy Apostle Paul, when with so much
vehemence and patheticalness he renounceth his own Righteousness, and shuns
standing in it for Justification unto Life, Phil. 3.9. as dross that was of no
wortlh, as loss that would undo him, yea, as dung which would defile him, and
render him abhorred. This he speaks of his own Righteousness, and thus his
heart stood affected toward it in the business of his Justification, even then
when he had been converted and sanctified many years, and done and suffered
much for Christ in an excellent manner, and with a choice and Evangelical
Spirit. Bellarmin indeed would have Paul there by his own Righteousness, to
mean nothing but his own Hypocrisy or formality, and is so very angry with
Chemnitius for interpreting Paul's own Righteousness there, and the [all
things] which he renounceth as comprizing them under his Grace of
Sanctification, and his new Obedience, that he charge him for it with
blasphemy. And indeed it is no wonder, if depreciating and crying down a Man's
own Righteousness be resented as Blasphemy by a proud Cardinal, an haughty
Jesuit and blind Papist. But the Light and Pregnancy of the Apostles
Expressions are so strong and clear, that it is somewhat surprising, that any
pretending to be a Protestant Such as Dr. Sherl. See Antisoz. p. 547 to 568,
and Mr. Williams. See Pref. p. 9. and p. 202, 203, 204, 209. Grotius indeed
goes the same way. Annot. in loc. And I learn by Mr. Rutherf. of the Cov. p.
171. that Arminians and Socinians do so too. But I do not reckon him or them
among Protestants. It is like Grotius and the Arminians might have it from the
Racovian Catechism, cap. 9. p. 194.
should lick up that Popish Self-justiciaries vomit. But vain Man would be
wise, though he be born like the wild Asses Colt. There is in us an obstinate
adherency to our own Righteousness, and a desperate lothness to foregoe it, and
be beaten off utterly from it. And thence, if we see we cannot have any thing
of our own before Conversion to bring us into a justified State, yet we
struggle as for Life, that somewhat of our own, something done by us, or
inhering in us, may some way or other be our Justifying Righteousness, or a
part of it, may have some band in continuing us in that Estate, though it could
do nothing to bring us into it. But doubtless Holy David's heart was under the
conduct of the Blessed Spirit of Wisdom and Grace, when he resolved to make
mention of the Righteousness of God, and of it only, for his acceptance, as
well as to walk in the strength of the Lord God, for his Assistance, Psalm.
71.16. And this was not at first. Conversion only that he might be put into a
State of Justification, but it was when he was old and gray headed, and had
been sanctified and done much for God, and been in a justified Estate many
Years. See ver. 9.

4. This free, effectual, valid, abiding imputation of this righteousness unto
Believers is such, and it is through Faith so upon them, that they are thereby
constituted as righteous as Christ is righteous as their Surety. When I say
they are by its being upon them made as Righteous as Christ is Righteous, as he
is their Surety, I mean it not in a way of Similitude only, but in a way of
Equality. I am well aware that this is looked on as a monstrous absurdity and
horrid impossibility by Papists and others, who contend against the Imputation
of the Righteousness of Christ unto us at all And no wonder, for Christ and his
Righteousness are a stumbling stone and rock of offense to many in Israel; it
was so of old, Romans 9.32, 33. and it will be to as long as that word, 1 Pet.
2.8. stands firm, that there are any in the World who are appointed to stumble
at that stumbling stone. But we must not foregoe a truth so certain, so clear,
so comfortable, though all the Unbelievers in the World stumble and quarrel at
it. That I may, if possible, prevent the offense, I desire you would observe
that I do not make comparison between the Righteousness of Christ, and the
Righteousness of Believers, by their being sanctified, and their Holy walking.
In this regard there is only a similitude, to dream of an Equality, would be
prodigious Ignorance and blasphemous Madness. Nor is the comparison between the
Righteousness of Believers by Imputation, and their Righteousness in point of
Sanctification. These are not the things compared together. To make these equal
would be foolish in it self, and uncomfortable for Believers: For alas the
Righteousness of the Holiest Believer, if we speak of his Sanctification and
Holy walking, is far from being perfect. But the comparison is between the
effect of this Righteousness of Christ upon him as their Surety, and the effect
of the same Righteousness of Christ upon Believers, as it is made theirs by the
Gift and Imputation of God. And moreover, what other or further effect it may
have upon Christ I now consider not, but limit the comparison on that side to
the effect it has upon him as their Surety in making him Righteous. And thus
understood it is a clear and certain Truth that believers by the Imputation of
it to them are as righteous as Christ is Righteous as their Surety. For as he
is perfectly Righteous, having fully paid their Debt, and being fully
discharged, so are they in him. There is no condemnation to them no, not one,
Romans 8.1. Their sins though in themselves as Scarlet, red as Crimson, are yet
made as Snow and white as Wool. Isa. 1.18. Their Iniquities though sought for,
yet are as if they were not, and though searched for, yet shall not be found:
So perfect and full is Gods pardon, so complete is God's justifying of them,
Jer. 50.20. There is none can condemn them, there is none can lay any thing to
the charge of those Elect of God, Romans 8.33, 34. They do stand before the
Throne of God without fault, Rev. 14.5. For they are made the Righteousness of
God in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.21. then which no higher, no more full or emphatical
Expressions are any where used of Christ's being righteous as their Surety, nor
can be readily invented. Moreover those very words which the Holy Ghost uses
by the Prophet with reference to Christ's acquittal and righteousness, as the
Surety of Believers, Isa. 50.7, 8, 9. viz. that he shall not be confounded,
that he shall not be ashmed, that he is justified; that there is none that
shall condemn him; these very words does the same Spirit by the Apostle use,
and that in the same sense concerning the discharge and righteousness of
Believers, through this righteousness of Christ's being upon them, namely, that
they shall not be ashamed, and that they shall not be confounded, that they are
justified, and that there is none that shall condemn them, Romans 10.11. 1 Pet.
2.6. Romans 8. 33, 34. Thus showing that this Suretiship-righteousness of Christ
which is through Faith upon all who believe has as to this the very same
effect upon them that it has upon Christ as their Surety. And indeed the thing
is so obvious and plain, that the Original Debtor is as clear and free as his
Surety is, considered as his Surety, when the Debt is paid and that Payment
accepted for, and adjudged to the Original Debtor by the Creditor; that I see
not what can possibly cause any to doubt of Believers being as righteous as
Christ, is considered as their Surety, if he be not influenced by a secret
disbelief of our being constituted Righteous by this Suretiship-Righteousness
of Christ being upon us, and imputed to us through Faith, or by a lothness at
heart to stand justified in it only, and a desire to stand righteous in some
righteousness or other of his own. And it is but too manifest that this lies at
the bottom with many who exclaim against it as an impossible thing, and a
monstrous paradox.

Nor is it a truth only that Believers are in the sense before given as
righteous as Christ: But it is also true (and I the rather mention it, because
it tends to clear this whole matter) that Believers have that very same title
to the favor of God here, and to Heaven and Glory hereafter that Christ has
as he is their Surety. It Is true Christ has another title and right both to
the Love of God, and unto Heavenly Glory, viz. by the prerogative of his Birth
(if I may so express it,) I mean his Eternal Generation, as he is the only
begotten Son of God. But though he* was rich, yet such is his Grace, that for
our sakes he became poor; he consented (not to foregoe this his title but) for
a time to foregoe the actual enjoyment of the full fruit and benefit of it. He
was contented to lay aside his Glory for a time, and to dwell here below on
Earth under the frowns and displeasure of God his Father, until he should fully
to the utmost farthing have paid our Debt: But then he was to be restored and
raised up to the enjoyment of his Fathers Love and Heavenly Glory in the virtue
of that forementioned double right or title, viz. bothas the Son of God by
Nature, and also as having discharged all the Debt of the Elect as their
Surety; this latter being accumulated and superinduced upon the former, and
therefore being not a Natural, but an Acquired Title. Now it is of this latter,
this Acquired Title that I speak of when I say Believers have the same Title to
the Love of God, and Heavenly Glory that Christ as their Surety has. For this
his Title lies in his having perfectly pleated God in all the Demands of his
Justice, by virtue of the Moral Law. And this very thing is a Believers Title
also, this Righteousness of Christ which answers all the Demands of the Justice
of God by the Moral Law, is through Faith without difference unto them all, and
upon them all who do believe. I know right precious Faith may possibly stagger
at these things they are so great, and so astonishing; I know also the Devil,
whose Eye is Evil toward us, because God is so exceeding good, does malign our
taking of them in, and feeding on them. And thence he does labor to forestall
and shut up our Hearts against them, both by mis-representing them, and by
loading them with horrid consequences, such as a spirit of any tenderness
cannot but abominate. Whereas those Blessed Truths neither have any such
frightful and deformed face, if set and viewed in a true Light, nor are there
any false or evil consequences that can be inferred from them. Therefore that
if possible I may remove all stumbling blocks and rocks of offense, let me
subjoyn these four things further, with reference to what I have been
delivering.

1. Nevertheless, Believers cannot be said to be in all respects righteous as
Christ is righteous. No, far be such a thought from us. To entertain it would
be damning and blasphemous Ignorance and Arrogance in conjunction. To say
nothing of that vast imparity and disproportion that there is between the
inherent righteousness of Christ and of Believers, which may be fitly called
the righteousness of their Sanctification, nor of the great Inequality that is
between the righteousness of the walk or practice of Christ and of Believers,
which I may call the righteousness of their Obedience; for as to this I did
even now observe that thereis no more but a resemblance or likeness, the best
Believer falling woefully short of his blessed Pattern: Even with reference to
this Suretiship-righteousness of Christ, and its being on Believers, they
cannot with any truth or sobriety be said to be in all respects righteous as
Christ is righteous as he is their Surety. For this very
Suretiship-righteousness of Christ is upon him, as the Original Native subject
and efficient of it; he wrought it out. But it is on Believers by derivation
from Christ as they are in him. Hence, the Glory of bringing it in is his, even
Christ's peculiar and wholly Due to him alone, they share not at all with him
therein; though they do through his Grace participate in the righteousness thus
brought in by Christ, and in the precious Effects and Fruits of it. Moreover as
it is Christ's and upon him, it is a Public or Common Righteousness, for he is
a public or common Person being a Surety for all the Elect; as performed by
him, it was performed for them all, as accepted from him, it was accepted for
them all. But now every Believer is made Righteous by it for himself only, it
is upon him not as a Public, but only as a Private Particular Single Person.
And therefore though Christ by this Righteousness be the Savior and the
Redeemer of the Church, yet it cannot be inferred as both Papists and Socinians
impotently argue and calumniate, that if it be imputed to Believers, and they
stand righteous in it, they are Saviors and Redeemers as well as Christ.

2. Believers are nevertheless still under obligation to obey the Law, and to
walk in all Holy Conversation and Godliness, unto all well-pleasing before God.
2 Pet. 3.15, 16. Colos. 1.10. 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. They are bound not only to do all
that the Law requires, but to do it in a way of subjection to the Authority of
God in the Law, and to put a respect of Obedience to his Command upon all that
they do, as well as a respect of Love and Thankfulness upon all their
Obedience, Colos. 3.17. Though withal it is true that Believers ought not to
yield Obedience to the Law in a Legal manner and Spirit, nor from Legal or
Old-Covenant Principles, nor unto Old-Covenant Ends. They ought not to obey in
a servile manner with slavish fear ruling in their hearts, nay they may not
fear being cast out of Covenant and favor with God for every failure of
theirs; Nor are they to obey only in the strength of Grace received, but to
depend on Christ for continual Influences as well as constant acceptance, Psalm.
71.16. Isa. 45.24. Nor lastly may Believers obey the Law for the same end as
under the Covenant of Works; namely, that their own Obedience should be their
righteousness wherein to stand accepted before God.

3. All the swervings of Believers from the rule of the Law, and all their
comings short of what the precept does require are sins in them,
notwithstanding this righteousness is thus upon them. Yea these sins of theirs
do deserve Eternal Death, as justly, as much as the like sins in others do. Nay
they are worse in Believers, being greatly aggravated, and of deeper demerit by
this very thing, that the Grace of God has thus appeared unto them, and has
thus exceedingly abounded to them-ward.

4. Hence it follows further, That it is the Duty of Believers, notwithstanding
this righteousness is upon them, and they are thus righteous by it, to lament
their sins, and to loath themselves for them, yea to arraign and condemn
themselves as worthy of Eternal Death for even the least of them. That promise,
Ezekiel. 16.61, 63. holds out this to be a Duty and a Practice pleasing unto God.
Such also was the practice of that Converted pardoned Sinner, Luke 7.37, 38,
47. Her Sins were pardoned, and she was justified before, and not for or by her
so lamenting and condemning her self. This righteousness therefore being thus
upon Believers, should not either encourage them unto Sin, or harden their
hearts under sin, neither indeed does it, nor can it so work in a Believer. The
abounding of Grace to them much more than Sin has abounded, does oblige and
teach them to abhor continuing in Sin, Romans 5.21. with Romans 6.1. Yea Believers
should argue with, and reprove themselves for their Sins as Nathan from God
argues with David about his Sin, and aggravates it upon him, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9.
Even so should Believers aggravate their own sins upon themselves, and load
their own hearts with them from this Grace of God toward them, that this
righteousness of Christ is upon them: Therefore when I said they should arraign
and condemn themselves for their sins, you must not understand it as if a
Believer, upon whom this righteousness of Christ is, should judge himself to be
in a state of wrath: No, that would be a false Judgment, for there is no
condemnation to those who are in Christ, Romans 8.1. But a Believer reflecting on
his sins should lay his Mouth in the dust, and his Neck down upon the block,
his Conscience should make this Judgment, and pass this Sentence on him, I am
for such and such things which I have done against the Lord worthy of Eternal
Death, yea I am more worthy of Hell than others, I do deserve a deeper place in
it than those to whom Grace never so abounded, over whom Grace never so reigned
through this righteousness of Christ as it has and will over me unto Eternal
Life.

Quest. 3. What is the import of that word without difference?

Answ. I shall lay before you the intendment of it in three words.

1. This righteousness of God is upon all Believers, one as well as another,
Gentile as well as Jew, greater as well as lesser Sinners; even all who have
sinned and are fallen short of the Glory of God, as ver. 23. all who are become
guilty before God, and whose mouths must be stopped, even all the World, as
ver. 19. All flesh who can never be justified in the sight of God by the deeds
of the Law; all who are in this common Condition of Mankind shall have this
Righteousness upon them, only provided they do believe. Nothing shall hinder,
nothing in their outward Condition, nothing in their Spiritual Condition shall
hinder the being upon them of this righteousness, in case they do believe: That
of the Apostle, Gal. 3.28. and Colos. 3.11. holds true, and takes place in this
matter, that here there is neither Jew nor Greek, Circumcision nor
Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond or Free, Male or Female; but this
righteousness is unto them all, and upon them all, one as well as another, if
they believe. This Grace is extended to the greatest, the foulest Sinners upon
their believing, as well as unto the least; according to 1 Cor. 6.10, 11.

2. This righteousness is equally and alike upon them all: There is in this
also no difference, it is in the same measure and degree unto them all and upon
them all. One has not more of it than another; it is no less truly, no less
certainly, no less validly and effectually given and imputed to one than it is
unto another. It Is true indeed, there is a difference in the degree and measure
wherein different Believers are made partakers of some of the Effects and
Fruits of this righteousness; yea there is a difference as to this in the same
Believer at different times. Sanctification and Comfort are the Effects of this
righteousness, and they are in different measures in different Believers, and
in the same Believer at different times. But yet this righteousness it self is
as much upon one Believer all Believers are equally justified or constituted
righteous by it. They that have been the greatest Sinners, and are most guilty,
have it upon them through Faith, and are as well and as much made righteous by
it as lesser Sinners, one who has done evil innumerable times, and whose days
have been prolonged so that he is a sinner of an hundred years old, has it
upon him through Faith, and stands as righteous in it as an Infant of days
does. All that believe are alike, and equally justified; Gospel-Justification
admits not of any degrees that one should be more or less justified than
another, and therefore in this regard also there is no difference.

3. This righteousness is upon all that believe in the same way, viz. through
Faith. No more, no other is required of one than of another, that this
righteousness may be upon him, namely, Faith, true Faith; though this true
Faith may possibly be weaker in one, stronger in another. It is true indeed
that on other accounts, and for other ends and from other grounds some things
may be required of some which are not required of others. In some cases
Restitution, and in some cases Confession unto men even of secret Sins are
required and insisted upon by God, Levit. 6.5. Jam. 5.16. And in some Cases
deeper Humiliation and greater breakings of Heart than in others are called for
and requisite. But this is rather for the evidencing to a Man's own Conscience
or unto others the sincerity and soundness of his own Faith and Repentance, and
so the assuring of that, and clearing it up to them, or to a man's self, then
that this righteousness of Christ may be upon him unto the Justification of
Life. If a Man have true Faith, if he do truly believe, this righteousness of
Christ is upon him; though he be possibly both weak in Faith, and very
defective in other graces of the Spirit, and in new Obedience. Nay, all our New
Obedience, and all the graces of the Spirit comprised under that one word love,
are the effects and fruits of our being justified, having this Righteousness
upon us, and not at all the means thereof. It is a great and dangerous mistake
to think that either our New Obedience, or any other Grace but Faith has any
hand in this righteousnesses being upon us. No, it is through Faith, and Faith
only.

Use. This Doctrine shows you, the reason and spring of that precious
acceptance and sweet communion with God which Believers are admitted into, and
do enjoy; and also of their humble rejoycings, and gloryings, and triumphings
before God; notwithstanding their guiltiness and vileness in themselves by
their many and great sinnings against him, and notwithstanding their abasing
Convictions, and heart-wounding, heartbreaking sense thereof.

They have sinned against God, they are guilty before him as well as others;
for this is the Condition and State of all the World, Rom 3.19. Every Mouth is
stopped and can have nothing to speak against God when he judges and
condemns them, for all the World is become guilty. They are involved in the
common Guilt and Misery and Ruin wherein all the Seed of Adam are plunged, and
they have that exceeding sinful sin dwelling in them which has invaded all
Adams posterity: And moreover they have in their own Persons sinned against
God, some of them more than many others: Yea they are all of them laid under
Everlasting Convictions of it in their own Consciences which can never be
blotted out, that they are worthy of Eternal Death. And some of them do with
Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15. walk up and down under such Convictions, that they are
amongst the very chief of Sinners, and with David, Psalm. 86.13. That they have
deserved the very lowest Hell.

But yet nevertheless they have all of them precious acceptance with God, all
their sins are blotted out, God remembers them no more for ever, Heb. 8.12.
Their trespasses are done away as if they had never been, Isa. 44.22. Jer.
50.20. and they do stand without fault before the Throne of God, Rev. 14.5. The
reason of this wonderful abounding of Grace toward them is, this Righteousness
of Christ is upon them.

Nay they are not only pardoned and pronounced righteous, notwithstanding they
have done so much and such vile things against God, but they are also taken
into special favor with him, they are made the Friends and Favorites of the
God of Heaven, as their Father Abraham is styled by Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.7.
and by God himself, Ifa. 41.8. and all Believers by Christ, Cant. 5. 1. Joh.
15.14, 15. yea (which is somewhat higher) they are made Sons and Daughters unto
the Lord God Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.18. Gal. 3.26. Joh, 1.12. Psalm. 45.10. Heirs of
God and of Glory, Coheirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. Well may themselves be
ravished with admiration and sweetest delight, and call upon others to gaze and
wonder at this love, (as the Apostle does, 1 John 3.1.) that ever they who were
by Nature Heirs of Hell, and Children of Wrath and of the Devil, and who had by
their sinful, hateful doings made themselves manifold times more so, should
ever have such love bestowed upon them, as to be the Sons of God. But this
gives the account of it, they are made thus highly accepted in that Beloved,
whose righteousness is upon them.

Nor does the Love and Favor of God rest here in having conferred such
Privileges and Dignities upon them, but it goes on still, (so mighty is the
Torrent of Love which is let out upon them,) it does bring them into a living
and near Communion with God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, 1 John 1.3. 2 Cor.
13, 14. Though they were afar off, yet they are made nigh, Ephesians. 2.13. and
they have boldness and access with confidence unto the Father, Ephesians. 3.12. And
God even the Father does let out his heart-love, and manifest it and himself
unto them, Joh. 14.21, 22, 23. Smiling upon their Souls, making them to go into
his House of Wine, and there in a victorious and triumphant manner, displaying
over them his Love, sometimes even to an overwhelming, Cant. 2.4, 5. Now if you
ask whence is this, and how comes it to pass that God deals with them in a way
of such mavelous Grace, this Doctrine tells you, the righteousness of Christ
is upon them.

Moreover, The hearts of Believers are sometimes raised up unto, and filled
with enlarged rejoycings, humble gloryings and triumphings, and that before
God. So the Apostle declares, Romans 5.2, 3, 11. We rejoice or glory in hope of
the glory of God, and not only so, but we glory in tribulations also: And he
comes over with that word again, ver. 11. saying, and not only so, but we glory
in God; it is the same word in the Greek in all the three Verses, though
differently rendered in our Translation. How do they thus glory in God? It Is
through Jesus Christ, who has broug^t in this righteousness for them, and by
whose Death they were when Enemies reconciled to God, and by whom they have
received that Atonement. They do glory before God in him only, in whom they
are, and who is of God made righteousness unto them, 1 Cor. 1.30, 31. and in
the unchangeableness of the Love of God toward them in Christ, they do triumph
even while they have before their eyes their own guiltiness in themselves, and
how much matter for Eternal condemnation there is in them; for it is upon
Christ's not being spared or abated any thing but being delivered up and dying,
and God's justifying (all which plainly speak them in themselves obnoxious to
condemnation, and worthy of Death) upon these things it is that the Apostle
bottoms that challenge, and raises that triumphant persuasion, and Song of
assurance which he there utters in the Name of all Believers, Romans 8.32, 33,
34, 35, 38, 39. Believers have given them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, and they do
greatly rejoice in the Lord, even in the Lord, who was angry with them, and
their Souls are joyful in their God whom they know they have sinned against.
But how comes this to pass? Is it because their sins are through tract of time
out of Gods thoughts, and Memory? No, a thousand years are with him but as one
day. He is an Eternal God, and they are as fresh, and present before him, as if
they were just then in committing. Is it because God thinks better of their
sins than formerly he did when he frowned upon them, and wrote bitter things
against them? No, their sins are as distasteful to him, as much hated by him as
ever they were, nor will he ever to Eternity have a better thought of any of
them. Is it because Believers are become more vain and senseless and
slightly-spirited than they were in those former days of bitterness and
anguish? No verily, they have more of the heart of Flesh than they then had,
and there is in them now a deeper sense of the evil of sin, and a deeper work
of the Spirit of Humiliation, and more through thawings and meltings of heart
before the face of God then ever. Whence is it then, and how comes it to pass
that Believers are made even in the view of their own endless sin and
guiltiness yet to triumph and rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory!
It is hence, God has clothed them with the Garments of Salvation, he has
covered them with the robe of Righteousness, as the Prophet, speaks, Isa.
61.10. This righteousness of Christ is upon them, and thence they have the
consolations of God, delighting their Souls, and abounding in them.

Lastly, There are not only such great and precious things enjoyed by Believers
while here, but there are also things high and glorious, laid up and reserved
for them hereafter, when they shall be here no more. There shall be a Glory
revealed in them far beyond all compare with any of the afflictions that they
meet with in this World, Romans 8.18. They are now indeed the Sons of God, and
that is such manner of Love, and so great that Men and Angels may stand and
gaze and wonder at it: But though now already they be thus loved, nevertheless
it does not yet appear what they shall be. Only we know that when the only
begotten of God, the Prince of Life, and Lord of Glory shall appear, then shall
they appear with him in Glory, and they shall see him as he is, and they shall
be made like him, even these vile Bodies shall by him be fashioned like his own
Glorious Body, Colos. 3.4. 1 John 3.1, 2. Phil. 3.21. And in that day the world
shall see and know, and they themselves shall everlastingly feel that Christ is
in his Father, and they in Christ, and he in them, Joh. 14.20. And that both
Christ and the Father too have loved them as the Father has loved Christ, and
that very lo e wherewith the Father has loved Christ himself shall be in them
for ever. John 15.19. Joh. 17.23, 26. But now if you ask as she sometimes did
concerning another great work of love and wonder, Luke 1.34. How can these
things ever be, seeing they are such sinful, such guilty, such vile, and
loathsome, and hateful Creatures in themselves: This Text, this Doctrine
answers all in this one word, The righteousness of Christ is through Faith unto
them all, and upon them all without difference who do believe. Let your hearts
answer and echo back as Ma^ries there did, ver. 38, 45. Behold the handmaid of
the Lord, be it to me according to thy word. Stagger not you at these great
things as incredible, as impossible ever to be done for you who are so ashamed
of, and do so exceedingly abhor* your selves, and who are worthy of nothing but
to be rejected and abhorred of God eternally, but believe, take them in by
Faith, and by Faith receive the gift of this righteousness, and then there
shall most assuredly be a performance unto you, even unto you, of those things
that have been told you from the Lord.

ROMANS iii. 22. Even the Righteousness of God which is by Faith of Jesus Christ
unto all, and upon all them that believe, for there is no difference.


THE Point of Doctrine observed from these words you may remember was to this
purpose.

Doctrine. There is a Righteousness of God which is by Faith of Jesus Christ
unto all, and upon all without difference who do believe.

Six things have been proposed to be spoken to for the clearing up of the
Doctrine, viz. 1. What is this Righteousness of God, and why so called. 2 How
it is unto and upon all that believe? 3. What is the import and meaning of that
word, without difference? 4. What is this Faith of Jesus Christ? 5. What
reference has this faith unto this Righteousness being on Believers? 6. Whence
is all this, and how comes this about? Of these particulars I have already gone
through the three former, and know not any need either to retract, or to
explain further what was then delivered, so shall it go with your Souls, so
will God deal with every one of you, as you receive or reject those Truths of
his.

That which is now before me is those other three remaining particulars for the
clearing up of the Doctrine, and the further application of it. And hereto I
now address my self.

Q. 4. What is this Faith of Jesus Christ?

Answ. By Faith of Jesus Christ is meant Faith upon him, that Christ is the
object, not the subject of it. Not that Christ is he that believes, but he on
whom we believe. So is this manner of speaking used elsewhere, Gal. 2.16.
Knowing that a man is justified by the Faith of Jesus Christ, we have believed
in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Jesus Christ. And
so ver. 20. I live by the Faith of the Son of God. So in Acts 3.16. By Faith in
his Name. It is the same case and construction in the Greek as it is here in
the Text and in the Galatians, and might as well be rendered Faith of his Name.
You have the like, Mark 11.22. Have Faith in God, or as your Margins tell you,
Have the Faith of God. It might as well be rendered here Faith in Jesus Christ
as it is their Faith in God. The Grammar and the meaning is the same in both
places. It is genitivus objecti, not efficient is or subjecti.

It being then Faith on Christ, let us next consider what this Faith is: And I
shall briefly touch on three things concerning it.

1. The subject of Faith is the heart of a convinced, brokenhearted, humbled
sinner. Faith is seated and acted in the heart. Romans 10.10. With the heart man
believes unto Righteousness. And it is the heart of a convinced, contrite,
humbled Sinner. Where there is not any conviction of Sin there is no Conviction
of Righteousness. For as the whole and well do not need, so they do not see and
feel themselves sick and wounded unto Death will not seek to a Physician, nor
commit themselves into his hands. He that does not see himself in danger of
Death by the Avenger of Blood will not flee to Christ for refuge to lay hold
upon him, which is the work of Faith, or that which the Soul does in believing;
as the Apostle sets it forth, Heb. 6.18. The very nature of Faith and the
Acting of the Soul in it, is such as does imply and include a sight and sense
of Sin and Misery, and an over-powering, practical, lively, heart-influencing
Conviction of utter helplesness in a man's self, and unworthiness to be helped
by God. In believing the Soul looks on it self as in a perishing Condition,
Luke 15.14, 16, 17, 19. as a poor and needy Friendless and Fatherless Creature,
Hos. 14.3. and betakes it self to Sovereign Grace and Mercy. It believes that
it may be justified, Gal. 2.16. which implies that it sees it self liable to
condemnation: Yea, it knows as the Apostle there speaks, that men are not
justified by the works of the Law, that is, in its believing it is under a
particular and lively Conviction, that by the works of the Law neither any
other, nor it self shall ever be justified, and it is thereby influenced to
seek to be justified by Christ in this way of believing. Not but that after
Faith and Pardon, and a sense of it too, there are deep humblings and meltings
of God according to that promise, Ezekiel. 16.61, 63. and we see was in her, Luke
7.38. Nevertheless a truth it is, that Unhumbledness and Pride are inconsistent
with true Faith, Joh. 5.44, and so also is impenitency and hardness of Heart,
the Seed of the word of the Gospel will never take root and grow up in such an
heart, Matthew. 21.32. and 13.20, 21.

2. The object of Faith is Jesus Christ, that is, the anointed Savior, or the
Name of Christ, as 1 John 3.23. and Joh. 1.12. that is, Christ as made known,
and set forth and declared in the Gospel. And in the Gospel he is set forth as
the Ordinance and Servant of God for saving Sinners of the Sons of Men. Christ
is the next and immediate object of Faith, God is the ultimate Object of it.
For by him we come to God, Heb. 7.25. and by him we do believe in God, 1 Pet.
1.21.

3. The hearts acting toward this object in its believing is most properly in
a way of trust and dependence and affiance. The Holy Ghost, who is the Author
and worker of Faith, and who best knows the Nature of it, does in Scripture set
it forth by great variety of expressions, some proper, some metaphorical.
Trusting and believing in, are among the proper expressions whereby the Holy
Ghost declares the Nature of Faith, and the acting of the Heart therein toward
Christ and God by him. The former is used by him, Ephesians. 1.12, 13. Isa. 50.10.
and 26.3, 4. and often elsewhere. The latter is used Genesis 15.6. Joh. 1.12. and
6.29. and 14. 1. Gal. 2.16. 2 Timothy 1.12 and in many other places. There are
also some Metaphorical Expressions used by the Holy Ghost to the same purpose.
And as they are in their Nature apt and fit to let in a Light of Understanding
into our Minds, and to guide them in their conceivings concerning the Nature of
this Faith, through which the Righteousness of Christ comes to be unto all, and
upon all that believe: So the Holy Ghosts using them, warrants us to use them
in speaking of and describing Faith. To give some instances. Believing is
called looking unto Christ, Isa. 45.22. and it implies a looking to him with
earnest desire and expectation. For that expression in the Prophet, is taken
from that Ordinance in Moses, Numb. 21.8. where you find the Israelites
directed when stung by the Fiery Serpents to took to the Brazen Serpent that
they might not dye but live and be healed. Christ shows us that himself was
shadowed and prefigured by that Brazen Serpent, John 3.14. and his death by the
lifting of it up, John 12.32, 33. and accordingly by their looking to it, was
believing taught, as Christ plainly intimates, John 3.15. And therefore as an
Israetite who felt himself stung by the Fiery Serpents and dying, looked with
earnestness of expectation to the Brazen Serpent; in like manner does the Heart
of a convinced Sinner work toward Christ in believing. Again, Believing is
called coming to Christ, Matthew. 11.28. John 6.37, 44, 45. for in ver. 35. he
had explained coming to him by believing on him. But what manner of coming is
it? Is it a dead, cold, careless coming? No, it is a coming with appetite and
affection, as an hungry man comes to his Meat, and a thirsty man to drink;
which also is Christ's comparison there. And thence elsewhere the same Spirit
who is the worker of Faith in us, and under whose hand the Soul is conducted
and does act in its believing, calls it a fleeing unto Christ for refuge, to
lay hold upon the hope set before us, Heb. 6.18. All the expression sets forth
earnestness in the Heart in its believing. For they are taken from the practice
of one who finding himself in danger of Death from the Avenger of Blood, fled
unto the City of Refuge (the Ordinance for which you may see Numb. 35.13, 15.)
or from the practice of a self-convicted, self-condemned Criminal among the
Jews, who fled to the Tabernacle and caught hold on the Horns of the Altar (as
you see Joab did 1 King. 3.28.) even in like manner does the Soul act in
believing, it comes, it flees to Christ for refuge, it lays hold upon him.
Moreover, Believing is called by the Holy Ghost committing our Selves, and
Souls, and Concerns unto Christ and God in him, Psalm. 31.5. 1 Pet. 4.19. Psalm.
37.5. and 10.14. Prove. 16.3. I know the word in the Original in those places is
different, but so it is rendered by our Translators, and that not amiss. And the
Apostle Paul plainly shows that believing on Christ is a committing of our
Souls unto him, when speaking of himself he says, I know whom I have believed,
and know that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him, 2 Timothy
1.12. Lastly, (for I will mention no more) Believing is called leaning,
staying, resting, viz. on Christ and on God, Isa. 50.10. This I conceive was
taught them and us by that Ordinance which enjoined him that brought the
Sacrifice to lay his hand, or lean with his hand upon his Sacrifice, Exodus
29.10. Lev. 1.4. and 3.2, 8, 33. and 4.4, 15, 24, 29, 33. and 16.21. I know
that Rite is by many interpreted as signifying the transferring or translating
of the Sin of him that brought the Sacrifice unto or upon the Sacrifice which
was to be offered for him. But the laying of our Sins upon Christ is not our
act but Gods, Isa. 53.6. and the word used in Exodus and Leviticus does signify
a leaning with stress and might, and is rendered, Psalm. 88.8. lies hard, and
Ezekiel. 24.2. beset, that is, pressed upon with force and strength. And the
Apostle (if I mistake not the meaning of the place, which I think I do not)
tells us, Heb. 6.1, 2. that Faith toward God, or on God, is the doctrine of
laying on of hands, that is, the thing taught by that Rite or Ceremony; even as
repentance from dead works is the doctrine of, or thing taught by their
Levitical washings, which I take to be there meant by Baptisms. However it is
manifest that the Holy Ghost frequently sets forth believing by leaning,
staying, resting, and words of like import. And very apposite and lively
Metaphors they are, for they do hold forth both the nature and the tendency of
Faith. The Nature of Faith, inasmuch as in believing the Soul does make an
adventure of it self, and all its concernments for Eternity, upon Christ and
this Righteousness of his. Such an Adventure, that if Christ and his
righteousness should fail it, it has no other hopes or expectations, but must
fall and perish and sink it self for ever. And the tendency of Faith, namely
that it tends to bring in ease and peace, repose and tranquillity, yea,
Assurance, and humble, holy Security into the Soul. Or, as the Apostle
expresses it, Romans 15.13. it tends to the Souls being filled with all peace
and joy; for the end of Faith to which it tends, is joy unspeakable and full of
Glory, 1 Pet. 1.8, 9. The word used in that forementioned Rite which I said
signifies to lean upon with stress and weight does also signify to susteyn,
support, uphold. and is often so translated. It is such a leaning and relying
as brings in relief and support, and on that account it very aptly sets forth
believing.

Quest. 5. What is the reference that Faith has unto this Righteousness of
Christ's being upon them that believe? For the Text and Doctrine say it is
through Faith unto them and upon them.

Answer 1. Some there are who (possibly out of a godly fear of giving too much
in this matter to man, or any thing done by him,) seem to deny that Faith has
any reference unto Christ's Righteousness being upon us, save only by way of
discerning or evidence. And accordingly they seem to make Justification to be
nothing else but Gods speaking peace in the Conscience of the Sinner, and
causing it to see and hear what was done for him in Heaven long before.
Possibly they might be led into that mistake by the Expression of some great
Divines, Rutherf. Exerc. de gr. cap. 2. p. 24. Owen Append. against Biddle, p.
19. Bradsh. of Justific. C. 23. To. 6. and C. 24. To. 15. Nort. Orth. Evang.
page 311, 315, 317, 318, 322.
who are far from being Antinomians, that the Sentence of Justification is
terminated on the sinners Conscience. Wherein I conceive they mean no more but
that it is a sentence of God so declared in his Word, as that the Conscience
may and ought to receive it, and sit down satisfied and acquiescing in it. For
surely to confound Justification and Assurance, and make them one and the same,
must needs be a wide mistake; when the Scripture plainly declares, that they
may be separated, Isa. 50.10. Though it is true, that Faith, if it be sound and
saving, does tend toward Assurance or Peace of Conscience, and that there is
some kind of Assurance in all Faith, if it be the Faith of Gods Elect, Faith of
the operation of God Namely, there is an assured satisfying persuasion in the
heart concerning the Object of Faith, or the thing believed on. This kind of
Assurance God requires in all acceptable Worship, Heb. 10.22. and the Apostle
tells us there was this Assurance in the Thessalonians at their first
believing, 1 These. 1.5. Nevertheless to make Faith to have no other influence
unto our Justification, or Christ's Righteousness being upon us, than to discern
and see it, does not come up unto the expression of the Holy Ghost in the Text,
where he says it is upon us through Faith, not, it is seen or discerned to be
upon us.

2. Of late some (chiefly Socinians and Semi-socinians, who reject the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, allowing only the benefits or effects of
it to be upon us, and communicated to us, but not the Righteousness it self)
find much fault with that word instrument in this matter, and contend eagerly
that the respect which Faith has to the Righteousness of Christ being on us,
and to our Justification, must be expressed by the word condition. But this is
not a Scriptural Word, and therefore we are at liberty to receive or to refuse
it, as it agrees or disagrees with what the Scripture speaks in this business.
And the truth is, that word Condition is ambiguous and of an uncertain sound
and signification, and therefore there is danger in using it, for there may be
deadly Poison under it; Because there are many sorts of Conditions; Some are
valuable considerations, yea, some that are the price and procuring Causes of
that whereof they are the Conditions. Grevinchovius the Arminian will have
Faith to be such a condition, as that the foresight thereof moves the Will of
God as a Judge to give us the reward of Life. And another among our selves
asserts, that all the benefits of the Covenant of Grace (among which surely
Justification, Adoption, the Righteousness of Christ being upon us, and our
being united to him, are none of the least) are rewards given, not indeed for
our believing, says he, not by way of Merit, not of Debt, yet in way of
reward. Another, who speaks clearly and less covertly, says expressly, that God
justifies and saves none but for their believing. And another who searched and
saw as far as either of them, and speaks out, says plainly, that we are
Pardoned, Justified and Adopted to Eternal Life as a reward to Believers for
their Faith and Obedience: And withal tells us in the same Book, that Reward
and Merit are Relatives, so as that wherever there is Reward following, there
Merit went before, and that there is no Reward, but it is a Reward of Merit.
It Is true indeed, he will have the Merit of our repenting and believing, but a
subordinate Merit, and Christ's the principal. But what is this better than the
old Popish Notion, that Christ Merited that we might Merit, and we Merit in the
virtue of his Blood, and by Gods Grace? And indeed he expressly owns this Tenet
of theirs. But surely this is another Gospel, that we are pardoned, justified,
adopted, and vested in the Privileges of the New Covenant Estate as a reward
of or for our believing, repenting, or new obedience; and a Doctrine grosser
than many Learned Papists hold, as great Merit-mongers as they are; For they
insist upon it as one condition requisite unto Merit, that the Person Meriting
the Reward must first be in a State of Grace and Favor with God; and therefore
Justification and Adoption cannot be Merited by us, nor are conferred upon us
as a reward of any thing that we do. Yea, methinks it is a very pernicious and
Soul-destroying Error, if there be or ever have been any such in the World. For
if a Man's Heart be influenced by it, and molded according to it in all his
treating with God and applications to him for pardon of Sin, and Justification
and adoption, he is wholly led aside quite off from the way of the Gospel, and
it is utterly impossible he should ever truly believe. For Faith receives and
looks for Union to Christ, interest in this righteousness of his, pardon of
Sin, Justification and Adoption, not as a reward for or of any thing that we
do, but merely of Free Grace, and wholly for the sake of Christ and his
righteousness. I conclude therefore that though this Word Condition may be
used, and is so by some, in a sound sense, and with a good meaning, concerning
Faith, and its reference to the righteousness of Christ being upon us; yet it
is neither convenient nor safe. For it may occasion an unhappy stumbling, and a
Soul-ruining mistake. And therefore I cannot but join with that great Divine,
Dr. Tho. Goodwin on Ephesians. 2. Sermon. 22. p. 301.
who wishes it were laid aside, and wholly disused, because there is danger in
it, or at least, (if men be impotently fond of the word) that it were both more
soundly meant and better explained than it is by our present Contenders for it.

3. The generality of all those that own the righteousness of Christ being upon
us, as that wherein we stand justified, have used to express the influence of
Faith thereunto by that word Instrument. So the Westminster Assembly do, both
in their Confession and in their Catechism. Nor have I seen any thing alleged
against expressing it by that word, that amounts to any more but that the word
is not strictly and precisely proper in the same sense wherein it is used in
other cases; which for my part I will easily grant. But what then? Ars
posterior prioris utitur opera. Arts in (...) concrescunt. We must of
necessity, and are warranted by the practice of the Holy Ghost to use Figures
and Tropes in speaking of and declaring the Truths of God. It is als readily
granted that, the word instrument is not found in Scripture used matter. But
yet for all that it may be a word of the Holy Ghosts Teaching; for it is suited
and apt to declare, and let in into our Minds the true Notion and conception of
what the Scripture declares to be the reference of Faith unto our
Justification. The Scripture says it is by and through and of Faith, yea, it
says that God justifies us by Faith and through Faith. I know no word that
does so well express the work and use of Faith in this matter which the Holy
Ghost sets forth by receiving, Joh. 1.11, 12. Romans 5.11, 17. where we are said
to receive Christ, and to receive his Righteousness and the Atonement made
thereby. An expression that speaks both our having it, or being possessed of
it, and the means or way on our part, wherein it is effected or brought about,
viz. that it is by and in such a like acting of our Hearts toward Christ and
his Righteousness, as answers the work of the Hand in taking and receiving a
corporeal thing offered to us, and by our taking it made ours. For my part, as
on the one hand I would not be needlessly tenacious of a word where we can as
well retain and express the Truth without it; so on the other hand, I cannot
but observe, that all those (even to a Man, not one as far as I remember to be
excepted) who quarrel with that word instrument, and wrangle to bring in the
word condition in this business of our Justification, and Christ's Righteousness
being upon us, do labor under that Covert to bring in withal a very weighty
and momentous alteration in the substance of the Doctrine of the Gospel: For
they would also bring in other things, viz. Repentance and Love and new
Obedience, as Conditions of our Justification as well as Faith, and as the
Righteousness which is imputed to us, and wherein we stand. And they are
generally for a conditional Redemption also, and many of them for a conditional
Election too.

4. I shall therefore, waving those dissatisfying words set, before you what I
conceive to be the Truth of God in this matter briefly in a few Propositions,
concerning the reference that Faith has unto the Righteousness of Christ being
upon us. Only premising two things.

First, That I am speaking of possession or actual enjoyment of this
righteousness of Christ, not of right or title to it. Right and Possession are
different things, and therefore things of a different Nature, and may be one
without the other. Rutherf. of the Covenants, p. 231, 232.
Faith has no influence, no not so much as in a way of instrumentality, to
confer upon us a right and title to Christ's Righteousness, all the influence
that Faith has in this matter is only unto our actual Possession of it; which
the Holy Ghost calls our having it, Phil. 3.9. and here in the Text its being
upon us.

Secondly, This Possession, or having this Righteousness of Christ, the
reference of Faith whereunto I am speaking of, is that having it which is unto
Justification of Life, and that as the next and immediate effect of this
Righteousness being thus upon us. It is having it freely imputed to us, so as
to stand in it before God for the present and everlasting acceptance of our
Persons as righteous by it unto Eternal Life. It may be (and indeed is) upon
us, as to some effects of it, and this not be through Faith, but unto Faith.
For Faith is obtained for us by it, and bestowed on us for the sake of it. But
its having an efficacy for us, so as to have some effects of it communicated to
us, is indeed its operating for us and on us, but it is not its being upon us
which the Text speaks of. This righteousness is one thing, the saving effects
of it are another. The thing I am to speak to is not what reference Faith has
to any of the effects of this righteousness being wrought on us, but what
reference it has unto the being on us of this righteousness it self, and that
by the free gift and valid imputation of God unto Justification of Lite.

Having premised these two things, I shall deliver my self touching this matter
in Six Propositions.

Propos. 1. There is a reference or respect of connection between Faith and this
Righteousness being upon us unto Justification of Life. And this connection is
inviolable, and holds in all persons. (I speak of such as are adult, for how it
is upon Infants I now consider not). Insomuch as it is a certain Truth, that
whosoever believes not, this righteousness is not upon him; and whosoever has
it upon him is a Believer. Having believed, and having this righteousness, are
so inseparably connected and linked together, that wherever there is one the
other also is; and if there be not both there is neither. If thou have not
believed with the Faith of Gods Elect, thy own Conscience ought to pass this
Judgment on thee (for God in his Word does it) that thou have not this
righteousness upon thee. And on the other hand, if thou have indeed believed
with this Faith of the operation of God, and thy Conscience know it, thou may
then conclude assuredly, that whatever thy Sins have been, or whatever thy
defects and corruptions now be; yet this righteousness of God is upon thee,
thou have it, and thou do stand in it. Propos. 2. There is a reference of
order between a man's believing, and this righteousness being thus upon him. I
do not speak of an order of Time, but an order only of Nature and Consecution
of the one upon the other. And such an order there is among the Blessings and
Benefits of the Covenant. For it is ordered in all things, 2 Samuel 23.5. all the
concernments and blessings and benefits of it are wisely and graciously
disposed and ranked by God. You may see it in other Instances. We are not first
made Children and then pardoned, but first pardoned and then adopted to be
Children. We are not first sanctified and then justified, but first justified,
and then being justified we are sanctified. Not that there is any space of time
between them, no they are as to time done together and at once; but yet there
is an order of dependence and causality. Our being sanctified is the Effect,
not the Cause of our being justified, and our being justified the Cause, not
the Effect of our being sanctified. In like manner it is between our believing
and this righteousness being upon us for our Justification, or the change of
our state. It is through Faith that this righteousness is upon us as the Text
expressly says, and the Scripture every where speaks, not contrarily. ] Propos.
3. There is between our believing and this righteousness's being upon as a
reference of causality. For Faith is a means thereof by the Ordination of God,
and whatever God has ordained as a means, has some causal influence toward
that whereof it is by him made a means. Those Expressions of the Holy Ghost
that we are justified by Faith, and through Faith, and this in the Text, that
this righteousness is upon Believers through Faith, do imply some kind of
causality, nor do I see how they can be satisfied, or a just account given of
them without admitting some kind of causal influence and efficiency to be in
Faith toward our having this righteousness, or its being upon us. I hope you
will not stumble at the word causality. All that call Faith an instrument do
speak as much as I mean, for instrumenta etiam in causis adjuvantibus
connumerantur, Instruments are a sort of Causes. Those who are very tender in
this Point and greatly averse and watchful against ascribing too much in our
Justification unto any thing in us or done by us, yet do concerning the hand of
Faith herein freely use those words Causality, Efficiency, and instrumental
cause. See Dr. Owen of Justification, page 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153. Mr.
Durham on Rev. digres. 11. and indeed it is the common language of all
Protestants who own the imputation of the righteousness of Christ unto us. I
shall endeavor to clear it further in the following Propositions. Propos. 4.
This Causality of Faith unto the righteousness of Christ being upon us, is of
the least and lowest kind. It is not at all by way of Merit or Desert, nor is
it by way of sole Efficiency, no nor principal, but all its Efficiency or
Influence herein is from Gods Constitution or Ordination, and wholly by virtue
thereof. And this Ordination or Constitution of God, is not that we should have
the righteousness of Christ upon us either for or as a reward of our believing;
No, far be such a thought from us. But God having in Wisdom and Grace made this
inviolable Constitution, that this righteousness shall be upon every one that
believes, it does actually take place upon particular persons at their
believing, and so this righteousness is upon them through Faith. He that
removes out of the shade into the shine of the Sun, hereby comes to have the
Sun beams fall upon him: But that removal of his has no influence upon the
Sun, nor does any thing to draw down the beams of it upon him. So our believing
has no influence upon the righteousness of Christ, it has an influence only
unto its being upon us. Though our unbelief makes us unworthy of it, or of any
the least mercy, yet our believing is as far from making us worthy to have this
righteousness of Christ upon us, as our defective and defiled Obedience is from
making us worthy of Eternal Glory. Propos. 5. The next and immediate influence
of Faith in this matter is, that by it according to the constitution of God,
our mystical vital union with Christ is accomplished. Such an Union there is
between Christ and Believers. They are ingrafted into him, Joh. 15.4, 5. Romans
11.17, 23, 24. Betrothed and married unto him, Hos. 2.20. Romans 7.4. They do
dwell in Christ, and have Christ dwelling in them, Joh. 6.56. This Union is
brought about, effected and accomplished by our believing; and therefore we are
said to believe into Christ, (...), Gal. 2.16. and Faith is called a coming to
him, a phrase which implies and holds forth, not only that while we continue
in Unbelief we are at a distance from Christ, and that Christ is the Object of
Faith; but also that by believing, Christ and the Believer are brought
together, if I may so express it. As Believers dwell in Christ and Christ in
them, so this is by their eating his flesh and drinking his blood, or eating
him, Joh. 6.47. with ver. 54, 56. In eating and drinking, the Food and the
drink are incorporated and made one with the Body. By eating and drinking
Christ's Flesh and Blood, he there means believing on him. The Metaphor is taken
from their eating the Manna, and drinking of the Rook in the Wilderness; or
from their eating and drinking of their Sacrifices, as you know they were by a
positive Ordinance to do of some of them. Christ indeed first lays hold on us
and joins himself to us, and we being laid hold on and drawn by him, do close
with him, and so come to co-alesce into one mystical Person with Christ. This
our vital Union with him is indeed begun on his part, in his laying hold on us
in a preventing way, but it is completed and accomplished, and becomes mutual
by our believing. Now being thus made one with Christ, his righteousness comes
to be upon us unto the Justification of Life by the Ordinance, Constitution and
Donation of God. It is as we are thus in him, and made Members of him, that his
righteousness is upon us. As a base-born Beggar and Criminal comes to have the
Honor of a Princess upon her by being Married and becoming one Flesh with an
high born Prince. Propos. 6. Nevertheless this Righteousness of Christ has
some operation on us as well as for us antecedently to our believing. It has
an operation for us. For it did make Atonement, procure our Peace and
accomplish our Reconciliation unto God: These things were done and finished,
they were perfected by Christ in his bringing in this righteousness. It has
also an operation upon us before our believing. To say nothing of Gods
forbearing us, and showing forth all long suffering toward us during all the
days of our vanity and madness of heart, nor of any other excellent Mercies
given to us then, which when Grace comes to be grafted on them become very
serviceable for the furtherance of our Salvation, because it is not altogether
so clear that these things which are not of a saving Nature, and which are
enjoyed by us while we are not under the bond of the Covenant, nor living
Members of Christ, are procured for us by his righteousness: This is certain
and plain, that the Spirit, and Faith it self are procured for us by, and given
to us for this righteousness, which is unto Justification upon us through
Faith, Phil. 1.29. Faith is purchased for us by it, and our justification is
purchased by it, and both of them absolutely obtained. And it may also be said,
that because Justification is absolutely procured by this righteousness,
therefore also Faith, being procured for us by the same righteousness, is for
the sake of it given to us; that being the way ordained of God for our being
justified, and it being a Mercy peculiar to the Elect, and a Mercy that has
Salvation accompanying it, and a leading part of the application of Christ.
This possibly may be one thing that has occasioned some to say that our
Justification is rather the condition of our having Faith given us, than our
Faith the condition of our Justification. I conceive they mean, that if
Justification had not been absolutely procured and obtained for the Elect,
Faith would never have been either given them or obtained for them. However,
most certain and undeniable it is, that this Righteousness operates on us
antecedently unto our believing, because that preventing Grace and work of the
Spirit, whereby Faith is wrought in us, are the effects of this Righteousness,
as being procured by it.
From what has been said, Two Things follow, which I will briefly note, for
the further clearing up this whole Matter, and then pass on to the last Enquiry
proposed.

1. Our being justified is not the next or immediate effect or consequence of
our believing, but of Christ's Righteousness being upon us. For between our
believing, and our being justified, there comes in our co-alescing into one
Mystical Person with Christ by this Vital Union, and our having his
righteousness upon us unto the Justification of Life: Which latter is the next
fruit and consequent of that our union to him, or being in him. His
righteousness is upon us as we are Members of him, and do stand in him: And
this our union to him is brought about, and accomplished upon, and by our
believing. Union to Christ goes before Communion with him. Union is the
immediate consequent of Faith. Our having this righteousness upon us is one of
the first things in our Communion with Christ. We are first in Christ, and so
have him made righteousness to us, 1 Cor. 1.30.

2. Our Faith has no hand in working out this righteousness for us, nor is it
any part thereof. The righteousness of Christ is a garment, a robe wherewith
Believers are clothed, Psalm. 45.13, 14. Isa. 61.10. Rev. 19.8. But our Faith
neither is a part of it, nor ever took stitch in it. The Apostle here in the
Text does not say this righteousness of God is by or through Faith, or that it
consists either in whole, or in part, in Faith, but that it is upon us through
faith. Wherein he plainly distinguishes between this righteousness and our
believing, and tells us it is the former, namely, this righteousness of God
which is upon us unto justification of life, whereas the latter, namely faith,
is within us, not upon us.

Quest. 6 How comes this about, and whence is it, that this righteousness is
through faith unto and upon all that believe?

Answ. This Enquiry leads me to lay open before you something of the deep
Counsels of the Wisdom and Grace of God, in the Plot of our Salvation. I shall
content my self only to point a little at the Heads of Things, telling you the
Story of it from its first and highest Original, in these Seven Steps.

1. God the Father from Eternity begat his Son, the second Person in the
Trinity, and loving him with an infinite Love, designed a special Revenue of
Glory, and Honor, and Praise, unto him, as from all his Creatures in their
kind and way, so more eminently from and in a certain number of Mankind: Even
those whom he chose in him before the Foundation of the World, that they should
be holy and without blame before him in love, having predestined them unto
the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good
pleasure of his Will, unto the praise of the Glory of his Grace, Ephesians. 1.3, 4,
5, 6. Prove. 8.22, 23, 24-30. The End and Upshot, and last issue that all his
Counsels about them come to is this, that they may be brought to the
acknowledgment of the Son of God, and he and his Father be Admired and
Glorified by and in them, Ephesians. 4.13. 2 These. 1.10, 12. Rev. 5.11, 12, 13, 14.
For they were made for him, Col. 1.16. Rev. 4.11.

2. God has ordained two more eminent ways for this end of bringing in a
Revenue of Gl ry unto his Son, in the salvation of his Elect, viz. That he
shall do all with God for them, and that he shall be all from God unto them.
And hence as he had chosen them in Christ, so he gave them unto Christ, and
that from Everlasting to be an Head and Savior to them, Joh. 17.2, 6, 9, 10.
and 6.37, 39. And thence Christ stands engaged for them, and charged with them
before God, Joh. 6.38, 39, 40. Joh. 10.16. And God beholding them in Christ, is
fully at rest, and infinitely delighted, and therefore speaks as glorying and
triumphing in this counsel of his, Psalm. 89.19.

3. Though this was in the heart of God from Everlasting, and thus consulted
and agreed on between the Father and the Son; y t God made mankind, and among
them the Elect in such an estate, as that they needed not Christ's so
interposing between God and them, nor indeed were they capable of it, being
constituted under another head, and under another Covenant, which had nothing
in it of Christ and his Righteousness, either to be brought in for them, or to
be applied to them. And indeed it became God to put his rational Creature
perfect out of his hand, Eccles. 7.29. Genesis 1.27. It was suitable to his
Wisdom, Holiness, and Goodness, that if he made a rational Creature he should
be made sinless and holy, and in a state of friendship with God. For else sin
would have been God's work (which is impossible) and the breach have begun on
God's part, which would not have been meet, for then Man's destruction would not
have been of himself, nor could God have beheld the works of his hands, and
have pronounced concerning them all that they were very good, nor could he have
rested and rejoiced in them.

4. All mankind, even the Elect who are given to Christ, as they were at first
constituted under Adam, so they as well as o hers fell in him, and were plunged
into ruin and death, being involved in the guilt of his disobedience. In him
they sinned, and in him they dyed, though the Son of God had undertaken for
them, and stood charged with them from Eternity. For his undertaking for them
was not to keep them from falling into a state of Sin and Death, but when
fallen into it, to bring them out of that Estate unto Eternal Life. Neither was
his being charged with them to operate upon them till the time appointed for
it; which was not till they should be plunged into Guilt and Death, so as
neither they themselves, not any mere Creature could recover them out of that
Estate, and raise them up unto that happiness to which they were appointed.

This fall of the Elect into a state of Sin, and Death, and Wrath may possibly
seem somewhat remote from the point in hand: But it is not. For hereby a Door
is opened for the Son of God to step in, and do all with God for them, and be
all unto them, and that from God. All, I say, that in this ruined, perishing
condition they need to bring them to that height of Happyness to which they
were foreordained in the great Love of God to them, and unto Christ his Son.
So that as Christ speaks of the blindness of him who was blind from the Womb,
Joh. 9.3. That it was that the works of God might be made manifest in him; we
may say of this fall of the Elect, it was in the Counsel of God designed to
this end, that the depths of the Riches of the Knowledge, and Wisdom, and
Grace, and Power of God might be made manifest in them: And as Christ speaks of
Lazarus his sickness and dying, Joh. 11.4. That it was not unto Death, meaning
it was not that he should abide in a state of Death, so must we say of this
falling of the Elect into a State of Spiritual Death in Sin and Trespasses; it
is not unto Death for ever, but for the Glory of God, that the Son of God might
be glorified in recovering them.

5. In order unto the recovery and Salvation of the Elect by Christ, and his
being glorified therein, God has in infinite wisdom ordained a double Union
between Christ and them, or two ways of their being in him. The one, that
Christ may stand before God, and transact for them with God in Redemption as a
public Person: The other, that he may be all to them from God, wherein what he
has obtained and received for them comes to be unto them, upon them, and in
them, in the Application of that Redemption. The one of these Unions between
Christ and us I may call an Union in Law, the other a Vital Union. I confess
the terms are not so apposite as I could wish, But I know not any better, and
in that penury of words under which we labor, we must sometimes take up with
terms which are not altogether to our minds. I call the one an V;nion in Law,
because by it Christ and the Elect are after a sort made one Person in Law, and
he bears a relation to them so as that they are said to be in him in his
reviving, rising from the dead, and sitting in Heavenly places, Ephesians. 2.5, 6.
and that Grace, which we in our own persons are in time made partakers of, is
said to have been given us in him before the World began, 2 Timothy 1.9. The other
I call a Vital Union, because there is in it a mutual Living acting on each
other between Christ and us. Christ apprehends or lays hold on us, Phil. 3.11.
He draws us, Joh. 12.32. and we being drawn do come to him, and close in with
him. Both these Unions are Mystical, that is Spiritual, Sacred and Sublime,
both of them are of Grace, free and mere Grace, and therefore Supernatural, and
therefore of Supercreation Grace. Both of them are for the Honor of Christ the
Son of God, and both of them make for insuring of Life unto all the Seed, unto
all that are given unto Christ, unto all the Elect of God: For these are but
different adjuncts of the same subject. Yet between these Unions there is a
manifold and manifest difference. The one was from everlasting, 2 Timothy 1.9. the
other in time, Romans 7.4. The one is of all the Elect at once and together; the
other is not so, but brought about in the several seasons determined on between
the Father and the Son, namely, when the day of their Power, and the time of
their Love dawns upon this and that particular Perfon; for some are in Christ
before others with that Vital Union, Romans 16.7. The one is completed and
perfected in the transaction between God and Christ concerning us, without any
thing done on us, or in us, or by us; which cannot be said of the other, for in
it, and indeed in order to the effecting it, Christ lays hold on us. Moreover,
the one, I mean that which I call Vital Union is reciprocal or mutual, in it
not only we are in Christ, but he is also in us, Joh. 14.20. and 15.4. and
17.23. Colos. 2.7. In this Union there is a mutual in-being between Christ and
Believers. But that other Union, which I called Union in Law, is not in like
manner mutual; for though we are said to be in Christ because of that public
capacity and common relation to us all that he stands in, yet till the Vital
Union between Christ and us is effected, it cannot be said that he is in us.
And lastly these two Unions stand affected one to another as cause and effect.
The former, namely that which I call Union in Law between Christ and us is the
cause of the latter, namely of our being brought into that Vital Union to him.
And hence the former is the rule and measure of the latter, the latter is
extended to all those, and to those only who are comprised within the former,
and it is in the virtue and causal efficacy of the former that the latter is
brought about and accomplished.

6. Of this latter, viz. Vital Union between Christ and us, Faith is the means
on our side. Hence appears a further reason why it may well be called a Vital
Union: Both because in its effecting there is a vital touch, as I may say,
between Christ and us, and a clasping each on other; and also because by, and
in this Union unto Christ, we are brought immediately into a state of Spiritual
Life, first relative in Justification and Adoption, and then and thereupon
qualitative or transformative in Sanctification and Comfort, which are Glory
begun, and shall be perfected hereafter. Hence it is that some Divines (and
those no mean ones for Spiritual Light and Judgment,) make Faith to be actus
medii ut simus in vivis, rather than actus vitae qua in vivis jam constituti
vivimu, the means and way of our being made Spiritually alive, rather than our
acting Life as being already brought into a state of Life. As the Bodies
closing with, and clasping hold on the Soul by the animal Spirits, which are
corporeal things, is rather the means of Natural Life, than an Act of Life it
self. And the Notion seems to be countenanced by the Scripture, which makes
believing one thing, and Life another, and Faith the means of Life. See Joh.
5.40. and 6.53, 54, 57. and 20.31. and Romans 1.17. However this is plain and
certain that he who has the Son has Life, and he that has not the Son, has
not Life, 1 John 5.12. and that we in our believing do receive Christ, Joh.
1.12. Faith being our closing with him in that conjugal Covenant, and Relation
in which we are and stand vitally united to him.

7. It being the proper use of Faith to be the means of Uniting us thus unto
Christ, and its proper Nature to rest upon Christ for all, and to receive all
from Christ, the Crown of all is hereby set upon the head of Christ, and to
flourish there for ever. And thus you see how the grand original design of God
to bring in a Revenue of singular Honor, and Praise, and Glory unto his Son
Christ, is in this way brought about, accomplished and fulfilled. For, this
Righteousness of Christ being upon us through Faith, it glorifies Christ in
that he is made all unto us in our acceptance with God as righteous to Eternal
Life. And indeed Faith is such a Grace, as that there is in its Nature a
singular aptitude and fitness to give Glory unto Christ. This will be made
apparent by considering these two things.

1. Faith is a going out of our selves unto Christ for all. It is a going out
of our selves as Indigent, miserable, and perishing. And to whom do we in
believing go, but unto Christ? Faith therefore gives him the Glory of having in
him a fullness of suitable sufficiency for Sinners in our guilty, ruined
Condition. And what do we go to him for? It is for all that we need. Being
guilty and under Condemnation, we go to him for Righteousness unto
Justification of Life, and thence Faith is said to be in his Blood, Romans 3.25.
Being utterly without strength, and dead in sins, we go to him for strength,
Isa. 45.24. Being frail and mutable as Creatures, and having unsteadfast,
treacherous hearts as Sinners, we go to him for Everlasting Righteousness, and
for establishment in himself by an unchangeable Ordinance, and constant
never-failing influences, that is, in one word, for Eternal Life. Thus as the
Son of God is in himself a Person of infinitely higher Excellency than the
first Adam, and a better Head unto all his Seed than the first Adam was: So
Faith acknowledges him to be an Head far better than Adam beyond all
comparison, and gives him the Glory of it accordingly.

2. Faith is a prime and principal part of our being conformed to the image of
the Son of God. Suppose that the principle of Grace begotten and created in us
in Regeneration do contain in it the habit of Faith (which I will not now call
in question nor determine) yet this is manifest, that in our acting Faith we
cannot so well and congruously be said to act like God, as to act like Christ.
For God never acted Faith, but Christ did, Heb. 2.13. and was so open and
frequent in the profession of it, that his Adversaries took notice of it, Psalm.
22.7, 8. He owned and professed that he lived by the Father, as we by Faith do
live by him, Joh. 6.57. Though he be God by Nature and of himself, yet as
Mediator he lives by the Father, and the Humane Nature of Christ lives and
subsis Person, leaning on the Eternal Deity of the Son of God, it has its
subsistence in the bosom of the God head. We in believing do herein imitate
Christ after our manner and measure, and according to that unmeasurable
distance and disproportion that is between him and us. We lean and live on
Christ, and fetch all from him and from God through him. But he is the first
Pattern and Original Copy of believing; both because he lived a Life of Faith,
and because the Humane Nature of Christ leans on the Godhead in the Son, and
has the Eternal Power of the Deity clasping about it, and holding it in that
Union. After somewhat of a similitudinary way, though with great dissimilitude
and disparity do we by Faith lean and live upon Christ, and on God in and
through him, the Eternal Power of the Godhead in Christ (and not so much the
strength of any created principle of Grace in us) holding our hearts unto him,
and causing them for ever to li^e upon him.

USE 1. Here we may see the certain perpetuity of a Believers State, and the
ground thereof. The Righteousness of Christ is upon him through Faith. His
Estate therefore is not, cannot be, undecided, and in suspense. They who deny
or consider not that this Righteousness of Christ is through Faith upon all
that believe, and look only to the falseness and slipperiness of our hearts,
and either imagine some other way then through Faith for its being upon us, or
hold that we stand not in it, but in our own Obedience or Faith, as our
Righteousness before God; it is no marvel if they be for Believers falling away
from Grace. Their Darkness and Error in those other great Principles of the
Gospel naturally leads and betrays them to this uncomfortable, unevangelical,
and racking Error also, that a Believers State is in suspense and undecided.
But it is a plain case, They upon whom the Righteousness of Christ is, they are
not in a State of suspense, their State is not undecided: But so it is with all
that believe. It is true indeed, if Believers stood in their own Obedience, and
in their persevering therein, so as to have their State depend on them, it
might well be uncertain, and must be in suspense and undecided till their last
breath. But their continuance in Obedience, and the not failing of their Faith,
is one of the Privileges of their Estate, and the Effect or Fruit of their
having this Righteousness of Christ upon them, and not the means or cause
thereof. But it may be you will ask, if it be not in suspense and undecided,
where is it decided? I answer; It is not always decided in their own
Consciences, they may possibly be in the dark about it, and woefully tossed with
weary fluctuations between hope and fear concerning their own Estate. Neither
do I mean that it is decided before Men. The work and walk of a true Believer
may possibly under the prevailing of Corruption and Temptation, and under Gods
Dereliction, be such as to make him look in the Eyes of Men like a graceless
Castaway. Nor is it so publicly and so solemnly decided before all the World
of Men and Angels, as it shall be at the great Day. But yet decided it is, and
put out of suspense. Where? In the Court of Heaven, where God sits as a Judge
passing Sentence concerning the Spiritual Estate of all Men. I mean his word,
his written word, that is the Court of Heaven, there are Men condemned, and
there they are justified, in the word God sits as a Judge, pronouncing and
passing Sentence concerning Men's Estates. There he pronounces a Sentence of
Condemnation upon all that are out of Christ, and there he pronounces a
Sentence of Justification unto all, and upon all that are in Christ by Faith.
This I mean by the Court of Heaven. We should take heed in this matter of
having our thoughts vanish into Airy Speculations and Imaginations of I know
not what Voices and Proclamations made in Heaven in the hearing of Saints and
Angels, just as there is here on Earth among Men, when Persons arraigned are
acquitted. The Scripture tells us not of any such thing, though it tells us
indeed there is Joy in Heaven over a Sinner that repents, and though it be made
known to Angels when the Estate of an Elect here below is changed, yet this is
not Gods justifying of him, but his revealing to them his being justified. Gods
justifying us is in and by his word; what the Word speaks God speaks, and there
is the Estate of every one that believes in Christ put out of suspense for
ever, and immutably and eternally decided. For there is an Unchangeable,
Everlasting Constitution, that the Righteousness of Christ is and shall be upon
every one that believes in him. Now he with whom God is immutably and
everlastingly well-pleased his State certainly is not in suspense and
undecided. But so is God pleased in Christ with every one that is in him by
Faith, for this Righteousness of Christ is unto and upon every Believer.

USE 2. This Doctrine speaks Conviction unto all that are in their Unbelief.
You may here see, you should here read that your Estate is wretched and woeful;
for the Righteousness of Christ is not upon you, it is only upon those who do
believe, and upon none else: And it is upon them through Faith; but you are
without Faith, and therefore have not this Righteousness of Christ upon you.
And if his Righteousness be not upon you, the Wrath of God, and the Curse of
the Law, even of the violated broken Law are upon you, Gal. 3 10. For if this
Righteousness of Christ be not upon you, your Sins are upon you, the guilt of
them all is upon you. As it is said of those Tyrants and Terrors in the Land of
the Living in their day, that they lay down in their Graves with their
Iniquities upon their Bones, Ezekiel. 32.27. So it must be said of you, and it
should be believed by you of you selves, that you walk up and down among the
Living with all your Iniquities upon you; and if you dye in this Faithless
Condition, your Souls shall go down to Hell with all the uncircumcised and
wicked of the World, and the guilt of your Iniquities will be upon you for ever
and ever. And it is very fearful and overwhelming guilt that is upon you. For
there is the guilt of innumerable actual sins of thy own perpetration, in Deed,
in Word, in Thought; and some of them are heinous and amazing: Ask thy
Conscience else. And there is upon thee moreover the guilt of a depraved,
defiled Nature by that exceeding sinful sin which dwells in thee, a sort of
sin that has a fullness of evil in it, and excessive madness of heart, Eccles.
9.3. it has in it Infidelity, and Atheism, and Blasphemy, and Contempt of
God, and Enmity a against him; and also all the flagitious atrocious wickedness
against the second Table that ever was committed by any of the Children of Men;
and moreover all that audaciousness and outrage which ever broke forth in any
of the Sons of Belial in their sinning. Such an one art thou in thy Heart and
Nature before God, and therefore in his judgment (and his judgment is according
to truth) guilty before him concerning all these things, though perhaps thou
have never felt many of them stirring in thy bosom. And moreover there is upon
thee the guilt of thy first Fathers sinning and disobedience; when he turned
Rebel against God, thou wast involved in that woeful deed of his, and guilt and
condemnation is upon the thereby, Romans 5.18, 19. and from that sin of thy first
Father thou can never be discharged and justified, unless this Righteousness
of Christ be upon thee through Faith, Isa. 43.27. And lastly, over and above
the guilt of all these sins, there is also upon thee the guilt of disobeying
the Gospel in refusing and despising this Righteousness of Christ tendered and
brought near unto thee, when thou art in such a lost, and perishing, and
forlorn Condition: And verily this is an heavy and an overwhelming guilt
superadded unto all the rest. You should take in Convictions of your condemned,
Condition, and that the Wrath of God abides on you, and will do so as long as
you continue in unbelief. Do not flatter your selves and delude your own
Consciences, by saying, I have mourned, and I have wept bitterly for my sins,
and over my poor Soul, and I have left them, and amended and reformed my Life,
and I thank God I walk so and so, blamelesly and exemplarily. Be it so, yet let
me put these two Demands to thy Conscience. 1. Are these things the
Righteousness of Christ? And 2. Are they Faith? If they be not the
Righteousness of Christ, they can never justify thee from any the least sin:
And if they be not Faith, the Righteousness of Christ will never be upon thee
by or through them. The Scripture no where says that the Righteousness of
Christ is upon us through our repenting, not yet through our amending and
reforming; no, nor through any works of Righteousness and Obedience that we
have done or can do. No, this is the Privilege, Prerogative, and peculiar
Office of Faith. True it is, these things are thy bounden Duties, God will damn
thee for neglecting them: But yet as true and as certain it is, that they
neither are the Righteousness of Christ, nor will they entitle thee to it, and
interest thee in it. Know therefore that though thou could mourn Rivers of
Tears, or Seas of Bloody though thou could amend thy Life, and reform thy
way, and thy heart too, so as never more to sin and though for the time past of
thy Life thou had, and for all the time to come should live like a Saint
dropped down from Heaven, and walk up and down in the World like an Angel in
flesh, shine, and sparkle, and glitter among the Sons of God, yet as all this
is not the Righteousness of Christ, so neither would the Righteousness of
Christ be upon thee through all these things, for they are not Faith. Thou art
therefore in a state of Condemnation, and the Wrath of God abides upon thee,
and will do so as long as thou continuest without Faith.

USE 3. This Doctrine speaks earnest exhortation to get Faith, to believe. And
it speaks to you all, one and other, for you all stand in need of this
Righteousness of Christ to be upon you, the very least sinner among you all, as
well as the greatest. As the Apostle Paul sometime said to Peter, Gal. 2.15,
16. We who are Jews by Nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, knowing that a
man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ,
even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith
of Christ, and not by the works of the law: for by the w^rks of the law shall
no flesh be justified: So I say to you that are not such grievous and atrocious
sinners as some others are, you as well as the greatest Sinners must believe in
Jesus Christ that you may be justified. And much more you whose own Consciences
neither do nor can make any other judgment of you, but that you are among the
very chief of Sinners, Sinners before the Lord exceedingly, O do you get Faith,
See that you believe. For in this way it will come to pass that the
Righteousness of Christ shall be upon you, and in no way, by no means, unless
you believe. You may try other courses, you may gad about to change your way
from foul to clean, from careless and loose and profane, to strict, and
serious, and circumspect, but though you wash you with Nitre, and take you much
Soap; yet your Iniquities will stand marked before the Lord, your guilt, the
guilt of all your sins wilt still be upon you. You may take up the practice of
Duties and abound therein, you may attain much light in Spiritual things, and
become Eminent in Gifts: You may walk blamelesly in the Eye of the World, you
may live in the fellowship of Saints, and in the observance of the Ordinances
of God in the purest way of their Administration upon earth, and yet be without
this Righteousness of Christ upon you: For these are not Faith. It is therefore
a preposterous course to begin with taking up of Duties without looking after
Faith; nay, it is an error in the Foundation, and a building on the Sand: All
your building of Duties, and Profession, and Hopes will fall down, and the fall
thereof will be great and fearful. Yet I fear it is the oversight and error of
many Professors among us at this day, but it is a fatal and Soul-ruining one.
My advice and Exhortation to you therefore is, that whatever you do in the
concernments of your Souls look to it that you believe. Whatever you neglect,
neglect not getting Faith: Yea look to it in the first place. Thus your
Teachers should instruct and lead you: This is the Apostles direction unto
Titus, that he should teach them that have believed, to be careful to maintain,
or to excel in good works, Tit. 3.8. not to teach and press Sinners in their
unbelief to fall to doing good works first, and overlook believing wholly, or
to postpone it after them. And thus you should practice, else you labor in the
fire, and weary your selves in very vanity, for all your pain, and toil, and
doing will not bring it about that the Righteousness of Christ shall be upon
you, for they are not Faith. But through Faith that Righteousness will be upon
you, and being upon you, it will produce good works, and both your Works and
your Persons be accepted, your Persons first, and then your Works. And if you
believe, this Righteousness shall certainly be upon you, and you shall be
accepted and made Righteous in it, how many, or how heinous soever your sins
have been, or how great soever and amazing to your Consciences your guilt be.
For it is through Faith, and net through works of Obedience that it is unto
all, and upon all without difference who do believe. Therefore look to it that
you do indeed believe, look to it that your Faith be the Faith of God's Elect.

Use 4. This Doctrine speaks to Believers, and to you it shows how you should
live and walk before God, so as to please, enjoy and glorify him. I will
instance in three things.

1. You should walk holily in all new Obedience. If you be redeemed and
delivered from Condemnation and Death (as verily you are if this Righteousness
be upon you) it is that you might serve the Lord without fear, slavish legal
fear, in holiness and righteousness in all the Duties required both in the
First and Second Table of the Law, and that before him in sincerity and
uprightness of Heart, as in his sight; and all this not in a fit only, or for a
while, but all the days of your lives, Luke 1.74, 75. This Love, this Grace of
Christ, should constrain you and make you thus judge, That if one dyed for all,
then those all have dyed, namely unto sin; and he dyed that they which live
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him who dyed for them and
rose again for their Justification, and that they might rise unto newness of
life, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Thus the Apostle Peter also argues, pressing it upon
Believers to be holy in all manner of conversation, even as he who has called
you is holy: And the ground upon which he inforceth it is this, because they
are redeemed with the precious Blood of Christ. See 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16, 18, 19.

2. You should walk humbly also as well as holily. This God does require, Mic.
6.8. for you stand accepted, not in your selves, nor in any Works of
Righteousness that you have done, but wholly in the Righteousness of Christ
that is upon you through Faith. Therefore when you have done all, and attained,
to the utmost, you should still be humble, and say you are unprofitable
servants; Luke 17.10. For all your obedience and conformity to the Law avails
no more to justify you than your worst sins do; and you should look on your
best performances and your worst sins even with the same eye in the business of
Justification. Believers do own that all their best Righteousness is as to
their Justification but as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. and true Converts have the
like, and can have no worse thoughts of their worst sins, Isa. 30.22. Labor
you should and abound in the work of the Lord; not to work out a Righteousness
to stand justified in before God: No, God forbid such a thought should ever be
entertained by any Believer. I do not think the Saints in Heaven would be
willing to exchange and put off the Robe of Christ's Righteousness to stand
before God for acceptance in that perfect and spotless Holiness to which they
have there attained. Much less should any Believer be willing to stand and
continue in a justified estate by his own imperfect defective and stained
Obedience. Neither indeed can I see how such a frame of Heart can be consistent
with true Faith. But obey you should because you have a Righteousness upon you,
in comparison and in competition wherewith the Righteousness of Men and Angels
is to be despised. Obey therefore to the utmost, but look away from it when you
have so done. Obey, not to acquire or continue to your selves an interest in
this Righteousness, much less to be your Righteousness before God, but that you
may show forth the Praises of him who has called you into Fellowship with his
Son Jesus Christ.

3. You should also walk comfortably and rejoysingly as well as holily and
humbly. For you are made accepted in the beloved. Standing in this
Righteousness, having it upon you through Faith, you may, you should rejoyse
and glory, not in your selves on any performances of yours, or Graces inhering
in you, but in the Lord in whom you have both Righteousness and Strength: For
the Lord has sworn that in him should all the seed of Israel be justified and
glory; Isa. 45.23, 24, 25. Having by Faith received the atonement, you may
glory even in his presence, of whom you are in Christ Jesus, who is of God made
unto you Wisdom, Righteousness, and Sanctification and Redemption, and you made
the Righteousness of God in him, that he that gloryeth should glory in the Lord.

POSTSCRIPT.
THere are two Passages in the foregoing Sermons which have been exclaimed
against publicly and privately by one that heard them not: And I do believe he
was angered by more than two. For he is one that makes union to Christ, our
having this Righteousness upon us, and our being justified by it to be given us
in way of reward of something done by us; and he is the man that makes the
state of Believers to be undecided and in suspense during this Life. Both which
Errors are damning; the former in its Nature and direct tendency; the latter in
its Grounds and Principles. And whether he do not in truth disown the
imputation of our Sins unto Christ, and of his Righteousness unto us, it is
like if he live the World will see more fully; for he has given such pregnant
indications thereof as do amount to at least just cause of jealousy. But
touching these things he thought it best to keep silence, and to fix his nails
where he thought he had better advantage.

The one Point is, page 7. That the Incarnation of Christ is no part of his
Humiliation. As to the truth of it as there laid down, I shall say little more,
knowing it cannot be overthrown. The whole stress of the matter lies in those
two words, Incarnation and Humiliation, how they are taken. If the former be
taken largely, as comprising Christ's taking both our Nature and the common
sinless Frailties of it, together with his being in the form of a servant, and
made under the Law, I know not why it should be denied to be a part of his
Humiliation. But if it be taken strictly for his dwelling in Flesh, or Humane
Nature, comprehending under it both the act of assumption and the relation or
union arising and effected thereby between the Humane Nature so assumed, and
the Person of the Son of God who did assume it; neither the one nor the other
of these, neither the act of assuming, nor the Union of the two Natures
effected by it may be allowed to be any part of Christ's Humiliation. For
Humiliation is not in this argument to be taken laxly and improperly for any
thing which has Goodness or Grace in it, as God's beholding things in Heaven
and in Earth, is said to be an humbling of himself, Psalm. 113.6. So Christ
might have been said to humble himself, though he had never been Incarnate. But
in this subject Humiliation ought to be taken precisely, for that which is
proper and peculiar to the second Person in the Trinity, which the Apostle
calls his being in the form of a Servant, or rather his being made under the
Law. Between which there may be conceived some difference; for Christ is now in
his state of Exaltation Gods Servant, but he is not now under the Law, as he
was in the days of his Flesh and Frailty. And taking these words thus, it is
far from being a singular conceit of mine, that the Incarnation of Christ is
not a part of his humiliation. Mr. Bradshaw not only says expressly, Christ's
assuming the Humane Nature, cannot properly be said to be a part of his
Humiliation, but gives his reason for it, of Justif. chapter 17. Sect. 7. and makes
the Title of that Chapter to be this, Christ that he might taken on him the
guilt of sin, was made man: Whence it is evident that in his Judgment (which is
also the current Judgment of all Christians) Christ's becoming Man was not the
effect of the guilt of sin being on him, but the way of his becoming capable to
have our guilt imputed to him. I suppose none will imagine that Christ had been
in a state of Humiliation if our guilt had not been upon him. Dr. Ames is as
express as express can be to the same purpose. Marrow of Div. l. 1. chap. 20.
sect. 3, 4. Mr. Norton against Pinchion, Part. 2. chap. 3. p. 205. has these
words, Incarnation is not a Mediatorly or Office-Act, but an Act constituting
the person called to that Office. Mr. Samuel Stone (a Divine of very exquisite
judgment and acuteness, and one so far from being an Antinomian, that he wrote
against some of their Tenets, as I gather from Mr. Baxters Script. Gosp. def.
l. 1. p. 73.) has these words, Prin. of Orac of God, part 1. chapter 17 q. 2. What
is Christ's humiliation? Answ. The abasement of Christ, whereby he became
subject to Divine Justice to satisfy for our offenses, and to merit Life and
Happiness. This abasement presupposes his Incarnation and Unction. His
Incarnation is therefore no part of his humiliation. And in his following
explication he says, The state of abasement falls upon the Son of God
incarnate, his Incarnation is one part of his fitness to redeem, and hence the
Son of God is incarnate before his humiliation in order of Nature, being the
subject of humiliation. Hence the humiliation is ascribed to the whole Person.
Lastly, since the preaching of these Sermons, an understanding Person tells me
that that eminent Servant of Christ now in glory, Mr. John Collins delivered
the very same thing, and being taxed for it by one who would not receive
satisfaction from him, the matter was brought to Dr. Owen, who readily declared
himself to concur in his judgment with Mr. Collins. It is true, Divines
commonly say Christ was humbled in his Conception. So besides others, Mr.
Alexander Richardson, Ames, Stone, who yet hold that his Incarnation was no
part of his Humiliation, and that in good consistency with themselves, and with
the Truth. For Christ's Incarnation is one thing, his Conception is another: By
the one he became Man, by the other the Son of Man; the former implies only his
participation of the Nature, the other together with the nature, the manner,
and way of his partaking thereof; though still in Christ they did concur and
co-exist. Besides there is a difference between saying Christ humbled himself
in his Conception, and saying his being conceived was part of his Humiliation.
The former I readily assent to; for there were many circumstances of great
abasement attended not only his Birth, but his very Conception. But as to the
latter I would not so crudely assert it without some explication. For that the
Virgin Mary conceived him, is agreed on by all Christians; nor do I see reason
to dissent from that of Ames, That the Humane Nature was really related to Mary
as to its cause. But yet I do not remember that I have met with it in any
judicious Writer, that Mary was a cause either of Christ's Incarnation, or of
his Humiliation. And for my own part I would choose to refer Christ's Conception
(taken precisely as abstracted from all the afflictive or eclipsing
circumstances of it) to the things that made him allied in blood to us, and so
a fit Person to stand and act as our Surety, rather than to his actual
performing the work of Suretiship as antecedently standing in that relation
unto us. For as I do not think the precept of the Moral Law obliges us to be
conceived, nor that the curse of it does inflict it on us as a punishment, so
neither do I see that Christ's Conception was any part of his fulfilling that
Law for us, either in the precept, or in the penalty of it. Nor do I think it
any dangerous Heresy to hold that it is not imputed to us any more than that
his Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession are not. And yet whatever there
was in Christ's Conception, of his fulfilling the Law either in the precept, or
in the curse of it, I do look upon as a part of his Righteousness which is
imputed to us. But though there were circumstances of great abasement in
Christ's Conception, yet I can by no means assent to that which was again and
again asserted at Pinners-Hall by him, who there opposed Christ's Incarnation
being no part of his Humiliation, namely, That the Son of God was united to an
Embrio. I do not herein transgress the Apostles rule, 1 Timothy 5.19. I have seen
the Notes of that Sermon taken by two Persons, and have had this attested by at
least twice too. An Embrio is an unformed unorganized mass or lump, not a
perfect Humane Nature. To say that the Son of God did assume, or was united to
such a thing as an Embrio is a piece of Ignorant Blasphemy. But alas, whither
will the heat of opposition carry Men. That the English Reader may not think I
am singular herein, he may look into Mr. Nortons, Ortho, Evang. chapter 3. p. 39.

But what is the reason why Christ's Incarnation must needs be made a part of
his humiliation? I suspect there is a secret at the bottom of this matter. I
doubt he discerns that if Christ's Incarnation be taken up and admitted to be a
part of his humiliation, it puts an Engine into his hand to overthrow the
imputation of Christ's humiliation unto us. For if one part of it be not
imputed, it is easy inferring, the rest is not. And it is no difficult task to
evince that the Incarnation of Christ is not imputed to us. But for that very
reason I did, and still do judge it necessary to be so expressed in
distinguishing between Christ's Incarnation and his Humiliation, and to declare
the former not to be a part of the latter.

The other point deeply reflected on, is page 22, 23, 24, 25. That Bilievers
are as Righteous as Christ is, as he is their Surety. I heard it, and took it
in first many Years ago in a Sermon from that Reverend Man of God, my Honored
Father in Law, Mr. William Ben of Dorchester, a Man so shining in Holiness, so
excelling in clearness of Gospel Light, and so abounding in Solid, Spiritual,
Practical, Scriptural Notions, that I have not known many that have gone beyond
him, few that equalled him. I have since considered, all that I have met with
against it in Papists, Socinians, and their Followers: And am and was well
aware that some Learned Men seem to decline owning it, but it is only in the
sense in which their Adversaries mean it, and would infer it. Others seem to
own it with certain limitations and explications. I no way doubt, but that, as
by me delivered, it will be found a Truth that will abide in strength, and
firmness, when all the Papists, Socinians, and Semisocinians on Earth have
broken their Teeth upon it. And this I say with an eye particularly to his
Discourses who so publicly quarrelled at it, in which by the account I had of
them I could find nothing fit to be taken notice of. It is an easy thing to
quote many that tax it as madness and blasphemy to say Believers are equal with
Christ, but they must be understood in a limited sense, and as meaning such an
equality as interferes with Christ's Headship, and with his having the
pre-eminence in all things. For taken absolutely, and in all respects it will
not hold. Believers are Men equally with Christ, and they are justified from
their sin equally with Christ, for they are perfectly justified, and perfectly
freed from the revenging Wrath of God in this Life, and from Condemnation. Mr.
Bradshaw though he be not for such an imputation of Christ's Righteousness, as
others are, who are not Antinomians, as Dr. Owen, Dr. Jacomb, Mr. Ant. Burgess,
yet says, God does not only forgive to Persons justified all their sins, but
does also, even in like manner esteem them themselves, and accounts them in the
same place as if they were altogether free from all manner of sin both of
commission and omission. Perinde aestimat e^demque loco habet. What would this
dissatisfied Person have said, if I had affirmed that we have a whole and
unmaimed righteousness, against which God in his most exact justice cannot
proceed; no more than he can call his own Son to a second Death, or not accept
his face, who is the righteousness of God himself? Or if I had said, that Mary
under the Cross was more just imputatively than Christ, which was also true of
every Believer then living, when Christ was under the actual imputation of Sin.
And that God looking on Believers through Christ sees no more sin (safely
understood) than he sees in him. The former are the words of Reverend Mr.
Cartwright against the Rhemists on Romans 2.13. and the latter of Mr. Norton,
Orth. Evang. chapter 14. page 324. I might multiply quotations to the same purpose.
But to what end? I fear it is a dislike and heart-hatred of standing justified
in the Righteousness of Christ imputed and in it only, that lies at the bottom
in these oppositions. For the thing is evident in it self (and I can hardly
think any man is so forsaken of common understanding as to deny it) that if it
be the same righteousness in which Christ and we stand, he and we are so far as
that righteousness makes righteous, equally righteous: If it be the same
righteousness that is upon him and upon us, it must needs have the same effect
as to making righteous. Let it be but owned and believed that it is Christ's
Righteousness, and not our own, either Faith or other Graces, or Obedience that
we stand justified in before God, and what I have delivered must be owned, and
is so, whether Men see it or not. But if Christ's Righteousness be not upon us,
if that be not the only righteousness in which we stand justified; it is then
absurd and monstrous and blasphemous, or whatever men that like not standing in
the Righteousness of Christ please to call it, to say that imputatively we are
as righteous as Christ is righteous as our Surety.

It may be that some or other who do believe these things to be blessed and
glorious Truths may think it had been better not to have spoken them out. I
must crave leave in this to dissent from them, I do not think that in such a
Subject we should at such a time be mealy-mouthed. Had Luther, Zuinglius,
Calvin, Zanchy, and others of the first Reformers been as faint and complying
in their expressions, as some very great and good men then were; and as Peter
Martyr himself for some time was, the precious truths of God had been greatly
obscured, and the Light thereof not propagated down to us, as it is at this day.

FINIS.

