REMARKS FROM THE COUNTRY; Upon the Two LETTERS Relating to the CONVOCATION AND
Alterations in the LITURGY.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by most Booksellers. 1689/90.

REMARKS FROM THE COUNTRY.
I Am sorry to find the Abilities of our English Convocation so much distrusted
by some of their Brethren, that it should be thought necessary to send public
Letters of advice, by way of charitable assistance to direct them what to do;
had they been left to themselves, they might possibly have erred dangerously
concerning those Fundamental Points of the Calendar, the old Translation of the
Psalms, the Surplice, etc. and have retained a too favorable opinion of the
Service and Constitution of England, which is now become the only intolerable
and unpardonable Heresy. That Reverend Assembly will I hope pardon me, if at
present I wave all vindication of the capacity they may be presumed to have,
for the settling of these profound Points; for it would reflect too much upon
the wisdom of those Directors, if the Convocation should appear to stand in no
need of their charity, and their Letters look like a too forward and solemn
impertinence. It is a Thousand Pities so instructive and so Eloquent Papers
should ever fall under such an imputation, and be ranked among the Scriblings
of Elenor James, with this only advantage of having better Language; whereas
the Woman Counselor is judged to have the better meaning.

But supposing the Convocation so weak indeed as this way of Proceeding does
suggest, and that the matters to be brought before them, like Childrens Meat,
must be chewed beforehand, and put into their Mouths; yet the charity had born
a better grace, if it had been conveyed more privately, and had concealed those
defects of our Church Representative which it pretended to supply. If these
Gentlemen intended only to be Prompters to the Convocation, they mistook their
part, and spoke much too loud, and instead of Assisting, served only to
Disgrace the Actors. Therefore when these instructing Papers were publictly
exposed among the Toys of Westminster Hall, and Proclaimed by Hawkers, together
with Scotch News, and Observators, it is no wonder if the Company at Harry the
Seventh's Chapel resented the affront, and cried out a Libel, and carried
their Complaints as far as Jerusalem-Chamber there to be decently buried in
Oblivion.

It is doubtless out of pure condescension, that one of these Directors is
pleased to style himself a Minister in the Country; the undertaking does not
agree very well with his Character, and it is seldom that Persons of that Rank
take upon them to direct and Chatechise Synods. Country Ministers, Poor Men,
are at too great a distance from the Spring of Business to be so early
acquainted with these Mysteries, hid from the Country, till these Letters
Revealed them. But the Knowledge of affairs, and the assuming that commonly
attends too much Knowledge, speaks this Author rather of the Commission than of
the Country. But if the Title be serious, it is a great Pity that the obscure
Dull Country, that knows not how to value such a Treasure, should possess him
any longer so much to his own disadvantage, as well as to the regret of the
Court and City.

The Author of the Letter to a Friend is pleased to give some intimations of
his being a Member of the Convocation, which some Persons who wish well to the
design of the Letter, will by no means allow; and indeed it seems something odd
and preposterous, that a Person of so impetuous and irresistible Eloquence,
should in the First place enter his public Protestation, and make his final
Appeal to the People, before he had tried the force of one of his Reasons
within-doors. But some of our Friends from this rough way of Proceeding,
guessed him to be an Undertaker, who was to prepare Men as well as Matter for
this Convocation; and not finding the success of his Private application to
answer the expectations he had conceived, or the assurances he had given, grew
wroth with the disappointment, and fearing to have lost his design, lost his
Patience and Discretion to that degree, as to cry out of Obstinacy and Rigor,
and in a sort to post the Convocation for Stiff and Inflexible People, before
any thing had been in due form laid before them.

You may imagine from this beginning, that I shall differ from the sense of
these Letters in every Point proposed; but to prevent such a Mistake, I will
let you see at setting out how easily we are agreed; for I join heartily with
the Country Minister in the First thing he lays down, p. 3, 4. as the
Foundation of what he afterward should propose, that there are such things in
the Church of England that are in their own nature alterable, and the other
Letter notes it as a great mistake in us to hold any thing of this nature not
prescribed in Scripture to be unalterable. I have some exception against the
words in us, because I do not know the Companions of his Mistake; and I dare be
bound to free all Church of England men from the imputation. For how addicted
soever they may be thought to their constitution and their forms, I never could
meet with any of them so unreasonably stiff, as not readily to allow every
thing of Humane Institution and use, to be in it is nature changeable. And
because I would not have a Point so evidently true as I take this to be,
brought under evil suspicion by a False Argument, I desire the Convocation-Man
pretended, to Pray in the Aid of somebody who understands the Language, and to
look over the Titles of those Twenty Volumes of Greek Liturgies, that he calls
to witness p. 13. 4. how much the Greek Church has altered Forms, for fear all
these Volumes should happen to be not so many different Forms of their
Liturgies, often altered and brought to a Review, but parts of one and the same
Service; because I do not remember many Volumes of Greek Liturgies Printed,
besides those which as several Offices make up the present Service of the Greek
Church. There are indeed Three old ones Printed by Morellius, but all of them
not half so big as our Common Prayer. There is one thing more which I would
desire him to consider for the sake of this first Point in which we are agreed,
and that is what he affirms in the same place, p. 14, that the Act of King
Edward the 6th, was the First Law for an Uniform Liturgy in any Church, that
was ever Enacted from the beginning of Christianity to that time. Such a man as
our Author who speaks of M. SS. in the lump, cannot be ignorant that the Canons
of Provincial Synods, for Uniform Liturgies, had the effect of Laws, and
especially in these Western parts, where Kings were commonly present in Synods,
and ratified what was there concluded. This Men of ordinary Reading may be
allowed to know, because it is in Print; but besides many very ordinary Men
without affecting to pry into the Secrets of Learning, have heard of such Men
as King Pippin and his Son Charles the Great, and that they laid aside the
French Service, and established the Roman in its place, and that by such Laws
as passed in those times: And Charles in his constitution, de Emendatione
Librorum Ecclesiasticorum, expressly ratifies the Service Book so corrected by a
Law, nostra eadem volumina authoritate constabilimus, vestraque Religioni in
Christi Ecclestis tradimus ad legendum. It was likewise by Law, that the Roman
Office was Established in Spain under Alphonsus the 6th, much against the grain
of the Church, which could not part with its old Office without Tears.
Therefore to conclude this Point, that there are things in their nature
alterable, I would desire this Gentleman to alter these Passages, if he thinks
fit in the next Edition of his Letter.

Now that you may not think, that we shake hands here at setting out, in order
to part presently; I do willingly agree with the same Author, P. 1. ^. That
nothing is more dangerous to Religion, than frequently to make alterations in
things pertaining thereto: Nay, though it were in outward Circumstantials only
that the Church of England may be justified in her proceedings hitherto, that
she has not been forward on every demand of the Dissenters, to unhinge those of
her Communion from her long received Establishments, but has to the utmost
resisted all alterations from them, hoping by less dangerous methods to cure,
etc. When I met with so many passages in these Letters, reflecting with great
sharpness upon our Service and present Constitution, I began to be afraid,
that we might have been in the wrong, ever since Edward the 6th. Days: But I
took courage when I found that hitherto all had been well, and provided we
yield our selves tractable upon this occasion, all our past proceedings and
stifness against Dissenters may be justified. It is well for the Church that
she needs not apprehend any retrospect into her behavior; since as Times go
with Churchmanship, it must be acknowledged to be no common favor. But good
Sir, how can this Liberality consist with those Reflections you make upon the
past Conduct of the Church, how can it consist with your Censure of that
unreasonable Rigor, whereby we have hitherto maintained them. P. 5. or with
this kind Expostulation, have we not already lost our Reputation with the
People of the Land, by insisting too rigorously on those things? How can it
agree with the frightful Representation you are pleased to give of the faults
of the Liturgy. P. 15. for if me are forced to read such ridiculous things to
our People instead of the Word of God; if by reading the old Translation of the
Psalms we impose that on our People for true Scripture, which in so great a
Number of places quite differs from it; and if there be many Grievances, and
Defects of this Nature which he could tell us of, to which we are bound: If all
this be in earnest, I must needs confess, that I cannot see how we may be
justified for the Time past; for were these ridiculous things less ridiculous,
or these reading Psalms less differing from true Scripture a hundred years ago?
Was it allowable to retain most Religious and Gracious King in the last Reigns,
and is it now grown a Flattery not to be warranted? Those things that are now
such Grievances and Defects, were they of another Nature in the Days of Queen
Elizabeth? In short, the Liturgy and Constitution of the Church of England, are
they grown worse and more intolerable now than when these Gentlemen thought fit
to declare their Assent and Consent to them? Yet both give the Church and
Liturgy very good words; a Church, says one, which I am certain of in respect
of its Doctrine, Worship and Order is inferior to none upon upon the Face of the
Earth. P. 1. As to the Liturgy of our Church, says the other, I freely
acknowledge, and I think no Man can contradict me herein, that it is the best
which was ever yet used in any Christian Church, P. 12. Now if this Liturgy, so
faulty, so ridiculous, so wicked as to impose false Scripture upon the People
be yet the best of any, and if this Church with all the Faults here
represented, so unwary as to turn the Sign of the Cross into a Sacrament, be
inferior to none; God help the rest I say! I am afraid, that I should be
tempted to have a very sorry opinion of Churches and Liturgies, if I had not
some hopes that our Authors might be mistaken in many of those things they
expose for the Defects of the Church of England: But I must confess, that I
cannot see how it is possible to reconcile the Complement with the Reproach.
Weigelius indeed pretends, that in the School of Grace Contradictories may be
reconciled and united by the mind; but the matter being passed my Skill, all
the Service I can do him is to refer him to that Mystical Divine.

I once thought, these alterations so much talked of, were intended by way of
condescension and favor; but when I find these Advocates for the project, lick
up the Venom of the Dissenters, and spit it in the face of their own Church;
when they try to give new strength to old weak Objections, and affect new
Quarrels and Cavils against the Liturgy; there is too great reason to be
jealous, that they do not intend to mediate an Accommodation, but to procure a
Conquest for the Dissenters. Many therefore that seemed not averse to make some
Concessions, provided it might have been to any good effect, were extremely
discouraged by the method which these undertakers took to persuade them. For if
this new pretended Reformation, cannot be introduced but upon the Disparagement
and Condemnation of the old, if it must reflect blemish and infamy upon the
Memory of the preceding Generations of our Church, if it must through Contempt
and Ignominy upon so many excellent Persons, who have not only consented to
this Constitution, but defended and justified it against the frivolous
Exceptions of Dissenters; if this be the Case, you must pardon me, if I have
not now that inclination to alterations which I own my self to have had
heretofore.

Neither would I be thought so punctilious, as to prefer a Point of Honor to a
Case of Necessity. If it be so necessary to make these Changes; if it will
unite all Protestants, and create an universal Concord; I am content to
discharge all these Circumstantials, and bid them stand out of the way of such
mighty Blessings. That so it is, a certain Person positively affirms to a
Friend, P. 2. I think now to make such alterations as are proposed, so
absolutely necessary as ought no longer to be deferred, and then P. 8. That
these things administer only to Schism and Division in the Church, and to
Distraction in the State; and again, P. 9. They become mischievous too in the
Evils that they bring upon the Church and State. Nay further, P. 10. I here
plainly aver, that the Church of England cannot be guiltless in this matter, if
^he do not alter some of these things. And to conclude, The present Posture of
Affairs require it: For the greatest hopes of the French for our Destruction is
from our Divisions -- and what remedy have we left to prevent this terrible
Ruin, but to come to as firm a Union among our selves as we are able? and the
hopes of preserving Church and State from the great dangers under which they
are both involved, do in a great measure depend upon what we shall do. P. 5.
Who could have imagined, that these little things should be of so great
Consequence either for good or hurt? If these Trifles had but sense enough to
understand the Charge laid against them, they could not but wonder with the
Fly upon the Coach-wheel at the mighty Dust they made; and could they but speak
for themselves, they might plead with the Officers of the Children of Israel,
Exodus 5. 16. Behold thy Servants are beaten, but the fault is in thine own
People. However since they are so positively accused of having raised the
Tempest, and there is no way to calm it, but by throwing these unhappy
occasions overboard: Let us consent, and by way of supposition lay all these
things aside. Now Sirs, it is all done as you have ordered: Call the Dissenters
in, that the Church may be full: Go to the Quakers, for they are a numerous and
very compact Party; and let them know, that there is now neither Apocrypha, nor
obsolete Translations, nothing but Scripture in the Lessons; that there are now
Collects more spiritual than the old, and in short, a Liturgy, and a Church
better than the best. What Answer think ye, the Foreman of a Quaker Assembly
would probably return to such an Invitation? You may reasonably expect
something to this purpose. Friend, go to thy Steeple-house and thy dead Letter
again, thou might have kept thy old Lessons, and thy Prayers for us, and
forbear tempting and troubling our Spirit any further.

But pray Sirs, be not so far discouraged by the obstinacy of one unmannerly
Sect, as not to proceed to a Trial of the rest. Carry then your reformed
Liturgy to the Anabaptists, and acquaint them what glorious Alterations you
have made, and that it is now quite another thing from the old one, at which
they were so justly offended: Nay, the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, that great
Stumbling Block, is removed, and the Surplice that offended tender Eyes, is
turned into Aprons for the Church-warden's Wife: Come Brethren, let us all go
into one Church, and then we shall beat the French, and save the Nation. When
you had said all you could, the Pastor on behalf of his sworn Congregation
would gravely tell you, that you were much mistaken, if you intended to gain
them by your Alterations. For you could not but know, that their Exceptions
were not against this or that passage in the Common Prayer, but against the
whole; all Forms of Prayer in their opinion tending to suppress the free
motions of the Spirit: Besides, what could it avail in respect of them* that
the Cross in Baptism was removed, since Infant Baptism was to them a greater
Offense, than all the Ceremonies of the Church of England? and as for the
French, they were willing to join against them; but there was no necessity of
making the Church the General Rendezvous.

The Design is great and generous. I beseech you do not sit down and despair
after, but two Denials. Go on to the Independents, for they are civil Men; and
tell your Story to the best Advantage. Tell them, that now you have Prayers
that Angels would be content to join in; Prayers, that must make all men Saints
that use them; come then to our Church, and see the new and heavenly Face of
things these Alterations have made; You cannot possibly find fault now with our
Parish Churches: Besides, there is an absolute Necessity now for our joining in
one national Church, otherwise the French and the Philistines will be upon us.
Parish-Churches, and national Churches, reply the Independents; and what can
the French and the Philistines do worse? You know we are in Covenant with God,
and with our Pastors, from which we cannot recede, though all the World should
be destroyed: Those mixed Companies and Parish Assemblies our Souls hate, and
therefore do not urge us. We have our Liberty now to meet in our own way, and
for ought I know this Disturbance you have given us, may fall within the
Compass of the Act: You know the Forfeit, therefore be wise. But before you go,
take your Answer in the words of the Prophet; who has required this at your
hand?

Now Gentlemen, if you are weary of walking, send for T. F. and the Socinians;
he perhaps may owe you a Visit, and will be glad of an opportunity to show his
Coach. Let him understand his Obligation to you, how for his sake you have
either taken away the Athanasian Creed, or pulled out the Sting of it. It is
therefore more for their Credit to join with us upon this occasion, than to
make themselves odious to all Christians, by joining interest and Friendship
with Mahometans. A Man of less Pertness than T. F. would return upon you, That
you cannot expect any compliance from them, as long as the Nicene Creed, the
Spring of all the Doctrine which makes up your Mystery, and their Abomination,
does remain; they will do you the civility to hear you Preach, provided you
confine your selves to Morality, and forbear the Doxology at the Conclusion.

Unfortunate Enterprise! yet surely thou deservest a more favorable
Providence, and a more suitable success: But Sirs, be of good comfort, there is
yet one hopeful reserve that can never fail you, I mean the good Presbyterians;
make haste therefore to Mr. A. and Mr. B. before the Scotch Covenanters have
engaged them: make them sensible that the Gates of Iron are broken down, and
the Trojan Horse may now enter in with all that he has in his Belly, without
any hard Examination that may discover a Conspiracy. Now the Ceremonies are
given up as useless and mischievous; now the Communion may be given you
Standing, or Sitting, or Lolling if you think it more for Edification; all
Superstition and Offense is taken out of the way, and all the old Demands
yielded; nay there is nothing left in our new Book, that ever fell under your
displeasure: Come in now, for we have engaged for you, and all our Credit is at
stake. Methinks I see Mr. A. draw his Mouth, and put this sly Question, And
must this new Book be imposed? Why, you will say it is so absolute and so
perfect that it were to be wished that it were imposed upon the whole World.
Nay says Mr. A. do you not know the mischief of impositions? Can you be
ignorant that it is our Common Doctrine from which we can never depart, That
Command changes the nature of the thing? Besides after all your Cobling, it is
still but Common Prayer, and our People can never endure it; for after they
have been used to the excellence and variety of our Spiritual effusions, they
will never suffer themselves to be brought down to the Poor and Beggarly
Elements of Common Prayer. To be brief, it is our Fervent pouring out, is the
very Brandy of Devotion; those that are once accustomed to it, can never leave
it.

For the last Stage of your Apostleship for Union, address your selves to the
moderate Presbyterians, if any such Creatures there be; you may assure your
selves they are but few, and scarce arise to the number of the Apostles:
However they are considerable for the scarcity of them, if for nothing else;
these are your own wherever you can find them, for it is impossible they should
ever resist the Power of your Alterations, when they come to understand that
for their sakes you have changed your constitution, and hazarded the
displeasure and separation of your own People. But because it is customary
after the first Groan for the Zeal of these Good Men, to Fire against Lords,
Bishops, and the Hierarchy, give them the Wink, and whisper them in the Ear,
that perhaps it may come now to the turn of such Godly Men as they, to be
Bishops: Assure your self, this will make them much more moderate, especially
when they see so many Bishops Seats upon the point of being pronounced void,
and the countenance of the Court to shine so auspiciously upon their merit. And
lest they may fear this Hierarchy may lie too heavy upon their Consciences; you
may assure them that care shall be taken to relieve them under this Oppression;
and they may when they think fit, resign their Dignity and Revenue, and have
the Honor of standing last in the Catalogue of that order. And what better
course can they take to secure themselves a Name in after Ages, than that it
shall be said, that in them the English Hierarchy so much spoken against, did
finally expire? One Private Friendly reason in ones ear, proves many times more
convincing than all the Arguments that can be alleged in Print or Public
Disputation; and to moderate Men, Alterations with Preferments must be
irresistible motives of Conformity, unless they think they have a fairer Game
than this you would put into their hands, and it shall seem more advisable to
them, to stick where they are, than to join in a discouraged sinking Communion.
This ramble of imagination is not altogether a Dream, or if it be, it is
neither vain nor delusory, but flew abroad through the right Gate.

But the Letters tell us, that suppose there were never a Dissenter in the
Land, those Alterations ought to be made; Minist. P. 27. to gratify our selves
by further Improvements, Amendments and Perfection. Let us then before we
comply, consider a little of the State of Perfection into which these
Alterations would translate us. Is it for our own sake and perfection that we
should leave the Cross in Baptism, and renounce the common badge of
Christianity, and the practice of the Universal Church? Is it for Perfection
that we should lay aside the Surplice for the short Mantle? Is it for the
heightning and perfection of our Devotion, that we should choose to receive the
Communion Standing or Sitting, rather than upon our Knees? Is it for our own
sake that we should leave the old version of the Psalms, that has generally a
plain and determined sense, for the new that affects too much of the Hebrew
Phrase, and in which the sense in many places is suspended? Is it for greater
Edification, to astonish our People with Reading in our Churches all the hard
names in the Chronicles, Ezra and Nehemiah, instead of the Books of Wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus? If the Canticles are omitted, because Interpreters of that
Misterious Song are not so easily to be found as Readers, we have the practice
of the Synagogue and the Ancient Church to justify us. But Tobit and his Dog
are abominable. Give me leave for once to intercede for that Poor Dog, because
he is a Dog of good example, for he was faithful and loved his Master; besides
that, he never troubles the Church on Sundays when People have their best
Clothes on: only on a Week day, when Scrupulous Brethren are always absent, the
poor Cur makes bold to follow his Master.

But after all, I would not be thought so fond of our Liturgy, as to pronounce
it beyond all improvement; yet I must avow, that in my Judgment the Authors of
the Letters have not put us in the right way to perfection. In the last place
therefore, although many things in our Church might receive improvement, if our
Directors had put us in the right way of retaining them; yet I must declare
that in my judgment, the present time is the most improper to try the practice
of any that has past since the Reformation. Perfection is certainly a desirable
thing, yet if Men's minds are averse, and for the present incapable, if the
times are unseasonable, if inconveniences appear inseparable from the
experiment, Men may be excused if they do not presently run away with every
project of good appearance; and their shieness for meddling with new practices
ought to be ascribed rather to their tenderness and godly jealousy and mistrust
of consequences, than as one of our Epistlers in his great charity is pleased
to judge to their peevishness, stiffness, or what is the hardest charge of all
their Wickedness. Nor, can I blame any Men, who in hopes of Fairer Weather,
think it advisable to lie short, in compliance with St. Paul's rule, Phil. 3.
16. Nevertheless whereto we have attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us
mind the same things.

But why is not this a time? not a Season. Says the Minister, is there any
thing can make that not seasonable which is always a duty? I am sorry all our
Predecessors have died in the mortal omission of this indispensible duty. But
our Minister suggests sometimes, that they were ignorant and knew no better:
Here I must leave him to dispute this with his Friend the Author of the other
Letter, who takes upon him to justify our Forefathers for refusing Alterations
in their time. Let it not displease, if I cite a scrap of Horace upon this
occasion, which never gave any offense before this last Convocation; Vixerunt
fortes ante Agamemnone, -- thus rendered by the Old Translator.

Before his time the Fool maintains
That Men were born without their Brains.
Is it not a Season to remember the tenderness toward Dissenters, and the
promise of coming to a temper in the Bishops Petition? What have we to do with
the Bishops Petition? were they not put in the Tower for it? Who will concern
himself with those Forsaken Bishops, whom one of our Authors threatens with
Annihilation; Poor Men, that must be immediately crushed and fall to nothing,
P. 25. But I hope that without falling under the heavy resentments of the
State, I may ask one Question on the behalf of those Reverend Persons against
whom every Ass is now lifting up his Heels: Are our Directors sure that they
have in their Project of Alterations hit the temper promised by the Bishops? If
a Project formed, I know not where nor by whom, has not the fortune to be
approved, must the Clamor of the People be raised against the Bishops, as a
Base False sort of Men, who can promise fair in times of Adversity, and forget
all performances when they are over? I wish indeed that the times of Adversity
were over with those Good Men, that they may be able to perform their Vows; but
there is one circumstance of the time of the Petition generally forgot. All the
Penal Laws for the security of the Church of England against Papists and other
Dissenters, were then in full force; against these the Dispensing Power was
directed, and in the behalf of these the Bishops did Petition; but now all
those Laws as far as they concern the Dissenters in their private capacity are
Repealed, the greatest part of the Dissenters are not capable of any other
temper than Toleration, which they all have, and the Presbyterians, who alone
of all our Sects are capable of uniting with a National Church, are so for from
desiring an accommodation, that they are raising new Objections against
Conformity, and standing off at greater distance than ever. Their very sitting
still at this time, without offering any Proposals for Union, while Churchmen
are wrangling with one another about giving them satisfaction, declares plainly
that they are resolved to stick to their own way after all the Alterations we
shall be able to make. So that I do not see what those Bishops, if their
Authority were still entire, could possibly do further to make good the temper
which they promised.

Not a Season? says the Minister; what, because the Enemy is withdrawn shall we
devour one another, P. 27. This is doubtless an Eloquent vehemence, if I were
worthy to reach the sense of it; devour one another! God bless us, we are not
such Canabals sure! I cannot devise how this should come in, unless it slipped
from some Scripture Common-place-Book made in the time of Vavasor and Lunsford.
But are we yet without danger? Now because the Man to his Friend represents the
dangers more sensibly, we'll take his Description. We have a formidable Enemy
in our Neighborhood, who thinks of nothing less than of subjugating these
Three Kingdoms to his Absolute Tyranny; his greatest hopes for our destruction
is our Divisions among our selves, -- these make us unable to resist him with
that success, etc. Is there any Prophesy I pray (for it is not Civil to ask
this Gentleman for Reason) that Duke Schomberg cannot Reduce Ireland, unless
the Cross in Baptism be taken away? Or will not our Fleet engage the French,
except Presbyterian Ordinations made in defiance of Bishops and Episcopacy be
allowed? Have the Quakers promised to Fight if we Reform the Calendar? Or will
not the Independants and Presbyterians strike one Stroke, but under the Banner
of the New Reformed Church of England, provided always it be not a Cross? Is
there no way of joining in Fight, and Paying Taxes without this Church Union so
much talked of by us, and never so much as mentioned by the Dissenters? Indeed
Sir, the Dissenters are much to blame, if after so ample Toleration, that as
you observe has put them upon as good a bottom of Legal Right and Protection as
the Church of England, they refuse to assist the Government, unless the poor
defective Common Prayer be put into a state of Perfection. This Church of
England is certainly under the Dominion of the most unfortunate of all the
Planets, for whoever miscarries, she must bear the Blame. If a Frigate be cast
away, the Winds and the Sea, though subject to no Actions in our Courts, are
absolved, and the faults laid upon our Rigours, much harder than the Marble
Rocks of Plymouth. If a Disease in the Camp, render our Army unfit for Action,
the Church of England is the cause, because she does not unite all Protestants:
If a Commissary Victuals not the Camp sufficiently, and a French Apothecary
provides not proper Drugs, O the lamentable Divisions and Distractions of the
Church and State; and our Stiff Churchmen will never come to a healing temper.
I have heard some Learned Men say, that the Primitive Christians were in their
time in the same office of Blame-beating that we are now; if the Roman Arms
wanted success, some Oracle spoke, Away with these Atheistical Christians: If
the Year was unfruitful, Hang up the Christians. Let the Dissenters or the
Moderate Men say what they please of Bishops and Liturgies and Ceremonies, this
one thing at least we may be allowed to have common with the Primitive Church,
I have almost filled up my sheet though I write in short hand, and therefore
cannot now give you my reasons at length, why I think this an unfit Time for
Alterations, if any at all were to be thought of. I will only hint them to you.
In the first place the Dissenters do not seem to be in any Disposition to an
Accommodation, having never made any Proposals either to the Commissioners or
Convocation. 2. The Condition they are in at present by the Act of Toleration
raises their expectations too high to be satisfied with any reasonable Terms.
3. The abolishing of Episcopacy by their Brethren of Scotland, may encourage
them here to think of such matters as can never be the fruits of a Treaty, and
perhaps to dream of a second Conquest. 4. Their insolence in all places since
this Revolution declares them to be above the humble Dispensation of an
amicable Composure. 5. The great men that influence them, will always think it
their interest to keep them separate from the Church, for so they will be most
for their turn, and therefore will never suffer them to join with us; or should
they come in, will always keep them up as a separate Party within the Church.
6. Several of the most considerable among them have declared, they will never
think of treating, unless their Orders are allowed, and then too they will
insist upon the Point of Episcopacy. 7. The Church of England Men do not seem
to be in a Disposition for altering at this Time; for they find themselves
insulted and oppressed in all parts of the Kingdom, where the moderate Men are
got into Power and Commission. 8. The Clergy are alarmed with the Destruction
of Episcopacy in Scotland, and think they have reason to be jealous, that now
the Presbyterians of England hold intelligence with the Scots; because they
have always corresponded. 9. Our Laymen find Dissenters even in this State of
Separation to have the Preference; and upon a new Model they may have reason to
suspect, that the Proselites may pass for the only Churchmen, and then Veteres
migrate Coloni. 10. There seems to want a Plenitude of Authority in the
Convocation, to enact these Alterations; the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Five
of his Suffragans, Persons of great Consideration and credit in the Church,
lying at present under an incapacity. The Objection about their Schism is
nothing but a Calumny of their Enemies, and shall have no Answer from me,
because it is not agreeable to my temper to give it such an Answer as it
deserves: But certainly an Archbishop the Praeses natus of the Convocation, and
Five Bishops of the Province must needs be missed in the House, consisting of
but Two and Twenty. It is not enough to say that it is a Legal House without
them; for a House of Commons of Forty Persons is a Legal House; but there would
be great exceptions, if Three times the number, and no more, should take upon
them to Repeal a Statute, or alter common Law. And in this Jealousy that one
Party has of another, it appears odly, that this time of all others should be
thought most proper to introduce Alterations of such a consequence as these
appear to be at the first view. 11. The Kingdom is yet in such a ferment, and
many things so unsettled, that to change now in the Church, is like altering
Military Exercise in the midst of a Battle, or cavining a Ship in a Storm. The
most proper time for Alterations in Religion, is that which is most calm, when
the Spirits of Men run low, when there is a mutual confidence between parties,
when they all conspire in one desire of accommodation, and when the
Ecclesiastical Authority that is to Enact them, is entire, not only in respect
of the Law, but of Common Opinion: And whether these circumstances belong to
the present time, you will easily discern.

I will conclude with answering Two Arguments in the Letters, which I had
almost forgot; The First is, that if we do not make Alterations, most certainly
the Parliament will, and we may provoke them by our stiffness, to follow the
Example of Scotland. It is a strange confidence, and scarce of English growth,
to declare so certainly beforehand what our Parliament will do. These Gentlemen
will pardon me, if I should think the Parliament something wiser than them, and
cannot apprehend any thing from them that may prove for the prejudice of the
established Church, and to the dissatisfaction of the generality of the
Kingdom: For the Example of Scotland, we despise the Threatening* I have read of
an Owl* that appeared in a Roman Council and frighted the whole Assembly; but
our Church of England Convocations are not so easily scared. This is the third
Time that Episcopacy has been abolished in Scotland, we know it to have revived
twice, and we still believe (...) Resurrection.

The second Argument is, that the King is desirous of these Alterations, and
the Church of England cannot but be safe in his hands. This is an Argument I
must acknowledge my self to be unable to answer yet. I know, that the King's
Name and the King's Money are often used without his knowledge; but because I
cannot reply directly, I will plead the Privilege of Old Age, and tell you a
short Story. In the Beginning of King James the First's Reign, the
Presbyterians of this Kingdom entertained violent hopes of an Ecclesiastical
Revolution, and gave out every where, that the King having been bred in
Scotland in the Presbyterian way, was desirous of a change in favor of it: A
great Number of Conformists, and much a greater Number than have yet appeared,
for this new Project, joined with the Non conformists; defamed the
Common Prayer beyond Measure; declared they could never subscribe again, though
they had done it several Times before; You know the Issue, they found
themselves mistaken in the King's Inclinations, the moderate Men were glad to
be reconciled to their Common Prayer, and the Church outlived the too hasty
Triumphs of her Enemies, and the Treachery of her pretended Friends.

FINIS.

