MEDICINAL COUNCELS OR ADVICES: Written Originally in French, BY Dr. THEODOR
TURQUET DE MAYERNE, Knight.

Baron of Aubonne, Counselor and Chief Physician to the late King and Queen of
England.

Put out in Latin at Geneva, by THEOPH. BONETUS, M. D.

Englished by THO. SHERLEY, M. D. Physician in Ordinary to his present MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed for N. Ponder, at the Peacock in the Poultry near Cornhill,
and in Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet. 1677.

Licensed,

Roger L'estrange.
May 15. 1676.
To Denzell Lord Hollis, Baron of Isfield, STEWARD of her MAJESTY'S Revenues.
My Lord,
I Did heretofore acquaint your Lordship, with my intention to write my
thoughts and Experience, both of the Causes and Cure of the Stone in Humane
Bodies: And that I did design to Dedicate that Book to your Lordship, as the
most proper Altar at which to offer whatever I should produce on that subject;
you having been not only the most Illustrious Patient I have had in that
Disease, but also the most Generous too: For when some years since I was so
happy to serve your Lordship not insuccessfully, upon that occasion, in the
recovery of your health, your Lordship was pleased to take the opportunity (in
a most Glorious Assembly) to give so obliging a Character, both of my Skill,
and Care in my Profession, that had I not many former inducements, yet this
alone were sufficient to challenge (as a due debt to your Lordship) not only my
Labors upon that subject, but the Services of my whole life.

Some part of that Treatise of the Stone, I writ some years since, and have yet
lying by me; having had no convenience to complete the same, by reason of the
removal of my Habitation, and the constant Trouble the prosecution of my Right
to a considerable Estate, has engaged me in: For I find that a work of the
nature of that Treatise, will allow of fewer Avocations, and requires a more
easy posture of affairs, than I at present enjoy. Therefore be pleased, till I
can make you that Present, to accept of this Book of Medicinal Councels; which
I shall not need to recommend to your Lordship, since the worth of their
Author, Sir Theodor Mayerne, is sufficiently known to you. I put them into
English for the public good: But I present them to your Lordship, not that you
need Translations, (for your great Learning, and knowledge in most Languages,
as well as your excellent Wisdom, has been amply manifested to the world) but
that I might take the opportunity of making a public acknowledgement of your
favors to me, and attest how much I am bound to be, what I subscribe my self,

Your Lordships most humble, faithful, and affectionate Servant, THO. SHERLEY.
From my Lodgings next door to the steps going into the Blackfriars, by the
side of Fleet River, near Fleet-Bridge.
TO THE READER.
IF you have ever been Sick, and have felt the incommodities of a Tourturing or
Languishing Disease, I am sure you will conclude with me, that Man cannot enjoy
a more useful and precious Blessing, then that of Health: For this gives us the
true relish and delights of Honor, Riches, Knowledge, etc. All which without
health, have more of bitter then sweet in them: And it were much more Eligable
to die, then to languish out many years under the daily oppressing insults of
some vehement and cruel Disease; which is in reality to die, and but supposedly
to Live. How much reason have we then to praise God for giving the knowledge of
that Divine Art of Physic to mortal men; And to Honor Physicians (as we are
commanded to do) whose Office it is, to take care of preserving our Health; and
when it is decayed, to restore us to it with speed, safety, and Pleasure.

The Heathens were so sensible of these benefits, that they Idolized, and gave
Divine Honors to Physicians; which thing we that are Christians do both
renounce and abhor: But yet we must acknowledge, that a Faithful and Learned
Physician, can hardly either be rewarded, or praised to his merit: And those
men are most Ungrateful, and deserve not to enjoy even their own Lives, who
despise either the Art of Physic, or its Professors.

The Cultivators and Promoters of this Science, have employed their learned
Labors several ways; some of them in writing Medicinal Institutions, others in
Controversies, others in Comments, Notes, and Illustrations upon the works of
Hippocrates and Galen, others in composing Methods and Practices of Physic. As
also in describing Chirurgical Operations; others in Anatomy, others in
increasing the materia Medica, by writing Pharmacopaea's, both Galenical and
Chemical. But none have merited so much, (because of the utility which redounds
from that way of writing) as those Authors which have writ Consultations and
Councels: For by this singular Artifice, (or way of writing) we are taught to
effect that which is the most difficult thing in the Art of Physic, viz. The
Application of general precepts, to particular Subjects and Persons: For the
Art of Physic is long by precepts, but is rendered short and efficacious by
Examples. And by this means we have the Knowledge, Learning, and Experience of
industrious able Physicians, (which they have labored all their life time to
acquire) conveyed to us in Epitomy.

Of these sort of Writers is our Author, Sir THEODOR MAYERNE: (Chief Physician
to his late Majesty, and his Royal Consort;) For whose abilities, let his large
Fame, and almost constant success, speak: And I need say the less of him,
because he has yet living so many Testimonies of his worth and skill amongst
the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom: I conceive this Book may prove
acceptable to many; and therefore have put it into English, that many may
receive the advantage; which is the wish of,

Reader, Thy Friend THO. SHERLEY.

In this BOOK is contained,
1. A Council or Advice in a Consumption, for a certain Nobleman. Written in
French.

2. Advice in a Consumption, for the before mentioned Nobleman's Son. Sent into
France.

3. Council or Advice in various disaffections of the Hypochondries: Written in
French for a certain Gentleman, a Counselor at Law.

4. Advice in the same Disease, for the same Person. Given in French.

5. Another Advice in the same Disease, for the same Counselor. Written in
French.

6. Another Council in the same Disease, for the same Person. Written in French.

7. Advice in diverse disaffections, upon which followed a Gangrene of the
Perinaeum, and an Ischuria, or suppression of Urine. Written for a Person of
great Quality.

8. Council in a suppression of Urine. For a Person of Quality.

9. Advice for a Caruncle in the Urinary passage. For a certain Person of
Quality.

10. Advice in the Plague. Written in French.

11. Another Council in the Plague. Written in French, and presented by the
Kings Physicians, to Lewis the xiii. the French King.

12. A Council in the Constriction, or Stranguling of the Throat, proceeding
from Melancholy Fumes arising from the Hypochondries: For the renowned
Physician, the most excellent Mounsier Bouvard, chief Doctor to the French
King. Written in French.

13. Another Council in the same Disease, for the same Person. Written in
French, by the renowned Dr. de Arduynes, Physician of the Hospital of Charity
at Paris, called St. James Hospital.

14. Another for the same Person. Written in French.

15. Advice against the Epilepsia, or Falling Sickness: For a Maid of Quality.
Written in French, by a Physician whose name is not known.

The First COUNCIL, In a Case of Consumption; for a Noble Person.
Written in French.
My Lord,
I Give you thanks for your Charitable and Pious advice sent to me, and taken
out of the last Chapter of Ecclesiasticus. It is very fit for me, who am now
growing into old Age, the inconveniences of which, are already incumbent upon
me. The Inhabitants of this Kingdom being disturbed with Tumults, and I at a
distance from my Lordship of Aubonne: In that place it would not have been
difficult to have found a Sanctuary, where I might have took a farewell of the
World, and there quietly have resigned my Soul into the hands of my Savior.
But perhaps it is otherways decreed by Gods overruling power, to resist which,
were impious and wicked. I know not if there yet remain such a happiness for
me, (which the troublesomeness and incommodity of the journey, proceeding from
the distance of the place, and length of the way, forbids me to hope) that I
may yet enjoy your Company: But if God do grant it, it will be much to my
satisfaction and content; if otherways, accept favorably of the friendly and
kind propensity of my mind; and my desires to be near and present with you: I
am ready by all sort of services to deserve your favor. But being separated
from you by a fatal necessity, since I cannot assist you nearer hand, (for the
honor you confer upon me, in desiring my advice) in the recovery of your
health (which I wish to God you may enjoy better) though this present
intemperate Weather does not savor it; but rather puts a stop to the use and
efficacy of Medicines; yet for all that, as improper as the Weather is, accept
of, and follow the Council I here send you, the which I offer to you with an
affectionate mind.

I do not doubt but that Mr. de Gras has exactly and thoroughly examined your
Constitution in general, and the unequal distemperature of all your parts, both
Natural, Vital, and Animal; and I do firmly allow of the conjectures,
constituted by so Learned a Man, and one knowing in the Art: but since I have
been acquainted with you from your Cradle, nay, with your Ancestors before you,
the last fate of whom, was thoroughly examined and looked into by me. I suppose
this affair ought to be deeper inspected.

Your Illustrious Father, of happy memory, had the thread of his Life broken
off before its due time, by a continual Cough, and an incessant defluction upon
his Lungs: But as to what concerns your self, (if I remember rightly) you are
like him in every thing, both in your Mind, and in your Body, you had always
weak Lungs, you wax Lean, (of which I have been an eye witness) and oftentimes
also you did use to spit blood, though in small quantities: This I suppose,
That as those parts which are weak by Nature, are subject to suffer by all sort
of injuries, so the Lungs are so above the rest, both upon the account of their
proper Texture, which is rare and spangious, as also by reason of their
Situation, by which they easily receive the Morbiffick Causes, as well from
the superior parts which lay over them, as also those which to their great
prejudice are transmitted to them from the inferior parts.

I do not deny but that the Stomach performing of its Office ill, the Mesentery
filled with Obstructions, and the Liver generating acrid and thin blood, may
(from the depraved condition of the aliment they afford) evilly affect the
Brain and Lungs; whose Excrements, whether they are transmitted thither (from
other parts) or Congested there, are yet very Liquid, as long as they remain in
their state of Fluidity, which is common for all dissolved Tartars; but having
gained a place, and being lodged in the Pipes of the Lungs, they Coagulate into
a glutinous and mucilaginous substance, producing that Asthmatick and P^isical
disposition, or difficulty of Breathing, with which you are molested. For this
mischief, viz. the Leanness and Corruption of the whole Body, is occasioned,
and does proceed from these Excrements, although there be no present
Aposthumation, Vomica, or Ulcer, yet do these Excrements threaten the same
effects, and no less mischievous.

That you may receive relief, there is a necessity by a good Diet, to amend the
Vices of the antecedent Causes, in their Fountains or Spring-heads, reducing by
degrees to a better state, the depraved Faculties of the parts, in which the
First and Second Concoctions are performed. Secondly, to hinder the Flood and
defluction from the Brain, and that by strengthening, drying, and diverting to
other parts, that humor, which otherways perpendicularly flows from thence
upon the Lungs. Thirdly, repairing their Balsom, retrieving them from put
refaction, by the sorce of Medicines endowed with a Balsamic power. And if in
the course of doing this, in the mean time the Anacatharsis, or upward
Evacuation happen to be difficult, or stopped, care must also be taken of that:
And at last there must be Analeptick means made use of to refresh and restore
the parts which are tending to a decay and Consumption.

1. That you may attain this end, follow exactly the advice given you by your
Physicians concerning Diet; which if I should particularly describe, this
Council would swell into a Volume.

2. Upon the account of the Brain: prepare Emissary passages for it, besides
such as it has naturally of its own: I do not disapprove of Issues in the
Arms, but they are no way comparable to those which are made in the Shoulders
upon the Region of the Omoplats, or Shoulder Blades, at an equal distance from
the Spine (or Backbone) perhaps you will object your Leanness, to which I
answer, That I have not spared those which have been extenuated, and I find
them to be more efficacious then those made in the Neck, betwixt the first and
second V^tebra's. Wherefore omit not this remedy; and in this case, it is
sufficient to put in, and closely press down five or seven Pease, applying a
sticking Plaster upon them: I approve of the Plaster pro suturis, which is
composed of moderately warming, and gently adstringent things, which does
powerfully strengthen and confirm the parts, and helps to suspend the
defluction: The place of this may be supplied by a Capp or Coife, which I make
of dried Bettony, Rosemary, Red Roses, and the Barks of new Pistacho Nuts,
adding moreover yellow Amber, and the Seeds of Roman Nigil, with a few Cloves:
Keep your Head neither too hot, nor too cold, but nevertheless, let it be so
covered, that the cold may not offend it. I cannot forbear to press upon you
the advice of Celsus, whose words are these; Nothing is so profitable to the
Head as cold water is. Therefore he that has this part infirm, he will d^
well, in the Summer time, to hold his head for a good while together, every
day, under a large spout of Water, or to cause it to be Pumpe^ upon.

Let your Capp be covered on both side with whited brown Paper, and quilted
betwix with Tow, or Flax; it is convenient to sum; with some Cephalic Powder,
in the composition of which, there ought to be a larg^ quantity of yellow
Amber: I know not i^ you ever have used to take Tobacco. You may make a powder
of Coltsfoot, the Bark of Pistacho Nuts, Rosemary, yellow Amber, and a twelfth
part of Tobacco: To which, if the Lungs abound with tough Phlegm, and there be
an Asthma, you may add as a powerful help, (and wonderfully beneficial) a
little Orpiment, (for as D^sconides says, it is very useful in these Diseases)
you cannot be ignorant how it is to be made use of, to wit, in a Pipe, you may
use it Morning and Evening, passing the smoke through your Nostrils, or only
blowing it out at your mouth, as you shall find it to be most effectual.

In favor of the Lungs, it is particularly advantageous to drink thin
Metheglin, or Meade, not too strong, but well fermented or wrought, composed
with Agrimony, Bettony, both kinds of Veronica, or Fluelling, and both sorts of
Lungwort, Colts-soot, and a large quantity of Iulubs. This kind of drink if it
be made right, is not unpleasant to the Taste. Wine is hurtful for you, but I
doubt whether you can leave off the use of it: but if you can abstain from it,
do. A Syrup made with the flesh of Tortoises, Snails, the Lungs of Animals,
Froggs, and Craw-fish, all boiled in Scabiose, and Coltsfoot water, adding at
last Sugar Candy, will prove very useful. Lac Sulphuris is a precious Balsom,
which may be taken in a rere Egg, with a few grains of Benz^min and Sugar, or
it may be made into Tabellets, with Sugar and the pulpe of Marsh Mallow Roots:
These sort of Medicines require to be used long, nevertheless, forbearing the
use of them for some days; least Nature being accustomed to them, should at
last neglect them, though they are precious, as she uses to do other things.
The unadulterated Balsom of Peru, either black or white (if you can procure it)
taken to the quantity of four or five drops at a time in Oxymell, is highly
conducive; also the Ruby of Sulphur rightly prepared, with the white Aetherial
Oil of Turpentine S. A. but as this Operation is artificial, so the
preparation of it should be committed to an expert Artist: The before said
suffumigation promotes Expectoration: If the Phlegm be yet Tough, take care to
prepare an Oxymell, with the Pectoral decoction, well clarifi'd, Sugarcandy and
Honey, made sharp with Oil of Sulphur: and this upon urgent necessity may be
licked with a Liquorish stick bruised at the end.

As to what relates to restoration or nutrition, persist in the use of
Cock-broath, made with China Roots, and cleansed Barley, besides the use of the
beforomentioned Syrup of Tortoises, but Asses Milk, with Sugar of Roses, is to
be used both Winter and Summer, and is very prevalent to this intention: I also
advise you to change the Air; for the situation of your House is absolutely
unwholesome for you: The next Spring go to Delph, and find out the House of your
Noble Brother, nay, travel as far as Aurange, Lunell, Biterras, and Mompelier,
staying in those places some Months, or longer. I have not time to say any
more, but this one thing, if perchance any of your Relations come about you,
have a care that they do not contract the same Disease in their Lungs. You
ought to follow this my advice exactly in every particular; which if you do,
undoubtedly it will prove beneficial to you for preservation. God prevent an
ill Omen.

Dated London, 1645.
The Second COUNCIL. For an Illustrious Nobleman, Son to the former, inclined
to a Consumption.
Written in French.
My Lord,
APologies are remote from the busines^ in hand, and are needless: for yo^ are
not guilty of any injury to me^ My Friends, and your self above the rest (...)
them, ought to esteem me altogether of another mind, from the custom of those
wit^ whom Complements and Ceremonies is usua^ amongst their familiar
acquaintants, (which can hardly be practiced by sincere minds.) (...) at any
time I admit any one into my intimat^ friendship, and addict my self to serve
hi^ (which I have long since done to you, and devoted my self to your whole
Family) (...) never impeach them for being nice, or omitting of officious
occasions, nor interpret any thing in the worst sense, being secured of their
constancy; supposing business does hinder my friends, or that there is some
other great occasion, that is the cause of the intermitting of their writing to
me; but if my pains may be useful to them at any time, I never deny it to them,
greedily laying hold of all opportunities to deserve well at their hands,
whenever occasion does offer it self, chiefly where I may be assistant by my
Art, or Profession.

I have long been afraid lest this Disease, which has threatened you a great
while, should at last break out into act. I was heretofore thoroughly acquainted
with the Nature and Constitution of your Illustrious Father, and Grandfather,
(who are to be reverenced by me upon many accounts) the depraved Constitution
of whose Lungs, I could not so well alter, but that it hastened their fate.
Their infirmities are descended to you by way of Inheritance, together with
their great Endowments and Virtues. If you have done any thing which has
hastened this misfortune to fall upon you, it is unknown to me, and it were
necessary that you acquainted me with it; for accurate instruction is
necessary, that you may receive the full advantage and fruit of my advice. I
particularly wish to be informed what kind of Tumor that was on your Breast,
and what those acrid Medicines were, which your Physician writes you have made
use of; and whether they were Mercurial or no: also the quality, and quantity
of the matter you excluded by Vomiting, it were convenient to know whether it
were purulent and stinking, or not. These things being well inquired into, are
of great moment toward the Cure of your Lungs, which are the Basis and
Original of your Griefs, a Consumption is but a fingers breadth off from you,
and evil is threatened, unless you seasonably use your utmost endeavors to
extricate your self from the power of it, with which, to my sorrow I perceive
you are already ensnared, I have often observed Aposthumes to break in the
Lungs, some of them with good success, some of them with ill; God preserve you
from them. Ulcers of the Lungs, because the Lungs are in perpetual motion, and
are filled with large Vessels, and constantly receiving humors, both from the
upper, and inferior parts, do difficultly admit of Cure; but all our
endeavors must be made use of, and the success submitted to God, expecting
from his will a happy event: You have already been under the Cure of
Experienced Men of Art, which their own accounts testify. And amongst our
rules, this is the Chief: If all things be done rationally, and success do not
presently follow (the intentions and indications of Cure remaining still the
same) we are to insist upon the same Medicines, without any alteration, unless
something happen which absolutely compells us to it.

But to satisfy your desire, because you expect my advice, I will, having
begun, proceed farther, submitting my Council to the judgment and experience
of those Learned men, under whose hands you now are, (I being at so great a
distance from you) And in the first place I advise, as soon as the Weather
shall be more temperate, That you try the Change of Air, experimenting another
and more propitious one, without delay, being carried in a Litter, or
otherways, so that the motion may not hurt you, beginning your Journey with the
rising of the Sun, and getting into your Inn before Sunset. Travel to Volcas,
Aurange, Mompilier, Bitteras, etc. breath dry Air, the heat of whieh you may
easily temper in the House, according to the conveniences the place allows:
Galen, the Master of Physicians, used to send Consumptive Patients to Tabias,
not that he might be rid of the care of them, but to dry up the Ulcer and
Defluction, by drawing in of a more pure Air, endowed with a drying faculty,
and a Balsamic power from the Plants which grew there.

Some years since a Gentleman of these parts, called Mr. Cotton, who was in a
confirmed Consumption, spit matter mixed with blood, and was extremely
extenuated, being a mere Skeleton, covered with a dry skin. This Gentleman was
sent to these parts, and upon his return, he was absolutely recovered; he
lives healthy with his Family, and is Father of many Children. I have seen
(that I may discover the Efficacy of the Air in Diseases of the Lungs) a
Gentleman, who having received a deep wound in his Breast, he was twice Cured
thereof by making an Aperture in the opposite side, which necessity compelled
to be made betwixt his Ribs: which Aperture became a Fistula; He traveled into
Spain, where after five years stay, the Fistula healed up; returning to his own
Country, which was a cold and moist Climate, it opened again of its own accord:
and he was healed again by going into Spain for the same number of years as
formerly. From hence it will plainly appear to you, that the Air pervading all
the Bronchia, or Pipes of the Lungs, and passing directly to the Heart, is more
efficacious in exerting the force of its native, or acquired qualities and
virtues, than any other sort of remedy whatsoever.

The Second head regards Drink: If you can forbear Wine altogether, you will do
very well to do so: for whether you drink much or little, it does affect, and
will afflict your head. I hear they make good Beer at Geneva; if you can get
that which is small and clear; or else the Decoction of Barley well fermented,
and without Hops, that may be commodious for you: which moreover you may render
Medicinal by the addition of China roots, or the roots of the greater Canes, or
Reeds of Narbon, and with Tro^matick, or wound Herbs and Pectorals; amongst
which the Male Veronica, Bugle, and self hete, are the best: If you leave your
native Soil, and your own House, (which are not healthy for you to dwell in)
there may be prescribed a weak Hydromel, or Meade, or else a thin drink made
with Raisons, but well fermented, and impregnated with the virtue of the
foresaid simples, and others as Pimpernal, the greater Comfory, AElurop,
Plantain, Midlin, broad leaved Lungwort, (which is a Moss of an Ash Color,
growing upon old Oaks) These kind of Drinks rendered familiar and ordinary, and
pertinaciously continued by their constant use work wonders; they being endowed
both with a Nutritive and Medicinal Virtue. Arcaeus an approved Author, (a
Spaniard) does much commend Guajacum in Ulcers of the Lungs, and I know by
experience it is very successful; nor is the use of it to be feared in lean
bodies, for its accrimony and heat, (if you proceed by degrees to use it) may
be tempered, by adding the larger quantity of Water, or it may be boiled in
Barley Water: or else the Roots of China, or Reeds, are harmless, and without
heat, dry sufficiently; moreover, do not descend from the necessary advice
given you about Diet, by your Physicians.

Cows Milk is useful to condense and nourish well; but to refrigerate and cool,
Asses Milk is more efficacious; it detergeth, and cleanses better, and carries
off the watery Excrements by Urine, (to which intent also lignum Nephriticum
conduces, being added to your ordinary drink,) add to this, that it leaves
nothing untouched, but brings it away with it self, if only it pass well: And
this your own experience will make out to you, there being this occasion given
to make proof of its effect: Follow what your Physicians advise you; The force
and virtue of the Milk will be augmented, if the Beasts feed upon Herbs, which
are appropriate to your Grief.

I commend Sugar of Roses, with which sweeten your Milk. I firmly hold upon
this account, that a Syrup made with Vulnery Herbs, and Wood Tortoises, (in
Narbon called Garrige) shell Snails, the Tails of Craw-fish, green Froggs, (of
which you have plenty) will be of great use to you for the future, dilating'an
Ounce of it with a draught of Milk. You may cast in a fourth part of Rose Water
into the Decoction of the aforesaid simples, being clarefi'd before the Sugar
is put to it: I would have to be added to the Tabblets of Sugar of Roses which
you use, some truly prepared Blood stone: Harts-borne well and Philosophically
calcined by the vapor of some Pectoral Water, and I approve of Crabs Eyes,
prepared after the common way: Concerning the Lapis haematitis, or Blood stone,
read what is delivered of its virtues in your Disease, by the most experienced
amongst the Ancient Physicians Alexander Trailianus, cap. 1. lib. 7. Practicae,
under the title of; Such things as are convenient for those which spit blood,
from the defluction of an acrid humor; which I also think useful for those
which spit blood by reason of an Anastomasis, and all sorts of Haemoptysis,
proceeding from the Breast, let the Cause which produces it be what it will.

A Cough is the most troublesome Symptom of these kind of Diseases; for it
irritates and shakes the Lungs, and will not permit the mouths of the Vessels
to close, nor grow together. Take care therefore to prepare Bec^hical, or
Pectoral Tabblets of an Extract made without the least burning, but performed
with the vapor of water; let it be made of the best Liquiris, macerated in the
waters of Fluellin and Mullin: adding to it new made Penidies, Blood Stone, and
Manus Christi, composed with Pearls and Corals: If you are not inclined to
sleep, procure it by intervals with Art; take care therefore to prepare, either
Diacodion Tabellatum, or use Syrup of white Poppies, dispensed as it ought to
be; using them at the hour of sleep, and taking them in the Cream of Barley,
beginning with half an Ounce, or three Drams, and so proceeding by degrees to
an Ounce at most, if necessity require it; but have a care you use them not, if
they may be spared.

As to General Remedies, viz. Purgation and Blood-letting, let the use of the
first be seldom, always avoiding strong Purges, for it is enough to use
Laxative Ptisans, prepared with Senna, Tamarynds, Cassia, and Syrup of Cichory,
with a fourfold proportion of Rhubarbe, sometimes adding new granulated white
Calabrian Manna, all being well clarified. Neither omit letting blood, which
let it be frequent, rather then much, according to indications: moreover, the
revelling and derivative Medicines prescribed by your Physicians, are to the
purpose, and therefore to be applied at convenient times, according to advice:
As to the Issue which is in your Arm, I do not dislike of it, but according to
my Judgment, I had rather have one made by burning in the Neck, betwixt the
first and second Vertebra's, or two Issues made upon the Shoulders, betwixt the
superior Angles of the Omoplats, and the Spine of the Back.

Besides these, let Medicines be provided ready against the Paroxysme, that is,
when the blood does abound: in this case I do no ^ess approve of opening a Vein
in the Foot, than in the Arm, or let a Cupping-glass be applied to the region
of the Liver: use Oxycrate made with Plantain water and Frog Spawn: Let
Trochises, or little Balls, be made with Gum Tragacanth, dissolved in Plantain
water, and compacted with a Powder, composed with half a part of Rock Alom,
reduced to a subtle Powder, a fourth part of Harts-borne, calcined with fire
till it be white; also a fourth part of prepared Blood stone, and coro^ted
Manus Christi, the weight of all of them. Hold these Balls in your mouth, and
let them melt by degrees, and so swallow them; for they dissolve but slowly:
The effect of Alon^ (...) this cafe is very great, it may be given at ^he hour
of sleep, to the quantity of a Dram (...) Barley Broth, several days
successively; it may also be dissolved in Milk that is turned, ^d become thin
by Boiling in it Plantain, Mullin, Allheale, Pimpernell, Tormontill, and Vinca
per Vinca, or Periwinckell, clarifying this Milk, by settling and adding Alom
to it, that so it may be given with Apozemes, or Iuleps. I cite here this
Experiment (taken out of our Authors) because by the prescribing the use of it
I have gained honor and credit, especially in the ordering the use of it to a
Noble Matron, afflicted with a desperate Haemoptysis, or spitting of Blood from
the Lungs; ejecting from thence diverse pounds for several days together. I
ordered to bruise the tender Leaves of red stinging Nettles, and to give five
Ounces of the juice pressed out of them, and cleared by settling; Twice in a
day, (if there be added to this an Ounce of rightly prepared Syrup of Coral,
the Medicine will be more efficacious.) And although she was then Threescore
Years Old, weak and helpless, yet she was restored to perfect help for five
years. You may put the Council I have given you into use: for now I have
nothing more to say. If God grant you Life, it must be restored by proper
Remedies, I shall always be ready to serve you, in the preservation of your
Health, as far as my Experience in the Practice of my Profession will enable me.

London, February 20, 1657. This Illustrious Nobleman is now living, Anno 1674.
He is more then Threescore Years Old, a Bachelor, has (...) or Shoulder
Blades which stand off like Wings, showing by his Habit of Body, and all other
signs, his native propensity to a Consumption, spitting Matter, perpetually
afflicted with a Cough, only using drying Food, as Salt-meat, Herrings, and
smoaked Meats: finding moist Food to be hurtful for him.
COUNCIL the Third. In various Hypochondriacal Distempers: For a certain Noble
Councellor at Law.
Written in French.
WHen I carefully take under examination all those Symptoms with which you have
been molested and tired out, and having also an Eye to your Temperament, I do
constitute the root of a^ those Griefs with which you have been afflicted, to
be in a Melancholy humor, not only ge^erated in the Liver, and evilly
separated or expelled, worse wrought upon in the Spleen (remaining to the hurt
of the Stomach, an^ those parts, by which it ought naturally t^ be discharged)
but also mixed in the Veins with the rest of the Mass of Blood, nay, extended
as far as the Brain, which this offensiv^ Enemy of Nature, does assault as an
Organical part, upon whose temperament an alteration being made by it; from
hence the Principle Functions of the Soul do act erroniously at sometimes: And
from this humor, and from nothing else, is the Original of your fore-pass'd
Melancholy afflictions, returning upon you by fits; the settling of humors in
the parts near the Fundament, (the malignancy of which humors consists in a
Septick, and Corrosive Salt) has begotten that great Ulcer, which is now
turned to a Fistula.

That troublesome heat of the Palm of your left hand, and the sole of your
Foot, does plainly show the power of the Spleen, affecting the upper as well as
the nether parts; also the intense dryness of your Mouth; all which are induced
by Sulphurious, Nitrous, and Vitriolate exhalations sent up from the Bowels:
Moreover the Stupor and Numbness of your Arms and Legs, which affects you only
by Periods and Fits, not constantly: to all which may be added the (...), or
stuttering of your Tongue, returning by intervals; from these without doubt I
say, is the Idea of your Melancholy afflictions: all which may be constituted
to proceed from the Reciprocal flowing of that juice from the Spleen to the
Brain, and contrary ways flowing back again; which oftentimes introduces
grievous Symptoms, as the Epilepsia, and others, insomuch that it is not absurd
to make a presage from these signs, of the near approach of a Palsy, though I
think the danger may be prevented, if you be but strong enough: let us omit the
Cure of the Fistula, since it is almost healed: But lest we Triumph before the
Victory be gained, we must allow the space of five or six Months, to expect
whether perhaps any new budding of the Disease, do not cause us quite to lay
aside our conceived hopes of a perfect Cure; for the Melancholy humor is not
unlike the dispositions of the most sort of Poisons, which by the force and
efficacy of Antidotes, are somewhat weakened, and the Tempest which they
brought with them allayed, and the introduced Symptoms ended, so that Nature
being restored to her former state, does easily overcome what remains: Let us
direct our aim then at this point, since in my judgment, any other method of
Cure, though it may appear never so useful, will prove ineffectual for the
future.

I do not touch upon your Diet, being certain, that those to whose care you
have committed your health, will not pretermit any occasion of either doing
what is fit, or omitting what is inconvenient; let us proceed to remedies; of
these I think it will be vain for the future to continue in the use of slight
ones, which are usually prescribed, more for the comfort of the Physician, then
the Sick; which are really adiaphora, or indifferent, they are innocent truly,
but by being so, they afford no help: This Evil is to be plucked up by the
Roots, otherwise it will be perpetually hatching, and producing a new Brood.
Let Vomits lead on the first and main Battle, as well for their efficacious
removing the filth of the first regions of the body, as also to remove by their
specific efficacy (from which only the Triumph and Victory over Melancholy is
to be expected) future impediments. Of these, I know none more prevalent, nor
of less danger, than the infusion of Crocus Metallorum, made in Canary Wine,
allowing an Ounce of this to a Pint of the Wine; of which if you are easy to
Vomit, you may take the first time one Ounce, adding of simple Oxymel half an
Ounce, and one Ounce of Cardus Beneditus Water: if you are hard to work upon,
then you may take from the quantity of ten Drams, to an Ounce and half of it,
though I think it safest to begin with a small Dose, except the vehemence of
the Disease persuade otherwise. Vomit three or four times, nay more, making use
of no other Medicine between: but if your endeavors to Vomit prove fruitless,
the Stomach may be easily moved to it by drinking of Barley Water, or thin
Chicking Breath, nay only with warm Water; procure this sort of Evacuation at
least three times, allowing the space of two or three days between, after
which, apply your self, to Purgation, beginning with Elleborat, and
Hypochondriack Apozems.

If by rubbing and pressing hard with your hands, the whole Abdomen and the
Hypochondries, there be found pertinacious obstructions there, it will be
necessary then to exhibit some preparing Medicine for 7 or 8 days together,
which being performed, the Purgation of the humor is to be administered again:
If there be any occasion to open a Vein (from which nevertheless I expect
little benefit) let the Physician that is present take care of that: I note
this one thing to you, that I prefer the opening of an inferior Vein in the
Malleoli, or Ancles, rather then a superior in the Arms, unless there be
somewhat else that hinders it.

The Body being thus conveniently Evacuated, the whole business of the Cure is
to be directed to the use of Steel, in this Cure the chief Medicine: There are
three Weeks at least to be employed about the foresaid general praescripts, and
in the mean time, care must be had of that intense dryness of your Tongue,
which is so troublesome to you, which I hope in a small time will be
dissipated, from which no great danger is threatened; so that care be took,
that the Body be cleansed from those hot, dry, and vitriolick juices, (of the
nature of Canker of Brass) which does enduce this intense and unsatisfied
thirst; in which case there is great relief found in the opening the Veins,
situate under the Tongue, by which the heat of the Lungs and Heart is allayed,
and the Brain effectually discharged; if you find the Brain to be possessed
(with this matter) and if you find the continual Numbness of the Members to
remain, together with an imbecility to move, apply a great visicatory to the
Nuck of the Neck, and make two Issues in the topes of the Shoulders; The Head
being shaved, put upon it Fernelius his Cataplasme, or some other Epispatick:
Anointing the whole Backbone every day with Balsom of Earthworms, or Batts,
etc. And when the Weather is convenient for it, go to the Baths of Borbon, or
Aquense, which are not far from your House, and use to wash your Body with
them, and let the whole Spine of your Back be dropped upon by these Waters.

I do firmly believe your Panick fears will vanish, if you devote your self to
the use of Steel, by the virtue of which, I have seen many Melancholy persons
delivered, the weakness of whose Limbs did declare, that they were already
Paralitick: And among these, a certain Maid of Honor, committed to my ^re the
last year, by the Queen of Bohemia, who by the force of this Melancholy juice,
had the motion of all her Limbs took from her, whom by Gods assistance I
restored to the Queen again, Merry, and enjoying a firm health, to the
admiration of all those which had her in Cure before me, in whose judgment she
was afflicted with a Palsy, I proceeded altogether another contrary, and yet
common way, by the help of which she attained her health: For it is only old
Dogs that are the best Hunters.

But concerning your Fistula, I think it is not far from being healed, if your
Chyrurgion may be credited, who is a most expert man, to whom, (which you
before desired me to do) since I have lately writ, there is no need that I take
up my pen again, that he may be further satisfied of my kindness.

Outward Remedies are needless for the future, but lest I should seem to be
wanting in my Care and Friendship, if there is any thing needful to dry and
confirm the Cicatrice, use the Balsom of Sulphur, of which you have heard me
spoke often, which will supply the place of all other Medicines which are fit
for the part affected: you may apply Emplastrum Diasulphuris to the part; which
since it needs some detersion and cleansing, upon that account it is convenient
to use the solution of Crollius his Lapis Mirabilis, or another according to my
judgment, of equal efficacy, consisting of pure Bole-Armenick, White Vitriol,
and Camphor, prepared according to Art: or you may well use the Mercurial Water
described by Hartman; made of Mercury sublimate, freed from its corrosive
Spirits by Tynne, according to Art.

When the fear of a Palsy shall be dissipated, and the humor bred in the
Hypochondries overcome, and cut off; also when it shall only remain to employ
our endeavors, that the Cure of the Fistula be made firm and undoubted; And
that the birth of the same germinating kind of Ulcers, (in those lower parts
subject to corruption) may be prevented, then the use of Mercurial Medicines
taken inwardly, will be seasonable, which in convenient time and place shall be
prescribed to you with necessary cautions; as also certain other exsicating
Medicines, taken from the Classes of Minerals, and these such as promote a
Diaphoresin, (or transpiration) at the pores, whose power and faculty is to
discuss malignant vapors, and to hinder defluctions; These produce different
actions, according to the diverse distemperatures of the receiving parts; which
Distempers they master and overcome, by their particular efficacious
impressions: But enough for this time, and I will only subjoin an orderly
description of certain Medicines promised above: If you please, you may make
use of Mr. Favonius the Apothecary, who will be very careful in their
preparation: If your Fistula be healed, and Cicatriz'd, that it may long remain
so, it is necessary you go to Geneva, etc.

In the first place prepare the Stomach for the space of two days before, that
so you may Vomit easily.

As, Of simple Oxymel, iij. Oxymel of Squills, j.


Mix them for 4 Doses, taking them in a draught of Ptisan, at a large distance
from Meals.

Then, Of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum; made with Canary Sack
(proportioning j. of the Crocus, to xvi. or a Pint of the Sack) take (I say) of
this infusion philter'd through a Papire, j. Of the water of Carduus
Benedictus, j. Simple Oxymel, ss.
Mix them, and make a draught, to be given in the Morning, with observing a due
and regular order, in the time of its Operation.

Let this Medicine be repeated Thrice, interposing the space of two, or three
days betwixt each time of taking, according to the strength and disposition of
the Stomach; a regard being had to the Operation of the Medicine; If there be
occasion, those that can bear the Operation well, may increase the quantity of
the infusion to Ten Drams, or an Ounce and half.

In the days between, it will be necessary to soment the Hypochondries, and
region of the Stomach, with an emollient, inciding, and Opening Decoction: by
this means, the humors which are to be discharged by Vomit, will be rendered
fluid, and the Operation will succeed with the less trouble.

After taking the third Vomit, a day or two being allowed for quiet, let there
be given the following Apozem. Of the Roots of female Fers, Cichory, Lions
Tooth, The Middle-Barke of an Ash-tree, the Roots of sharp Leaved Docks,
an. j. Marshmallows, ss. The Bark of Caper-roots, Of Tamariske,
an. x. The fresh Roots of Polypody, iij. Of the Leaves of Fumaterry,
Germander, Ground Pine, Agrimony, Bettony, Of all the sorts of Maidenhair,
an. M. j. The Flowers of Cowslips, St. John's wort,
an. P. iij. Water Lillies, P. ij. ss. The Tops of Rosemary, Marjarom,
an. P. j. The Seeds of male Piony, iij. Of sweet Fennel, Of Corryander
prepared, an. ss. Of Carthamum, fresh, full, and such as sink in water, ij.
Raisons of the Sun stoned, Iujubs, an. iv. Sweet smelling Apples, cut into bits
with their peels on, N. iij.
Make a decoction of all these in a s. q. of water, in which was steeped before
for the space of four hours, Sparkling Tartar of White Wine, vi. Clean picked
Senna Leaves, ij. The small shings of true black He^or roots, iv.
After a sufficient decocting, strain it; which reduce by gentle Boiling to xv.
in which dissolve, Of the solutive Syrup of Damask Roses made with Agarick. Of
the Syrup of Cichory, with a fourfold proportion of Rhubarb,
an j. ss. Spirit of Vitriel, gut. xii.
mix them, and make an Apozem for three days, to be taken a Mornings, with
care, and keeping within doors, either every day, or every other day, according
to your strength: and this to be done three hours before you take any Broth.

If it seem convenient either between, or after these Purgations, to open
either of the Saphena Veins, let that be committed to the pleasure of your
Physician which is present with you.

Afterward let the peccant juices be prepared again and again, and the
obstructions of the Bowels powerfully recerated by this following Medicine: The
Decoction of sweet seuted Apples, Nephriteck wood, adding a little (...) iij.
Small White Wine, lb j. Spirit of Salt, Vitriol,
an j.
Mix them exactly in a flat glass dish, then ^resently drop leisurely into it,
of Oil of Tur^ar, made per deliquium, q. s. to extinguish ^ll acidity, or
sowerness, add to the. Syrup of the flowers of red fluelin, with the Violet
flower, Syrup of Cowslips,
an. ^j. Cl^on water, one spoonful.
Make a perfect mixture of them by long agi^ating them together: Take of this
Liquor (...) v, for a Dos^, twice in a day, at a good ^stance from Meals, do
this eight days together: which time being elapsed, repeat Purging, Thus. Clean
picked and small cut Senna Leaves, iv. Choice Rhubarb, ij. The stringy fibers
of true black Hellebor roots, iv.
To these being strained, pour such a quantity of the strained Decoction of
Tamarynds and Tartar, as is sufficient to make the infusion for a whole Night
upon warm Ashes, adding, Of Lavender flowers, j. One blade, or flower of Mace.
In the Morning after a gentle boiling, strain it, in which reduced to a Dose,
dissolve, Syrup of Damask Roses with Agarick, Calabrian Manna,
an. j. Spirit of Vitriol, gut. iv.


Mix them for a Potion to be given in the Morning, with a careful governing of
yourself.

This being performed, your Body is sufficiently fitted for the use of Steel;
the metho^ of taking which, was sufficiently describ'^ to you the first time:
In the interim, Sir while you are at leisure betwixt making u^ of the
prescriptions, and that will take up good space of time, (but absolutely
necessar^ to the right preparing, of the peccant juice and the Cure of your
Body) In the mean sp^ use these things which have a respect to t^ dryness of
your Tongue: As a Syrup made with the white of an Egg, and Sugarcandy.

Trochisch's of Liquoris, prepared from its Extract mixed with Sugar of Roses,
adding a ^ittle of the Mucalage of Gum Tragacant.

The distilled Water of Milk, with the Syrup de Mucilaginibus taken by a
Spoon, or put of a glass Bottle, or out of a phyol with a narrow mouth.

The use of Rock Crystal truly prepared, with Conserve of Violets, or Water
Lillies, is good.

An injection into the Jaws made with Barley water, and Milk warm from the
Cow, either by it self, or adding a little Sal pru^lla.

Syrup of the Juice of the greater Semper^uive or House-leek, boiled with
Sugar, adding (...) little of the same Sal prunella: see that you ^se them by
turns, lest Nature being too much accustomed to one, frustrate or reject ^eir
effect.

I doubt not but those Symptoms which ^hreaten a Palsy, will either be
diminished, ^r for the most part removed, by the before ^rescribed Medicines,
which Symptoms if they ^ould persevere, though but a little, that ^he fearful
mind of the Patient may be satis^'d; by the advice of the Physicians which ^re
present; let there be applied to the head being shaved, Fernelius his
Cataplasme against Catarrhs, described in his Councels, for diverse days
together: Apply to the hinder part of the Neck a large Visicatory, with which
excite a Blister, which keep running a long time.

Affix a couple of Pyroticks, or Causticks, to the superior angles of the
Shoulder Blades, with which large Ulcers being made, let them be kept
continually open with many Pease, applying upon them a strong sticking and
drawing Plaster. Morning and Evening anoint the whole length of the Backbone
with our Balsom of Batts, rubbing it very well in with a warmed hand.

The Balsom of Batts.
The greater sort of Serpents, or Snakes, cut into pieces, their Skins being
first stripped off, Number. iij. Butts, Number. xii. Very fat sucking Puppi^s, Number.
ij. Earthworms washed in White Wine, lb j^ Common Oil, lb iij. Malago Sack, lb
iv. The Leaves of Sage, Marjarom, Bays, Calaminth, Origanum, Penyroyal,
an, M. ij.


Boil them (adding new Hogs-lard, lb ij.) (...) the consuming of the Wine, and
the falling ^f pieces and putrilage of the Animals; let (...) Fat be well
pressed out, Of this fatness, lb j. Gum. Elemi, Tacamahaca,
an. j. ss, The Marrow of a Stag, An Oxes Leg,
an. ij. Of p^ Gum, Galbanum^ j. Liquidambar, gut. x. Butter, of Nutmegs Oil of
Bays,
an. ss.
Mix them, and make a Balsom.



I believe, and I hope, that the Ulcers which ^ere caused by the incisions
about the Fundament are closed, and confirmed by a Cicatrice: it happen to be
otherwise, let them be ^ashed with the dissolution of the Artificial ^one,
which is called Lopis Mirabilis; or ^uch the Ulcers with Mercurial water made
sublimat, delivered from its Corrosive Spirit, ^d deaded by Tin: apply Balsom
of Sulphur them, such as is described by Rulandus, (...) put upon them a Lead
Plaster, with ^alk, or Emplastruin Diasulphuris, which ^dicines may be
approved of as specificks Ulcers of the Fundament, and the circum^ par^d.

(...) there be any internal Symptoms continue, or bud again, these evils are
to be remedied by Mineral Medicines, such as are mad^ of Mercury and Antimony
rightly prepared which shall be prescribed by us, in their du^ time, according
to the degree of urgent necessity.

POSTSCRIPT. The use of the aforesaid Remedies.
AFter your return into your own Country, about the beginning of the Mon^ of
September, take care to have prepared (...) you an Emollient and detergent
Glyster, addi^ lenitive Electuary, and honey of Dog Nettl^ let it be injected
in a Morning about the hours before Dinner.

The day after take the Purge prescribed and if you like the form of a Bolus,
you (...) add a Scruple of Mercurius dulcis truly prepared, observing to govern
your self, order in the working.

The day following, begin the use of (...) Apozem, continuing the use of it for
eig^ days.

Which being ended, purge your body aga^ with the same proportion of the Purge,
or the Bolus.

After which, if necessity require, proceed to the use of Steel, observing the
Order laid down.

If nothing do absolutely insinuate the use of this, then a good Diet will be
sufficient, the particulars concerning which, you may easily gain the knowledge
of. Omit not in the mean time the exercising of your Body, which is absolutely
necessary for you. Also by intervals, at least once in a Month purge your Body,
taking the before prescribed Bolus, with Mercurius dulcis.

Let the Infusion be familiar to you, or the gentle Decoction, remembered in
the second Council, to which you may if you please, add half a pound of the
filings of Steel, to four measures of Fountain, or Cistern-water: taking every
time two Ounces.

COUNCIL the Fourth. In the same disaffections of the Hypochondries; for the
same Noble Councellor at Law.
Written in French.
WHen the P^st had-now come three times to us, and yet no account was written
to me concerning your health, I^ was possessed with careful and troublesome
thoughts, by reason of the great and dreadful Symptoms described in your last
Letter, upon the account of which I writ, and sent you my Advice and Council:
But your last Letter has expelled all my fears, which does manifest, that the
troublesome dryness of your Mouth, and all those Symptoms which were praelud^,
and fore-run^ of a Palsy, did wholly seize upon the unlooked for arising of an
Apostbume in your right Cheek, which as well upon the opening of it by Mr.
Iuis, as also at your Ear, did pour out laudable, and well digested Pus, (or
Matter.)

As to your Fistula's, heretosore so afflictive to you, they are shortly to be
closed up with a Cicatrice, for they are now almost healed, by the acurate care
and diligence of your Chyrurgion; for which, both from my self, and all
experienced Artists, he worthily deserves praise, which I will publicly make
known, whenever you require it, although I am equally averse to admit, or
impart adulatory expressions.

Before your Sores can attain a perfect consolidation, the greatest part of the
Winter will be past over, and the subsequent Spring will be near at hand; at
which time you will much better pass through that tedious course of Diet and
Medicines which are to be made use of, then you can do in the height of Winter.
Wherefore since it is necessary to preserve, and repair your life, that
something be courageously taken in hand, and yet nothing urges to begin it
now: my opinion is, that you Elect a proper time, in which, without
interruption, you may prosecute the course of your Cure, and use your Medicines
successively, in due orde^, and with advantage; which if they be otherwise
administered by fits, or broken intervals, and not with one steady course,
although they be artificially and properly prescribed, yet they cannot have the
least success: I advise (to complete the Cure) that as soon as Dr. Guenalt,
etc. shall think fit, your Body be emptyed by Purging, according to the method
I have prescribed; from thenceforth you may safely be quiet, only studying how
to repair your strength, as well by aliments of good juice, as by gentle
Cordials, such as the Majestery of Pearls, red Corals, and Crabs Eyes,
sometimes given in Broaths, sometimes with the Confection of Kermes, and Syrup
of Queen-Apples, procuring gentle Purgations betwixt whiles, with Laxative
Ptisan, composed only with Senna, or sometimes adding Cassia, Tamarinds, and
Manna, Clarifying all of them well, sometimes putting to the same quantity of
the infusion, a double Dose of the Purgers, upon the account of cleansing. From
the going through this course, to the time that remains to the Vernal Aquinox,
I advise you to rest; but when that time is come, then apply your self to the
other course, nourishing your body afresh, insisting in the method I sent you
before; according to which, having used the general remedies, the Prascripts of
which you have by you, you are to make use of the Essence of Steel, which I
send to you mixed, and prepared with my own hands: And in my Opinion this sort
of remedy is so powerful, and so fitting for you, that if it agree with your
nature, which I suppose it will not be repugnant too, I think the use of it is
to be continued for threescore days together, according to the rules I have
prescribed: This being performed, I hope your Bowels being strengthened, the
humors will be amended, and the Collection of all the Causes of ^he before
past accidents being cut off; nay the fear of a recidiva, or relapse, which
might happen upon closing up the Fistula in the Fundament, which though it be a
thing to be desired, yet it is osten full of danger, when nature of her own
accord seeks a vent: And this is confirmed by Cardinal Rich^leus Arm, who
possibly might have enjoy d a longer li^, if the Cure of his Fistula had been
prosecu^ed with less diligence.

In the using of the Steel, let necessary Purgations be interposed, having a
care from henceforth of such as have Aloes in them, they irritate, and offend
the Fundament, unless their bitterness be altogether taken away, which though
it may be performed by Art, yet in my judgment it signifies little to attempt
that thing, which has less utility then Ostentation in it.

Having taken your Essence of Steel (which ought not to procure any loathing to
you) warm Bathes are to be thought off, and the use of Asses Milk, and of
mineral Waters: but the place of these I believe will be supplied by the Steel.
I wish I could be by your side to direct you; but whether that will be
hereafter or no I know not, although I heartily wish that I may once again see
my Country.

The Steel sent to you, was prepared wholly and completely with my own hands;
and by Gods assistance you will receive more advantage from it, than from all
the rest. God give it his blessing, etc.

COUNCIL the Fifth. In the same disaffections of the Hypochondries; for the
same Noble Councellor at Law.
Sent into France.
MY last Letters gave you a large account how to make use of the Steel, which
as I suppose is the chief, and apt remedy to recover your health, it only
remains that I send it to you ready prepared, which I now do: you are to
receive seventeen Ounces weight of the Syrup, which that it may be tempered,
and fitted to be used, according to the rule laid down in my former Letters,
take order to have this following Syrup carefully made.

Take sweet smelling Apples, commonly called Queen Apples, (with short Stalks)
as many as you please, cut away their rind, afterward draw a water from them
in a double Vessel, in a boiling Balneo Maria, till you have got a sufficient
quantity, pour the foresaid water upon the rinds, which have been first laid
upon a Table until they are almost dry, add to them new Lemon peels cut small,
distill this Water again by a Body of Belvee Earth, or Tin; or so that the
Distiller may carefully avoid the breaking of the Vessel in a large glass
Alimbeck, and head of the same Metal; put into the inward part of the spout of
the Alimbeck, a Nodule or little Bag, made with fine Linen, and filled with
half a Dram of Ambargreece, and six grains of Mosck: put the Vessel into a
Kettle of Water, filled with Hay, or Saw-dust. Make the joining of the Body,
Head, and Reciver, fast with Lute, or Paste, made of Meal, Quicklime, and the
White of an Egg; draw a Water from this by distillation; in which, with a
gentle heat, dissolve as much white Sugarcandy, ground to a fine powder, as it
can possibly contain, to make it of the consistance of a Syrup, of which take
exactly twenty three Ounces dilute, and mix it with that quantity (of the
prepared Steel) which I send to you, which is sufficient for you to use
threescore days, which is the time prefixed by me. This Syrup is included in an
Earthern Bottle, well stopped, and sealed with my own Seal, which Note, least it
be changed.

I would willingly have sent you the whole prepared, but that the price of the
carriage would have been insufferable: keep this as a Treasure for the recovery
of your health, (which perhaps you will not attain too in the place you now
dwell in) take it all, leaving no remainder of it; I wish I were nearer you,
for my presence would conduce much for the right use of so great a Remedy,
although you cannot want expert directers when you shall be in that vast City
of Paris: Give me an account of the success, chiefly if the desire of
recovering your perfect health, shall call you home, and hinder you from
expecting the Spring, which assists the efficacy and operation of Medicines.

As to the swelling behind your Ear (it is a thing of difficulty, and for the
most part eludeth the force of Medicines) I hardly think you are in that
condition now, that upon the account of that you need my advice, since I
imagine this grief of yours is already past the declination; but if there do
remain any stubborn hardness, let that be overcome by some Mercurial Remedies,
which will advance the power of other Medicines, and efficaciously overcome the
hardness. I do often make use of them; and I do find, if all hope of
suppuration be gone, yet these do so rarifie the humors, that nature is able
to dissolve that humor that was congealed, into the form of perfect Matter:
This (besides other Experiments) happened in two Pestilential Tumors, of which
one was under the Arm-pit, they retained their hardness for six weeks, though
the Malignity was extinct; yet by the help of Mercurial Remedies, they were
brought to a happy suppuration.

COUNCIL the Sixth. In the same Disease; for the same Gentleman.
IN convenient time, as the next Spring, a little after the Equinox, the
general praescripts being before made use of, and by them the peccant juices
carefully prepared and evacuated, then exhibit the Chalybeat Medicine. Continue
the use of it (according as it ageees with you) for threescore days; observing
necessary cautions: Wherefore let this number of days be so divided, that there
be exhibited of our Steel Syrup, two Drams for six days, three Drams for as
many days; four for xii days, five for xii days more, six for eight days
together; seven for eight days. eight for eight days; let it be given in any
grateful Liquor, whether it be in Clarified Whey, the water of Apples, of
Fumaterry, Burrage, Baume, or thin Capon Broth, Wine, small Beer, etc. or in
the Restorative Water, of which, mention is made in what follows.

After the taking of the Medicine, you must walk, or use some other gentle
exercise, by which the body may be moderately warmed, without procuring sweat;
but forbear Dinner for four hours, which may be sufficiently large, according
to your Appetite, and the disposition of your Stomach easily to concoct meat of
good juice: But let your Supper be sparing, not cramming in Meat before the
former Food be digested; let your ordinary Drink be Oligophorick Wine (that is,
such as will bear but little water) of a Brick color, or a Flesh color, very
well diluted with the Decoction of cleansed female Fern roots, of Lentisk, or
Mastick wood, and Nephritick wood.

In the passing through the Chalybiate course, let your body be purged by this
following Potion the days which follow, the xij. the xxiv. the xliv. the Lij.
and the Lx. giving the draught four hours before any Broth, observing due
Orders.

Fresh Polypody roots, Pulpe of Tamarinds, an. ss. The clean picked Leaves of
Senna, cut small, and sprinkled with well sented White Wine, v. The small
strings of the roots of true black Ellebor, j. Tragee Commun. Cream of Tartar,
an. ij.


Make a decoction in a sufficient quantity of the distilled Waters of
Fumaterry, and Water Lilly flowers; add to the straining, Of choice Rhubarb ij.
infused by its self in Baume Water. Of yellow Sanders, ij.
reduce them all unto a small Dose, in which dissolve, The solutive Syrup of
Damask Roses with Agarick, j. Calabrian Manna, ss.
Mix them, make a Potion to be taken in the Morning.

In the days betwixt, let the Chalybeate Syrup be dissolved in a draught of
Laxative Ptisan, prepared with Senna and Liquoris, according to Art; do this
every third day.

Let the restorative Water be prepared of the juice of the pulpy flesh of a
Calf, a Capon, (...) Weather, the heart of a Lamb, and a Calf, distilled in a
body and head; to which let there be added the juice of Queens Apples, ^ew
Whey, and the Blood of a Golt Pig, a Lamb, a Calf, all agitated so long till
they ^re freed from the Fibers and Strings. Some Cinnamon and Mace; and let
them be distilled (...) a double Vessel; to the distilled Liquor ^dd the fourth
part of the strongest and best ^d Wine, and distill it again: reserve the Liquor
in a glass Viol, close stopped for use. Syrup of Queen Apples, Of the flowers of
red Fluellin,
an. vi. Of Citron Peels, iv.
mix them, and drop into them as much Spirit of Salt as will make them
moderately sower, add, Of Confection of Alkermes, ss.
Reserve it for Iulips, mixing j of this Syrup, with four of the aforesaid
Water; to be taken five hours before Dinner, and two before Supper, those days
in which you take the Martial Syrup: or if your Stomach be any way disturbed
with this drink, betwixt the two Meals, then you may take it at the hour of
sleep, chiefly if you perceive that the Spirits are low, or any inclination to
swounding*

These things being performed exactly, and in order, there will be place for
the usual strengtheners and renovators of the Body, and the Specificks against
Melancholy: warmis^ Baths of fresh Water, Whey of Asses Milk and perhaps
Mineral Waters. All and every one of which are to be prescribed according a^
occasion shall offer, and according to the suc^ cess of the former.

In the interim, let there be prepared by the hand of a'careful and expert
Artist, the following Bezoartick Pastills; than which the^ is nothing more
precious to defend the Hea^ and Brain against the impulse of any sort (...)
malignant vapors.

The Bezoartick Pastills.
Harts-born Philosophically calcined by the vapor of strong White Wine, with
the shavings of Juniper, Ebeni, and Rhodium wood according to Art. Harts-born
Bezoar, prepared from Harts-born calcined to whiteness, with the strongest Oils
of Vitriol and Salt, an* two Ounces. The Scull ^f a Stag, and of a healthy man
that was hanged, both prepared the same way, of each one Ounce. Of the
Majestery of red Coral. Of Pearl, Of Mother of Pearl precipitated with Alom,
an. six Drams. Crabs Eyes, The black tips of the Thighs of the greater sort of
Sea Crabs prepared,
an. one Ounce and half. The roots of Carlin Thistile, ten Drams. Indian Contra
Yerva, half an Ounce. Cuchinill, The Oriental Bezoar stone, The Occidental,
an. five Drams. Of the Flesh of the Liver, Heart, and of the Back-bones of
Vipers, taken at a fitting time, twelve Drams. Of Cloves, Of Mace,
an. one Dram* Ambar-greese, two Drams. Mosk, half a Dram. Of the fixed Ceruss
of Antimony, one part to five of the rest.


Make a subtle powder of all of them, and taking a sufficient quantity of the
strong Gelly of Harts-born, a little colored with Saffron, adding a little of
the Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, made with distilled Treacle Water, make a Past,
of which form Pastils of convenient shapes for use: let them be dried; and kept
in a Box impenetrable by the Air, in a dry place.



When the Melancholy vapors are oppressingly urgent; the Palpitation of the
Heart, or other vaporous disaffections assaulting, let there be given ten,
twelve, fifteen, or twenty grains, in Confection of Alkermes, the Water of a
Stags head, Treacle water, Wine, or any other Cordial Liquor.

These things being exactly performed, this Noble Gentleman was Cured, though
he followed his Pleasure, etc.

COUNCIL the Seventh. In diverse disaffections of the Perinaeum, upon which
followed a Gangreen, and an Ischuria, or difficulty of Urine: For a Noble
Person.
The Description of the Disease.
BEcause you are desirous to know the state of this Noble Patient, I will in
few words, but in order open it to you, at his entreaty: Upon his return hither
out of England, he often complained of heat in his Urine, and many times also
of a stoppage of it; but taking of the Emulsions and Glysters you prescribed
him, applying also of Candles, he was easily recovered; but he was continually
sensible of a pricking pain (though not very sharp) in the left part of the
Perinaeum, and this for two or three Months before this Disease, which
continued till the Aposthume in the Perinaeum was broke.

But about the beginning of the Month of April, this year 1620. when not
exactly observing the l^iet prescribed him, and also exceeding in the
exercising of his Body, there was a certain stinking scent perceived in his
Urine: This stink by degrees was so increased, that it was wonderful how such
put refaction could remain so long in the Body without a Fever, Nauciousness,
and other grievous Symptoms: Also at the same time, there was to be seen at the
bottom of the Urine, a certain viscous matter, not unlike the Spawn of Frogs.

The Month of May being past, when he traveled to the Alps to see his Lands
and Possessions, he went on Foot up and down the Rocks, and contrary to custom,
and above measure having overheated himself, he was invaded with Symptoms after
a more grievous manner: When he was returned, I prescribed him Emulsions, and
caused him to take Milk Glysters several times: I anointed his Reins with
refrigerating Ointments and Oils, I have purged his body with gentle Cholagos,
(or purgers of cholor) and opened a Vein in his Arm: And because plenty of that
stinking viscous matter was expelled with his Urine, I persuaded the use of
Whey with Sugar for some days together.

These things being observed, together with an exquisite Diet for xiv days, all
things appearing fair and well, and the stench of the Urine seeming to be much
abated, I was called to Sol^durum; not long after my going away, the Disease
sell a raging with more bitterness and cruelty then before; for there was not
only a fierce Fever, and a continual suppression of Urine, but also a
Phlegmon, or Inflammation did arise in the Perinaeum it self: Wherefore in my
absence he was necessitated to send for another Physician. He insisted in the
use of Emulsions and Glysters, and anointed the place affected with convenient
^ls, he was forced also to make use of a Bath, by reason of the vehemence of
the pain: In the mean time I returned, and found the Patient as it were in an
Agony; for he was seized with a vehement Fever, frequent Soundings,
Nauciousness, and loathing of Food, heat and retention of Urine, and all the
eminent signs of Death: The inflamed Tumor in the Perinaeum was bigger then a
Goose Egg, with extreme pungent pain, with a Tumor and hardness of the Cods
and Yard: The Kings Doctor, before my coming, had made use of discutient and
resolving anodyns, but without success: Wherefore it was fit to procure
digestion, and ripen the matter, which was effected by this Cataplasme, or
Poltess. Of the roots and leaves of Marshmallows, Mallows,
an. M. j.
Boil and bruise them according to Art, and add, Of Wheat Meal, ij. ^aenugreeg
Seed, Linseed,
an. j. Fresh Butter, Oil of White Lillies, Ointment of Marshmallows,
an. j, ss. Saffron, ss. Yolks of Eggs, Number. ij.
mix them, and make a Poultess.

Which was applied twice in a day warm. The xxix of May, the Aposthume was
broke in the middle of the Perinaeum, upon the very Seam, upon which there
flowed forth in a large quantity, such stinking and putrid Pus, (or Matter)
that the whole Chamber was filled with a most incredible, nay, a cadavorous
sent, (like that of a rotten Carcass) which continued for several days: for
such was its Gangrenous putridness, that the whole Perinaeum being mortified,
fell off, and there succeeded a very large Ulcer.

Notwithstanding he applied such things as hinder putrefaction; I applied to
the Ulcer my Ungnentum AEgyptiacum, with pleggets, and two Tents, of which one
ascended toward the Scrotum, and the other was thrust downward toward the
Fundament, I afterward put upon it the following Poultess.

Meal of Lispine, Of Beans,
an. j. ss. The powder of the Tops of Wormwood, Of Scordium, Rue,
an. ij.
Boil them in simple Oxymell, and make a Poultess, to which, being yet warm,
add, Aloes, Myrrh,
an. j. ss.


But I cut off as much as I could of the dead flesh with Scissers and Knives,
as often as I opened the Ulcer: I wiped away the Matter with Pencils made of
Sponge, dipped in the decoction of Scordium, Rue, Wormwood, and Lupines, adding a
little Salt: by which means the putrefaction went off by degrees, and that in
three days time, and spread no further. Wherefore I omitted the further using
of the Aegyptiack Ointment, and applied to the Ulcer a Linement composed with
the powders of round Aristolock roots, the roots of Florentine Oris, Angelica,
Aloes and Myrrh, with the Extract of Scordium, mixed with a little Yolke of an
Egg; I did use the before prescribed Cataplasme for more then three weeks: for
not only the Skin and Flesh of the Perinaeum were wasted and eat away by the
putrefaction; but also much of the membrains were rotted, as without doubt were
the Tunicles, or Coats of the Urinary passage, which we were fain to cut off,
and take away; wherefore almost all the Urine did issue out at the Ulcer for a
long time.

About the beginning of June, that Pimple or small Tumor in the middle of the
Yard upon the right side thereof, which was hard almost from the beginning of
the Disease, became an Aposthume; and a little while after it also broke, but
it did not penetrate to the passage of Urine; wherefore applying of Emollients,
Digestives, and Mundificatives, it was with difficulty healed.

Three days after the breaking of the small Tumor in the Yard the humor which
was before spread through the whole Scrotum, fell down to the lower part of it,
toward the Ulcer in the Perinaeum, and there made a hard extuberance, but by
applying of Emollient Bags, Ointment of Marshmallows, and Melilote Plaster,
the matter which was collected there, was by degrees evacuated by the Ulcer of
the Perinaeum.

The Ulcer being sufficiently cleansed from putrid flesh, and mortified
Membrains, we made use of a Traumatick decoction, (or wound think) composed of
Winter green, Ladies mantil, Sanicle, or Butter-wort, Sa^acens consound,
Mugwort, red Betts, all boiled in adstringent red Wine; after this manner, The
Patient drank a draught of this three hours before Dinner, and another as many
hours before Supper; we also injected it into the Ulcer twice a day warm; we
also put in two Tents moistened in the same decoction, into the Ulcer,
thrusting one of them forwards, the other backwards toward the Prostatas, at
last we applied a doubled Linen Cloth, dipped in the same warm: We did not
only pour in the decoction with a Syringe into the Ulcer, but also into the
Urinary passage, both above and beneath; which that it might be done the more
conveniently, we caused a crooked Pipe to be made to the Syringe.

It Is to be admired, that in this great and high putrefaction, the Sphincter of
the Bladder did always remain safe and untouched, which appeared from hence,
that the Patient, even in the height of his Disease, could always retain his
Urine, nor did he ever let it go from him against his will. Nevertheless the
Ulcer which went downward toward the Bladder, was deep, and touched the
Prostatas, which I suppose were evilly affected heretofore; as often as he made
water, it flowed partly at the Yard, partly at the Ulcer, but without any
difficulty or pain: He used the foresaid Traumatick Decoction for three Months,
so that by degrees the Ulcer was fully consolidated, nor did there remain any
Fistula.

Besides Topical means, general Medicines were made use of, and the strength
being recruited by degrees, I gave him every other day, and sometimes seldomer,
a little of the best Turpentine, by the benefit of which his belly was
loosened, and the Urinary passages also cleansed: the Reins were anointed with
Ointment of Roses, with Camphor, and there was applied a plate of Lead big
enough to cover the Loins, and the Os Sacrum.

Now God be praised, this Gentleman enjoys a perfect health, nor does perceive
any inconveniency of these great Griefs; he makes water freely, there being
only left this impediment, that he is sensible of a certain painful itching in
the place where the Ulcer was formerly; moreover, many times there appears a
Branny substance in his Urine, and as often as he makes water, there appears
one drop of a white, viscous, glutinous matter at the top of the Urinary
passage, before the making of his water.

This Gentleman desires to know of you what kind of matter this is, and from
whence it comes? I suppose this matter to proceed from the weakened, and not
sufficiently strengthened Prostatas, and that it is as it were an Excrement of
the Seed, by the benefit of Nature thrust out to the extremity of the Yard.

He also inquires, why that painful itching when he makes water, should only
happen after Supper, when he is about to go to bed, and is not perceived in the
morning, or day time? I judge Nature does in the night time, (which is the time
she performs her chief Operations in) furnish that part which wants its
Membrain, with a certain viscous, glutinous matter, to the intent to defend it
from the acrimony of the Urine, that it be not hurt by it; but in the day time,
by reason of making Urine often, that matter is washed away, and the part being
yet weak, is vellicated and gnawn; if this be not probable, it seems so to me.

The Answer.
THat you would gratulate me concerning my lately bought Lordship of Aubonne,
and wish my new Possession may be happy to me, is friendly done of you, most
worthy Sir; whereas chiefly for this cause you propose a strict necessity of
our mutual discourse sometimes, which hitherto has been begun, and continued
only by Letters betwixt us; which Friendship I extremely desire may be improved
by our personal Converse: The great God allow me and mine a long and quiet lot,
and grant we may enjoy your wishes* I think speedily, by Gods assistance, to
visit our possessions, the which are yet unknown to me: In the mean time I most
affectionately return you my love for yours: and know that I am yours.

Behold how propitious Heaven is to us wretched men, which as with one hand it
afflicted our Generoas Patient with almost incurable Diseases, so with the
other it raised him up again by the help and Operation of Remedies, by which
(if ever) seasonable presence of yours, this excellent man was restored to
life, and snatched out of the Jaws of death, and emerg'd from an Iliad of
Diseases: The great and good God, the Author of health, perform your desires,
to whom be praise; and let there be dedicated to your self AEsculapius his
Cock, the Hier^glyphick of Vigilance.

In those Bodies whose Urethra, or Urinary passage of the Yard, has been long
afflicted, and tortured by a cursed Caruncle, even after the flesh thereof is
consumed, and the Ulcer healed and cicatric'd, the part remains weak a long
time, and is very apt to receive defluctions, and that chiefly in Plethorick,
Sanguine, and Bilius Constitutions, and such as have movable humors, and use
hard exercise, indulge their Appetite, and are little careful in their Diet.
The Kings Doctor, and you, did stoutly endeavor to prevent the Phlegmon, which
perhaps might have been hindered, if the part had not been so extremely filled,
and heaped up with humors, that it eluded the force of Remedies, and did upon
that account manifoldly exceed, and surpass the power of digestion, and
dissipation: The lower parts are moist, and near to the Excrements, whose
putridness and stench uses to be very great, which was the reason that they
were the sooner seized with the Gangreen; with that horrid stench which the
Patient was afflicted with: If the feeble and languishing heat deserts the
parts, there does immediately follow a sudden deadness, (or cadaverous
corruption) and dissolution of the subject. But by the Divine goodness these
mischiefs have been already removed by you, the curing of which I certainly
attribute to your Tranmatick Decoction, with which I am well acquainted, and
have approved it by manifold experiments.

There now remains three things, of which you require my opinion. 1. The
itching in that place where the Ulcer was, and that chiefly after Supper, it
being not perceptible all the day time. 2ly. The Urine's being filled with a
substance like Bran, which it does not pour out so constantly, but by fits.
3ly. The Purilent matter excreated which appears at the top of the Glans, at
the upper end of the urinary passage, and comes before the Urine, and is
expelled by it.

For the first, I do with you attribute it to the yet tenderness, and rawness
of the part; which is scarce yet covered with a Cicatrix; and is of that tender
and exquisite sense, that (being by the reiterated excretion of Urine in the
day time, cleansed and washed from that Mu^us substance with which the whole
passage in the time of sleep was moistened, and as it were lined) this nervous
body is easily hurt by the acrimony of the Urine, and is moreover irritated by
the frequent solicitation of the expulsive faculty. To avoid this
inconveniency, let the Cicatrix be confirmed by drying Medicines: make ^erary
Injections into the Urethra, adding to them the insipid Oc^r of Vitriol
thoroughly calcined, and also Sugar of Lead: let the Perinaeum be sumed (in a
Chair with a hole in it) with Frankincense, Mastick, Sanderack, Amber, Aloes,
Myrrh, adding crude Antimony, and also the Cinabar of Antimony, in small
quantity.

It Is questionable whether the Branny substance proceed from the Kidneys, or,
which often happens, by the length of the disease, it ^th drawn the Prostratas
into ^sent; or whether the Bladder (by reason of the long distemperature,
tumor, and solution of the continuity of the adjacent parts) be not afflicted
with a kind of Scabb^ness.

As for the white viscous matter, it appears to be of the nature of (...), Pus,
or corruption, and I suppose it to sweat out per (...), through the thin
membrane of the Ulcer; or to proceed from the ulcerated Pro^ratas, grown hard
at the bottom: which Glandules since they naturally contain an excrementitious
slime very diffrent from Seed, (...) which matter is designed to line the
urinary passage, that the Seed and Urine may be excreated easily, and without
pain) if they be weakened, the quantity of this humor will ^hen exceed more
then usually, and it does commonly impose upon many under the spe^es of a
Gonorrhaea: This Symptom will be ^ured by the foresaid injections, and fume, to
which if there be joined the Artificial use of Medicinal Waters, and at length
we exhibit, ^r a month or two, Pills composed of Turpentine, and Mastick, I
hope we shall have ^one all that is necessary for a perfect Cure. The history
of this Disease is long, which God grant I may see an end of when I come (...)
you; if any thing remain to be done more, let it be performed by mutual ad
vice; in the mean time, proceed to afford your assisting hands to this generous
man Farewell.

London, the 23 of January Anno 1621.
COUNCIL the Eighth. In an Ischuria, or difficulty of Urine, proceeding from a
stony disposition of the Kidneys: For a certain Noble Person.
The Description of the Disease.
THe Lord N. is of a hot and dry Constitution of Body, he is now entered his
^xty third year of his Age; his Noble and Principle parts are yet sound and
firm, except his Kidneys, chiefly his left one: He has ^een a Soldier, and
followed the Camp from ^s youth, and upon that account has undergone much
labor and trouble. From ^ence it was, that more then twenty years ^nce he
began to be afflicted with defluctions ^on his Ioints: When the hot
distempera^re of his Liver, continually sending up va^urs to his head, did not
a little increase the ^isease: Also upon the account of these ^ins in his
Ioints, and the Defluction, his excellence made use of the Advice of Dr.
Rivi^rus, and Dr. Quercetan, and other Physicians, and used their Medicines
with some success; but for all that, he endured long an^ grievous crucifying
pains, insomuch that a^ length it turned to the knotted Gout; and h^ was forced
to keep his Bed for many* Week^ together: but in the mean space, the pai^
ceasing, besides his domestic and priva^ business, he took care also of
public affairs and they also of the greatest concern, and b^ stowed great
pains about them But because he had hitherto made use of his familiar
Medicines, prescribed him by the fore-name^ Physicians, to defend him from the
pains (...) the Gout, (and to lessen the cause of the Disease) with good
success; and found no sm^ advantage by the Issues which he had, h^ Excellency
would not have burdened y^ with Letters: but that more then a year sin^ he
being troubled with another Distemper, (...) had required your Excellencies
advice, a^ had found relief thereby; but that you m^ the better understand the
business, I will expose it to your eyes in few words.

June the xviij. the last year 1620. at sumptuous ^east, he filled his Stomach
wi^ Crude, and with fried Meat, and did dri^ Wine, contrary to his custom,
refrigerat^ with Fountain water, he was taken with Nauciousness, and Belchings.
But when (...) found he was bound in his Body, about the xxij day, a little
before Dinner, without the advice of a Physician, he took a little Turpentine,
by the help of which he had two Stools: But what followed? about the beginning
of the Night, his Urine was plainly and fully stopped; upon which, he was
afflicted with sharp pains; Nauciousness, Gripes, and Vomiting. When I visited
him upon the 23d. day of the said Month, I found him as it were dead with
extreme pain: his Belly was extreme hard, and his Bladder, by reason of the
plenty of Urine, was extended after a wonderful manner: I persuaded him to
loosen his Belly with a Glyster, and that he would admit of a Catheter to be
put into his Bladder. But this Noble Patient was infinitely averse to this
Operation, by reason of the narrowness of his Urinary passage, (which he said
was natural) he desired I would try all other Remedies before I put in the
Catheter.

I caused him to take several Glysters, and prescribed him a Bath, with
Emollient Roots, Herbs, Flowers and Seeds and such things as relaxed and eased
pain; I applied also Bags, composed with the same simples, to his Belly; and
also anointed the Perinaeum with Oil of white Lillies, and Oil of sweet
Almonds; But when I had used all my diligence, and yet his Urine did not pass,
the pains and other Symptoms were increased more and more, the xxvi day, about
nine at Night, I exhibited to him a small Potion of three grains of Laudanum,
Confectio Alkermes, j. dissolved in the Pectoral decoction, and a little
Cinnamon water: by the benefit of this Medicine he slept quietly that Night,
and his Water came plentifully from him in his sleep. But whether he voided at
the same time with it, any small Stones, or Gravel, was not observed: But after
a few days, we found in the Urinal a small Stone, porous, and of the color of
Ashes: From that time he was oftentimes sensible of pain, chiefly in the region
of the left Kidney; but applying a Bag made with Marsh-mallow Roots, Mallows,
Pelletory, Chamomil, Mellilot, and Emollient Seeds, and such as discuss wind,
his pains remitted, neither from thenceforth did any grievous Symptoms afflict
him. But from that time ever since, he has voided certain small, red, hard,
and rough Stones: also about xiv days since, in his last sickness.

That which remains is, that he keeps an exact Diet: by intervals purging the
first and common passages, with a Medicinal Wine made with Agarick; Senna,
Rhubarb, Creme of Tartar, and certain appropriated Herbs, prepared in the time
of Vintage, after which, to wit, the following, or the third day after, he does
purge the Urinary passages with Turpentine: and osten drinks a water made of
the opening Roots, Saxafrage, and the like things, but never uses these,
unless his body be first rightly purged: The Generous Patient desires to be
informed, if the Turpentine is to be washed or not, because in this Practisers
disagree: hitherto by my advice he has used it unwashed; for to me it seems
likely, that the subtiler parts which go to the passages of Urine, are lost in
the washing, etc. the 3d. of December, 1621.

The Answer.
AS to the material cause, the Stone and the Gout are the same kind of Disease,
they differ only in Place, and in the condition of that juice which accompanies
the Disease, that which passes to the loose and weak Ioints, belongs to the
kind of dissolved Salts: But that which seats it self in the Kidneys and
Bladder, is like coagulated Tartar. Worthy Sir, you acurately describe those
Symptoms with which this Noble Person has had a sharp conflict, the abating of
which, nay, if it were to be hoped for, (by the removal of the cause) that the
Patient might be relieved from it, is your desire: the like I also wish with my
Soul.

The Knotted, and stony Gout, resuseth Medicinal helps: Now then let us only be
sollicitous concerning the future coming on of a suppression of Urine, from
Gravel oftentimes impacted in the narrow passages, by which the discharge of
Urine is hindered.

The generating of the Stone is powerfully impeded, by procuring a revulsion of
the viscid, slimy matter to the upper parts, and excluding them by Vomit, after
liberal eating, and large drinking: Let this be done once in a month, or every
other month, after Supper, that by sleep presently following after it, the Body
may be refreshed again, and the Spirits recreated.

About the last Quarter of the Moon, let his Body be purged with the pulpe of
Cassia, with Turpentine, and powder of Rhubarb: And for four mornings together
after that, let there be given j. or ss of vitriolated Tartar, prepared after
Crollius's way, described by him in his Basilica Chymica: after this drinking
Broth seasoned with Salt, and rendered Medicinal with the Opening Roots, with
the tender tops of Mallows, and stinging Nettles; let this Worthy Person ride,
since by reason of the weakness of his Limbs he cannot admit of other kind of
Remedies.

From henceforth let his Belly be emptied, and his Kidneys tempered with
Emollient and Cooling Glysters, adding to them Quercetanus, Antinephritick
Electuary.

The drinking the Mineral Waters will not be unuseful hereafter, unless perhaps
it be a little inconvenient for the Gout, upon the account of stirring up a
destuction: But I account it worth while, to buy with a small present
inconveniency, a great benefit arising from thence.

Let the parts in which the Sandy B^ost is lodged, be fomented with Relaxing,
Emollient, and Diuretical things; prepare a Semicupe, or half Bath (if the
decay of the Limbs be not very great) adding to it very much Oil.

To remove the rubs and obstructions stopping the passages, let there be given
the before described Tartarus Vitriolatus in Pelletory water, white Wine, Oil
of sweet Almonds, etc. The Liquor of Raddishes prepared with Sugarcandy is
excellent: nothing is more precious then Lapis Prunella, dissolved in common
Ptisan, or Pellitory Water, adding a little Syrup of Marshmallows: The
Conserves of common Mallows-flowers, and of Roses, prepared at a fit time,
renders the passages slippery, to which let there be added a third part of
powder of Liquoris, Gum Arabic, and the pulpe of Pruines, mixed in equal
proportions, and let this Noble Person take the quantity of a Wallnut of it in
a Morning, for five or six days, drinking a little white Wine upon it, and
that before his taking the Monthly Purge, and the Dinretick Broth,

Ease the bitterness of his pain as often as there shall be need by giving of
Laudanum: I neither will, nor ought I to burden this worthy Person with more
Remedies, the Omnipotent God grant that these Medicines may remove the cruel
tortures with which this stout Commander is afflicted.

Dated London, February the 17th. An. 1622.
COUNCIL the Ninth. In a case of a Caruncle in the Yard: For a Noble Person.
The Description of the Disease.
THe Noble N. is of an excellent habit of Body, strong, and now is past the
37th year of his age, and is by Nature of a hot and dry temper: When more then
xij years ago, he had contracted a Gonorrhea by immoderate, and too violent
Copulation, and had been afflicted with it for some time, he relates, that a
certain Night, in the act of carnal Copulation, he had a large efflux of pure
blood, instead of Seed: From the beginning, (and truly for many years since)
out of modesty he concealed his Disease, and almost quite neglected it, by
degrees there followed upon it a difficulty of Urine, which for all that was
sometimes more violent, at other times more remiss, according to his Diet and
Exercise: But in the mean space, for many years this Patient could scarce ever
make water without difficulty and heat: and in the time of making Urine, he
felt also pain almost in every part of his Yard, and a Branny substance, did
often appear in his Urine, and does also still appear; he voids his Urine not
in a strait line, but sometime on one hand, and sometimes on the other; also
for many years there has continually distilled by his Yard a certain purilent
matter, but without pain, and sometimes, though not often, after the excretion
of Urine, there has followed a drop or two of Blood: Though his pleasure in
Copulation be less then it was formerly; yet nevertheless he-hath many Children
by his Wife. Moreover, when the last Summer, by reason of public business, and
that of great moment, he rode Post a very great journey on Horseback, the
disaffected part was so bruised and rubbed, and also the grief was so
exasperated, that all the Symptoms which I have related were wonderfully
increased; wherefore about the end of the Month of September, at which time I
was called to him, I purged him diverse times with Cholagogs, and the Patient
used a Semicupe, or half Bath, as also I exhibited by (...), the Syrup of
Violets, and Marshmallows, with the water of the Opening Roots, that it might
be as it were a vehicle to the Syrup, I commanded the Perinaeum to be ^inted
with an anodine liniment, and the ^ins twice every day with a refrigerating
Ointment, which Medicines were not made use of without advantage: his pain
abated, and he began to make Water with less difficulty; when therefore all
things were safe, (for I knew nothing yet of the Caruncles, or that it was a
Disease inveterate) I did hope that I might return to my own Family, and what
was further to be done, I left to the Patient and his Domestics to perform.

Not long after my going away, when the Disease began to renew it self again,
there was another Physician called in to advise: He again purged his Body with
Cholagogs; and with Syrup of Violets, and Marshmallows: he exhibited also with
great success, Emulsions made with the greater cold Seeds, and sweet Almonds;
when I was called again, (the pain still continuing; the sick person then
discovered to us, that it was a Disease of long standing) it was agreed upon
then by us, that I should search with a Probe, and a Catheter, what was at the
bottom of this grief, or what was its cause: Wherefore the Body being re-purged
with Cholagogs, composed of the compound Syrup of Roses solutive, together with
the Electuary of the juice of Roses; and the Catheter being put in, I found
Caruncles in diverse places, chiefly toward the left side of the Urinary
passage; which Caruncles do even now so stop up the passage, and are so
painful, that to this very time he could not search farther then the half way
of his Yard; neither with the Catheter, nor with the Syringe, or could the
Patient Probe, or feel any further with wax Candles; which instruments and
Medicines he has hitherto applied to himself with his own hands; therefore I
could not hitherto make any Medicine reach any farther; though I doubt not,
that a great part of the Distemper, nay, the root of the Disease, is hid in the
Prostatas: For if the Urinary passage was exulcerated from the long continuance
of that Gonorrhea, and the Caruncles grew from that occasion, how much more
reasonably may we suspect the disaffection and exulceration of those Glandules?
Moreover the pain (although obscure) which the Noble Patient did feel more then
two months since about his Fundament, as I shall declare afterward, did denote
some kind of Grief to be lodged there; for truly, as Hippocrates and Experience
cause us to believe, Ubi dolor ibi and morbum esse, where there is pain, there
the Disease is: His Urine also, the last Autumn, did many times flow from him
against his will, and that whilst he slept; without doubt by reason of the
Sphincters being hurt, which does immediately adjoin to those Glandules, and
the great pain which the Patient did suffer heretofore, proceeded from the
Sympathy that part has with the Prostatas.

The Urinary passages being searched, and the Caruncles being discovered, we
applied two Bags, composed of emollient, resolving, and pain easing Roots,
Herbs, Flowers, and Seeds, and we anointed the whole Perin^um with an anodinus,
and Emollient ^iniment: As also we injected an Emollient decoction with a
Syringe, into the Urinary passage: But as I said before, the Pipe of the
Syringe could never be admitted deep enough, by reason of pain; nevertheless,
we hoped the Cure would succeed according to our wishes, but in vain: For when
the Patient had moved his Body again with some violent Exercise for some days
together, the Disease made a new assault upon him; by reason of which, not only
the evil affection in the Urinary passage was exasperated, but also the Patient
was invaded with a Tertian Fever: wherefore we were forced for a time to lay
aside the Cure we had began of the Caruncles: We again purged him with the
before prescribed Cholagogs, we opened a Vein in his left Arm; we ordered the
best kind of Diet, to wit, cooling and moistening, and we gave him such things
as are usually given to bridle and temper the Ebullition of yellow Choler. and
to abate the acrimony of Urine; we anointed his Loins, as also the region of
his Liver with a refrigerating Ointment.

We injected with a Syringe into the Urinary passage, a Collyrium made of
Mucilage of Quince Seeds, extracted with Rose, and with Plantain water, to
which was added washed Cerusse, prepared Tuthia, Harts-born burnt, and
prepared: These Remedies being applied for some days, the Fever, and that
sharp pain in the Urinary passage did remit; but the Patient complained of a
certain obscure pain about the Fundament, and about the region of the
Prostatas, but applying of Bags made with the Flowers of Chamomill, Melilot,
Elder, Roses, Wormwood, and the like, that pain did abate, at length the
Patient himself put in a Wax Candle, covered over with Emplastrum de ranis cum
Mercurio, and this he thrust in as far as he was able to suffer it, to the end
that I might discover, if by this means the Caruncles might be mollified and
discussed: for I durst not hitherto apply stronger Medicines, by reason of the
exquisite sense, and tender feeling the Patient was endowed with: The Candles
(which by no means ought to be hid) as often as I drew them out, were covered
over with a viscid, and purilent matter; from which I conjecture, that the
Urinary passage is exulcerated in diverse places, which also the Noble Patient
easily perceived when he put in the Pipe of the Syringe, or the Wax Candle; and
this is what I have hitherto observed concerning this Worthy Persons Distemper,
together with an account of the Medicines applied to him.

Now it is inquired first, if that Branny substance which has hitherto
appeared in his Urine, do denote in our Noble Patient, a scabby Bladder, as
Hippocrates will have it, 4 Aph. 77. I suppose, (but submitting to your
Judgment) these Branny Scales do not proceed from the Bladder, but from the
Urinary passage: for those which are afflicted with a Scabby Bladder, do not
only let fall, or void a Fursurous, or Branny substance with their Urine; but
their whole Urine is such, as Hippocrates testifies: But in this Patient the
Urine is not thick, but was always (excepting when he had his Fever) natural,
and he voideth these Branny scales in very small quantities: wherefore these
furfures are nothing else but Crusts or Scales, concreate and made of the
purilent and viscous matter, procured by nature (as it seems probable) to the
intent that it might be as it were a covering to the Ulcer which is in the
Urinary passage, which Crusts the Urine, softens and seperates from the small
mouths of the Ulcers, and brings away with it self, when it flows forth.

Secondly, It is inquired, if any Medicines taken at the Month, or other
Topics, can extirpate the Caruncules, or heal the Ulcers in the Urinary
passage? We have always thought it vain to try them on this Noble Patient.

Thirdly, If Topics are to be applied, whether those which I have mentioned
may be sufficient, or whether in this Patient, who has so exquisite a sense,
that he can scarce suffer a Wax Candle, covered with Emplastrum de ranis, as
was said before? whether stronge^ ones, described by Andreus Lacuna, Alphonsus
Ferrero, and others, be to be applied, w^ doubt.

Fourthly, Whether or no some part of the Disease be in the Prostatas? Of this
the Patient has always doubted; but we never did and that for the reasons
related before.

Fifthly, If that purilent matter, which has distilled by the Yard for so many
years, be tr^ Seed or no? I absolutely believe it not to b^ Seed, but a vicious
matter which falls thither from the superior parts of the Body: for Physicians
know, that the innate heat is extinguished, the radical moisture consumed, and
the Body wasted by a long lasting Gonorrhea nay by immoderate Coition, or
Copulation but because this has not in the least happen to our Noble Patient,
(who has always be^ of a strong and excellent habit of Body) it follows
therefore, that this is not true Seed, but a vicious or depraved humor that
flows out: I ascribe it to this therefore, that I might demonstrate some evil
does lurk in the Prostatas; and that the matter is supplied from thence: We may
be assured, it does not in the least flow from the Kidneys or Bladder, because
the Urine was almost always clear, and laudably digested: (excepting the Branny
substance which appeared in it) But the Patient objects one thing, to wit, that
heretofore he felt no pain about his Fundament, and therefore there was no
Disease there before? I answer with Hippocrates, That two pains at one time,
and not existing in the same part of the Body, the more vehement obscures the
less; since therefore the Tope, or head of the Yard, by reason of the concourse
of Nerves, is of an exquisite sense, it is no wonder if the vehement pain in
that place, (before we exhibited Anodynes, and Consolidating Injections) did
obscure that other about the Prostatas, whose sense is not so acute: from hence
it does clearly appear, that the Collyrium and other Medicines, were not made
use of without very great advantage, and there might have been much hope from
them, could they have been admitted deeper into the part.

Sixthly, Since heretofore the Patient many times found advantage in the use of
Powder of Liquoris, mixed with Turpentine, it is enquired whether Spirit of
Turpentine may be safely given to such a body as this, who is very Bilio^s, or
abounds with Choler?

Seventhly, If the use of Mineral Waters alone, that is, without Topics, can
cure this evil, as well in the Prostatas, as the Urinary passage? We always
have doubted of it; for suppose that the Mineral Waters do greatly cleanse the
Urinary passages, we do not believe they can in the least consume the Caruncles.

Eighthly, If those Emollient, Anodyne Fomentations, which relaxed the Urinary
passages, were exhibited according to reason or no? And if by the using of them
the Caruncles could grow bigger, as the Patient would persuade us: Although the
effect demonstrates the contrary to us.

The Answer.
I Have hitherto forborne either to write, or send an Answer to your Letters
which came to me above a year ago, (most learned Sir) for that the Noble Person
in whose behalf they were writ, put us in hopes a long time of his coming to
us; which at length he confirmed by coming: wherefore since in your learned
Letter you recount the History of the whole Disease with which he was
afflicted, and require my advice (at this great distance) concerning what is to
be done, I thought it needless to write those things, which things themselves I
had an opportunity to perform, the Subject of them being at hand: And it was
sufficient by way of Compendium, to do them to the Patient himself. Accept
therefore of what has passed here in our Land of Britain, and an account of
what we have done with the Patient.

The difficulty in, and the manner of his making Urine, did cause a suspicion,
that there were (...), fleshy excrescences, commonly called Caruncules, within
the Urethra, or passage of the Yard; searching it with a Wax-candle, I found
the grief, whose double cause being as they say unravelled ab ovo, or from its
beginning, I sound its first rise was to (...) attributed to the Gonorrhaea, in
whose in^ed ^entigo, (or erection of the Yard) by Copulation the chorde, as the
vulgar call it, was broke; but to speak move like an Artist, the membrane of
the Urethra was cl^t, or chopped, and being by the inflammation, and force of the
tumor contracted and made short, after that large haemorrhage or stux of
blood, which usually follows such torcible endeavors, and violent (...),
avulsions or tearings of the parts, there remained an Ulcer, from which by
degrees there grew a Fungus, or red spongy flesh, a preternatural tumor, which
is a disease in me^tu, (or in the passage) which can be taken away safely, and
certainly by no other means, then by removing the superfluous flesh by
Exoereticks, or gentle Corrosives.

This Spongeous proud flesh is wont to ouze or sweat out a purulent s^nies, or
matter, which usually for the most part imposes upon those who less accurately
enquire into this disease, under the species of a Gonorrhaea: from hence those
strings, and filaments of corrupt matter, which flowed forth with the Urine on
both sides, at our first view; which matter (I suppose as you do) does partly
flow from the Prostatas, which have been offended, and for a long time
afflicted with a malignant distemper, the destroyer of the native heat, and the
underminer and weakner of all the actions.

Having carefully weighed every difficulty, and chiefly the delicate and nice
nature of the Patient, whose tender sense is such, that the slightest and
easiest Chyrurgical remedies, are esteemed by him for most cruel torments, I
applied my self to the business; and universal or general Medicines being
premised, I consumed with a gentle Cathaeretick (applied with a Wax-candle) the
whole Caruncle, and that with little pain in the harder sort of Warts, half the
length of the urinary passage, the dimension of which was hardly so long as the
breadth of three of his fingers: the nearness of the Neck of the Bladder,
caused me no small trouble, when I was come to the end of the Caruncle; but
chiefly that small ^ubercle which gives way for the Seed to enter the Urethra,
by the little mouth which opens it self in the Prostatas, whose bulk being
increased by a Tumor, proceeding from the flux of humors, might have deluded
an Artist of small experience, and persuaded him to have continued the use of
the Corrosive longer.

But take this as a secret from me, in the cure of a Caruncle, you shall
procure it sooner by going slowly to work, than by being hasty: As often as the
Lips, or Edges of the Ulcer shall be swelled by the irritation of Medicines, if
they be fomented with lenitives, they will subside, and fall again, and (what
is wonderful) the most pertinacious stops, or obstructions, will vanish of
their own accord in a few days time.

So it happened to our Noble Patient, who by the mercy of Almighty God, is now
as free from this Chronick Disease, (which was almost converted into a habit,
or nature) as ever he was in his life, as appears by the free passage of his
Seed and Urine, also he Pisseth with a full, continued, and strait stream, who
lately expelled his Urine by drops, and with much difficulty.

The superfluous flesh, (or Caruncles) being removed, there remained a longish
Ulcer, which in respect of the part is great; and the cause being malignant, we
have again and again cleansed the Ulcer, and have hitherto with incessant
labor, endeavored to dry up, and bring it to a Cicatrice: But there is one
thing yet remains after the healing of it, that is, to procure a solidity and
hardness of the Cicatrix, which cannot be done either by slight, or few
Medicines, or in a few days, in a Part, which is washed every day by the
torrent and flood of the Urine: If public business would permit this Patient
to remain longer with us, we would add a conclusion to the Cure; but at the
time of his departure, he shall bring along with him both advice and necessary
Remedies, which shall supply the want of our presence.

Therefore by way of Confirmation, and that whatsoever remains in the
Glandules, may be radically taken away, and that there may succeed no new
infirmity, I advise, that the Body being artificially purged again, the next
Spring he enter upon a Sudorifick Diet, than which I suppose nothing more
advantageous, both as to correcting the general cause, as also by strengthening
and greatly drying the parts, to restore them perfectly.

I have written what is further necessary more minutely, and particularly in my
advice (which he brings with him) and at the present time of acting, the
present face of things will direct you what is to be done first, and what last:
The Soul of Cures are the opportunities of times, which to follow, and lay hold
of the moments, is a thing denied to the absent.

You will learn from the mouth of this generous Person, what arts I have made
use of in fighting against this pertinacious Enemy; with what prudence I have
eluded the cruelty of the most dangerous* Symptoms, with what care and
diligence I have mittigated their present fierceness.

This Epistle would swell into a Volume, should I relate all. But lest I seem
to envy the public good, I will commit to the Press my small Commentaries upon
Caruncles, and my experience in this part of the Art, as soon as my affairs at
Court will give me a breathing time, which imperfect faetus I willingly leave
to be licked by more polished ingenueties, and such as are more experienced in
Art: For I am not in love with my own labors, nor can I believe that I can
produce greater, or better things than other men.

That you may experiment our Exaeretick Medicine, I have sent you a little of
it, which nevertheless is sufficient to take away four great Caruncles.

I^ it perform its work but slowly, let not your mind d^spond; for to work
safely and pleasantly, is better then swiftly and dangerously: The effect of
the Medicine will never prove vain; but you may accelerate it by adding of
Mercurius praecipitatus; but why do I light a Candle to the Sun: receive this
as a testimony of my kindness; if you desire greater and more solid ones, know
that they shall not be denied you.

I answer nothing to your Questions; if you require my Testimony concerning
what you have advised, or administered heretofore to the Noble Patient, whoever
calumniates you, let them learn to know, that Men experienced in the Art are to
be believed, and I do aver, that you have done all things according to Art, etc.

Dated London, February the 5th. An. 1616.
COUNCIL the Tenth. In a Catarrh: For a Noble Person.
Written in French.
SIR,
I Participate in the evils which happen to my Friends, and suffer by consent,
or sympathy with them, chiefly if they be such to whose service I have devoted
my self, my Genius compelling to do so: I hear that a troublesome Catarrh
afflicts you, which by Day gives you some respits, but by Night is exasperated
and very troublesome: The disposition of these sort of disaffections is, that
they grow worse when the Night approaches, at which time Phlegm predominates
over the rest of the humors.

Now since your Body in general is sufficiently purged already, it remains
particularly to cleanse your Brain; and afterward, by means of drying Medicines
to strengthen it.

To which intent I advise, that in the Mornings, two days together, and again
every other day for some time, you use a Gargarisme, composed of twelve
spoonful of White Wine, four spoonfuls of Vinegar, three of Honey, and two of
Mustard distempered, and as the custom is, ground together; let this Mixture be
warmed, and take of it a spoonful or two, Gargarising with it, and carefully
spitting out whatsoever Phlegm it draws from the Brain: Reiterate this
Gargarisme five, six, or seven times, until you find your head emptied, and
made lighter; if there remain any heat in your Iaws, that will be removed by
Garguling with a temperate Oxycrate, or mixture of Vinegar and Water.

Cause to be prepared a Powder made of Mastick six Drams, Yellow Amber three
Drams, Benzomin two Drams, Red Roses, and Coriander Seeds, of each two Drams
and a half; fume those things you cover your Head with in a Morning, and at
Night going to Bed, with this powder; or rather a Cap made of Tow, or Wool,
quilted, and make a paper Coif to be worn perpetually, putting over it the
foresaid Cap: It Is absolutely necessary, for the Cure of the present sickness,
and to prevent greater dangers which are ready to fall upon you, that you
defend your self the whole Winter against the injuries of the Cold: In the
Mornings use Frictions, or rubbings of the upper parts of your Elboes and Arms,
and the whole length of your Backbone, with moderately warm linen Cloths:
Apply to your Pole, hot Bread newly drawn out of the Oven, and cut in the
middle; or rather a Mornings, apply dry Cupping Glasses.

All these things being observed, unless you go to Stool of your self, your
Belly is to be loosened, to which purpose Glysters are useful: But if you abhor
them, than at the beginning of your Meal use Prunes, stewed with Senna: If my
advice prove effectual to you, I shall be abundantly satisfied, etc.

Precautions and Cure, Against the Plague cruelly raging.
The Remedies. Prescribed by the common consent, and joint endeavors of the
King and Queens Doctors, and Physicians in Ordinary, in pursuance of their
Duty; and directed to their Majesty's Apothecary, July the 6th. 1625.

Preservatives against the Plague.
The Medicinal Broth.
FOr the Kings Breakfast let him sup this Broth: Let his Majesty take Broth
altered with the leaves of Wood Sorrel, three^eav'd Sorrel, Porcelan, Borrage,
Bugloss, (...), Baume, Pimpernel, the red flowers of Fluellin, the fruit of
Barberies, shaving of Hartshorn: in viij. of the straining of this ^et there
be dissolved of the sweet Majestery of Coral, of Pearl, of each j. Chrystals of
Sor^el, and of small Oster, of each j. mix them. If the Chrystals be wanting,
drop in as much Oil of Sulphur made by a Bell as will render it moderately
sower: Let the King take this Broth before he come out of his Chamber, having
first been at Stool; let him deferr Dinner for three hours after it. If this
Broth be troublesome to him, and his Stomach require change of Break-fasts,
then every morning let this following be ready to be given at his Majesty's
command.

Gelly of Hartshorn.
Of the thin and broad shavings of Hartshorn, made of the horns of a Beast
newly killed, j. ss Spring Water, lb ij. boil it till half be consumed, not
taking away the Scum: then presently strain it through a Tammy cloth, to which
whilst it is yet warm, add as much as you please of Rhenish Wine, juice of
Limons, or Pomecitrons, a little Cinnamon Water, and a few grains of
Ambergrease; it may be made of a yellow color with two grains of Saffron, made
into a little knob, by tying it up in a piece of Tiffany, which being moistened
with the liquor, let it be often squeezed out: Let the Gelly yet warm be poured
into a Murrhy, or a Chin^ Dish, and suffer it to congeal in a cold place.

Another Gelly, more Cordial.
Rasped Hartshorn, j. ss. Flowers of Borrage, Bugloss,
an. Pug. iv. Celandine, Red Veronica, or Fluellin,
an. Pug. j. The tops of Baum, M. j. Fountain Water, lb ij. The best Rhenish
Wine, lb ss, Boil it till there remains lb j. to which add, Of the Quiddenies
of Mulberies, Rasberies, Currants,
an. ij. Cinnamon Water, one spoonful. Ambergrease, gr. iv. Oriental Musk, gr.
j.


All being melted with a gentle heat, pour it out, and put it into Murrhy, or
else China Dishes, and permit it to cool for use.

Biskets of Pomecitron-peels.
Of fresh Citron peels, both the yellow part and the white, only removing the
sour part, take lb j. boil it in Spring Water for the space of one hour, and
removing the Vessel from the fire, suffer it to remain in infusion for xxiv
hours, in an earthen vessel: pour off the water, and dry the Peels well with a
clean linen cloth, beat them in a Stonemorter into a Past, and then let there
be added a double proportion of Sugar dissolved in Rose, Orange, and Baume
Water; boil it to the consistance of a solid Electuary, adding Ambargrease j.
Oriental Musk, gr. v. Majestery of Pearls, and red Corals, an. ss. of Oriental
and Occidental Bezoar-stone subtly powdered, and ground upon a Porphery, with
Baume Water, an. j. mix them, and make Morsels, or little Cakes, like the solid
Conserve of Roses: Let his Majesty take one, or two of them in a Morning for
his Breakfast: Let the King drink upon them a Draught of well wrought clear
Beer, in which has been infused Pimpernell and Meadow, sweet, the flowers of
Borrage, Bugloss, and the Tops of Baume.

The Cordial Syrup.
Cut off the Tops of the Stalks of Augelica cross ways, whilst they yet remain
fixed in the ground, then fill them up with white Sugarcandy finely powdered,
and stop them up with Cotton, and cover them on the top of that with
Nut-shells, and after two or three days, pour the Sugar which is dissolved into
a Syrup, into a convenient Vessel, and let there be prepared a sufficient
quantity of the Syrup this way, of which take viij. Syrup of Mulberries,
Rasberries, and the sower Syrup of Citrons, an. iv. Ambargrease, gr. vj. Mosck
tied up in a Cloth, gr. ij Oil of Sulphur, as much as is sufficient to give it
a pleasant sharpness: keep it in a Viol close stopped for use, which is to be
taken in a Morning, to the quantity of ss in the stead of the foresaid
Prophylac^icks, or Preservatives.

Let him eat sometimes new Butter spread upon Bread with the Leaves of Sorrel,
and three leaved Sorrel, and a little Salt, and let him drink upon it a Draught
of Beer, with the infusion of the before-named Herbs.

Tabella Hypoglottides, or, Tabellets to be put under the Tongue.
Of Bole Armenick washed in Rose Water, j. Sealed, Lemnian, and Strigoninan
Earths, an. ss. Harts-born, burnt white, x. Sweet Majestery of Pearls, Coral,
Crab's-eyes,
an. vj Bones of a Stags-heart, iij. Fragments of Iacinths, Emrods, Chrystals
prepared, an. ij. The Stone called Lapis contra Yerva, which is prepared of the
juice of the Herb in the Indies, ss. Oriental and Occidental Bezoar, an. j. ss.
The roots of Zedoary, Tormentil,
an. v. Candied Citron-peels, ij. ss. Ambargrease, j. The best Mosck, ss.


Let all of them be finely powdered, and made up into a Past, with the Mucilage
of Quince-Seeds, extracted with Rose Water adding to these a double proportion
of Sugar, of which make Trochises, and keep them for ordinary use, drying them
with a gentle heat: Let them be held in the mouth, and swallowed by degrees,
and let them be dissolved as often as his Majesty goes by suspected places.

Bezahartick Trochises.
Of the Chrystals of Wild-Sorrel, of three-leav'd Sorrel, an. j. Strigonian
Earth, vj. Hartshorn burnt white, The sweet Majestery of Pearls, Corals, an.
v. Bones of a Stags-heart, iij. Roots of Contra Yerva, Tormentil, an. ss. The
Hearts and Livers of Vipers, taken at a fitting time, ij. Ambargrease, j. The
best Musk, ss. White Sugarcandy the weight of them all;
make of them all a fine Powder, which make into a Past with Baume, Roses, and
Orange flower Waters, of which form Trochises, to be used as before, a portion
of which may be acuated with a few drops of Oil of Angelica, or with that which
drops out of the ripe Stalks (without pressing) when they are cut.

The Pomeambar.
Of the best Labdanum, iv. Benzoin, Gum. Caranna, Stirax Calamita, Wood of
Aloes, Angelica roots, Zedoary,
an. ss. Sweet smelling Reed, j. Rhodium Wood, Yellow Sanders, Juniper, Cedar,
an vj. Lavender flowers, Oris flowers, Marjarom, Citron-Peels, Aurange-Peels,
an. xij. Cloves, vj. Ambargrease, iij. Musk, j.


Rub the Rosins and Gums to a fine powder in a hot Mortar, bruise, and mix them
altogether; and by adding as much as is sufficient of Balsom of Peru, make a
Past, of which form round Balls, to be carried about and smelt to.

The sweet sented Pestilential Liquor.
Because the King hates to smell to Vinegar, prepare this sweet sented Water
following, to infuse the species in.

Of Oris flowers, lb j. the leaves of Marjarom, M. iv. Common-Time, Wild-Time,
an. M. iij. Basil, M. iij. Baume, M. v. Sage, Rosemary, Bays,
an. M. ij. Of the flowers of Elder, P. vj. Red Roses, Red Fluellin, Spanish
Broom, Pipe-Tree, an. P. viij. Shaving of Cedar-wood, vj. Cinnamon, vj.
Rose Water, lb xviij.
Let all the simples be very new and fresh, and put them in a double Vessel, or
a Body and Head; and having poured upon them the Liquors, distill it according
to Art, in a Balneo, with a Refrigeratory. Then, Of the roots of Butter-burr,
Enula Campaine, Gentian, an. iv. Winters-Barke, iij. Of the Roots of Angelica,
the great Valerian, Master-wort, Carlin Thystil,
an. ij. Galangal, sweet keed, Zedoary, Wood of Rhodium, Juniper,
an. x. The leaves of dried Scordium, Baume, Lemon, Time, Sage, Marjarom,
Rosemary,
an. M. j. Rue, M. ij. Dittary of Crete, Malabar^hrum,
an. ss. Flowers of Elder, P. iv. Lavender, French Lavender both sorts,
an. P. ij. Orange-Peels, The yellow rind of Citrons,
ij ss. Cloves, xij. Nutmegs, Mace,
an. ij.
All of them being cut and bruised, sprinkle them with Malago Sack, afterward
put them in a Stone-Pitcher, and pour upon them, Of the before described Water,
lb viij. Rose Water, Orange-water, Water of Jassemy flowers,
an. lb ij.
Put them to digest in Dung, or a Balneo, for the space of four days, strain
some of it immediately for the Kings present use: which Liquor may be made
stronger sented, by adding some grains of Ambargrease and Musk.

Our Lord the King may carry about with him, a Sponge dipped in this Liquor,
and put into an Ivory Box, full of small holes.

You may pour Vinegar upon the remaining Mass, and make another infusion for
the Courtiers, adding a greater quantity of Lavender flowers, Citron-Peel, and
Cloves: Also add Treacle and Mithridate, that it may become an Acetum
Theriacale.

The moist Fume for the Kings Bedchamber.
Of the Roots of Florentine Oris, vj. Enula Campaine, Angelica, an. iv.
Winters-Bark, Storax Calamita, an. iij. The inward Bark of Cinnamon, j. Sweet
Garden-Reed, ij. Rhodium Wood, Juniper Wood, an. j. ss. Yellow of Citron-Peel,
Benzoine, an. v. Zedoary, Galangal, an. xij. The dried leaves of Marjaram,
Sage, Rosemary, Time, an. M. ij. Lavender-flowers, P. vj. Cloves, x.


All being bruised and cut, put them in a Stone Vessel, and pour upon them of
the best Rosewater, lb x. of the strongest Vinegar, lb ij. Let the Vessel be a
fourth part empty, and put it in a Balneo, and let it infuse for three days,
then take it out again for use: whilst it is in infusion, let he Vessel be
covered with a Bulls Bladder, cast of this Liquor upon a h^ plate of Iron, and
thus fume the Kings Bed. Chamber three or four times a day, every day. Or make
with this, that which they call Cassolet is a perfuming pot, with fire under it.
Cassolets, to boil in a Corner of the Kings-Chamber; but then you may add
stronger sents or perfumes, as Benzoin, Storax Calamita, Ambargrease, or you
may pour this Liquor into a Spanish Cassolet, with silver little Balls, and so
make it to boil according to Art.

The dry Fume for the Court-Chambers.
The Wood of Rhodium, Juniper, Cedar, Pine, an. iv. Mastick, Frankincense,
Sanderack, Colophonium, an. iij. Dry Balsom, Gum Caranna, Storax Calamita, an.
iij. ss. Benzoin, x. Red Roses, Winters Bark, The inward Bark of Cinnamon, an.
ij. ss.


Mix them all together, and make a gross Powder; strew some of it upon coals
for a Fume.

If you add ij. or iij. of Amber to the ^foresaid Powder, though it will not be
the gratefuller, yet it will be the more efficacious.

Trochises to Fume the Kings Shirts, and Clothes.
Damask Roses gathered after the Sunrising, lb ss. Benzoin, ij.
Mix them, and make them into a Paste, by ^ong beating them together in a
Mortar; of which form Trochises to be dried in the ^hade.

Of these Trochises, reduced to a Powder, j. Musk, gr. j. Civet, gr. iij.
Caraman Balsom, ss.
Make Trochises with Rose Water, and a little Gum Tragacanth, to be dried and
kept in a ^ox close shut, to be used in the mornings.

II. Trochises.
Trochises of Roses, vi. Powder of Benzoin, ij. Musk, gr. j. Civet, gr. xvi.
Rose Water, as much as is sufficient,
Make a mass.

The III. Perfume.
Very fine Powder of Juniper-wood, Benzoin, an. vij. Musk, j. Rose Water, q. s.
with the Muscilage of Gum Tragacanth.
Make a mass.

It will be convenient to sprinkle his Hankerchief with Aqua Angeli: let the
settling of this Water be made up into Pastills, for to fume the Chamber,
Shirts, and other Vestments.

Aqua Angeli.
Wood of Aloes, Storax Calamita, an. ss. Benzoin, iv. Nutmegs, Yellow Sanders,
Cloves, an. ij.


Boil them in Rose Water, such a quantity a^ may cover them four fingers; do
this in (...) close Vessel, with a gentle fire, in Sand o^ Ashes; continue the
boiling for a day and (...) night, then strain it, and add to it, Of the best
Rose Water, lb iij. Orange flowers, Jessamin flowers, Musk, an. j.
Of the remaining mass, being warm, make Pastills.

The Balsom for the Nostrils.
Balsom of Peru, iij. Distilled Oil of Angelica, or if you have it, that which
drops from the Stalks being cut, Oil of Citron-peels,
an. ij. Rosemary, Juniper, an.
j. Roses distilled, ss. Orange Butter, Jessamin Butter, an. ss. Ambergrease,
iv. Oriental Musk, Civet, an. ij.


Mix them all together as they should be, and by grinding them upon a Porphiry,
make a Balsom, for the King to anoint with in a morning before he go out of his
Chamber.

Oil of Amber often rectified with Spirit of Wine, is excellent good.

Mathiolus's Oil of Scorpions is very efficacious, if our Lord the King anoint
his Pulses, and the region of his Heart with it, when he hears a Sermon, or
admits a crowd of people to come to him.

Let his Diet be refrigerating, and drying; let him change the Air, and avoid
the concourse of people.

Besides these Prophylactick, for the cure of the disease when it is present,
have these following ready prepared. Aqua Theriacalis, described in the London
Pharmacopoea, p. 12. Antidotus Saxonica vera. Electuar. de Ovo, Vegetabile, ac
Minerale. Pulvis rubaeus Pannonicus alter Pharmac. Aug. p. 114 Pulvis griseus
Caesaris, ibid. p. 3. Species Liber, ibid. p. 137. Diascordium Magistrale,
Mayernii. Diascordium Fracastorii. Theriaca Andromachi. Londinensis Antidotus,
p. 91. Mithridatium Damocratis. Confectio Alkermes. Confectio Hyacinthina.
Salts of Butter-Burr. Meadow-Sweet. Elder. Rue. Scordium. Juniper. Pope Leo's
Oil of Scorpions. Species for Emulsions, composed of Citron Seeds, Mustard
Seeds, ^actis ^erlurum, or Milk of Pearls.


Let these Purges be in a readiness. Tryphera, Persica Mesusi, vel Iohannis
Damasceni, Pharm. Aug. p. 56. Pilul^ Ruffi. Mastichinae Fernel. Angelica Seeds,
with other Cordial Herbs.


Another Council or Advice in the Plague.
Written in French, and presented by the Kings Physicians to Lewis the XIII.
the French King.
The Curative Part.
THese are the signs of the simple Plague, when it is alone, and it is joined
with no other kind of Fever: a small Pulse, L^nguid, low, unequal; decay of
strength, Fainting, Vomitings, and Anxieties; but nevertheless, the heat is so
moderate, that the Fever is insensible: there is no Thirst, no Pain, the Urine
is like healthy peoples: But the sick dye in this gentle state of the Disease,
contrary to hope and opinion.

If the P^st be joined with a putrid Fever, then there are these Symptoms, a
most sharp pain of the head, drousiness, ravings, difficulty of breathing, with
a stinking breath, unextinguishable Thirst, loss of the Appetite, urgent
Vomiting, burning heat of the inward Bowel^ with coldness of the extreme parts,
turbid, confused, and flame colored Urine; the excrement^ of the Belly
extremely stinking.

If the Plague be simple, let this Composition be made use of.
A new laid Egg, pour out the White, and fill it with Saffron, roast it under
hot Ashes, till it be almost hard, then the Shell being taken away, beat the
Egg with these things added to it. White Dittany, Tormentil, Angelica,
Juniper Berries,
an. ij. Camphire, gr. iij.
Mix them all in a Mortar, with the weight of all of them of the best
Turpentine, or Mithridate.

Let there be taken gr. xx. in equal parts of Spring Water and White Wind,
reiterate this Dose thrice in an hour, if it happen that the Stomach cast it up
by Vomit; but after that hour is elapsed, give a simple Glyster to expel the
Excrements, in which oftentimes the Contagion is lodged; which being voided
presently, procure Sweat by giving of the fol^owing Water.

Of the roots of Sorrel, Gentian, White Dittany, Tormentil,
an. ss. Juniper Berries, ss. Seeds of Carduus Benedictus, Citron,
an. ij. Old Mithridate, j. Shaving of Guajacum-wood, ij. Water of Sorrel,
Meadow-sweet, Carduus Benedictus,
an. lb j.


Let there be taken of the foresaid Water, two or three Ounces, with ss. of
Syrup of Lemons, sustaining the sweet for 5 or 6 hours, according to the
strength of the Patient, avoiding Sleep whilst it is breaking forth; in the
interim giving the Patient slices of Citron to suck, infused in cold Water, the
Berries of ever-green Thorn, and washed Cherries, and the like, that he may
cool his Mouth.

The Heart being thus fortified, the Excrements voided, and the Venom expelled
by Hidroticks, or procurers of sweat; let there b^ given to the sick, Broaths
made with Sorrel Lettice, Cichory; season his Meat with the juice of Sorrel;
Oranges, Lemons; give foo^ often, but little in quantity, lest the stomach be
burdened: Let Drink be allowed more freely, for Thirst is hurtful: Let there
b^ given Spring Water, in which is infused Liquoris, and a good many slices of
Citron, no^ omitting to boil it: But our opinion is, Wi^ may be allowed
(notwithstanding the heat) to defend the Heart, which is destroyed by often
^aintings: But let the Wine be small and thin, and a little rough, according to
the height of the Fever, if the Patient be desirous of it.

Let his Sleep be little, and every hour to temper the heat of the Mouth,
Gargule with simple Water, or diluted with a little Wine: in the mean time make
the Patient cheerful, nourishing the hopes of health in him; for nothing is so
pernicious in these kind of Diseases, as terror and fear is.

Also let the sick be in a temperate place, letting in often fresh Air, by
opening the Doors and Windows, which o^ght to be toward the North: These
Remedies, together with Diet so used, it is taken by many for an excellent
thing to anoint the Armpits and Grain, with Oil of Scorpions, or Oil of
Lillies, adding Treacle to it; and this to be done several times, to extract
the Venom; by this ^he Heart is defended, and freed from it.

Blood-letting does not seem necessary, un^ess a putrid Fever be joined with
the plague, with extreme pains, inflammations, anxieties, difficult breathing, a
high Plethora, and other ^he like accidents, which are the issue of ful^ess: in
letting blood, observe not so much ^e quantity, as the measuring it by the
te^our of the Patients strength and vigor: let this Medicinal Indication be a
general Canon and Rule.

Observe these few things; with whatsoever means the Disease is to be opposed,
let it be done at first, before the Disease be confirmed, and have taken root:
Begin with the Cordial Potion, giving of it thrice in an hour, if the Stomach
cast it up again: At the same time cast in a Glyster, and presently let blood,
except something hinder, exhibiting a little after the Sudorifick Water; so
that these helps and remedies are to be administered in the space of six hours;
letting blood procrastinated is unuseful, since it is better to let it alone,
then to make use of it when a Bubo appears; for he that does that, intends
mischief, not to Cure.

To Cure a Bubo.
Many use only boiled Scabious, bruised and brought into the form of a
Poultess, adding Hogs-lard to it: from the great power the is endowed with in
these Diseases, it ha^ gained the name of (Casse bosse) the Cure (...) Bubo's:
To this Cataplasme some add Li^ roots, or Onions baked under the Embe^ to which
being bruised, they add some Yoll^ of Eggs, Pigeons-Dung, and Leven, beati^
them all together with a sufficient quantity (...) Oil of Li^tes; afterward
they apply it warm, changing it every other hour: They add to every Ounce of
Oil, one Dram of Treacle.

To Cure a Carbuncle.
To this purpose it may be sufficient to apply only Scabious or Sorrel, backed
under the Embars, making it into the form of a Poultess, with Yolks of Eggs,
and fresh Butter, to be renewed every hour: The leaves of Mallows,
Marchmallows, Pellitory of the wall, etc.

The rest are wanting.

Advice for the Constriction, or Stranguling of the Throat, arising from
Melancholy vapors, proceeding from the Hypochondries. For Dr. Bouvard, chief
Physician to Lewis XIII. King of France.
Written in French.
FRom the relation of the compression of your Throat. which is not fixed and
stable, nor continual, and is without an Ulcer, Tumor, and Inflammation: And
from your perceiving an agitation in the region of the Hypochondries, from
whence acrid and hot vapors are carried to the Throat, (which is the Tube and
Funnel of the Chimny) in the extremity of which there resides a Distemper which
proceeds from another place, just as the Nostrils are exulcerated by acrid
Phlegm, and Choler inflames and vellicates the Fundament in Bloody-fluxes,
although the cause of those evils lurk in other places. We suppose this Disease
is only a Symptom of an internal cause afflicting you, to wit, of the
Hypochondries, Liver, and other adjacent parts, with a notable hot and dry
distemperature, upon which account the Belly is bound, and all the Thin and
serous humors are snatched into the Veins, there being lodged plenty of
Choler, and other gross humors, in the chief Veins of the Mesentery, and the
natural Caveties of the Bowels.

This foundation being laid, it is easy to procure help by Diet, and generous
cooling and moistening Evacuators: And if your recovery do not presently
follow, according to wish, you must not therefore abstain from Medicines, (a
word is sufficient to an understanding Physician.)

Prescribe your Diet to your self by strong refrigerators: I understand you
have used weak mineral waters, such as Monfran (once or twice a year:) I hear
to evacuate, you have frequently let Blood in your Arm: use Laxative Ptisans
with Cassia and Senna, and other slight sort of Purgings of that kind, with
Syrup of Roses, and Peach-blossoms: universal Baths; and also use Milk, and
clarified Whey, in which Fumaterry has been insused; drink Asses-milk
plentifully: persist in the use of these, according to the vehemence of your
contumacious and habitual Disease, which otherwise no doubt will increase, and
bring upon you worse Symptoms.

In the same Disease. By Dr. de Arduynes, Physician of the Hospital of Charity
at Paris, called St. James.
Written in French.
WE have been made acquainted with the Disease with which N. D. is af^licted,
which in my judgment is an offspring of the distemperature of the Bowels,
whose office is to prepare the nourishment; from which Bowels, plenty of
vapors ascend to the Head, which afterward fall down to the Throat, and parts
adjacent: The parts which are affected are the spaces betwixt the Laryngx, or
Tope of the Wind Pipe, and the Bone Hyoides.

To the Cure of this Disease, frequent and iterated Purgation is necessary, to
be begun with this usual Ptisan following.

Of the common Ptisan made of the roots of Cichory and Bugloss Flowers, two
pounds: in which infuse of Oriental Senna Leaves, ij. strain it, and prepare a
Ptisan, of which take two or three Wine Glass-fuls in a day, one upon an empty
stomach, another a little before Dinner, the third about four of the Clock in
the Afternoon.

This Purgation being performed, in the use of which you are to persist for
five or six days, first the Basilica in the right Arm, then that in the left
Arm is to be opened. Let Bathing follow this letting of blood, for seven or
eight days; other Topical Medicines, as Oils, Poultises of Swallows-Nests, etc.
are altogether useless; for having used the former Medicines, health will
follow: If any thing remain of this Disease, it is easy to look to its
specific cause; but in this case we are to be warned of the effect.

By the same Person, for the same Person.
Out of French into Latin.
WE do collect from your Note sent to us, (in which the Symptoms with which the
Noble D. is afflicted are related) that there is some lessening of the Disease;
and that it did arise from vapors in the Head, which descended by the way of
the Throat: And because there is less plenty of these dry vapors, from hence
there does not follow so great a distention of the part; but on the contrary,
they being confined within their first region, from hence there follows a
greater distention of the Hypochondries then formerly: from hence arises that
kind of affection or Disease we call Windy Melancholy, which is now much
flighter then it was: Nor is it needful to enquire, if there be a Phlogosis, or
Inflammation or no, in those places; for this is certain, wheresoever adust
Melancholy lurketh, there is always present and joined with it a
distemperature, the reason is, that the presence of the vapors does suppose
heat, which stirs them up.

But to the Cure of this Disease, the now prescribed Remedies are to be
insisted on, afterward proceeding in the use of the following.

Let the beginning be with opening a vein, unless it have been performed
already, and first strike the Basilica, afterward the Saphena; in the
intermediate time let there be constantly used Semicups, or half Baths, in
which the Patient sitting, let him take the Decoction of Scorzonera, with the
simple Syrup of Apples, not omitting Pimpernel: the third or fourth day after
the Encathisme, or sitting in the Bath, this following Purgation is to be made
out of hand.

The foresaid Decoction, lb j. in which infuse Oriental Senna leaves, j. in the
straining dissolve clean Pulp of Cassia, ix. strain it again, and make an
Apozeme, to be taken at three Doses, without the Syrups: adding to every Dose
Syrup of Dodder, j. and so make an Apozeme to be taken in the Bath.

After the celebrated use of the Bath, let Bloud-Leaches be applied to the edge
of the Fundiment: And after that, sit in a Chair with a hole through it, a B^son
of hot water being placed underneath it, that the Haemorrhoides may be excited
by the vapors of it: which if by Natures assistance you can cause to appear,
it will be a good Omen. And afterward persist in the use of altering Remedies,
adding to them Capper roots, and Tamarisk wood: these things being rightly
performed, send us back word, how the Patient finds himself then.

The Patient was restored a little while after by using the Mineral Waters, and
Cha^byate Wine.

Advice in the Epilepsia, or Falling Sickness: For a Noble Virgin.
Written in French, by a Physician whose Name is not known.
ALthough the Disease of this Noble Virgin, is called the Epilepse, and is
noted to be fixedly rooted and confirmed, as having eluded and baffled many
Medicines, yet I hope God (the chief Physician of Chronical diseases) giving
his blessing, in progress of time she will be freed from it; and by changing
her Age and Temperament, (which happens in Climacterick years, to wit, on the
seventh year, by the help of the natural heat, grown more and more viget and
lively) she will overcome that pernicious Diath^sis, or indisposition: chiefly
when Nature, at her appointed time, shall have cleansed the body of this Maid
of its impurities, by the coming on of that Flux which is familiar to the Sex.
And this is the rather to be hoped, for that those which have been by, and
present when the Fits invade her, and have noted the signs going before, do
deny it to be idiopathical but rather assert it to be produced by Sympathy, and
consent of parts: That is, its Original is not to be derived from the evil
Constitution of the Brain; but wholly from the inferior parts, chiefly from
the Bowels, (with whom the Brain consents by affinity) from which gross vapors
ascend upwards, chiefly in the time of sleep, which is stirred up from their
proper Mine by the heat then going to the inward parts: And this is manifest
from the pain which is perceived in the upper part of the Belly, before the
assault of the Paroxysme, or Fit; and the turbulency, and want of sleep going
before it, indicating the Bowels are filled or stuffed with vicious humors,
(to which perhaps may be joined Werminous, or Wormey matter, a thing familiar
to that Age) which first pour sorth vapors, which procure those terrifying
wants of sleep, and afterward produce the Epileptical Insults, by obstructing
the passage of the Animal spirits, and hence for a time intercepting their
action, until those vapors be dissipated, or are transmitted to the inferior
parts.

Now since according to my judgment, the antecedent, and first cause of this
rebellious and troublesome disease, is constituted and made by those depraved
humors, and that vicious Minera, we may well hope they will be taken away, and
their effects removed in time, by the Divine assistance and blessing: And that
the rather, because perhaps all things have not been prescribed with a fit and
due Method, nor Chemical Medicines made use of, by the help of which most
pertinacious diseases are overcome; which sort of Medicines are to be rightly
used, slighter ones having been first made use of.

Let the first scope, or intention of Cure be to purge the Sink of the Body, by
the help of the Emetick, and Purging Medicine, noted A. taking of it presently,
in a double proportion of Breath; walking after it the space of an hour, to
make it act the better; also taking several spoonfuls after it of Broth,
(somewhat more then warm) till it begins to nauceate; by which the Vomiting
will be the casier: If perchance the Epileptical Paroxysme shall happen whilst
it works, that ought to be no cause of fear, since it is an effect of the
commotion of the humors stirred up by it, which ceasing the Fit also will
cease.

Let the second intention be, to prepare the Morbifick or offending humors
with the Decoction prescribed for that purpose, and noted B. of which a draught
is to be taken six days successively in the morning, two hours before Dinner.

The third thing that occurs is, that the humors thus prepared, be excluded by
the pargation, in the form of a Potion, noted with the Letter C. let her drink
that two hours before she take thin Broth: Let her be allowed to Dine two
hours after that; but in the mean time let her keep the House all day.

Let the fourth scope be, to remove thos^ vapors w^ are the authors of the
Epileptical Fits, ^ne other place, by making Issu^* in a conv^ent place, to
wit, in the inwar* part of the Legs; ^so procure a constant Evacuation of the
Ex^rements of the Brai^ which otherways b^ng joined to the vapor: arising from
the lower parts, they are thereby melted, and prove mischievous; for being
become liquid again, and being first express^ or squeezed out of the Brain,
they fall dow^ upon the Throat, and produce that Stertor, o^ Snorting, which is
manifestly perceived bo^ before and after the Fit: we may obtain t^ delivering
of the Brain from these Excreme^ titious humors, by making of another Iss^ in
the Pole, which after full six months m^ be permitted to be stopped up, making
anoth^ in the Arm, if there be occasion.

The fifth scope regards Specificks, design'^ (...) strengthen the Brain, and
marked with (...) ^ter D. the application of which is (...) to the judgment of
the Apothecary.

^f the Disease resist these Medicines, mo^ efficacious ones must be made use
of, viz. Chemical ones, which are frequently used by the most excellent
Physicians of our times, as Dr. Quercetan, and Dr. de Mayerne, and are marked
with the Letter E.

As also Peacocks-Dung must be used, which I look upon as a Specific remedy
amongst these Medicines.

If the Paroxysmes do continue, or are protected, there is to be given a
spoonful or two of Rondeletius's Water of Swallows: also Rulandus his Aqua
Benedicta, and for the cutting of Phlegm, which produces the Snorting, there
may be given one spoonful of Oxym^l of Squils, or Sea-Onions, with the like
quantity of Oil of sweet Almonds.

Let there be joined to these Medicines, an exact rule of living, eating of the
most wholesome food; let the Dinner be larger then Supper, which ought to be a
good while before going to Bed, walking gently after it, that the digestion may
be the better: let her abstain from all hot nourishments, Saeces, Spices, from
all sort of Pulse, Parsni^-roots, Cabbage, Garlic, Onions, Leek^, Ch^s, and
other flatulent and vapourous Meats, and suchas are of difficult digestion: As
to Drink, abstain altogether from pure and good Wine for some time, because it
is a high incentive of these kind of Diseases: in the place of which let her
use the Decoction of the Roots of China, Paeony, and a little Calamus
aromaticus, and a few Leaves of Bettony: Let her avoid the Crepusculum, that
is, the d^wn of the day, and Twilight, and all external injuries of the Air;
let her beware of violent exercise; Passions of the Mind, chiefly Fear and
Grief; which s^ she avoid as much as is possible.

The Series, or course of the designed Medicines.
Crocus Metallorum truly prepared, gr. v. White Wind, j. ss. Cinnamon, gr. XV.
Make an infusion for a Night, and afterward^ add ss. of Sugar.

Let it be boiled to the consistance of a thi^ Syrup, use it as is prescribed,
and sign it (...) Of the roots of Polypody, Cichory, Scorzonerae, Paeony, The
Bark of Tamarisk,
an. ss. The Leaves of Bettony, Germander, Fumaterry,
an. M. ss. The Flowers of Lillies of the Valleys, Bugloss, Sweet Primerose,
Leaves of Sage, Hyssop, The Leaves of Spleenwort,
an. P. j. Calamus aromaticus, Misselto of the Oak,
an. j.
Boil them for two hours in a sufficient quantity of Water, they having been
infused a whole day before, afterward strain them, and sweeten it with lb ij.
of Sugar, and clarify it with the White of an Egg; Note it B. Of clean Senna
Leaves, ij. Trochises of Agarick, The Bark of black Hellebor,
an. ij. Annis-Seeds, j. ss. Salt of Tartar, j. Spirit of Wine a few drops.
Infuse it for a Night in lb ss. of the former Decoction, upon warm Embers:
dissolve in four of the Expression of it. King Sabors Syrup of Apples with
Senna. j. Cathol opt. ij.
Mark it with the Letter C.

If this Purge does not work sufficiently, repeat it the day following, adding
iv. of Confect. Hamach.

The Monpelier Powder called puler. de Gutteta, j. Misselto of the Oak, Man's
Scull rasped,
an. ij.
Mix them, and make a Powder, of which take half a Dram, or ij. with j. of
Sugar, and drink upon it one or two spoonfulls of Langius Epileptical Water, or
Rondeletius Aqua Epilepticae Hirundinum. Sign it with the Letter D.

Let it be used every Morning two or three hours before Dinner: But in the
Evening, about the time of going to Bed, let her take one of the Candied
Morsules following, or ij. or ss of it.

Of the solid Conserve of Roses, j. ss Candied Citron-peel, Bettony flowers,
an. ss The aforesaid Powder de Gutteta Monspel. ij. Coral, White Amber
prepared, an. j. Sugar, the weight of them all.


Aquilae al^e Quercetani, that is, the white Eagle of Quercetanus; which is,
Mercurius Dul^is six or seven times sublimed, gr. XV. Rosin of Scamony, gr. V.


Wrap it up with a little pulp of a roasted Apple artificially, and so take it.

Let this Medicine be noted with the Letter E.

Let her use these Medicines according to the Rules I have prescribed, as also
the Peacocks Dung if necessity require it, at a proper time, which I am to
acquaint you of.

But I had forgot to tell you, that for the greater diverting of the diseasie
bun^ours, after the exhibiting the Purge noted with the Letter C. there is to
be let out some ounces of Blood, from those veins about the Ancles of either of
her Feet, which shall appear most Turged, or swelled: and this Bloud-setting
being performed, the two Issues are to be made. It Is also very conducive, that
a good Concoction be procured, and that vapors be suppressed; and therefore
after every meal, let her take one spoonful of the following digestive Powder.

Biscuit bread, j. Powder of Coriander-seeds, Caraway-seeds, an. iij. Red Roses,
Red Coral, an. ss Sugar, the weight of them all.
Mix them, and make a Powder for the foresaid use.

The Chemical Medicine consisting of Quercetans Aquila alba, and Rosin of
Seamouy, or its Extract prepared with Spirit of Wine, according to Schroder, is
the Calomelanos Turqueti: it is to be repeated every month, before every New
Moon, either increasing or lessening the Dose of the Rosin of Scamony, or the
Aquila alba, as it works more or less.

These things being strictly observed, this Noble Virgin was delivered from
this grievous Disease.

ERRATA.
Correct literal faults as you find them: And read p. 88. l. ^2. (...).

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
Air.
WArm Air beneficial for those in Consumptions, p. 9. A Fistula Cured by it, p.
14.
Apozem.
To prepare Melancholy, p. 31. To prepare Phlegm in the Brain, p 132.
Balsom.
Of Batts, p. 36. Cordial against the Plague, p. 111.
Biscuit.
Made of Citron-Peels, p. 99.
Brain.
How to free it when it is loaded with Humors, p. 27. To strengthen it in a
Consumption, p. 6.
Bran.
In the Urine not always a sign of a Scabby Bladder, p. 83.
Broth.
Medicinal in the Plague, p. 97.
Bubo.
In the Plague the Cure, p. 118.
Carbuncle.
In the Plague, p. 119.
Caruncles, vid. Yard. Cataplasme.
Easing pain, and ripening, p. 58. Cleansing, and resisting Putrefaction, p.
59.
Ca^teries.
In Consumptions where to be applied, p. 5. 19. In the Shoulders, p. 36.
China.
The Decoction in a Consump^ion, p. 16.
Conserve.
Cephalic in the Falling Sickness, p. 134.
Consumption.
Hereditary hardly to be Cured, p. 12. Curative Indications, p. 4. Remedies, p.
5, 6. Diet, p. 7, 8. One in a Consumption cured by removing into warm Air, p.
9. Strong Purges hurtful, p. 18. How to let Blood in it, p. 18.
Decoction.
Traumatick, p. 60.
Diet.
Sudorifick useful after consuming the Caruncule in the Yard, p. 91.
Dung.
Of Peacocks in the Falling Sickness, p. 3 1, 135.
Epilepsie.
From the lower Belly the signs, p. 128. Indications for the Cure, p. 129, 130.
Specificks for it, p. 131, 135. Diet against it, p. 131.
Fistula.
In the Fundament how to Cicatrice it, p. 28, 29.
Fume.
To dry the Brain, p. 95. Moist Fume in the Plague, p. 107. Dry Fume in the
Plague, p. 108.
Fundament.
The healing of a Fistula there, p. 28, 29. Pain not always there where the
Prostata's are affected, p. 85.
Gargarisme.
Which draws Phlegm from the Head, p. 95.
Gout.
Gout and Stone, Diseases of the same kind, and proceed from the same cause, p.
73.
Gonorraea.
If that which drops out of the Yard be always Seed, p. 84. The use of Spirit
of Turpentine, p. 86. If mineral Waters be beneficial in it, p. 86. If useful
in the Gout, p. 75.
Guajacum Wood.
The Decoction good in Consumptions, p. 16.
Haematites.
Its virtues against spitting of blood, p. 17.
Hydromel.
A Medicinal one in a Consumption, p. 7, 15.
Hypochondries.
A Fomentation against its obstructions, p. 33.
Hypochondriacal Fits.
What Vein to open in it, p. 26. Remedies against it, p. 31, 32, 33, 34. Signs,
p. 121, 124, 125.
Iscuria.
Remedies against it, p. 71, 72.
Iulep.
A Cordial one, p. 52.
Liquor.
(...) in the Plague, p. 104.
Lungs.
Ulcerated hard to cure them, p. 12.
Mead.
A Medicinal one in a Consumption, p. 7. 15.
Medicines.
Proper in the Plague, p. 98, ad 119.
Melancholy.
The signs of it, p. 23. It rejects slight Medicines, p. 25, ad 45.
Milk.
Cows Milk in a Consumption, p. 16.
The virtues of Asses Milk, ibid. Mouth.
The cause of dryness of the Mouth, p. 23.
Nephritick Wood.
Its decoction in a Consumption, p. 16.
Palsy.
The Cure of a spurious one, p. 27, 35.
Parotis.
Stubborn ones, how to ripen them, p. 47.
Pastills.
Bezoartick ones, p. 53.
Perinaeum.
The curing of its Ulcers, p. 58, ad (...).
Phlegmon.
Of the Perinaeum, p. 57.
Plague.
Its Cure, p. 114, ad 119. If fit to open a vein in it, p. 117.
Pomeamber.
In the Plague, p. 103.
Potions.
Vulnerary ones useful in Consumptions, p. 15. Melanagogal, p. 50.
Powders.
Antiepileptick, p. 133. Purging in the Epilepsie, p. 134. Digestive, p. 135.
Purgations.
Drawing away Phlegm and Melancholy from the Brain, p. 130. Malanagogal, p.
125. Ptisan Laxative, p. 122, 123.
Scabios.
Its effi^cy in the Plague, p. 118, 119.
Sleep.
How to procure it in Consumptions, p. 11^*
Sweat.
How to procure it in the Plague, p. 115, 11^*
Sulphur.
The use of its Milk in Consumptions, p. 7.
Syrup.
Cordial, p. 110 To prepare Melancholy, p. 45, 49. In a Consumption, p. 7, 16.
Tabellets.
To hold under the Tongue, in the Plag^ p. 101.
Tobacco.
The use of it in a Consumption, p. 7.
Trochises.
Bezoartick, p. 102. To fume the Kings Clothes, in the Plague, p. 109, 110.
Trupentine.
Its usefulness, p. 62. Whether to be washed or not, p. 73.
Veins.
To open under the Tongue, the usefulness, p. 27.
Vomits.
Their use in the Epilepsie, p. 129. in Hypochondriack Fits, p. 25. The use of
Crocus Metallorum, p. 25, 30, 132.
Vomiting.
How to prepare the Stomach for vomiting, p. 30.
Urine.
The cause of Branny Urine, p. 83.
Wine.
Hurtful to the Epileptick, p. 131. to the Consumptive, p. 15.
FINIS.

