A LETTER Out of the COUNTRY, To a MEMBER of this present PARLIAMENT:
OCCASIONED By a late LETTER to a Member of the House of Commons, Concerning the
BISHOPS lately in the Tower, and now under SUSPENSION.

Licensed Nov. 7. 1689. J. F.

LONDON, Printed for Awnsham Churchill at the Black Swan near Amen-Corner, 1689.

A LETTER to a Member of the House of Commons, etc.
SIR,
THE concern, which in your last to me you were pleased to express for those
good Bishops now under Suspension for not taking the Oaths, and your earnest
Enquiry after some Expedient to prevent their utter Destitution, do well become
that Character of Goodness and Generosity, by which you are known no less than
by your Name. It is some comfort to see, that a Person of your Understanding
and Practice in the World, does not yet despair, nor give up these Excellent
but Unfortunate Persons as lost beyond possibility of recovery. Some begin to
bewail their Fall already, as a thing unavoidable, and others may be casting
lots for the Garments; there is nothing that the Church of England in general
desires more than the Preservation of these bright and shining Lights, that
direct and adorn her; and cannot think with any patience that they should be
extinguished in Dishonor. They have the Compassion and the good Wishes of the
People; which if they have not always Effect, yet may serve for a good Omen,
and portend something better than what now appears. But after all, there can be
no ground of Hopes but by a Parliament; for the Act has left no other Remedy,
and we cannot expect that the Dispensing Power should now revive to save those
from whom it received its mortal Wound in the last Reign: Now Providence has so
far favored their Cause, that a Parliament is assembled within the Time
assigned for taking the Oaths, and before the last Severities are to fall upon
the Refusers; and who can tell but it may be with a Design to give that great
Assembly an opportunity to find some Relief for these Reverend Bishops, who
have deserved so well of this Church and Kingdom, and whose absolute Ruin
cannot but be dishonorable and invidious.

I do not pretend to justify their Refusal of taking the Oaths; but wish with
all my heart they would yet take them, and bring their Conscience to go along
with the Stream of the Public Judgment: that they would consider what
allowance is to be made for the real Necessities of a Kingdom, and whether the
Safety of a People must not be preferred to all ordinary humane Rule. We of the
Church of England have the greatest reason in the World to wish this; for we
cannot but account it one of the greatest Calamities that can befall us, to see
the chiefest and best of our Guides divided from the major part and general
Consent of the Nation. But our Affliction will be insupportable, if we must see
our selves deprived of such Men, under whose Conduct we have found Safety and
Honor in the most difficult Times; and see them, whom we reverence and love as
Fathers, disgraced, and deposed, and undone, because they boggle in a kind of
moot Point of Conscience, and cannot satisfy their Minds about the Oaths now
enjoined.

Nor can I much wonder that several of the Clergy have their Scruples upon this
occasion; for Men of Retirement and Study are not so quick in a Change, as
Statesmen, and those who have the Experience and Practice of the World. As
those who keep within doors, are not so soon sensible of alteration of Weather,
as those who are abroad and live in the open Air. Besides, the Arguments for
the maintenance of our rightful Liberties and just Defense, and all the grounds
of our Common and Necessary preservation have been so miserably abused, by
restless and seditious Men, that they have lost a great deal of their
Operation. They have been so often pretended without reason, that when the real
Case of Necessity happens, many may be apt to suspect it for Counterfeit and
mere Pretense; as those who have been too often abused with false Alarms, may
not so readily be brought to arm and prepare upon a real one.

The Parliament therefore, that made this Actt enjoining these Oaths, could not
but foresee that several of the Clergy might probably be under great
difficulties upon this Occasion; and upon this Prospect thought fit to exempt
Twelve Persons from some part of the Penalties of the Statute, so far as to
leave them at the King's Discretion for a third Part of their Revenues; which
shows that in the Opinion of this very Parliament there might be some Refusers
not unworthy of Favor. But it is possible they might not foresee all that
happened, nor think that the Rigor and Severity of that Act should in a manner
wholly fall upon such Persons, who are the Chief for Merits as well as
Authority in our Church, and that they only should feel the Extremities of that
Law, who had deserved another kind of acknowledgment and return from the
Nation, for that unparalleled Zeal for the Protestant Religion, and for the
Privileges and Liberty of the Subject, which in so signal a manner they showed
in the last Reign.

It is little more than a year, since most of the Bishops, who are now so
unfortunate as not to be able to reconcile their Consciences to the Oaths, were
hurried into Prison for their opposition to Popery and Slavery. The Zeal and
Courage which they made appear upon that occasion, cannot so soon be forgot;
for who cannot but have yet a lively remembrance, how sensible the whole Nation
was affected with their Sufferings and Enlargements? how all sorts of People
were concerned, as if the Fate of the Kingdom had been tied to theirs, and all
must have been ruined or preserved with them: I might mention the Malice and
Virulence of their Prosecution, and how near Treason it was then thought by
some to oppose King James his Arbitrary Power. But I do not now call the
Sufferings of these great Men in remembrance with any design to render the
Instruments of them odious: But to let you see how strange a thing it will
appear to the present Age and to Posterity, that those Prelates who had escaped
the fury of Papists, and had made so glorious a Confession for Protestant
Religion and English Liberties, should in so little a compass of time come to
be disgraced and deposed, and ruined under a Protestant Government, without any
high Crime laid to their Charge, but only because they cannot prevail with
their Consciences to take the Oaths; which though I think to be just and
necessary, yet cannot but acknowledge to have some Circumstances that are
unusual and extraordinary.

It might be expected upon the Deliverance of this Nation from Popery and
Tyranny, that those who had stood in the gap, and distinguished themselves by
the check and stop which they gave to the Progress of those spreading plagues,
might have been proportionably distinguished by the Countenance and Favor of
the next Settlement; but the Ruin of such men under this Government will
appear unaccountable, when we consider what Lenity it has used to all sorts of
Offenders; when we see few or none of all those Perfidious Wretches, who joined
in the Attempt of enslaving and undoing this Nation, so much as called in
question; when the Prosecutors of the Bishops are not only received into mercy,
but into favor. What can People think, What can they say, when they see the
chief Champions for Protestant Religion and Liberty to be the only Men that are
ruined by the Change? What will foreign Nations think of us, since even among
them the Names of these Bishops are become venerable? for their Reputation has
reached as far as Protestant Religion does extend. Those who have applauded
them from far, and acknowledged them as the chiefest and bravest Defenders of
the common Cause; what will they think, when they come to hear, that after the
deliverance of the Kingdom, those whom they admired at such a distance, are
covered with dishonor, and deprived of every thing, but the Reputation and
Conscience of their Merits? There will be but poor Encouragement for any
hereafter to hazard themselves for the Public good, while they have before
their Eyes such sad and frightful Recompenses as this.

Nay, though there had been no provision at all made for any other scrupulous
person in this case, yet the signal merit of these Bishops might leave room for
a Special Plea in their behalf. But when Quakers are thought not unworthy of
particular provision and tenderness; a Sect who are known to this Kingdom by no
good Office or usefulness; but are fallen under the just displeasure and
detestation of the Kingdom for their conjunction with King James; when these
come to be humored in their Nonsense, excused from Oaths, exempted from the
Penalties of this Act, while this stands in the very Body of our Law, and is
allowed throughout the whole Kingdom: how can any one, without indignation see
the chief Bishops of our Church, and the celebrated Patriots of our Liberties,
fall an unbecoming and miserable Sacrifice to this Act, and endure its last
Extremities, from which such humorsom and sullen Impostors are exempted?

Now these Bishops Character and manner of Life dispose them to peace; their
proper business, which is not of this World, is not likely to give them leave
to be overbusie in troubling the Affairs of it; their Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, which is beyond dispute; their Love of their Country and the Laws,
which appeared sufficiently to the whole Kingdom: these things, in my judgment,
though they do not take the Oaths, are much a better and more solid security than
any Quakers Declaration can amount to.

Now as I cannot but think it reasonable, that these worthy Bishops should have
some relief in their present distress, before it be too late; so I am of
opinion, this may be more proper time to do it, than when the Act was in
making. For then there might be good reason to make some show of rigor; for
the Government was but new, and required, that all sorts of Men should declare
Allegiance to it; but now the Act having operated sufficiently, and the
generality of the Clergy having taken the Oaths, the Examples of these Bishops
can have no ill influence, and the favor that shall be showed them will be
only Personal, and draw no consequence of danger after it; for the Entrance of
the Church is sufficiently secured, since none can receive either Orders or
Preferment, without taking the Oaths.

And as it can be no prejudice to the Government, to preserve these good Men:
so I am sure it will be very honorable, and give it credit both at home and
abroad. You know as well as I, that there cannot be any thing more acceptable
to the generality of the Kingdom. You can searce meet with any man, that will
not wish it were in his power to restore them. I have spoken with several of
your House, and with some of the Lords, and I find all well-wishers: What then
can hinder the effect of so universal an Inclination? I have not the honor to
be of your House at this time; it was indifferent to me whether it should be
you or I; nay, I am better satisfied, that you are there, since I know you wish
as well as I can to this matter, and have greater dexterity and credit in the
House to bring it to pass. They are much mistaken, who fancy that the suspended
Bishops have by their refusal of the Oaths forfeited all that credit which they
got with the People in King James his time; for, as far as I can observe, the
People are rather sorry, than angry with them for not complying; and when they
are once deposed, will be much more sensible, of their suffering, which is
visible, than of the reason of it, which will not be so easily comprehended.
And even the Clergy who have taken the Oaths, are so far from diminishing the
Affection and Reverence they had for their Bishops, that they rather increase
from the consideration of their misfortune. The Clergy look upon the
Deprivation, which without relief from this Parliament, must shortly fall upon
their Bishops, to be more a punishment to the Dioceses, than the Diocesans. In
proper speaking, they are rather deprived of their Bishops, than the Bishops of
their Preferments; and I dare say, it there were any appearance of hope, the
respective Dioceses would quickly petition for the Restoration of their
Governors, and beseech you in the most render and passionate manner in the
World, that you would not leave them Orphans while their Fathers are alive; and
they are like to continue so while these Bishops are living, since it can
scarce be conceived, that any worthy Men will be forward to accept these
Preferments, and thereby shut the door against their Predecessors, so as to
make their return impossible. For notwithstanding Deprivation, as long as the
Places are void, the deprived Bishops are in a possibility of being restored;
but when the Seats are one filled, there can be no remedy; so that the
Successors, and not the Law, will be looked upon as the Deprivers: And if the
Ambition of any should be so prevalent, as to despise the invidiousness of such
Preferments; they must consider, that they will have but little authority over
their Clergy or People, and can do but little good, where they are judged to
intrude to the prejudice of the old Possessors, for whom both Clergy and People
have so great esteem; and though they may have legal right and possession, and be
Bishops and Fathers in Law, yet as long as their Predecessors are in being, and
in possession of the hearts of their People, and looked upon as deprived not
for any Canonical Reasons, but for their Misfortune rather than their Fault;
the New-comers can expect to be but sorrily beloved, and will have great
difficulty to maintain the Peace and Unity of their Church. Besides, the
Reversion of the Bishoprics to be voided upon this occasion does not seem to
me to be very desirable upon another account, even though they should become
vacant in an ordinary way; for those who succeed them will find it a hard task
to come up to the pitch of their Predecessors merit and reputation, and will
probably be lessened by comparison with those that are forced to quit; but when
men will enter upon the ruin of those to whom they are found so inferior,
their reception is like to be but very indifferent.

Since therefore it is not an impossible thing, while the Parliament sits, to
restore the Bishops now under suspension, and it can be no prejudice to the
Government, since it is so generally wished, so honorable, and at the same
time so safe, since their final deprivation may bring great Inconveniences, and
not the least advantage to the Public, It is to be hoped, that the Wisdom of
this Parliament will find out some Expedient to restore them to the Exercise of
their Office, and the Church to the Benefit of their Administration.

FINIS.
A LETTER Out of the COUNTRY, etc.
Dear SIR,
SInce you seem to desire my thoughts of the Paper you sent me, although I am at
present pretty much indisposed, yet I had much rather give my self a little
uneasiness than frustrate your expectation, not questioning but your Friendship
can make allowances for the mistakes, and little peevishnesses too, to which
Sickess may sometimes betray one; for I must confess if I had not thought my
self pretty much master of my own Notions as to this point, I should not have
attempted giving you an account of them at this time.

As to the Letter then about the Bishops, I cannot but say, That as to the main
Design (at least as it appears to me,) I must approve of it, as I Am sure you
will say, I shall of any thing that sounds in favor of those excellent
Persons, for whom I have so particular a veneration, that you your self can
witness I have often wished there might be some Expedient found out to keep them
from suffering the rigor of that Law, to which they so wilfully expose
themselves. And although I still continue in the same Sentiments, yet I cannot say
I approve of the Methods proposed; for I doubt he has begun at the wrong end:
For in my apprehension, he should in the first place have applied himself to
the Bishops, and persuaded them to have desired before he had so peremptorily
prescribed the giving a Dispensation to the Parliament. But alas! I know how
very hard it is, not to be partial where one has particular affection; it
having been a failing to which I have been too much inclined my self, even in
the same case. But having taken some pains to place things in the true Light,
perhaps it may be a piece of Service to show them to others in it. And to that
purpose I shall crave leave to consider the two differing Matters of Fact, that
of refusing the Declaration from King James, and the Oath to King William and
Queen Mary. As to the proof of both, I think there needs not much evidence,
since the whole Nation is their Testimonial in that Point: And for the
Inferences that may be made by either side. I desire to set them apart for the
present, and to consider the Actions in their naked circumstances. And in the
first place, Here is an ill thing imposed on them by King James, and not only
so, but they are required to be Parties in it, and spread it all over the
Nation. And now I would only ask this Question. Whether it was their Duty to
refuse this Command or no? If not, they sinned (I Am sure, according to their
own Doctrine) in disobeying King James; but if it was their Duty to refuse (as
I suppose we all grant,) then we may gather up this observation by the by, That
the Commands of Kings may, nay ought to be resisted, if in themselves unlawful,
that is, against the Law of the Land, (for that is their main Objection to the
Declaration.) But although they had been very faulty if they had complied, yet,
without admitting the Popish Doctrine of Supererogation and Merit, I cannot see
why they should boast, or we magnify them so extremely for doing that which was
their indispensable Duty; nay, I Am confident those excellent Persons have too
much Humility to do it, or else they had not learned our Savior's Lesson so
well as I believe they have, who in the 17th of St. Luke, verse. the 9th. asks,
if a Master does thank a Servant for doing those things that were commanded
him? And answers, I trow not. To which he presently subjoins in the 10th.
verse, So likewise ye, when ye shall have done all that is commanded, say we
are unprofitable Servants, we have done that which was our Duty to do. But
although nothing can hold weight in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and no Flesh
must glory in the presence of God; yet Elihu has well observed, Job 35.8. Thy
Righteousness may profit a Son of Man. And on that account it must be owned,
that there never was Action by which a whole Nation was more obliged than by
that of the Bishops. But yet we should be too partial to them; and unjust to
others, should we suffer them to engross all the Praise of that great and
glorious Scene; the remembrance of which puts me almost into an ecstasy. For
was there ever any sight so transporting, as that to see the Church asserting,
the Law defending, the Nobility assisting, and all agreeing in the defense of
our true and ancient Liberties, and that to the face, and in defiance of
Arbitrary and Dispensing Power. For how gallantly soever the Bishops behaved
themselves in that undertaking, had not some of their inferior Clergy been as
forward as themselves; and had they not been as bravely seconded by the Lords,
and Lawyers too, neither their Courage nor Innocence had been of any use either
to themselves or us: So that to be just, we must divide the Praise and Thanks
due to that great Action; which I am very unwilling to leave, because, alas! I
must now divert to a less pleasing Subject, Their refusing of the Oaths. And
how many Partners soever they had in their applauded part, I find they must
bear the blame of this alone; for no body pretends to share with them in that;
so that they must either stand or fall by themselves. And truly, I shall be so
kind to them, as to make them Judges in their own Causes; for to go through the
whole Dispute would be much too long for a Letter: But I only desire the
dissenting Bishops to review, and consider their own Declaration of December
the 10th. 1688. for so I think I may call it, being signed by so many of them;
for W Cant. is (I am sure) the first Name, and the Bishop of Ely was not only
one that signed, but carried it to the then P. of O. And I would fain ask what
their Lordships then thought? For if they did not then think King James had
disserted the Government, I am very confident they would not have done what
they then did. For I am sure they take upon them as if there was no King in
Israel. And because it is possible you may not have the Declaration by you, I
will with your good leave transcribe some part of it.

We do therefore unanimously resolve to apply to the Prince of Orange, who with
so great kindness to these Kingdoms, so vast Expense, and so much hazard to his
own Person, has undertaken, by endeavoring to procure a Free Parliament, to
rescue us, with as little effusion as possible of Christian Blood, from the
imminent Dangers of Popery and Slavery.

And we do hereby declare, That we will with our utmost Endeavor assist His
Highness in the obtaining such a Parliament with all speed, wherein our Laws,
our Liberties and Properties may be secured, the Church of England in
particular, with a due liberty to Protestant Dissenters, and in general the
Protestant Religion and Interest over the whole World, may be supported and
encouraged, to the Glory of God, the Happiness of the Established Government in
these Kingdoms, and the advantage of all Princes and States in Christendom that
may be herein concerned.

And in the mean time we will endeavor to preserve Peace, taking care to
disarm all Papists.

And if there be any thing more to be performed by us, for promoting his
Highness generous Intentions for the public Good, we shall be ready to do it
as occasion shall require.

These are the very words of the Declaration which was signed and delivered too
by the Persons abovementioned, so that we have reason to look upon it as their
own Act and Deed: And must therefore beg leave to be resolved in one Point, and
that is, By what Authority their Lordships did this? And I cannot suppose they
will say it was done by any Deputation from King James, or any Power they
derived from him; so then it seems they did it in their own right. And if so,
it is pretty indifferent to me whether King James disserted or no; for let them
take which fide they please, either will do my business. For if they will own
the Dissertion, they yield the Point we have all this while contended for; but
if they deny that, and say that King James was at that time actually their
King, then I perceive that Subjects may prescribe to, nay, force their Kings to
do their Duty. But what becomes of Passive Obedience all this while I wonder?
For here we find our good Bishops not only applauding, but joining with, and
assisting that very Person whom their King James called an Invader, and whose
very Errand hither, as they themselves at that time very well knew, was only to
teach him better Behavior.

And how they can avoid one of these Consequences (for we may allow them their
choice), I must confess I cannot very well see: For the involuntary Return
which King James did make to London, does not, in my Conceit, much alter the
matter, unless we will allow Kings to play at Boe-peep with their Government;
and now they will be seen, and now they will not. But I hope the Persons I was
now speaking of, have too much Gravity, as well as Understanding, to approve
of, much less to act their Part in such Boys-Play, especially in things of this
Nature and Consequence. And yet, to our great wonder, as well as trouble, we
find those very wise Men recalling their Consent, flying from their
Subscriptions, and nauseating all those great and glorious Designs they then
seemed so eagerly to pursue: For since that very Free Parliament has been
obtained, and the Rights of this particular Church and Nation, as well as the
Interest of the Protestant Religion in general, secured, as far as Humane
Wisdom can reach; now they loath this Manna, and long for the Flesh* Pots of
Egypt again; and with the Men in the Gospel, they will not have this Man
(though courted before) to reign over them. Now what can one say to Men of this
Temper? Nay, what can God himself do for them, since they are displeased with
Heaven for granting their Desires, and quarrel with Providence because the
Change was not made exactly by their Model, although, for any thing I perceive,
they were not very well agreed about it themselves. For should we have attended
till they had pleased themselves with a Scheme of our Deliverance, it is
probable we might all, before that, have been swallowed up in that Common Ruin
which was then just ready to overflow the Nation. But pardon me, dear Sir, if
my Zeal for the Public have transported me too far in this Point; For it would
raise something of Indignation in any English Man, that had a true sense of his
Countries Interest, to see People sent abroad (God forbid I should say, by the
Bishops; for I have a much better Opinion of them; but however, by those that
pretend to be of their Party) to proclaim, That now Iniquity is Established by a
Law. But whether what they are pleased to call Iniquity Established by a Law, is
not at a venture better than a Lawless Power, that will both Establish and
Maintain Idolatry and Cruelty; I fancy is a Point that will be pretty easily
decide, if left to the Majority of Voices in this Nation.

But I have been hitherto relating only Matters of Fact, which I hope I have
done so impartially, that they only conclusion I have made, I believe will be
found to flow very Naturally from my Premises; that is indeed, from the
Declaration that was both signed and sent by these Worthy Bishops.

Now to return to the Letter you sent me. I find the Author does not only think
the Oaths Lawful, but Necessary; wherein I must agree with him, as I do also in
wishing the Bishops would yet take them, and, as he well says, bring their
Consciences to go along with the Stream of the Public Judgment: That they
would consider what allowance is to be made for the Real Necessities of a
Kingdom; and whether the Safety of a People must not be preferred to all
ordinary humane Rule. And these being the very Words of their own Advocate, I
knew not how to put my Queries into more proper Terms; and therefore recite
them: and where Salus Populi est Suprema Lex, is the avowed Maxim of the
Government and Constitution, one would think it should not require much
deliberation to answer the Question. But now, if they please, we will come to
dispute the matter in cool Blood, and shall not restrain this great Law only to
the Subject; but by the Safety of the People, understand the Government in the
Concrete: For we know the Saying is derived from the Old Romans, among whom the
People, with their Senate, did carry the Face of the Supreme Magistracy: And we
may be sure the Safety of the whole was intended by it. So that in our
Constitution it would be very hard to shut out the King from his Share in it,
and say, he was not at all concerned in that Maxim: But yet in admitting a
Head, I would not exclude the Body. And although it is possible Kingdoms may
have suffered by the Peoples Encroachments upon the Royal Prerogative, yet to
say, That a Government can suffer in no other Instance, would be full as absurd
as to say, That a Man can be Mortally wounded no where but in his Head: But we
are sure there are parts in our Body as fatal to be touched as the Brain it
self; and therefore ought to be guarded with equal care: And in all
well-ordered Commonwealths the Rights of the Subjects ought to be as Sacred as
those of the Sovereign: Or else we should invert the very End and Design of
Government in its first Institution; which certainly was not erected only for
the agrandising one single Person or Family, but was intended for the Safety of
the whole: Therefore in those Cases we are not tied up to the Rigor and Words
of a Law: For if the Moral Equity, and the Design of the Commandment, is better
observed by breaking the Letter of it, it is surely very lawful, nay, our Duty
to do it. And this holding in Divine, must by a stronger Reason do so in Humane
Laws: for the Positive Precepts of the Decalogue it self have been, and are
frequently dispensed with, and that by God's permission: As for instance, The
great Commandment of the Sabbath, although so essential a part of the Jewish
Law and Service, that one calls it, The very Sacrament of the Worship of the
True God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, in opposition to Idolatry. Whether
it deserves that Title, or no, I know not; yet I think I may very properly
style it, The Distinguishing Character of the Jewish Church; and that it is a
Precept which is the oftest repeated, more Promises made to the Observers of
it, and more Judgments threatened to the Breakers of it, than to all the other
Commands of the Law: So that I should make this swell to a Volume, should I
transcribe all the Texts wherein the Observation of the Sabbath is enjoined.
And yet, for all that God seems to lay so particular a stress on that
Commandment, you see our Savior blames the Jews for adhering so strictly to
the Letter of it, for the saving of the Life of an Ox or Ass, was to be
preferred before their Obedience to it. But waving all those Instances which
our Savior gives us in the Gospel, wherein the Jews themselves did break the
Sabbath, and were blameless: I shall insist only on one Story in the Maccabees,
which is pretty much to this purpose, 1 Mac. 2. beginning at the 31. Verse,
where we have the Relation of the Fate of those poor mistaken Jews, who, for
fear of profaning the Sabbath, would not so much as stop the Passages against
their Enemies, but let them come in, and kill them tamely, without striking a
stroke. But Mattathias and his Sons, though as great Zealots for the Law as any
we read of, yet seemed to understand that Point better; and in ver. 41. it is
said, At that time therefore they decreed, saying, Whosoever shall come to make
battle with us on the Sabbath day, we will fight against him; neither will we
die all, as our brethren that were murdered in the secret places; which was
surely a lawful, as well as prudent Resolution. And truly just such wise
Martyrs should we have been to the Fifth Commandment, as they were to the
Fourth, had we pursued the Notion of Passive Obedience so far as some would
have had us; by which we should have betrayed both our Religion and our
Friends, and at once have rendered our selves the Prey and Scorn of our
Enemies: For we are not to think that God Almighty will work Miracles for the
maintaining of our fanciful Opinions and Comments on his Law: For if we will
lay Necessities on our selves, and choose Destruction when he allows means of
Escape, it is but reasonable we should perish: For that, generally speaking, is
his method, as to this World, as well as to the next. We must do our part to
save our selves, or he will never help us; There must be the Sword of Gideon,
as well as the Sword of the Lord, if we design to get the Victory: for we see
that God suffered the Passive Jews to perish, but blessed the Active Maccabees
with most miraculous Victories, while in the defense of the Law they broke the
Commandment. And a great many more Arguments might be drawn from the same
Topic, but that I fear to swell this to too large a bulk: Therefore to
conclude this Point, I shall only recite what our Savior says of the Fourth
Commandment, Mark 2.27. The Sabbath was made for Man, not Man for the Sabbath:
Which may as properly be applied to the Fifth: for we may as truly say, Kings
were made for the People, not the People for Kings.

But I doubt you will think that I forget my Letter all this while; but I was
so taken up with his Wish, That the Bishops would take the Oath, that I could
not but say all I could to induce them to it: But alas! so many have failed in
that Attempt, that I dare hardly hope my weak Arguments should be more
powerful. But now to my apprehension this is downright Demonstration, that
either it is lawful to obey K. W. or it is not; if it is lawful, why then may not
any Man swear they will do so? For certainly, any body may lawfully swear to do
a lawful thing, especially when the Law requires them to do it. But indeed, if
they do not think it lawful to obey King William, then they have no reason to
take the Oath, nor truly has the Author very much to expect that the King or
Parliament should grant Dispensations to them that avow'dly disown their
Authority, and disobey their Laws. But perhaps it will be urged, that this is
not the Law; but I Am sure our Savior tells us, Luke 11.23. He that is not with
me is against me: And it is so hard a thing to be perfectly Neuter, that all
sides suspect them that pretend to be so: Therefore it would give great
satisfaction, if these Worthy Persons would declare themselves. And besides, it
is so reasonable a thing to give Security to that Government from which they
receive Protection, that no Sect refuses doing it after some way or other: And
if the Bishops do really stumble at the Oath, yet it is possible for them to
contrive some other way of binding themselves as firm, and giving as good
security to the Government, as if they had taken that. But it is their part to
propose it, for they are not to expect that the Parliament should be projecting
ways to evade their own Laws, or offer Relief to those Grievances that were
never complained of to them: The Bishops know the way, and also know their
Right of Petitioning; which makes some people suspect, that they had not so
much to say for their refusing the Oaths, as they had for the Declaration; or
else they would not have been so wanting to themselves, as not to have done it
before now, unless the neglect proceed from a worse Principle, that of the
slighting and despising the Government it self. And they cannot more
effectually clear themselves from that Imputation, than by proposing something
that may be equivalent to the Oath, and consequently as good Security to the
Government: Which if refused, they will then have something to say for
themselves, and may lawfully complain. But I believe, Sir, that you have reason
to think it would be accepted if offered; and at a venture I dare promise them
your Vote; for the Author of this Letter is not the only one that has wished
some Expedient might be found out, that those excellent Persons might continue
in the Station they so well became.

The rest of the Letter is only Panegyric of the Bishops, and a Prophecy of
the Resentment that the whole Nation is to express when the Sentence comes to
Deprivation: And as to the Encomium he makes of them, I should be very well
pleased with it in the Positive Degree; but Comparisons, they say, are odious:
But why they should be advanced to the Superlative, only for not taking the
Oaths, I do not so well understand; for we have Two of the famous Seven, who
may pretend to as great Merit as any, for I am sure they suffered as much as
the other Five needed to have done; and I think do not deserve the less from
the Nation, because they have not made a Faction and Schism in it, as the
others have, nor been the occasion of the expense of so much Treasure and Blood
too. For whatever obligation we in England may have to them, I doubt the poor
Irish Protestants have not so; for I believe you, and a great many in your
House, are satisfied, That if the Church of England had unanimously come in to
King William at first, so that he could have sent his Army over while the
Protestants in Ireland had been in a condition to have assisted them, that
Kingdom had been reduced long ago; and consequently so many Lives saved as it
has, and will cost to do it now.

But this is not a Subject for me to insist on, tho it deserves their
consideration: But I perceive the Author thinks there is no falling from Grace;
else he would not have concluded that after one Eminent good Act, it was
impossible for them to do an ill. It would indeed be very happy if one generous
piece of Piety would render one infallible ever after; but I fear the rule will
fail, though I heartily wish it may not in those Reverend Persons, for whom I
have as great and true a Veneration as any body can pretend to. But in case
they should think fit to prefer Quiet and Privacy, before Profit and State; and
adhering to their own humor, before serving God and the Church in the places
they so well filled; if I say they should think fit to do this, I cannot
suppose those dismal consequences must necessarily follow that this Author
foretells: for I fear the generality of the People do not so much value true
worth, as to be concerned for what good Men suffer, if they themselves are at
ease, and in safety. But good words cost nothing, and they can easily afford
them, that will not do any thing more to serve either King or Bishop: Which may
be one reason why both have been so out in their computation. For King James
making his Musters by his Addresses, I Am sure reckoned without his Host: and I
fancy the Bishops have been a little out in their Count too, as to the numbers
of the Clergy that would refuse the Oaths; as it is possible this Author may be
in his. But indeed where the dissenting Bishops are the whole Church, a very
small Party may by the same reason be the whole Nation; and both contained in a
good honest Conventicle. Nay, for any thing I know, at the rate some men talk,
both Church and Nation may in a few years be reduced, as the Church of the
Donatists was, to one single Person. But I do not desire to be a Prophet in
that point, for I do from my Soul wish that we may be all united as in one
Faith, so in one Communion; that we may with one Heart, and one Mouth Praise
God, and Pray for our King, whom God has been pleased to make the Glorious
Instrument of the greatest Deliverance that ever yet happened to the Reformed
Church. And truly it does seem as strange to me, that any body that calls
himself a Church of England Man does not both see and acknowledge that, as it
does to this Author to think that the great Assertors of the Protestant
Religion and English Liberties should be Suspended, and Deprived. But the
latter is still in their own choice, and let them but qualify themselves for
Their Majesty's Favor, by complying with the Law, and I do not question but
they shall receive such marks of it, as shall be proportionable even to their
Merits. Which I do think as great as any body can pretend to, but without
admitting the Doctrine of Compensation, I cannot say that the Sepererogating in
one point of the Law should give one License to break another: For St. James
tells us, Chap. 2.10. That whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend
in one point, is guilty of all. And I suppose this holds in Humane as well as
in the Divine Law. Therefore unless they do think fit to comply, I cannot help
it though the Law do look upon them as Criminals, though I must always admire
their Personal Endowments, and particular qualifications for Government, which
makes it so desirable they should keep their Stations. But if they think fit to
deprive the Church of their further Service, (for after all the exclamation
that is, or can be made against it, it is apparently their own doings, because
their choice) although the Proverb, That seldom comes a letter, may be very
likely to hold in their Case, yet I do not think there is so great a scarcity
of Worthy Men in the Church, but that it may be possible to find out four or
five as good, who may be able to supply, even their places, and come up to
their pitch. Of which the two last Vacancies is a convincing instance to me;
for by that time that the Diocesses of Worcester and Chichester are thoroughly
acquainted with their New Bishops, I do not believe they will think they have
changed much for the worse; although the two Predecessors were as Eminent, and
as good men, as any they have left behind them.

But I fear I have exceeded the bounds of a Letter, though I hope not those of
your Patience, for I question not but you can pardon a Fault to which I was
betrayed by my obedience to your Commands; for all your desires you know are so
to,

Dear Sir, Your most Affectionate Friend, and Servant.
Nov. 1. 89.

