A True COPY Of a LETTER Written by N. Machiavill, IN DEFENSE of Himself, And
His RELIGION. Translated from an Original Copy.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley in Covent Garden, 1691.

AN ADVERTISEMENT. TO THE READER, Concerning this LETTER.
Courteous Reader,
IT has been usual with almost all those who have Translated this Author into
any Language, to spend much of their time and Paper in Taxing his Impieties,
and Confuting his Errors, and false Principles, as they are pleased to call
them: If upon perusal of his Writings I had found him guilty of any thing that
could deceive the Simple, or prejudice the rest of Mankind, I should not have
put thee to the hazard of reading him in thy own Language, but rather have
suffered him still to sleep in the obscurity of his own, than endanger the
World; but being very well assured of the contrary, and that this Age will
rather receive advantage than damage by this Publication, I did yet think that
it was fit to say something in a Preface to vindicate our Author from those
Slanders which Priests, and other byast Pens have laid upon him. But still I
thought that it might prove a bold and presumptuous Undertaking, and might
excite Laughter, for a Person of my small Parts and Abilities, to Apologize for
one of the greatest Wits, and profoundest Judgments that ever lived amongst the
Moderns. In this perplexity, I had the good fortune to meet with this Letter of
his own writing, which has delivered me from those scruples, and furnished me
with an opportunity of justifying this great Person by his own Pen. Receive
then this choice Piece with benignity, it has never before been Published in
any Language, but lurkt for above 80 years in the private Cabinets of his own
Kindred, and the descendants of his own Admirers in Florence; 'till in the
beginning of the Pontificat of Urbane the VIIIth, it was procured by the
Jesuits, and other Busybodies, and brought to Rome, with an intention to divert
that wise Pope from his design of making one of Nicholas Machiavill's Name and
Family Cardinal, as (notwithstanding all their opposition) he did not long
after. When it was gotten into that City, it wanted not those who had the
judgment and curiosity to copy it, and so at length came to enjoy that
privilege which all rare Pieces (even the sharpest Libels and Pasquils)
challenge in that Court, which is to be sold to strangers: One of which being a
Gentleman of this Country, brought it over with him at his return from
Florence, in the year 1645. and having Translated it into English, did
communicate it to diverse of his Friends, and by means of some of them, it has
been my good fortune to be capable of making thee a Present of it; and let it
serve as an Apology for our Author, and his Writings, if thou think he need
any. I must confess, I believe his Works require little, but rather praise, and
admiration; yet I wish I could as well justify one undertaking of his not long
after the writing of this Letter; for we find, in the story of those times,
that in the Month of August following, in the same Year 1537 this Nicolo
Machiavelli (except there were another of that Name) was committed Prisoner to
the Bargello, amongst those who were taken in Arms against Cosimo, at the
Castle of Montemurli; notwithstanding all his Compliments in this Letter to
that Prince, and professed Allegiance to him. If this be so, we must impute it to
his too great Zeal to concur with the desires of the Universality at that time,
in restoring the Liberty of their Country, which has so far dazel'd the
Judgments even of Great and Wise Men, that thou see many Grave Authors
amongst the Ancients have even commended, and deify'd the ingratitude and
treachery of Brutus and Cassius. But certainly this Crime of his would have
been much more unpardonable, if he had lived to see his own Prophecy fulfilled
in the Persons and Descendents of this Great Cosimo; for there was never any
Succession of Princes since the World began, in which all the Royal Virtues,
and other Qualities necessary to those who Rule over Men, were more eminently
perspicuous, than in every individual of this Line; so that those People have
as little cause as ever any had, to lament the Change of their Government,
their great Dukes having been truly Fathers of their Country, and treated their
Subjects like Children, though their Power be above all limitation, above all
fundamental Laws; but they having no Law, are a L^w to themselves. I cannot
choose but instance in some few of their benefits to their People; First the
making the River Arne Navigable from Pisa to Florence in a Year of dearth, that
so the Poor might be set on work, and have bread; and the Traffic of both
Cities infinitely facilitated: Their making at their own charge a Canal from
Lucerne to Pisa; their erecting at Pisa a Famous University, paying the
Professors, who are Eminent for Learning, and discharging all other incidences
out of their own Revenue; besides the raising Stately Buildings for Schools and
L^braries; their fonding a Renowned Order of Knighthood, and keeping the
Chapter in the same City, and ordering a considerable number of Knights
constantly to reside there; both which were intended and performed by them, to
increase the Concourse* and restore the Wealth to the once oppulent Inhabitants
of that place. (...) New Building, Fortifying, and Infranchising Lucerne (...)
by abolishing their own Cust^ms, they mig^t enrich their (...) and make that
Port (as it now is) the Magazine f^ll ^he I^^vant Trade: And lastly, their not
having in 140 years ever levied any new Tax upon their People, except in the
year 1642 to defend the Liberties of Italy against the Barbarians. These things
would merit a Panegyric, if either my parts, or this short Advertisement would
admit it; I shall conclude then, after I have born a just and dutiful Testimony
to the Merits of the Prince who now Governs that State, in whom (if all the
Princely Virtues and Endowments should be lost) they might be found and
restored again to the World: As some ingenious Artists in the last Age,
retrieved the Art of Sculpture by certain bas rilievo's remaining on some
Pillars, and Walls at Rome. The Prudence, Magnanimity, Charity, Liberality, and
above all, the Humanity, Courtesy and Affability of this Prince, though
exceeding expressions, yet they are sufficiently known, not only to his own
Subjects (the constant Objects of his Care and Goodness) but even to all
Strangers, more particularly to our Nation; he having undertaken a troublesome
Journey to visit this Kingdom, and to make it witness and partake of his
transcendent Generosity and Bounty, which he has continued ever since, as can
be testified by all who have had the honor to wait upon him in his own
Country, or the good fortune but to see him in ours. I my self, who have been
so happy to be admitted into his presence, and have been honored since, in
having his Highness my Customer for many choice Books, to increase (not his
knowledge, for that is beyond receiving any addition by Books) but his
Curiosity and his Library; do think my self bound in duty to take this poor
opportunity of testifying my gratitude and devotion to this Excellent Prince.
As to this Letter I have nothing more to say, but that thou may see how
right this Author was set in Principles of Religion, before he could have the
information which we have had since from the Pens of most Learned and rational
Controversists in those Points; and therefore thou may admire the Sagacity
of his Judgment. Read him then, and serve God, thy Country, and thy King, with
the knowledge he will teach thee. Farewell.

A True Copy of a LETTER
Written By N. Machiavill, etc.
THE Discourse we had lately (dear Messieur Zenobio) in the Delightful Gardens
of our old deceased Friend Rucellai Cosimo, and the pressing importunity of
Messieur Giulio Salivati, that I would use some means to wipe off the many
aspersions cast upon my Writings, gives you the present trouble of reading this
Letter, and me the pleasure of writing it: which last would be infinitely
greater, if I were not at this day too Old, and too Inconsiderable, and by the
Change of our Government, wholly incapable of performing either with my Brain
or my Hand any further Service to my Country. For it has ever been my Opinion,
that whosoever goes about to make Men publicly acquainted with his Actions, or
Apologize to the World for imputations laid upon him, cannot be excused from
vanity, and impertinence, except his Parts and Opportunities be such as may
enable him to be instrumental for the good of others: And that he cannot
atchieve that excellent end, without justifying himself from having any
indirect and base ones, and procuring trust from Men, by clearing the Repute of
his Justice and Integrity to them. But although this be far from my Cale, yet I
have yielded (you see) to the entreaty of Messieur Giulio, and the rest of that
Company, not only because I am sufficiently (both by the restaint of our Press,
and the discretion of the Person I write to) assured that this Letter will
never be made public; but for that I esteem it a duty to clear that excellent
Society from the scandal of having so dangerous and pernicious a Person to be a
member of their Conversation; for by reason of my Age, and since the loss of
our Liberty, and my Sufferings under that Monster of Lust and Cruelty Alexander
de Medici, set over us by the Divine Vengeance for our Sins, I can be capable
of no other design or enjoyment, than to delight, and be delighted, in the
Company of so many Choice and Virtuous Persons, who now assemble themselves
with all security under the happy and hopeful Reign of our new Prince Cosimo;
and we may say, that though our Commonwealth he not restored, our Slavery is at
an end; and that he coming in by our own choice, may prove (if I have as good
Skill in Prophesying as I have had formerly) Ancestor to many Renowned Princes,
who will govern this State in great quietness, and with great Clemency; so that
our Posterity is like to enjoy ease and security, though not that Greatness,
Wealth and Glory, by which our City has for some years past (even in the most
factious and tumultuous times of our Democracy) given Law to Italy, and bridled
the ambition of Foreign Princes. But, that I may avoid the loquacity incident
to Old Men, I will come to the business. If I remember well, the Exceptions
that are taken to those poor things I have published, are reduceable to three;
first, That in all my Writings I insinuate my great affection to the
Democratical Government, even so much as to undervalue that of Monarchy in
respect of it; which last I do, not obscurely, in many passages, teach, and as
it were persuade the People to throw off. Next, That in some places I vent very
great impieties, slighting and vilifying the Church, as Author of all the
Misgovernment in the World, and by such contempt make way for Atheism and
Profaneness; and lastly, that in my Book of the Prince I teach Monarchs all the
execrable Villainies that can be invented, and instruct them how to break Faith,
and so to Oppress and Enslave their Subjects. I shall answer something to every
one of these; and that I may observe a right method, will begin with the first.
Having lived in an Age when our poor Country and Government have suffered more
Changes and Revolutions than ever did perhaps beyall any People in so short a
time; and having had, till the taking of Florence, my share in the managing of
Affairs, during almost all these Alterations, sometimes in the Quality of
Secretary of our City, and sometimes employed in Embassages abroad; I set my
self to read the Histories of Ancient and Modern Times, that I might by that
means find out whether there had not been in all Ages the like Vicissitudes and
Accidents in State Affairs, and to search out the Causes of them; and having in
some sort satisfied my self therein, I could not abstain from scribbling
something of the two chief kinds of Government, Monarchy, and Democracy, of
which all other forms are but mixtures: And since neither my Parts nor Learning
could arrive to follow the steps of the Ancients, by writing according to
Method and Art, as Plato, Aristotle, and many others have done upon this
Subject; I did content my self to make slight Observations upon both, by giving
a bare Character of a Modern Prince, as to the Monarchical frame, and as to the
popular choosing the perfectest and most successful of all Governments of that
kind upon Earth; and in my Discourses upon it, following the Order of my
Author, without ever taking upon me, to argue problematically, much less to
decide which of these two Governments is the best: If from my way of handling
matters in my Discourses upon Livy, and from those incomparable Virtues and
great Actions we read of in that History, and from the Observations I make, Men
will conclude (which is I must confess my Opinion) that the excellency of those
Counsels and Achievements, and the improvement which Mankind, and as I may so
say, Humane Nature it self obtained amongst the Romans, did proceed naturally
from their Government, and was but a plain effect and consequence of the
perfection of their Commonwealth; I say, if Readers will thus judge, how can I
in reason be accused for that? It would become those who lay this blame upon me
to undeceive them whom my Papers have misled, and to show the World to what
other Causes we may impute those admirable Effects, those Heroic Qualities and
Performances, that Integrity, and purity of Manners, that scorning of Riches
and Life it self, when the Public was concerned: if they please to do this,
they will oblige my Readers, who will owe to such the rectifying of their
Judgments, and not at all offend me, who have reasoned this matter impartially,
and without passion, nor have possitively affirmed any thing. But what if this
part of my Accusation had been true? why should I be condemned of Heresy or
Indiscretion for preserring a Commonwealth before a Monarchy? Was I not born,
bred, and employed in a City, which being, at the time I writ, under that Form
of Government, did owe all Wealth and Greatness, and all prosperity to it? If I
had not very designedly avoided all dogmaticalness in my Observations, (being
not willing to im^tate young Scholars in their declamations) I might easily
have concluded from the Premises I lay down, that a Democracy founded upon good
Orders, is the best and most excellent Government, and this without the least
fear of confutation; for I firmly believe, that there are none but Flatterers
and Sophisters would oppose me, such as will wrest Aristotle, and even Plato
himself, to make them write for Monarchy, by misapplying some loose passages in
those great Authors; nay, they will tell their Readers, that what is most like
the Government of the World by God, is the best, which wholly depends upon his
Absolute Power. To make this Comparison run with four feet, these Sycophants
must give the poor Prince they intend to Deify, a better and superior Nature
to Humanity, must create a necessary dependence of all creatures upon him, must
endow him with infinite Wisdom and Goodness, and even with Omnipotency it self.
It will be hard for any man to be misled in this Argument, by Proofs wrested
from Theology, since whosoever reads attentively the Historical part of the Old
Testament, shall find that God himself never made but one Government for Men,
that this Government was a Commonwealth (wherein the Sanhedrim or Senate, and
the Congregation, or popular Assembly had their share) and that he manifested
his high displeasure when the rebellious People would turn it into a Monarchy.
But, that I may not strike upon the Rock I profess to shun, I shall pass to
that which is, indeed, fit to be wipt off, and which, if it were true, would
not only justly expose me to the hatred and vengeance of God, and all good Men,
but even destroy the design and purpose of all my Writings; which is to treat
in some sort (as well as one of my small parts can hope to do) of the
Politics; and how can any man pretend to write concerning policy, who destroys
the most essential part of it, which is Obedience to all Governments? It will
be very easy then for Giulio Salivati, or any other Member of our Society, to
believe the protestation I make; that the animating of private Men, either
directly or indirectly, to disobey, much less to shake off any Government, how
despotical soever, was never in my thoughts or Writings; those who are
unwilling to give credit to this, may take the pains to assign in any of my
Books the passages they imagine to tend that way (for I can think of none my
self) that so I may give such person more particular satisfaction. I must
confess I have a Discourse in one of my Books to encourage the Italian Nation
to assume their ancient valor, and to expel the Barbarians, meaning (as the
Ancient Romans used the word) all Strangers from amongst us; but that was
before the Kings of Spain had quiet possession of the Kingdom of Naples, or the
Emperor of the Duchy of Milan; so that I could not be interpreted to mean,
that the People of those two Dominions should be stirred up to shake off their
Princes, because they were Foreigners, since at that time Lodovic Sforza was in
possession of the one, and King Frederick restored to the other, both Natives
of Italy; but my design was to exhort our Countrymen not to suffer this
Province to be the Scene of the Arms and Ambition of Charles the VIII th, or K.
Lewis his Successor; who, when they had a mind to renew the old Title of the
House of Anjou to the Kingdom of Naples, came with such Force into Italy, that
not only our Goods were plundered, and our Lands wasted, but even the Liberty
of our Cities and Governments endangered; but to unite and oppose them, and to
keep this Province in the hands of Princes of our own Nation; this my intention
is so visible in the Chapter it self, that I need but refer you to it. Yet,
that I may not answer this imputation barely by denying, I shall assert in this
place what my Principles are in that which the World calls Rebellion; which I
believe to be not only a rising in Arms against any Government we live under,
but do acknowledge that word to extend to all Clandestine Conspiracies too, by
which the peace and quiet of any Country may be interrupted, and by consequence
the Lives and Estates of innocent Persons endangered. Rebellion then, so
described, I hold to be the greatest Crime that can be committed amongst Men,
both against Policy, Morality, and in Foro Conscientiae: But notwithstanding
all this, it is an Offense which will be committed whilst the World lasts, as
often as Princes tyrannize, and, by Inslaving and Oppressing their Subjects,
make Magistracy, which was intended for the Benefit of Mankind, prove a Plague
and destruction to it: For let the terror and the guilt be never so great, it
is impossible that Humane Nature, which consists of Passion as well as Virtue,
can support with patience and submission the greatest Cruelty and Jnjustice,
whenever either the Weakness of their Princes, the Unanimity of the People, or
any other favorable accident, shall give them reasonable hopes to mend their
Condition, and provide better for their own interest by Insurrection: So that
Princes and States ought, in the conduct of their Affairs, not only to consider
what their People are bound to submit to, if they were inspired from Heaven; or
were all Moral Philosophers; but to weigh likewise what is probable de facto to
fall out, in this corrupt Age of the World, and to reflect upon those dangerous
tumults which have happened frequently, not only upon Oppression, but even by
reason of malversation; and how some Monarchies have been wholly subverted, and
changed into Democracies, by the Tyranny of their Princes, as we see (to say
nothing of Rome) the powerful Cantons of Swisserland brought by that means, a
little before the last Age, to a considerable Commonwealth, courted and sought
to by all the Potentates in Christendom. If Princes will seriously consider
this matter, I make no question but they will Rule with Clemency and
Moderation, and return to that excellent Maxim of the Ancients (almost
exploded in this Age) that the Interest of Kings, and of their People, is the
same, which Truth it has been the whole Design of my Writings to convince them
of.

Now having gone thus far in the description of Rebellion; I think my self
obliged to tell you what I conceive not to be Rebellion. Whosoever then takes
up Arms to maintain the Politic Constitution, or Government of his Country, in
the Condition it then is, I mean, to defend it from being Changed, or Invaded,
by the Craft or Force of any Man (although it be the Prince, or Chief
Magistrate himself) provided, that such taking up of Arms be Commanded, or
Authorized by those who are, by the Orders of that Government, legally
entrusted with the Custody of the Liberty of the People, and Foundation of the
Government: This I hold to be so far from Rebellion, that I believe it
laudable, nay, the Duty of every Member of such Commonwealth; for that he who
Fights to Support and Defend the Government he was born and lives under, cannot
deserve the odious name of Rebel, but he who endeavors to destroy it. If this
be not granted, it will be in vain to frame any mixed Monarchies in the World;
yet such is at this day the happy Form under which almost all Europe lives, as
the People of France, Spain, German, Poland, Swethland, Denmark, etc. Wherein
the Prince has his share, and the People theirs; which last, if they had no
means of recovering their Rights, if taken from them, or defending them if
invaded, would be in the same Estate as if they had no Title to them, but lived
under the Empire of Turkey, or of Muscovey. And since they have no other Remedy
but by Arms, and that it would be of ill Conquence to make every private man
judge when the Rights of the People (to which they have as lawful a Claim as
the Prince to his) are Invaded* which would be apt to produce frequent, and
sometimes causeless Tumults; therefore it has been the great Wisdom of the
Founders of such Monarchies, to appoint Guardians to their Liberty; which if it
be not otherwise expressed, is and ought to be understood to reside in the
Estates of the Country, which for that Reason (as also to exercise their share
in the Sovereignty, as making Laws, Levying Money, etc.) are frequently to be
Assembled in all those Regions in Europe, before mentioned. These are to assert
and maintain the Orders of the Government, and the Laws established, and (if it
cannot be done otherwise) to arm the People to defend them, and repel the force
that is upon them. Nay, the Government of Aragon goes further; and because in
the intervals of the Estates or Courts many accidents may intervene, to the
prejudice of their Rights, or Fueros, as they call them; they have, during the
intermission, appointed a Magistrate, called El Iusticia, who is, by the Law
and Consti^ution of that Kingdom, to Assemble the whole People to his Banner,
whenever such Rights are incroacht upon; who are not only justified by the Laws
for such coming together, but are severely punishable in case of refusal. So
that there is no question, but that if the Kings of Aragon, at this day very
powerful, by the addition of the Naples Kingdom, and of Sicily, and the Union
with Castile, should, in time to come, Invade their Kingdom of Aragon with the
Forces of their New Dominions, and endeavor to take from them the Rights and
Privileges they enjoy lawfully by their Constitution, There is no question, I
say, but they may (though their King be there in person against them) Assemble
under their Iusticia, and defend their Liberties, with as much Justice, as if
they were Invaded by the French, or by the Turk. For it were absurd to think,
since the People may be legally assembled to apprehend Banditti Robbers, nay,
to deliver a Possession forceably detained against the Sentence of some
inferior Court, that they may and ought not to bestir themselves to keep in
being, and preserve that Government which maintains them in possession of their
Liberty, and Property, and defends their Lives too, from being Arbitrarily
taken away. But I know this clear Truth receives opposition in this
unreasonable and corrupt Age; when Men are more prone to Flatter the Lusts of
Princes than formerly, and the Favorites are more impatient to bear the
impartiality of Laws, than the Son^ of Brutus were; who complained, Leg^s esse
Surdas; that is, though they were fine Gentlemen, in favor with the Ladies,
and Ministers of the King's ^leasures, vet they could not Oppress, Drink,
Whore, nor Kill the, Sbiri, Officers of Justice, in the Streets, returning from
their Night Revels, but the Execution of the Laws would reach them* as well ^s
others; who, in the times of Tarquin it seems, found the Prince more exorable.
Nay, the very Divines themselves help with their fallacies to oppugn this
Doctrine; by making us believe, as I said before, that it is God's will all
Princes should be absolute; and are so far in a Conspiracy against Mankind,
that they assert that in the Text ( This shall the manner of your King be) God
was giving that People the Ius Divinum of Government, when in truth he was
threatening then with the Plagues of Monarchy. But I spare the Divines here,
since I shall have occasion, in Discoursing of my next Accusation, to show how
that sort of People have dealt with God's Truths, and with the Interests of
Men; and to be as good as my word, I shall presently fall upon that Point,
having been so tedious already in the former.

I am charged then in the Second place with Impiety, in villifying the Church,
and so to make way for Atheism. I do not deny but that I have very frequently,
in my Writings, laid the blame upon the Church of Rome; not only for all the
Misgovernment of Christendom, but even for the depravation, and almost total
Destruction of Christian Religion it self in this Province. But that this
Discourse of mine does, or can tend to teach Men Impiety, or to make way for
Atheism, I peremptorily deny; and although for proof of my innocence herein, I
need but refer you, and all others, to my Papers themselves, as they are now
Published; (where you will find all my Reasons drawn from Experience, and
frequent Examples cited, which is ever my way of arguing) yet since I am put
upon it, I shall in a few Lines make that matter possibly a little clearer; and
shall first make protestation, that as I do undoubtedly hope, by the Merits of
Christ, and by Faith in him, to attain Eternal Salvation; so I do firmly
Believe the Christian Profession to be the only true Religion now in the World:
Next, I am fully persuaded that all Divine Verities, which God then designed to
teach the World, are contained in the Books of Holy Scripture, as they are now
extant, and received amongst us. From them I understand, that God Created Man
in Purity, and Innocence; and that the first of that Species, by their frailty,
lost at once their Integrity, and their Paradise, and entailed Sin and Misery
upon their Posterity. That Almighty God, to repair this loss, did, out of his
infinite Mercy, and with unparalled Grace and Goodness, send his only
Begotten Son into the World, to teach us new Truths, to be a perfect Example of
Virtue, Goodness, and Obedience; to restore true Religion, degenerated amongst
the Jews into Superstition, Formality, and Hypocrisy; to die for the Salvation
of Mankind, and in fine, to give to us the Holy Spirit, and to regenerate our
Hearts, support our Faith, and lead us into all Truth. Now if it shall appear,
that as the lusts of our first Parents did at that time disappoint the good
intention of God, in making a pure World, and brought in, by their
disobedience, the Corruptions that are now in it; so, that since likewise the
Bishops of Rome, by their insatiable Ambition and Avarice, have designedly, as
much as in them lies, frustrated the merciful purpose he had in the happy
restoration he intended the World by his Son, and in the renewing and reforming
of Humane Nature, and have wholly defaced and spoiled Christian Religion, and
made it a Worldly and a Heathenish thing, and altogether incapable, as it is
practiced amongst them, either of directing the ways of its Professors to
Virtue and good Life, or of saving their Souls hereafter. If, I say, this do
appear, I know no reason why I, for detecting thus much, and for giving warning
to the World to take heed of their ways, should be accused of Impiety, or
Atheism, or why his Holiness should be so enraged against the poor Inhabitants
of the Valleys in Savoy, and against the Albigesi, for calling him Antichrist.
But to find that this is an undoubted Truth, I mean, that the Popes have
corrupted Christian Religion, we need but read the New Testament (acknowledged
by themselves to be of Infallible Truth) and there we shall see, that the Faith
and Religion Preached by Christ, and settled afterward by his Apostles, and
Cultivated by their Sacred Epistles, is so different a thing from the
Christianity that is now Professed, and Taught at Rome, that we should be
convinced, that if those Holy Men should be sent by God again into the World,
they would take more pains to confute this Gallimaufry, than ever they did to
preach down the Traditions of the Pharisees, or the Fables and Idolatries of
the Gentiles, and would in probability suffer a new Martyrdom in that City,
under the Vicar of Christ, for the same Doctrine which once animated the
Heathen Tyrants against them. Nay, we have something more to say against these
Sacrilegious Pretenders to God's Power; for whereas all other false Worships
have been set up by some Politic Legislators, for the Support and Preservation
of Government, this false, this spurious Religion, brought in upon the ruins
of Christianity by the Popes, has deformed the face of Government in Europe,
destroying all the good Principles and Morality left us by the Heathens
themselves; and introduced instead thereof, Sordid, Cowardly, and Impolitick
Notions; whereby they have subjected Mankind, and even great Princes and States
to their own Empire, and never suffered any Orders or Maxims to take place,
where they have power, that might make a Nation Wise, Honest, Great, or
Wealthy. This I have set down so plainly in those Passages of my Book which are
complained of, that I shall say nothing at all for the Proof of it in this
place, but referr you thither, and come to speak a little more particularly of
my first assertion; That the Pope and his Clergy have depraved Christian
Religion. Upon this Subject, I could infinitely wish, now Letters begin to
revive again, that some Learned Pen would employ it self, and that some Person
verst in the Cronology of the Church (as they call it) would deduce out of the
Ecclesiastical Writers the time and manner how these Abuses crept in, and by
what Arts and Steps this Babel that reaches at Heaven, was built by these Sons
of the Earth: But this matter, as unsuitable to the brevity of a Letter, and
indeed more to my small Parts and Learning, I shall not pretend to, being one
who never hitherto studied or writ of Theology, further than it did naturally
concern the Politics; therefore I shall only deal by the New Testament, as I
have done formerly by Titus Livius, that is, make Observations or Reflections
upon it, and leave you Messieur Giulio, and the rest of our Society, to make
the judgment, not citing like Preachers the Chapter, or Verse, because the
reading of Holy Scripture is little used, and indeed hardly permitted amongst
us. To begin at the top, I would have any reasonable Man tell me whence this
unmeasurable Power, long claimed, and now possessed by the Bishop of Rome, is
derived; first, of being Christ's Vicar, and by that (as I may so say)
pretending to a Monopoly of the Holy Spirit, (which was promised and given to
the whole Church, that is, to the Elect, or Saints) as is plain by a Clause in
St. Peter's Sermon, made the very same time that the miraculous Gifts of the
Spirit of God were first given to the Apostles, who says to the Jews and
Gentiles, Repent, and be Baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the Remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost; for this Promise is to you, and to your Children, and to all that are
afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Next, to judge
infallibly of Divine Truth, and to forgive Sins as Christ did: Then to be the
Head of all Ecclesiastical Persons, and Causes in the World; to be so far above
Kings and Princes, as to Judge, Depose, and Deprive them, and to have an
absolute Jurisdiction over all the Affairs in Christendom, in Ordine ad
Spiritualia; yet all this the Canonists allow him, and he makes no scruple to
assume, whilst it is plain, that in the whole New Testament there is no
description made of such an Officer to be at any time in the Church, except it
be in the Prophecy of the Apocalypse, or in one of St. Paul's Epistles, where
he says, Who is it that shall sit in the Temple of God, showing himself that he
is God. Christ tells us his Kingdom is not of this World, and if any will be
the greatest amongst his Disciples, that he must be Servant to the rest; which
shows, that his Followers were to be great in Sanctity, and Humility, and not
in Worldly Power. The Apostle Paul, writing to the Christians of those times,
almost in every Epistle, commands them to be obedient to the Higher Powers, or
Magistrates, set over them; and St. Peter himself (from whom this extravagant
Empire is pretended to be derived) in his first Epistle, bids us submit our
selves to every Ordinance of Man* for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the
King, or, etc. And this is enjoined, although it is plain, that they who
Governed the World in those days, were both Heathens, Tyrants, and Usurpers,
and in this submission there is no Exception, or Proviso for Ecclesiastical
immunity. The Practice as well as Precepts of these Holy Men shows plainly that
they had no intention to leave Successors who should deprive Hereditary Princes
from their right of Reigning for difference in Religion, who without all doubt,
are by the appointment of the Apostle, and by the Principles of Christianity,
to be obeyed and submitted to (in things wherein the Fundamental Laws of the
Government give them power) though they were Jews, or Gentiles. If I should
tell you by what Texts in Scripture, the Popes claim the Powers before
mentioned, it would stir up your laughter, and prove too light for so serious a
matter, yet because possibly you may never have heard so much of this Subject
before, I shall instance in a few: They tell you therefore that the
Jurisdiction they pretend over the Church, and the Power of pardoning Sins,
comes from Christ to St. Peter, and from him to them. Thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock I will build my Church. I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven; what ye bind (this is spoken to all the Apostles) on Earth, shall be
bound in Heaven, and what ye bind, etc. From these three Texts, ridiculously
applied, comes this great Tree, which has with its Branches overspread the
whole Earth, and killed all the good and wholesome Plants growing upon it. The
first Text will never by any Man of Sense be understood to say more, than that
the Preaching, Suffering, and Ministry of Peter was like to be a great
Foundation and Pillar of the Doctrine of Christ; the two other Texts, (as also
another spoken by our Savior, to all his Apostles, Whose Sins ye remit, they
are remitted, and whose Sins ye retain, they are retained) are by all the
Primitive Fathers Interpreted in this manner: Wheresoever you shall effectually
Preach the Gospel, you shall carry with you Grace, and Remission of Sins to
them which shall follow your Instructions; but the People who shall not have
these joyful tidings communicated by you to them, shall remain in darkness, and
in their Sins; but if any will contest, that by some of these last Texts, that
Evangelical Excommunication, which was afterward brought into the Church by the
Apostles, was here pre-signified by our great Master; how unlike were those
Censures to thos^ (...) thundered out (as he calls it) by the Pope? These were
(...) Edification, and not Destruction, to afflict the Flesh for the Salvation
of the Soul; that Apostolical Ordinance was pronounced for some notorious
Scandal, or Apostasy from the Faith, and first decreed by the Church; that is,
the whole Congregation present; and then denounced by the Pastor, and reached
only to debar such Person from partaking of the Communion, or Fellowship of
that Church, 'till Repentance should re-admit him, but was followed by no other
prosecution, or chastisement, as is now Practiced. But suppose all these Texts
had been as they would have them, how does this make for the Successors of St.
Peter, or the rest? Or how can this prove the Bishops of Rome to have right to
such Succession? But I make haste from this Subject, and shall urge but one
Text more, which is, The Spiritual Man judges all Men, but is himself judged
of none: From whence is inferred by the Canonists, that first the Pope is the
Spiritual Man, and then that he is to be Judge of all the World; and last, that
he is never to be liable to any Judgment himself; whereas it is obvious to the
meanest Understanding, that St. Paul in this Text means to distinguish between
a Person inspired with the Spirit of God, and one remaining in the state of
Nature; which latter he says cannot judge of those Heavenly Gifts, and Graces,
as he explains himself, when he says, The natural Man cannot discern the things
of the Spirit, because they are foolishness unto him. To take my leave of this
matter, wholly out of the way of my Studies, I shall beg of you Messieur
Zenobio, and of Messieur Giulio, and the rest of our Society, to read over
carefully the New Testament, and then to see what ground there is for Purgatory
(by which all the Wealth and Greatness has accrew'd to these Men) what color
for the Idolatrous Worship of Saints, and their Images, and particularly for
speaking in their Hymns and Prayers to a piece of Wood (the Cross I mean) Salve
Lignum, etc. and then fac nos dignos beneficiorum Christi, as you may read in
that Office; what color, or rather what excuse for that horrid unchristian and
barbarous Engine called the Inquisition, brought in by the Command and
Authority of the Pope; the Inventer of which, Peter a Dominican Friar, having
been slain amongst the Albigesi, as he well deserved, is now Canonized for a
Saint, and styled San Pietro Martire. In the dreadful Prisons of this
Inquisition, many Faithful and Pious Christians (to say nothing of honest Moral
Moors, or Mahometans) are tormented, and famisht, or if they outlive their
Sufferings, burnt publicly to death, and that only for differing in Religion
from the Pope, without having any Crime, or the least Misdemeanor proved or
alleged against them; and this is inflicted upon these poor Creatures, by
those who profess to believe the Scripture, which tells us, that Faith is the
gift of God, without whose special illumination no Man can obtain it; and
therefore is not in Reason or Humanity to be punished for wanting it. And
Christ himself has so clearly decided that point, in bidding us let the Tares
and the Wheat grow together 'till the Harvest, that I shall never make any
difficulty to call him Antichrist, who shall use the least Persecution
whatsoever, against any differing in Matters of Faith from himself, whether the
person so diffenting be Heretic, Jew, Gentile, or Mohammedan. Next, I beseech
you to observe in reading that Holy Book (though Christian Fasts are doubtless
of Divine Right) what ground there is for enjoining Fish to be eaten (at least
Flesh to be abstained from) for one full third part of the year, by which they
put the Poor to great hardship; who not having Purses to buy wholesome Fish, are
subjected to all the Miseries and Diseases incident to a bad and unhealthful
Diet; whilst the Rich, and chiefly themselves, and their Cardinals, exceed
Lucullus in their Luxury of Oysters, Turbots, tender Crabs, and a Lake Fish not
known here, brought some hundreds of miles to feed their gluttony, upon these
penitential days of abstinence from Beef and Pork. It may be it will lie in the
way of those who observe this, to inquire what St. Paul means, when he says,
that in the latter days some shall depart from the Faith, forbidding to Marry,
and commanding to abstain from Meats, which God has Created to be received
with thanksgiving: But all these things, and many other abuses brought in by
these perverters of Christianity, will I hope e're long be inquired into by
some of the Disciples of that bold Friar, who the very same year in which I
prophesied that the Scourge of the Church was not far off, began to thunder
against their Indulgences, and since has questioned many Tenants long received
and imposed upon the World. I shall conclude this Discourse, after I have said
a word of the most hellish of all the Innovations brought in by the Popes,
which is the Clergy; these are a sort of Men, under pretense of ministering to
the People in Holy things, set apart, and separated from the rest of Mankind
(from whom they have a very distinct, and a very opposite interest) by a Humane
Ceremony called by a Divine Name, viz. Ordination; these, wherever they are
found (with the whole body of the Monks, and Friars, who are called the Regular
Clergy) make a Band which may be called the Ianizaries of the Papacy; these
have been the Causers of all the Solicisms and Immoralities in Government, and
of all the Impieties and Abominations in Religion, and by consequence of all
the Disorder, Villainy, and Corruption we suffer under in this detestable Age.
These Men, by the help of the Bishop of Rome, have crept into all the
Governments in Christendom, where there is any mixture of Monarchy, and made
themselves a third State; that is, have by their Temporalities (which are
almost a third part of all the Lands in Europe, given them by the blind Zeal,
or rather folly of the Northern People, who overran this part of the World)
stepped into the Throne, and what they cannot perform by these Secular Helps, and
by the dependency their Vassals have upon them, they fail not to claim and to
usurp by the Power they pretend to have from God, and his Vicegerent at Rome.
They exempt themselves, their Lands, and Goods from all Secular Jurisdiction,
that is, from all Courts of Justice, and Magistracy, and will be Judges in
their own Cause, as in matters of Tithes, etc. and not content with this, will
appoint Courts of their own, to decide Soveraignly in Testimentary Matters, and
many other Causes, and take upon them to be the sole Punishers of many great
Crimes, as Witchcraft, Sorcery, Adultery, and all Uncleanness: To say nothing
of the forementioned Judicatory of the Inquisition, in these last Cases they
turn the Offenders over to be punished (when they have given Sentence) by the
Secular Arm, so they call the Magistrate, who is blindly to execute their
Decrees, under pain of Hell fire; as if Christian Princes and Governors were
appointed only by God to be their Braves, or Hangmen. They give Protection and
Sanctuary to all Execrable Offenders, even to Murderers themselves (whom God
commanded to be indispensably punished with death) if they come within their
Churches, Cloisters, or any other place which they will please to call Holy
Ground; and if the ordinary Justice, nay, the Sovereign Power, do proceed
against such Offender, they thunder out their Excommunication, that is, cut off
from the Body of Christ, not the Prince only, but the whole Nation, and People;
shutting the Church doors, and commanding Divine Offices to cease, and
sometimes even authorizing the People to rise up in Arms, and constrain their
Governors to a submission; as happened to this poor City, in the time of our
Ancestors; when for but forbidding the Servant of a poor Carmilite Friar (who
had vowed Poverty, and should have kept none) to go armed, and punishing his
disobedience with Imprisonment, our whole Senate, with their Chief Magistrate,
were constrained to go to Avignon for Absolution, and in case of refusal, had
been Massacred by the People. It would almost astonish a Wise Man to imagine
how these Folks should acquire an Empire so destructive to Christian Religion,
and so pernicious to the Interests of Men; but it will not seem so miraculous
to them who shall seriously consider, that the Glergy has been for more than
these Thousand Years upon the catch, and a formed united Corporation against
the purity of Religion, and the Interests of Mankind; and have not only wrested
the Holy Scriptures to their own advantage (which they have kept from the
Laiety in unknown Languages, and by prohibiting the reading thereof) but made
use likewise, first, of the blind Devotion and Ignorance of the Goths, Vandals,
Huns, etc. and since, of the Ambition and Avarice of Christian Princes,
stirring them up one against another, and sending them upon foolish Errands to
the Holy Land, to lose their Lives, and to leave their Dominions in the mean
time exposed to themselves, and their Accomplices; they have besides kept
Learning and Knowledge amongst themselves, stifling the light of the Gospel;
crying down Moral Virtues as splendid Snares, defacing Humane Policy,
destroying the purity of the Christian Faith and Profession, and all that was
Virtuous, Prudent, Regular, and Orderly upon Earth; so that whoever would do
God, and Good Men service, get himself immortal Honor in this Life, and
Eternal Glory in the next, would restore the good Policy (I had almost said,
with my Author Livy, the Sanctity too) of the Heathens, with all their Valor,
and other Glorious Endowments: I say, whoever would do this, must make himself
powerful enough to extirpate this Cursed and Apostate Race out of the World;
and that you may see this is lawful, as well as necessary, I shall say but one
word of their Calling, and Original, and then leave this Subject. The word
Clergy is a term wholly unknown to the Scriptures, otherwise than in this
sense. A peculiar People, or God's Lot, used often for the whole Jewish
Nation, who are likewise called a Kingdom of Priests in some places. In the New
Testament the word Cleros is taken for the true Believers, who are also called
the Elect, and often the Church, which is the Assembly of the Faithful met
together; as is easily seen, by reading the beginning of most of St. Paul's
Epistles; where, writing to the Church, or Galathian Churches, he usually
explains himself to all the Saints in Christ; sometimes to all who have
obtained like Faith with us; sometimes to all who in all places call upon the
Name of the Lord Jesus, etc. By which, it appears, that neither the word
Church, nor Clergy, was in those days ever appropriated to the Pastors, or
Elders of the Flock, but did signify indifferently all the People assembled
together; which is likewise the litteral construction of the word Ecclesia,
which is an Assembly, or Meeting: In these Congregations or Churches, was
performed their Ordination, which properly signifies no more than a Decree of
such Assembly, but is particularly used for an Election of any into the
Ministry. The manner was this, sometimes the Apostles themselves in their
Perigrinations, and sometimes any other eminent Member of the Church, did
propose to the Society (upon Vacancy, or other necessity of a Pastor, Elder, or
Deacon) some good Holy Man to be Elected; which Person, if he had Parts, or
Gifts, such as the Church could Edify by, was chosen by lifting up of hands,
that is, by Suffrage; and oftentimes hands were laid upon him, and Prayer made
for him. These Men so set apart, did not pretend to any Consecration, or
Sacredness, more than they had before; much less to become a distinct thing
from the rest of Mankind; as if they had been Metamorphos'd, but did attend to
perform the several Functions of their Calling, as Prophesying, that is,
preaching the Gospel, Visiting the Sick, etc. and never intermitted the
ordinary business of their Trade, or Profession, unless their Church or
Congregation was very numerous; in which case, they were maintained by Alms, or
Contribution, which was laid aside by every Member, and Collected the first day
of the Week by the Deacons; this was said to be given to the Church, and was
employed by Suffrage of the whole collective Body to the Poor, and to other
incidences; so far was it from Sacrilege in those days, to employ Church Goods
to Lay uses. From these words, Church, Clergy, Ordination, Pastor, (which last
has been Translated of late years Bishop) you see what Conclusions these Men
have deduced, and how immense a Structure they have raised upon so little a
Foundation, and how easily it will fall to the ground, when God shall inspire
Christian Princes and States to redeem his Truths, and his poor enslaved
Members out of their clutches, and to bring back again into the World, the true
Original Christian Faith, with the Apostolical Churches, Pastors, and
Ordination, so consistent with Moral Virtue, and Integrity; so helpful and
conducing to the best and most prudent Policy, so fitted for obedience to
Magistracy, and Government, all which the World has for many years been
deprived of, by the execrable and innate ill quality, which is inseparable from
Priestcraft, and the Conjuration or Spell of their new invented Ordination, by
which they cry with the Poet Claudian, Iam furor humanum nostro de pectore
sensum,
Expulit and totum spirant praecordia Phaebum.
Which makes them so Sacred, and Holy, that they have nothing of Integrity, or,
indeed, of Humanity left in them. I hope I shall not be thought impious any
longer, upon this Point; I mean for Vindicating Christian Religion from the
assaults of these Men, who, having the confidence to believe, or at least
profess themselves the only Instruments which God has chosen, or can choose, to
teach and reform the World (though they have neither Moral Virtues, nor Natural
Parts, equal to other Men for the most part) have by this pretense prevailed so
far upon the common sort of People, and upon some too of a better quality, that
they are persuaded their Salvation, or Eternal Damnation, depends upon
believing, or not believing of what they say. I would not be understood to
dissuade any from honoring the true Apostolical Teachers, when they shall be
re-established amongst us, or from allowing them (even of right, and not of
alms or courtesy) such Emoluments as may enable them cheerfully to perform the
duties of their Charge, to provide for their Children, and even to use
Hospitality, as they are commanded by St. Paul. But this I will Prophecy
before I conclude, that if Princes shall perform this business by halves, and
leave any root of this Clergy, or Priestcraft, as it now is, in the ground; or
if that Famous Reformer, fled some years since out of Picardy, to Geneva, who
is of so great Renown for Learning, and Parts, and who promises us so perfect a
Reformation, shall not in his Model wholly extirpate this sort of Men; then I
say I must foretell, that as well the Magistrate, as this Workman, will find
themselves deceived in their expectation, and that the least Fibra of this
Plant will overrun again the whole Vineyard of the Lord, and turn to a
diffusive Papacy in every Diocese, perhaps in every Parish. So that God in his
mercy inspire them to cut out the Core of the Uulcer, and the bag of this
Impostume, that it may never ranckle, or fester any more, nor break out
hereafter, to diffuse new corruption and putrefaction through the Body of
Christ, which is his Holy Church, nor to vitiate and infect the good Order, and
true Policy of Government. I come now to the last branch of my Charge, which
is, That I teach Princes Villainy, and and how to Enslave and Oppress their
Subjects: In which Accusation I am dealt with as poor Messieur Agnolo Canini
was, who, as they report, being a very Learned Practiser of the Laws, and left
the only Man of this profession, one Autumn in our City, the rest of the
Advocates being fled into the Country for fear of a Contagious Disease which
then reigned, was commanded by our Judges to assist with his Counsel both
Parties, and to draw Pleas as well for the Defendant, as the Plaintiff, else
the Courts of Justice must have been shut up. In the same manner my Accusers
handle me, and make me first exhort and teach Subjects to throw off their
Princes, and then to instruct Monarchs how to Enslave and Oppress them; but I
did not expect such ingratitude from mine own Citizens; or to be served as
Moses was, when he was upbraided for killing the Egyptian, by one of his own
People, for whose sake he had done it; whereas he believed they would have
understood by that action, that he was the Person whom God intended to make use
of in delivering them from the horrid Slavery they were then under. If any Man
will read over my Book of the Prince with impartiality, and ordinary Charity,
he will easily perceive that it is not my intention therein to recommend that
Government, or those Men there described, to the World; much less to teach them
to trample upon good Men, and all that is Sacred and Venerable upon Earth;
Laws, Religion, Honesty, and what not.

If I have been a little too punctual in designing these Monsters, and drawn
them to the Life in all their Lineaments, and Colors, I hope Mankind will know
them, the better to avoid them; my Treatise being both a Satyr against them,
and a true Character of them. I speak nothing of Great and Honorable Princes,
as the Kings of France, England, and others, who have the States and Orders of
their Kingdoms, with excellent Laws and Costitutions, to found and maintain
their Government; and who reign over the Hearts, as well as the Persons of
their Subjects. I treat only of those Vermin, bred out of the corruption of
our own small Commonwealth, and Cities, or engendered by the ill blasts that
come from Rome, as Olivarol^* da Fermo, Borgia, the Baglioni, the Bentivogli,
and a hundred others, who having had neither right, nor honorable means to
bring them to their power, use it with more Violence, Rapine and Cruelty upon
the poor People, than those other Renowned Princes show to the Boars, the
Wolves, the Foxes, and other Savage Beasts, which are the Objects of their
Chase and Hunting. Whosoever in his Empire over Men is tied to no other Rules
than those of his own Will and Lust, must either be a Saint to moderate his
Passions, or else a very Devil incarnate; or if he be neither of these, both
his Life and Reign are like to be very short; for whosoever takes upon him so
execrable an Employment, as to Rule Men against the Laws of Nature, and of
Reason, must turn all topsey turvy, and never stick at any thing; for if once
he halt, he will fall, and never rise again. I hope after this I need say
little to justify my self from the Calumny of advising these Monsters to break
their Faith, since to keep it, is to lose their Empire; Faithfulness and
Sincerity being their mortal Enemies: And Vguccione della Faggivola, to one who
upbraided him, that he never employed honest Men, answered, honest Men will cut
my throat; let the King use honest Men, meaning the King of Naples, who was
Established in this Throne, and had right to it. But that I may have occasion
to justify my self against a little more than I am accused of: I will confess,
that in a Work, where I desired to be a little more serious than I was in this
Book of the Prince, I did affirm, that in what way soever Men defended their
Country, whether by breaking or keeping their Faith, it was ever well defended;
not meaning in a strict moral sense, or point of Honor; but explaining my
self, that, de facto, the infamy of the breach of word would quickly be
forgotten, and pardoned by the World, which is very true; nay, what if I had
said that good success in any Enterprise (a far less consideration than Piety
to our Country) would have canceled the blame of such a perfidy?

I might have alleged a thousand Examples for the truth of this; to take one
for all, we see the treachery which Caesar (whom I compare to Cataline) used
toward his fellow Citizens; not only not detested by Posterity, but even
crowned with Renown, and immortal Fame, insomuch as Princes to this day (as I
have observed elsewhere) think it an honor to be compared to him, and the
highest pitch of Veneration their Flatterers can arrive to, is to call them by
the name of one who violated his Faith, and Enslaved his Country.

I hope that in showing as well these Tyrants, as the poor People who are
forced to live under them, their danger; that is, by laying before the former,
the hellish and precipitous Courses, they must use to maintain their Power; and
by representing to the latter what they must suffer, I may be Instrumental,
first, to deter private Citizens from attempting upon the Liberties of their
Country, or if they have done it, to make them lay down their ill-gotten
Authority, and then to warn the rest of the Nobility and People from those
Factions and Malignancies in their several Commonwealths and Governments, which
might give hope and opportunity to those who are Ambitious amongst them, to
aspire to an Empire over them. However it prove, I hope I am no more to be
blamed for my attempt, than that Excellent Physician of our Nation is, who has
lately taken so much pains to compose an excellent Treatise of that foul
Disease, which was not long since brought from the New World, into these parts;
wherein, though he be forced to use such expressions as are almost able to
nauseate his Readers, and talk of such Ulcers, Boils, Nodes, Botches, Cankers,
etc. that are scarce fit to be repeated; especially when he handles the Causes
of those Effects; yet he did not intend to teach or exhort Men to get this
Disease, much less did he bring this lamentable infirmity into the World; but
describes it faithfully as it is, to the end Men may be deterred, and avoid the
being infected with it, and may discern and Cure it, when ever their
incontinence and folly shall procure it them. I shall say no more in this
matter, but, to conclude all, make a protestation, that as well in this Book,
as in all my other Writings, my only scope and design is to promote the
interest and welfare of Mankind, and the peace and quiet of the World; both
which I am so vain as to believe, would be better obtained, and provided for,
if the Principles I lay down were followed, and observed, by Princes and
People, than they are like to be by those Maxims which are in this Age most in
vogue.

For my self, I shall only say, (and call you all to Witness for the Truth of
it) that as by my Birth I am a Gentleman, and of a Family which has had many
Chief Magistrates of Justice in it; so I have been used in many Employments of
Great Trust, both in our City and Abroad, and at this Hour, I am am not in my
Estate one Penny the better for them all nor should I have been, although I had
never suffered any Losses by the Seizure of my Estate, in the Year 1531. For my
Carriage, it has ever been void of Faction and Contention; I never had any
Prejudice against the House of Medici, but Honored the Persons of all those of
that Family, whom I knew, and the Memory of such of them as Lived before me,
whom I acknowledge to have been Excellent Patriots and Pillars of our City and
Commonwealth: During the turbulent times of Piero, and after his Expulsion out
of Florence; though my Employments were but Ministerial, my Advice was asked in
many Grave Matters, which I ever delivered with Impartiality and Indifference;
not espousing the Heady Opinions of any, much less their Passions and
Animosities, I never sided with any Party further than that the Duty of my
Charge obliged me to serve the prevailing Party, when possessed of the Government
of our City; this I speak for those Changes which happened between the Flight
of the said Piero de Medici, and the Horrid Parricide, committed by Clement the
7 th upon his Indulgent Mother, joining with his greatest Enemies, and uniting
himself with those who had used the most Transcendent Insolence to his own
Person, and the highest Violence and Fury the Sun ever saw, to his poor
Courtiers and Subjects; that so accompanied, he might Sheath his Sword in the
Bowels of his own Desolate Country. At that time, and during that whole Siege,
I must confess, I did break the Confines of my Neutrality, and not only Acted
as I was commanded barely, but roused my self, and stirred up others,
Haranguing (in the streets and places of the City) the People to defend, with
the last drop of their Blood, the Walls of their Country, and the Liberty of
their Government, taking very hazardous Journeys to Ferruccio, and the rest,
into the Mugello and other parts, to bring in Succors and Provisions to our
languishing City; and Acting as a Soldier (which was a new Profession to me) at
the Age of above Sixty, when others are Dispensed from it. For all which I had
so entire a Satisfaction in my Mind and Conscience, that I am persuaded this
Cordial made me able to support the Sufferings which befell me after our
Catastrophe, and to rejoice in them so far, that all the Malice and Cruelty of
our Enemies, could never draw one word from me unsuitable to the Honor I
thought I merited, and did in some sort enjoy, for being instrumental to defend
(as long as it was possible) our Altars and our Hearths. But all that I have
undergone, has been abundantly Recompensed to me, by the Favor and Courtesy
of the Most Excellent Seigneur Cosimo, who has been pleased to offer me all
the Preferments the greatest Ambition could aspire to; which I did not refuse,
out of any scruple to serve so incomparable a Prince, whose Early Years
manifest so much Courage, Humanity, and Prudence, and so Fatherly a care of the
Public Good, but because I was very desirous not to accept of a Charge which I
was not able to perform, my Years and Infirmities having now brought me to a
Condition, in which I am fitter to live in a Cloister than a Palace; and made
me good for nothing but to talk of past times, the common Vice of Old Age; so
that I did not think it Just or Grateful, to Reward this Excellent Person so
ill for his Kindness, as to give him an useless Servant, and to fill up the
place of a far better. This is all I think fit to say of this matter: I choose
to address it to you Messieur Zenobio, for the constant Friendship I have ever
Entertained with you, and formerly with your Deceased Father, the Companion of
my Studies, and Ornament of our City. And so I bid you Farewell.

This 1st of April 1537.
FINIS.

