TRI-VNITY: OR THE DOCTRINE OF THE Holy Trinity, ASSERTED, IN A DISCOURSE ON 2
Cor. XIII. xiv.

By ISAAC MAUDUIT, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by Hannah Clark, for John Dunton, at the Raven in the
Poultrey. 1694.

THE PREFACE, TO Them that Love the Lord Jesus in Sincerity, at Tooting, and in
the Neighborhood.
Dearly Beloved in the Lord,
THE Soundness of your Judgments in the Doctrins of the Gospel; your entire
Union amongst your selves, and the Generousness of your Spirit, is your Glory,
as Christians, your Strength, as a Society, and my Encouragement, as a
Minister. Three Years I have Labored amongst you; and I trust, that the Lord
of the Vineyard will not Sentence any of you, as not finding in you the
expected Fruit. Most Congregations may sadly Bewail the fewness of Converts;
but I Rejoice that God has given me your Hearts; and I readily return them to
the Donor, by desiring to espouse and present you to Christ. You know I affect
not tediousness on any Subjects, that from proper Texts ( I might through
Divine assistance) declare to you the whole Council of God. Though in the course
of my Ministry I have in set Discourses labored to establish your Minds in the
Existence of a God; in the Deity of our Blessed Redeemer, and in his being the
true Messiah.

I now tender (what several of you have lately heard) an Asserting of the Holy
Trinity. These Blessed Persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, have
contrived, effected and do apply our Redemption; they are that One God whom we
Adore, and I hope shall be the Object of our eternal Praises.

I expose this to the public View, not from the least conceit of the stress of
my Arguing; but to awaken some Acute Pen, which may designedly treat of this
Subject, and answer the Cavils of late Pamphlets. Also several of you being at
your Residences in London, hereby I trust to be Serviceable to you in your
Absence; and to testify that the smallness of my Auditory in the Winter, is no
temptation to me to cause the Offerings of the the Lord to be abhorred, by
doing my Office Negligently. God confirm you in the Truth as it is in Jesus,
and make me and you a Blessing to each other; that we may rejoice in the Great
Day. I crave your daily earnest Prayers, that my Ministerial endeavors may be
attended with the fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel of Christ: And whilst
(in these Parts) I shall delight to be

Your Watchman, Brother and Servant in the Lord, I. M.
Feb. 5. 1693/4.
THE DOCTRINE OF THE TRINITY.
II COR. xiii. 14. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the
Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all.
THE Text is the close of this Epistle, which the Apostle shuts up with a wish
of the greatest Happiness to the Corinthians.

He took his leave of them as a Christian, and as a Minister, with excellent
Counsels and Prayers.

His Counsel or Directions are comprised in Verse 1. Be perfect, be of good
comfort, be of one mind, live in peace.

Be perfect, (...): Be compact and united, like Members of one Body, as parts
of the same House; Union conducing much to the perfection of a Society. This
perfection does not here so immediately respect an improvement of the members
in the habits and exercise of grace, (though this be very desirable) as a
perfecting of the Body of the Church; by restoring (upon Repentance) such as
were for Scandal separated from their Communion; and by reducing such as from a
contentious humor had withdrawn from this Fellowship: The Verb imports a
setting Members that were out of joint, into their proper place again.

Be of one mind: If possible, maintain the same judgment in the Articles of
your Faith; at least pursue the same scope or end, in the intireness of your
Affections.

Be of good comfort, (...): The word may be rendered,

Be exhorted to obey these Precepts.

Be confirmed in Divine Truths, or established in the good ways of God.

Or keep up a good Heart, be cheerful under all your Trials; drop not your
Encouragement under any Afflictions, which you may yet meet with, for the
profession of the Gospel.

Live in peace; be as free as you can from Division, Strife, Wrath, Debate,
Envyings; wherein you have been too faulty in times past.

How happy would the Churches of Christ be, did they attend to this Apostolical
Counsel!

His Prayer is in the Text: St. Paul here wishes abundant Grace and Mercy to
all the Members of this Church.

Omnia Testamenti beneficia a Paulo Apostolo comprehenduntur, sub gratia
Christi, Patris amore, and Spiritus sancti communione.

In which Addresses to Heaven, note,

1. The Object of this Supplication; The Lord Jesus Christ, God, and the Holy
Ghost; from whom as the Supreme Author or Original, descends every good and
perfect gift.

2. The matter of this Petition;

Grace, Love, and Communion.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ; or that kindness and bounty which flows
from him, as the Fountain of Grace; considered as God: with that Grace which is
derived from him, as Mediator betwixt God and Man, let this be with you; or I
heartily wish, that from his Fullness ye may receive Grace for Grace.

The love of God be with you: That good will of Benevolence and Complacency,
wherewith the Father embraces them that are in Christ, for his sake.

The Communion of the Holy Ghost: Or I earnestly entreat, that all manner of
gracious Communications may be granted to you from the blessed Spirit, to
strengthen, quicken, refresh, and seal your Souls.

We shall only now consider the first Head remarked, or the Object of St.
Paul's devout Requests.

Thus the Text is an eminent Proof of the blessed Trinity, all the Persons
being here distinctly named; the Father is called God, the Son Lord, and the
Spirit is mentioned by his Common Epithet, the Holy Ghost.

Moreover, something is here attributed to each of these Persons.

Love, to God the Father, as the Spring of his Munificence to his Creatures:
Or, that which moved him to send his only begotten Son into the World to save
Believers.

Grace is here ascribed to the Lord Jesus, as that which edged him on, to give
his Life a Ransom for many, and to die so freely for the Elect.

We farther read of the Communion of the Holy Ghost; because by the blessed
Spirit, the Father and the Son do bestow or convey their Love and Grace to all
the Saints.

Though all the Persons in the glorious Trinity are equal in Essence, Majesty,
Glory, and Duration; yet from this Verse we may remark, That there is

A difference in their Order of Subsisting; on which account the Father is
before the Son, and the Redeemer precedes the Holy Ghost.

Thus God the Father (the first Person) has the foundation of Personal
Subsistence from himself; God the Son receives it from the Father, and God the
Holy Ghost from both.

To intimate an Order in the Trinity therefore, perhaps we find, that the Son
in some Texts of Scripture is mentioned before the Father; so in the words
read; sometimes the Holy Ghost is nominated before the Father, Ephesians. 2.18. We
have access by one Spirit unto the Father: Or he is spoken of before Jesus
Christ, Revel. 1.4. Grace be to you from the seven Spirits, i. e. from that
Holy Ghost whose Gifts are various, and from Jesus Christ, v. 5.

But although on the account of Relation, or with regard to the Order of
Subsistence, one of these insinite Persons is set before another, yet we may
not derogate the least Punctilio from the Immensity of either of them; any low
Thoughts of this nature, would be an attempt to disfigure the beautiful Aspect
of the Trinity; or to diminish their adorable Perfections.

The Words being thus opened, the conclusion hence may be:

Doctr. There are Three Persons in the glorious Godhead.

When we say, there are Three Persons, Personality denotes a complete
Subsistence, endowed with Understanding; therefore we retain the Term, as
importing a most excellent kind of Being. Nor do the sacred Oracles disdain to
attribute this Title of Person to the God of Glory, Heb. 1. v. 3.

Our Redeemer is styled, The express Image of the Father's Person.

When we affirm there are Three Persons in the Godhead, i. e. the Divine
Essence may be conceived by us as modisied three ways.

1. As the Fountain or Principle of the Deity: Thus it is the First Person, or
the Father, who is not the Cause, but the Principle of the Godhead. The
beginning of a Thing is not necessarily its Cause, e. g. The first Point in a
Line, is not the Cause thereof: Neither have the Son and the Holy Ghost any
principle of Time, but of Order; no Commencement of Duration, but of
Proceeding, or Origin.

2. If we apprehend the Divine Nature as streaming forth from the Father; then
it is the Second glorious Person.

3. If we regard the Essence of God, as breathed forth by the Father and the
Son; this we call the Holy Ghost.

The Doctrine of the Trinity might be illustrated, if we consider,

That in the Sun is Light, Heat, and Beam, yet these make up but one Sun.

In the vegetative Soul, there is a triple Virtue, Moving, Separating, proper
Matter for Nourishment from what is unfit, and attractive, or a kind of
analogical Appetite.

In the Sensitive Nature, there is a threefold Operation, viz. Vitally active,
apprehensive, and appetitive.

In the rational Soul (though the Virtue be centrally one, as in the Vegetative
and Sensitive) yet its working is various, in Activity, Understanding and Will.

In the new Creature there is an holy Power, Wisdom, and Love.

And all these meet in one Man.

Grotius is noted in his Catechism, to give us some Light herein: In his
Questions and Answers following: Que ratio suadet tres ut credantur in uno?
R. Distat a carente sine, quod fines habet.
Artificis nusquamne sui spectatur Imago?
R. Sol, Lux, carorque tria sunt, unum tamen.
Nil hominum natura jubet nos tale tueri.
R. Vigere, sapere, velle; in uno sunt tria.


A Trinity in Unity is not then too hard to be conceived of us.

But this Article of our Faith, touching the ever-blessed Trinity, may be
proved by the Attestations of the Old Testament, by the Records of the Gospel;
and in that Reason cannot justly deny what is thus revealed.

The Declarations of the Old Testament do warrant our belief of this Doctrine.

Full evidence of a Plurality of Persons in the Godhead, we have from Genesis
1.26. Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. God's not speaking now
as before; Let there be light, v. 3. Let the waters bring forth abundantly, v.
20. But the Lord's varying the phrase, insinuates that Man was the most perfect
Work of God in the visible World; and this Expression (as well as other Texts)
makes it plain, that Man had more Creators than one Person.

Other Scriptures confirm to us the Unity of the Godhead, and this clears a
distinction of the Persons.

Neither can the seeming Contradiction of more than One enjoying the Deity, be
reconciled, but by acknowledging a Plurality of Persons in the Unity of Essence.

God said, Let us make Man in our Image. Here observe,

1. It is ridiculous to pretend, that the Most High thus spoke to the Angels;
for as much as they to whom the Discourse is directed, were Partners, or
Companions in the wonderful Work of Creation; which Work exceeds any finite
Power: Nor can the Creature be an Instrument in such an Operation; because
Creation denies any duly prepared subject matter to work upon, being the making
of Things out of nothing, or indisposed Matter; also denying Time to work in,
as producing in an instant: Now without Matter and Time, no Instrument can act.

2. It is as groundless to suppose, that when God said, Let us make Man, he
spoke after the manner of earthly Princes, or Grandees; seeing such a form of
speaking in the Plural Number, was no wise agreeable to the plainess used in
the first Ages, or elder Times of the World; nor consonant to the Hebrew style.
The Isralitish Kings spoke of themselves in the Singular Number, particularly
David, 2 Samuel 3.28. I and my Kingdom are guiltless from the blood of Abner; Not
we and our Empire: 1 Chronicles. 21.17. Is it not I that commanded the people to be
numbered? Even I it is that have sinned: Let thy hand, I pray thee, O Lord my
God, be on me.

Me me inquam, in me convertito ferrum.

In the same manner did the Eastern Monarchs issue forth their Proclamations,
especially Darius, Ezra 6.8. I make a Decree, which ye shall do to the Elders
of these Jews, for the building of this House of God. So also, Ezra 7.21. I,
even I Artaxerxes the King, do make a Decree.

It is then a daring presumption for any to intrude the Customs of the later
Times, into the ancient Records of the Holy Scriptures.

Yea, the God of Glory spoke of himself singularly: Thus when he manifested his
Resolve to drown the World, Genesis 6.17. I, even I, do bring a flood of waters.
Likewise when he displayed his Glory, Power and Majesty at the Publishing of
the Law on Mount Sinai, Exodus 20.2. I am the Lord thy God. So the Prophet
notes, Isa. 42.6.8. I the Lord have called thee: I am the Lord, that is my
Name; and my Glory will I not give to another; neither my Praise to graven
Images. Wherefore that passage, Let us make Man after our likeness, supposes
more than one Person to be concerned in framing of Man.

Nor is the Old Testament a stranger to the Trinity of Persons; we have them
all mentioned, Isa. 63.7, 9, 10. Here is a discovery of God the Father, or
Jehovah: I will mention the loving kindness of the Lord, and the praises of the
Lord. Notice is given us of Jesus Christ, called here, the Angel of his
presence. Other Angels are in the presence of God, but were not so from
everlasting, as Christ was: The Angel of his presence saved them; viz. He who
deserved this Title, by way of Eminency, as being the same that appeared to
Moses in the burning Bush, Exodus 3.2, 4. The Angel of the Lord appeared to him
in a stame of fire, out of the midst of a bush: and when the Lord saw that he
turned aside to see, God called to him out of the midst of the bush. The same
Angel as conducted them in the Wilderness, and spoke to the Israelites from
Sinai, Act. 7.35.37, 68. The Angel of whom God himself testified, My Name is in
him, Exodus 23.20, 21. Moreover in that forequoted Text, the Prophet adds, They
vexed his holy Spirit. Here is an acknowledgment of the Third glorious Person,
denominated his Holy Spirit. Him the Seed of Jacob grieved by their frequent
murmurings in the Desert; by only making the Nations tributary, whom God
commanded them to destroy; and by defying the warnings of the Prophets, even
till the Babylonish Captivity.

2. The New Testament ratifies this Doctrine by sufficient Testimonies.

1. At our Savior's Baptism, the present Truth was confirmed, Matthew. 3.16, 17.
Jesus when he was baptized, went up straitway out of the water; and lo, the
Heavens were opened, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and
lighting upon him; and lo, a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased.

Now the ever-blessed Trinity clearly manifested themselves;

Voce Pater, Natus Corpore, Flamen ave.

He that spoke from Heaven was the Father; He who was baptized in Jordan was
the Son; He that came down in the form of a Dove, is styled the Holy Spirit.
The Father at this time made himself known, by an audible Voice: Jesus Christ
the Essential Word in Heaven, was now born Witness to, by a Word from Heaven;
and God the Holy Ghost now descending on him in the shape of a Dove.

Thus these Three glorious Persons revealed themselves: Pater auditur in voce;
Filius manifestatur in homine; Spiritus sanctus dignoscitur in Columba, Aug.

Three several Actions also at this juncture, serve to establish our Faith, as
to this Article of our Creed: For one proclaims by a Voice from Heaven, This is
my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. This was the Declaration of God the
Father; since it could not be the Speech of Christ, for then he would be Son to
himself. Nor can it be ascribed to the Holy Ghost, for then Jesus should be the
Son of the Spirit; but thus he was never styled in the Scriptures.

The second Person also was now manifested, as invested with the Humane Nature,
baptized; and moreover after that, he prayed, Luke 3.21, 22.

The third Person is now signalized as coming down in the resemblance of a
Dove, and rested upon Jesus Christ, John 1.29, etc.

No wonder now that the Primitive Christians, commonly said to any that doubted
of the Trinity; Abi ad Jordanem and videbis, Go to Jordan, and there you may
receive full satisfaction.

2. The Institution of Baptism, may settle us in the belief of this Truth. Go,
teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28.19. The blessed Trinity is written in legible
Characters on this Ordinance.

Here is a Commission, or solemn Command for Baptism, and the form of
Administering this Sacrament in all Ages, is now set down; and as to the present
purpose, we might remark,

1. The Apostles are ordered to Baptize in the Name of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. Non in nominibus, sed nomine, ut trium unitas
significetur. Consider them Personally, then they have Three Characters here
mentioned, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; but Essentially, they all come under
one Name.

Further, if we expound this Clause in the Name, i. e. Calling on the Name,
acting by the Warrant, or dedicating to the Service of these Three: Hence we
must either establish three Gods, or confess three Persons in the Godhead. But
though we grant Deum trinum, we abhor Deum triplicem. In the Name: This one
Name is expressed only of one Deity; nor can any be the Appointer of Ordinances
for the Church, the Object of our Prayers, or be served and adored, but God
alone, Matthew. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve.

2. The Twelve Disciples were to Baptize in the Name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost; importing an exact, Parity in these Three Persons: Therefore it is
not said, by the Son, or by the Spirit; as if these were unequal in Nature,
Glory, or Dignity to the Father.

3. An Article is prefixed thrice, or added to every one of them; Baptizing
them in the Name (...), of the Father, whose Voice you heard from Heaven at my
Baptism in Jordan; and when Transfigur'd on the Mount, (...), of the Son, whom
you now behold manifested in the flesh; (...): Of the Holy Ghost whom you
formerly saw descending and remaining on me like a Dove. The repeating of the
Article increases the Emphasis.

3. That Passage of the Apostle may strengthen our Faith in this Point, Romans
11.36. Of him, and through him, and to him are all things; to whom be glory for
ever. Here are three Particles, (...), of, through, to; not only to signify
the many Benefits, which Creatures (especially Mankind) do receive from God;
but also to insinuate the Trinity of the Persons in one God. Of him, denotes
the Father, through him, discovers the Son; as we find it interpreted, 1 Cor.
8.6. To us is one God the Father, of whom are all things; and one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are all things: To Him, represents the Holy Ghost. The Father
is a Principle without a beginning; the Son is a middle Person through whom
Operation received from the Father, is transmitted to the Holy Spirit; and the
Holy Ghost is as it were the End in the Trinity, from whom there is no farther
progress to any other Person.

4. That Declaration carries in it convincing evidence of this Doctrine, 1 John
5.7. There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, and these three are one. Here observe,

1. Three recorded Witnesses, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; Necessarily
implying Three Persons: The matter of their Testimony is, That Jesus is the Son
of God, v. 1.5. And the Author of eternal life to Believers, v. 11.

2. The Word and the Holy Ghost are joined as Attestators with the Father. This
were an Honor too great for a mere Creature. Moreover, Christ here styled the
Word, has the glorious Denomination of the true God, v. 20. and the Holy Ghost
here mentioned, is called Truth it self, Verse 6.

3. Each of these Witnesses is God: One is not the other, yet they are not many
Gods; they must therefore be three distinct Persons, subsisting in one divine
Essence: These Three are One, i. e, agreeing in their Testimony, and united in
their Nature.

The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost enjoy the same Substance in an inseparable
equality. We have but one God, because there is but one Godhead; and the Elect
are related to One, whom we also believe to be Three. One is not less God than
the other; nor are they separated in Will, or divided in Power: But there is
one undivided Deity in several Persons. As if there were three Suns cohering,
there would be one Commixture of Light.

Jesus Christ did not say, I am the Father, but I am in the Father: Nor did he
assert, I and the Father am one, but (...), are one, John 10.30. That we might
not exclude the Son from the Godhead, nor confound him with the Father. I and
my Father are one: One in the Dignity of the Deity, because God begat God: One
in Kingdom, both reigning over the same Subjects; One in Will and Operation.

Cyril. We acknowledge one God the Father, of himself, and unbegotten: One Son,
begotten of the Father; and one Spirit, having his Subsistence of God, of the
same Nature and Glory; the same in all things, except this, That he is not
unbegotten, as the Father; nor begotten as the Son.

He that begat, only knows him that is begotten; and none knows the Father, but
the Son: Believe that God had a Son; but how, do not curiously enquire: It
suffices to understand, that God had only one Son naturally begotten; who did
not begin to be, when born in Bethlehem, but was before the World, Mic. 5.2.
Out of thee shall he come forth, that is to be Ruler in Israel; whose goings
forth have been of old from everlasting.

More is not revealed, nor is the Generation of the Son, by the Father
described. Why should any pragmatically search into what is not mentioned? We
know not all that is written, and do we curiously pry into what is not recorded?

Nescire velle quae magister maximus non docuit, erudita est inscientia. It Is
no shame to be ignorant of what Christ has not discovered; or to expect clearer
Revelations in another World: Where Saints shall know more by the pure
illumination of the glorious Trinity, and be more modest, adoring then, the
incomprehensible God; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

3. Natural Reason may not oppose this Truth, so confirmed in Divine
Revelations. Aquinas indeed notes, That he that endeavors to prove the
Doctrine of the Trinity by the Light of Nature, derogates from the Faith: 1. As
to the Dignity of its Articles, being invisible Objects, exceeding Humane
Reason, Heb. 12.1. Faith is the substance of things not seen.

2. As to the likelihood of drawing others to the Faith; for when any alleges
Arguments which are not cogent, he becomes the scorn of Infidels; who imagine
that we do, (leaning upon such Reasons) subscribe the Doctrines on these
accounts.

However, our Minds depending on the Divine Authority of the Sacred
Revelations, may thereby be fully satisfied in this Truth.

Arguments from Sense may not be insisted on, if contrary to Reason, e. g.
Though some Stars seem to us like Spangles, yet Reason corrects such an
Opinion, by urging their vast distance from us: This necessarily infers them to
be great Bodies, else they would be wholly invisible. The Sun appears greater
in the Morning, or toward its setting, than at Noon; but the ground hereof is
the thickness of the Air.

Now as in these Cases, the Dictates of Reason do preponderate to the
Suggestions of Sense: So in the Mysteries of the Gospel, we must prefer the
Declarations of Faith, above the Sentiments of Reason; not presently imagining,
that if a Truth transcends our Capacity, it is contrary to our Understanding.
Use the Maxims of Philosophy in subservience to Divinity; keep the old Rules
within their proper bounds; never think them to be of equal Authority with the
Sacred Oracles. Ex nihilo nihil sit; a privatione ad habitum non datur
regressus; Limit these Conclusions to a finite Power. Admit the interposings of
that Arm which subdueth all things to its self; then the Creation or
Resurrection will not be thought incredible; neither will thou be amazed, that
the same numerical Essence is in three distinct Persons.

By way of Use.

1. How glorious a God do we serve! One who is Infinite and Incomprehensible;
His Ways are unsearchable, and his Works past finding out: Far less can his
Nature, Essence, Subsistence, receive any bounds, or be searched out unto
perfection. Earthly Diadems only incircle the Heads of Princes: God's Laws, and
Men's fundamental Constitutions, should keep their Feet within due limits;
seeing these Potentates are Creatures, though of the fairest Character; and are
finite Beings, though they are highly advanced: But the God of Glory is under
no Obligations or Articles, nor can have any Lines drawn round about him, by
Men or Angels. Arbitrary humane Government is very unsafe; but the Most High
acts purely by his own Will, as being Commensurate with his Council: He needs
no Rule, and his Pleasure is the Supreme Reason.

Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas.

2. See the necessity of studying something of this Doctrine: Without a
knowledge of this Truth, we cannot worship God aright. The Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, are the Object of Divine Faith, and of Gospel Adoration: Neither
may we direct our Addresses to either of these glorious Persons, but as united
to one another: We confess there is but one God, yet must be acquainted with
Him as he is in Christ; else in Prayer we can have no confidence, Heb. 10.19,
20, 21, 22.

Some knowledge of the Trinity is necessary to Salvation, and all baptized
Persons profess their belief in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; which
Declaration implies,

An acknowledgment, that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are one true
Coeternal God, one in Essence, though three in an incom prehensible manner.

A Confession that Jesus is God-man, the Savior of the World.

With an hearty yielding up our selves to that God, who in his Covenant reveals
and offers himself under the Relation of our God; as an appeased Father,
reconciling Redeemer, and sanctifying Spirit.

Or, as St. Aug. explains it; We believe Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be one
God, the universal Creator and Sovereign: Also, that the Father is not the
Son, nor the blessed Spirit either the Father or the Son: Sed Trinitatem
relatarum ad invicem Personarum, unitatem aequalis essentiae; A Trinity of
Persons related to one another, equally united in the same Nature.

3. Bless God for revealing this Mystery, it not being discernible by the Light
of Nature. The Pagan Philosophers had no true Notions of God, as the Author,
Object Matter, or Way to Eternal Life; nor any right Apprehensions of the
blessed Trinity: This glorious Article of Unity in Trinity, was hid from them:
The wiser of the Heathen had some dark and imperfect Traditions concerning this
Truth; the great Eastern Maxim which Pythagoras brought from thence into
Greece, touching God, that he was (...), One and many, is conceived to be a
Notion borrowed from the Jews.

The Platonists had some Sentiments of the Three Persons, whom they called
(...), a Trinity: The first they named (...): Self-being, the Good, the Father.
The Second Person they styled, (...): the Mind, the Word, the Begotten, the
Framer, The Third they entitled, (...): The Soul of the World. These dim
Notices of a Trinity were perhaps derived from the Jews to these Philosophers,
by the Phaenicians or Egyptians; but none of the Heathen had a true sound
Apprehension of the Trinity: Their Conceptions were mixed with many Errors,
they never attained to a knowledge of the Eternal Production of the Divine Word

One Verse of the Evangelist is unconceivably more clear than all their
Writings, John 1.1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God.

By Natural Light we cannot fully understand what relates to Religious Worship;
far less can we hereby distinctly apprehend the Essence, Nature, and
Subsistence of the Most High. The dim Light of Nature could not have taught us,
that the Tree of Life should be a Sacrament to Adam, when in Paradise: Neither
did this instruct the Jewish Church, what Creatures were Ceremonially Clean or
impure; nor did Natural Reason acquaint them, that the Priest hood should
settle in the Family of Levi, and not in another Tribe.

The Light of Nature does not inform us in all Things, respecting the Moral
Law; there were secret Irregularities which St. Paul did not perceive, when a
Pharisee, though by his Education he was very expert in the Letter of the Law,
Romans 7.7. I had not known Lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet.
The Light of Nature is much weakened by the Fall; its become faint and
miserably defective, and is an imperfect Guide in Moral Duties. To cry up the
Law written in our hearts, is a disparaging of the Law recorded in the holy
Scriptures: It is the setting up of an expiring Snuff in the Socket; yet at the
same time to reject the Sun's Meridian brightness. The Law of Nature, since,
Adam's Apostasy is so blotted, as that it does not detect the smallest part of
the Corruption of the Heart: How then should it reveal God unto us? The Doctrine
of the Gospel is doubtless a grand Mystery, but what Truth is a greater secret,
than the Article of the Trinity? No Man can comprehend it, and Angels above
Adore it. Would it then deserve the Character of a Mystery, if the dim Light of
an unrenewed Conscience, or the Conduct of Nature, could make it manifest?

4. Labor to apprehend a little the difference betwixt Essence and Person, in
the holy Trinity. Essence is a Nature not existing before the Persons, or
without them; common to them, and the same in them: Or it is the very Divinity
which is individually and wholly in each Person. Hence the Essential Properties
belonging to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (as Wisdom, Power, Holiness,
Justice, Goodness, Eternity.) are one and the same numerically.

A Person is a Subsistence in the Divine Nature, which though related to
others, yet is distinguished from them by an incommunicable Property: So we
conceive the Son asbegotten, and the Holy Ghost as proceeding from the Father
and the Son.

Though these Three glorious Persons are distinct, yet they are not separated;
because the Divine Nature is Infinite, not capable of being divided into parts;
existing wholly in each Person: Whereas the Nature of Men or Angels, is not
only in each individual, but partly in one, and equally in another.

5. Observe a double distinction, (not diversity) in the glorious Persons of
the Trinity.

1. Outward, taken from the external Works of God, e. g. The Father sent the
Son, into the World; the Son being sent, became the Redeemer, and the blessed
Spirit is the Sanctifier: Tho one and the same God effects all these Things;
the Actions of the Trinity which are terminated on the Creature, being
undivided. Greg. Naz. expresses this: (...): I no sooner conceive of One, but
the glorious Trinity present themselves to my Mind in a dazzling Splendour:
Neither can I apprehend a Trinity of Persons, but immediately my Thoughts
center in the Unity of the Godhead.

2. Inward, caused by their intrinsic Proprieties, or Operations. The noble
Acts performed by God, without any Creature, are peculiar to one Person of the
Trinity: Opera Trinitatis ad intra sunt divisa. For instance,

The Propriety of the Father is this, That He, existing from Eternity, neither
begotten, nor made, yet did beget an Eternal Son, of the same Substance with
himself.

The Propriety of the Holy Ghost is this, That being neither created nor
begotten, yet he eternally and inseparably Proceeds from the Father and the
Son.

The peculiarity of the Word consists herein, That although he were not formed,
or made, yet He from Everlasting was begotten from the Father, existing in and
of himself, as God; but from the Father, considered as a Son. As Light is
begotten by the Sun in the Firmament, so Christ is from the Father, another
Person, or the Second in the Order of the Trinity, but one and the same with
his Father, as God, On which account Naz. speaks, (...): A Reverential Silence
is more becoming us, than over-free Discourfes of the Birth of a God; it is
sufficient to understand, that the Redeemer is the only begotten Son of God.

The Lord Jesus considered absolutely, is Jehovah, subsisting of himself; but
Relatively, the Father may be styled his Principle; therefore our Savior is
said, John 3.35. To receive all things from his Father. Hence the Schoolmen
say, The Son is by himself, not from himself. St. Hilary notes, Data a Patre
non infirmant Divinitatem Christi, sed affirmant: His Father's Grant does not
lessen his Divine Excellency. And St. Aug. to this purpose declares, Christus
ad se Deus dicitur, ad Patrem Filius dicitur: In himself he has the Character
of God; but with regard to the Father, is styled his Son.

This internal Difference between the three Persons, is not Essentially, as
betwixt the Creatures, which have all their proper and determinate Essence: but
one and the same Nature is in the Father, in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost;
the whole whereof the Father Communicates to the Son, and both Father and Son
do the like to the Holy Spirit.

It is not a mere conceived Difference; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are not
bare Thoughts or Words alone.

Nor respective, as the same Man in different accounts, may be a Father and a
Son. But this Distinction is real, tho Incomprehensible, either Person having
his peculiar description, with an incommunicable Property of Subsistence, and
varies from another not in Essenee, sed (...), in the manner of subsisting.

6. Take heed of denying the Trinity: To disown this Article, is of all
Opinions (...): A most desperate Tenent, striking at the Root of all Religion.

Heresy is Smoke arising out of the bottomless Pit, and is commonly vented by
some Star that fell from Heaven.

When an Eminent Man in the Church Apostatizes from the Faith, the Key of the
Infernal Pit is then in Judgment given to him. Satan cannot utter such
Blasphemies by himself, but may by his Instruments. Such therefore making a
Defection from the Truth, are given over to the efficacy of Deceit, venting the
Doctrine of Hell, and publishing the Depths of Satan, Rev. 8.10, 11. Pelagius
perhaps was this Ecclesiastical Star, who falling from his Profession, poisoned
and ruined many Souls, with his corrupt Opinions. The Devil loves to Roar like
a Lion, or to raise Persecution against the Church: But if this be not
feasible, he casts out a Flood of Error to drown the Truth, or to darken
Spiritual Light.

Here it may be proper, to hear what Arius objected against this Doctrine:

If there be Three Persons in the Godhead, they are something or nothing: If
nothing, there can be no ground of Distinction: Nam non entis nullae sunt
affectiones, nulla praedicata. If something, then there was somewhat from
Eternity which was not God: If they are Finite, then something in God is
limited: If Infinite, then there are Three Infinites, which cannot be in one
God.

Ans. 1. The Scriptures positively Assert, There is but one God, 1 Cor. 8.4.
Yet the Sacred Oracles mention the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, affirming them
to be Three; therefore they are distinguished from one another, 1 John 5.7. To
all these the Godhead is attributed with the Essential Divine Properties. We
read of God the Father, 1 Cor. 8.6. the same Word who was Incarnate, is God,
John 1.1. The Holy Spirit he dwells in the Hearts of the Faithful all over the
World; therefore he is Omnipresent: He changes the Heart, and is thereby
Almighty: He supplies with Influences and Graces daily: He teaches them to
Pray, and helps their Infirmities; which things none can do but God.

Moreover, these Three are said to be One, 1 John 5.7.

1. Because the Divine Essence is One. Further, something is ascribed to One,
which cannot be applied to Another, e. g. The Father is not the Son, nor
begotten; the Word was made Flesh, dwelt amongst us, and was sent; so was not
the Father: Hence they are plainly distinct, although one God.

2. We think it not strange, that the same Person should be a Man and a Father,
in different respects: Why may not this be believed of the Godhead? The Gospel
remarks several Actions ad intra; from whence arise the Relative Properties of
the Blessed Trinity, e. g. The Father begets, the Son is begotten, the Holy
Ghost proceeds from both.

If then the Demand be, What a Divine Person is? The Answer here is ready: It
is the Divine Essence, invested with its distinct Propriety: Thus the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, are all Infinite, as having an Infinite Essence.

3. Though we could not express the manner of Subsistence in these Three
glorious Persons, yet we might be satisfied in the Scripture Records. If we
cannot demonstrate how Three should be One, and One Three; yet we may not bring
the Revelations of God, to the determinations of our crooked, blind,
presumptuous Arguings. Curious Inquiries into the Things of God, are not
agreeing with the nature of Faith, nor becoming true Christians. Let no Man
spoil you through Philosophy, Col. 2 8. (...): making a Prize of you, carrying
you away, as Pirates do the Goods of others which they Seize: Philosophy in its
best improvement is raised or sanctified Reason, and is excellently useful as
an Handmaid to Religion; but it is vain when it steps out of its Place, to
ascend the Throne as a Judge of divine Truth: In matters proper to it self, it
may be regarded: Sed cum pronuntiat de rebus ad fidem spectantibus, explodienda.

This was the ground of the ancient Heresies, the debasing of the holy
Scriptures to the Dictates of carnal Reason. Believers ought not to measure
sacred Mysteries by Humane Apprehensions; (...), but according to the intention
of the Spirit's Doctrine.

Did any enquire into the manner of uniting the two Natures in Christ, we
should confess our Ignorance; yet we believe upon God's discovery, what our
Tongues cannot express, or our Understandings comprehend. So Justin Martyr
speaks, Tho I cannot describe the Union, yet I believe it on the Authority of
God; tho I am in the dark as to those things, (...), which I cannot perfectly
Understand nor Declare.

7. Exercise Faith, Love and Assurance, on all the Three Persons of the Blessed
Trinity.

1. Faith. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are the supreme and ultimate Object of
our Faith, and the actings of this Grace are Imperfect, if it takes not in all
its Objects. Your Obedience is suspicious if you overlook the weighty things of
the Law, tho you may be diligent in less Duties: And your Faith may be
questioned, if it has only an eye on inferior. Blessings, without regarding
the Personal Promises of the Gospel.

Here Note,

1. All the Persons are especially concerned in saving Sinners, having the same
Nature. Hence, What One Acts, the Others do likewise, Joh. 5.19. Yet there are
peculiar Works attributed to each Person: When you think of Election, remember
God the Father; when you meditate on Redemption, six your Eye on God the Son;
when your Minds do study the Work of Sanctification, forget not the Holy Ghost.
These three Considerations are joined in one Verse, 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according
to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through Sanctification of the Spirit,
and sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus.

2. The design of the Gospel, is not only to make known and Glorify the Divine
Attributes, e. g. his Justice and Mercy, but also to Magnify the Trinity in
the Hearts of Believers. And the Three Persons are not so much Honored by
receiving of Spiritual Benefits from them in Common, as in our special noticing
of their distinct Works; that in such Blessings, the Person from whom they come
may be highly Exalted in the Soul. Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings in
Heavenly Places in Christ.

3. The Works of Grace do follow the Order of subsisting in the Glorious
Trinity. The Benefits in the Covenant of Grace, are attributed to God the
Father, as First, In Order of Nature; and next, They are ascribed to the Son.

Hence Adoption, which is the Father's Act, is conceived by some to be the
first Spiritual Blessing, received before Redemption or Sanctification.

2. Manifest your Love toward all these Glorious Persons. It will be the
Honor and Pleasure of Saints to be with an Innumerable company of Angels; but
much more to walk in the love of all the Divine Persons, when they come to
Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to God the Judge of all, Heb.
12.23, 24. It is ground of Faith and much Support that in their Addresses,
Believers can go to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; feeling the Grace of the
Lord Jesus, the Love of the Father, and Fellowship with the Holy Spirit:
Tasting the Love of God in bestowing his Son, and admiring the Redeemer's
Grace, in giving himself.

Christians ought to testify their Love to each Person in the Glorious Trinity;

By fearing to Offend, being cautious of not provoking the Father, who is a
Consuming Fire; also not to displease our God and Savior, according to the
ancient, Charge, Exodus 23.21. Beware of him; obey his voice; provoke him not,
for he will not pardon your Transgressions: For my Name is in him: Also
dreading lest we should grieve the Holy Spirit, or quench his Motions, These.
5.19.

By discharging Duty from a Principle of Love to all the Three Persons: If any
love me, he will keep my Words.

By giving Glory to them all. Being duly affected with their particular
Goodness. We are Baptized in their Names, and should ascribe Praise and Honor
to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Our Love ought to terminate on God more for
what he is in himself, than for his Benefits to us.

3. Our Assurance has for its Object all the Three Persons; waiting to be
Sealed, or to have their Ratification of our Evidences. St. John declares, That
all the Saints shall partake of Eternal Life; and hereof there are three
Witnesses in Heaven, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, 1 John 5.7. All these
three do affix their Seal to this Record: Although if we are certain of the Love
of the one, we need not doubt the Affection of them all: Yet this ensurance the
Faithful may humbly expect to be enjoyed by a direct Beam darted into the Soul,
helping them in Prayer to cry Abba Father; or after Self-Examination, assisting
them to conclude, I am my Beloved's, and my Beloved is mine. The Soul cannot
boast in the Lord, nor triumph in him, till it be satisfied of a
Covenant Interest in all the Persons.

8. Observe the distinct acts of Office undertaken by the Trinity for the
benefit of the Saints. e. g.

1. In Conversion, the Father Begets, Calls, Draws; no Man can come to Christ,
except the Father draw him. The Lord Jesus receives Sinners, viz. Such whose
Souls the Father gave him: These shall come unto him, and none else: Nor will
he cast off any that come unto him.

The Holy Spirit he Unites God, Christ, and the Soul; or is the Bond of Union
betwixt Believers and their Mystical Head, Baptizing them all into one Body.

2. In Duties performed by the Faithful, each Glorious Person is particularly
concerned: e. g.

1. In Hearing, we hear the Truth of God the Father. The Gospel hence is
called, A Mystery hid in God from many Ages. The Lord Jesus who sits upon the
Throne, he opens the Book of the Heavenly Councils; for this he is styled, The
Word of God, or Interpreter of the Father's Mind; as words discover our
Conceptions. By virtue of his Priesthood, as he is the Lamb Slain, he opens the
Book, Rev. 5.9. There is not a Truth discovered but it cost the Blood of
Christ. Thou art worthy to take the Book and to open the Seals, for thou wast
Slain and have Redeemed us to God by thy Blood. Grace and Truth came by Jesus
Christ Meritoriously, Joh. 1.17. The Blessed Spirit he applies the Eye Salve to
grant us an Understanding of what is Revealed; and ingrafts the Word in our
Hearts.

2. In Prayer God the Father is addressed to; to him we look up, saying Our
Father: Not but that Christ and the Spirit may be Prayed to as well as Believed
on; being equally God. But from the distinct Offices of these Blessed Persons,
we therefore Supplicate God as the Object and hearer of our Petitions: We
regard the Son as our Advocate; and the Holy Ghost as an Intercessor in us: The
Spirit Indites our Requests, and Jesus Presents them with his own Odours, Rev.
8.3.

And here Note,

These distinct Offices of the Trinity, are only during the administration of
Christ's Mediatory Kingdom: When that is finished, the Father will draw none to
Christ; The Son will Offer no Sacrifice unto God; the Holy Ghost will no longer
assist, Sanctisie, or Seal us in this Life; but Grace shall be perfect, and the
ends of the Covenant be attained. Till the Restitution of all Things, peculiar
Glory redounds to each Divine Person, by these Offices. The Father reconciles
the World to himself: The Son took the form of a Servant to purchase Eternal
Life; therefore he is Glorified in his People's Hearts: The Blessed Spirit
begins the work of Grace, and perfects it. All saving habits are Fruits of the
Spirit; and for this he is distinctly Adored. The Hearts of Saints are Ravished
with the Love, Goodness, and kind Offices of the Glorious Trinity, Rev. 1.4, 5,
6.

God does not barely aim at the Glory of his Essence, but at an exalting the
Excellency of the Persons, as well as at the admiring the Attributes of the
Deity. Rev. 4.8. They rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy: By a
constantly repeated Acclamation, they acknowledge One God, and confess him also
to be Three Persons.

FINIS.
Books Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey.
1. PRoposals for a National Reformation of Manners; Humbly offered to the
Consideration of our Magistrates and Clergy. To which is added, I. The
Instrument for Reformation. II. An Account of several Barbarous Villainies,
detected by the Society for Reformation: As the same have been Sworn before two
of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace: As also the Black Roll; containing
the Names and Crimes of several hundred Persons who have been lately Prosecuted
for Whoring, Drunkenness, Sabbath-breaking. The whole Published by the Society
for Reformation. Price 6 d. 2. A Narrative of the late extraordiry Cure in an
Instant, wrought upon Mrs. Elizabeth Savage, (Lame from her Birth) without the
use of any Natural Means; with the Affidavits which were made before the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the Certificates of several Credible Persons who
knew her both before and since this Cure: Inquired into with all its
Circumstances by Noted Divines, both of the Church of England and others, and
by Eminent Physicians of the College, and many Persons of Quality, who have
expressed their full Satisfaction: With an APPENDIX, attempting to prove, that
Miracles are not ceased. Price 6 d. 3. This is to give Notice, That it was
designed, that no Persons who did not Subscribe to the 2 d. 3 d. and 4th.
Volumes of the French Book of Martyrs, etc. (which with the First lately
Published, complete the Work) by the 24th of December last, should have had any
Advantage by the Proposals made concerning it; but at the request of several
who have greatly encouraged the Work, and who have not quite completed their
Setts, the Undertaker now gives till the 10th. of March for the sending in
Subscriptions, but after that, no further time will be given, the Work being to
be delivered pe fect to the Subscribers by the 25th of next March. Proposals
are to be had by the Undertaker John Dunton, at the Ravon in the Poultrey, and
of most Booksellers both in London and the Country. 4. Bishop Barlow's REMAINS:
Containing near an Hundred distinct Subjects, Theological, Philosophical,
Historical, etc. in Letters to several Persons of Honor and Quality. To which
is added, the Resolution of many abstruse Points; as also Directions to a young
Divine for his Study of Divinity and Choice of his Library. Published from his
Lordships Original Papers. Price Bound, 6 s. 5. The Third Edition of the Life
and Death of the Reverend Mr. John Eliot, who was the first Preacher of the
Gospel to the Indians in America: With an account of the wonderful Success
which the Gospel has had amongst the Heathen in that part of the World: And of
the many strange Customs of the Pagan Indians in New England. Written by Cotton
Mather. 6. The Twelfth Volume of the Athenian Gazette, or Casuistical Mercury,
(neatly done up in Marble-Paper, with a General Title, Preface and Index to it)
is newly finished, resolving all the most Nice and Curious Questions Proposed
by the Ingenious of Either Sex, from Saturday, October 21. to Tuesday February
6. 1694. Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultrey: Where is to be
had the Entire Set of Athenian Gazetes (and the Supplements to 'em) for the
Year, 1691: As also the Entire Set for the Year, 1692. (Or single Volumes, or
Mercuries to this time.) 7. The Young Student's Library; containing Extracts
and Abridgments of the most valuable Books Printed in England, and in the
Foreign Journals, from the Year, 1665. till May, 1692. To which is added a new
Essay upon all sorts of Learning, by the Athenian Society: As also a Discourse
concerning the Antiquity, Divine Original and Authority of the Points, Vowels
and Accents that are placed to the Hebrew Bible. The Complete Library,
Published Monthly, is a Continuation of this Work. 8. The First Volume of the
COMPLETE LIBRARY: Containing an Historical Account of the Choicest Books
Printed in England and in the Foreign Journals, for the Months of May, June,
July, August, September, October, and November, 1692. As also The State of
Learning for those Months: To which is added two Alphabetical Tables, the one
of the Books, and the other of the Matters. 9. The Second Volume of the
Complete Library for the Months of December, January, February, March, April,
May, June, July, August, September, October, November, December, 1693. To which
is added, two Alphabetical Tables; the one of the Books, and the other of the
Matters. 10. The Trials of several Witches lately Executed in New England, with
many remarkable Curiosities therein occurring, etc. Published by the Special
Command of his Excellency the Governor of New England; First Printed at Boston,
and now Reprinted. The Third Edition. 11. A further account of the Trials of
the New England Witches; with the Observations of a Person that was upon the
Place six or seven days, when the Suspected Witches were taken into
Examination: To which is added, Cases of Conscience concerning Witcheraft and
evil Spirits Personating Men. Written at the Request of the Ministers of
New England. By Increase Mather, President of Harvard-Colledge. Price 1 s. This
Book is Printed on the same size with the first Accounts of the Witch-Tryals,
that they might Bind up together.

