A DEFENSE OF Diocesan Episcopacy, IN ANSWER to a BOOK OF Mr. DAVID CLARKSON,
Lately Published, ENTITLED, Primitive Episcopacy.

By HENRY MAURICE, D. D.

LONDON: Printed by Hannah Clark, for James Adamson, at the Angel and Crown in
St. Paul's Church Yard, 1691.

Imprimatur.

Carolus Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.
Nov. 4. 1690.
bookplate

THE PREFACE.
AS in many of his Actions the Devil expresses an Emulation of the divine power
and greatness, and affects to resemble the most high: In the production of
Schism, he tries to counterfeit the Creation. For as God produced this world
out of nothing, his power operating without any matter: So the Devil too
creates a Schism from color, or the shadow of a pretense, or whatever else may
be thought to stand in a nearer degree to nothing.

Now it is the common way to judge of the nature of Schism, by the quality of
the pretense; if this be slight and frivolous, they conceive the other cannot
be dangerous, and must be in a near disposition to admit a Cure. But common
experience proves this to be a mistake: For on the contrary, where the occasion
of difference seems to be most trifling, there we may observe the animosities
to be highest. And the reason is plain enough; for he who is resolved to force
a quarrel, will lay hold on any pretense; and the more frivolous it is, the
more bitterness and rancour it discovers in that Spirit that lusts to envy.
And at the same time, it is a good testimony of the integrity and exactness of
the party against which the quarrel is affected, that those who were resolved
to break, are forced to take up with so mean Cavils.

When you have done all you can to remove occasion from those who seek offense,
the Prediction of our Lord and his Apostles will continue to be accomplished.
Offenses will come, and Heresies and Schisms must be; and those who are sincere
will be made manifest, and those who are otherwise will not be hid. The Enemy
of Christian peace does confirm the Gospel, while he endeavors to destroy it
by divisions; as the Jews fulfilled the Prophets by condemning the Messiah.
While the Church remained under the conduct of the Apostles, in the simplicity
of the Christian Faith, and exactness of Discipline, it might be expected there
should be no Dissenters. But those golden times, for our comfort, have left us
their complaints, that then, there were railings, evil surmises, and perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth; even then there
were false Apostles, deceitful Workers, transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ. Then as well as now, there were some who separated
themselves, and forsook the Assemblies of the faithful.

S. Paul the popular and complying Apostle, who became all things to all men,
had no small struggle with this spirit of Separation. Some were such
proficients in a free censoriousness, as to think of him as though he walked
according to the flesh; some disparaged his Gifts, and despised his bodily
presence as weak, and his speech contemptible; detracting from him doubtless,
to add to themselves the character of more acceptable, and more edifying
Teachers. Some were puffed up, despised his authority, and made divisions in
the Churches under his care. He who healed all manner of diseases, who raised
the dead, and could cast out a Heathen spirit of Divination, found it a harder
matter to deal with the spirit of separation, that operated in the such false
Prophets as bore the forms and titles of Christianity.

The Divine providence permitted many Demoniacks in our Savior's and the
Apostles time, when God conferred miraculous abilities to dispossess them; but
seems to have shortened the chain of evil Spirits in succeeding ages, in the
same proportion that he lessened the gifts by which they were mastered. But the
Spirit of separation was still suffered to practice his Arts of deluding, and
to break the peace of the Church, by infinite variety of pretenses. Sometimes
it was too pure for the mixed society of the Church; sometimes it was exalted
with new Revelations, and those who would not receive them were carnal; and in
short, was so diligent in inventing reasons, and in snatching occasions of
dividing Communion, that all the Topics of Schism seemed to be exhausted.

But this Spirit it seems will not be stinted, nor confine its self within its
own ancient Precedents. For in these last times it is become nice, in taking
offense beyond former examples, and beyond all measure acute in assigning
causes of dissatisfaction. The old Church-dividers swallowed many things, that
our Dissenters strain at as fundamental corruptions; and most of the things,
which they object as the causes of their departure from us, were never known
before to have made any difference between Christians. For who, I pray, before
our Dissenters, separated from a Church, for having a set Form, and Order of
Divine Service? Who before our times ever took offense at the use of the Prayer
that Christ taught his Disciples? What sect from the beginning, forsook the
Assemblies of the faithful, for using the sign of the Cross, as the common
Ensign of the faith of Christ crucified, upon the solemn admission of
Church Members? Who ever divided the Communion of any Church, because it had a
Bishop? Aerius indeed pretended to see no difference between a Bishop and a
Presbyter; but this was not the reason, but only the effect of his separation:
for having no Bishop of his Communion, he was forced to represent them as
unnecessary, though he durst not condemn their Institution. It is strange, that
these blemishes should so long deform the Church, and no Greek or Latin Sectary
have the sagacity to discern them; that so palpable motives of separation
should escape the spirit of Maximilla, and the acuteness of Tertullian; that
the Novatians reputed skillful men in observing faults, should be so little
perspicacious, as not to discover such gross abominations: Or that the
Donatists should puzzle themselves so long, with a story of Cecilian, that they
could never make out, and leave such Topics as these untouched. I cannot think
the people of former ages so gross, as some of our Virtuosi may represent them.
From the principles they chose, they reasoned as well as we, and their
Sectaries wanted no wit to find out such objections of Nonconformity, as our
Dissenters have advanced. But as I am apt in some things to be favorable to
Antiquity; so in this case, I cannot but commend the judgment of ancient
Schismatics, for not using such frivolous pretenses, as must unavoidably
expose them to the scorn of all discerning men, who seeing through such
miserable shifts, must conclude, that no ingenuous mind could use them, and
nothing but consummate and hardened Hypocrisy persist in them.

But of all the Pleas preferred by Dissenters against the Church of England,
none looks more new, or more affected, than that which concerns Diocesan
Episcopacy. The old quarrel about the pre-eminence of Bishops above Presbyters,
seems in a manner to be dropped, and all the difficulty now to remain,
concerning the bounds of the Bishops Territory, and the numbers belonging to
his Inspection; yet in ancient times this made no difference.

For Sozomen (...). Soz. l. 7. c. 19.
observing the great inequality of ancient Dioceses, and some other little
usages, in which the Churches of one Country differed from those of another,
commends the wisdom of ancient Bishops, who looked upon it as a great piece of
folly, to divide communion about these matters: The greatness or smallness of a
Diocese making in their opinion, no difference in the office. The Synod
assembled at Antioch, in their Letter Soz l. 3. c. 8.
to Julius Bishop of Rome, let him understand, that they do not account
themselves inferior to him in authority, though their Churches were not so
great or populous as his; but are far from disowning him to be of their Order,
because his Diocese did exceed theirs. And Jerome Hieron. Ep. ad Evagr.
declares himself freely upon this point, that the greater or lesser compass of
a Diocese, made no alteration in the Episcopacy; but the poor Bishop of
Eugubium had the same authority and order with that of Rome. Yet now it seems
this difference is become fundamental: And Mr. Clarkson contends, that there is
but one sort of Bishops to be endured, such only, who have the charge of no
more than a single Congregation. This we are told by him, the Apostles
intended; this the first three or four Ages practiced; and within that space of
time there was no other Episcopacy. How well he has performed this undertaking
will appear from this Book, in which I have been so far from dissembling, or
passing by any Testimony that might seem material, that I am afraid to have
incurred very just censure, for being too minute and punctual in my answers,
beyond the merit of the Objections. Yet for this I may be allowed to use the
plea of Apuleius Ne videar cuipiam si quid ex frivolis praeteriero, id
agnovisse potius quam contempsisse, -- quod si forte inepta videbor, and oppido
frivola velle defendere, illis debet ea res vitio verti quibus turpe est etiam
haec objectasse, non mihi culpae dari, cui honestum erit, etiam haec diluisse.
Apul. Apol.
on the like occasion, that I have taken notice of many frivolous things, least
to some I might seem to decline them as unanswerable, and not to omit them out
of just contempt. And if my answers to some mean and captious remarks, may seem
sometimes to taste of the futility of the Objections; yet I hope this will be
imputed to him, who was not ashamed to offer such things in evidence, and not
to me who was concerned to disprove them.

Some may perhaps expect an Apology for delay, that the Book came not out
sooner. But for this, I am not solicitous for an excuse, apprehending rather
the contrary fault, that it is come out too soon. For I found in the Book I
answer, so many marks of haste and precipitation, that I thought my self
obliged to take warning; though the design of that work seems to have taken up
a great part of the Author's life. In such variety of facts, so remote, and
many of them so obscure, there are too many things to be considered to admit of
haste: And after all the care, and the leisure one can take, it is neither
easy nor usual, in this kind of work, to avoid oversights, and omissions of
some things very material.

The Author of the Preface may perhaps think himself neglected, that he is not
thought considerable enough to deserve an answer. He promised himself, it
seems, that the Epistle Recommendatory should find the same entertainment with
the worthy Treatise of Mr. Clarkson. But Diviners are sometimes disappointed.
For my part I am resolved to make a difference between the Book and the
Recommendation. And I hope Mr. Chauncey will see some reason why he should not
take it ill. I wish he had been able to have represented the references right:
But we must forgive where it is not to be had, and I dare say the good man did
his best.

But why should he be angry with Dr. Sherlock, for defending Protestant
Principles, against the Papists, upon the grounds of the Church of England? Why
did not he or some of his Brethren step out to vindicate Congregational
Episcopacy, against Father Ellis and his three Colleagues, who made but four
Dioceses of this whole Kingdom? For God's sake tell me, who maintained
Protestant Principles then upon the foundation of the Dissenters? But the
Serpent and the venomous Vermin are subtler than the other Beasts of the
field; for in hard weather they are not to be found on the face of the Earth,
but are crept into their holes; but when a warmer season comes, they crawl out,
to snap at the heels of those who had endured the severities of the winter.

If he expected the same Treatment with Mr. Clarkson, he should have written
intelligibly, and writ sense. But when he runs the Changes upon Jus Divinum,
Humanum, and Apostolicum; when he talks of Hermaphroditick Divinity, of
Office-Charge, of Office Discrimination, of Appendix-Courts and Vestments, and
Canons among the Heteroclites of his Divinity, what can a man do but wonder and
keep silence? Believe me, I would as soon dispute with a Paper-mill, as
undertake to answer a man of such amazing language. But for the Heteroclites, I
may perhaps know what they may import; it is when a thing changes its kind: As
for Example, when a man leaves his shop and the business of his Calling, to
write Letters Recommendatory of what he does not understand.

Errata's which disturb the Sense.
PAge 18. Line 14. for Passover, read Pentecost. p. 31. l. 6. for disprove, r.
prove. p. 37. l. 18. for future, r. further. p. 69. l. 6. for useful, r. unfit.
p. 78. l. 20. for first, r. fifth. p. 98. l. 9. after Bishop of, add, the City.
p. 358. l. 27. for populously, r. pompously. p. 361. l. 16. after he does, add,
not. p. 406. l. 8. for Fermissus, r. Telmissus.

A DEFENSE OF Diocesan Episcopacy, etc.
IT is an easy matter for those who confine their Charity, as they do their
Primitive Episcopacy, to a single Congregation, to charge all who differ from
them, as Men wholly governed by Prejudice and Interest. The fondness they have
for their own Conceits, renders them incapable of any Jealousy of their Truth
or Evidence; and if these Notions do not receive such Entertainment, as the
Indulgent Author is persuaded they deserve, and Success do not answer Mr.
Clarkson's Primitive Episcopacy, page 1.
Opinion, it must be ascribed to the unequal Encounter they had with Prejudice
and Interest, Things that do frequently baffle the best Evidence in Persons
otherwise very discerning and judicious.

It is just indeed, that they should bear the reproach of Insincerity, who
refuse full or competent Evidence, when the Proofs rise up to a Demonstration,
or are direct and suitable to the nature of the Matter. But for Men to advance
new Notions and Paradoxes, concerning things at very great Distance, of which,
the Proofs are obscure, and the Evidence only conjectural; and then to cry out
upon those who are not convinced, as Persons of no Faith or Equity, argues a
Confidence very unusual, and rarely to be seen either in understanding or good
Men.

That for the space of the first three Centuries, a Bishop was no more than a
Pastor to a single Congregation; is in the first place, a Conclusion very new,
and never heard, that I can learn, before the last Age. The space of time
intervening between the nearest point of the three Centuries assigned, and the
Birth of this Notion wants little of Thirteen complete Centuries; and therefore
the Evidence of a matter so remote, ought to be positive and direct; and it
must be expected, that some Ancient Witnesses who lived within the compass of
that Term, or in the next Age at least, should be produced and have declared
expressly, that no Bishop had more than one single Congregation, or that it was
the Opinion of those Times, that a Bishop ought to have no more: If but one
Author of Credit had left this Testimony, the circumstantial Evidence might
reasonably be admitted for Confirmation; but when all the Proof of a Fact so
distant, consists only of Conjectures and Suspicions, and unconcluding
Circumstances; I hope that in this time of Liberty, an honest Man may refufe to
believe so obscure and unnecessary Inferences, without any Diminution of his
Reputation. It may be very true, that some Villages had Bishops; that several
Cities were not greater than some of our Market Towns; that all the People may
be said in an usual sense to be present at Church in the greatest Cities; all
this may be true, and yet very far from proving the Point in Question.

The Conclusion, Congregational Episcopacy, may remain still at as great a
distance from these Premises, as the Primitive Times we speak of are from the
present Age, or as some gifted Men's Discourses are from the Text.

When this fancy of Primitive Congregational Episcopacy came first into Men's
heads, the Diocesan way had been every where Established; and that we may not
take this for a piece of Popery, no Churches came nearer to the Congregational
Standard, than those that were under the immediate Jurisdiction of the Bishop
of Rome; nor was it pretended, that Diocesan Bishops were new; they had an
acknowledged Prescription of above twelve hundred years; but the time of its
rise was not so positively assigned. Cartwright pretended to trace some
footsteps of the Congregational way in the two first Centuries; but I do not
find that he, or the Dissenters of his Time, had made the Conclusion so
universal, that no Bishop within that compass of Time, had more than one
Congregation. Rome and Alexandria, and the greatest Cities seemed to stand out,
and remained Exceptions; but now they too are taken in, and reduced to the
Congregational Model. It is something hard to conceive, how the Species of
Church Government should come to be changed, and no Account of so important a
Change be transmitted to Posterity: Those who fancy Presbytery turned into
Episcopacy in the former part of the second Century, make some show of Reply,
when they say, that it is a very obscure Age, and has left little or nothing
of its Story behind it. But the Ages in which Primitive Episcopacy is pretended
to have been transformed into Diocesan, were of another Character; they
abounded with Learning and Writers, and a great many of their Books have been
preserved, but not the least hint of this Fundamental Alteration of
Church Government. What! so just an Offense given by the Church, and no
Sectary, no Schismatic to reproach her? Those who were so minute and trifling
in their Cavils, could they overlook so obvious a Topic as this of Diocesan
Innovation? Nay, these very Sects, where their Numbers made them capable, lived
themselves under the Diocesan Way: If then in times of so much Division,
Contention and Dispute, such a change as this could be introduced without any
Opposition, and all Parties of different Opinions and Interest conformed to it;
for my part, I cannot see how it can be denied, that it was done by Miracle:
For what greater Miracle can we well imagine, than that so many sorts of
Christians divided by Principles and mutual Aversions, should conspire to
receive this pretended alteration of Episcopacy? So that those who deny it to
be Primitive, must allow it a higher Title, since Miracle carries with it much
greater Authority than Prescription.

Mr. Clerkson therefore had great reason to aprehend, that it would appear a
great Paradox, to hear that a Bishop of Old was but the Pastor of a single
Church, or that his Diocese was no larger than one Communion Table might serve.
It does indeed seem very strange; not only to those who take the Measures of
Ancient times and things by their own, or are much concerned they should not be
otherwise than they are now; but most of all to those who have competent
knowledge of those Times, and who are qualified to make some Judgment of the
State of the Primitive Church, from the Testimonies of Ecclesiastical Writers.
It is a great weakness to take the measures of Ancient times, by our own; P.
116.
but I know none more unfortunate in this way of reckoning than the Author
himself, who measures the Ancient Territories of Greek and Roman Cities by
Liberties that belong to Ours; and demands with more Zeal than Knowledge, How
many Cities in the Roman Empire can be sh^wn us, where this Jurisdiction of the
City Magistrates reached farther than it does in our English Cities?

Vrbem quam dicunt Romam, Melibaee, pu^avi
Stultus Ego huic nostrae similem.
But of this in its proper place

How great Advantages may be expected from a clear discovery of, what the
Author thinks to be, true in this particular, I cannot readily discern, having
not the assistance of his Prospective to discover things at so vast a distance;
much less can I see that it may contribute much to the deciding of the
Controversies among us about Church Government, and bringing them to a happy
Composure. Now to deal liberally with this Notion of Primitive Episcopacy, let
us yield up the point at once, and grant, that no Bishop for the three first
Centuries had more than one Congregation: But at the same time, let us take the
Reason along with us, that for so long time, no City had more Christians then
might meet in one Church; no Bishop then could have more Congregations then all
the Christians of his City and Territory did compose. But the Controversies
about Church Government are still undecided, for this does not preclude the
Bishops from a right of having many Congregations under their inspections, if
more had been. The Controversies about Church Government turn upon questions of
Right, and not of Fact. But matters of Fact are pertinently alleged to prove a
Right, where the Fact does involve a Judgment of Right; but where it is purely
accidental, it has no consequence on either side. Two great Casuists upon a
certain time fell into Dispute about the Lawfulness of taking Tobacco, the
Dispute was carried on with great Learning and Niceness, one made it out
clearly, that none of the Primitive Christians ever used it, and that for many
Centuries there was not one Christian Smoker in the World. The other desired to
know the Principle upon which they condemned it, and was told very seriously,
that there were no Church censures against it, nor could there well be any, for
the Plant had not yet been brought to these Parts of the World. So the
Controversy remained undecided by this negative instance of the Primitive
Church, because their forbearance was not the effect of Judgment or Choice, but
from an absolute ignorance of the matter.

Now for deciding of Controversies, and bringing things to a happy composure, I
was resolved to signalize my Compliance, and submit to a Paradox, not for the
sake of any Testimony brought by the Author, but to avoid Importunity, and upon
the account of Peace. But seeing all our Controversies about Church Government
remain in the same state after all my yielding, I conceive that I am at liberty
to revoke my Concession, and to Contest the matter of Fact, and to show that
the Testimonies alleged by Mr. Clerkson, do not make sufficient proof of the
point under debate, that a Bishop in the three first Centuries was no more than
Pastor to a single Congregation.

For the Scripture-times there will be little difficulty, since as much is
acknowledged by the most Learned and Judicious Assertors of Prelacy, as need be
desired. Prim. Ep. p. 2.
Archbishop Whitgift is brought in to witness, that the Gospel was not
generally received any where when it was first Preached. That when Matthias was
chosen, the whole Church was gathered in one place, and so it was when the
Deacons were chosen; this may be true, and yet not reach to the whole extent of
Scripture-times, but only to those instances of Popular Election, which were
alleged by Cartwright, the latest of which seems to be within a Year of our
Savior's Ascension: and if for the first Year of the Apostles Preaching, the
Church might not Increase beyond a single Congregation, it will be of no great
consequence either for or against Diocesan Episcopacy: yet it is plain from
Scripture that the matter of Fact was otherwise. For in the Election of
Matthias, the Assembly consisted of about a hundred and twenty; Acts 1.
whereas our Savior before his Ascension appeared in an Assembly of five
hundred Brethren; 1 Cor. 15.
so that not a fourth part of the Church was present at that Election. When the
Deacons were elected, the whole Church of Jerusalem could not be present in
that Assembly, for the number of the Converts was then too great, especially
considering the Christians had not the convenience of very capacious places to
meet in. A great part of the Church was not concerned to be present on that
occasion, for the Women had no part in Election, nor perhaps Servants, nor
Children though of Age, while they lived in their Fathers House. But that the
whole Church could not be present, I shall then show more fully, when I
consider the ways by which our Author endeavors to diminish the First Fruits
of the Gospel, and to lessen the Church of Jerusalem.

Bishop Downham is alleged to as little purpose: For all he affirms, is, that
at the very first Conversion of Cities, the whole number of People converted
was able to make but a small Congregation. For who can tell how far he intended
the very first Conversions should extend? The closing of the Scriptures of the
New Testament was above sixty Years after the first Conversions of many great
Cities; and therefore, though at the first Conversions the number of Christians
might be but small, yet a Church may improve something in threescore Years, and
grow up from one small, to many great Congregations. No instance, says our
Author, can be brought against this, but the three thousand Converted at
Jerusalem, Acts 2.41.
to which some would add five thousand more. Some would add! Let it not
displease any zealous Brother of the Congregational way, that St. Luke has
recorded the number of those Converts; his words are so plain, and his sense so
necessary that they cannot be avoided by any shift: Acts 4.4.
many of those who heard the word, (i. e. then Preached, not in a set Assembly,
but occasionally in the Temple) believed, and the number of the men was about
five thousand. But can there no instance be brought against the Independent
fancy, besides these two? Our Author, it seems, was willing to overlook such
passages, as testify the great Increase of Christians in Jerusalem after this
happy beginning. Acts 5.13, 14, (...)
St. Luke relates, that after the fearful end of Ananias and his Wife,
Believers were the more added to the Church, multitudes both of Men and Women.
The Ethiopick Version deserves to be considered in this place, for instead of
(...), the Author of that Version seems to have read (...), as if the Jewish
Magistrates durst not then restrain the Preaching the Apostles, because the
People magnified them for their Miracles, and then great additions were made to
the Church. But St. Luke proceeds to give yet greater Instances of the Increase
of the Church of Jerusalem; Acts 6.1, 7. (...).
Before the choice of the Deacons, the number of the Disciples was multiplied;
and immediately after the Institution of these Officers, the word of God
increased, and the number of the Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly, and
a great company of the Priests, or as the Syriack reads, of the Jews, were
obedient, or submitted to the Faith. It may be said that no certain Number is
expressed in these places, and therefore they conclude nothing. It is true, the
Numbers of these later Converts are not set down; but must they therefore be
lost to the Church and Bishop of Jerusalem? These Expressions of multitudes of
Men and Women, of Increasing greatly, or mightily, of great Company, or Crowd,
are of very great content, and capable of receiving many Myriads; and if we
compare them with these general terms, of which we know the definite sum, it
must be allowed by all rules of speaking, that those indefinite expressions
must exceed the other. For instance, when an accession of five thousand was
made to the Church, it is said, that many of those who heard the word,
believed. If the Relator had not expressed the Number, but left it to the
discretion of independent Calculators, I am afraid this Indefinite word, Many,
would never have yielded us an hundred Converts; and yet it seems it
comprehended no less than five thousand. Wherefore we may reasonably conclude,
that those general words that denote exaggeration of multitude, and a sum
unusual and wonderful, cannot but comprehend more than those thousands of the
first Conversions. This would be sufficient, though there should be no farther
Evidence, to persuade any equal Reader, that the Church of Jerusalem was now
grown too numerous to meet all in one place, especially considering the
Christian Assemblies in those times were held, (...), from house to house. But
there remains yet another instance, that seems more definite and decisive. For
James and the Elders of Jerusalem observe to St. Paul, that there were many
Myriads of the Circumcision which believed. Acts 21.20.
Thou see Brother how many Thousands [Myriads] of Jews there are which
believe, and they are all zealous of the Law. The multitude must come together,
etc. If these Myriads were present at Jerusalem, when St. Paul was there; there
will be little reason to deduct nineteen parts out of twenty, Prim. Ep. p. 6.
upon the account of Strangers, as our Author undertakes to do. For I hope to
make it appear, that the Pentecost was over, before the Apostle arrived at
Jerusalem.

Now lest these great numbers of Converts should grow into a Diocese consisting
of several Congregations, Mr. Clerkson interposes a timely Caveat in these
words; Prim. Ep. p. 4.
What may be argued from hence for great numbers of Christians in Cities,
proceeds upon a mere mistake, which I shall clearly remove. For it is but a
small proportion of those Thousands, that can in reason be accounted to the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and so fixed Members of that Church, for they were
Converted at one of the great Feasts; at which time the Inhabitants were not by
far a twentieth part of those that were assembled in the City.

This Exception concerns only the three thousand who were converted on the
Feast of Pentecost; but the five Thousand that followed, and the Multitudes of
Men and Women, and the Multiplying greatly, and the great Company, will remain
to the Church of Jerusalem, notwithstanding this exception. For our Author does
not so much as suggest, that these Accessions were made upon any of the three
Feasts, and therefore without these three Thousand, there will be sufficient
number for several Congregations.

That it may appear, what small proportion the Inhabitants of Jerusalem Prim.
Ep. p 4.
held to the Multitude that resorted thither on the solemn Feasts, our Author
enters into an enquiry, both after the number of the Inhabitants of that City,
and of those that resorted from other places to those Solemnities. To begin
with the latter of these, Jos. de bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 1. p. 969.
Josephus tells us, and out of him H. E. l. 3. c. 5.
Eusebius, that Cestius Gallus willing to represent to Nero, who contemned the
Jews, the strength of that People, desired the Priests to take an account of
the number, and to make the Story short, from the number of the
Pascal-Sacrifices, they computed all the Jews present at that Passover to be
about three Millions: Pr. Ep. p. 5.
But then they were all in a manner Foreigners, Jos. B. J. l. 7. c. 17.
for a great part of that multitude came from abroad; whereas the Inhabitans of
Jerusalem Jos. cont. App. l. 1.
were but sixscore Thousand, as we learn by Hecataeus: And that we may not
fancy Hecataeus to have under-reckon'd the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, our Author
intimates a quite contrary suspicion. It may be Hecataeus or his Informer,
overreached as well in the Number of the Citizens, as in the Measure of the
City. He makes the Circuit of it fifty Furlongs, whereas Jos. B. J. l. 6. c. 17.
Josephus says, it was but thirty-three, and the Circumvallation of Titus but
thirty-nine. From all this therefore he concludes, that the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem upon the most favorable Computation, will scarce make the twentieth
part of the Multitude which usually attended those Feasts, and consequently not
a twentieth part of the Converts mentioned in the Acts can be supposed to
belong to the Church of Jerusalem.

Although I have already showed, that this concerns only the three Thousand
converted on the day of Pentecost; yet because it is new, and carries with it
the air of Demonstration, I will beg the Readers patience, while I let him see,
with how great Pains and Learning some Authors can trifle. For to find out the
proportion between the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the Pascal Assemblies, it
is necessary to know the number of each at the same time, or at leastwise in
the same Age. Now Hecataeus, from whom he learns the number of the Citizens,
lived under Alexander the Great and Ptolomy the Son of Lagus; but the numbers
of those who resorted to the Passover, was taken by the order of Cestius Gallus
under Nero, i. e. above three hundred and fifty years after. The Inhabitants of
Jerusalem might be much more numerous in the Apostles time, than in the Age of
Hecataeus, and therefore this Calculation cannot be certain, and this Spectre
of Demonstration vanishes.

That I may not seem to want a due regard for Mr. Clerkson's diligence upon
this Point, I will not dismiss his Calculation with so short a Reply, but
examine every point of it apart, and show of what consequence it may be to the
present Question, concerning Congregational Episcopacy. 1. The three Millions
returned to Nero came from no authentic Census, or any certain account, but
only from conjecture; and one may reasonably suspect, that the Priests, to set
out the greatness of the Nation to a Prince who had them in contempt, would be
apt to over-reckon. 2. Jerusalem could not receive so many Millions, if the
circuit of it were but thirty-three furlongs, as we read in Josephus, and our
Author does contend it was no more. 3. If this Account of the Priests should be
admitted, yet that Passover might be extraordinary, and like that of Josiah, of
which it is said, 2 Kings 23.22.
that surely there was not holden such a Passover, from the days of the Judges
that judged Israel, nor in all the days of the Kings of Israel, nor of the
Kings of Judah. And that this Number was extraordinary, appears from Josephus,
who accounting for the incredible Number said to be slain and taken in
Jerusalem, informs us, that the Jews resorted thither out of all the Country,
and were unawares shut up in that fatal Siege; and yet the Sum was about twelve
hundred thousand persons, not half of that number upon which our Author
calculates: Yet this seemed so extraordinary, (...), Jos. B. J. l. 6. c. 45.
Ed. Frob.
that Josephus to make it pass, observes, that the greatest part indeed were
Jews, but not Inhabitants of Jerusalem or Judea. 4. Though a middle number
might be agreed on for calculating the Pascal Assemblies, yet would it be of no
use in the present Question; for we do not read in Scripture of any Converts
made on the Passover; but the three Thousand which are now under debate, were
converted on the Feast of Pentecost, and from the resort of the one, no guess
can be made of the Numbers that repaired to the other; for the Passover was
much more frequented than the Pentecost. It is true, that the Law seems to make
no difference between the three Festivals, but obliges all the Males to repair
to the place which God should choose upon each of those Feasts. But the
Practice of the Jews seems to have been otherwise, long before our Saviors
Time. Lyra in Exodus 23.17. Deuteronomy. 16.16. Tamen cum illis qui erant remoti a
Jerusalem aliquando dispensabatur, de duabus vicibus sc. Pentecoste, and Festo
Tabernaculorum: Veruntamen illis qui erant long a Jerusalem parcebatur de
duobus Festis.
Lyra observes, That those who were far from Jerusalem were excused from
attending on the two Feasts of Weeks and Tabernacles. And Yst. in Deuteronomy. 16.
Vid. Lorin. in Deuteronomy. 16. and Abulens.
Ystella cites some Jewish Authors to this purpose, That the Law obliged those
only who lived near the Sanctuary; the rest were dispensed with, so they
appeared once a year, i. e. at the Passover. He mentions others that were of
opinion, that the Law was satisfied, if every third year all the Males came up
to the three Feasts; but he himself thought, that either they were obliged
yearly to come twice, i. e. on the Passover and Feast of Tabernacles, for the
Pentecost being so near to the Passover, they must be excused for that, or else
some years they were to come up only once, i. e. at Easter; on others twice, i.
e. at Easter and the Feast of Tabernacles; for every seventh year the Law was
to be read on that Feast; so that those who were any thing remote, were never
bound to go up at Pentecost. But besides the Males obliged to attend on the
three Festivals, the devout Women and Children, not yet under the Obligation,
went up to the Passover out of voluntary Devotion: 1 Samuel 1.3.
So Elkanah's Wives went to the yearly Sacrifice at Shilo. So the Parents of
our Savior Luke 2.41
went up to Jerusalem every year at the Feast of the Passover. Now those
Interpreters, who are concerned to make Joseph, as touching the Law blameless,
send him up three times a year according to the Law, and are content to have
these words understood of the Blessed Virgin, that she went up but once a year,
and that at the Passover. Though others understand them of both our Saviors
Parents, as if they had gone up but once; and Lyra according to his Notion
mentioned above, observes that Galilee was remote, and therefore within the
Dispensation for two of the three Feasts; and indeed the Expression of St. Luke
does not easily admit of any other construction. And the words of the Book of
Samuel do as plainly intimate, that Elkanah himself, though a Levite, went up
to Shilo but once a year: 1 Samuel 1.3, 20, 21.
This man, says the Text, went up out of his City yearly to worship in Shilo.
And after his Wife had vowed, and he and his Family had returned home, it
follows; wherefore it came to pass, when the time was come about, after Hannah
had conceived, that she bare a Son, and called his Name Samuel; and the Man
Elkanah and all his House went up to offer unto the Lord the yearly Sacrifice
and his Vow. So that by this relation, Elkanah seems not to have gone up to
Shilo, from the time Hannah vowed in the Temple, until after the birth of
Samuel, i. e. the space of a whole year. But however these places may be
understood, it is allowed by all, that the Passover was the chiefest for
Solemnity and resort of Worshipers, of all the Feasts of the Jews, and
therefore a computation of the Strangers at Jerusalem on a Pentecost, from the
extraordinary Numbers said once to have been at a Passover, must be very
fallacious; for the same Calculation cannot serve both.

Now lest this Argument should lose any thing of Advantage by being too
diffuse, the force of it shall be contracted into less compass, that it may be
the easier observed. 1. Because three Millions are reported to have been at one
Passover, therefore every Passover had as many. Many will be apt here to deny
the Consequence: But let it pass. And then the Argument proceeds farther. If so
many resorted to the Passover, then the same Number came up at Pentecost; this
is hard to grant: But who can deny any thing to such a Disputant? To go on
therefore, If three Millions were present at the Passover, on which three
Thousand Souls were Converted, therefore not above a hundred and fifty could
belong to Jerusalem; because in Hecataeus his time, that City had but a hundred
and fifty thousand Inhabitants. Wonderful! Who can find in his heart to deny
any thing so Consequential? But had that City received no increase from the
time of Hecataeus to that of Nero? B. J. l. 5. c. 13.
Josephus mentions several Improvements it had under the Asmonean Kings, whose
Family united the Priesthood and the Crown, and under whom this Sacred
Metropolis could not but receive great Advantage. Afterward we have an
account, that the old Walls could not hold it, and that the Inhabitants
multiplied so much, that they were forced to build without the Gates; and these
new-buildings in the Time of Claudius, were so considerable, as to make as it
were another City. Yet our Author keeps to his old Computation, which is just
as if the Inhabitants of London were to be computed by what they were about
three hundred years ago. It may seem perhaps no less ridiculous to refute such
an Argument; than it was to make it. Yet because our Author suspects even this
Number in Hecataeus as too great, I must take the Liberty at leastwise to
explain this matter a little more.

Mr. Clerkson suspects his Author to have over-reached in his Number of the
Citizens at Jerusalem, Prim. Ep. p. 9.
because he had done so in the measure of the City, of which he makes the
Circuit to be fifty Furlongs; whereas Jos. B. J. l. 6. c. 17. (...).
Josephus says, it was but Thirty-three, and the Circumvallation of Titus to be
Thirty-nine. And to show the Number of Inhabitants in Jerusalem could not be
great even in the beginning of the last War, he observes, that when Twelve
Thousand were slain in Jerusalem in one Night, the loss is represented, Jos. de
bell. Jud. l. 4. c. 20.
as though the greatest part of the Citizens had been destroyed.

As to the Circuit of Jerusalem, I cannot conclude Hecataeus to have
over-reached, till I can be sure there is no fault in the Copies of Josephus,
or that our Author did rightly understand him. For first, Jos. B. J. l. 5. c.
13.
Josephus does not seem to agree with himself in this matter, when in the same
Chapter, giving an account of the three Walls that encompassed the City, he
makes the third to have ninety Towers, (...).
each of twenty cubits Diameter, and between every one these Towers, a curtain
of two hundred cubits, which being sum'd up, make near fifty furlongs in
compass. Or if we take Appar. Vrb. Templi. p. 1. l. 2. c. 21.
Villalpandus his reckoning, who allows but four hundred Cubits to a Furlong,
we shall have fifty Furlongs complete. Nor was this the whole compass of the
City, for this Wall was not drawn round the other two on every part, but where
the City ended in inaccessible precipices (...). Jos. ub. sup.
there was but one Wall, and then it must be by so much more than fifty
Furlongs. So the particulars and the sum total of this Author not agreeing,
there must be some mistake in the Calculation.

But several Learned Men have endeavored to reconcile these passages, among
whom, Villalpandus Appar. l. 2. c. 4.
seems to have succeeded best; who having showed the right order and situation
of the three Walls out of Josephus, against the mistakes of Adricomius and
others, concludes with great probability, that the City which is said to have
been thirty three Furlongs about, was the old City contained within the first
Wall of sixty Towers; and if the distance between these was equal to that of
the third Wall, the sum will be exactly according to Josephus his measure. Now
to confirm this conjecture, it must be observed that the Town about which Titus
drew his Vallum, was only the Old; for the lower Town, and two of the three
Walls were taken by the Romans, and ruined before that Circumvallation was
begun, which was according to Josephus thirty nine Furlongs; and it was this
which was properly called the Villalp. App. l. 2. c. 10. Ant. Jud. l. 15. c.
ult.
City, the other accessions being accounted for Suburbs, and so called by
Josephus. Nor can we imagine, either that the Romans would leave so great a
part of the City as that which was destroyed in the possession of the Jews, or
contrive their Vallum, which was to keep them in, at so great a distance from
the remaining Wall or place of Attack, as it must needs be, if the
Circumvallation encompassed that part which was before ruined by the Romans,
and quitted by the Jews. Now if Josephus be thus understood, he is not only
reconciled to himself, but to that character of Greatness which Pliny
Hierosolyma long clarissima Vrbium Orientis non Judeae modo. Plin. l. 5. c. 4.
gives Jerusalem, of being far the most famous City, not only of Judea, but of
all the East. Arist. de 70 Inter.
Aristeas, if he deserve any credit, makes it Forty Furlongs about, and there
are Miambourg Croissa. l. 3.
who represent it as quadrangular three Miles in length, and something less in
breadth, which is indeed the most liberal of all Calculations, but has no great
authority to vouch it. However by the reckoning of Josephus, Jerusalem was more
than fifty Furlongs in Compass, and the Precipices being reckoned where there
was but one Wall, many Furlongs more may remain to be added even to that sum.
What is suggested to lessen the number of the People of Jerusalem, Jos. B. J.
l. 4. c. 20. (...).
from the complaint made to the Idumaeans, that they had destroyed in one night
almost all the People, when there was but twelve Thousand slain, is not exact
enough to ground any Calculation. For the Idumaeans slew above twenty, perhaps
above forty Thousand while they were in Jerusalem, as Jos. l. 4. c. 17. c. 18.
c. 19.
Josephus reckons. For the first night the Idumaeans were let in, they slew
eight thousand five hundred Persons; not in the City, but about the Temple. And
not content with this Slaughter, they turned upon the City and killed every one
they met. Nor did it end thus, but they still went on and butchered the People
like a herd of unclean Beasts; these without number: But afterward taking many
persons of Condition, and young Men, they bound and put them into (...).
custody, hoping to gain them to their side, but they all chose rather to die
than join with their Enemies, whereupon they were tortured and killed. Those
who were taken in Custody in the day, were slain and cast out in the night to
make room for others the day following, who were also destroyed in the same
manner, and the number of those young People of quality destroyed in that
manner is said (...).
to be twelve thousand. Such was the slaughter made by the Idumaeans in
Jerusalem, that it is no wonder if those who had a mind to be rid of their
company, should represent the whole People as destroyed; and considering the
prodigious numbers slain by the Factions in that City, it is a wonder there
should be any more remaining for new calamities; and yet after this loss, the
People of Jerusalem were so formidable, that Josephus commends the conduct of
l. 4. c. 21.
Vespasian for not adventuring to attack it at that time, when his Officers
urged him to march his Army thither, that so the Factions might have yet more
leisure to weaken one another; whereas if the people were in a manner all
killed, he had no reason to apprehend any opposition.

Now should all this Calculation be allowed, and Jerusalem reduced to the
narrowest Circuit, and the lowest Reckoning; yet I cannot see what benefit can
redound to the Notion of Congregational Episcopacy. For we do not read of any
great accession of Proselytes to the Christian Faith on any of the three
Feasts, except one, on that of Pentecost, when three thousand Souls were
gained; but since that, there were many added daily to the Church: There were
five Thousand converted at a time; and after this, Acts 5.14.
Believers were the more added to the Church, multitudes both of Men and Women.
And after this, Acts 6.7.
The Word of God increased, and the number of the Disciples multiplied in
Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the Priests were obedient to the
Faith. These Accessions are no where said to consist of out-lying Jews, nor to
come in upon solemn times, but daily; and all this to fall out within the
compass of a year. And if there be any truth in the Tradition which Eus. H. E.
l. 5. c. 18.
Apollonius an ancient Writer cites from Thraseas, who suffered Martyrdom in
his time, that the Apostles were commanded by our Savior not to depart from
Jerusalem in twelve years, we must conclude the numbers of Proselytes must
needs surpass the measure of a Congregation, if the success of following years
did in any proportion answer this beginning.

All the endeavors therefore of deduction from the numbers of Converts
expressed by St. Luke, can have no place in the Church of Jerusalem: For, 1.
All that were converted on Pentecost, are said to continue in the Apostles Acts
2.
Fellowship, and breaking of Bread and in Prayer; i. e. to stay with them in
Jerusalem. So that though they were not dwellers before, upon this occasion
they became such. 2. The five thousand added to these, according to the
circumstances of the Story, and the exposition of all the ancient Writers, will
afford no occasion for any deduction. 3. The increase, of which the numbers are
not expressed, may reasonably be presumed no way inferior to the other, where
the number is set down; but if we observe the Expressions, seem to surpass
them. For when five thousand were converted, it is said, that many of those who
heard the Word, believed. If the number had not followed, this would have
passed for a little matter with our Author; but in other places it is said,
that great multitudes both of Men and Women, a great number of Priests, etc. 4.
While the Apostles continued in Jerusalem, we have reason to believe the Church
was still increasing, and the People being generally of their side upon the
account of the Miracles they wrought, so as to give a check to the Rulers, and
to restrain them from persecuting the Apostles, it cannot be well doubted, but
the Apostles improved this good disposition to a perfect conversion. 5. Besides
the preaching of the Apostles, the influence of the Converts, who were
generally men, upon their Families, could not fail of having great effect, and
of making no small addition to the sum of Believers. The Authority the Masters
of families had over them among the Jews, being very great, and the submission
of Wives and Children to them being in that Nation very implicit; Letter 17.
from Baghdad.
It being the received custom of the East, as De la Valle observed, that the
Women and Children should accomodate themselves to the Father of the family in
matters of Religion, though the Women had before they married, been bred up in
other Rules. 6. That the Multitude converted could have no convenience in
Jerusalem of meeting in one Assembly. The Apostles went from House to House,
(...), i. e. in several Houses there were several religious Assemblies, and so
consequently several Congregations; so that the Multitude, though it might in a
very great Theater or Temple have come together; yet for want of such
accommodation began in the Diocesan way, and dispersed into several Assemblies,
which still made up but one Church.

Prim. Ep. p. 6.
It is confessed, says Mr. Clerkson, that in those times, and after, there was
more than one Bishop in a City; and if the Christians in any City were but few,
and those divided betwixt several Bishops, how small a Diocese would the share
of each make up? For this he cites Dr. Hammond on the Rev. c. 11. p. 662. It is
true indeed, D. H. was of opinion, that the Believers of the Circumcision did
for some time keep at some distance from the Gentile Converts, and had their
Assemblies and Officers apart; and that the Apostles having no other remedy,
were obliged to manage the matter so tenderly as to connive for some time at
this separation. But this can by no means concern the case of the Church of
Jerusalem within the time of her increase, before the death of St. Stephen and
the conversion of St. Paul; for as yet no Gentile had been baptized, Cornelius
being the first, and that some time after these many thousands had been
converted in Jerusalem. Besides, were this allowed, that the Jews and Gentiles
in each City had a distinct Bishop, yet that makes nothing for the
Congregational way, for this happened upon another Account. And after the ruin
of Jerusalem, and the destruction of the Jewish Commonwealth, the Jews came to
an accommodation, and joined with the Gentiles under the same Officers, before
the second Century; and therefore can be of no consequence to the point in
hand. And if those Dioceses were small, it was in order to greater increase,
that the Jews might be for a little while indulged, and then united with the
Gentiles in one Church. But after all, this matter of separate Churches is no
more than the conjecture of some learned men; and our Author himself is willing
to dismiss it, by saying, P. 7.
That there is no need of this acknowledgment, nor will he insist on the
grounds on which he proceeds. Nor is there any reason he should, if he can make
out what he affirms in the same place, that there is evidence enough in
Scripture for a plurality of Bishops in several Cities, which may be easily
vindicated from the attempts of some that would deface it.

His first instance is Phil. 1.1. To all the Saints that are at Philippi, with
the Bishops and Deacons. That these were Bishops of the Province, as Dr.
Hammond contends, and not of the City of Philippi, our Author will by no means
allow, nor will I be very importunate with him that he should. But one thing I
would learn of him, what sort of Bishops he takes these to be? For if in his
opinion they are no other than Presbyters, then this place is impertinently
alleged, since many Presbyters are by all sides acknowledged to have belonged
to one Church. But if he speak of Bishops in the common Ecclesiastical sense,
and then concludes from this passage, that there were many in the Church of
Philippi; his opinion is as singular, as that of the Doctor he endeavors to
refute. For my part, I must profess that I am not much concerned in this
Dispute between our Author and Dr. Hammond about these Bishops. I could never
find sufficient reason to believe them any other than Presbyters, as the
generality of Fathers and of the Writers of our own Church have done. And though
I have great reverence for the name and memory of Dr. Hammond; yet where he is
alone, I may without any imputation of disrespect, take the common liberty of
leaving his opinion to stand or fall according to the strength of the Arguments
upon which it is founded. Yet there are some things in our Authors reply, which
may be taken notice of.

Dr. Hammond 16, 12.
from a passage in the Acts, where Philippi is said to be the first City of
Macedonia and a Colony, infers that it was a Metropolis. To which our Author
answers, that it is first in Situation, P. 8.
and not in dignity and pre-eminence. This conjecture of Camerarius and
Zanchius may after all be more ingenious than solid. For Bezas M S. has (...)
and not (...), i. e. the head or chief, not the first in Situation; and the
Syriack and Arabic Versions follo wit. Now the most ancient Copy, as it is
supposed, of the New Testament now extant, confirmed by two old Versions, may
weigh as much as a late conjecture. Besides Philippi was not the first in
Situation, as is pretended, but Neapolis. And it would be something strange, if
Dover be indeed the first Town of England; that he who passed that way, should
call Canterbury the first. It might not be very considerable, when Macedon was
reduced by Paulus Aemilius, but it might be the chief Town of that part of the
Country when St. Luke wrote. Brev. c. 5,
Liberatus mentions the Archbishop of Philippi, and in the Council of Ephesus
the Bishop subscribes among the Metropolitans, though it be expressed that he had
the Proxy of the Bishop of Thessalonica. In an old Notitia he is Metropolitan
of the Province of Macedon. And so Sedulius styles him; and Tertullian de
Praescrip.
names it before Thessalonica.

Nor will I contend with our Author about the other Argument of Dr. Hammond,
which he rejects; that Philippi was a Metropolis, because it was a Colonie. It
does not indeed necessarily follow; but yet Roman Colonies were generally
placed in the principal Cities of Provinces, and endowed with the chief
Dignities and Jurisdictions in the Countries where they were. So Carthage,
Corinth, Caesarea, and many others might be named. But if it was the Head of
that part of the Country and a Colony, as Beza's old Copy has it, this Dispute
is over; and nothing I am sure Mr. Clerkson has produced, does make out that it
was not a Metropolis when St. Paul was there.

Now this Debate concerning the Bishops of Philippi had soon been at an end; if
our Author had thought fit to explain himself, and told us what he meant by
Bishops. For were they Pastors of single elect Congregations respectively in
covenant? Then there must have been several Churches or Congregations in that
one City. But on other occasions he will not allow more than one Congregation
for three hundred years after Christ, even in Rome it self. But if we allow
such an obscure place as Philippi to have many Churches so early; we cannot
avoid yielding to Alexandria and Antioch and other great Cities many more; and
what will prove worse than all, those Churches must be acknowledged to be all
under one Bishop. Or were these Bishops only Presbyters ruling the Church of
Philippi with common and equal Authority? Then our Author must give up the
Question, and instead of making many Bishops must own that there was none at
all there but only Presbyters. Will he contend that there were no other Bishops
than Presbyters? This will be to abuse his Reader with the ambiguity of a word,
which he takes in one sense and the Church in another. That many Presbyters
might belong to one Congregation, none ever denied; that many Bishops in the
allowed and ecclesiastical sense of the word had the oversight of one City,
sounds strange and incredible to the ancient Christians. Chrysostom observing
this expression of the Bishops of Philippi, seems to be startled with it. What,
many Bishops in one City? By no means, it cannot be. What then? They were not
Bishops properly so called, but Presbyters.

The same poor Sophistry is carried on Prim. Ep. p. 10.
under the color of another Text. Acts 20.17.
St. Paul from Miletus sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church,
who are said, v. 28. to be made Bishops by the Holy Ghost. Now these Elders or
Bishops belonged to the City-Church of Ephesus, as our Author contends, and not
to the Province, and therefore there were several Bishops in the same City. But
if we demand here again, what Bishops are here meant, whether these were
Bishops in the sense of the present question, or Presbyters only? The objection
vanishes, and leaves the Reader to wonder, that any man should so solemnly
undertake to prove what no man ever doubted, that in Scripture-times there were
many Presbyters over one Church. But Dr. Hammond will have these Bishops to be
Suffragans of Ephesus: And Mr. Clerkson with all his force does endeavor to
disprove them to have been City Bishops. Now in the midst of this contention,
we may be very safe from the danger of Congregational Episcopacy. For if Dr.
Hammond's way prevail, these Bishops must have each a City and Territory, and
be Diocesans either actually, or in right. If Mr. Clerkson carries it, then
properly speaking there might not be a Bishop among them all; for they are but
Presbyters belonging, not to several Independent Congregations, but to one
Church, and might have a Bishop to whom they were subject, as the Ancients
believed they had, and thought Timothy to be the Person. And here he musters up
great forces against Dr. Hammond's opinion, and affirms, Pr. Ep. p. 10, 11.
that the Text it self, the Syriack Version, Chrysostom, Theophilact,
Oecumenius and Theodoret, and the whole stream of Ancients are against this new
sense, not any favoring it but one among them all. But what sense are these
Ancients for? that there were many Bishops of one City-Church? Nothing less,
for they all declare the contrary, and that these were no other than
Presbyters. But there happened to be one for the Doctors new sense; our Author
does not name him, it was Irenaeus; and it seems something incongruous to call
that sense new which is vouched by so ancient Authority. For this Father is
judged by Diss. 3. in Iraen.
Mr. Dodwel to be born in the later end of the first Century, or the very
beginning of the second. He conversed with Polycarp, as himself declares, whose
Martyrdom according to the computation of Bishop Diss. Post. 2. c. 14. et seq.
Pearson could not be later than the year 147. And therefore must have lived
forty years of the first Century. He was Bishop of Smyrna, which was under the
Jurisdiction of Ephesus, and might understand from the Tradition of the place
more of St. Paul's visitation than is recorded by St. Luke, and so be more
particular in noting the quality of the Persons that the Apostle called to him
to Miletus; and expressed himself therefore in that manner, (c) having called
together the Bishops and Presbyters of Ephesus, and the other Neighboring
Cities. Now if Authority go by weight, and not by number; Dr. Hammond's case
will not appear so desperate; for though many names are produced against him,
yet several of them are very light. For Oecumenius and Theophilact may be
discounted as Transcribers of Chrysostom, who with Theodoret will scarce weigh
down the credit of Irenaeus in a case of this nature; for they speak only by
conjecture, whereas he might have nearer notices from Tradition. However it
were, yet our Author should have called this sense any thing rather than new,
since it is ancienter than any thing he can produce to the contrary. As to the
Iren. l. 3. c. 14.
Text it self, it determines positively on neither side; and for the Syriack
version, if it be against the Dr. in Ephesus, it must be remembered that it was
for him at Philippi. But after all, the present question is not concerned in
this Dispute; for though these Elders who are called Bishops, were not of the
Province, but of the City of Ephesus; yet it does not follow, that there were
several Bishops properly so called and distinguished from Presbyters at the
same time in one Church. And our Author's stream of Ancients are against him,
who understand these not to be proper Bishops, but Presbyters.

I should dismiss this point about the Ephesine Bishops; if our Author did not
say he did insist upon another Argument, as new and altogether his own. The sum
of it is this. The Apostle Paul resolved to be at Jerusalem Acts 20.16.
at the day of Pentecost. -- But he could not be there at the day, if he stayed
long at Miletus. And he could not Assemble the Bishops of Asia there, if he
stayed not long there. Ephesus was fifty miles from Miletus, and so four days
journey going and coming. And if Paul stayed longer than three or four days at
the most at Miletus, he could not be at Jerusalem at Pentecost. Now the chief
Cities of Asia he shows were at a great distance from Ephesus, and at a greater
from Miletus: and therefore the Elders sent for, could not be those of the
several Cities of Asia, but of Ephesus; and then it cannot be denied, but in
that Church there was a plurality of Elders or Bishops. That there was there a
plurality of Elders or Presbyters, has been often granted. That these were
Bishops in the Ecclesiastical use of the word, is still denied. Upon that the
Question turns, and our Author says not a word to it. But this ruins Dr.
Hammond's notion. For the account given by St. Luke of the Apostle's Journey,
will not permit the Bishops of Asia to assemble at Miletus. Should it be
granted that this notion is not tenable, Diocesan Episcopacy will not be much
concerned. For it has been always maintained, and may be so still without this
support. But yet after all this pains, the Argument on which Mr. Clerkson does
so much insist, does it no hurt at all. For what if the Apostle did not reach
Jerusalem by Pentecost? St. Luke does no where affirm it, and no circumstance
of his Journey or Arival does evince it: Nay the very account of his Voyage
makes it incredible. Chrysostom reckons forty-two days from the days of
Unleavened Bread when he was at Philippi, to his arival (...). Chrysostom. Acts 21.
Ser. 45.
at Caesarea, where he stayed many days, i. e. more than he tarried any where
else, which at lowest reckoning must be eight. And so the Pentecost must find
him at Caesarea as that Father affirms, though Annal. 58. S. 117.
Baronius mistaketh his words, and would understand them of Jerusalem. And
Chrysostom upon those words, intending, if it were possible, to be at
Jerusalem, observes, how the Apostle is moved after the manner of men. Chrysostom.
in Act. 21. Ser. 43.
How he designs, hom he hastens, and yet often times misses of his end. Which
implies, that in his opinion that he had not attained what he intended so
earnestly, i. e. to be at Jerusalem by Pentecost. Nay, so uncertain is this
whole matter, that to some Writers Theophil. in Acts 21.
Paul seemed to pass the Pentecost at Troas twelve days after he had set out.
By our Author's computation he has scarce two days left for seventy five miles,
which were between Caesarea and Jerusalem. But our Author's reckoning has
omissions. For he makes no allowance between Tire and Ptolemais, which is
thirty two miles. The time in which Paul's company went before by Sea from
Troas to Assos, and Paul went by Land, is not reckoned: For St. Luke speaks of
the whole company. Acts 20.6, 13, 14.
We abode there seven days: And then we went before the ship, and sailed to
Assos. -- And when he met with us at Assos. What time this took up is
uncertain, as well as the distance between Troas and Assos. Besides, three or
four days is something of the shortest allowance for his stay at Miletus, that
the Elders of Ephesus might be sent for, and come to him. The Journey took up
four days: and less than one day cannot be well allowed them to confer. The
Voyage from Miletus to Tire is of an uncertain time; and five days seems
something of the least. What is to be allowed for the many days stay at
Caesarea, is still uncertain. And in common understanding of the phrase, it
cannot signify so few as would permit the Apostle to be at Jerusalem at
Pentecost. Bishop Pearson Annal. Paulini. A. 59. p. 16.
therefore, a person of great Exactness, having considered this matter,
concluded that Paul could not be at Jerusalem till after Pentecost. These are
his words, Venit Hierosolyma cum collectis post Pentecosten mense Junio, ubi
tumultu concitato, etc. If therefore this be all Mr. Clerkson has to insist on,
that St. Paul could not stay above four days at Miletus, because he could not
otherwise arrive at Jerusalem before Pentecost; his proof amounts to little.
For it appears much more probable, that the Apostle arrived not thither till
after that Feast, and therefore might have stayed at Miletus as long as he had
pleased. But since Dr. Hammond allowed St. Paul to reach Jerusalem within the
time designed; I must confess that the Argument is good against him, but not
against his notion of the Bishops of Asia, or the passage of Irenaeus; unless
we may suppose those Bishops assembled at Ephesus in expectation of St. Paul's
coming thither, and by that means in a readiness to meet him at Miletus. This
is all the account our Author thought fit to give out of Scripture concerning
the plurality of Bishops in one City. How well he has made good his Paradox,
let the Reader judge.

It is Acknowledged, says he, Prim. Ep. p. 14.
that both in Scripture-times and long after, the Bishops Diocese was so small,
that one Altar was sufficient for it. See Mr. Mede 's Proof of Churches in the
Second Century, p. 29. Nay more than this, it should seem that in those first
times before Dioceses were divided into the lesser and subordinate Churches, we
now call Parishes, and Presbyters assigned to them, they had not only one Altar
in one Church or Dominicum, but one Altar to a Church, taking Church for the
Company or Corporation of the Faithful united under one Bishop; and that was in
the City and place where the Bishop had his residence. It should seem, says Mr.
Mede, -- and again thus perhaps, is Ignatius to be understood, and then,
however I here determine nothing. With this diffidence and caution does that
Learned Man propose his Opinion; which, together with the testimonies upon
which it is grounded, Vindic. of the Prim. Chapter p. 34. and Seq.
has been considered at large in another place, and I am not willing here to
transcribe. Yet that I may not seem to decline an Answer in this place; I will
give the sum of what is there answered, and add something for future
explication. First then, Altar in the primitive sense, signified not only the
Communion Table, but the whole place where the Chair of the Bishop and the
Seats of the Presbyters were placed; and in this sense there was but one Altar
in one Diocese, as there is now but one Consistory. This is explained by
passages out of Ignatius, Cyprian, and Archbishop Usher; and to be within the
Altar, which is Ignatius his phrase, is no other than to be in Communion with
the Bishop and his Clergy. And the one Altar is no more than one Communion,
which may be held in different places, and at several Tables. Besides some
passages cited out of Ignatius about one Altar, are only allusive to the Jewish
Temple and Altar, and therefore are not to be urged too strictly. Lastly, the
name of Altar might be appropriated to that of the Bishop's Church upon another
account, and that is in respect of the oblations of the Faithful, which were
presented there only, and from thence distribution was made according to the
occasions of the Church. Among other oblations, was the Bread and the Wine
which were to serve for the Sacrament; these were always blessed at the Bishops
Altar, though not always consecrated there. Concerning these oblations
preparatory to the Sacrament Mr. Mede has given a judicious account in his
Treatise of the Sacrifice, where he shows these Offerings were in the nature of
a Sacrifice; and upon the account of these gifts, the Table might receive its
name of Altar. For as the Jews had but one Altar, on which their Sacrifices
were offered and sanctified, yet were they eaten at several Tables; so the
Bishops Altar might serve to the same purpose, at least within the same City,
to receive those Oblations which were to be communicated in different places.
This was the practice of Rome in Pope Innocent Innoc. Ep. ad Decent.
the first his time, who sent the Bread already consecrated to all the
Churches of the City; but did not send any to such Presbyters as were placed in
remote Cemiteries, since they might consecrate themselves; and as for Country
Parishes he did not think it convenient the Holy Consecrated Bread should be
sent to them, for it was not fit it should be carried to places remote. So all,
though not present in the same place, did yet partake of one Altar, and eat of
the same Spiritual Bread. And to this purpose perhaps, may most commodiously be
understood that noted passage of Justin Martyr concerning the administration of
the Eucharist in Christian Assemblies, where he says, that the Deacons
distribute it to all that are present, and carry it to those who are not
present. For to all who were not present, as they were dispersed in their
several dwellings, it could not conveniently be carried by the Deacons; besides
that in numerous Congregations it was not easy to know who was not present. Nor
is Valesius Annot. in Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24.
his conjecture very probable, who would send it to persons of other Dioceses:
So that it seems most probable, that it was carried from the Bishop's Church to
other Assemblies in the same City. Nor will this look strange for those times,
that the Holy Bread should be sent from the Bishops Altar to other Churches of
the same City, when it was usual to send it into remote Countries and Dioceses
as a symbol of Communion. The old Bishops of Rome, before (...). Eusebius. H. E.
l. 5. c 24.
Victor's time, used to send such presents: and Act. Lucian. ap. Metaph. 7. Jan.
Lucian the Martyr sent them from his Prison. So Paulinus Paul. Ep. 1.
did to Severus. This practice was forbid by the Synod Can. 14. (...).
of Ladicea, that the holy Mysteries should not be sent abroad into other
Dioceses, which Zonaras observes to have been a very ancient custom. And this
forbidding it to be carried into other Dioceses, seems to allow its being
carried from the Bishop's Church to other places of the same Diocese.

After Mr. Mede, Prim. Ep. p. 16.
Dr. Hammond is brought in a witness of this notion of one Altar. In re
incomperta non est audacter nimis pronunciandum. Ham. Diss. 3. c. 8. s. 15.
He mentions it indeed as the opinion of some learned Men, but he himself makes
no judgment concerning it, leaving the matter as uncertain, and declining to
pronounce any thing in a point so obscure.

Bishop Tailor Episc. Assert.
is likewise forced to appear in this cause, merely because he cited Damasus in
the life of Pope Marcellus, who is said to have made twenty five Titles as so
many Dioceses for Baptism and Penance. From whence the Bishop is said Prim. ep.
p. 16.
to infer, that there was yet no preaching in Parishes, and but one pulpit in a
Diocese. And further, Damasus, and the Doctor out of him leaves us evidently to
conclude, that there was no Communion Table but in the mother Church. And this
three hundred and five years after Christ, and at Rome too. It is not very
advisable to conclude any thing too hastily upon the authority of this
pretended Damasus; it costs such counterfeits nothing to build twenty Churches
in a day, and to consign them to what use they please. But this Impostor, as he
had little wit, so in this instance his luck was very bad, to make so many
Converts, and to erect so many Titles in the year three hundred and five, when
the Roman Emperors were persecuting the Christians to utter extirpation, and
when there was not a Church or Title standing in Rome. This was the third year
of the Persecution, according to Baluz. Chron. Mart. ex Lact. Dodw. Di. 8.
Cypr. XI.
Lactantius; or the second, according to Eusebius, and therefore a sorry time
for Converts, and making of Titles and Baptistries. So that the relation being
fabulous, and forged by one who had no knowledge of those times, the inferences
made from it must drop.

It was surely, not very well contrived to multiply Churches for Baptism, and
to leave but one Communion Table for all the Christians of Rome. For one
Baptistry may serve the greatest City, because men are baptized but once, and
that not all together, but at several times; and in ancient times no City had
more, unless where the magnificence of Emperors or Bishops made, as it were,
many Cathedrals. And at this time in the City of Florence, Pflaumern. Merc.
Ital. Lasselina.
reckoned among the chief of Italy, all the children are christened in one
Font, in the old Church of St. John. Which Leandro Alberti Gloss. v.
Baptisterium.
says was a Temple of Mars; which Dufresne observes, Tanquam veteris moris
Institutum. It being the old way for all, who lived in or near the same City,
to be baptized in one Church, i. e. the Cathedral. But the use of the Altar was
more general and more constant; for every Lord's day, in the primitive times,
all the Faithful received the Sacrament. And the administration of it does
require more time and more room than any other office of Christian Religion.
For more may pray together, or hear the Scriptures or a Sermon with
convenience, than can receive the Sacrament, which was delivered Eus. H. E. l.
6. c. 43.
with a form of words to every person that received it, to which the receiver
answered, Amen. So that in a numerous Congregation it must grow inconvenient,
and soon stand in need of several other Churches. Wherefore it seems most
probable that the Christian Assemblies were first parted on this account, and
Titles or parish-Churches erected as supplements of the chief Altar. Let a man
but consider the state of the Church of Rome under Eus. H. E. l. 6. c. 43.
Cornelius, when above fifteen hundred persons were maintained from the public
stock of the Church, what numbers of believers there must be in that City; and
then let him conceive if he can, how so many thousands could meet every Lord's
day in one Church, and receive the Communion at one Altar. And in Lions, (c)
where in Severus his time there are said to have been eighteen thousand
Christians, it is not easy to conceive how one Altar could be sufficient. We
are told indeed, that we have many thousands in a Parish that has but one
Altar; but if our Communions Irenaeus martyrizatus est cum omni populo
Christianorum, XVIII. M. Thron. S. Benig. ap. Dacher. T. 1.
were as frequent and as numerous as those of the Primitive Church, many Altars
I am sure would be necessary to such Parishes.

To conclude, the words of the counterfeit Damasus now under debate, do not
deny to those Parish-Churches the administration of the Eucharist; for when he
appoints them for Baptism and Penance; he does not exclude all other Christian
Offices, such as Prayer, reading of the Scripture, or the Communion; but names
those of Baptism and Penance, because even in his time they were not allowed to
every Parish Church. But this Damasus lived later than to think of a Church
without Mass, or without an Altar; and he had taken care not only for such
Churches, but for the Sepulchers of Martyrs, that they should have Altars
raised over them, and Masses celebrated, long before the time of Marcellus, and
ascribes the ordering of that matter to Pseud. Damas in Felix, 1.
Felix 1. And Baron. An. 275.
Baronius seems to be troubled that this Author had not done it sooner, and
therefore thinks fit to let the Reader know, that all this had been provided
before. And lastly, the expression, quasi Dioceses, referring to Baptism and
Penance, import, that those services indeed belonged only to a Cathedral; and
therefore the granting of those privileges to Parishes made them seem like
Dioceses, whereas Innoc. Ep. ad Dacen. Aug. Conf. c. 2. vid. Eusebius. H. E. l. 7.
c. 11. l. 9. c. 2.
every Martyrium, every Cemitery, and common Title had the privilege of the
Communion.

That there was no preaching in the Parishes of Rome, may very well be granted,
without reducing the Christians to a single Congregation. For if Soz. l. 7. c.
19. (...).
Sozomen was not misinformed, there was no preaching in any Church in Rome, not
in the Bishops; for in Rome, neither the Bishop, nor any other taught in the
Church. And Valesius takes notice, that we have no Homilies of any Roman Bishop
before Leo 1. and to confirm this of the Historian, he observes, that
Cassiodore, who was well acquainted with the customs of the City, had
translated this passage; which he would scarce have done and published it in
Rome it self, if he had not known it to be true.

Prim. Ep: p. 16, 17.
To carry on this notion of but one assembly of Christians in the greatest
Cities, Petav. Animad. in Epiph. p. 276.
Petavius is cited with an ample character, that he had no superior for
learning among the Jesuits, nor any to whom Prelacy is more obliged. But our
Author is as much obliged to him as the Prelates; if while other Witnesses speak
doubtfully and with reserve, He is positive, that in the fourth Age there was
but one Church or Title ordinarily in a City, and proves it by Epiphanius, who
speaks of more Titles in Alexandria, as a thing singular and peculiar to that
City, there being no instance thereof but in Rome. I am willing to believe our
Author did not read that place himself, but took it upon trust. For Petavius
affirms there, the direct contrary to that for which our Author makes him so
positive. For these are his Words; You may guess (says he) that this was a
singular manner of Alexandria, or at leastwise in use in very few Churches;
that Epiphanius makes so particular mention of this way of Alexandria, as if it
had been peculiar to that Church, -- but the same thing had been long before
ordered elsewhere, particularly in Rome. I do not doubt but there were many
Titles or Churches within the pomaeria of the greater Cities, since the people
could not all meet within the Walls of one Church, and therefore had Presbyters
appointed for those Churches into which the Christians were distributed. In
smaller and less populous Towns there was but one Church, in which all were
assembled together, such as the Cities of Cyprus were, upon which account
Epiphanius observes the manner of Alexandria as an unusual thing, and strange
to his People. This is what Petavius delivers there. You may guess, says he, as
our Author fancies, that this was peculiar to Alexandria, -- but the same thing
was ordered elsewhere, and he did not doubt but it was so in all the greater
Cities. But that Petavius should prove this also by the Council of Neocaesarea,
can. 13. is an oversight yet stranger. For though Petavius cites that Canon,
yet it is not to prove this or any thing like it; but having entered into a
discourse about Chorepiscopi, he shows from that Canon, that they were Bishops
and not Presbyters; because they had the privilege of officiating in the
City-Church, in the presence of the Bishop or his Presbyters, whereas that
privilege is expressly denied the Country-Presbyters. But how our Author came
to fancy this passage to be for his purpose, I will not undertake to divine.

I have hitherto only showed what Petavius had observed concerning the
Alexandrian Parishes; but whether his Observation be just, is another question.
For my part I cannot find any reason to believe, that all the Cyprian Cities
were so small; or if they were, that Epiphanius would upon that account have
made such a frigid Observation, as to take notice of that as a singularity in
Alexandria, which was common to every great City. That which was peculiar to
Alexandria was this, that the Parishes were assigned to fixed Presbyters, which
has been elsewhere observed. Vind. of Prim. chapter p. 65, 66.
The Titles of Rome were served by the Presbyters in common; as Val. Annot. in
Sozom. l. 1. c. 15.
Valesius observes out of Innocent 1. Epistle to Decentius. And what he adds of
his own as more proper to show, that in (...). Athan. Ap. 2. T. 1. p. 739.
Julius 1. his time, there were Parishes appropriated to certain Presbyters,
has but a slight foundation. For the expression of Athanasius, though it may
bear the sense of Valesius, seems to be more naturally and simply rendered by
Nannius, that Vito the Roman Presbyter assembled fifty Bishops, and not that
fifty Bishops assembled in Vito 's Church, or the place where he assembled the
people. This Periphrasis seems too frigid and affected, when every Church had
its proper name by which it was called. It may perhaps seem strange, that a
Presbyter should assemble and preside over Bishops. It were strange indeed, if
he should do it in his own right; but when he acts as the Deputy of the Bishop
of Rome, this will be no wonder; for the Legates of Bishops always sat in the
place that belonged to those they represented, though themselves were but
Presbyters, or sometimes Deacons. And that Vito should be appointed to preside
in this Synod, is answerable to the character and employments he had born
before. For he seems to be the person Sozom. l. 1. c. 17. (...) Phot. Ep. 1. de
7. Syn. Niceph. Call. l. 8. c. 14. (...).
sent by Sylvester to the council of Nice with Vincentius; for though the Latin
writers often call him Victor, yet the Greeks constantly write Vito, and the
Latins sometimes Vitus; the fittest person surely to moderate in a Synod where
the Council of Nice was concerned, in which he had so eminent a part.

There is one thing more observable in the distribution of Parishes and
Presbyters in Rome, which I cannot omit, because I do not know that has been
taken notice of by any. It is that every Church in Rome had two Presbyters to
attend it; and not one only as the Churches of Alexandria. This information we
have from Hilary the Roman Deacon in his Comment on Ambr. in 1 Timothy c. 3. Nunc
autem septem Diaconos esse oportet and aliquantos Presbyteros, ut bini per
Ecclesias, and unus in Civitate Episcopus. -- Omni enim Hebdomada offerendum
est, etsi non quotidie peregrinis incolis, tamen vel bis in Heb. domada, etsi
non desint qui prope quotidie baptizentur aegri.
1 Timothy c. 3. which is published among the works of St. Ambrose, but observed
long since by learned men to be the work of this Luciferian Deacon. This Author
speaking of the order of the Roman Church, and comparing it with part of the
Jewish Temple, notes, that they had twenty four courses of Priests, but now we
must have but seven Deacons; and Rome had no more, as Sozomen Sozom. l. 7. c.
19.
observes; whereas other Churches confined themselves to no definite number.
And besides these Deacons, there must be such a number of Presbyters, that there
may be two for every Church. For the inhabitants Communicate twice a week, Vid.
Hieron. Apol. adv. Jovin. et August. Ep. 118. ad Januar.
and their Sick are to be Baptized almost every day, who according to the
practice of those times were to receive the Communion, upon which account they
are mentioned in this place.

But to put this matter beyond all doubt, it is evident from several Writers,
cotemporary with Epiphanius, that it could not be noted as a singularity in
Alexandria to have many Parish Churches in it; since the same thing is
occasionally reported of most great Cities in that time in Rome. Opt. Milev. l.
2. con. Parnen.
Optatus informs us that there were above forty Churches when Victor Garbiensis
came thither, which was long before his time. And it will be as much to our
purpose, if Optatus be understood of the state of Rome in his own time: since
he wrote under Valens, Hieron. in Catal. in Opt.
as St. Jerome informs us, who died in the year three hundred seventy eight. But
Optatus wrote about the year three hundred seventy, as may be gathered from his
own words, Opt. l. 1. v. 3
where he reckons but sixty and odd years from the beginning of Dioclesian's
Persecution, to the time of his Writing. But Epiphanius Epiph. in prolog. Panor.
began his work against Heresies in the year three hundred seventy four. When
he wrote of the Manichees, Epiph Haer. 66. n. 20. Anim. Petav. 1.
it was the year seventy six. The Arian Heresy comes afterward at some
distance, where he speaks of this custom of Alexandria. So that making the
largest allowance that can be required for Optatus his words, he must be
granted to have wrote before Epiphanius.

In Milan there were many Churches at the same time; for St. Ambrose Ambr. Ep.
33. id. Ep. 85.
names several; for example, Portiana, Nova, Vetus, Ambratiana, Romana, Faustae.

In Constantinople we have an account of many Churches before Epiphanius his
time; Eusebius. l. 3. de vit. Constable. c. 48.
for Constantine built there many Oratories and vast Churches, as well within
the City as the Suburbs. Socr. l. 1. c. 16.
Socrates names two, that of Irene, and the Apostles; the former was afterward
joined to Sophia Id. l. 2. c. 16.
by Constantius, though it was from a small Church raised by Constantine to be
very magnificent and large; yet his Son building a great Church hard by it,
concluded both in one enclosure, and under one name. Theoph. in Chron. Niceph.
Hist. l. 7. c. 49. (...).
Theophanes, and Nicephorus Calistus reckon others, as three to the Honor of
Christ under several denominations of Wisdom, Peace, and Power. One bore the
name of the Apostles. And besides these, he built Martyria for Mocius, Acacius,
Agathonicus and Menas. In An. 342.
Constantius his time there is mention of the Church of St. Paul in
Constantinople. Socr. l. 2. c. 12.
In short, the Historians who speak of that City from Constantin the Great
downward, speak of the Churches of the City, as familiarly as we should of
those of London, without taking any notice of it as an unusual thing. So the
Bishop of C. P. is sometimes styled from the Church, sometimes from the
Churches of that (...), l. 2. c. 6. (...). Socr. l. 2. c. 27. Socr. l. 4. 1.
City. So Socrates speaks of Alexander who was Bishop there in Constantin's
time; so Macedonius is said to possess himself of the Churches of that City.
Instances of this kind there are without number; but I will conclude with Greg.
Naz. orat. coram 150. Ep. in fine.
Gregory Nazianzen's Apostrophe to the Churches of Constantinople when he took
his leave of them; Farewell Resurrection, thou auspicious name, for thou have
raised up my speech when it was yet contemned; thou happy field of common
victory, in which I first pitched my Tent. -- And thou, that great and
celebrated Temple, now become a new accession to the faith, and made greater by
the doctrine preached in thee, than by the vastness of thy pile; which from a
profane Jebus I have consecrated into a Jerusalem. And all ye other Churches,
which after this adorn every part of this City by your several beauties, and
tie them together, like so many bands, each taking to its own proper resort
that which is next to it. You, whom not I, but the grace of God working by my
weakness has filled beyond what could be hoped. Farewell you Apostles fair
habitation, masters of my labors, although I have not often preached within
your Walls. This passage is too bright to need a comment; and those who cannot
discern the Parish-Churches of C. P. by these Expressions, will scarce know a
Church when they see it.

Carthage is known to have had a great number of Churches about the time of
Unreason. of Separ. p. 249.
Epiphanius; for we have several of their names in the titles of Aug. Sermon.
359. Ed. Ben. Praef. ad Hilar. fragm. p. 49. Aug. Sermon. 156. Sermon. 26. vid.
not. Bened. in Ser. 156. Sermon. 53.
St. Augustin's Sermons. And to those observed already by a learned hand, we
may add the Church called Florentia, which Nicolaus Faber places in Carthage,
though the Benedictins seem to make some doubt of it. There was Basilica
Gratiani, and Theodosiana, and Honoriana, and Tricillarum, and many more
doubtless of which there is no mention.

The Christians of Antioch were much to blame, if they had not many
Parish-Churches before Epiphanius his time; for surely their numbers did
require them. For Julian the Apostate, who was not forward to magnify the
strength of the Christians, reproaches them for being in a manner all of them
so. Julian in Misapogon.
Many of you, I had almost said all, the Senate, the rich, the people for the
greater part, or rather all together, have chosen Atheism, that is,
Christianity. And that they had many Churches in Constantius his time, appears
by the discourse that happened between that Emperor and Athanasius in Antioch.
The Emperor desired of that Bishop, that now upon his restoration he would
allow one of those many Churches he had in Alexandria, to such as were of the
Arian persuasion: Soz. l. 3. c. 20.
The Bishop replied, That he was very ready to comply with his request,
provided the Orthodox might have the same favor in Antioch, to have one Church
of the many which are said to be there in the same place. And Socr. l. 3. c. 9.
(...).
Euzoius the Arian is said to be master of the Churches of Antioch, while
Paulinus had but one of the least within the Town. And at the same time when
Theodor. Hist. Relig. in Aphrate.
Meletius was driven out, it is said that all the Clergy were likewise turned
out of the sacred Temples, and out of every Church. And to come to Cities of a
lower rank; Soz. l. 6. c. 8.
Cyzicus had many Churches in Epiphanius's days, and so had Soz. l. 6. c. 18.
Edessa, so had Soz. l. 5. c. 4.
Caesarea in Cappadocia, and many more, especially such great Cities as are
taken notice of for being altogether Christians, of which I shall have occasion
to speak in another place, when I come to consider the evidence of our Author
for the paucity of Believers, even in the greatest Cities of the Empire. In the
mean while, I hope I have sufficiently cleared this point, that it could be no
singularity in Alexandria, in the time of Epiphanius to have many
Parish-Churches.

Prim. Ep. p. 17.
The last Testimony our Author produces on this head, is from p. 27.
Dr. Stillingfleet, now Bishop of Worcester's Sermon against Separation.
Although when the Churches increased, occasional meetings were frequent in
several places; yet still there was but one Church, and one Altar, and one
Baptistry, and one Bishop with many Presbyters assisting him. All this may very
well be, and Diocesan Episcopacy remain primitive; for one Bishop's Church may
have several dependent Congregations; one Altar may consist with many
subordinate Communion Tables; one Baptistry may serve the greatest City, and
one Bishop may supervise several Parishes; and the occasional meetings spoken
of, might not be destitute of the privilege of the Sacrament. But I must
remember my measure, and not take upon me to explain the notion of so learned a
person, who might have many things in his view which I may not have observed.
Yet I cannot but take notice, that the Champions of the Congregational way must
needs be distressed, when they betake themselves to that Sermon, to make out
the antiquity of their notion, where it is exploded p. 28.
as a novel and late fancy, that has not age enough to plead prescription. And
the same learned Unreas. of Separ. from p. 228, to p. 262.
Prelate has made it sufficiently appear, that even in Africa, which was
fancied to come nearest to the Congregational standard, several Bishops had in
ancient times, and immemorially, very large Dioceses.

In conclusion, our Author comes to sum up his evidence, and to assure his
performance, Prim. Ep. p. 17.
That this is not barely delivered by persons of excellent learning and
intimate acquaintance with antiquity, but proved by those records which are
most venerable in their account; and the evidence reaches not only the Apostles
times, but diverse ages after. What has been delivered or proved by the
witnesses produced by him in this Chapter, has been fairly laid down and
considered; and I desire that all may be judged by the merit and pertinence of
the evidence, and not by the confidence of the Advocate.

CHAP. II.
SECT. II.
IT has pleased Mr. Clerkson to fancy, that those who maintain Diocesan
Episcopacy would be very much distressed, if he could prove that of old several
Bishops had their seats in Villages, and therefore observes, Prim. Ep. p. 19.
That those who are concerned to extend the ancient Bishops to the modern
pitch, will not endure to hear, nor would they have any believe that it was
usual of old to have Bishops in Villages. And that these therefore D. D. l. 2.
c. 7. Tail. op. Assert. p. 304.
tell their opponents, That the most learned of them have not been able, with
great labor and hard study, to produce above five instances thereof. -- And
yet more have been, and may be produced for Bishops in Villages, than some are
willing to take notice of. Although I profess my self concerned for Diocesan
Episcopacy, because I believe it to be Apostolical and Primitive; yet I do not
find in my self any aversion to these instances of Village-Bishops; nor can I
find that they ever had any quarrel with, or were irreconcilable to Diocesans.
Before the Conquest this Country Malms. l. 3. vil. 1.
had several Bishops seated in Villages, who were afterward translated to
Cities, but they were no less Diocesans before, than after their translations.
And at this time in Wales there are four Bishops who are content with Villages
for their Sees, and yet have large Dioceses to govern. Of old the Chorepiscopi,
who seem to have been rather Presbyters than Bishops, had their residence in
Villages; but each of them had many Villages under his visitation. What hurt
then can these instances of Bishops in Villages do to the Diocesan way? Or why
are they represented so formidable to Episcopal Writers, that they will not
endure to hear of them? Had every Village that might furnish a Congregation, a
Bishop residing it it? Or those Bishops who were Seated in Villages, were they
only Parish-Pastors, and confined within the bounds of their respective
Villages? If our Author had proved this, there had been some ground to set
Village-Bishops against Diocesan; but since he has not thought fit to do this,
I may take leave to say that he has left his Argument imperfect, and far short
of the purpose for which it is produced.

To make this general Answer yet more plain, let us suppose the bounds of our
English Dioceses to become as much unknown to after-ages, as those of the old
Egyptian or Syrian Dioceses are now to us; and that the Books of Mr. Baxter,
Mr. Clerkson, and others, against Diocesan Bishops in this Country should be
lost, for the Genius does not promise immortality. Under this supposed
ignorance of the present distribution of our Bishoprics, if a dabler in
antiquity finding that St. David's, Landaf, and St. Asaph had been Bishops seats
some ages before; and that in elder times, Dorchester, and Selsea, and Kirton,
and Elmham, and Hexham, and some other Villages in England had been honored
with Episcopal Chairs, should upon this discovery entertain a conceit, that our
Episcopacy was parochial, and that a Bishop in our time and many ages before us
was no more than a Parish-Minister, and write a Book to maintain this
vainfancy: Such an undertaking, and such a work would be the exact copy of this
Chapter of Village-Bishops.

It may perhaps seem a needless labor to examine the instances he has
collected of Villages that were Episcopal seats, since they reach not the point
in question, nor make the least color of proof that the Bishops residing in
Villages were but Pastors of a single Congregation. But since he pleased
himself so much with this performance, that he seems to triumph, and say, That
the instances of Bishops in Villages were more than some are willing to take
notice of, he has laid a sort of a necessity upon his Answerer not to pass them
by, lest his Disciples might mistake a just neglect of impertinence, for a
despair or diffidence of being able to reply. I will therefore take notice of
every instance he has produced upon this head, though I may have just reason to
apprehend the censure or contempt of my Readers for insisting so minutely upon
the examination of things, which to the first view sufficiently appear to be
beside the purpose. But I hope the defiance and importunity of my Adversary may
excuse this digression though a matter of curiosity rather than of argument or of
weight.

To begin then, In the Diocese of Egypt, we are told, Prim. Ep. p. 19.
Hydrax and Palaebisca two Villages had their Bishops. He should have said
Bishop, for they had but one, as appears from the Epistle of Synesius, Synes.
Ep. 67.
who had orders from the Bishop of Alexandria to ordein a Pastor for those
Villages. But from the account which was put into his hands by the people of
that place, we find that these (...). Synes. ep. 67.
Villages were far from being Primitive Bishoprics; for at the time of which
we are speaking, which was about the year of Christ, 400, thy had but one
Bishop; For by Apostolic authority, as well as by the Law of the Country,
those Churches had ever belonged to Erythros, and were Parishes of that
Diocese. The people further declare, That they were not divided from the
Diocese of Erythros until the time of Valens the Emperor, when all things were
in confusion, and that then one Syderius who came from Valens his Army, was
made Bishop there in a very unusual manner, without the knowledge or approbation
of the Bishop of Alexandria, by the hands of one Bishop only, i. e. Philo of
Cyrene; and all this done to engage the protection of Syderius, who by the
Commission he had from Court had it in his power to do much good or hurt to
that Country. (...). Synes. Ep. 67.
Before this they had no Bishop, nor did any succeed him. Wherefore they
beseech Synesius in the most earnest and importunate manner in the world that
he would not force them to choose another, but that they might be allowed to
continue in their former condition, as Parishes and dependences (...). Synes.
ibid.
of Erythros, for they had put themselves already under Paul the Bishop of that
City, and prayed they might not be made Orphans in their Father's life time,
nor be violently torn from their Mother Church. Especially since they had
returned to their first estate by the approbation of Theophilus of Alexandria.
Judge then by this instance, which was the Primitive Episcopacy of this place.
By Apostolic Authority and Prescription they were members of a Diocese, and
depended on a City; but to have a Bishop of their own, did in their opinion,
agree neither with the Apostles rule, nor the usage of their Country. It is
pity some Independent had not lived in those days, to have informed this people
better concerning their Christian Privileges, and to let them know that every
Parish, not only might, but ought to have a Bishop of their own.

Olbium Prim. Ep. p. 19. (...). Synes. Ep. 76.
a Village in the same region had a Bishop. After the death of Athamas Bishop
there, the election of a Bishop was needful, and Antonius was chosen. There is
no mention either of this place or people any where else that I can find; and
from this (...).
expression of Synesius, it does not appear, whether they were the People of
one Village, or rather a people dwelling in Villages, such as in the old
Testament are called Perizites. Of this sort Proximis nullae quidem urbes
stant, tamen domicilia sunt, quae Mapalia apellantur. Mela. l. 1. in Cyren. --
Nusquam pauci degunt. ibid.
there were several in the region of Pentapolis, and all over Africa, where
there were but few Cities, as Pomponius Mela observes; but where the country
People inhabited, they were generally in great numbers. And Plin. l. 5. c. 5.
Pliny names several little Nations of this Country from the titles of
Cornelius Balbus his triumph. Besides Synesius his (...). Hesych. Jul. Pollux.
Suid.
phrase may signify not a Village-people, but a Neighbouring-people. Such a
people as I mentioned before, rendered in the Tabidium Oppidum. Nitenii Natio.
Nigligimela Oppid. Bubeium Natio. etc.
triumphal titles of Balbus by Nation. And it is not unlikely that Synesius,
who affects antique phrase, might mean no more than a neighboring People,
without regarding whether they were Villages or Cities. However it was, I shall
not forget to allow for this as a Village-Bishop, together with some others,
when I come to take my leave of Egypt.

Prim ep. p. 20.
Zygus is an Egyptian Village in Ptolomy. And Athanasius Athan. ep. ad Antioch.
gives us the name of the place and of the person that was Bishop there. But
this Village, as it had a Bishop, so it (...), etc. Ptol. l. 4.
had a territory along the Sea side; and the whole Seacoast of Lybia was
divided between that and two other Villages.

Prim. ep. p. 20.
We meet with Antia, a Village in Diodorus Siculus, and in the Council of
Ephesus with Episcopus Anteensis; I cannot find any other place that will suit
him. It is well enough guessed, for it is in the same place, something (...).
Subser. Ephesians.
differently writ in the subscriptions of the Council of Ephesus, from what it
is in Diodorus; it is the Town of Antaeus, or Antaeopolis, accounted for a City
by (...). Steph. ib.
Stephanus, and by Plut. de Solert. Animal.
Plutarch. Nor was this all, but this City was likewise the Metropolis of that
Nomus or Praefecture of Egypt, which bears its name (...). Pol. l. 4. (...).
Athanas. Apol. 2. p. 784. l. 1.
when Ptolomy wrote his Geography. So this Village in the account of our
Author, was a City and a Metropolis of a Country, long before the Council of
Ephesus, and before it had a Bishop.

Prim. ep. p. 20.
Schaedia in Strab. l. 17.
Athan. ep. ad Antioch.
Strabo is (...), rendered pagus urbi similis, (b) Athanasius tells us who was
Bishop of it. It is some comfort, that in Strabo's time this Village was not
inferior to a City; and before Athanasius his time, or any mention of a Bishop
in this place, it might be a City for ought our Author knew. However, the
walls, or the charter, or title of a City signify little to the present
question. If a Town be populous and have a Territory sufficient to make a
competent Diocese, the Bishop of the place will be a Diocesan, and such was the
Bishop of Schaedia. For besides that Town, he had a Agathodaemon, (...), Athan.
Ep. ad Antioch, p. 580.
Region belonging to his Diocese called Menelaites, (...) Steph.
Menelaites, and he is styled by both Titles. Now Menelaites was a Nomus, or as
we should say, a County of Egypt, of which Canopus (...), Ptol. l. 4. Plin. l.
5. c. 9.
was the Metropolis, part of which it seems belonged to the Bishop of Schaedia,
and this Region had a City of the same name in the time of Menelaitem Vrbem
Lybiae adjecimus. Justin. Ed. 13. c. 18, 19.
Justinian, and possibly it might be a City at this time when Agathodaemon was
Bishop. So that instead of a Bishop of a Village, our Author seems to have
stumbl'd upon one who had two Cities. And among the subscriptions in Athanasius
Athan. Ep. ad Antioch.
there are other Bishops who bear double titles, as Agathus Bishop of
Phragonis, and part of Elearchia; and Ammonius Bishop of Pachnemomi, and the
remaining part of Elearchia.

Prim. Ep. p. 20.
In the Breviary of Meletius, wherein he gives Alexander an account what
Bishops he had made, among the rest, Athan. Ap. 2. p. 189. T. 1. id Ep. ad
Antioch.
there is Cronius in Metole, and a place called Andromene was the Episcopal
seat of Zoilus, as Athanasius informsus, which two last are in all probability
Villages, since there are no such Cities discovered in Egypt. What this Metole
should be where Meletius set up a schismatic Bishop, is not very material to
our question, since the practice of Meletius can be of little authority in a
dispute concerning Primitive Episcopacy. Schismatics are too apt to innovate,
to be cited for examples of primitive practice. Yet considering the rest of the
places furnished by Meletius with Bishops, were the chief of Egyyt, and that
this Metole is placed in his Catalogue Metelis, (...). Steph. Ptol. l. 4.
next the Region of Alexandria; I am apt to suspect this reading, and think
this Metole is no other then Metilis Metilis Mela. l. 1. c. 9.
which gave name to a Prefecture, and was the Metropolis of it. But for this
Andromene, it is a monster composed of a City and a man, and in pity they ought
to be parted. For so they are in the Paris Edition, (...).
Zoilus was Bishop of Andron, and Menas was Bishop of Antiphrae; now Andron, or
Andropolis (...). Ptol. l. 4. Strab. l. 17. and Steph. in (...).
is the chief City of a Nomus of that name, and Antiphrae was a small City in
Strabo's time, not far from Alexandria.

Our Author Prim. Ep. p. 20.
goes on still in quest of Episcopal villages in Egypt, and not finding any
more for his turn, he takes upon him to reduce Cities into Villages. Hypselis
says he, is a Village in Stephanus, and had two Bishops at once; Ausonius, he
would say Arsenius of the Meletian faction, and Paul for the Orthodox. Athan.
Apol. 2.
That Hypselis had an Orthodox Bishop at that time, I do not question; but that
his name was Paul I cannot find in Athanasius; there was indeed a Person of
that name who lived there, and is mentioned by Athanasius, (...). Pens Ep. ad
Joh. apud Athan. Ap. 2.
but he was only a Monk; but our Author in his haste, was pleased to create him
a Bishop. But if he does too much honor to his person by one mistake, he does
as much disgrace his seat by another. For though Stephanus make Hypselis a
Village, yet was it not so when Arsenius was Bishop there; for this Arsenius
the Meletian Bishop, so famous in the story of Athanasius, Athan. Ap. 2. p.
786. T. 1.
styles himself Bishop of the City of Hypselis. Socrates speaking of the same
person, says (...), Socr. l. 1. c. 32.
that he subscribed the condemnation of Athanasius, as Bishop of the City of
Hypselis, with the same right hand which was pretended to have been cut off by
Athanasius; and Epiphanius Epiph. Haer. 66. (...)
speaking of this place, gives it the same title. For giving an account of
Scythianus the Father of the Manichean doctrine, he says, that he came to
Thebais to a City called Hypselis: And to conclude, Ptolomy (...)
makes it the Metropolis of the Country, called from it Hypseliotes.

Prim. Ep. p. 21.
Dracontius being made a Bishop in the territory of Alexandria, could have no
City for his seat. Athan. Ep. ad Drac.
Our Author pronounces too rashly from this passage; for the Territory of
Alexandria is the same with its Nomus or Prefecture, and in the same Nomus
there may be more Cities than one, otherwise all Egypt must have but six and
thirty Cities, for into so many* Nomi it was divided. But that this Dracontius
had a City for his seat, our Author might have learnt from Athanasius, (...),
Athan. Ep. ad Antioch.
in a place which is often cited in this chapter. It was Hermopolis the lesser,
which Ptolomy Ptol. l 4. Steph.
places in the Alexandrian Region, and the only place he mentions there besides
Alexandria.

Prim. Ep. p. 21.
Secontaurus was a very small and contemptible Village that Ischyras was made
Bishop of, containing so few Inhabitants, that there was never Church there
before. And is this then to be a model of Primitive Episcopacy? But this place
deserves a more particular consideration: This Ischyras who pretended to be a
Presbyter of Meletius or Colluthus his Ordination, accused Athanasius of
forcing his Church, overthrowing his Communion Table, and breaking the Chalice;
although it was proved he never was a Presbyter, nor had any Church; for there
never had been any in his Village. For a reward of calumny, this Hamlet was
erected into a Bishop's seat by Constantius, in opposition to the Catholic
faith, to the rules of the Church, and to (...), Athan. Ap. p. 802. and p. 793.
ancient tradition and usage of that Country. Athanasius (...). Athan. Ap. 2.
p. 802. Socr. l. 1. c. 27.
is very particular in his Description of this place, which was made the scene
of his Accusation; and tells us that Mareotis the Region in which this Village
was, had always belonged to the Bishop of Alexandria as part of his Diocese;
that here never had been a Bishop, nor so much as a Chorepiscopus before
Ischyras; but the Villages were distributed to Presbyters, some having ten,
some more of them to make up one Parish. In this Region there were fourteen
Parish Presbyters and thirteen Deacons, as appears by their subscriptions to
the Letter they sent to the Synod of Tire on the behalf of their Bishop. This
was the state of that place; and since our Author was not ashamed of urging
this instance to countenance his notion, I am content the whole cause should be
tried upon this issue, and that it may be judged by this instance, which
Episcopacy was the primitive, Diocesan or Congregational. Here was a large
Region, that had many Churches, and many more Villages so near Alexandria, that
they could not want Christians in the earliest times; yet we are assured by a
Athan. Ap. 2. p. 792.
competent Judge of this matter, that this Region never had a Bishop of its
own, but was always under the Bishop of Alexandria, who at certain times
visited it in person. But about three hundred years after St. Mark had planted
the Church of Alexandria, Constantius upon the Instigation of the Arians, made
one of the least of these Villages a Bishop's seat, against all Rule and
Prescription, as Athanasius contends. Judge then which is most ancient or most
primitive in this place, the Diocesan or the Parish Bishop. And since the
council of Sardica is obliquely taxed by Mr. Clerkson, as guilty of Innovation
upon the account of forbidding Bishops to be made in Villages, excepting such
where Bishops had been formerly made: This passage is sufficient to clear and
justify that Canon against frivolous reflections, since it appears from hence,
that there was too much reason to put a check to the innovations of the Arians,
who for the encouragement and strengthening of the party, took upon them to
multiply Bishoprics contrary to the ancient tradition and practice of the
Church.

Prim. Ep. p. 21.
That was little better, where the Gro. Alex. p. 110. Anon. 345. (...).
writers of the life of Chrysostom tell us, Theophilus of Alexandria settled a
Bishop. How long shall we have Innovations urged upon us for proof of Primitive
Episcopacy? Theophilus is justly blamed by all the writers of Chrysostom's
life, for erecting new Bishoprics against the Canons of the Church, in places
unseemly, and where there had been no Bishop before. And such w^^ this place,
which our Author has produced for an Episcopal seat; it never had any Bishop
before Theophilus ordained one there. A happy place, where primitive Episcopacy
began about four hundred years after Christ, when from the days of St. Mark to
that time, it had lain under the yoke of Diocesan Usurpation.

Having traveled through Egypt, not with the usual curiosity to see great
Cities and Pyramids, but with an humble inquisitiveness to look for Villages,
and the obscurest places that had been the seats of Bishops; let us now sit
down and recollect what we have observed. We have found after great search,
that two Villages in Lybia, where Cities are not very frequent, once in
distracted times had a Bishop, though they had been Parishes belonging to
Erythros for near four hundred years after Christ. One Village we find had a
succession of two Bishops, but the circumstances of the place or people are
altogether unknown. Another Village we observed in Lybia, that gave name to a
people, and had a considerable territory. Four Cities we mistook for Villages,
not because they were small, but for want of skill. One Village wanted nothing
of a City but the name, and to make amends for this defect, a large Country was
joined to it. One was made a Bishops seat for private ends, about the beginning
of the fifth Century, having never been so before, and being then very useful
for it. And in the last place there was Ischyras his Village, raised to a
Bishop's seat by the Arians, the least of all indeed, and yet much greater than
the merit of the Bishop.

I may be thought perhaps to deal too rigorously with my Adversary; if I should
not allow more Episcopal Villages to have been in Egypt in old time, than he is
able to find at this distance; therefore I am content to grant where he cannot
prove, and to take his general observation to supply the defect of particular
Evidence; that Prim. Ep. p. 19.
there are several things counted usual in the ancient Church, of which no more
instances can be given, nor so many. Be this Village-Episcopacy then one of
those usual things in the ancient Church, and in Egypt let him reckon twenty if
he think fit, or if this be not sufficient, let him take his bill and write
forty. Yet when all is done, it will do no service to the Congregational way.
For in all Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis, there were but an hundred Bishops in
the fourth Century, within the compass of which are all the instances of
Village Bishops in Egypt. Alexander (...), Alex. Ep. Socr. l. 1. c. 6.
reckons near that number; and Athanasius Athan. Ap. 2. p. 788. (...).
pleads, that in Egypt, Libya and Pentapolis there are near an hundred Bishops,
and of those not one has accused me. And long after this time, Geogr. Sacra.
Not. Ant. p. 55.
the old Notitia published by Carolus a Sancto Paulo has but an hundred and
one, and of these several are styled from Villages. Now the extent of Egypt is
variously represented. Herodotus Herod. l. 2. c. 9.
makes the line of Egypt properly so called, along the Seashore, to be four
hundred and fifty miles, and above eight hundred up the River. Plin. l. 5. c. 9.
Aristocreon does not come much short of this account: But Vossius Voss. Obs.
in Mel. l. 1. c. 9.
has reason to reject this computation as extravagant, and exceeding the truth
by one half. For Pliny Finis navigationis Egyptiae, Plin. l. 5. c. 9.
corrects the Geographers that wrote before him, as to the extent of this
Country, from more exact Surveys made in his time; and from these, he shows
that the length of Egypt up the River, as far as it was navigable, was five
hundred and eighty-six miles: But from Pelusium to Canopus was but an hundred
and seventy miles, which was all the Country between the branches of the Nile;
but from Pelusium Eastward Egypt Diodor. Sic. l. 1.
reached near two hundred miles. If we add on the West Libya and Pentapolis, we
have a line of five hundred and fifty miles according to the Nubian Geographer
Greogr. Nub. p. 91. Ed. Par.
from Alexandria to Barca. And Plin. l. 5. c. 6.
Eratosthenes reckons from Cyrene to Alexandria five and twenty miles less. Now
this great Country had but an hundred Episcopal seats; and though half of them
had fallen out to be in Villages, yet I will leave to any one capable of making
any judgment to decide the question, whether they were Diocesan or Parish
Bishops. For as in England there are Bishops in Villages, and Towns not much
superior to Villages, and yet the Dioceses are very large, because the whole
Country is divided between six and twenty: So in Egypt the Dioceses must have
been very large, when so great a Country for extent and people, had no more
than an hundred Bishops. For upon a modest Computation, that which our Author
calls the Diocese of Egypt, was three times as great as England; if we consider
the number of the Towns it had in Ptolomaeus Philadelphus his time, more Towns
than any one Country in the world; for Theocritus (...), Theocr. Idill. 17.
(...), etc. Theocr. Idill. 17.
who lived then, reckons them above three and thirty thousand, and styles them
Cities; nor have we any reason to believe, that their number was diminished
under the Roman Government. So that supposing the Country generally Christian
in the fourth Century, every Bishop, one with another, will have above three
hundred Towns within his Diocese; so large were the Bishoprics of old in that
Country, and so little is it to the purpose of our Author, to seek for Bishops
seats in the Villages of Egypt.

From Egypt, we are to travel like the Children of Israel into the Deserts of
Arabia, but not with so good a guide. Those who travel in this Country must not
expect to meet Cities very frequent, and ought to be thankful, if now and then
they happen upon a good Village. Our Author has found some here that were
Bishops seats. For Prim. Ep. p, 21.
in the Council of Ephesus there was Episcopus Bacathensis, and Epiphanius
(...), Epiph. Anaceph. p. 141.
calls Bacathum a chief Village in Arabia. In that part of Arabia which was
annexed to Palestine, there was good store of Bishops in Villages, as appears
by the ancient Catalogue in Gulielmus Tyrius. There is no need to mention
particulars, since Sozomen Soz. Hist. l. 7. c. 19.
assures us that there (...).

It is no wonder if in Arabia, where Cities are very rare, that Bishops should
be ordained in Villages; for (...), Dio. Chrysostom. Or. 47.
all barbarous People chose rather to live at large, scattered in Villages,
than thronged in Cities: And Aristotle reproaches his Stagyrites for refusing
the privilege of a City, when Olynthus to which they belonged, was destroyed by
Philip, and that they were better satisfied to live in Villages, after the
manner of Barbarians rather than Greeks. But in these Countries where some
Villages had Bishops, the Dioceses were no less, nay generally greater than
where Cities were numerous. So in the Northern Countries of Europe the
Bishoprics are much larger than in Italy or Greece. So the Bishoprics of
Cappadocia, of Armenia and Arabia, were greater than those of Syria or the
lesser Asia, as may easily appear by comparing their numbers in the ancientest
Catalogues we have extant, or in the subscriptions of provincial Councils.
(...) Epiph. Haer. 58. 1.
Bacathon was a Mother Village in the Philadelphia Arabia; and that title
sufficiently denotes, that it had other Villages and Parishes of its resort.
For Metrocomia id inter vicos est, quod Metropolis inter Urbes. Gotofr. Ann. C.
Th. l. 11. Tit. ^5. ss. 1.
a Mother Village in respect of Villages, is what a Metropolis is to the Cities
of its dependence. The Catalogue of Bishoprics in Guilelmus Tyrius is no older
than the twelfth Century, and is no other than a piece of that Notitia which
goes under the title of Ordo Provincialis, of which I must give a more
particular account hereafter. And for the Testimony of Sozomen, it is to be
observed, that he mentions the ordaining of Bishops in Arabia, and in Cyprus,
as a thing unusual and of rare example, because he compares it with the
practice of the Scythians, who had but one Bishop for a Nation, though they had
many Cities. But let us leave this wild Country, and follow our Author whither
he is pleased to lead.

Prim. Ep. p. 21, 22.
In Syria, Theodoret tells us of Paul a Confessor, in the Persecution by
Licinius, one of the Fathers of the first Council of Nice, and Bishop of
Neocaesarea, which he says, is a Castle or a Fort near Euphrates. Why this
place should be reckoned among Villages, I can see no reason, since the word
(...). Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 7.
which he renders Castle or Fort, signifies any fortified place; for even
Cities pass under this name, as Gotofred Etsi non sim nescius de omnibus
munitis locis, in quibus and civitates, (...) quoque dici, Gotofr. in l. 15. de
Erog. Mil. Annon.
has observed; and those places which Eunapius Eunap. excerp. leg.
calls Fortresses, Ammianus Marcellinus Ammian. Marc. l. 18. p. 187.
styles Cities; and Pinaca a City of the Parthians upon the Tygris, is styled
by Strabo Strab. l. 16. (...),
a Fortress, consisting of three Castles, which made it in a manner a Tripolis,
i. e. three Cities. It is not therefore fair to reduce this Town into the
condition of a Village, because it was a Garrison, and a fortified place;
whereas notwithstanding this, it might have been a City; but I will not contend
about words. For though this place should have been no better than a Village,
yet are we never the nearer to know the extent of this Confessor's Bishopric,
unless our Author would think fit to confine him within the walls; for perhaps
the bounds of this Diocese were laid out when the Castle was besieged.

P. 22.
Maronia is described by Jerome to be a Village 30 miles from Antioch; and we
meet Georg. Alex. vit. Chrysostom. p. 236.
with a Bishop there, and the name of him Timothy. That there was such a
Village Jerome Hieron. in vit. Malchi. Mon.
tells us; but that it had a Bishop, neither he nor any body else ever said
before our Author. This little place indeed had a Church, and was the
possession of Evagrius, a Kinsman of St. Jerome, who was sometime Bishop of
Antioch; and probably this Village, though distant 30 miles, did belong to that
City. But George in the life of Chrysostom says, it had a Bishop named
Timothy. He says indeed, that there was a Bishop of Maronia; but that this was
the place, neither he nor any body else affirmed before. There were two Cities
of this name, one in the Syrian Chalcis, and the other in Thrace, both which
Ptolomy Ge. Ptol. l. 5. and l. 3.
mentions. The Bishop of the latter in all probability, was the person who
suffered in the cause of Chrysostom, for he was of his Province, Thrace having
long before been subject to Constantinople; and in less then 30 years after, we
find one Docimasius Diaecesis Thraciae, Provinciae Rhodopes, Civitatis
Maroniae. Conc. Ephesians. p. 535. Ed. Labb.
Docimasius Bishop of that City among the subscribers of the first Council of
Ephesus, and many ages before this, Polybius Polyb. Hist. l. 5.
makes mention of this City.

To proceed, Athanasius Athan. Ep. ad Solitar. vit. degrees. p. 812. T. 1.
gives us the name of a Bishop in Calanae, and of another in Siemium, which
were Villages, or such obscure inconsiderable places, as no Geographer takes
notice of. King James his Regulators were not more dangerous men to the
Franchises of our Corporations, than this Author is to ancient Cities; for if
there be but a letter amiss, the Charter is forfeited, and it sinks into an
obscure Village. This is the case of Calanae, because there is a C. where there
should be a B. our Author has dis-franchis'd it. The place where Euphration was
Bishop, was Balanea; so it is writ in Antonin's Itinerary; 27 miles from
Gabala, and 24 from Antaradus. Stephanus (...), Steph.
styles it a City of Phoenicia, in his time called Leueas; and adds, that
Epicrates had writ an Encomium upon it. Ptolomy (...), Ptol. l. 5.
names it next to Paltis, and so does Plin. l. 5.
Pliny; in the same order it lies in Athanasius. But why must this be
Euphration's Town? Because the same Euphration among the subscribers of the
first council of Nice, writes himself Bishop of Balaneae; but I have better
proof than this, it is because Athanasius himself makes him Bishop of that
City. For speaking of the Bishops who were deprived for adhering to him, he
says Athan. Ap. 1. Initio.
that Balaneae mourns for Euphration. For Siemium, whether it be a Village or a
City, or any thing, I cannot tell; it is possibly a mistake of the Copist for
the name of some City. For it is not likely that Athanasius who had Bishops of
the principal Cities of all parts sufferers for his sake, would think fit to
omit so many of considerable and known titles, and to name the Bishop of a
place unknown to all Geographers. Here may be room for conjecture, but I dare
not venture, knowing the temper of my Adversaries to be too captious to make
necessary allowance for critical divination.

But it is in vain it seems to contend; Prim. Ep. p. 22.
for the Council of Antioch in their Synodal Epistle Eusebius. H. E. l. 7.
concerning Paulus Samosatenus mention (...).
Bishops both in Country and Cities: These Country Bishops, who were the
flatterers of Paulus Samosatenus, Valesius Chorepiscopos intelligere videtur;
eos enim distinguit Epistola ab Episcopis Urbium. Vale.
takes to be Chorepiscopi, and the meaness of their behavior makes it probable
that they were of his own Diocese, and had dependence upon him. But whatever
they were, it does not appear from this, or any thing else, that they were
Parish Bishops; for even the Chorepiscopi had many Villages and Congregations
under their superintendence.

Let it not seem tedious to the Reader, that he is led on through Villages
only, and obscure places, for it is in his way to the holy Land; yet to mortify
his curiosity, he must not see either Jerusalem or Caesarea, or any other City;
only he may if he please take notice, that in Palestine, Jamnia Prim. ep. p. 22.
was a Village in Strabo's account; so is Lydda in Josephus, yet both Bishops
seats in Tyrius his Catalogue; so is Nais there and Zoaron. This Catalogue of
William Archbishop of Tire is nothing else but a piece of the Ordo
Provincialis, written since the 12th Century, and published long ago. It has
several Bishops sees erected in that Century. And though some Copies of it that I
have seen, are later than this time, yet I could not find any more ancient. So
it is an extraordinary way of proving Primitive Episcopacy. Jamnia and Lydda
were Villages in Strabo and Josephus; and about eleven and twelve hundred years
after are Bishops seats. But I will not insist upon this, because I know those
places had Bishops in the first Century, or sooner, and long before that time
were accounted Cities. Pliny Jamnes duae, altera vicus. Plin. ep. 5. c. 13.
mentions two Jamnias, whereof one was a City, the other a Village. Ptolomy
Ptol. l. 5.
places Jamnia-among the Cities of Judea, and Stephanus (...).
calls it a small City, and in the time of the Macchabees 1 Match. 5.59. (...).
it had the title of a City; and even Strabo, who calls it a Village, makes it
so populous, that from that and some neighboring places 40000 men took arms
upon the sudden; and this place had dependences, for it is joined with Joppe,
and with it is said (...). Joseph.
to preside over the neighboring Region. For Lidda, though Josephus calls it a
Village, yet he adds (...).
that it was not inferior to a City: But this is not all, for this great
Village was made a City and called Diospolis; it is mentioned by Pliny,
Stephanus, St. Jerome and Theodoret, Theod. H. E. l. 1. c. 5. (...). Lyddam
versam in Dospolin. Hieron. Epit. Paulae.
with an account of the change of the name. Nais is not to be found in any
ancient Notitiae or Subscriptions, and therefore in probability may be of late
erection. But Zoara is the Zoar in Genesis; and in Josephus Joseph. B. I. l. 4.
c. 27.
his time belonged not to Palestine, but to Arabia; though in Leo the wise his
Notitia, it is placed in the third Palestine; but that it may not be thought
too meanly of, it is by Stephanus (...). Steph.
said to be a great Village, and a Garrison, and Ptolomy mentions it. So that in
all Palestine, properly so called, our Author has found no Village. Lydda and
Jamnia were Cities, and Zoar, and Nais, belong to Arabia. But Prim. ep. p. 22.
in one of the three Palestines there is an account of fourteen Villages which
were Bishops sees. Those Villages did not belong to Palestine, but to Arabia,
according to the Notitia of Leo; and it is no wonder if in that Country where
there were scarce any Cities, we should find Bishops seated in Villages. And
that we may not think all those places that pass for Villages in that Country
as inconsiderable as those with us, Josephus B. Iud. l. 4. c. 26.
tells us that Vespasian took two Villages in the middle of Idumea, a Country
which generally goes in later writers for part of Arabia: Their names were
Betarni, and Caphar-Toba; he killed in them above 10000, takes 1000 Captives,
and drives the rest away. The Remark of Miraeus, p. 22, 23.
which our Author quotes, is too considerable to be omitted; for upon occasion
of these Episcopal Villages, he observes, that (...) signifies a Village, and
there were several such under the Patriarch of Jerusalem. But it had been more
to the purpose of our Author to have produced some proof, that these
Bishoprics had been of ancient Erection. For if they should be new, they would
give but sorry evidence for primitive Episcopacy; and that many of them were of
a late date, the Catalogue of the Archbishop of Tire, or the Ordo Provincialis
informs us, that upon the Erection of Jerusalem into a Patriarchal seat, some
Bishoprics were taken from the Patriarch of Antioch, and others from him of
Alexandria, and some new erected; and because the new Patriarch besides those
Metropoles, ought to have Suffragans, they withdrew some from those
Metropolitans, and annexed them to Jerusalem, and some they erected new, to the
number of 25. Jerusalem was made Patriarchal in the sixth Century, and then it
seems those Bishoprics had their Original; nor were they yet so many in the
beginning of that Age, as appears by the subscriptions of a full Conc. Hieros.
A. 518. apud Conc. genesis 5.
Synod of the three Palestines, which in all are but 35; whereas the Arabian
Bishops which our Author accounts to Palestine, were as many. To these belonged
Prim. Ep p. 23.
Tricomia, Pentacomia, Hexacomia, and Eneacomia, of which there is no account
before the ninth Century; and what they were, is not easy to guess at this
distance; whether they were so many Villages as the names denote, reduced to
one, as Athens was composed of several Villages of Attica; or whether they were
still distinct; or whether they were only the chief and Mother Villages; what
distance, what numbers, what convenience for personal Communion, are things now
as hard to know, as it is to find the place where they once stood. So that this
can give no evidence for primitive Episcopacy, since they were erected later,
and it is impossible to know their bounds. Our Author's Prim. Ep. p. 23.
guess from the names of Pentacomia, Hexacomia, etc. that each of them was a
Precinct consisting of so many Villages as the names import, may be a mistake.
For among the Cities of the greater Phrygia, Ptolomy Ptol. l. 5.
mentions one called Tricomia; and Strabo Strab. l. 12.
has an account of a People called Heptacometae, living in the mountains near
Colchis, so considerable that they destroyed three Cohorts of Pompey, and must
be more than seven Villages or Hamlets could furnish. Much less can we judge of
Prapedius his Diocese, who is said Soz. l. 6. c. 34. (...).
to have the Inspection of many Villages, or so much as determine whether he
ever were a Bishop, but only a Chorepiscopus or Deputy of the City-Bishop for
some part of his Territory. And such a one it seems Valesius judged him to be.

What is alleged out of Mr. Fuller, is produced I suppose, more for the jest
than for argument. Lydda, Jamnia and Joppa, were neither such inconsiderable
places, nor so near one another as he pretends. Joppa is a City in Josephus,
and so are the other two in other Authors, as I have showed already, and had a
a considerable Region under them. And for their distance Antonine's Itinerary
makes Diospolis or Lydda, twelve miles from Jamnia; and their distance from
Joppa is not certain from any ancient Author; what Travelers report from the
tradition of the Country, deserves little credit. For the site of many of those
places is at this time as uncertain, as where Simon the Tanner's house stood in
Joppa, or Pilate's in Jerusalem; and yet such things, and many more as minute,
are shown to Travelers, who have more civility than to gainsay the Tradition
of the Country, of which the Inhabitants make no small gain. And the reason why
Geographers have not mentioned these places in Tyrius his late Catalogue, was
not for shame, for they have many places as inconsiderable; but because they
were found only in a Catalogue, and mentioned in no History.

From Prim. Ep. p. 24.
Palestine and the Patriarchat of Jerusalem, we come to Cyprus, where Sozomen
l. 7. c. 19. (...).
tells us, it was usual to have Bishops in Villages, as also in other
Countries, without regard it seems to any restraint, which some Bishops
endeavored to put upon that practice; and thus it continues with the Cypriots
to this age. The first thing I shall take notice of, is a little disingenuous
Artifice of our Author, in transposing these words in other Countries, as if
Sozomen when he had named Cyprus, had added other Countries indefinitely, and
spoken of a thing usual in many Countries. But that Historian showing the
different traditions and practice of several Nations, observes, that the
Scythians, though they had many Cities, yet had but one Bishop. In other
Nations, as in Cyprus and Arabia, there were Bishops in Villages, setting one
unusual practice against another, and intimating, that he knew of no other
Countries where they had Village-Bishops; and therefore having no other
Instances in the Catholic Church, he takes notice of the Montanists and
Novatians, who in Phrygia had Bishops in Villages. So that from this passage we
ought rather to conclude, that it was not usual in other Countries, besides
those specified in this passage, to have Village-Bishops; at leastwise, that
Sozomen knew no other, or did not remember any when he wrote that passage. Now,
though in Cyprus some Villages were Bishops seats, yet may we not conclude,
that either all, or the greatest part were such; nor can we make any guess how
many Villages went to make up a Diocese in Cyprus. Gratian De Bell. Cypr. p. 1.
Bishop of Ameria tells us, that in the Island there are 840 Villages, and
about two hundred thousand Souls. The ancient state of this Island is not to be
taken from the present calamitous condition under which it groans; for in
Trajan's time Dio. Cass. in Trajano.
there were more men destroyed here by the Jews in one day, than are now in all
the Country. Mr. Clerkson tells us without any Author, that whereas there are
betwixt twenty and thirty Bishops in that Island, (and it is likely the number
has decreased there, as in many other places) there are but four of their seats
which have the face of a City. As to the present state of Cyprus In Cypriana
Provincia quatuor tantum Episcopi suffraganei numerantur. Dr. Smith Graec.
stat. Hod. p. 71.
there are but four suffragan Bishops in the whole Island; and if Mr. Clerkson
had consulted his Miraeus upon this occasion, he had found there but four Greek
Bishops, and five Latins, before it was taken by the Turks. In Hierocles his
Notitia it had fifteen Cities, and yet in that of Leo the wise, we find but
thirteen Bishops; nor can we find, that ever it had more in elder times; for
Carolus a S. Paulo Geogr. Sacr. p. ^06.
could not find above twelve Bishops seats from the subscriptions of Councils
and other ancient writings. The Synodical letter Baron. Anal. A. 643.
of the Cyprian Bishops to Pope Theodorus against the Monothelites has no
subscriptions, and so the number of them is unknown; and what number the Synod
Socr. l. 6. c. 10.
under Epiphanius, that condemned the writings of Origin, did consist of, is as
much in the dark. But that Epiphanius Vindic. of Prim. Chapter p. 554, 555.
had himself a large Diocese in Cyprus, has been already showed in another
place.

In pursuit of Primitive Episcopacy, we are carried from Cyprus to Armenia,
where the Catholic had above 1000 Bishops under his obedience, as l. 7. c. 32.
Otto Frisingenses writes from the report of the Armenian Legates; and after
him Ann. 1145.
Baronius and our Brierwood. Prim. Ep. p. 24, 25.
Yet both the Armenia's in Justinian 's time, who made the most of them, made
but four Provinces, which had in all but twenty Cities. -- If the Armenian
Bishops had not amounted to above the twentieth part of the number, yet more
than one half of them must be Village-Bishops. Since Brierwood is cited for
voucher of these 1000 Bishops, I am content to submit the whole matter to his
Arbitration. He Brier. Enq. p. 127.
thought, that Otho mistook perhaps Obedience for Communion, as he verily
believed he did; for the Communion which the Armenians maintained with other
Jacobites, extended indeed very far; but the jurisdiction of Armenia contained
only four Provinces, in which small Circuit, that such a multitude of Bishops
should be found, is utterly incredible; for all the Bishops of Armenia in Leo
's Novel, and those of Cilicia in Guilelmus Tyrius, put together, exceed not
the number of thirty. And although I find that Justinian divided the two
Armenia 's into four Provinces, yet were not for that cause the number of
Bishops increased any whit the more.

Nov. 31. c. 2.
Justinian when he made a new distribution of Armenia into four Provinces, made
an express provision, Quae vero ad Sacerdotia spectant, volumus in eadem manner
forma, -- quantum ad ipsa nil penitus innovetur
that the Ecclesiastical state of the Country should not be affected with this
alteration of the civil forms; and therefore we find in all Armenia, that
belonged to the Roman Empire, but two Ecclesiastical Provinces in Leo's
Diatyposis, which was the ancient distribution of that Country. Of these two
Justinian made three, and annexed to them some Cities from other Provinces,
which notwithstanding remained in their former dependence as to Ecclesiastical
matters. To these Provinces he added a fourth, which was never before reduced
into the form of a Province, which was before divided into several Satrapies of
barbarous names. This is represented in Leo's Notitia, Nov. 31. c. 2.
under the title of the higher Mesopotamia, or fourth Armenia, and divided into
two parts. In the first we have Martyropolis mentioned by Justinian, and 33
Bishops seats more under the Metropolis of Amida. And in the second part, there
are most of those barbarous names mentioned by Justinian, Sophene, Bilabitene,
Astianica, Anzitene, together with Cetharizan, called by Justinian (...), and
in the Notitia, if I mistake not, styled (...), though that passed with the
Transcriber for the name of a Town. In this division there are 17 Bishops; in
all 52. At the bottom of this last division we have this Remark, that this
Armenia is Independent, and belongs to no Patriarch, upon the account of St.
Gregory of Armenia, and it has 200 Cities and fortified Towns. So far were all
the Armenia's from having 1000 Bishops in the ninth Century. And before this,
about the middle of the fifth Century, we find in the first Armenia but six
Bishops subscribing to the Synodical Epistle Conc. Chalced. Pars. 3.
of that Province, in confirmation of the Council of Chalcedon; and in the
second Armenia, but three; And yet the Metropolitans of each speak Cum Sancto
Concilio quod mecum est. Ep. Arm. 1. Una cum Episcopis nostrae Provinciae. Ep.
Episc. Arm. 2.
of their Synod as entire. So far is the most ancient state of Armenia from the
fabulous pretenses of those Legates.

Nor do the Armenian Legates say, there were 1000 Bishops in Armenia, but under
the Armenian Catholic, whose Jurisdiction might reach much farther than
Armenia. Some affirm, that all the Christians in Cathaia and India were under
this Armenian Patriarch. So Josephus Indus; Jos. Indi. Nav. c. 133. p. 204.
Muller. Disque de Cathaia p. 89.
and how many Bishops might be in those Countries in the twelfth Century, will
be something hard to be informed. And even now that Catholic is not confined
to Armenia, though the condition of his Churches be very low. For in a
Catalogue Hist. Critique de la creance de rel. du Levant, p. 217.
of the present Bishoprics under the Armenian Patriarch, we find several in
Persia, and others in Cappadocia, and others belonging to other Provinces; and
all together scarce make up an hundred Archbishops and Bishops.

But to speak freely, and to conclude this point, the relation of the Armenian
Legates seems to need confirmation. For besides, that there is no account of the
tenth part of this number of Bishops belonging to the Catholic, either before
or since; There is otherwise very little credit to be given to the report of
these Legates. For one of them, Baron. A. 1145. 523.
when the Pope said Mass, affirmed he saw a Sun beam of unusual brightness rest
upon the Pope's head, and two Doves ascending and descending in it. How easy
was it for these to make 1000 Bishops in a remote Country, when they had the
confidence to put such gross fictions upon the Court of Rome? But both had one
end, to flatter the Pope, who was now in some distress driven out of Rome, and
residing at Viterbo. And therefore Deficientibus Romany Arnaldistis universus
terrarum Orbis confluit. Baron.
the new accession of so ample Communion as that of a 1000 remote Bishops, was
to comfort him for the undutifulness of those nearer home; and it is the usual
artifice of that See, when its authority declines at home, to dress up some
Impostor, who shall come from the ends of the earth to worship the Pope in the
name of some great Patriarch, or some numerous Eastern Sect.

In Lazica, Justinian Nov. 28.
finds seven Castles and but one City, and that made so by himself, Prim. ep.
p. 25.
Petravon. Yet in the Diatyposis of Leo, in Lazica there are fifteen Bishops
belonging to one Metropolis. It is a miserable thing to travel so far for an
Argument, and to bring back such a trifle. Lazica in Justinian's time had but
one City, And in Leo the Wise his Reign, i. e. 350 years after had 15 Bishops.
So long tract of time may have made great alteration in that Country, and
produce as many Cities as there were Bishops; and therefore this Argument for
so many Village-Bishops in that Country is but an humble begging of the
Question, and depends entirely upon the good nature of the Reader. But the fact
it self is as uncertain as the conclusion drawn from it. For it does not appear
that in Leo the Wise his time, Lazica had so many Bishops. For in the (...),
etc.
Notitia Printed by Car a S. Paulo, and after him by Goar, and last of all by
Dr. Beveridge, said to be made in that Emperors reign, A. D. 890. Lazica had
but 4 Bishops under the Metropolis of Phasis; and in an old Notitia of the
Patriarchat of C. P. we find the same number. But that which our Author cites
and commonly passes under the name of Leo's Diatyposis, is of the later date;
as appears by several names of places later than Leo's time. And even in that,
Lazica had not the same bounds as it had in Justinian's time, partly mentioned
in his Novel, but more exactly by Procopius. Procop. B. Pers. l. 2.
For when Lazica had 15 Bishops, they were under the Metropolis of Trapezus,
which belonged to Pontus Polemoniacus, and in the Ancient Notitiae placed under
Neocaesarea; but at a great distance from Justinian's Lazica, and that
exhibited in the old Notitiae. For from Trapezus to Phasis, Strabo Str. l. 12.
reckons 300 miles, and we are told by Procopius Probel. Pers. l. 2.
that all that lies off Lazica on the West of the River Phasis, is but a days
journey for a Footman. These 15 Bishops therefore will do no service to the
Congregational design; since it is uncertain what sort of places they had for
their Seats, or what extent of Diocese each may have. Only this will appear,
that supposing Trapezus the Metropolis in Leo's Diatyposis to be the remotest
place of the Province Westward, the length will be near 400 miles, to be
distributed between 15 Bishops. I ought not to dismiss this instance without
taking notice of the condescension of our Author in following the blundering
Translatour of the Novels, and putting Petravon or Petraeon, (...).
for Petra, by the same Grammar as one might take the Nominative of London, to
be Londinensium.

In Lycaonia, and the parts adjacent, we have more instances hereof. Here Act.
14.2, 3.
the Apostles ordained Elders in every Church. Those Elders were Bishops, as
they assure us, who have modeled the Principles by which Prelacy may be
maintained with most advantage, and without which (whatever their Predecessors
thought) they judged it not defensible. If one should be so peevish, as to deny
that these Presbyters were Bishops, and oppose to the opinion of Dr. Hammond
the stream of ancient and modern Interpreters; an elaborate and hopeful
argument would come to nothing. But because it is so meek and harmless a thing,
let these Presbyters be Bishops by courtesy, and let us abide the consequence.
Prim. Ep. p. 26.
The places where these Bishops were constituted, are mentioned, v. 20, 21.
Antioch, Iconium, Derbe, Lystra; -- lesser Towns, or Country Granges and
Villages. Be it so. But did the Apostles confine the care and authority of
these Bishops wholly to these Villages, in which they were ordained? Without
this concession, the argument will have no force; and before we grant, let us
consider what our Author offers concerning these places. Antioch was the
Metropolis of Pisidia, and a great City, yet not so great, but all the
Inhabitants Prim. Episc. p. 25, 26.
in a manner could meet together to hear the word. St. Luke Acts 13.44.
indeed says, that the whole City almost came together to hear the word; but
that the Jews Synagogue would contain all the City, he neither says, nor can we
reasonably believe. For expressions of this nature have an allowed favor of
construction among all men; and when a whole City is said to come together, men
understand only a great multitude, without any rigorous computation, what
proportion such an assembly may bear to the whole City. Moses is said Deuteronomy.
31.30.
to speak in the Ears of all the Congregation of Israel the words of his song;
Deuteronomy. 32.45.
and he made an end of speaking all these words to all Israel. When Moses
numbered the people, they were above six hundred thousand men fit for service,
besides women and children, which could not be less than three times as many.
And to speak in the ears of all these together, had been one of the greatest
miracles that ever Moses had done, and such as the holy Ghost would not have
passed unobserved. Theodoret. Hist. Relig. (...).
All the people of the great Antioch are said to come together to see Julian
the Monk. All the People of C. P. come daily to us, say Apud Conc. Ephesians.
the Oriental Bishops who were stoped at Chalcedon by the Emperor's order. And
the Author of the life of Paul Bishop of C. P. says, that the whole City of C.
P. came to the Church called by the name of the Apostles. And Cyrill Phot. cod.
257.
says that all the people of the City of Ephesus attended him to the Council.
St. Jerome speaking of the Penance Fabiola did on Easter Eve, for marrying while
her first Husband, whom she had divorced, was alive, Tota spectante Urbe
Romana. Hier. Epit. Fabiolae.
says, that it was in the sight of the whole City of Rome; and in the same
Treatise says, that all the people of Rome came to the funeral of that Lady.
And if the greatest Cities of the world may be thought so thin of people, as to
be able to furnish but one Assembly; what shall we say to that expression Tota
ad funus ejus Palestinarum Urbium turba convenit. Hieron. Epit. Paula.
of Jerome, that all the people of the Cities of Palestine came to the funeral
of Paula? Wherefore, if our Author's remark may diminish Antioch in Pisidia to
the Congregational measure, because the whole City almost came together to hear
the Apostles; the greatest Cities in the world must shrink into a single
Congregation, because the same expression is used of them too; and without any
such guard or correction, as almost, or in a manner, (...). Acts 13.
which St. Luke thought fit to interpose. It may seem very unnecessary to
insist so much upon the proof of a matter so obvious to every Reader. But the
importunity and cavils of my Adversary, who snatches at such expressions as
these, the whole Town, all the People, as arguments for his Congregational
Episcopacy, have obliged me to it. And whoever Totius Urbis populum ad exequias
Congregabat. Ibid.
is once engaged with a Caviller, cannot well avoid the mean drudgery of
descending to very jejune explanations.

Prim. Ep. p. 26.
Iconium in Strabo Str. l. 12. (...).
is but a small Town, but well built; by which we may judge of those places
which were Bishops seats under it. There are fifteen of them in Leo's
Diatyposis. There is but little reason to fancy any of these Bishops seats to
be Villages; since in the civil Notitia of the Eastern Empire, ascribed to
Hierocles, there are seventeen Cities under the Metropolis of Iconium. And though
it might not be a very great City in Strabo's time; yet being made the
Residence of the chief Roman Magistrate in that Country, it may reasonably be
thought to have received considerable increase, and so it seems to have done.
For Pliny Datur and Tetrarchia Lycaonia civitatum 14. urbe celeberrima Iconio.
Plin. l. 5. c. 27.
takes notice of a Tetrarchy of Lycaonia on that side where it joins to
Galatia, in which there were fourteen Cities, of which Iconium was the most
renowned. Among other Cities belonging to the Metropolis of Iconium, we find
Homona or Homonada^ in the whole Territory there were no less than 44.
fortified places, in the time of Pliny. Ibid.
It was not long when Strabo wrote, since those Countries had been recovered
from the Tyrants and Pirates who oppressed them; and Strabo Pr. l. 12.
tells us, that he had seen Servilius Isauricus. In Constantius his time
Iconium belonged Ammian. Marc. l. 14. Oppidum Pisidiae.
to Pisidia; but was then so considerable, that it had an Amphitheatre and
public shows, which were not ordinarily exhibited but in the place where the
chief Governor of the Province resided: And Basil Bas. ep. 8. (...).
accounts it to Pisidia, and gives (...).
some intimation of the rise of it into a Metropolis, that anciently it was the
second City, i. e. after Antioch. But now it is become a Metropolis and
presides over a part, which being made up of several pieces, makes up one
Province. And that Lycaonia was then under it, the same Bas. Ep. 397.
Basil intimates, and what else at this distance we cannot tell, since the
Province belonging to it is said to be made up of several parcels. So that
Strabo's calling it a little Town, does not conclude it to be so in aftertimes
when it was made a Metropolis, nor lessen the Towns depending upon it. And this
way of reasoning is as if one should observe, that in Julian the Apostate's
time Paris is Julian in (...).
called a little Town; therefore by this we may judge what pitiful Towns those
of France are now, which are and have for a long time been subject to that
royal City. Nor does it always happen, that the Metropolis is greater than all
the Cities under her jurisdiction.

Prim. Ep. p. 26.
Derbe in Stephanus (...). Strab. l. 12.
is a Fort or Castle of Isauria, the seat of the Tyrant Antipater. This Fort
being the fittest receptacle for such a person, this could not be populous
because of no large compass. This Derbe called a Fort by Stephanus out of some
Ancient Author, is by St. Luke Acts 14.6.
called a City of Lycaonia. Nor does it diminish the place to be called a Fort,
or Tyrant's Seat. For I have before observed, that the (...).
word which our Author commonly translates by Castle, Fort, and sometimes
childishly by Country-Grange, signifies any Fortified place, whether great or
small, whether it be a City or a lesser Town. For in Countries exposed to War,
such places are for common refuge; and most of our old Cities bear still the
names of Castles, to which they owed their rise and preservation; and for its
being a Tyrant's Seat, that does by no means imply it to be a narrow place; for
Syracuse, Agrigentum, and several Cities of the largest size, might very
properly pass under the very same title. Hierocles his Notitia Ap. Car. a S.
Paulo. Georg. Sac.
places it among the Cities of Lycaonia; and it is very probable, that it was
one of the fourteen Cities of that Tetrarchy of which Iconium was the
principal, mentioned by Pliny in the gross; but not named. That this place
could not be populous because of no compass, our Author takes an extraordinary
way of proving. Polybius talks of Teichos such a Fort, which was but a furlong
and an half in compass. But how does our Author find it was such a Fort? did he
survey or compare them, or does any ancient Author mention the compass of
Derbe? No: But both have one common Appellation. This way of reasoning is very
dangerous, and will dis-people great Cities worse than the plague. London must
not be populous, because Ely or Rochester, which are Cities too, have no great
compass, and but few Inhabitants. Nor does our Author's Criticism, about the
word (...) do him any great service for the diminishing of any Town called by
that general name. For though it be sometimes distinguished from a City, yet are
there instances of some of the greatest Cities that are called (...). For
Aquileia was a City of the largest size; and yet Procopius (...). Procop. Bell.
Vandal. l. 1. p. 97. Ed. Hoeschel.
who was a master of propriety of speech, does not stick to call it (...). For
having represented it as a great and exceeding populous City, he adds, that
Attilas was not able to take the place.

Prim. Ep. p. 27.
Lystra seems a place no more considerable; it was a small place, called by
Ptolomy Ausira, by Strabo Isaura; yet St. Luke calls it a City more than once.
Nay, Ptolomy Ptol. l. 5. (...).
places it among the Cities of Isauria, and distinguishes it from Isaura.
Florus Validissimas Urbes eorum, Phaselin, Olympon evertit. Isaurumque ipsam
arcem Ciliciae, unde conscius sibi magni laboris Isaurici cognomen adamavit.
Flor. l. 3. c. 6.
names Isaura among the Cities of Cilicia, and makes it the most considerable
place of all those the Pirates held in those parts; and therefore Servilius who
reduced those Robbers, took the name of Isauricas from it. Pliny Oppida ejus
intus Isaura, Olibanus, etc. Plin. l. 5. c. 27.
names Isaura among the Cities of Cilicia; and Stephanus Steph. in Isaura,
(...).
and Diodorus Siculus Diod. Sic. l. 18.
style it a City of Isauria; and Gregory Greg. Regist. l. 12. Ep. 2, 3.
the Great mentions the Bishop of Isaura. But Strabo Strab. l. 12.
mentions two places of this name, and calls them both Villages. I will only
add a few words that follow in that Author; and then let the Brethren of the
Congregational way make what use they please of this instance. Isauria, says
Strabo, (...).
has two Villages of its name, but a great many other Villages were subject to
these. And if the civil subjection of so many Villages should draw after it an
Ecclesiastical and Religious dependence, the Diocese of Lystra might be large
enough. So that after all our Author's diligence to find or to make Villages
for St. Paul's Bishops, he does not appear to have ordained any in such
inconsiderable places, nor Prim. Ep. p. 28.
left the practice warranted by Apostolical example and authority.

To proceed, Prim. Ep. p. 28.
Artemidorus, says our Author giving an account of the Cities of Pisidia,
reckons but eleven, whereas there are twenty two Bishoprics in the Catalogue
of Leo. It is pity so great diligence should have so little good fortune. In
summing up those Cities, he has lost two, for Artemidorus Strab. l. 12.
reckons thirteen. But to pass by small mistakes, let us consider the main
consequence. In Artemidorus his time, Marcian. Heracl. Peripl.
who lived in the 169th Olympiad, i. e. about a hundred years before the Birth
of our Lord, the Pisidians had but thirteen Cities. In Leo the Wise his time,
who began Baron. An. 886.
to reign in the year of our Lord 886, Pisidia had 22 Bishops; therefore half
of them could not have Cities, but Villages for their seats. This way of
reasoning must be of that sort which we call eternal, for it has no regard at
all to time; and a thousand years with such Reasoners go for nothing. Antioch
it seems, the Metropolis of the Country, was not built when Artemidorus
described it; much less could Adrianople, and several others of later names,
mentioned in the Civil and Ecclesiastical Notitiae. But that it may appear, how
much the number of Cities was increased in this Country before Leo the Wise;
let us appeal to the civil Notitia, (...). apud Car. a S. Paulo.
that goes under the name of Hierocles, where we have 26 Cities under a
Consular Governor. And if all of them remained to Leo's time; some Bishops of
that Province must have two Cities under his care. So far is Pisidia from
affording Village-Bishops.

After this, Cappadocia comes Prim. Ep. p. 28.
under search for primitive Village-Bishops. Strabo divides Cappadocia Taurica
into five Praefectures, three of which had no Cities, and yet there were many
Bishoprics in them. It must be confessed, that in Strabo's time, the
Praefectures of Melitene, Cataonia, and Isauritis, had no City; but it is as
certain, that then they had no Bishops. That Writer published Vass. de Hist.
Graec.
his Geography in the fourth year of Tiberius, eleven years before our
Savior's Baptism, and was then a very old man, as Vossius computes by his
being acquainted with Aelius Gallus, and seems to be farther confirmed from
what he relates Strab. l. 12.
of having seen Servilius Isauricus. But these Countries (says our Author) had
many Bishops afterward, though they had no Cities. That they had Bishops cannot
be denied; that they had no Cities then, our Author does not so much as pretend
to prove, unless we admit his usual way of reasonirg; that because these
Praefectures had no Cities before the preaching of Christ, therefore they had
none ever since. But there is sufficient evidence, that these Regions,
Melitene, Cataonia, and Isauritis had Cities not long after Strabo's time.
Stephanus (...). Steph.
says, that Melitene was a City of Cappadocia: Ptolomy Ptol. l. 5.
places it among the Cities of the lesser Armenia, to which in the later
distribution of the Empire it did belong; and two other are named as Cities
belonging to that Praefecture. Lucas Holstenius Postea tamen Melitene extitit,
urbs satis nobilis. H. Vales. in Eusebius: l. 5. c. 5. Holsten. in Steph.
says, that the Romans built this City, and confirms it by Salmasius, Salm. in
Jul. Capitol. in vit. Marci, and Plin. exercit. p. 630.
who calls it a City of Cappadocia: And Ammianus Marcellinus Ammian. Marc. l.
19, and 20.
calls it a Town of the lesser Armenia, in more than one place; and the Bishop
of this place is made one of the Standards of Catholic Communion by the edict
of Theodosius Cod. Theod. l. 3. de fide Cath. and Soz. l. 7. c. 9.
the great. And to conclude, the Notitia of Hierocles names it as the first
City of Armenia the lesser. When Justinian (...), Novel. 31. c. 1.
made a new distribution of Armenia, in that which he called the third, but he
says was before the second, i. e. the lesser Armenia, This City is made the
Metropolis, and commended by the titles of ancient and renowned; and he places
(...). Ibid.
six Cities under it, which he there names, and adds, that there is no
alteration as to this Province; but before his time it consisted of six Cities.
All that is new in this Order, is the raising the dignity of its Title, and
making it Spectabilis, and styling the Governor Comes Justinianeus. Eustathius
Eustath. in Dion. v. 694.
gives the sum of this Edict; but the Copist has writ Justin for Justinian, in
this and several other places. As for the Praefecture of Cataonia, it had
several known Cities in Ptolomy Ptol. l. 5.
the Geographer's time. Cabassus, Cybistra, Claudiopolis, and several others
less known, are placed in that Region, which we find in later Notitiae, some
belonging to Cappadocia, some to Isauria. And as for that part which was called
Isauritis or Isauria, Ptolomy mentions three Cities there. Ammianus Marcellinus
L. 14. c. 8.
names two as principal Cities, Seleucia and Claudiopolis. But in Hierocles his
Notitia there are no less than 23. These bounds of Countries were frequently
altered; and therefore we find Cities sometimes ascribed to one, sometimes to
another Province. Therefore these three Prefectures may be fairly dismissed,
having nothing to say for Village-Episcopacy; and though there had been Bishops
there without Cities, their Dioceses might have been of no less extent than
those where the Bishops had Cities for their seats. And it is hard to think,
that three Provinces having no City, could not be capable of Diocesan Bishops.

Prim. Ep. p. 28, and 29.
In the other two Praefectures, there was Doara, which is a Village in Basil.
That this place had an Arian Bishop in Basil's time, cannot be denied; and as
may be conjectured, by comparing some passages Bas. 10. and 39, 5. Greg. Naz.
Ep. 28, ad Simplic.
in Basil and Gregory's Epistles, seemed to have been erected by that faction
in opposition to the Bishop of Nyssa, to whom it seems to have been subject.
And if in a matter so obscure it may be allowed to guess, this is the place of
Simplicia, to whom Gregory Nazianzen writes, (for a woman and she an Arian
commanded in Doara, and such was Simplicia) that when the Arian Bishops died,
Basil might ordain an Orthodox person to succeed there.

Now, for the first and second Cappadocia, we have a certain account of the
number of their Bishops in the middle of the fifth Century. For in the
Synodical Epistle Ep. Synod. Cappad. 1. ad Leon. in calce Conc. Chalced.
of the first, to Leo the Emperor, Alypius Bishop of Caesarea says, that he
had two Bishops in his Province; one he sent to the Emperor according to his
Order, the other was sick. In the second Cappadocia, the Bishop of Tyanae
subscribes Convocatis in unum Episcopis secundae Cappadociae, etc. Ep. Episc.
2dae Capp. ad Leon. Imp.
with seven Suffragans, and speaks in the name of all the Bishops of that
Province, which he says he called together upon that occasion; among these the
Bishop of Doara subscribes. And though this place was but a Village, as there
were some more in the same Province; yet I hope the Bishops had Dioceses large
enough; since so great a Province was divided between so few; and of these
scarce one half were primitive, but known to be erected in the fourth Century.

Ep. 406. Primit. Ep. p. 29.
Basil advises Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium to constitute Bishops for that
Province in little Towns and Villages. The Province there recommended, is
Isauria, which Basil more than once challenges as belonging to him. By some
accident not known, this Country became destitute of Bishops; it may be upon
the recovery of those Churches from the Arians, for it was once overspread
with that Heresy; and the Council of Seleucia might contribute not a little
toward it. This Province then being destitute of Bishops, Basil confers with
Amphilochius about the best means of filling up the vacancies; and deliberates,
whether it were more advisable to ordain a Metropolitan only, and refer the
rest to him; or else to ordain Bishops (...). Bas. Ep. 400.
in lesser Cities or Villages where there had been any before, That is, in such
Cities as were less than the Metropolis, or in such as were rather to be styled
Villages, yet might have large dependances. And the words in the Original (though
otherwise rendered by the Latin Translator) seem to imply not little Cities or
Villages, but districts of little Cities or Villages. The Bishops of these
places were the Suffragans of Seleucia, which is called the City by way of
eminence, being the Metropolis, and the rest called little Cities in comparison
of this. So Nazianzen Greg. Naz. Carm. de vita sua, p. 8. (...).
calls the suffragan Cities of Cappadocia, little Cities, where they are
mentioned with relation to their Metropolis. Nor were all these to have
Bishops, but such as were Episcopal seats before. These are sometines styled
Cities, as it were of courtesy. Under that Title they pass in Hierocles his
Notitia, and some of them in Ptolomy. Sometimes they are called Oppida, as in
Ammian. Marcell. and here expressed by Villages, yet the chiefest places in
those parts of the Country. In the old Notitia so often cited, this Country has
29 Bishops; but of those Sees, several belonged anciently to other Provinces.
In the Synodical Omnes pariter congregati. Ep. Episc. Isaur. ad Leon.
Epistle of Isauria to Leo the Emperor, though by the names of the Cities it
appears that this Province was enlarged, yet we find but seventeen Bishops.

Prim. Ep. p. 29.
Sasima is Angusta Villula in Nazianzen, who was ordained Bishop there. It is
true, that this was a Village, and made (...). Naz. Carm. de vita sua.
an Episcopal See, upon the quarrel (...).
between Basil and Anthimus. But it was not so from the beginning; for before
Gregory it never had a Bishop, but belonged to Tyana, from whence it was
distant From Sasima to Andabalis 16. m. from Andabalis to Tyana, 16 m. Anton.
lilner.
about two and thirty miles. It was situate on the confines of both Dioceses;
and being erected late, and upon a competition of Jurisdiction, makes but a
sorry instance of primitive Congregational Episcopacy. For this Bishopric is
wholly owing to the contention of two Metropolitans; and Gregory (...).
complains that Basil had done it without necessity, having no less then fifty
Chorepiscopi (...).
belonging to his great Diocese. The Country place of Simplicia seems to be no
other than Doara, of which we have spoken before. And for the other places
which Basil made Bishops seats, and those Bishoprics were not a few; no body
could ever find them out. And notwithstanding the expression of Nazianzen, of
the Country having more Bishops by this contention, they could not be many, and
perhaps no more than one. For in the subscriptions to the Synodical Epistles
Ep. Synod. etc.
of the two Cappadocia's to Leo, the first in which Caesarea was Metropolis,
there were but two Suffragans; and the second under Tyana has but seven; and
the Bishops of Sasima and Doara are among the subscribers. So two large
Provinces had not after all these new erections, above eleven Bishops. But
Gregory Prim. Ep. p. 30.
applauds this multiplying of Bishoprics as an excellent art, souls being
hereby better looked after. He does indeed in the funeral oration of Basil, set
this in the best light, as becomes a Panegyric. But in his verses he is more
blunt, and makes it unnecessary for one who had fifty Chorepiscopi, to make a
Bishop of so poor a place as Sasima. And though Naz. Carm. de vita sua, vide
supra.
care of souls was the pretense, the true reason was love of pre-eminence. The
charitable reflection with which our Author concludes his range of Cappadocia,
that others would have souls less regarded, and the Bishops honor more,
becomes the temper of a Fanatic. A venomous beast may be in danger from his
own poison; if he have no vent, rather than burst, let him discharge. For my
part, I believe a Dissenter may be of kin to the Cappadocian in the Greek
Epigram, whose blood poisoned a viper that happened to bite him.

Prim. Ep. p. 30.
In Pontus Polemoniacus, Pityus and Sebastopolis, were Bishops seats, and yet
they were not Cities in Justinian's (...). Nov. 28.
account. That they were Bishops seats in Justinian's time, or some time after,
does no where appear that I know. In the old Notitia Car. a S. Paulo.
of the Patriarchat of C. P. it neither was a Bishop's See; nor yet in the
Notitia, said to be compiled under Leo the wise. For in both these there are
but five Bishops seats in that Province, according to the number of Cities
mentioned in that Novel of Justinian. And before that, in the time of Leo the
first; there were but four Bishoprics, as appears from the subscriptions to
the Synodical letter to that Pope. Indeed there is a Bishop of Pityusa among
the subscriptions of the first Nicene Council; but those subscriptions have
little credit, being judged by learned men to belong to the second, and not the
first Council of Nice.

Prim. Ep. p. 30.
Coracesium is but a Castle in Strabo; yet it had a Bishop in Leo Sophus his
catalogue: And Thymbria is a Village in Strabo, and had a Bishop in the Council
of Chalcedon. Amyzon, and Heraclea in Caria were no more than Castles in
Strabo, and yet are Bishops seats in Miraeus. Heraclea ad Lathmum, Ceramus and
Bargesa, are called little Cities by Strabo (...).
and were Bishops seats. I have already showed the weakness of such
Allegations, from the great distance of time between Strabo and Leo Sophus,
which was near 900 years, which may very fairly be allowed to make great
changes in the circumstances of these places. How many Villages are become
Cities? How many Cities are sunk into Villages, or into places utterly
desolate? Yet our Author will make no allowances, but all things must be taken
in aftertimes, as they were in Strabo; and the being recorded in that Book,
leaves an indelible character of a City or a Village. Some considerable Cities
are said to be owing to the dreams of great men; but our humble Author can
dream of nothing but Villages; and those which he finds to have been such
before the beginning of Christianity, he is resolved, as far as the power of
dreams will go, to keep under in the same low condition, lest they should
become the possession of Diocesan Bishops. Yet after all, several of these
places, as Amyzon and Heraclea, are said to be Cities by Strabo, L. 14. (...)
(scil. (...)) (...).
though not equal to the three which he calls the considerable; and Ptolomy
names them both among the Cities of Asia; and both the Heraclea's mentioned by
our Author were in Caria, the one ad Lathmum, and the other in Hierocles his
Notitia and the subscription of the Council of Chalcedon, writ with the
addition of Salbacis, by Ptolomy Albanum, but restored by Holstenius Holsten.
in Steph. de Vrb. in (...).
Salmacis. And there is indeed Thymbria a Village of Caria, mentioned by
Strabo; (...). l. 14.
but whether this had a Bishop, or was under Ephesus, is a great question; it
was four Stadia's from Myus, which in Strabo's time was dispeopled, and added
to Miletus, in whose room this may possibly arise. And Coracesium is named by
Ptolomy, l. 5. among the Maritime Cities of Cilicia.

Prim. Ep. p. 30.
Docimia is a Village in Strabo, and a Bishop's seat, often mentioned in
subscriptions of Councils. Our Author proceeds upon his own principle, not yet
received in the world, that what was once a Village, must always remain so: And
therefore makes no difficulty to argue from Strabo to the subscriptions of
Councils in the fourth and fifth Century. Now, unknown to our Author, this
Village of Strabo was grown into a City long before those subscriptions he
speaks of. For Stephanus (...). Steph.
calls it a City of Phrygia, and cites Eudaemon, the same I guess, that is
mentioned by Suidas, and is contemporary with Julian and Libanius. But before
this time it was a City; for Ptolomy Ptol. l. 5.
who lived under Marcus Aurelius, places it among the Cities of the greater
Phrygia; and there are Medails Holsten. in Steph. de urb. (...).
of Marcus Aurelius and Trajan and of Nero, with the name of this City upon the
reverse; which show it to have out grown the condition of a Village soon after
Strabo's time. And if our Author had taken notice of the subscriptions of the
Council of Chalcedon, Conc. Chalc. Act. 3.
he had found it there a City; and one Eustochius styling himself Bishop of
that City; and the same thing may be found in the Council of Ephesus. Eustasius
Ep. Civitatis Docimi. Conc. Ephesians.


Prim. Ep. p. 31.
There is Nea a Castle in Suidas and Stephanus, and another in Pliny and
Strabo, which is a Village. In the Council of Chalcedon there was a Bishop of
Nea under Laodicea, and another under Ephesus. The Nea in Suidas and Stephanus,
is no other than that mentioned by Strabo and Pliny; for these place it in
Troas, the other in Mysia. Now this part of Troas was called anciently the
lesser Mysia; and that Nation, as Pliny observes, was so considerable in the
ancient times, that all the Country was called by their name Mysia; and Strabo
makes it difficult to find the borders of the Mysians. Now, whether it were one
or different Villages, it does not appear that they had any Bishops from those
subscriptions of the Council of Chalcedon. For the Nea of Strabo, Strab. l. 12.
which was in Troas, between Polychna and old Scepsis, could not be under
either Laodicea or Ephesus, but must belong to the Bishop of Cyzicus; and the
Bishop of Scepsis subscribes the first Ephesine Council as Suffragan of
Cyzicus. Pliny is misreported in this place by Mr. Clerkson; for he no where
says that Nea is a Village; but Oppidum In Nea oppido Troadis, l. 2. c. 96.
Neae oppidum l. 5 c. 30.
which is a word which he very frequently uses for Cities, and rarely for any
other than considerable Towns. But to clear this matter beyond cavil, the Nea
under Laodicea was not a Village but a City; which our Author might have seen
in the subscriptions of Chalcedon. (...), Conc. Chalc. Act. 6.
Here Nunnechius subscribes for Antiochus Bishop of the City of Nea, and for
the other under Ephesus, without the first letter. And though it be Nea in
Crabbe, and some old Latin subscriptions, yet in the Greek Conc. Chalc. Act. 6.
it is called Anaea; and Zoticus in that place subscribes as Bishop of the City
of Anaea, called so from an Amazon of that name. It is mentioned by Stephanus
and Suidas; (...). Suid.
the later calls it a City, the other gives it no Title, but gives the
situation of it, that it belonged to Caria, and was over against Samos. So
unfortunate is our Author in comparing Villages in Strabo with the
subscriptions of Councils.

Prim. Ep. p. 31.
Pannonion, he would have said Paemanium or Pamaninum, is a Castle in the
Territory of Cyzicus, says Stephanus; and there is a Bishop of that title under
the Metropolitan of Cyzicus in Leo's Diatyposis. Stephanus (...). Steph.
says, it is a City or a Fortress, and it is also a place belonging to Cyzicus.
If it be the same place which our Author expresses by so many names; the last
must signify the Region belonging to that Town or Castie. Pliny tells us, that
the Pemanetij were a colony of Macedonians, and reckons them among the most
considerable Towns of Hellespont; and for any thing that appears, it might be a
City when it had a Bishop.

Prim. Ep. p. 31.
There is a Bishop of Gordi under Sardis, and of Midei under Synnada in
Phrygia, which are in Strabo, (...). Strab. l. 12.
the dwellings of Gordus and Midas, which in Strabo 's time had, no footsteps
of Cities remaining, but were Villages a little greater than ordinary. Bishop
of Gordi and Midei is such a form of Speech, as Bishop of Londini and St.
Davidis. But to pass by small faults, I cannot but take notice, that Our Author
read with the wrong end of the Perspective, when he observes it, for the
diminution of these places, that they had been the dwellings of Midus and
Gordus, that is, that they were royal Cities. But in Strabo's time they were
little better than Villages. It may be so, and yet those Bishops might have
good Cities for their seats, and large Dioceses to govern. But the truth is,
that Gordus which had a Bishop, and Gordium which was the seat of Gordius, and
father of Midas, and was reduced to a Village in Strabo's time, are not the
same place; though our Author according to his ordinary misfortune, has
mistaken the one for the other. One was in Phrygia near the borders of
Cappadocia; the other was in Lydia, and under the Metropolis of Sardis. This
indeed had a Bishop, but was a City long before. For Strabo tells us, it was
the place where Cleo the famous Robber was born, who of a Village made it a
City, and called it Juliopolis, and is generally known by the name of Julia
Gordi, or Julia Gordus; so it is in Ptolomy: Ptolom. l. 5.
And Pliny Nunc sunt xv. Civitates, inter quas Gordia-come, quae Juliopolis.
Plin. l. 5. c. 32.
calls it Gordia-Come, and Juliopolis, i. e. by the old and new name. Socrates
Socr. l. 7. c. 36.
mentions a Bishop of this place translated to Praeconesius: And Valesius in
his version calls him: the Bishop of the City of Gordus. As for Midaeum, though
it was low in Strabo's time, yet afterward it has the title of a City; for so
it is in Stephanus and Ptolomy: And Pliny convenient Midaei, Julienses, etc.
Plin. l. 5. c. 29. and l. 5. c. 32.
places it among the most famous Cities of that Country, which were under the
resort of Synnada. And Holstenius takes notice of a Medal of Caracalla with the
name of this people on the reverse.

After having mistaken so many Cities for Villages, our Author is pleased most
acutely to remark, that there were Villages of several sizes then, as there are
now. Tom Coryat in all his Travels never could make such an observation, for
want of learning it may be and study, as if reading were necessary to perfect
impertinence. And Mr. Sorbiere though a Virtuoso, and descending to take notice
of things very mean, has no reflection, that I can remember, so humble as this.
But Critics are not to be neglected, when they trifle; and therefore let us
attend.

Prim. Ep. p. 31.
Some Villages were very little; such as Zonaras calls (...).
Monaecia, scattered or alone houses, or such as those mentioned in the
Constitutions of Izaac Commenus, which had but twenty or ten Chimneys. The
Council of Chalcedon, (...). Can. 17.
to end some disputes that happened between Bishops about the bounds of their
Dioceses, orders that such Country Parishes shall remain to him, in whose
possession they had been for thirty years. Now because the Canon has two words
to express Country Parishes, Zonaras had a fancy, that they must be different
in sense; and therefore takes one to signify such small places (...).
as he calls Monaecia, places remote from the Bishop's seat, and placed in the
outmost skirts of his Diocese, and having few Inhabitants: The other such
(...). Zon.
as are nearer Villages, and have more Inhabitants. How much this may be to the
point of Village Episcopacy, let the Reader judge. That it describes a large
Diocese that has Country parishes remote, and of uncertain resort, is I think
so clear, that it would be unreasonable to require a clearer instance. However
these places are so small, that our Author himself does not think it fit they
should have Bishops.

Concerning the dimension of Villages, our Author proceeds, and observes, Prim.
Ep. p. 31.
that there were some pretty big, as those of the Phocenses in Pausanias, which
consisted of fifty houses. This Country might have been the Holy Land of the
Independents, if their better fortune had not restored them to their Cities
again, before the rising of our Christian light. There might have been as much
resort to Phocis upon the account of Village Episcopacy, as was heretofore to
Delphis for Oracles. But as the case stands, it serves only as an occasion for
our Author to show his learning, and to make this great remark, that Villages
consisting of fifty houses, are pretty big, though he is not pleased to
resolve, whether they are yet big enough for a Bishop of his own way.

It is mavelous, that there should be Prim. Ep. p. 32.
some greater yet, such as Justinian (...), Nov. 24.
calls the greatest Villages. Who could have imagined that there had been in
old times Villages so great as to exceed fifty houses, if the authority of
Justinian had not been produced? Poor Justinian! After having built so many
Cities, art thou to be alleged a poor witness for larger Villages than those
of Phocis? No Italian Professor ever cited upon meaner occasions.

Prim. Ep. p. 33.
The Synod of Laodicea, which forbad the making of Bishops in some Villages,
gives evidence, that in such places there were Bishops. This was the only Synod
in the East, that prohibited Bishops to be made in Villages; -- and indeed the
prohibition was understood of lesser Villages. In villulis.
That there were Bishops in some Villages, no body I think ever denied: That
every Village should have a Bishop, I think our Author does not desire. Those
of twenty or fifty houses may be excused. What then is it he contends for? Is
it that every Village of more than fifty houses may have a Bishop of its own?
Let him have his fancy, I will not oppose. But then it is to be remembered, that
the question is not, whether this may be done, or whether the Synod of Laodicea
had forbid it; but whether it ought to be so of right, or was the practice of
the primitive Church? Were there in Egypt but a hundred Cities and Villages
that could furnish a decent Congregation, when their Bishops were no more? Or
in other Provinces where the number of the Bishoprics are known, were there so
few Villages of such a size? Or were they all reduced to the standard of
Phocis, or Zonaras his Monoecia? It is a very poor, and begging way of
reasoning, to urge, that primitive Bishops ought to have but one Congregation,
because some Villages are not under the prohibition of the Canon of Laodicea.
And in truth it had been very hard to deny all Villages the privilege of
Bishops, since some Countries had no Cities; and therefore, if those Countries
had any, they must be in Villages; but they were nevertheless Diocesan. In
those Countries where there were Cities, Village-Bishops are very rare and
unusual, especially in the first Centuries. But after the Arians had divided
Egppt, Mareotes became an Episcopal seat; and when Donatus had distracted
Africa, one old Bishopric is torn into three or four: Not in compliance with
ancient rule or practice; for it was not so much as pretended; but to serve the
ends of parties. And therefore it was time for Synods to put a check to these
Innovations and Irregularities, and to secure the peace of the Church by
forbidding new erections, and by confining turbulent and enterprizing men
within the bounds of ancient use.

Our Author does Prim. Ep. p. 32.
wrong to Zonaras, when he quotes him for this observation, that it was not
needful there should be great multitudes; but (...).
small Parishes, and not very populous, might have Bishops. Whereas this Author
uses those expressions of small, and not populous Parishes, where he speaks
not of such as might have Bishops, but of those that were remote from the
Bishops seat, and contested by two Bishops. However our Author observes, Prim.
Ep. p. 32.
that such little places were allowed Bishops, with the consent of him who had
the chief seat; so he, i. e. Zonaras Zonar. in Can. 17. Chalced.
on the 61. Canon of the Council of Carthage. It is true, that in that Canon
two African Bishops say, they had heard of a decree, forbidding any Bishops to
be made in Parishes, (...).
without the consent of the Bishop to whom they belonged; and that some in
their Dioceses having been made Bishops by the consent of their Predecessors,
were not content with the Parishes in which they were ordained, but invaded
other parts of the Dioceses out of which their Bishoprics were taken.
Whereupon it was ordained, that such new erected Bishops should be confined to
that people for which they were ordained. Now these Parishes Zonaras calls
(...) Territoriam. Cyr. Philox. Gloss.
small Territories, or districts, which may consist not of one small Village,
but of several; for both the word of the Canon, and that of the Commentator,
may bear that sense. But after all, it is not to be doubted, that in Africa
there were Bishops of small Territories, and seated in Villages; yet the same
evidence that we have for these small Bishoprics, discover them to be new, and
taken out of larger Dioceses; so that in older times even the Dioceses of that
Country were large. Besides, the allowance of these erections was not from the
fitness of the thing it self, much less from any Apostolic rule; but for
reasons peculiar to that Country and those times. For the Donatists had so
distracted the Church of that Country, that the Catholics found themselves
under a necessity of suffering many things, though contrary to the old practice
of that Church, by way of temporary Economy and Dispensation. And the same
Canon makes farther proof, that even after these new Bishoprics permitted in
Villages, the old ones from which they were taken, remained still Diocesan; and
therefore takes care, that all the remaining Parishes or Dioceses, for both
words are used, should belong to the first Bishop; and that only (...).
that one district or Parish taken one of many, should belong to the new Bishop.

Prim. Ep. p. 33.
For Europe and the more Eastern parts of it, he gives some instances jumbled
together as it were in haste, and without marking the places where they are to
be found. But these are like the rest, and if it were possible, less to the
purpose. Melanicus is a Castle in Cedrenus, but was no Bishopric either in
primitive or ancient times. Tzulurum is a Castle in Zonaras; but is not found
to have had any Bishop before the seventh general Council, or the second
Nicene, near eight hundred years after Christ. Byzia and Macrontichos are
likewise Castles in Aemylius Probus. These instances are too early, as the
other are too late. Alcibiades indeed is said by that Author in his Life, to
have built Castles in those places; but that they ever after remained Castles
or Villages, no body has hitherto said. But these places happened to become
Cities, without any notice given to our Author, though he might have found it,
if he had consulted the book he sometimes quotes. Biza is called a City of
Thrace by Ptolomy, Ptol. l. 3.
Stephanus Steph. in Beza.
and Suidas, and is joined with Arcadiopolis in the subscriptions of the
Council of Chalcedon; those two Cities having immemorially belonged to one
Bishop, according to the Testimony given by the Bishops of that Country in the
first Ephesine Council: And in the fifth general Council, this place was a
Metropolis. So accurate is our Author in his account of his Episcopal Villages
and Castles. The other was a City before it could well have a Bishop. For in
Pliny's Plin. l. 4. ^. 11.
time it was so accounted, and called Bizantha. Diabolis, another of our
Author's Castles in Nicephorus he says, but tells us not which, nor where; for
there are more writers than one of that name, is to be found in no ancient
Author, and it therefore signifies little to the present purpose. And if there
were a hundred more Bishops in Castles in Europe, there would be no danger to
Diocesan Episcopacy; nor can I think, that any one of those Episcopal Forts
could be brought to declare for the Congregational way. It was well for the
Bishops of some Countries, that they had Castles in their Dioceses to retire to
in the time of need. And Gregory Greg. Reg. l. 2. c. 12.
the Great directs his Bishops to remove from their Cities, into such places
within their Dioceses as were fortified. If they had been Bishops of single
Parishes in Italy at that time; this direction had not been very proper.
Alalcomenae, no great Village of Baeotia in Pausanias, is added to the
Episcopal Villages; yet I do not find any Bishop of it in ancient times,
although it be a City in Stephanus; who follows perhaps some ancienter Author,
who speaks of it in its first and more flourishing estate. And to conclude, we
have Cenchrea put upon us for a Bishop's seat out of Clemens Clem. Constable. l. 7.
c. 48.
his Constitutions, who speaking in the person of St. Paul, pretends to have
made Lucius Bishop of that place. Such counterfeits as this when they once
presume to personate the Apostles, care not where, nor whom they make Bishops.
But the world is now grown too wise, to take Fable for History, and Forgery for
ancient Records.

Our Author (y) seems to be displeased with the Council of Sardica, because it
was the only Synod in Europe for 600 years after Christ, that forbad the making
of Bishops in small Towns and Villages. Indeed there appears little reason from
those parts in which the Synod was held, given for such a prohibition. For our
Author could not find one Village-Bishop in those parts, within the six hundred
years he speaks of; for his instances, and his Authors are but late, and
improper vouchers of Antiquity. Learned men are of opinion, that the occasion
of this Canon against making Bishops in Villages, proceeded not from Europe,
but from Egyyt, and that the Bishops had the case of Ischyras in their view,
when they made this order. The Arians had begun a foul practice in Athanasius
his Diocese, taking away a part from it, and erecting it into a new Bishopric;
and perhaps this was not the only instance. Wherefore the good Bishops in
Sardica thought they had reason and authority sufficient to oppose such
ill-intended Innovations, that tended to overthrow all that had been settled of
old time, and to introduce endless confusion and dispute. If our Author has a
dislike to all things that tend to secure old Establishment; he was in the true
spirit of his party, which is too active to endure any settled and perpetual
order. But our Author is half reconciled to this Synod, and doubts whether this
can be counted a Prohibition; because in the Prim. Ep. p. 34.
Latin, which is the Original, the restraint is laid upon foreign Bishops, that
they shall not erect such Bishoprics in another Province. Because our Author
endeavors to raise a mist here about a very plain matter; it may not be amiss
to lay down the sum of that Canon, Can. Sard. 6. Gr. 5, and 6. Lat.
and to rescue it from cavil. The Bishops assembled at Sardica thought fit to
order, that if in a Province which had several Bishops, there should happen to
be left but one, (which cannot be supposed, if such Bishops were but as Rectors
of our Parishes) and that sole remaining Bishop should refuse to ordain others,
such as the people should desire; that then the people might apply themselves
to the Bishops of the next Province. And then it follows, (...). Licentia non
est danda. Verse. Vet.
that it shall be by no means lawful to ordain any Bishops in Villages or small
Cities, that the dignity of a Bishop may not grow contemptible from the meaness
of the place. Our Author then would have it, that only Extra-provincial Bishops
are concerned in this prohibition. But why, is it because the dignity of a
Bishop is less contemptible from a Village when strangers place him there, then
when those of his Province do it? The reason then of this prohibition is from
the place and not the Ordainers; although it might be more necessary to apply it
to Foreigners than Provincials, who would take greater care to preserve ancient
bounds. So that if this be not an absolute Prohibition, it will be hard to know
what is. The reason is general, and holds alike, whoever may be the Ordainers.
But Prim. Ep. p. 34, 35.
they except such places where there had been Bishops already, and forbid it to
none for the future, but such for which one Presbyter is sufficient; and so
there is room enough for Bishops in large and populous Villages. What our
Author mincingly calls places where there had been Bishops already, the Canon
both in the Greek and Latin Edition, calls Cities; and when he says there is
room left by this Canon for Bishops in populous Villages, he knew the contrary
to be true. For the Canon (...). Si qua talis aut tam populosa civitas.
mentions only the case of a City; if a City shall be found very populous and
worthy of a Bishop, let it have one. So that this Synod neither leaves room for
Bishops in any Villages, nor signifies that it was usual before this to have
Bishops in small places, unless such places were Cities. What our Author has in
his margin, that this Synod decreed, that where there were twelve families,
there was to be a Rector, is a mistake; Vid. Crab. T. 1. p. 331.
for in this Synod there was no such Decree.

Prim. Ep. p. 35.
In Creet they tell us more than once, that there were a hundred Bishops; yet
Pliny and Ptolomy found but forty Cities there. So that the far greatest part
of Titus 's Suffragans must have their Thrones in Country-Villages. He seems
to take it for granted on all hands, that Crete had indeed an hundred Bishops
in Titus's time. On the contrary I know some Thorndike Prim. Goverm. c. 4.
who make Titus the sole Bishop of the Island, and conceive the Churches of
that place governed by Presbyters under that one Bishop. This is indeed
contradicted by several ancient Writers. And some Chrysostom. Oecum. Theophil.
Theodoret.
say expressly, that the Apostle would not commit so great an Island to one man.
Eusebius H. E. l. 3. c. 4 (...).
seems to favor Mr. Thorndike's opinion, and makes Titus Bishop of the
Churches of Crete. In the third Century we find two Bishops of this Island
mentioned, and each said Ego and consacerdotes mei.
to be a Bishop of Churches. There might be many more, though they are no where
mentioned. But in Leo the first's Reign, there seem to have been no more than
eight; for so many subscribe the Synodical Epistle Epistola. Synod. ad Leon.
Imp. apud Car. a S. Paulo. Not. Ant.
of that Island. In an old Notitia of the Patriarchat of C. P. Crete has one
and twenty Bishops; and in Hierocles his civil Notitia, this Island has twenty
three. In the Notitia of Nilus Doxopatrius, Leo Allat. de consens. Ecc. Orient.
etc. l. 1. c. 24. Simon Hist. Crit. de Levant. and Moine Adv. Sacra.
Crete has ten Bishops. This Island according to Pliny l. 4. c. 12. was 270
miles in length, and fifty in breadth; and therefore the Dioceses one with
another must be competent, when the Bishops were most numerous; and very large
in old time, when they were but few.

We are at last come to Italy; and one would scarce imagine, that any thing
very Primitive should be found there, and especially in the Pope's own
Province. Here our Author observes, Prim. ep. p. 36.
that every petit Town has a Bishop; and he cannot discover, that there are
more Bishops now than of old; nay in that, called in special the Roman
Province, there are now fewer by many than anciently, as Miraeus tells us is
evident, by comparing the old Provincial Code with the new, l. 4. p. 160. This
Roman Province, of which our Author has taken upon him to speak, without
understanding the matter, consists now of such Churches as were under the
Bishop of Rome's immediate Jurisdiction, a great part of which were in the
Country that lay next to Rome; but many are remote, and situated in other
Provinces. Now these Churches our Author observes are now fewer than anciently.
If he speaks of all those under the peculiar Jurisdiction of the Pope, it is a
mistake; for they are now more numerous than heretofore. But if he mean only
those Bishoprics that lie near Rome, in the next adjoining Provinces, of those
there are fewer indeed belonging to the Pope, than did formerly; not because
the Bishoprics were sunk, but many of them were made Archbishopricks, and
others thrown under another Jurisdiction.

Florence, which was in the old Roman Province, was made Anno. 1421.
an Arch-Episcopal See, by Martin the fifth, and had four suburbicary
Bishoprics given to it for Suffragans; besides as many more of newer erection.
Siena, belonging to Rome anciently, was made Anno 1459.
an Archbishopric by Pius II. and had Grosseto and Soano for two of its
Suffragans, which also belonged to the Roman Province. Vrbin was made Anno 1459.
an Archbishopric but in the last Century by Paul the third, and had six
Bishoprics out of the Roman Province annexed to it. Fermo was made an
Archbishopric by Sixtus the fifth, and had five Suffragans given it, all of
new Erection. So that in the two ages next preceding this, within the Roman
Province there were ten new Bishoprics made, and fifteen taken from the
immediate Jurisdiction of the Pope, and subjected to new Arch-Bishopricks. So
that the Bishoprics remain, though they are not in the same Province. There were
indeed about five old Bishoprics united to others in the Roman Province since
the writing of the old Provincial; but we have seen ten new raised to make
amends; and there are more yet unaccounted for, if there were occasion.

But after all it signifies little to the present question, whether the Roman
Province at this time have fewer Bishops, than it had when that old Provincial
was made. For that which our Author calls old, is indeed but new in respect of
Ecclesiastical Antiquity. Baronius places it in the eleventh Century, and that
is Ughell. Ital. Sacr. and Miraei. Not. l 4.
at least an age too high; for there are several Bishoprics even in the oldest
Copies of it, that were not raised till the twelfth Century. Viterbo was not
made an Episcopal seat till the latter end Anno 1189, or 1191.
of that age; and yet it is in all the Copies of that Provincial; and Italy
affords many instances of Bishoprics raised in that age, which are all to be
found there. In England it has Ely and Carlisle, both made Anno 1109, and 1133.
Episcopal seats in that Century; and in Ireland it has the four
Arch-Bishopricks, which were not erected till the middle An. 1151. Matthew. Par.
in Steph. Rege, and Chron. Norman. p. 986.
of that Century. In this all the printed Copies, and six Manuscripts of the
Lambeth and Cotton Library do agree. But for later Bishoprics there is a
difference between the Copies, the later receiving these into the list, which
in the other are not to be found. The first printed Copy came Labbe Geogr.
eccl. in fine Council.
out in 1503. and that had a mixture of new and old Bishoprics. Miraeus
pretended to publish the old Provincial more exactly; but either his Copy was
not very old, or he did not publish it as he found it; for his Edition has many
Bishoprics of the thirteenth and fourteenth Centuries. For in that, among the
Bishoprics of the Roman Province Aquila is represented as united to Furconium;
whereas Aquila was Ughell. Ital. Sac. T. 1.
not made a Bishop's seat till the year 1257. Nor can it properly be said to be
united, since it was before in the Diocese of Furconium. Montefiascone is named
there; but was not made a Bishopric till the year 1376. Cortona is there,
which was not erected till the year 1322. And Mons Cassini erected in the year
1322, is exhibited in the same Edition. Now Miraeus Mir. Praef. ante Cod. Prove.
p. 64.
because he did not find the Archbishopric of Florence and other erections of
the fifteenth Century, took his Copy to be ancient, when it had so many
instances of the Bishoprics of the age preceding. Nor did he print any one
Copy, but jumble several of different ages together. So that in the Catalogue
which he calls old, you have several Bishoprics that never subsisted together;
for he has Auxima in the Roman Province; and at some distance after there is
Recana. Whereas Ughell. Ital. Sacr. T. 1.
the one was raised upon the suppression of the other, in the year 1240. Since
Miraeus, Carolus a S. Paulo published Geogr. Sacr. inter Notit.
two Copies of this Provincial, one from the French King's, and the other from
Thuanus his Library; but both younger than the eleventh Century.

Now to return to our Author's observation, that there are more Bishoprics in
the Roman Province, in the old Provincial, than in the new; we have shown the
contrary, if we take that Province for the extent of a Country represented in
the old Provincial. For there are above twenty more in the new; but many of
them have left their old relation, and are now under other Metropolitans; and
many more have been new erected, than have been sunk. But since the oldest of
these Provincials is no older than the twelfth Century; it will signify little
to the point our Author had undertaken to prove, if it should be granted that
the Bishoprics of the Roman Province were once more numerous than they are
now. For the state of the Italian Dioceses about the year 1200. will afford but
a poor argument for the extent of the primitive Bishoprics of that Country.
The face of Ecclesiastical affairs here in the first three or six hundred years
after Christ, might be very different from what it was at the end of the
succeeding Centuries; and in particular, the Roman Province could not but
receive a great change from the civil Revolutions of that Country. Now he who
from the state of the Italian Churches five hundred years ago, will presume to
represent Primitive Order and Apostolical Institutions, will quickly fall into
mistakes, not only very absurd, but dangerous to the Reformation. The Papists
would gladly venture all their Controversies upon this issue; and there would
remain but little of Popery that, would not be found primitive, if the eleventh
and twelfth Centuries might prescribe, and the practice of those ages be
received as evidence of immemorial Custom.

Our Author Prim. Ep. p 96.
is pleased to tell us in general for Italy, I cannot discover that there are
more Bishops from there than of old. -- And in all the new Erections that I can
find, discounting those which are upon old foundations, amount not to the
number of those which are either dissolved or united. It is not easy to
discover such matters as these without search, which he did not think fit to
make; for if he had pleased to examine, he could not but have found, that the
Bishoprics of Italy are much more numerous now, than they were four or five
ages ago. In the Kingdom of Naples, where the Dioceses are many and little, we
may find this by comparing their present number with what they had in foregoing
ages. There are now Pierre d' Avity. Royaume de Naples. Luc. de Londa, p. 542.
Annot. all. Istor. de Napole.
in that Kingdom 20 Arch-Bishopricks and 127 Bishops, though within half an age
before they had not so many; as may appear from the account of Thomaso Costo,
and Miraeus out of Marinus Freccia; and Prosper Augustinus reckons of
Archbishops and Bishops but 134. But if we compare the present number with what
the old Copies of the Provincial represent, we shall find yet greater
difference; of these the later have the greatest number, and the older they
are, the fewer Dioceses they have. The latest I have seen, which was writ in
Clemens the sixth"s time, who was made Pope Anno 1342. has no more Neapolitan
Bishoprics and Arch-Bishopricks, than 132. In an old Manuscript of the Lambeth
Library, there are in that Kingdom but 123 Archbishops and Bishops. In
another, which is the oldest I have seen, there are but 116. So that within the
compass of four or five hundred years, above thirty new Sees have been raised
in that Kingdom. The Dissolutions, or Unions of which our Author speaks, can be
no exception to this account, in which the total Sums are compared.

As to the small Dioceses of the Kingdom of Naples, they are so far from being
Primitive, that most of them were erected since the tenth Century. Campana a
small Town, has no Diocese beyond the walls; yet was it not made a Bishopric
till vghell. Ital. Sacr. T. 7.
the year 1525. Vesta has no Diocese belonging to it, but is no older than
Pascal 2d. and was raised Id. T. 8, and 9.
in the year 1110. Cava had not five hundred Communicants belonging to it; but
was no Bishopric till the year 1394. And the small Bishoprics that belong to
Beneventum, were not made till that was raised to an Archbishopric, which was
in the tenth Century. And the same is observed by Vghellus Id. T. 8, and 9.
of many Bishoprics under Brundusium, Amalphi, and several other new
Metropolitans in the South of Italy.

Another cause of multiplying Bishops in that part of Italy, might proceed from
the difference between the Greeks and Latins in the ninth and tenth Centuries,
and the competition of Jurisdiction between the Bishops of Rome and
Constantinople. Luitprandus Luitpr. Leg. ad Niceph. Phoc. in Acerentilas,
Acherunte, Turrico, Gravina, Maceria, and Tricarico.
relates, that Nicephorus Phocas ordered Polyectius Patriarch of Constantinople
to raise Otranto to the dignity of an Archbishopric, and that he would not
permit the Latin service to be any longer used in Appulia and Calabria.
Whereupon the Patriarch sent the Bishop of Otranto a privilege to consecrate
Bishops in six Towns of that Country, which are there named, and are said to
belong to the Bishop of Rome. When the Western Emperors, and at last the
Normans, got footing in the Greek Territories; the Greeks were soon shut up in
their Towns. And thence it seems to come to pass, that several Episcopal Towns
there have no Diocese or Territory at all. Not that it was always so while the
Country was in the hands of the Greek Emperors; but because this was the
expiring condition of the Greek Churches in those parts, the open Country being
in possession of their Enemies, and thrown into the neighboring Latin
Dioceses. But Bishoprics were much thinner in Calabria an age or two before.
For in the Notitia published by Goar, Hist. Byz. ad calc. Codini.
and afterward by Dr. Beveridge, Synodic. T. 2.
Calabria has but eight Bishops.

In the North of Italy the Dioceses are still large, but have been much greater
in ancient times. For the Province of Milan, though it was much larger than it
is now, in the middle Anno 452.
of the fifth Century had but nineteen Suffragans; as appears from the
subscriptions Inter opera Leonis Pap. Ep. 52.
of the Synod of that Province under Eusebius Bishop of Milan. Among these is
the Bishop of Regium and Brixellum, and Placentia, which belonged afterward to
Ravenna, and are now under the new Bologna Erected. 1583.
Metropolis of Bologna. The Bishop of Turin was then a Suffragan, but is since
made a Metropolitan by Sixtus IV. and borrowed some Suffragans from the old
Province. Augusta, now Aosta, was then a Suffragan of Milan, but now belongs to
Tarantaise. Genua was then a Suffragan, but is since Anno 1132.
a Metropolis, and took away Albingaunum along with it; and Como that then
belonged to the Synod of Milan, is now under Aquileia; besides many new
Bishoprics raised within this Province, and taken out of the old Dioceses: As
Alexandria de Capaglia raised Anno 1175.
by Alexander the III. And Cazale raised Anno 1474.
by Sixtus the fourth, who gave it sixty Castles or Burgs taken from the
Jurisdiction of Aste and Vercelli; yet Vercelli after this diminution has
Ughel. Ital. Sac. T. 4.
a very large Diocese remaining; for it is forty miles in length, and
thirty-five in breadth.

In the Province of Aquileia there were but fifteen Bishoprics in the time of
Gregory the Great, when the controversy of the three points was so hot in
Istria; and they are all named by Paulus Diaconus. Paul. Diac. de Gest. Long.
l. 3. c. 12. l. 18. Cont. Eutrop. int. Romans Script.
Many of the old Sees are still remaining, several are changed; but the number
is still the same, and the Dioceses are large.

To conclude, the ancient Dioceses of Italy were large, and not half so
numerous as they are now. For they have been increasing every age since the
writing of the Provincial; and even then they were exceedingly multiplied
beyond what they had been in the first six or seven Centuries. There are now in
Italy 31 Archbishops, and 281 Bishops, which makes up 312. Now if we look back
but two ages, we shall find the number much less; for in Biondi's time who died
in the year 1463, there were but 264 Cities or Episcopal seats in all Italy.
And Leandro Alberti Leand. Alberti Descritt. d' Ital. Praefat.
who lived in the beginning of the fifteenth Century, could not make out above
300. And since that time it seems there were twelve added. The more ancient
Copies of the Provincial fall short of Biondi's reckoning, some having but 250,
and the oldest of all not above 200. So much is the number of the Italian
Bishoprics increased within five hundred years.

But if we go a little back, we shall find yet fewer Bishoprics in Italy. For
in the Notitia published by Dr. Beveridge Notae in Synodic.
out of the Oxford Copy, there are in all but fourscore Episcopal Sees. Carolus
a S. Paulo Bishop of Aurenches (u) had suppressed this part in his edition,
giving notice that every thing was so corrupt and confused, that he could make
nothing of it. He is taxed by Dr. Beveridge, as if this omission had proceeded
from want of sincerity. But whatever cause that French Bishop had to leave out
this part, yet the Notitia had been published Goar. ad Codin. Int. Hist. Byz.
Anno 1644.
entire twenty years before the Dr's Edition, and much more correctly; for the
Oxford Copy, having fallen into the hands of a raw Transcriber, came out with
many more faults than its own. In this Notitia the Suburbicary Province has but
two and twenty Bishops; Campania just so many; Annonaria under Ravenna has one
more than those; and Aemylia has only three. The Provinces of Milan and
Aquileia are wholly left out. It cannot be denied, that this Notitia is
imperfect and very confused; and Salmasius Salm. Prim. Pap.
who had seen it before Goar's Edition, gives that account of it. And therefore
let us examine yet ancienter Records, to come to a more certain computation of
the old Italian Bishoprics.

In a Roman Council Conc. Romans sub. Agath. Anno 689. apud Conc. Genesis 6. Act. 4.
under Pope Agatho we have the subscriptions of the Italian Bishops by their
Provinces; and we may judge by the subscriptions of such Provinces as are best
known, as to the number of their old Dioceses, such as Milan and Aquileia, that
this was a plenary Synod, and all the Bishops of Italy present in it, but such
as age or necessity did excuse: And the Pope calls (...).
it the Generality of the Synod; yet all the Italian Bishops here were but
about an hundred and twelve.

The first Roman Synod Conc. Romans 1. sub. Sym. Anno 499.
under Symmachus was of the Roman Province properly so called. For no
Metropolitan subscribed besides Symmachus, nor any Bishop of any known Italick
Province; no Suffragan of Milan, Aquileia or Ravenna. In this there were 72
Bishops, whose names and titles remain. These subscriptions do sufficiently
show, that the Roman Province at that time was much wider than the Jurisdiction
of the City Prefect, and reached a great way farther than a hundred miles from
Rome. For there were most of the Bishops of Campania Felix, which was all of it
beyond the Lapis Centesimus, as Salmasius Salm. Ep. de Reg. Suburb.
does allow. Beyond this yet there was the Bishop of Acheruntia in Calabria, of
Vibon in Brutia, of Canusium in Apulia; and on the other side of Rome there was
the Bishop of Ariminum, and several others, whose seats were far beyond the
Provinces assigned by Salmasius to the Roman Diocese. A general Synod Anastas.
in Symmach.
of Italy under the same Pope had 115 Bishops, which is the only Synod besides
that mentioned above, that the Writer of his life takes notice of under that
Pope; Syn. Romans 4. sub. Sym.
but certainly the most remarkable for number of any then held. It was this
confirmed Symmachus his Election, and condemned his Competitor and his
Guardians; and the occasion being extraordinary, it cannot be doubted, but the
greatest part Totius fere Italiae Episcopi, Ennod. Ticin. 2. Synod. Defensor.
of the Bishops of Italy were there. And though the subscriptions be imperfect;
yet from those that are left, we may find that there were some from every
Province. The greatest objection it seems, which the Enemies of this Synod
could make against it, was Testis est Roma, si omnes Episcopi senes and debiles
convenerunt. Ennod.
that all the old and infirm Bishops were not there; and then that all were not
called by the King's Writ, attending to two or three only who were too far
engaged in the cause to become Judges of it; which Ennodius exposes rather as
Cavils than Arguments: Which he could not have done with any sincerity or
modesty, if much the greater part had not been assembled upon that occasion.
There is indeed a Synod Synod. 5. sub Symmacho.
under this Pope, whose Title bespeaks 218 Bishops; but there might have been
as many more, if borrowed subscriptions might pass muster; this is the case.
For more than half the subscriptions of this Council are taken from that of
Chalcedon, and there are not a hundred of Italy; the rest were discharged from
the Synodical attendance, and now no longer able to answer to their Names.

Under Damasus we have another general Council Conc. Romans sub Dam. Anno 369.
Theod. H. E. l. 2. c. 22. Collect. Romans Holsten. p. 163. Vales. Annot. in Soz.
l. 6. c. 23.
of Italy, consisting of 93 Bishops, in which Auxentius was deposed. But
besides Italians, there were some Gallick Bishops in this Council; and it
cannot be doubted, but Damasus assembled all he could, in a cause that required
the authority of the greatest number he could make, since the Arians had for
some time began to plead a majority. And it is certain some came from far; for
the Bishop of Aquileia was there.

Under Julius the first, we have a Roman Synod, Julii Epistola apud Athan. Ap.
2.
that seems to be general; in which above fifty Bishops were assembled, where
Vito presided as the Bishop of Rome's Deputy. This seems to be the same Vito,
who was sent Legate to the Council of Nice. Here Athanasius was received into
Communion. And Julius (...).
in his Letter to the Bishops of the East, alluding to this Synod, tells them,
that what he writ as in his own name, was the judgment of all Italy. Valesius
would not have Vito preside in this Council; but would render the words so,
that those Bishops assembled in Vito's Parish Church. But I do not see any
reason to depart from Nannius his Translation of this passage. The Copy that he
translated is very different from the Greek that is printed, and may possibly
have a relative which may take away the ambiguity of that Expression. I have
seen some Greek pieces of Athanasius in Manuscript, varying often from the
printed Copy, but exactly answering Nannius his version in all those
variations; which I have mentioned here upon this occasion, that the frequent
variations of that Version from the Original may not be thought to proceed from
affectation of liberty or mistake. To return then to the purpose for which this
passage was produced, if the judgment of between fifty and sixty Bishops be
represented as the sentence of all the Bishops of Italy; surely in those days
their number must be very much short of what they are at present.

I will conclude this Disquisition concerning the Bishoprics of Italy with the
Roman Synod Anno 251.
under Cornelius; which by Eusebius Eusebius. l. 6. c. 43. (...).
is called a very great Synod; and by Cyprian Cornelius cum plurimis Episc.
Cypr. Ep. 55. Ed. Ox.
said to consist of very many Bishops. They were in all sixty; which could
never have been observed as a very great Synod, if every good Village or Town
in Italy, where there were some thousands of such, had been provided of a
Bishop. But whether this were a Synod of the Province of Rome only, or of all
Italy, is a question about which learned men are divided. The words of Eusebius
are ambiguous and not easy to be determined. For he says, that Cornelius sent
Letters to Fabian Bishop of Antioch, giving (...), etc.
an account of the Synod at Rome, and the judgment of all in Italy and Africa.
St. Jerome speaking of these Letters of Cornelius says, De Synodo Romana-Italica
and Hieron. de Script. Eccles. in Cornel.
that he wrote about the Roman, the Italick, and African Synods; as if besides
that of Rome, there had been another at the same time in some other place of
Italy. Now if Jerome had seen no more of Cornelius his Epistles than what
Eusebius has excerpted, this of the Italick Synod may be a mistake. Bishop
Pearson Jo. Cestrens. Annal. Cppr. p. 31.
has demurred upon this matter, and the Conclusion of that Chapter in Eusebius
seems to make all clear. At the end of his Letter he sets down the names of
those who were present in the Roman Synod, and their Dioceses; and he sent
likewise the names of the persons (...), etc.
and of their places, who came not to this Synod, but signified their consent
by Letters, to what was there determined. Here is no place left then to an
Italick Synod; for by this account all who were not at Rome, consented by their
Letters. And that much the greater part of the Bishops of Italy appeared in
this Synod, cannot well be doubted, considering this assembly was for common
direction in a case very difficult and nice; and so nearly concerning the peace
of the Church. And he who observes it as an extraordinary thing, that out of
all Italy sixty Bishops should be assembled in one Synod, could not but have
taken notice of the number of the rest, who approved the acts of this Council
by their Letters, if it had been any thing proportionable to this. Therefore we
have reason to conclude, that at that time there were not very many more
Bishops in all Italy. I know it is suggested by some, that there were then but
few Bishops because Christianity was not much advanced, and their Churches were
but few; but the contrary is affirmed of this very time by Writers who lived
then. And Cyprian does expressly say, Jampridem per omnes Provincias and per
Urbes singulas ordinati sunt Episcopi. Cypr. Ep. 55.
that Bishops had long before this been settled in all the Provinces and in
every City. And how extraordinary this Synod must be esteemed at that time, may
be observed from another passage of the same Epistle; where it is remarked as
no inconsiderable thing, that sixteen or seventeen Bishops were present at the
Consecration of Cornelius. A poor business to be taken notice of, if the Roman
Province had then been so well stocked with Bishops as it is now.

And now we are taking our leave of Italy, let us look back, and from what has
been observed, make this General Conclusion, that the number of Bishops has
been increasing there in every age ever since the Primitive times; excepting
times of extraordinary desolation. And what Vghellus observes of Clusium and
some other Bishoprics, is true of most of them, that from one large Diocese it
was crumbl'd into many small ones. This City, says he, Vghel. Ital. Sal. T. 3.
in old time was possessed of a very large Diocese, which the Popes by degrees
have dissipated, and conveyed to other Cathedrals which they erected. Nay some
after the lopping off of several Branches still remain considerable, as the
same Author observes Vghel. Ital. 5. T. 1.
of Asculum. The Diocese that now remains, though much diminished by the
Erections of new Cathedrals, is not very small; for after all this it has
retained 156 Parish Churches.

From Italy we are returning home by the way of Spain; where, notwithstanding
the Inquisition, and great Bishops who have very large Dioceses, and take
themselves under those Circumstances to be jure Divino, as their Predecessors
did at Trent, our Author ventures to prosecute his design, and makes enquiry
after Village-Bishops.

Prim. Ep. p. 37.
In Spain the twelfth Council of Toledo Anno 681.
takes notice of one made a Bishop in Monasterio Villulae, and another in
Suburbio Toletano, etc. and of others in aliis vicis and villulis. It is true,
he adds, that the Bishops there allow it not, but order it otherwise for the
future. But for the satisfaction of the Reader, it may not be amiss to add the
Reasons of that Synod against this matter. 1. Res nobis novellae praesumptionis
Usurpatione sese intulit pertractanda.
That it was an Innovation or a Novel Presumption. 2. It was against the
received Laws of the Church, and Canonical Constitutions, Canonica Constitutio
id fieri omnimoda ratione refellit. 3. That it was against Scripture, and the
order of St. Paul to Titus to make Bishops in Cities; and then cites several
Canons Oportet in nullo Monasterio quemlibet Episcopum Cathedram collocare.
Conc. Carth. Frag. apd. Mabillon. Anal. p. 1.
of Councils against it, as that of Sardica, and two African Canons, and
Concilium Tauritanum Title the second. And in conclusion they null such
Ordinations. But what sort of Bishoprics they had anciently in Spain, shall
appear in due place.

To bring Episcopacy yet one step lower, our Author Prim. Ep. p. 38.
finds Bishops not only in Villages but in Monasteries, generally less then
Villages: and this he thinks will be a proof of the Question in hand. What will
these Bishops of Monasteries be proof of the Primitive way? And are Monasteries
of such Primitive foundation? There could be surely no Bishop in the
Monasteries, before there were such places. And we read not of any such till
the fourth Century, and of no Bishops in them till afterward, and those too as
rare and extraordinary in ancient times, as simplicity in Courts, or sincerity
and candor among Dissenters. But let us consider what he brings.

Prim. Ep. p. 38.
Barses and Eulogius had Soz. l. 6. c. 34, 32. Ed. Val.
a Monastery for their Diocese, no City nor Territory, and one Lazarus also. If
our Author had transcribed but two words more out of Sozomen; he had spoiled
all his his Argument. But because nothing goes more against the Conscience of a
Dissenter than Ingenuity; out of tenderness to that Infirmity I will supply the
omission. Sozomen does indeed say, (...).
that these were not made Bishops of any City, but only for honor's sake, and
as it were by way of recompense for what they had done. These then were Titular
or Honorary Bishops, according to this Historian, and therefore of little use
to prove what was the measure of Primitive Dioceses.

To these (our Author says) we may add those Monasticks which Epiphanius Epiph.
Expos. Fid. p. 1095.
speaks of, one of them a Bishop in the Desert of Egypt, the other in mount
Sinai, who having received Episcopal Consecration, took upon them to do
Episcopal Acts, and to sit as Bishops. He might, if he had pleased, have taken
some notice, that this reading is not only suspected, but plainly faulty. And
Petavius has noted in the Margin, that it should be read with a negative; that
these Monks having not received Ordination as Bishops, did yet presume to act
as such. This is plain from what goes before; for Epiphanius showing the
Extravagance of some Monks and men of severe lives, says, (...).
that one Zacchaeus being a Layman presumed to administer the Sacrament; and
then follow the two abovementioned, who took upon them the office of Bishops
without being ordained. For what extravagance or fault could it appear, for
persons who had been consecrated Bishops to administer the office committed to
them? But they are here censured, (...).
as men who presumed rashly and insolently to act as Bishops from I know not
what dreams, and as the sense must be, without ordination. I wonder our Author
should think fit to dissemble this; since it is more for the service of his
party, than any thing he has produced, to have some ancient instance to
countenance the practice of assuming the Pastoral office without Ordination.

The next instance P. 38.
of a Bishop of a Monastery is from the subscriptions of the Council of
Chalcedon, where we have Helpidius Bishop Thermensis Monasterij. We own this
Monastery to be a mistake, not of our Author indeed, but of the old Translator
of those subscriptions, who finding (...) in the Greek subscriptions, rendered
it Monastery; whereas it signifies a Mansion or a Stage-Town in the public
Course, or Post-road as we now speak. In some Manuscripts we have both words,
Mansio and Monasterium; some have Mansio only, as that of Paris and Dijon,
which Baluzius Baluz. Nov. Coll. Conc. p. 1031.
mentions; and Berterius Mansio Thermensis, Berter. Pithan.
had met the like. And the Theodosian Code makes frequent mention of these
Mansions, l. 21. de Decur. Magistrates are appointed for those places out of
the Cities in whose Territories they are. Claudiopolis, Tottas and Vordis, are
said to be Towns or Mansions in Bithynia, l. 119. de Decur. Cod. Theod. And
this Thermae is mentioned in Antonin's Itinerary in the way from Tavia to
Caesarea, the first stage: And one Elpidius a Bishop of this place subscribes
the sixth General Council, and calls it St. Agapius his Thermae in the second
Galatia.

Of the same Creation is the Bishop of the Monastery of Studius, which our
Author Prim. Ep. p. 39.
produces out of Theodorus Lector, after the decease of another who presided
there. For learned men have observed long ago, that the word Bishop should be
corrected, and the word President put in its place. And Valesius in his note
upon that passage, does agree to the amendment. And that this may not seem to
be done only from conjecture, and the seeming necessity of sense; Theophanes
Theoph. in Chron. p. 135.
and Nicephorus Niceph. H. E. l. 16. c. 25.
do vouch it.

The same misfortune of faulty reading has made us Bishops of Monasteries here
in England; and it is upon no other ground that our Author Prim. Ep. p. 39.
is so positive, that in Britain there were commonly Bishops in Monasteries,
and such too as were in subjection to the Abbot of the Convent though a
Presbyter, as appears by the Synod of Hereford. Vt Episcopi monachi non
migrent, etc. Spelm. p. 153. Beda l. 4. c. 5.

The word Episcopi in Mr. Wheelock's Edition of Bid is distinguished from the
Text, and the Saxon Version disowns it; and Mr. Wheelock Dele obsecro
(Episcopi) and pro Mss. i^i lege ipsi.
in his Errata's takes care to advertise the Reader, that this word must be
corrected, and ipsi put in its place. For so he found it in all his
Manuscripts, that is ipsi. This might be no news to our Author, for my Lord
Bishop of St. Asaph Hist. Account, p. 68.
had taken notice of it in his Historical account of the Church Government of
Great Britain. But Chifllet in his late Anno 1681.
Edition of Bid, printed from an old Copy Adorandum Antiquitatis optimaeque
notae Codicem. Chifl. Praef.
of S. Maximin's in Treves, of reverend Antiquity, has restored ipsi, though he
takes no notice of the Emendation. It is possible that in this Book, the word
ipsi might be writ at length. I have seen some Manuscript Copies that vouch
this Emendation, though the word be not written at length, but with
contraction. Yet there is one very old Copy of the Cotton Library which has the
word at length, and without any abbreviation, that puts an end to all further
criticizing upon this passage. Although I cannot but observe, how unhappy our
Author is in this particular; who in confirmation of that multiplicity of
Bishops, which he vainly imagins was once in the Church of England, has chosen
to instance in a time, when there were indeed no more than seven Bishops in all
the Saxon part of Britain.

In Spain it self, says our Author, Prim. Ep. p. 39.
Damium is an Episcopal seat, Says Ortelius, and it is a Monastery in Isidorus
and Honorius. Vnde Martinus Episcopus qui scripsit de quatuor Virtutibus
cardinalibus, oriundus.

It is true that St. Martin, called the Apostle of Gallicia, having converted
Theodomir King of the Suevi, or as others name him Chararacus, from the Arian
Heresy, was made Bishop in that Monastery which he had built. But that he had
no other Diocese than his Monastry, we have no reason to believe. For in the
Council, Aerae. 607. A. Christi 569. Vid. Not. Gars. Loyasae. in Conc. Luc.
apud Lucum, Dumium is said to have Familia Regia belonging to it; and in the
distribution of Dioceses made by King Wamba, the bounds of this Diocese are
marked, from Duma to Albia, and from Rianteca to Adasa. When this St. Martin
was made Archbishop of Braga, he ordained no other in Dumium; but when he was
dead, to do honor to the Seat of so great a Man, they might perhaps think for
some time to appoint him a successor in Dumium, as we find by the subscriptions
of several Spanish, Councils. Yet even in the Gothic times this place was
restored to Braga. For in the 16th Council of Toledo, Felix writes himself of
Braccara and Dumium, as Vasaeus Vasaei. Chron. c. 20.
informs us from a M. S. copy of Canons in Rodericus Archbishop of Toledo.
Nay, it may be questioned, whether there ever was another Bishop of this Dumium
after Martin. For Luitprandus Luitpr. Advers.
informs us, that there were two places of this name Episcopal Seats, one in
Asturia, and the other in Gallicia, which is the place of which we are
speaking. But to give this Instance a positive Answer: A Monastery in the
Suburbs of Braga made a Bishops seat about the middle of the sixth Century, is
no argument of Primitive Episcopacy; but on the contrary, this place had always
till this time belonged to the Bishop of a City. 2. All this matter is
extraordinary, to do honor to a person who had so highly deserved of the
Kingdom of Spain, and therefore ought not to be drawn into a Precedent; much
less to prescribe what sort of places are to be made Bishops seats. And after
all, it does not appear that there was not a Diocese of several Congregations
belonging to it.

Those who are not acquainted with the state of the Ancient Church, when they
find instances of Bishops in Villages, or in a Monastery, may be apt to fancy,
That these might be the Remains of another sort of Episcopacy. Therefore to
prevent such mistakes, I will briefly lay down the state of the Churches of
Spain, from which our Author has produced some instances, from the oldest
Records that remain of them. In the Year 569. King Theadomir complains Conc.
Luc. Not. Garc. Loyasae.
that in the Province of Gallicia the Dioceses were so large that their Bishops
were not able to visit them in a Year, and therefore desires that they would
take some order to remedy it. Whereupon they erected several new Bishoprics,
and one new Metropolis; yet all the Bishoprics of that great Province after
this accession, were but thirteen. When the Bishops of all Spain met in the
Synod of Valentia Anno. 541. Luitpr. Advers. cum Episcopi totius Hispaniae
convenissent.
they were in all but sixty four. In the old Book of Sevil there are but 6
Archbishops, and 67 Bishops in all the Kingdom of Spain. In the old Book of
Oviedo there are but 76 Bishops. Under King Wamba, Anno. 666.
according to the old Bood called Itacius, of which Luitprandus makes frequent
mention, there were in Spain 71 Bishops, and 7 Metropolitans. In a Controversy
between the Archbishops of Toledo and Valentia, it is said that Constantine
had divided the Country into Provinces and Dioceses, much to the same effect
with what has been already produced; with this agrees the observations of
Luitprandus, which are taken from the same Books: For speaking of the 13th
Council of Toledo, he says the number of the Bishops there were 76, of whom 27
subscribed by Proxies. And in his Chronicon he gives notice of several new
Bishoprics erected in Spain, in the later end of the seventh Century. The
Dioceses of Spain must be very large then, when so great a Country was divided
between 70 or 80 Bishops, and especially considering the Province of Narbon was
then reckoned to Spain. At the time of the Council of Illiberis, Spain seems to
have but few Bishops. For though we find by the Subscriptions that the Bishops
had met there from all the Provinces of Spain; yet were there in all but 19.
And long before this Anno. 254.
in St. Cyprians time, two Cities in Spain seemed to belong to one Bishop, as
may be gathered from the Inscription of St. Cyprians Ep. 67.
Epistle, Foelici Presbytero and plebibus consistentibus ad Legionem, and
Asturicae. Upon which Vasaeus Vasaeus in Chron. Hisp. Anno. 256.
has this Remark, Colligi videtur Legionenses atque Asturicenses eo tempore
eidem Episcopo fuisse subjectos, licet postea divisi Episcopatus fuerint.

Our Author Prim. ep. p. 40.
cites Rabanus Maurus to very little purpose, when he makes him to say, that
there were fewer Bishops at first, but in process of time they were Ordained
not only in Cities but in places where there was no need. Which then is the
most Primitive way, the first, or that which comes after?

After a tedious peregrination, our Author Anno. 305. Conc. Illib.
Prim. ep. p. 40.
is very kind to let us come nearer home. I need not tell you how few Cities
there are in Ireland; yet Primat Usher tells us out of Nennius, that St.
Patrick founded there 365 Churches and as many Bishops. I hope no reasonable
man will blame me as too difficult of belief, if I refuse this fable for
evidence. The authority of Nennius may be questioned without imputation of
skepticism, and can never pass as long as men have judgment enough to
distinguish between History and Legend. But I take Nennius his way of writing
to be a degree even below Legend. But since this fabulous Calendar of Irish
Bishops has passed without contradiction, not that any body ever believed it,
but because it is too gross to be refuted; and since it has been, and is still
urged for History in the behalf of Primitive Episcopacy, I will endeavor to
trace it to its Original; and when the ground of the Story is understood, it
will do the Congregational way but very slender service.

Archbishop Usher Antiquit. Eccl. Brit. p. 473. ult. Ed.
published a Catalogue of old Irish Saints, which is divided into three ranks,
which are distinguished one from another as well by time as by merit. The first
is the best, they consisted all of Bishops, and their number was 350, they were
founders of Churches, etc. This Order of Saints lasted for four Reigns, the
last of which was Tuathail; but they were not all Irish, but Romans and Franks,
and Britans. Now according to Arch bishop Vshers Antiquit. p. 490. Ed. ult.
Chronology of those Reigns, there is above a hundred years from the beginning
of St. Patrick's Apostleship to the end of Tuathail; only there is one King
before him in that Chronological Table which the old Catalogue does not
mention. That these were the Bishops of St. Patrick's ordination, we may find
in Jocelin, Usher. Antiq. p. 492.
who says that St. Patrick ordained just so many with his own hand, and founded
700 Churches. To complete the Irish Calendar, Nennius increased their number to
365; a singular complement to a lazy Nation, to make it holiday for them all
the year round. Now whether all these lived in Ireland, or were all ordained by
Patrick, the Catalogue does not say: But it says expressly, That they were of
several other Nations besides Irish. So that this may rather represent the
Communion of Patrick, and the number of Bishops in Britain and France that kept
Easter on the fourteenth of the Moon, than his Suffragans of Ireland. And the
fewness of Bishops in succeeding times, and under the second order, seems to
represent a great change, not in the lives of the Bishops, for if I mistake
not, it is the cause that is in the bottom of that Catalogue; but in the
observances which are there mentioned. For whether the Franks by this time had
taken another way, and the British Churches were under great calamities, or
Augustine the Monk had introduced the Roman customs, there are but few Bishops
in the second order. But supposing these holy Bishops had been all of Ireland;
yet there is no need of so many Cathedrals for them; for they lasted four
Reigns, which makes up a hundred years. And though all the Bishops seats in
Ireland had not been above fifty, they might easily have afforded 350 Saints in
the compass of a hundred years. But because there are but sixty years allowed
for St. Patrick's Government in Ireland, even in that and the surviving
generation; this number of Bishops might easily rise from fifty. I mention this
number, because sometimes Ireland has had so many Dioceses or more, as we may
see in a copy of the Provincial published by Geogr. Sacr.
S. Paulo, which has more Seats in it than that of which Cambden speaks. After
all, I am not well satisfied but all St. Patrick's Bishops may be a fable, and
he himself only a Saint of imagination. For who can tell but Patricius
Arvernensis may have sunk a day lower in the Calendar, and made the Irish a
Patricius Hibernensis: Or the Spanish Patrick Luitpr. Advers.
of Malaga, who according to Luitprandus lays claim to that day, might appear
to the Irish in a Dream, as St. George did to our Countrymen, and become their
Protector, and at last their Apostle? For the Calendar is the ground upon which
the Legendaries run divisions, and as barren as it seems to be, it has produced
a world of devout Fables. For in old time, give a Monk but a name, and he would
quickly write a life.

Our Author taking S. Patrick's Prim. Ep. p. 40.
365 fabulous Bishoprics for effective, is not content, but would increase
their number about the twelfth Century. Afterward, says he, the number of
Bishops increased in Ireland; so that when Malachias went into Ireland, near
600 years after S. Patrick, Anno 1150. Bern. vit. Malach.
Vnus Episcopatus non esset contentus uno Episcopo, sed singulae paene
Ecclesiae singulos haberent Episcopos. That Bishoprics were multiplied in
Ireland in Malachy's time, Bernard does indeed complain of; but that before
this increase, they were 365, neither he nor any body else of that time does
affirm: Nor is it likely; for a man less eloquent then S. Bernard could not
have omitted it. For what could have exposed this humor of multiplying Bishops
more effectually, than to have shown, that there were already in that Kingdom
so many more Dioceses in proportion to the extent of it, than in any Christian
Country in the World? Bernard Bernard. vit. Malach.
makes heavy complaint, that it was a thing unheard of from the beginning of
Christianity; Bishops were changed and multiplied without order and without
reason. Yet for all this storming, his friend Malachy had a large Diocese to
look after; for he was not content, says Bernard, to go about his Episcopal
City of Conneth, but he went out into the Country, and visited the Towns of his
Diocese, and all this on foot. But within twenty years of the time we are
speaking of, we have a certain account of the Irish Dioceses. For when Henry
the second went Anno 1171.
over to Ireland, there were Joh. Brompton. X. Script. Col. 1070.
but twenty-nine Bishops in all that Kingdom, and four Archbishops, or thirty
according to the reckoning of Gervasius. Cron. Gervasij. X. Scr. Col. 1420.
The former number is confirmed by Benedictus Abbas in the Life of King Henry
II. And even of this number some were but lately erected. For Eadmer. Hist.
Nov. l. 2. p. 36.
in the year 1095. Murchertagh King of that part of Ireland, with his Clergy
and People, desired leave of Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury (who was then
Primate of all Ireland as well as England) to found a new Bishopric at
Waterford, complaining that in those parts they had hitherto wanted the
presence of a Bishop; requesting him to ordain Malchus for their Bishop, whom
they had sent over for that purpose, which he did accordingly. So far was
Ireland from being overstocked with Bishops at that time. The Copies of the
Provincial are of little use to show any thing of the ancient state of this
Country; for all of them are later than the year 1150, because they all have
the four Archbishops; the Irish Church having never had Matthew. Par. in Steph.
Anno 1151. Sim. Duwelm. Anno 1152. Gervasi. Chron. Anno 1171.
any before that year; though Archbishop Usher would have Armagh excepted.

When we had come so near home as Ireland, I was in hopes our wandering after
Village-Bishops had been at an end; especially when he had come to the dregs of
his evidence, Nennius and the Irish Legends. But I know not how, a sudden fancy
transports our Author to Afric, and thither I must follow, a proper place to
look rarities and unusual sights. It cannot indeed be denied, that in this
Country there were Bishops, if not in Villages, yet in Municipia or
Burrough-Towns; but that this was the primitive state of that Church, we cannot
allow. And the multiplying of Bishops being occasioned there by the Schism of
the Donatists, cannot be alleged for a precedent; since the Bishops of that
time complained of it in the Conference of Carthage, as a wrong and an
innovation. But of this there is a more particular account in another Book,
Vind. of Prim. chapter p. 516.
which I am not willing to transcribe. But yet what our Author would put upon
us, ought not to pass without Examination.

Prim. Ep. p. 41.
In five of the Provinces of the African Diocese (he might have said six, for
so they are reckoned in the Conference of Carthage, Tripolis being added to the
other five) there were in St. Austin 's time near 900 Bishops. And this he
proves by adding the Donatist Bishops to the Catholic, there being 500 of the
one and 400 of the other.

Prim. Ep. p. 41.
As for the Catholics, the utmost of St. Austin's account in the abstract of
the Conference is but 465. And yet in another Book he reckons Centum ferme
Episcopi contr. Don. post Coll. c. 24.
not the Absents full a hundred, which in his Abstract he sets at 120. And for
the Donatists who are reckoned 400, we are not so easily to admit their
account. S. Augustine never admitted it, though our Author says he did not deny
they were 400. It is true, he does not positively deny it, because he could not
be certain of their number; but he does every where suggest that they boasted
without reason, and made themselves more numerous than they were. For when they
pretended to have many absent, and more than the Catholics, he turns the
pretense into a jest. What, says he, Aug. post Coll. c. 24.
had some Pestilence invaded them, that a third part of their number should be
sick together? For they had acknowledged, that they were all present, excepting
such whom age or sickness had detained. And in all his accounts of the
Conference he detects their frauds in subscribing for the absents, as if they
had made their appearance. And among the subscriptions there was one found who
had been some time dead; and they could not deny it. But be the number of those
Schismatics what they will, it is not reasonable to admit them into the list
of the Bishops of that Country, since they set up Altar against Altar
oftentimes in the same City, and generally in the same Diocese, where a
Catholic Bishop was placed, and sometimes set up three or four against one. So
there is no reason that these should swell the account of African Bishops. We
reckon a Parish with us to have but one Rector, though an Independent or
Anabaptist Teacher may set up in it a separate Assembly; or though a speaking
Presbyterian Elder, the most forward and fiercest of all our Church-dividers,
should hold a Conventicle there for a Nursery to other Sects.

But we have reason (our Author thinks) to take the Donatists into the account;
since the Catholics decreed, that when the Donatists were reduced, those
places among them which had Bishops should continue to be Episcopal seats. If
he had thought fit to consider the order of time, and how different the state
of the African Church before the Conference at Carthage was, from that which
followed it; this apparition of an Argument had vanished. Before Marcellinus
his Decree, the Catholics of Africa made several temporary Provisions for the
reclaiming of the Donatists. And that no encouragements might be wanting to
invite either the People or their Bishops to be reconciled to the Church;
sometimes they order, that if a Donatist Bishop should prevail with his people
to leave their schism, he should remain still their Bishop: Sometime, that the
People who had a Bishop heretofore, and were converted from the Donatists,
might without a new order from a Synod, choose a Bishop of their own; or if they
would choose rather to be annexed to some other Diocese, it was not to be denied
them. Another time it is ordered, that where a Diocese was divided between a
Catholic Bishop and a Donatist, and the later with his people returned to
Catholic Communion, Aug. Gest. cum Emer. Cod. Afr. c 112.
they might both be Bishops of that Diocese; and upon the death of one, the
other was to succeed to the whole; or if the people should be offended with
this unusual sight of two Bishops in one Diocese, then both should resign, and
the Diocese left to a new choice. But after the Decree of Marcellinus, and the
confirmation of it by the Imperial Rescript, the case was altered. For then
Col. Carth. in fin. Cod. Theod. l. 55. de Haeret. Anno 414. Cod. Afr. c. 12.
Ed. Zon. 99. ap. Bin. 102. Ed. Til.
every Innovation of the Donatists was declared void, and those Dioceses of
theirs, which had been branches of others, and torn from them in the schism,
were now to revert to the first dependence. The Donatists therefore are not to
come into the number of the African Bishops by virtue of that Canon; for at the
end of the Canon it self the Imperial Law was afterward added, as an
advertisement of its being repealed. The Canon then was made before the
Conference, and consequently before the computation of S. Augustine. But after
the Conference and the Law, the door was shut; and the Donatist Bishoprics if
they had been parts of others were restored to them, and no provision made for
the Bishops though they should happen to be converted. After the time of S.
Augustine, we do not find the African Bishoprics much increased. For within
fifty years of the death of that Bishop, we have an account Not. Afr. apd.
Sirm. Miscel.
of all the Dioceses in that Country, which amounted to 466. out of which must
be deducted eight for Sardinia which did not belong to the Roman Africa. But I
am afraid the Proconsular Africa is imperfect in the Notitia, if Victor
Vitensis Vict. Persec. Vand. l. 1.
his account may be taken; or there be not some Error in the Copy. But not to
insist much upon small matters and uncertain, let us calculate the Bishoprics
of such Provinces of Africa of which we have a more distinct account. In the
two Mauritanias in the African Notitia, we have 173 Bishoprics, of which six
were then void. Now both these Provinces, according to Pliny, are 839 miles
long, and 480 broad. The Country must surely be very ill peopled; if every
sorry Village had a Bishop, nay if every Bishop had not 60, or 70 Villages in
his Diocese. Nay, if we consider the extent of the whole Roman Africa, we shall
have little reason to conclude, that Congregational Episcopacy should follow
from the great number of Bishops in that Country. Procopius Proc. p. Vand. l. 1.
who was acquainted with the Country, having attended Bellisarius in his
African Expedition, tells us, that the Roman Africa was ninety days Journey in
length; and that we might better understand his reckoning, he tells us that a
days Journey was 210 Stadia, or 26 miles and a quarter; which amounts to above
2360 miles. The breadth was unequal, in both the Mauritanias near five hundred
miles; in the Proconsular Africa two hundred. This Province was so populous
(...). Herodian. l. 7. ss. 9.
and so fertile, that Egypt cannot be thought to surpass it. And for Bizacena,
the account Pliny I^in. l. 5. c. 4.
gives of its fertility is prodigious; for the Husbandman there received a
hundredfold. Now in this Country so vast and so populous, let us take a low
estimate of the number of Villages that might be there, and reckon them at
forty thousand; and these divided into 500 Dioceses, every Diocese will have
fourscore Towns That this may not seem an extravagant Calculation, let us
compare it with other Countries. France is not half so big as the Roman Africa;
and yet in Lewis 13 his time it had above two and thirty thousand Parishes, as
Bertius reckons: And in Henry the third's time, by a Tax laid on every Parish,
they were found Bodin. de Rep.
to be near five and twenty thousand; the Provinces of Burgundy and Poictou not
reckoned, which may make up the remainder. Now it is well known, that there, as
well as here, there are many more Villages than Parishes; and therefore I
conceive I cannot over-reckon them, when I set a Country for extent double to
France; and of which a great part was more populous, at almost an equal number
for Villages: But suppose the number yet less by one half, every Bishopric
will have forty Villages, which is too much yet for the Congregational way;
especially since upon this reckoning, Towns must be thin and at greater
distance, and so less fitted for personal Communion with their Bishop. Nay,
though they had at last been reduced by the Iniquity of times and the
Opposition of parties to the measure of our Parishes; yet the condition of
those Churches would move our pity, rather than our desire of imitation and
condition so different from all other Countries, and so unlike that of Africa
it self, when Cyprian lived. For all the African Bishops of his time could not
have supplied the Dioceses of one Province, at the time of which we are
speaking. But for all this, when Mr. Baxter or Mr. Clerkson will have it so,
what is last must be primitive; what sprung from the unfortunate divisions of
one Country must be a Precedent to all. And that must be received as Apostolic
practice, which was introduced by one of the most heady and desperate and
Hypocritical Sects that ever divided the Church of Christ. But I am afraid we
may say with too much truth, that our Country has outdone Africa in Monsters
of this nature. Yet after all this distraction, there remained in Africa
several large Dioceses; which has been fully proved in other Books, Unreasonabl
of Separ. 249, 250. and Sequ. Vindic. of Prim. Chapter p. 524, 525. etc.
and needs not be repeated in this place; though I shall not omit to take
notice before I have done, of those exceptions which Mr. Clerkson has made in
another Book against the Evidence for Diocesan Episcopacy in Africa.

In the end of this Chapter our Author thinks fit to engage Bishop Tailor, who
answering an Objection concerning Asclepius, Gennad. Catal. Script.
Bishop of a small Village in the Territory of Vaga or Baga, shows that he was
a Bishop of a Territory as well as of a Village; and for this cites Trithemius.
Trithem. de Script. Eccles.
I confess that the expression of Trithemius does not conclude either for the
largeness or straitness of that Bishopric, which may be very large though the
Episcopal seat be a Village, or narrow though it have a City to give it
denomination; unless our Author thinks, that because there were but 500, or as
he reckons 900 Dioceses in Africa, there were no more Towns or Villages in the
whole Country.

He is pleased to add, that he never yet could see any proof, any instance of a
small Village, that had so extended a Territory under one Bishop. But did he
ever see an instance of a Bishop who had no Diocese but the single Village in
which he resided? Or has he ever seen the limits of such a Bishopric
described? If he have, why does he not produce it? For one such instance had
been worth his whole Chapter about Village Bishops. If he have not, why does he
use so much confidence when he is wholly in the dark? There are but very few
ancient Dioceses, that are delivered down to us with an account of their
Circuit. But we happen to know the number that was of old in several Countries;
and from thence can infer in general of the greatness and smallness of the
Bishoprics. And to give our Author one instance more in a Country he quotes
for Village-Bishops. In Cyprus, in Sozomen's time it was usual to have Bishops
in Villages; and yet in all that Island at that very time there were but nine
Bishops under one Metropolitan, as appears from the subscriptions of the
Council of Chalcedon. Conc. Chalc. Act. 6, and 15.
For in the Copy of subscriptions published by Labbe from the Papers of
Sirmond, there are six Subscribers from that Island. And again the Metropolitan
subscribing with several others, for his Suffragans that were absent, had but
three remaining to subscribe for. And therefore we must conclude, that either
the Village-Bishops had a considerable Territory, or the City Bishoprics were
enormously great.

At last this Chapter concerning Village-Bishops is brought to a Conclusion,
and upon the whole matter I conceive two points to be very clear: 1. That
although there were some Bishops seated in Villages, yet it does by no means
follow, that they were but Pastors to a single Congregation. 2. That a great
number of places, which our Author took to be Villages, are proved to be Cities
before he can find any Bishops to be seated there. So that either the skill and
the diligence of Mr. Clerkson were not so great, as his friends give out, who
in these matters are very implicit believers; or else we must complain of want
of ingenuity and fair dealing, a fault which the Saints are very easy to
forgive, when it is committed in pure zeal to their Cause; but we Church of
England men take for one of the blackest sins.

CHAP. III.
AFter a tedious Journey through Villages and obscure places, we are at last
come to Cities, and may hope now for a nobler Subjuct of our enquiry and
observation. But to our great disappointment and mortification, we are informed
by our Author, Prim. ep. p. 45.
That far the most part of them, (viz. those that were very little, and those
that were not great) were for their largness but like our Villages or market
Towns. They are much to blame, who have hitherto admired the magnificence of
Greek and Roman Cities; and pretend to judge of their former greatness by the
ruins that remain; as we discover the stature of Giants by some of their Bones.
Whereas these celebrated Cities, were, far the most of them, as we are now
told, not superior to Putney or Batersey, or to say the utmost, to Kingston or
Colebrook.

But to make out this Paradox, our Author Prim. ep. p. 46.
enters into a critical dispute concerning the Greek and Hebrew word for City,
and shows that some have bestowed the title of City upon those places that
others call Villages. City, says he, is not only City, but Town; because,
according to one Evangelist Luke 10.8. (...).
our Savior says, whatsoever City ye enter: According to another, Math.
10.11. (...).
whatsoever City or Village. And again in one place, Luke 4.43. (...). Math.
9.35.
he tells the Capernaites, he must preach in other Cities. In another place,
(...).
and upon another occasion, our Savior is said to go about all Cities and
Villages preaching. And in another place Mark 1.38. (...).
joins both the words in one, let us go into the chief Villages. But these
instances are so far from proving, that (...) signifies a Village; that some of
them do plainly show the quite contrary; for they distinguish between Cities
and Villages. And the other where Cities are only mentioned and Villages
implied, they are there to be understood not from the notion of the word, but
from the nature of the thing. For instance, suppose one were ordered to preach
to all the Citizens of Rome, and by virtue of this order should preach to the
Strangers and Servants there, shall therefore a Citizen signify a stranger or
a slave? yet from the nature of the thing these might be understood to be
included, though not from the signification of the word; and though another
relation of this order should add the particulars omitted, yet the former word
Citizens would not have a double sense. If one should say he had viewed a
certain house, and at another time speaking of the same thing, should say he
had viewed the house and gardens, does therefore a house signify a garden? The
less principal parts are often omitted in ordinary discourse, though when men
speak with more exactness, they are enumerated. Our Savior and his Disciples
may have entered some times into solitary and alone Houses, as well as into
Villages; and if one of the Evangelists had happened to have added this, must
therefore a Village or a City signify a simple house? Prim. ep. p. 46.
Bethlem is, Luke 2.38. the City of David; but no other than a Village, John
7.24. Which Epiphanius Epiph. Haer. 51.
takes notice of, and gives this reason for it, That it was reduced to small
compass, and had very few inhabitants. And what can be more directly against
our Author's purpose than this reason? For it is called a City with respect to
its ancient greatness, and a Village in respect of its present mean condition;
as the same man by an usual civility is styled by an office he once bore, though
he be reduced to a meaner place; yet the one title does by no means signify or
imply the other.

But this instance of Bethlem will prove yet more prejudicial to the cause of
Congregational Episcopacy upon another account. For the design of our Author in
disparaging Cities, by making the title common to Villages, is to show what
mean places those were that made up the Dioceses of ancient Bishops; whereas
this instance overthrows that vain imagination, and proves the quite contrary.
For this place which is called City, had never any Bishop of its own for above
a thousand years after Christ, but was part of the Diocese of Jerusalem,
Parochia est Episcopi, qui Herosolyman tenet. Sulp. Sev. Dial. 1.
from which it was six miles distant. In St. Jerome's Presbyteris tuis
obtulimus. Praecepisti Bethlem Presbyteris tuis. Hieron. adv. Err. Joh. Hieros.
time it was taken to have been immemorially a Parish belonging to that Bishop,
and was served by Presbyters as our country Parishes are. And Jerome Qui long
in minoribus urbibus per Presbyteros and Diaconos baptizati sunt. Hieron. Lucif.
in another place shows in general, that in lesser Cities there were no
Bishops, but Presbyters and Deacons, and these too at a great distance from the
Bishops seats; and cannot deny but that this is the Custom of the Churches,
that the Bishops go to confirm such as have been Baptized in lesser Cities at a
distance. And speaking of the same places, he In Viculls, aut Castellis aut
locis remotioribus. Ibid.
calls them Villages or Castles, and remote places, which were visited by the
Bishop, and this by ancient and immemorial custom. So that all our Authors
diligence to confound Cities with Villages, and to represent Cities as very
small, does at last no service to his Hypothesis; since we find that long
before St. Jerome's time many of these went to make up one Diocese, and were
under the visitation of one Bishop. The instances alleged out of Josuah do
little concern the present question; yet that nothing may pass without reply,
they should be considered. Prim. ep. p. 46.
There are thirty eight Towns enumerated and called Cities, Jos. 15.21. Yet all
the Cities are said to be but twenty nine, v. 32. Masius and other Expositors
remove the difficulty thus, that the rest of the Towns, tho called Cities, were
but Villages. Yet there may be another way of removing this difficulty, and
Grotius In loc.
proposes one that seems more probable, that the nine Cities which remained
over and above the twenty nine, did not belong to the Tribe of Judah, but of
Simeon; for Jos. 19.9.
out of the portion of the Children of Judah, was the inheritance of the
Children of Simeon -- and they had their inheritance within the inheritance of
them. And many of the same places, and at least the same names are recorded as
belonging to both, and sometimes in the same order. But this is cleared beyond
all cavil, 1 Chronicles. 4.28. and confirmed by the observation of Jerome Hieron.
Trad. Hebr. in Paralip.
in his Hebrew Traditions on the Chronicles.

To the same effect he observes, Prim. ep. p. 46.
that there are twenty three places reckoned by name and called Cities, Josh.
19. Yet, v. 28. there are said to be but nineteen Cities. They resolve it as
the former. This is a plain mistake of our Authors; for there are but sixteen
Cities named to the Tribe of Naphthali, though the sum is made nineteen. But that
which gave occasion to this mistake, is the mentioning of the borders of this
Tribe; Vid. Bonfrer.
but the places are not called Cities, and perhaps did not belong to that
Tribe, but to some other that bounded it; and of these sixteen we must deduct
some, if we follow the Septuagint. It is an usual thing in the book of Josuah
to have the sum to differ from the particulars, sometimes it is less, and
sometimes it exceeds, and this is not a place to attempt to reconcile them.
Prim. ep. p, 46.47.
There are four called Cities, Jos. 19.6. yet those in 1 Chronicles. 4.32. are
Villages. This too is a plain mistake, occasioned by the ill pointing of that
passage of the Chronicles. For the beginning of the 32 verse belongs to the
verse going before, and should be read thus, 1 Chronicles. 4, 31.32.33.
These were their Cities unto the reign of David, and their Villages. Then
follows five names; and in the end of that verse it is added, that they were
Cities; and the verse following, and all their Villages that were about the
same Cities.

Thus the Syriack and Arabic Versions read, and use a Preposition with their
Villages; and thus the sense requires, that both the Hebrew and Septuagint
should be read. And the occasion of this difficulty proceeds from St. Jerome's
Trad. Hebr. in Paralip.
mistake, which appears in his observation upon this place; and the mistake was
propagated by dividing the Hebrew Text and the version of 70 into verses
according to the vulgar Latin. Our Translatours were too bold in adding a verb
in this place, which is neither in the Original nor in any ancient Translation,
though they distinguished it from the Text by another Character.

From Scripture Mr. Clerkson Prim. ep. p. 47.
appeals to other Authors for the proof of his observation, that (...)
signifies a Village. When Polybius writes, that Tiberius Gracchus ruined three
hundred Cities in a part of Spain: Possidonius says that Cities were alled
Castles by him. But Possidonius is so far from allowing the expression, that he
exposes the Author for it, and shows it was to flatter Gracchus, and that this
way of speaking suited better with the pomps of a Triumph, than the exactness
of an Historian; nay he sticks not to call this a Lie. For, For, says he,
Strabo l. 3. (...).
Generals and Writers are easily carried to this Lie, magnifying their actions
beyond truth and reality.

Prim. ep. p. 47.
Those who say that Spain has more than a thousand Cities, speak after the
same figure, giving great Villages the titles of Cities. If vain men will call
their geese swans, it does not alter the species, nor change the common
language of the world. Yet after all, this loose way of speaking does by no
means hurt the cause of Diocesan Episcopacy. For every place which in
complement might be called a City, did not become a Bishops seat; for in this
very Country, where more than a thousand Cities are said to have been after
this favorable way of reconing, there does not appear to have been a hundred
Bishoprics in any age since the Apostles. Aelian Aelian. var. Hist.
reckoned in Italy eleven hundred and sixty six Cities. Guido of Ravenna
Leandro Alberti Descritt. d' Ital. Praefat. fol. 6.
writes from Higinus, who had made a Book of the Cities of Italy, that in his
time there were seven hundred. Yet we cannot find that for 600 years after
Christ, there were so many as 150 Dioceses in all that Country. But of this we
have given some account already.

Prim. Ep. p. 47.
Ptolomy Ptol. l. 5. c. 17.
calls Avarum (...). In Josephus, Jos. Ant. l. 12. c. 13.
Bethsura is called a City; but in the page before it is only (...) a Village:
And Justinian says of Petyus and Sebastopolis, reckoned among the Cities of
Pontus Polemoniacus, that they were to be reckoned rather for Castles than
Cities. It happens to Cities, as it does to men; some are born noble, others
rise up to it by gradual increase. Some have been Cities and great from their
first foundation, as Alexandria, Constantinople, Antioch, and many more; others
by industry and good fortune have grown up by slow degrees from Villages to be
Cities; and in their Progression, when they are become equal to the generality
of Cities in every thing but Title and Privilege, they are called Cities or
Villages according to the pleasure of those who speak of them. In the confines
of child and man, we are doubtful what name to use. Tra giovane e fanciullo
l'eta confine, as Tasso expresses it. Yet if a man should undertake upon this
account to show, that man and child are words used promiscuously; and that
therefore whatever right or privilege a man may have by Law or Custom, belongs
also to a child; such a person would be thought not yet arrived to the judgment
of a man, and to stand in need of a Schoolmaster to teach him propriety of
language. But besides the childishness of the notion, our Author has been
unfortunate in his instances; for it is possible, that the City and the
Village, which are called by the same name in Josephus, may not be the same
place. For Jerome Hieron. de loc. Hebr.
takes notice of two Bethsura's in Judaea, one in the way from Jerusalem to
Hebron, another within a mile of Eleutheropolis. And Josephus when he speaks of
these places, does not use the same name; for one (...).
is a neuter and plural, the other (...). Jos. Ant. l. 12. c. 11.
is a feminine. I know the Books of Macchabees vary the name for the same
place; but Josephus when he speaks of the City Bethsura, constantly uses the
singular and the feminine. Nor is it necessary to insist upon this; for
Josephus may speak properly, though it should be granted, that he spoke of the
same place. For before it was fortified by Judas Macchabaeus, it might be but a
Village; but afterward it is called a City, and the strong and impregnable
City. And being the only safe retreat of the Jews of that part of the Country,
it must quickly grow populous enough to deserve the Title, and to enjoy the
privileges of a City. And now we are speaking of this place, so renowned in
the History of the Macchabees, it may not be amiss to have it restored to its
true Situation. A faulty reading in the second Book of Macchabees 2 Macch. 11.5.
had brought this Fortress within less than a mile of Jerusalem; and
accordingly Adricomius places it in his Maps. But this can by no means be
reconciled with the relation which Josephus gives of several Actions in the
Maccabean Wars. When this City was besieged by Antiochus Eupator, Judas left
the Siege of the Citadel of Jerusalem, and advanced toward the Enemy who lay
before Bethsura; and having marched a considerable way, and posted his men in a
strait place called Bethzacharia, he was then seventy furlongs from the Enemy,
and from Bethsura. Besides, in the Book of Macchabees it is said to be built
against the Incursions of the Idumaeans; which supposes it near their Borders,
as indeed it was; for the Alexandrian Copy has cleared this point. For instead
of five furlongs, we read there that it was five Schaeni from Jerusalem. Now a
Schaenus according to Herodotus, Herodot. l. 2.
is sixty furlongs in Egypt. Pliny reckons it but thirty. And according to this
reckoning, the distance between Jerusalem and Bethsura will be near twenty
miles, as Jerome has placed it. As for Pityus, it was an ancient City, and had
been in reputation both for greatness and wealth. Strabo Strab. l. 11. in fin.
calls it the great Pityus; and Pliny Plin. l. 6. c. 5.
gives it the character of a most wealthy Town; but it was sacked by the
Heniochi. What if before Justinian's time the fortune of this place happened to
run so low, that it became little superior to an ordinary Garrison Town; yet
surely it might retain its former Title of City, without rendering it common to
every Garrison or Castle in the Country. Sebaste too was an old City, and
mentioned by Pliny among the chief of the Country; and let me entreat our new
Critics, that it may retain its old Title, though fallen a little into decay,
without making way for every upstart Village to come in and claim the dignity
of a City. These instances I was willing to account to his misfortune; but that
of Avarum I must own as an act of dexterity. This is represented as an
ambiguous thing, between a City and a Village. And Ptolomy the great Surveyor
of the world is made to speak doubtfully, as if he were not able to distinguish
the kind. Ptolomy is of no kin to me; but for Truth and Justice sake I am
willing to do him right. For to declare the truth, that Author did never say
that which Mr. Clerkson puts upon him. When men are positive, and quote Greek,
especially Fanatics; one may be apt to think they found it somewhere, and
never made the quotation. But here I must confess it happens to be otherwise;
for poor Ptolomy is put upon. For he does not say that Avara is a City or a
Village, but he places it in a part of Arabia, among many other Towns; and it
is unaccountable how our Author should single it from all the rest. At the head
of the Chapter there is a general Title: The Midland Cities and Villages of
Arabia; and at some distance this place is set down. If the Title make it of an
ambiguous kind, all the rest that are named with it must be so too. Nay most of
the Towns in Ptolomy must be of the same nature because the Title is very
frequent in him. I was willing to suspect my Edition, rather than the
conscience of my Author, who differed from the Church of England out of pure
tenderness of mind. But having examined other Editions, I found the old Heathen
Geographer was put upon by an Independent Saint. Some blunt men may in their
plain way call this manner of dealing, forgery and falsifying; but toward
godly men we must avoid rudeness, and let such tricks as these pass for
Economy, and dextrous management of a cause.

Prim. Ep. p. 49.
Bishop Bilson Bills. Perp. Gov. c. 14.
tells us, as also Dr. Field, Field of the Chapter l. 5. c. 27.
that the Apostles would have the City and places adjoining to make but one
Church; and that herein they proposed the Jews as their exemplar, who had their
Synagogues in Cities. How much Bishop Bilson or Dr. Field make for our Author's
purpose, let the Reader judge when I have laid the words before him. They (the
Apostles) says Dr. Field, so sorted and divided out particular Churches, that a
City, and the places near adjoining made but one Church. -- Now because
Churches of so large extent required many Ministers of the word and sacraments,
and yet of one Church there must be but one Pastor; the Apostles in settling the
state of these Churches did so constitute in them many Presbyters. Now
according to Dr. Field, every Episcopal Church, as laid out by the Apostles,
having so large extent as to require many Ministers, and yet but one Pastor or
Bishop, was plainly not a Congregational Church, but Diocesan. Bishop Bilson
Bills. Perpet. Gov. c. 14. p. 295, 298, 306, 321.
is yet plainer against the purpose for which he is alleged. We have, says
that learned Prelate, one Bishop in a Church, tied to the Laws of God, the
Church and the Prince; you would have 300 in a Diocese and some more, all of
equal power, and set at liberty to consult and determine at their pleasure. --
Neither had the Jews that kind of Government which you would establish in the
Church; neither did our Lord and Master ever prescribe to the Gentiles the
judicial part of Moses Law. And again, As the people did increase, so did the
pains in each place, and consequently the number of Presbyters; one man being
no more able to serve the necessities of a great City, than to bear the burden
of the Earth upon his back; and yet in each Church and City, one chief among
them, that as principal Pastor of the place, etc. And to conclude, you dislike
a Bishop should have any Diocese or Church, besides that one wherein he
teaches; -- which nice conceit of yours not only condemns the Primitive
Church of Christ, that assigned Dioceses to Bishops, but contradicts the very
ground of Government which the Apostles left behind them.

Prim. Ep. p. 48.
Now in what places the Jews had their Synagogues, if it were not plain, Matthew.
9.35. that they were far from being always great Cities, will appear from the
seats of their Consistories. I never yet heard of any, who denied that the Jews
had Synagogues in Villages, as well as Cities. But that the Village-Synagogues
were independent, and free from any subjection to the Cities in Ecclesiastical
causes, is now the question; and our Author is wise in saying nothing of it.
For those who have taken his side of the question, though men of good reading,
have not been able to produce any thing about it, but their own affirmations.
It is not to be doubted, but every good Village of the Jews had a Synagogue, as
every Parish with us has a Church; and great Cities had many Synagogues, as
our great Towns have many Parishes; and Jerusalem particularly is said to have
had 480. But that every Village-Synagogue had supreme authority in matters
Ecclesiastical, and no dependence upon any other Court, or the chief officers
of the City Synagogues, is very unlikely. For so many Independent and Co
ordinate Officers could never without a miracle have preserved themselves one
year under one National communion: And in those great Cities where the Jews had
many Congregations, it cannot well be conceived that every one had supreme
authority, but that there must be some Chief or Council, to which all those
Synagogues were subject. This is most likely, because common order and National
agreement cannot well subsist without it. I know there are some great men Grot.
de jure sum. pot. c. 11. Gotof. in l. 2. de Cod. Theod.
have been very positive on the other side, and have asserted the Independence
of every Synagogue, that every such Assembly had a chief Officer answering to
our Bishops, and all coordinate and of equal authority. But for all this no
evidence is produced; and when learned men speak without book about distant
matter of fact, their authority is but small; for then they do not speak from
their knowledge and learning but their affection. The Scriptures of the old
Testament give no directions concerning Synagogues, and do not so much as
mention those Assemblies. From whence some have concluded, that in those times
there were no such religious Assemblies among the Jews. In the new Testament we
have frequent mention of them, and sometimes their Officers are named; but how
they were ordered in respect of one another, and of general Communion, the new
Testament does not give the least hint. Nay, as to this matter the writings of
the Jews are not plain; and though they were, yet they taste too much of the
fable, to be depended upon. Great men may guess and affirm according as they
stand affected; but when all is done, this matter is still in the same
obscurity for want of sufficient evidence. After the establishment of Christian
Religion, we find general Officers of the Jews endued with the power of
Excommunication and Absolution; but that every Village or City-consistory had
that power then, we do not find; and for ought appears, they might have no more
power than our Churchwardens and Vestries. Nay, in the complaint the Jews make
to Arcadius and Honorius, L. 8. de Jud. Coeli and Sam. l. 15. de Jud. l. 29.
Codesh.
that the civil Officers had restored to Communion several, whom the Primates
of their Law had cast out without the consent of those Primates; the power
seems to belong chiefly to these, and they too derived their Jurisdiction, not
from the Synagogues, but from the Patriarchs, by whom they were appointed. And
this Invasion of the Imperial Officers is represented not as an injury to the
Vestries of Village or City Synagogues, but only to these Primates, whose
office was of greater compass than the inspection of a single Synagogue, as
appears from the last of those Laws cited in the margin; where we are informed,
that upon extinction of the Patriarchs these Primates succeeded to all their
power

But while I was thinking of the learned men who treat of this matter, I had
almost forgot our Author, who tells Prim. ep. p. 48.
us, That something will appear from the seats of their Consistories. Let us
therefore attend: In Cities of less than sixscore Families, they placed their
Consistories of three. In Cities of more than a hundred and twenty Families,
the Courts of twenty three. Maimon. in Sanedr. c. 1. Sect. 5. Seld. de Synedr.
l. 2. c. 5. And it is well known that many of our Country Towns with their
Precincts have more than 120 Families; and our lesser Villages are as great as
the Cities in the lower account. They must be very sore distressed, who repair
to Rabbis for propriety of expression, or evidence of Antiquity. In Maimonides
his language it seems, a place that had not 120 Families, was a City. And what
if it had but three? It was sufficient to furnish a Triumviral Consistory, and
therefore may pass for a Rabbinical City. But Cunaeus Cun. de R. P. Hebr. l. 1.
c. 13. Ego vero Aristoteli assentior, ne quidem eam esse civitatem. -- Civitas
nomen amittit, modus si defit.
who loved to speak properly, takes offense at this expression, and opposes the
authority of Aristotle to that of Maimonides, that such a place neither is, nor
ought it to bear the name of a City. But Maimonides may be excused, because he
followed his Fathers of the Talmud, from whence all the fabulous accounts of
the ancient Jewish Polity have been derived. Our Legends and forged Decretals
do as much represent the state of the Primitive Church, as that Jewish Rhapsody
does the state of the Jewish Synagogue or Temple. But the Authors of these
Forgeries being profoundly ignorant of what was Ancient and Primitive, drew the
face of antiquity with some features of their own times. Hence it is, that the
Jewish writers speaking of those times when their Nation and their Temple
stood, drop unawares several passages that agree better with the state of their
dispersion than establishment; and of this, the place alleged by our Author
about Consistories and Cities, gives a plain instance. For if we consult
Josephus, we shall find that Judaea before the last war that ruined it, was
inferior to no Country in the World for number of People; their Cities swarmed
with men, and there was scarce a Village that had not many thousands. Compare
therefore this rule that appoints Consistories in Cities of sixscore houses,
and a triumvirate in Cities that have yet fewer Families, with the true state
of that Nation; and you cannot but loath so gross and ill contrived a fiction.
But if you consider the Jews in their dispersion; even Maimonides his way of
speaking will be proper; for there might be very great Cities, where the Jews
had not a hundred Families; and they might retain so much of their old
discipline, as to order some sort of Consistory in every City: and yet the
estimate of their own Cities ought not to be taken from a miserable Synagogue
they might make when they were sojourners in a strange Country

Prim. ep. p. 48.
Egyptian Cities come next after the Rabbinical; and our Author would have us
take notice, that Diodorus Siculus speaks of three thousand Cities in Egypt,
not to take notice of more than six times as many, which Pliny says were
sometimes in the Delta. The Egyptian Priests spared no figures to set out
either the antiquity or the greatness of their Country; and may be suspected to
exceed as much in the number of their Cities, as they did in that of their
years. I will not now insist upon the disabling of his evidence, but proceed to
consider the passage of Diodorus. And here, if at any time I have diminished
the number of Cities produced by our Author, I am content to make him ample
amends, and to admit the emendation of Sir Jo. Marsham, Chron. can. p. 397.
Scribe. (...).
who instead of three, will read thirty thousand Cities. But then it must be
observed, that all the Villages of the Country came into the reconing. It was
not because this Author could not distinguish between a City and a Village,
that he thus speaks; but only to follow his Author, who being a Poet, Theocr.
dit. 17.
and setting out the greatness of Ptolomy's kingdom, had more regard to the
magnificence than the propriety of his Expression; and by a license which Poets
take, made all the Towns in Egypt Cities. The same Historian in that place
shows he could speak properly about this matter, when he tells us that he had
found in the sacred Record, that Egypt in ancient times, when it was more
populous than under Ptolomy Philadelphus, had 18000 Cities and considerable
Villages. Now to apply this to our Authors design, which I ought ever to have
in view, though he himself seems often to forget it; there were according to
old accounts, so many thousand Cities in Egypt, and consequently there ought to
have been as many Bishops; but it seems the Apostle did not understand (...),
in every City, according to the way of the Egyptian Priests, or a flattering
Poet, but according to the proper and received signification of the word. And
therefore in Egypt, instead of many thousands of Bishops, we never find above a
hundred when the Country was generally converted, and before the alteration of
the pretended Primitive Episcopacy can be pretended. But to proceed.

Prim. ep. p. 48.
In the tribe of Juda were a hundred and fourteen Cities; in half the tribe of
Manasseh 60, and in other tribes proportionably. It must be confessed, that in
the time of Josuah small places were called Cities; but in our Saviors time it
was otherwise, for the Evangelists distinguish not only between Cities and
Villages, but (...).
between Cities and large Towns: And Josephus mentions Villages so great, as to
have some 7000, some above 10000 inhabitants, and yet for all this styled
Villages. Now when Bishops were settled in that Country, it was not according to
the number of Josuah's Cities, but of those properly so. For generally
speaking, the Bishops were ordein'd in Cities, and therefore their number as
proportionable to these. For about the middle of the sixth Century all the
Bishops of the three Palestines were but five and forty, as appears from their
Subscriptions Anno. 536.
in the Council of Jerusalem, those who were absent subscribing by their
proxies, and yet among these some seem to be without the Palestines; for the
Bishop of Aradus subscribes there, and he of Petra, and some others. Now it
does not appear that ever there were more Bishoprics in this Country from the
beginning of Christianity, and perhaps not so many; for Parembolae had a Bishop
in that Synod, which was erected Euthym. vita. ap. Coteler. Mon. p. 238.
to an Episcopal seat not long before.

Prim. ep. p. 49.
In Crete there were 100 Cities, and therefore called Hecatonpolis. Homer Hom.
Iliad. B. Odyss. T.
who is the only witness for these 100 Cities, happens to differ from this
reconing in another place, and makes them but 90. Strabo Strab. l. x.
and Eustathius Eustath. in Iliad B.
take great pains to reconcile this difference; but for my part I am satisfied
with what Didymus (...). Did. in Odys. T.
has observed, that the Poet is not to be understood of any definite number,
but intends only to say that there were many. And if twenty had been as
necessary for a verse as the other numbers, the rest of those Cities had been
in danger of being demolished; for Poets can raise or destroy Cities with more
ease than the greatest Princes in the world. But Titus, who was directed by St.
Paul to appoint Bishops in the Cities of Crete, could not without revelation
find out half this Century of Homer's Cities; for they had been lost long
before; nay some of hose mentioned by the Poet, as the chiefest of the Island,
were not to be found in Strabo's Strabo l. 10.
time. Miletus and Lycastus were destroyed and their Territories seized by
Lyctus and Cnossus. And whatever Cities there had been there of old; yet in the
middle of the fifth Century the whole Island had but eight Bishops, as appears
by the subscriptions of their Synodical Epistle Ep. Episc. Cretae. ad Leon. ad
Calum. Conc. Chalced,
to Leo. As for the other instances of this paragraph, from Laconia, Epyrus,
Palus Pomptina, and the 1200 Cities of Gaul; they are discharged with their
company, and must take the same common answer.

But our Author not content to bring down the pride of Cities so low, as to
make our Market Towns and Villages equal to them, is resolved at last to reduce
them to their first elements, and to make them inferior to some single houses.
Prim. ep. p. 49.
Cities they had of old little bigger than some houses, as that of Nero in
Suetonius, The building about his Fishponds were like Cities. Circumseptum
aedificijs ad urbium speciem. If our Author intended to be witty, it is but a
poor jest; but if he be serious in this way of proof, it makes a Comedy. For
what he cites, does not disparage Cities, but represent that house as
monstrously vast, and beyond all measure extravagant. How can Cities be
diminished by this comparison, when this house Suet. Nero. c. 81.
reached from the Palatium to Esquiliae, and had a Portico three miles long. It
was a building that threatened to swallow all the City of Rome and the
neigbouring Country.

Roma domus fiet: Vejos migrate Quirites.
Si non and Vejos occupat ista domus.
To the same effect Salust and Seneca are brought in by our Author, Prim. ep.
p. 50.
complaining of the luxury of their age in building: That they had diverse
Houses comparable to Cities, and some private Houses exceeded the dimensions of
Cities. But still this is not to lessen Cities, but to expose the prodigious
greatness of those Houses. Besides this way of speaking is seldom without
Hyperbole, and not to be examined by rule and compass; for in such
exaggerations many things may be compared that are far from being equal. But to
make all sure, he tells Prim. ep. p. 50.
us, They accounted it an excessive great House which took up four Acres; as
would seem by that of Valerius Maximus, Anguste se habitare putat cujus domus
tantum patet quantum Cincinnati rura patuerunt; when three of his seven Acres
were gone. It is doubtless a very great House that takes up four Acres; but
that it should seem so from this passage, is very hard to conceive, unless
Anguste habitare should signify in English to have an excessive great House.
It seems therefore to those who understand a little Latin, that Valerius
Maximus took such Houses as took up but four Acres, as an inferior and moderate
extravagance, in comparison of the immensity of other buildings.

At last we are come to particulars. Prim. ep. p. 50.
Emporia a City of the Greeks in Spain was less than half a mile in compass, by
Livy's account. This Emporia, (...). Strab. c. 3.
which belonged to the Greeks, was but a small part of a great City that had
Hispanis retractior a mari trium P. P. in circuitu murus erat. l. v. Dec. 4. l.
4.
three miles in compass, only the Greeks dwelt in this quarter, and the
Spaniards in the rest; they were encompassed by one common wall without, but
they were separated by another within; and after sometime the partition was
taken away, and they lived promiscuously. There was (...). Strab. l. 16.
a City of the Parthians upon the Tigris, made up of three Cittadels exceeding
strong, each having a wall of its own; if our Author had found but the name of
one of these, we should in all likelihood have found it among his diminitive
Cities. At this rate we may have a City of Jews in Rome, because they have a
quarter there, and at some times are shut up and separated from the Romans.

Prim. ep. p. 50.
Phaselis is the next, the character of which we are to take from Lucan, who
speaking of it when Pompey fled thither, says it contained not so many souls as
Pompey 's ship, and yet it was an Episcopal City. It is well, our Author does
not insist to have it an Episcopal City in Pompey's time; for soon after it
seemed considerable enough to deserve that dignity. It had suffered much in the
Isaurian wars, and had been taken by Servilius; and from hence it was, that the
City was so weak at that time. But as it was one of the chiefest places of that
Country before those wars, as Florus Validissimas urbes eorum Phaselin, etc.
Flor. l. 3. c. 6.
and Eutropius Lyciae urbes clarissimas, in his Phaselidem. Eutrop. l. 6.
represent it; so soon after the time of which Lucan speaks, it recovered it
self so well as to be accounted a very considerable City. Strabo (...). Strab.
l. 14.
observes of it, that in his time it had three Ports or Havens, and was a
considerable City. And least it may be thought, that the word which Strabo
uses, and I render considerable, signifies but an ordinary common place, let
him explain himself. When he speaks (...). Strab. l. 10.
of Gortyna in Crete, he takes notice that it had a considerable Circuit; and
then explains himself, that it was fifty furlongs, i. e. above six miles round.
And that it was not a mean Town, when it became a Bishop's seat, we may learn
from the old Geographer Vet. orbis Descrip. ed. Jac. Gotofr. Anno 1628.
published by Gotofred, who reckons it among the chief Cities of that Country
in his time, which the Editor conceives to have been in the reign of
Constantius.

Prim. ep. p. 51.
Cucusus a City (the civility of whose Bishop, Chrysostom, when he was there
banished, commends) was (...). Chrysostom. ep. 13.
not so good as a Market Town. That it had no Market while Chrysostom was
there, proceeded not from the meaness of the City, but from its being besieged
by the Isaurians, and the famine that happened there at that time, as Palladius
(...). Pallad. vit. Chrysostom. p. 94, 96. Ed. Bigot.
relates. Sasima, says our Author, was no better, though it pass for a City. He
has mustered this already among his Villages. It never had a Bishop before
Gregory, but belonged to Tyana from which it was distant 32 miles, as we are
informed by Antonine's Itinerary. Prim. ep. p. 51.
Aradus in Strabo, and Antaradus in Pliny, were Cities of seven furlongs. Pliny
confounds Antaradus with Aradus, as Vossius Voss. observe. in Pomp. Mel. p. 202.
has observed; so it is but one City, to which that narrow Circuit belongs. But
notwithstanding this small compass, I am afraid there is no Market Town in the
three Kingdoms can equal it for force and number of Inhabitants. What they
wanted in compass they made up in height, and built (...). Strab. l. 16. Etiam
supra aliena tecta sedem ponere licet. Pomp. Mel. l. 2. c. 7.
one House over another, and in the language of the Scripture were raised up to
Heaven. In the time of the Greek-Syrian Kings they were so powerful, that they
had what terms they pleased from those Monarchs; and among others, gained this
point so seldom granted even to the greatest Ally, that they might receive all
the fugitives of Syria. And in Marc. Antony's time, this little nest was so
strong in People, that they had resisted the force he had sent thither to
gather Contributions, and in that quarrel destroyed Eusebius. Chron. Olym. 184.
Dion. Cass. l. 48.
four Cohorts of Romans; and Curtius Salassus who commanded them, they burned
alive. At the lowest reckoning four Cohorts must have considerably above two
thousand Soldiers: For if the first was there, which was called the Milliaria,
that alone had above eleven hundred foot and 132 horse; Veget. de Re Milit. l.
2. c. 6.
each of the other had above six hundred horse and foot. Now four of such
Cohorts is such a force, that I believe a Market Town or Village of ours would
not think advisable to attempt. Besides, this little place in old times had a
King after the manner of the Phoenician Cities. Strab. l. 16.
But I will not depend upon this, because I am not sure; but according to our
Author's notion and that of his party, a King may be under the same limitation
for Territory as a Bishop. For in the Infancy of civil Government Kings had but
small Dominions, when Abraham and his three hundred Shepherds could defeat five
together. Nazianzum is the last instance of a small City; but how small, or
what proportion it held to our Villages or Market Towns, we do not learn from
our Author; and therefore having no Evidence to give in to our Author's
purpose, it is dismissed for the sake of Gregory, whose name and merit has
preserved the memory of his City.

Now to prevent great and common mistakes about ancient Bishoprics, our Author
Prim. ep. p. 51, 52.
is pleased to make this acute observation, that there were Cities of several
sorts and dimensions. It is strange no Critic could observe so much before to
prevent those great mistakes. Those Cities that were six furlongs in compass or
under, are called (...).
little, such was Paeanium in Aetolia. This is little indeed, as dwarfs among
men, very rare, and of no great use, but to admire for rarity of example; and
therefore what is so much below the common size, is not likely to be of any
great use to show the compass of ancient Bishoprics. But to proceed.

Prim. ep. p. 52.
Those that had above six furlongs in Circuit to twelve or thereabouts, pass
for (...).
middle-siz'd Cities. So Antioch upon Maeander is (...). Strab. l. 13. So was
Jessus in Polybius, which was but ten furlongs. This Remark stands in need of
farther confirmation. For of that Antioch which is said to be an ordinary City,
no Author gives the Circuit. So that whether it were ten or fifteen or twenty
furlongs, is unknown. Jassus was indeed but ten furlongs; but whether to be
reduced to the little or the middle sort, no ancient Author has directed. But
this is to be made out by what follows. Those which had sixteen furlongs in
circumference or near it, and so upwards, were accounted great Cities: For some
of their prime Cities and Metropoles of Countries were no bigger. Nice the
Metropolis of Bythinia being (...). Strab. l. 12.
but sixteen furlongs in compass. No larger was Sands. Trav. p. 219.
Famagusta the chief City in Cyprus, built in the place of Constantia, the
ancient Metropolis of that Island. About that bigness was the great and famous
Tire of old, before it was taken by Alexander; for he having joined it to the
continent, and upon its recovery not content with its ancient bounds, had much
enlarged it, Plin. l. 5. c. 19.
yet it was but 22 furlongs in compass. Sidon was (...). Strab. l. 16.
of the like size with Tire. New Carthage, Polyb. l. 3.
the principal City in Spain, while the Carthaginians bore sway there, was but
twenty furlongs when largest; it might be less than sixteen when contracted. It
signifies little to the main question, what sort of Towns might be accounted
great in the East before Alexander, or in Spain in the days of Hannibal;
because it was long before the Institution of Bishops, and it was before the
great improvement of the World as to Cities, by the Macedonian and Roman
Conquests. Thucidides Thucid. l. 1.
comparing the state of old Greece with that of his time, observed a very great
improvement since the famous expedition to Troy; and thought that Micaenae,
which was the chief City in Homer's Catalogue, would be but a small Town
compared with the Cities of Greece in his time. The improvement of Cities in
other Countries happned to be later; for most of the great Cities of the East
were raised by the successors of Alexander, and bear the names of them or some
of their families. Hence we have so many Antiochs, Selencias, Apameas,
Laodiceas, Ptolemais, Demetrias and Alexandrias, in all parts of the East, from
their gratitude to their common master; and all these, Cities of the first
magnitude, and much surpassing the old ones of those parts. After these the
Roman Conquerors came, and by the greatness and number of their Colonies, and
the magnificence of their Cities, made ample amends for the desolations of
their Armies. And when that vast Empire had settled, and the Emperors betook
them selves to build and people Cities instead of destroying them; then were
Cities at the height for magnificence and greatness, and number of Inhabitants.
And to compare our Villages or Market Towns, or indeed our Cities, with those
of the Empire, argues a strange ignorance of those times, or a great
presumption that all other people are ignorant enough to be so grossly imposed
upon. For it is as absurd to compare our Buroughs, or the generality of our
Cities, to the Cities of the Roman Empire, as it would be to compare London
with old Rome, or England with the Roman Empire, or the reading of Mr. Clerkson
with that of Plutarch or Pliny.

After the Roman Empire had been torn in pieces, and divided between barbarous
Nations, there was a new face and order of things. The Barbarian humor had
something wild and fierce in it, that would not agree with the way of living in
Cities, and therefore the old Cities soon became desolate. The Roman Provinces,
which were nothing else, but so many combinations of Cities, all the Country
being divided between them for Territory, were divided into Counties instead of
Cities. The people were forced to resort to the Castle of the Count for
Justice; and the wild way of life in scattered habitations returned again. And
although in this part of the World we are much recovered from that barbarity,
and may have some Cities not inferior to the Roman greatness; yet in general
our Towns and Cities are much below those of old times. Nor can they well be
otherwise, since they stand upon much narrower foundations as to their
Constitution, than the Greek or Roman Cities. For our Cities are but so many
exempts from the jurisdiction of the County, and have seldom any Jurisdiction
half a mile beyond the walls, and besides are generally but an Assembly of
Tradesmen. Whereas the Roman Cities were upon another bottom, every one having
a Territory, as it were a County belonging to it, not only under the
Jurisdiction of the City Magistrate, but divided between the City Inhabitants,
who were the Lords of the adjoining Country. And therefore it is reasonable to
judge, that Cities of this kind would naturally become greater than ours,
having so much greater encouragement and means of increase. What is here only
said, and in short, shall be proved at large in another Chapter; where I shall
consider what is alleged by our Author concerning the Territories of ancient
Cities. In the mean time I will reply to the Instances of great Cities with
small circumference; although what is already said may be sufficient to excuse
me from any farther labor about this matter, having shown already, how little
pertinent it is to the present question.

The way which our Author takes of measuring Cities by their Circumference is
very gross and uncertain, and has been exposed long ago by Polybius, as a
vulgar conceit, proceeding from the ignorance of the first principles of
Geometry. Most people, says he, Polyb. l. 9. p. 777.
judge of Cities by their Circuit; and if one should say that Megalopolis which
is fifty furlongs in compass, is not half so great as Lacedaemon that is but
forty eight, his discourse will seem extravagant and incredible. Lacedaemon
(...). Polyb. l. 5. p. 504.
was of a round figure, and so more comprehensive. Megalopolis was irregular
and skirting. So when our Author fancies he has found a Village of equal
Circumference to an old City, he may be much mistaken, if upon this score he
thinks he can demonstrate, that the Towns are of equal bigness.

Now the best way (...). Thucid. l. 1. p. 4.
of judging of the greatness of a City is not from the Circuit of the walls,
but from its force and multitude of Inhabitants. For it is not the space of
ground on which it stands, but the people that render it great. For many Towns
of a small compass have so swarmed with people, that they have surpassed Cities
above three times their measure, in real greatness. Such was Aradus, of which
we have given an account already; such was Tire of old, if we should admit our
Authors survey of it; for it filled the World with its Colonies. Carthage, and
Septis, and Vtica, and 300 Towns more in Africa, were Colonies sent from this
little Hive, with which our Author thinks fit to compare our Market Towns. And
that we may not suspect these ancient accounts of the greatness of so small a
place, as incredible; Algiers is sufficient to convince us of the possibility
of the thing. For Recueil Histor. p. 1.
this little Nest of Pirates, scarce a league in compass, is inferior to few
Cities in Europe, that are double to it in circuit; and though it have not 8000
houses in all, yet are the Inhabitants innumerable. Ilium, built by Lysimachus,
was Strab. l. 13.
forty furlongs, or five miles in compass. Gortyna in Crete, which was but the
second of the Island, was fifty furlongs about; and if we may trust the reading
of that place in Strabo, Strab. l. 10.
it had once above fourscore furlongs of wall, and that not enough. Causabon
suspects a fault in the Copy, but if it be, it is an old one; for Eustathius
Eustath. in Iliad. B.
cites this place without the least variation. I might add several more of
great Circuit, which were much inferior to Tire in force and reputation; so
that upon this account it is no very sure way of judging of Cities by their
Circumference.

There is yet another reason, why we cannot depend upon our Authors way of
measuring Cities; because the Circumference generally mentioned by ancient
Authors is only that of the wall, and then the Suburbs is omitted, which is
sometimes little less than the City it self; Dion. Halicar. l. 4. p. 219.
and in times of peace most thriving Cities grow out of shape, and run into
Subburbs. The walls of Rome under the Vespasians were Plin. l. 3. c. 5:
Expatiantia tecta multas urbes addiderunt.
but thirteen miles about, yet at the same time without the walls there were
such great buildings as might make many Cities. And when all the Suburbs had
been walled by Aurelian, Vopisc. in Aurelian. ut 50 propo milia murorum ejus
ambitus teneat.
the compass of the wall was fifty miles. The circuit of the wall of Alexandria
was reckoned XV. M. pass. laxitate inserta. -- Orb gyrato laciniosam. Plin. l.
5. c. 10.
about fifteen miles, but the figure was irregular and full of windings; so
that the Area of the City might be less than that of Rome within the walls. But
if we may depend upon Vossius Is. Voss. var. obser.
his Calculation, this City with its Suburbs was fifty miles in compass. In
Turkey the Suburbs Ipsis oppidis majora Suburbia. Busbeq. Ep. 1.
are generally bigger than the Cities, and altogether look like great Towns,
which is the case of all thriving Countries secure from war, as the Roman
Empire when it flourished was, excepting only the frontier Provinces. If we
should take the measure of London from its walls, it might seem to those who
judge of Cities after our Author's way, to be but an ordinary Town; especially
if to lessen its compass, it should be thrown into a round figure. Colen might
perhaps seem to such Judges the greater place of the two, because it has Bert.
de Urb. Germ. p. 90.
near five miles in compass, which London would scarce reach in the same
figure, which is a semicircle. So uncertain is this way of judging of the
greatness of Cities, and making comparisons between them, from their
Circumference. I may now very reasonably think my self discharged from any
obligation to make particular answers to the instances alleged. Yet because I
know those of our Authors mind not very easy to receive satisfaction, I will
take notice of every particular; and if I have not the good fortune to
satisfy, I may perhaps leave them less room for cavil.

As to Nice, though it were the Metropolis of Bythinia, it was not the greatest
City there; for Nicomedia was Nicomedia Bythiniae Praeclara. Plin. l. 6. c. 32.
(...). Pausan. l. 5.
much greater, and was after Strabo's time made a Metropolis of the greatest
part of Bythinia, though Nice still maintained a right of primacy or
precedence; which gave offense to the greater City, and occasioned some
tumults; for the composing of which Dio Chrysostomus employed his eloquence and
authority. And if Dio's complement to Nice was not beyond all measure
extravagant, this City must have great Suburbs, or be much enlarged; for he
tells Dion. Chrysostom. Or. 39 and 38. (...). Dio. Or. 39.
those Citizens, that their City was not inferior either for strength or
greatness, to any of the renowned Cities. For if it were but two miles in
compass, there were some above ten times as great, and the generality of Cities
accounted great about twice as big, unless we may suspect the reading of Strabo
as to the sixteen furlongs; for immediately after it is plain there is
something amiss.

Famagusta is too young to be brought in Evidence for the measure of ancient
Cities; for I do not know that it is mentioned any where before the Holy War,
Radulph de Dicet. inter X Script. p. 660.
and could not be very long before, because Constantia in whose place this is
supposed to rise, is to be found in the Greek Notitia so often mentioned, which
cannot be older than the ninth Century. And we may presume it to be exact in
Cyprus, since it was written by one George a Cypriot, out of another Book
indeed; but he would in probability have corrected any thing that had been
amiss in his own Country. Nor was Famagusta the chief City in Cyprus when it
was taken Anno 1570.
by the Turks. For Nicosia was Gratian de Bello Cypr. l. 1.
then the Capital City of the Island, and its Circuit double to that of
Famagusta, for it was then four miles about.

That the famous Tire before it was taken by Alexander, was about that bigness,
i. e. of sixteen furlongs, we have not from our Authors reading, but his
invention; and it is from the same authority that we have another piece of new
History, that Alexander had much enlarged it. He joined it indeed to the
continent by filling up that arm of Sea that divided it, and made a causway of
a hundred paces broad to approach it; but that it was enlarged by this, is only
a vision of our Author's head. Pomponius Mela, who is of better credit in this
matter, tells us a quite contrary story, that Tyros aliquando Insula, nunc
annexa terris deficit. Mel. l. 1. c. 12. Voss. Observe. in Mel. and in Append.
Tire was once an Island, but now it is joined to the Continent, it decays.
Strabo (...) Strab. l. 16.
says it recovered it self from that calamity into which it fell; but that it
was improved, he does not give the least intimation: And Pliny Nunc omnis ejus
nobilitas conchylio and purpura constat. Plin. l 5. c. 19.
comparing its ancient Greatness and its Colonies with the condition of it in
his time, intimates it to have fallen much from its ancient splendour; for now,
says he, the place is famous only for its Purple. The greatness of it when it
was taken by Alexander, may be best judged from the descriptions of the siege
of Diodorus Siculus, Diodor. Sic. l. 16.
Arrian, Arian. Exped. Alex. l. 3.
and Quintus Curtius. Q. Curt. l. 4.
It had eighty Ships of war, and Inhabitants innumerable. For when the Town was
taken, there were 8000 killed, 30000 Captives, 15000 were saved by the
Sydonians, a great number of women and children were sent to Carthage in the
beginning of the siege. And now let any man judge whether this would not be
accounted a great City in our days, and whether any of our Market Towns or
Cities besides London, can enter into comparison with old Tire. As to the
Circuit of this famous City, I must confess I am not well satisfied, because I
cannot reconcile the descriptions of Strabo Strab. l. 16. (...).
and Pliny. Circuitus xix. M. P. est intra Palaetyro inclusa. Oppidum ipsum
xxii. Stadia obtinet.
The first says the City is all an Island like Aradus, and the buildings of
many stories, and higher than those of Rome; so that according to this Author,
the whole Island was taken up by the City: The relations of the siege seem to
to agree with this, that the walls of the Town reached to the Sea on all sides
of the Island; for all the attacks were made out of the ships, and there seems
to be no ground without the walls for the besiegers to lodge themselves on. Yet
Pliny tells us that this Island, taking in old Tire, was nineteen miles in
compass, and yet the City but two and twenty furlongs. I cannot dissemble my
suspicion of this place, though the Critics think fit to pass it over. Some
mistake there is in the numbers, and the sense is not very perfect. But I know
no remedy, since all Copies agree, and that ancient one, so much magnified by
the Paris Editors, does not vary here from the rest. It might be but 22
furlongs, as our Author tells us it was, when enlarged. The Enlargement is a
dream; the compass of the Island and of the City was the same both before and
since the taking of it by Alexander; and though it might be but narrow in
respect of Cities accounted great, yet the height of the houses made amends for
the smallness of the Area, and made it equal to the chiefest Cities. And if we
may compute this, as Aristides in his panegyric does Rome, and measure it
upward, we may say that here were many Cities laid one on the top of another.

If Sidon were as great as Tire, it might be called a great City without a
complement, and be much beyond the comparison of our Market Towns and Cities;
yet this in the Roman times was fallen something from its ancient greatness.
For before it had been taken by the Persians, it was the greatest of all the
Maritime Towns of that Country, and was still wealthy when Mela Adhuc opulenta
Sidon, antequam caperetur ^a Persis, Maritimarum Urbium maxima. P. Mel. l. 1.
c. 12.
wrote his Geography, and at the same time equal to Tire, as Strabo Strab. l.
16.
observes.

New Carthage (...). Polyb. l. 3. p. 236. (...). Polyb. l. 10. (...).
was indeed the principal City in that part of Spain that belonged to the
Carthaginians; but the greatness of the place is not to be estimated from the
compass of it, but from its strength and commodiousness of situation, and
number of Inhabitants. The Circuit was at first but 20 furlongs, which may
contain space enough for a great City, and within this compass, it may be more
considerable than many Cities of greater circumference. Emporium was a City of
Spain, and larger than Carthage, for it was three miles about; but there was no
comparison to be made between them as to their force and reputation. The
greatness of this place may be best computed from the spoil of it when it was
taken by Scipio. The particulars are to be found in Polybius Polyb. l. 2.
and Livy; so that the Town it self, to use Livy's Ut minimum omnium Carthago
ipsa fuerit. Live. l. 36.
expression, was the least part of the spoil.

Live. l. 34. c. 9.
Our Author makes after his manner a notable remark concerning this Town, that
when it was contracted it might be less than sixteen furlongs. After it was
taken and pillaged, it might have been reduced into a Village; but then surely
it ceases to be an instance of a great City. Laodicea was once a greater City
than New Carthage; but it is now reduced to a solitary Mill, as Monsieur Spon
Voyage de Spon. T. 1. p. 262.
informs us; yet I hope we are not to take the measure of great Cities, from
such poor and despicable remains.

Our Author having observed, that there were several sizes of ancient Cities,
and the greatest he thought fit to mention being not three miles in compass, he
comes to draw his conclusion, Prim. ep. p. 53.
that their lesser Cities were but like our ordinary Villages; their middle
sort of Cities were like our Market Towns or Buroughs, (we have some that may
compare with their great Cities) or like their larger Villages, such as
Justinian noted in Pisidia, etc. I was afraid when our Author began his
observations concerning Cities, that the Ancients had no Villages at all, but
that all places with them had been Cities. Now I am much better satisfied, when
I find that they had great Villages as well as small, and some equal to our
Market Towns; so that in those days when the Cities were small the Villages
were great, and many not inferior to Towns of worshipful Title. Our Author did
not consider well the consequence of this great secret, which he is pleased to
reveal. For of those great and populous Villages there was not one in a hundred
that had a Bishop, but were Parishes to the City Bishop, though his City might
be as small as any of those dwarf Towns which our Author has produced. So that
all his pains are come to nothing, that he had taken in diminishing the seats
of the ancient Bishops; since there were great and small Villages then, as well
as now, to make up their Dioceses. But let us see how the case of our Bishops
differs from that of their Primitive Predecessors. According to the Inquisition
made by Mr. Clerkson concerning ancient Episcopal seats, several of our Bishops
are seated in Villages, others have Cities for their seats which are not much
superior to Villages; and the most of their Episcopal Cities are not greater
than the chief of our Market Towns. Nay Canterbury it self, the Metropolis of
England, is not so great as the Borough of Southwark. What consequence this
may have in the reasoning and disputes of after-ages, I dare not divine. He
that shall be so industrious as to pick this out of some scattered papers which
time may render venerable, may like Mr. Clerkson acquire the reputation of a
learned man and a very harmless Adversary.

It ill becomes us of this Nation to vye Cities with the Roman Empire, and much
more absurd is it to set up our Villages and Market Towns in competition with
those Greek and Roman Cities that were distinguished by their greatness. For
few that read can be ignorant that our Cities, generally speaking, are much
inferior to those of our Neighbors. Those of France and Italy and Spain and
the Low Countries do much excel ours; and yet there are none of, these that
will undergo the envy of such a competition. Italy has as many great Towns in
proportion as any part of Europe, except the Low Countries; and yet how much is
it fallen from its ancient greatness? About 1500 years ago it was all covered
with Cities, and many of them great and populous; and to speak modestly of its
decay, it seems not to have a tenth part of the people which it had then; and
its Cities fallen at present as much short of those ancient ones, few only
excepted, as the present Rome is from that which was mistress of the world.
France may be now more populous and flourishing than when it was a Roman
Province; yet the Cities are generally Recherches de Pasq. l. 2. c. 16.
inferior to the old Roman Colonies. For while they are left to trades like
the other Towns of Europe, and the Nobility live in their Castles in the
Country, or in the Court, and the Country is separated by jurisdiction and
interest from the Cities, it is scarce possible that they should equal the
greatness of ancient times, when there was no Nobility but in Cities, no
quality higher than a Citizen.

By these instances of Cities accounted great and yet of narrow compass, our
Author would insinuate, that any thing beyond this measure of twenty furlongs
was extraordinary; whereas Cities double in circuit to these were scarce
accounted great. What proportion the old Cities of any reputation in story
might bear to ours, will appear from the Examples I am going to produce, and a
more just calculation of ancient greatness. I do not intend to follow the
extravagance of some late Writers, who can speak nothing of ancient or remote
people but miracles, and make more Inhabitants in one City, than half Europe
can reckon. It is really a wrong both to men and to Cities, to give them a
character that is incredible. Their real merit, which might be very great, and
beyond competition, is lost, when dressed up in Romantic fashion, and raised
beyond all belief and possibility. Wherefore in the account which I shall give
of ancient Cities which became Bishops seats, I shall confine my self to the
express testimonies of ancient Writers; and when any computation is to be made
by guess, I will take care rather to err by an under-reckoning, than stretching
too far.

Within the compass of the Roman Empire there were many Cities accounted vast,
and these I think are not to be equalled by any which later ages have produced.
These were the wonders of old time, and still remain so to us in the
descriptions and ruins that remain of them. Rome was a prodigy of a City, and
Servius Serve. in Virg. Eclog. 1.
doubts whether it had not outgrown the appellation, and become of another
species; so that it should be called a World rather than a City. The French
vanity has transferred Andr. du Chesne. Antiq. de Vill.
the complement to Paris; and some of their Writers have been so wise, as to
refine seriously upon the expression. The Hyperbole of Lucan, that if all the
world would agree to assemble in one place, Rome was big enough to receive
them, is not to be endured even in a Poet, and exceeds all bounds. But that
which is certain of the greatness of this place, is that Vopisc. in Aurelian.
it was fifty miles in circuit in Aurelian's time; that Strab. l. 5. Voss. var.
obser. Eusebius. Chron. Olymp. 173. Lapis Ancyr. Eusebius. Chron. Olymp. 188. Id.
Olym 206.
it was thronged with people; that their buildings were very lofty, and that in
several stories they had often several families; that their Census before the
Civil Wars between Caesar and Pompey exceeded the numbers of any City that was
then. And when the strangers and sojourners and servants are added, the sum
will be excessive. After the Government had been settled under Emperors, the
City still increased, though the number of the Inhabitants is not certain. For
the three Census under Augustus, which reckoned above four millions of
Citizens, and that under Claudius, that reckons near seven Millions, are not
confined to the Inhabitants of the place, but take in all that had received the
freedom of the City. In Vespasian's time there Eusebius. Chron. Olymp. 214.
happened a great mortality there, when for many days together there died ten
thousand a day, as appeared by the Ephemeris.

There was a dispute between several Cities for the next place after Rome; I
will name Carthage first, because it was the eldest. The circuit of it is not
certainly delivered; but a little before it was taken and razed by the younger
Scipio, it had Strab. l. 17.
seven hundred thousand Souls, which is almost double to what Mr. Grant Grant's
obs. on the Bills of Mort.
computeth the people of London to be, though he take in all within the bills
of Mortality, and perhaps exceeds in his calculation. This place after having
laid long desolate, received new life, and a Roman Colony under Julius Caesar.
And in Strabo's time who lived under Tiberius, it was equal to the best Cities
in Africa: And in Alexander Severus Herodian. l. 7. 13.
his time it contended with Alexandria for the second place after Rome, to
which alone it yielded; but vy'd with the other for largeness and multitude of
Inhabitants.

Alexandria has been mentioned already upon another occasion. It is described
by Strabo, Strab. l. 17.
who gives only the greatest length of it, and mentions (...). Strab. l. 2.
the breadth where it was narrowest, to make out his figure of a Macedonian
Chlamys; which Mr. Clerkson putting together, makes a circuit less than ten
miles; whereas Pliny Plin. l. 5. 9.
who went upon better ground, makes Strab. l. 17.
Clerks, in Baxt. Chapter Hist. p. 10.
the compass to be fifteen miles; a greater circuit of wall than any City in
Europe can show. It was admired for the number of Inhabitants, and for a long
time reckoned the second City of the World.

In the next place, Seleucia upon Euphrates deserves to be taken notice of; for
it has been from the beginning a City of the first rank. Strabo Strab. l. 16.
joins it with Alexandria, and makes it superior to Antioch. And though we
have no account of the largeness of it, yet we find Eutrop. l. 8.
that when it was taken by Lucius Verus, it had five hundred thousand
Inhabitants, which exceeds the sum of London according to Mr. Grant's
computation, by above a fifth part: But Sextus Rufus Sext. Ruf. Brev.
wants a hundred thousand of Eutropius his reckoning. But be it as it will,
it is enough to equal that City to any we have in Europe, if not to surpass
them. Yet this City and Ctesiphon which was little less, had Sozom. l. 2. c. 9.
but one Bishop in Constantin the Great's time.

Antioch has been ever in reputation for greatness and magnificence, but it
seems to have been much increased since the rise of Christianity. Strabo Strab.
l. 16.
makes it inferior to Alexandria; but Dio Dio Chrysostom. Or. 47. (...).
the Orator, who flourished under Trajan, tells us it was four miles and a half
in length, which is more than Alexandria had. It received many additions after
that from the Christian Emperors, of whom several had their residence there;
and particularly that City is said to have been enlarged, and the walls of it
carried on as far as the gate that looked toward Daphne. Without the gates it
had great Suburbs; and when in Justin the elders time it was destroyed by an
Earthquake, three hundred thousand men are said Procop. Pers. l. 2. Evagr. l.
2. c. 12. Niceph. Call. l. 17. c. 3.
to perish in that calamity, and yet a great number preserved. But whoever
would know the character of this City, need only look into Libanius his
Panegyric, and then let him match it if he can with any new City he has met
either in his Travels or his Reading.

Constantinople in the first design was equal to the greatest Cities after
Rome, and in a short time was adjudged to have the second place, not only for
dignity but greatness. Ausonius Auson. Clar. Urb.
pairs it with Carthage, as being the greatest next to Rome, and gives it the
preference to Carthage.

Constantinopoli assurgit Carthago priori,
Non toto cessura gradu, quia tertia dici
Fastidit, non ausa locum sperare secundum,
Et Constantino concedere cogit Elisam.
I perceive Mr. Clerkson, Prim. ep. p 66.
either out of mistake, or to try a small trick, has drawn in this great City
to favor his paradox, that Cities accounted great at this time, were but
ordinary Towns. For Bizantium, says he, was made by Constantine to be as large
as two Cities at least. -- And whereas it had been reduced to a Village by
Severus, the Enlargement he gave it, was no more than the addition of fifteen
furlongs to its former compass, as the said Zosimus (...). Zosim. l. 2. c. 30.
shows. That Author does indeed say, that Constantine did add fifteen furlongs;
but it was not to the former compass of the old City, but to be measured
directly beyond the old wall; that is, Constantine built his wall fifteen
furlongs beyond the old one. Now if Mr. Clerkson could not discern the
difference between adding fifteen furlongs to the compass, and building a wall
so many furlongs beyond the old one, it is great pity he should ever undertake
to measure Cities, or talk of the proportion they bear to our Villages and
Market Towns. The walls of old Bizantium, before they were pulled down by
Severus, were Dionys. Byz.
forty furlongs in circuit; but when the walls are removed fifteen furlongs
further, the space may yield us a City much more than double to the old one;
and this new one was effectually so. For its circuit is something short of
thirteen miles, according to Gellius; (c) and they want but one furlong of
fourteen miles according to the measure of Laonicus Chalcocondulas; though in
the common P. Gell. C. P. p. 15. De la Vall. Let. de C. P. p. 30. Spon.
Voyage. T. 1. p. ^01. 15. M.
discourse of the people, it pass for near twenty. The present City has the
same bounds with that of Constantine; for when it was first built it filled
that Isthmus (...).
as it does now. Themistius Zosim. l. 2. c. 30. (...). Themist. Or. 6. p. 162.
Ed. Pet.
speaking of the improvement of Byzantium by Constantine, What was once, says
he, the hem of the City, is now the center and heart of it. But Constantinople
would not be confined within those walls, as wide as they were, but soon run
out into Suburbs. Syca, which is now Pera, was but a Suburbs to that City; yet
it was Steph. de urb. in (...). Zosim. l. 4. (...). Topogr. C. P.
accounted it self a City in Justinian's time, and called by his name. Hebdomum
was reckoned in the Suburbs, though seven miles from the City. P. Gellius does
unfortunately make this a region of the City; and Du Fresne has followed him in
the mistake; but they are refuted by the very Authors and instances they
produce for their opinion. Sozomen Sozom. l. c. 24. (...).
says expressly it was seven miles from the City, that Theodosius had built a
Church there, which bore the name of John the Baptist. And Socrates (...).
Socr. l. 6. c. 12.
speaking of that Church, says it is seven miles from C. P. and not far from
the Sea; for Epiphanius as soon as he landed, is said to have gone to St.
John's Church. In that place there was Ammian. Marc. l. 26. Idatij Chron.
a Palace called Secundianae, and a famous Tribunal, where the Emperors or
Caesar's used to be declared. Valesius Vales. in Addend. Not. ad Ammian.
Marcell. p. 672.
has taken great pains to assert the situation of this place, and has done it
so effectually as to leave no farther place for doubt. There were several other
places that were out-parishes of Constantinople, Soz. l. 2. c. 3. Theodor. l.
5. c. 3.
such as Marianae, Pharmaceus, or Therapea, the port called Hieron. Hestiae,
afterward Michaelium, which was about four miles from the City by water, but
twelve by land; and Elaea where Sisinnius the Bishop of C. P. had been
Parish Priest; for he was not Minister, says Socrates, (...). Socr. l. 7. c. 26.
of any Church within the City, but in the Suburbs of C. P. which is called
Elaea. To conclude, such was the increase of this great City, that Sozomen
(...). Soz. l. 2. c. 3.
does not stick to prefer it even to old Rome; and says, that by general
consent it was concluded to exceed Rome in wealth and multitude of Inhabitants.

These may seem perhaps prodigious, and of no use in the present debate that
takes in the generality of Cities; yet these had respectively but one Bishop at
a time, except in time of schism, and then both parties agreed in this, that
there ought of right to be but one.

Below these therefore we have another size of great Cities, which may be
reasonably thought equal to the greatest now in Europe. Athens Dion. Halic. l.
4. p. 219. l. 9. p. 624.
was almost equal to Rome within the walls; and if we put the long walls that
joined the City to Piraeus into the reckoning, Strab. l. 6.
it will swell up the sum to above twenty miles. Syracuse Plut. in Nic.
was 20 miles in circuit and equal to Athens, accounted (...). Diod. Sic. l. 16.
once the greatest of all the Greek Cities: And though it had variety of
fortune, yet it continued for many ages the chiefest of Sicily. Old Corinth,
before it was razed by Mummius, was a great and wealthy City; it was Strab. l.
8.
eighty five furlongs, that is near eleven miles, in circuit, as Strabo reports
not from vulgar estimate, but from his own survey, for he had traced and
measured the old walls. In Italy there were Cities that seem to surpass these.
Milan the next after Rome, and therefore sometimes called the second Rome of
Italy, was not far inferior to that imperial City in the judgment of
Procopius, (...). Proc. Gotth. l. 2.
and Ausonius; Nec juncta premit vicinia Romae. Auson.
it still retains the Title of Great, and is now ten miles in compass, but much
below its ancient greatness, as the ruins of the old buildings without the
walls do still witness; but especially inferior to the old for number of
people. For when it was taken by the Goths in Justinian's time, Procop. Gotth.
l. 2. p. 143. Ed. Haesch.
there were three hundred thousand men put to the sword, the women not
reckoned, who were preserved and made a Present to the Burgundians for their
service in that siege. Next to this was Aquileia, a City of superlative
greatness, (...). Herod. l. 8. c. 4.
renowned for being fatal to Tyrants. The compass of the walls was twelve, some
say eighteen miles, besides great Suburbs mentioned by Herodian. Ravenna
Claver. Ital. Ant. l. 1. c. 28. Leand. Alb. Descr. d'Ital.
was about this size, for it was made up of three Towns, and therefore called
Trigemina by Sidonius Apollinaris. The Classis, which was the port; and Via
Caesaris, which was all built, and three miles in length; and Ravenna properly
so called. In Gaul there was Treves, which Ausonius Dudum celebrari Gallia
gestet. Treviricaeque Urbis solium. Auson.
sets before Milan, and yet intimates that it was rather postpon'd than put too
forward. Arles and Tholouze come into this number, the later of which is
commended Coctilibus muris quam circuit ambitus ingens.
Quae modo quadruplices ex se cum effunderet urbes;
Non ulla exhaustae sensit dispendia plebis.
Muris, Civibus, ambitu tabernis. Et Sidoni,
Te maris Eoi merces, and Iberica ditant. Aus.

for the great circuit of its wall and number of Inhabitants, so populous, that
when it had lately peopled four Cities, it was not sensible of any loss of men.
In the same Country Narbo was famous for the great compass of its wall, and for
people and magnificence, and the trade of the World. To this Class we might
reckon Nicomedia, Ephesus, the Cappadocian Caesarea, Cyzicus, Strab. l. 12.
which with its own strength defended it self against Mithridates with an Army
of an hundred and fifty-thousand men and a fleet of four hundred Ships. I might
reckon many more of this sort; but having not the skill of Homer to set off a
Catalogue of Cities with variety of expression, I will not presume farther upon
the patience of the Reader.

These instances may seem to be liable to the same exceptions with the former;
for it may be said that these were rare in respect of the number of lesser
Cities, and that not one in fifty was so great. It is confessed, nor are they
alleged with a design of persuading that the greater part were of this size;
but since these were frequent, and most Countries had some, it is reasonable to
conceive, that when ancient Writers speak of great Cities, they may have some
regard to these, and not be thought to magnify such mean places as our
Market Towns, when they had so many Cities like London or Paris in their view.
Wherefore to come yet lower, there were Cities accounted great, that wanted
half of the circuit of one of these. Lacedaemon Polib. l. 9.
was a great City, though but six miles in compass; yet this was not the old
Lacedaemon that contended with Athens for the Principality of Greece, for that
had neither walls nor contiguity, but was built scatterdly after the manner of
Villages, as Thucidides Thucid. l. 1. Live. dec. 4. l. 4. Pausan. lac. l. 3. ib.
l. 8.
describes it; but the City that Polybius represents was such as Tyrants had
reduced it to. Gortyna was a great Town, though but fifty furlongs about.
Byzantium Zosim. l. 2.
was but forty; new Corinth no more in Strabo's Stra. l. 13.
time; Ilium was of that size. It would be endless to reckon Cities of this
degree, since so many happened to have this measure, which were neither
Metropoles of Provinces, nor any other way remarkable, as some of these Cities
mentioned were not. Now, even these are accounted in our time great Cities.
This is the compass of Antwerp, if Pontanus Pontan. Hist. Amstelod.
was well informed; and Colen reckoned a very great City wants of it; and I do
not know whether any City of ours, besides London, will fill this girdle. About
this pitch we may six the point of greatness, so that what is below it, is not
to be accounted great in respect of circuit; though it may happen, that in half
this compass a great force of people may be contained. Vienna is accounted Dr.
Brown's Descript. of Vienna. p. 133.
among the chief Cities of the Empire, and yet it is scarce three miles in
compass; yet for number of people is inferior or to very few. And after this
manner Mr. Clerkson's riddle of little-great Cities is to be resolved. The size
is but mean, and belongs to little Towns, but something accidental and
extraordinary in such a bigness may happen to raise some few to a higher
quality, than their outward prospect might challenge. The circuit of Emporium
was three miles, and yet it is never reckoned among the great Cities of Spain.
Phocaea, one of the twelve Cities of Ionia, and the meanest of them, was little
less. Mr. Clerkson calls this one of the greatest Cities of Aeolis, but without
any authority; for Livy Live. Dec. 4. l. 7.
who mentions the measure of it, observes no such thing. The meanness of this
Town does sufficiently appear from the small assistance it could afford to
Miletus Herod. l. 6.
when Besieged by the Persians, which was but three Ships; nor is there any
account of its growing more considerable in aftertimes. Nor could it be
reckoned among the great Towns when it was Besieged by Harpagus, Herod. l. 1.
since the Ships that were in Harbor were sufficient on the sudden to convey
away all the goods and persons that belonged to it. As for such small places,
that sometime had borne the title of Cities, though they had but a mile or
thereabout in circuit; they are mentioned by ancient Authors with an exception
to their title. So Pausanias Pausan. l. 10. p. 614.
speaking of Panopaeum an old City of Phocis, corrects himself in this manner,
If such a place may be called a City that has neither the ornaments nor the
size of a City, for the walls were but seven furlongs in compass.

When Mr. Clerkson had endeavored to show, that the greatest part of ancient
Cities was not to be distinguished from Villages by their measure, he enters
Prim. ep. p. 53.
into an enquiry concerning the nature and constitution of a City, and what it
is that makes it to differ from a Village; and he can find nothing but a wall,
or some privileges, that can make a difference. For those Villages being
walled, or having (...), privileges of Cities granted them, became Cities
without farther enlargement; so this sort of Cities far the most numerous, were
but walled or privileged Villages. Although most ancient Cities were walled,
yet did they not derive their title from their walls; for many places had walls
that were never called Cities, and many great Cities were without walls.
Lacedaemon Pausan. Lacon. Live. l. 38.
was unwalled for many ages by the direction of Lycurgus, and the famous
Numantia Numantia sine muro sine turribus. Luc. Flor. l. 2. c. 18.
that defeated so many Roman Armies, had no walls. All the Cities of
Peloponnesus Zosim. l. 5.
in Arcadius his time were unwalled, accounting themselves sufficiently
fortified by the Hexamilium, or six-mile-wall drawn cross the Isthmus; and all
the Cities of Africa dismantled Procop. Vandal. l. 1.
by the Vandals, did not presently lose their old denomination, or change their
nature. It is then to the privileges or rights, our Author speaks of, that
Cities owe their dignity, whether they have enjoyed them from their first
foundation, or have been improved from Villages; but then there must be a
competent greatness, such as may decently bear the title, otherwise it will
look as absurd and ridiculous, as it was for Caracalla Herodian. l. 4. 16.
who was of very low stature, to affect to personate Achilles or Alexander the
Great. Aristotle (...).
requires in every place that bears the name of City, a sufficient number of
People, for an absolute and perfect communion of civil Life; for (...), Arist.
Pol. l. 7.
as that is not to be called a Ship that is but a span long, so neither is that
place to be accounted a City that has but few Inhabitants. He mentions some,
who thought a great House and little City differed only in name; but he is too
exact in his distribution of things into their proper kinds, to bear this loose
way of speaking; for says he, a House or Family is the first sort, and as it
were the foundation of civil society; a Village is but the increase, and as it
were, the colony of the first house; and then (...), Arist. Pol. l. 1.
many Villages united by a full and perfect communion make a City. And in all
his definitions of a City, he makes (...). Arist. Pol. l. 3. (...), Id. l. 3.
(...), Arist. Oecon. l. 1.
a multitude of Villages essential, and this multitude determined by such a
sufficiency of strength, as may serve for the defense and security of that
City, and the assistance of their neighbors in case they are invaded. So then
his City requires a complete strength for War, which no single Village can well
pretend to; it requires a Country sufficient to maintain this society, and a
strength to defend not only the Town, but the Territory. Now it would seem very
strange, that Aristotle should be so little aquainted with the condition of
Cities in his time, that when he defined the notion, he should shut out the
greater number out of his definition; as he must do if they were no other than
privileged Villages, or such as our Market Towns with a magnificent Charter;
for none of these in the state they now are, without any dependence, can answer
the sufficiency that he makes indispensable, and the principal part of his
definition.

Hippodamus the Milesian Arist. Pol. l. 2.
requires for his City ten thousand men; whom he distributes into three equal
parts, the first to consist of Soldiers, the second of Husbandmen, and the
third of Tradesmen. Aristotle finds fault with the distribution, but not with
the number; nor can it be judged extraordinary. For when Timoleon proclaimed
the freedom of Syracuse over all Greece to any that would remove thither, and
fifty thousand men had come upon this invitation, he placed ten thousand of
them in Argyrinea, recond as Diodorus Siculus (...). Diodor. Sic. l. 16.
says, among the little Cities of Sicily. And Myriandrus a City that had its
name from the number of those first settled there, is never mentioned among the
greater Cities. And Aegesta accounted Diod. Sic. l. 20.
among the smaller Cities of Sicily had 10000 in it when it was taken by
Agathocles. Plato Plat. de Leg. l. 5.
would have five thousand and forty houses in his City, because that number is
commodious for subdivisions; not because he would have his Commonwealth
confined to that measure, for sometimes he would have as many Husbandmen; and
other times he is so extravagant in multiplying his Citizens, that Aristotle
thought no place on earth able to maintain them but the Province of Babylon, or
if there be any other Country of so prodigious fruitfulness. Yet in the
general, he (...) Plat. de R. P. l. 4.
is neither for a great nor a little City, but one that is sufficient, and
would have it grow no farther then, that it still may remain one. And when it
has territories enough for its Subsistence, to part with the rest, in case it
had more, and not to retain a superfluous possession. Yet even of this moderate
size, he expects Plat. de Leg. l. 5.
a sufficience to defend themselves against the insults of their neighbors,
and to assist those who are wrongfully assaulted. But to leave these Cities in
the air, and to come to something more real.

The first Arist. Pol. l. 5.
Cities of the Greeks were very small and numerous; but finding the
inconveniency of having their strength thus dispersed, and being unable to make
any considerable defense apart, they thought it more advisable to make a few
great Cities of these many little ones, and to make their strength more useful
by bringing it closer together. So Theseus Plut. in These.
persuaded the people of the little towns of Attica to remove to Athens. So
Argos Pausan. l. 8. p. 498.
grew by demolishing Mycena and Tyrinthus, and other neighboring Cities. So
Epaminondas persuaded the Arcadians to leave their small Cities, and to go to
Megalopolis, which was made up of above thirty Cities. Thebes owed Dio. Chrysostom.
Or. 46.
its greatness to the same great person, who brought all Baeotia in a manner
into that City. And Miletus increased by the occasion of little Towns in Troas
and Aeolis. Halicarnassus Strabo.
was raised by the accession of six small Cities of Caria. And Alexandria
Strab. l. 13.
in Troas drew in the same Cities and Castles that were about it. And to
conclude, Cassander (...). Diod. Sic. l. 19.
prevailed with the people of Acarnania to leave their little strong places
that were numerous, and to betake themselves to a few large Cities for their
more easy defense against their Enemies; and accordingly that Nation resolved
it self into three great Cities, Stratopolis, Sauria and Agrinium. I might
multiply instances of this sort without end; but these are enough to explain
that sufficiency of measure that Aristotle requires as essential to a City, and
to show the vanity of those who pretend to demonstrate the measure and number
of Primitive Bishoprics, from the multitude and smalness of Cities dissolved
long before our Savior's time, and reduced into a small number of more
considerable Towns, as being better fitted for common safety and the ends of
civil community.

As to the rights and privileges by which Cities were distinguished from
Villages, they were of two sorts, either such as concerned Religion, or those
that belonged to civil Government. The feasts and games and sacrifices were
under the direction of the City Magistrate, and celebrated in Cities, whether
all the Villages that were within the terr tory of those Cities did resort on
such occasions; and therefore Dio Chrysostomus (...).
makes Festivals one of the characteristicks of a City. And then as to their
civil Government, they had administration of Justice within themselves, and
were subject to no other jurisdiction, as Villages were; for such as were of
the resort of any City, were obliged to go thither for Justice, and were in all
things subject to the City Magistrate; and if the Territory were very large,
then some subordinate Magistrates were appointed in the Villages for keeping of
the peace, and deciding of lesser actions. And it is observed Dio. Chr. Or. 39.
Polyb. l. 4. p. 468. l. 113 and Decur. Cod. Theod.
as a peculiarity in the Territory of Elis, that the country people had Justice
administered at home, without the trouble of repairing to the City Courts, so
that many of them did not so much as see their City in all their lives. Now the
privileges of our Cities, though they bear some resemblance to those of which I
have been speaking, yet are they much short of them in respect both of fullness
and extent of jurisdiction, which with us seldom reaches beyond the walls of
the City; whereas in the Greek and Roman way of Government, a City had as it
were a County belonging to it; so that our Cities are but exempts from the
County, whereas those of ancient times were the Lords and the Judges of the
Counties in which they were seated. Such were the Cities of the Roman Empire
when Christian Religion was first preached in them; and the Apostles or their
successors who planted Churches, and appointed Bishops in the Cities where
they preached, did not think fit to prescribe any new bounds, but accomodated
themselves to the limits of the several Cities, which as they were very
unequal, occasioned the Christian Dioceses to become so too. But this made no
quarrel in ancient times; for there were then neither Presbyterians nor
Independents to call for new Agrarian Divisions in the Church of God. That
therefore which our Author Prim. ep. p. 54.
affirms of ancient Cities, that they were but priviledg'd Villages, and that a
wall or something as inconsiderable made the only difference, must proceed
either from ignorance of the state of ancient Cities, or what is worse, from an
intention to deceive. Nor yet do those who grant Bishops to lesser Cities,
leave themselves therefore without reason to deny them to Villages; for the
difference was more than a wall or a formality.

Our Author Prim. ep. p 54.
goes on to confound Villages and Cities, and observes that Bethlega is a
Village in Josephus. But Jonathan having walled it, immediately after he calls
it a City. There were many Villages in the South of Judea and Arabia, that were
not only as populous as ordinary Cities, but great Communities, having a great
number of Villages in their dependences, as I have observed already. Armena was
an unwall'd place, till the inhabitants in their wisdom encompassed it with a
wall to keep them warmer, which may be the reason why to some it is a City, to
others a Village. Solinus whom our Author cites for calling it a City, does not
so much as mention it. Pomponius Mela and Pliny name it among the Cities and
Towns of the Country; but those who call it a Village, speak more exactly,
notwithstanding it had a wall. So Menippus in his Periplus or Voyage calls it,
and from him Strabo and the rest. Steph. in Armene. Xenoph. Exp. l. 6. (...).
What our Author means by mentioning the wisdom of the people of this Village
for building a wall about the Town, I cannot easily imagine, since of old it was
proverbial for folly, Strab. l. 12.
that those who built the walls of Armena had little to do. After this he
mentions Majuma the Port of Gura, honored with the privilege of a City for its
forwardness in the Christian Religion. Yet (...). Sozom. l. 5. c. 3.
even this very place had several country Parishes and Churches belonging to
it; and besides being an extraordinary case, and late, cannot be drawn into any
consequence in the present question about the seats of the Primitive Bishops.
Cenchrea by mistake is called a City by Stephanus, and our Author does worse
than mistake, when he cites Prim. ep. p. 55.
Strabo calling Nelias and many other Towns, both Cities and Villages in the
space of three or four lines, and uses this as an argument to show what little
difference there is between a City and a Village; for these places had been
Cities, but Demetrius (...), etc. (...). Strab. l. 9.
when he built a City, which he called after his own name Demetrias, he drew
out the Inhabitants of Nelias and several other small Cities, to people his new
Town, and so those places which were before Cities, became Villages to
Demetrias, and when they changed their nature, they might well change their
names. Our Author could not but see this; yet alas, it is given but to few
Dissenters to be ingenuous and fair dealers.

That there were Bishops in small Cities is so well known, that Mr. Clerkson
might have saved himself the trouble of proving it, and have presumed so far
upon the knowledge of his Reader; but since by taking upon him to make
unnecessary proof of so plain a fact, he commits some gross mistakes, I do not
think my self obliged to conceal them Abydus says he, Prim. ep. p. 55.
is parva habitatio; and for this cites Strabo Strab. l. 17.
but he had not the fortune to know that this Abydus in Egypt, of which Strabo
speaks, was never a Bishop's seat, at leastwise that it does not appear to have
been; though a City of that name on the Hellespont had a Bishop, which I
suppose was the occasion of our Author's mistake. For he who confounds Cities
and Villages together, may well be allowed to confound two Towns of the same
name. Ascalon because it was in Strabo's time (...), and afterward had a
Bishop, is brought among the mean Episcopal seats; whereas this place had the
fortune to improve so far, that in Constantius his time (...). Geogr. Anon.
Gotofr.
it was one of the chiefest Cities of Phaenicia, according to Gotofred's old
Geographer. He might have spared likewise those Cities that were raised from
Villages; since he has not the least intimation from ancient Writers, whether
they were great or small. It is not likely that Constantine should Socr. l. 1.
c. 18.
adorn a mean Town with his Mother's name, and that Helenopolis Conc. Chalced.
Act. 13.
the City should be no better than Drepana the Village; or that Julian Ammian.
Marcell. l. 25.
the Apostate should bestow his mothers name Basilima, to dignifie a Village
belonging to Nice, and improve it no otherwise than by the Title of a City. And
if to be raised from a Village to a City imply, that the place must be small,
then Constantinople must pass for a mean place, because it was but a Village
before Constantine raised it. Now though these Cities had been all as small as
our Author would suggest, yet will they do him little service in promoting of
Congregational Episcopacy; because there were several Bishops of small Towns
who had large Dioceses, and particularly Theodoret, Theod. Ep. 32. (...). Id.
Ep. 42.
who confesses the meaness of his City, that it was almost desolate, and had
but few Inhabitants; yet had a Diocese forty miles square, and 800 Churches
under his care. But of this I shall be more particular in a more proper place,

Prim. Ep. p. 56.
It is taken for a Rule, says our Author, that where there is a Defensor
Civitatis, there was a Bishop; and Justinian appoints such a Defensor, -- not
only of the great Cities, but of the less. -- And there is a Law in the Code,
that every City should have a Bishop, -- without exception of little or great,
but only two, Tomis and Leontopolis, which afterward had its Bishop, and Tomis
before. He must be very unreasonable, who finds fault with this Rule. And now
that our Author speaks reason, and plain things, God forbid he should be
contradicted. When men who delight in paradoxes and singular fancies, happen to
be in the right, it is a great sin to oppose them. Let every City have its
Bishop, and such exceptions as custom has prescribed, be allowed, till there
be reason for a change. There is surely from this no hurt to the Diocesan way,
nor any service done to Independent Congregations. Yet I cannot but take
notice, that our Author, after his usual manner, stumbles here too upon plain
ground; and the remark he thinks fit to make upon the exceptions in this Law,
shows he did not understand it. Tomis he observes had a Bishop before this
exception was made; as if the Law had suggested that that City had been without
a Bishop, or annexed to another. Whereas on the contrary it says, (...). c. 3.
Tit. 3.
that Tomis had the care of other Cities of Scythia; for indeed all that
Province of Scythia, though it had many Cities, had Sozom. l. 7. c. 18.
but one Bishop, of whom Tomis was the place of Residence and the Title. What
our Author adds to the same effect for Bishops in every City, from the ancient
Comments on Titus 1. and from S. Cyprian and Origin, is readily allowed without
farther debate. But when he comes to his application, and says over the same
things we have had so often before, that (...) is used by the best Authors
sacred and profane to denote both a City and a Village, and that the Apostle
would have such Bishops as were then instituted not only in Cities but in
Villages; -- and that it cannot with reason be questioned, that the Apostolical
intention was for places no larger than our Buroughs or Market Towns, yea in
places no greater than our ordinary Villages, and that they designed a Bishop
to be no more than the Rector of a Country Parish: He seems to me to affect to
say these strange things over to himself, that they might become familiar by
repetition, and the Importunity of affirming supply the defect of proof, of
which nothing has been past by or dissembled, that has been hitherto produced.
But he seems to suspect the sufficience of what he had hitherto alleged, and
therefore opens a new Evidence, which we are now to consider.

Prim. Ep. p. 58, 59.
Campania in Italy was a Region ennobled with Cities, being so thick set,
Strab. l. 5.
as they seemed to be one continued Town; and yet all were but little Towns,
besides Capua and Theanum. This instance had not been worth producing, if our
Author had been so fair as to add one word more out of Strabo, who does not say
the Cities of Campania were small Towns absolutely, but (...).
that they were such in comparison of Capua. For Capua, says he, was indeed
what the name imports, the head and the chief of the Country; for compared to
this the other were but little Towns, except Theanum; for that it seems was not
only considerable, but great enough to bear the comparison. As if one intending
to set out the excessive greatness of London, should say that the other Cities
of England were but Villages compared to it: Our Cities are not made Villages
or little Towns by the expression; but London is to be conceived excessive
great. The Spies of Israel who gave an account of the Giants of Canaan saying
Numb. 13.33.
we were in our own sight but Grasshoppers, did not intend to disparage their
own stature, but to represent the prodigious height of the sons of Anak. So in
Laconia, where were anciently a hundred Cities, in Strabo 's time there were
but thirty, and those small Towns. That Country was very low in Strabo's time;
and these Cities which are here reckoned, were but Villages to Sparta,
excepting those of Laconia who were called free. Ptolomy Ptol. l. 3.
reckons in this Region fewer Cities by much; and when Bishops were settled in
that Country, it does not appear that these small Towns ever had any, but only
the great Cities, upon which these depended: As appears from the subscriptions
of the Greek Bishops to their Synodical Letter Ep. Synod. Episc. Metr. Corinth.
Conc. Chalc. p. 3.
to Leo the Emperor.

Prim. Ep. p. 59.
The Kingdom of Eumenes is the next instance, and this left him by his father
in a part of Asia, (as well stored with Cities as any in the world) besides
Pergamus the Metropolis, consisted of such places as Polybius in Suidas calls
(...). Now if Mr. Clerkson's observation be true, that (...) never signifies a
City but a Village, this poor King had no Cities either small or great to begin
the World with; for by that name Strabo (...). Strab. l. 13.
calls the places about Pergamus that this King received from his Father; and
he adds, that Pergamus it self was hardly a City before this Eumenes had made
it so, for all its greatness was owing to him. How little these were is not
very material, since Polybius (...). Polyb. Excerp. de virt. and vit. p. 1467.
tells us they were but few. And however Asia might be furnished with Cities,
the paternal Kingdom of Eumenes was but very poorly provided. And now comes in
Crete once more, and I think the third time, with its hundred Homerical Cities,
and as many imaginary Bishops. Yet since our Author insists Prim. Ep. p. 59.
upon it as the most pertinent Instance, let it be mustered as often as he
pleases. We are often told that when Titus was there, it had a hundred Cities,
and that by the Apostles appointment he was to ordain as many Bishops. If our
Author was often told this Tale, he is even with his Authors, for he tells it
as often; and I am afraid if it had been true, he had not taken so great delight
in repeating it. Dr. Hammond indeed spoke unwarily of an hundred Cities in that
Island, and consequently of as many Bishops to be ordained by Titus, it not
concerning the question he was treating of, whether they were many or few; but
he did not consider, how different the state of that Island in Titus his time
was, from that which is represented by Homer. For in Strabo's time there was
scarce a tenth part of this number; nor do I know of any since Homer's time who
could find those hundred Cities, but Simeon Metaphrastes, who speaks of an
Earthquake that destroyed this whole Century of Cities at once; but he provided
by this destruction, that no body else should ever find them. But Scaliger
Scal. Not. in Eusebius. Chron. p. 258.
rebukes this extravagant destroyer, and corrects the figures, instead of a
hundred directing us to read ten. I shall add no more here; since I have given
an account already of the number of the Cretian Bishops and Cities.

Prim. Ep. p. 60.
For one Bishop in a great City, there was ten, sometimes twenty, sometimes
more in the lesser Towns; and more there had been, had not the ambition of
following Ages, with a non obstante to the Apostles rule, judged a small place
unbeseeming the honor and greatness of a Bishop. That the lesser Cities were
much more numerous than the great, is readily granted; that these lesser Cities
were no bigger than the generality of our Market Towns, after all our Author
has done, requires farther proof. We have indeed some Market Towns that are not
inferior to Cities, but then they are not for our Author's purpose; for they
have many Parishes and Churches, and cannot be crowded into one Congregation.
Cities very small were likewise very rare, and the generality were too great
for a Congregational Bishop. It was not the ambition of after-ages, that forbad
the making of Bishops in mean places; but when a Bishop was a name of great
honor, and had many civil privileges annexed to it, it was the ambition of
vain men that instigated them to endeavor to be Bishops though in a Village,
and places where there never had been any before; and it was the wisdom of the
Church to put a stop to that ambition, and by that means to secure the unity of
the Church and the possibility of a general Communion. But our Author
complains, that in some such places where they had been settled, they were
extinguished, and in other places they were united. So Phulla was united to
Sugdaea, and so Tyropolis to Alania. These Instances might have been spared,
for they are too new for our present purpose, being of the twelfth or
thirteenth Century. And these were not joined because the Dioceses were small:
For those of Bulgary, to which the first instance appertain, were very large
without those Unions; and in the other, Alania is not the name of a Town, but
of a Nation. But the question being about Primitive Dioceses, it had been more
to the purpose to have shown of what extent they were for the first three
hundred years, and then to have informed us what alterations succeding ages had
made as to the bounds of ancient Bishoprics; how some came to be extinguished,
and others to be united. But the ages that next followed the time, to which our
Author confines his Primitive Episcopacy, were so far from sinking or uniting
Bishoprics, that they divided those old ones, and made many of one; and yet
after all, they were still of the Diocesan way, as will appear hereafter. The
reducing of the Bishoprics of Sardinia to seven, is likewise late; and when
they were most, they were Diocesan and not Congregational: And in the fifth
Century Not. Africae. Ed. Sirmond.
they were not so many as they are now, for they were but five. As for the
Bishoprics of Ireland and of Italy, they have been already considered at
large, and may be dismissed without farther reply.

The Council of Sardica is once more arraigned Prim. ep. p. 61.
for forbidding Bishops in the least Cities; but the equity of that Canon, as
well as of several others to the same effect, has been already defended from
the cavils of Mr. Clerkson, and therefore ought in reason to be discharged from
farther vexation. Yet since these exceptions are made, not only against this
Canon, but the Authority of that Synod; for curiosities sake they may be
examined. Prim. ep. p. 61.
I will not say that many of the Bishops there were Arrians, though the Oriental
Prelates present there showed themselves immediately after at Philippopolis;
and the Arrians were branded for not being contented with small Bishoprics.
Some men can use very crafty figures of speech, when they have nothing to the
purpose. I will not say: But why I pray? There lies no Action of Scandalum
Magnatum from those Bishops; he might safely venture to say any thing of them
that he knew to be true. Yet the modest diffident man will not say they were
Arrians? No, he will not say it forsooth. But is there any ground for such a
suspicion? The good man will not say it. Why then does he say, that he will not
say it? Though the Oriental Prelates present there, showed themselves presently
after at Philippolis: Yet for all this, he will not say that many of them were
Arrians. A captious man may take this to be nonsense, but I will not say it.
When a Dissenter mumbles after this manner; it is not altogether for the
elegance of the figure, but when he knows that what he offers for an argument
is either a lie, or not to the purpose, then such reserves as this serve to
bring him off in case of detection, for he would not say it then for all the
World: and this is the present case. Our Author had a mind to disparage the
Council of Sardica for this Canon, that forbids the making of Bishops in
Villages and such small Cities where there had been none before; to take away
their credit he intimates that many of the Bishops were Arrians. Some Arrian
Bishops came Ep. Synod. Sardic. ap. Theodor. l. 2. c. 8.
indeed to Sardica, but they had no more to do in making that Canon, than Mr.
Clerkson. For they never joined with the Western Bishops so far as to be
present with them, and (...). Socr. l. 2. c. 20.
they refused so much as to confer or to speak with them, unless they would
first put Athanasius and Paul Bishop of C. P. out of their Communion; and when
they could not obtain that, they left Sardica and went to Philippopolis. And
though our Author was not ignorant of this, yet he could not forbear excepting
against that Synod, upon the account of those Arrians, who, he knew had not the
least hand in any of the Canons made at Sardica. Yet the close of this
exception surpasses all the rest. The Arrians were branded for not being
contented with small Bishoprics. By which observation our Author would
suggest, if the Reader will take it, that these Arrians made that Canon, which
forbids Bishops to be ordein'd in small Cities, because they were not content
with small Bishoprics; whereas this Canon was made against the Innovations of
the Arrians, who made Bishops in such small places where there never had been
any before. And Ischyras Socrat. l. 2. c. 20,
ordein'd in a small Village in Egypt, was among the Eastern Bishops at
Sardica, and it may be imagined, would not very readily subscribe to that Canon
which condemned his Ordination.

The next exception against this Synod is, Prim. ep. p. 62.
that it was of little authority, not admitted by the Greeks into their Code
till the Trullan Council. -- Nor by the Latins some ages after it was held,
etc. -- Nor by the African Churches, who rejected, and would not be obliged by
its Canons for Appeals to Rome. How soon or late this Synod was generally
received, does little concern the Canon in dispute, which does not establish
any thing new, but only affirms ancient Practice. And if the matter of this
Canon was generally observed, where the Synod of Sardica was not yet owned, it
is plain, that this matter depends upon better authority than the sanction of a
Council; immemorial Custom, and the general agreement of Churches. Without
regard to this Canon, the bounds of ancient. Bishoprics were accounted sacred,
and not lightly to be changed. Some Villages in Pentapolis, accounted
considerable enough to make a Diocese in troublesome times, because they had
immemorially been annexed to the Episcopal City, were judged by their poeple to
have been settled in that condition by Apostolical Order, and therefore the
people of those places were earnest they should return again to their first
dependence. The Region Mareotes was large enough to make a good Diocese of it
self; yet when a Bishop was set up in one part of it, Athanasius complains that
it was done against ancient Tradition, which in such cases as these, was to
take place. Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria having made a Bishop in a mean
place, where there had been none before, is blamed, as a violator of the
established Order of the Church. So that if the Synod of Sardica was not
received any where, for many ages after it was held; yet this Canon against
making Bishops in small places where there had been none before, was it seems
generally approved, at leastwise the matter of it was accounted equal and fit.
There are Orders of other Synods in the same age, to the same effect; and I do
not know of any ancient Assembly, or so much as a single Writer, that ever made
any exception against this Rule. But on the contrary, when Bishops were
ordein'd in small places, where there had been none before, we find complaints
against it, as a violation of old establishment; and even in Afric, where such
innovations grew frequent, the complaints were loud on both sides. In the
Conference at Carthage the Donatists as well as Catholics complaining of these
violations of ancient limits.

Prim. ep. p. 62.
Nor need I say that this Synod is misunderstood, and that this restraint is
laid on Bishops of another Province. Our Author speaks reason; for surely he
needs not say what he had said already, and to so little purpose; nor need I
repeat here what I have replied before. But what he adds, deserves
consideration for the newness and singularity of the Argument. It would be
much, says our Author, for our satisfaction, if we could understand punctually
what numbers they thought sufficient for one Presbyter; and we may have the
best direction that can be expected in such a case from Chrysostom, (...).
Chrysostom. Or. in. Ignat.
who affirms, that one hundred and fifty Souls was thought as much as one
Pastor could well, and more than he could without great labor discharge. His
words are, It is a very laborious thing for one man to have the charge of a
hundred and fifty. How much this was to the satisfaction of Mr. Clerkson, I
will not enquire; how little it is to the purpose, will I hope, sufficiently
appear from what I am going to reply. First then, Chrysostom makes not the
least mention of a Presbyter, nor of the number sufficient for his cure; but in
general says, It is a difficult thing for one man to take the care of a hundred
and fifty only. Whether one Presbyter or one Bishop, or one Captain, he does
not say. And this is clear, that at the same time he makes such a little flock
so formidable a charge, he makes (...). Chrysostom. in Ign. T. 5. P. 501.
the Apostles to commit a City of twenty myriads, or two hundred thousand, to
the cure of Ignatius; and therefore from thence gives an estimate of the
person, and of what talents he must be possessed, to whom the Apostles would
deliver so great a charge. The design therefore of Chrysostom in that passage
is to set out the character of Ignatius to advantage, from the greatness of the
City, of which he was Bishop; and to set off the City, he compares it with the
lowest or meanest Congregations; but does not give the least intimation that no
one Presbyter had greater, or that a place of more inhabitants than a hundred
and fifty required the care of a Bishop. If to commend the chief Magistrate of
some very great City, one should borrow this of Chrysostom, and say, that it is
a difficult thing to govern a Family of twenty people, or to keep good order in
a Town of but two hundred inhabitants; and therefore his endowments must be
extraordinary, into whose hands the government of so great a City is committed;
he would be thought a very strange Critic, who from such a complement should
remark, that a Family ought to consist of no more than twenty; or that a
Constable ought not to undertake the keeping of the peace in a Village that has
more than two hundred inhabitants; and therefore where there is a greater
number, it requires a Mayor and Aldermen to undertake the charge. Or if upon a
Commemoration of some Bishop of London, the Preacher should think fit to turn
the greatness of the City into a Topic of that Bishops commendation, and say,
that a cure of a hundred and fifty Souls is a great and difficult charge, and
great care to be used in providing even for such a place an able Pastor; and
therefore what wonderful abilities must he be thought master of, who was judged
capable of being the Pastor of so vast a City. Would any man that is awake
conclude from hence, that there is never a Parish-Presbyter in England, that
had a greater cure? So pertinent is that direction which our Author fancied to
have found in Chrysostom for understanding punctually what numbers they
anciently thought sufficient for one Presbyter. To the same effect he proceeds
to tell us, Prim. ep. p. 63.
that upon this account one Presbyter was not thought sufficient for a place
that contained three or four hundred inhabitants. For this we desire some
proof, but I am afraid we must expect long. There is one thing more in our
Authors remarks upon the Canon of Sardica, that deserves to be taken notice of;
and that is, that where one Presbyter is not sufficient, there a Bishop ought
to be ordein'd. It is a rule he has made to himself, by inverting the Canon of
Sardica, that forbids the making of a Bishop in a very little City, where even
one Presbyter may suffice. Now the practice of antiquity was very different in
this case from what our Author fancies; for there were several Towns that had
no Bishops, which had not only many Presbyters, but many Congregations.
Bethleem was but a Village belonging to Jerusalem, Hieron. ep. ad. Joh. Hieros.
and yet it had many Presbyters belonging to it; the great resort of Christians
thither from all parts making it too populous for one Presbyter to supply it.
Nicopolis near Alexandria Strab. l. 17. Voss. Var. Obser.
was not inferior to a City, but never had a Bishop of its own; and therefore
must have many Presbyters and Congregations without a Bishop. There were many
Villages in the Territory of Antioch (...). Liban. Antioche.
superior to many Cities, and these had no Bishops but Presbyters; and the
greatness attributed to them, makes it necessary they should have several
Ministers and Congregations. Fussala Aug. ep. 209.
which before S. Augustins time had always belonged to the Diocese of Hippo,
had several Congregations or Parishes in it. And as for single Presbyters, they
had of old Country Parishes large enough; for those of Mareotes Athanas. Ap. 2.
had some ten, some more Villages to make up their several Parishes. And these
Congregations must far exceed the stint of Mr. Clerkson, or those Villages must
be very mean; and yet one of the meanest of them was thought capable of a
Bishop by the Arrian party. Libanus (...). Theodor. Hist. Rel. in Abr.
a very great Village, had but one Presbyter, one Abram who Converted it; and
in the Territory of Antioch Id. in vit. Policron.
there were many Villages under one Presbyter. In conclusion, when he had
qualified the Canon so often mentioned to his own mind, and made it allow
Latitude enough for Congregational Episcopacy; he finds Prim. ep. p. 65.
fault with both Greeks and Latins, that they did not think themselves
concerned to observe it. Sometimes he thinks fit to lessen that Synod, because
neither the Eastern or Western Churches had received it; and now he is
discontented that all had not observed it. When some have puzzled long upon a
matter that does not easily comply with their Hypothesis, they are apt to lose
their first design, and to forget what it was they would have: But our Author,
though in some things he seem to forget himself, is sure to keep to the
conclusion, that those Cities lesser or greater, the greatest being no bigger
than Villages with them, and Market Towns with us. -- They contained no more
than might meet together for Christian Communion. -- What we assert concerning
the smallness of ancient Bishoprics, is clear for incomparably the greatest
number of them. How effectually he has performed this, let the Learned Reader
be judge, when he has compared the Allegations on both sides. And after all,
though what he contends for in this Chapter should be admitted, the smallness of
ancient Bishoprics is not clear, unless it be first proved that the City where
the Bishop resided made up his whole Bishopric; and how far this is from being
true, will appear in more proper place.

CHAP. IV.
THE great Cities come now under consideration; Prim. ep. p. 66.
and about these, our Author allows, there may be more question. Concerning
these, he insists earnestly upon two points. The first, That even those great
Cities were not very large nor populous. The second, That for many ages after
Christ, there were but few Christians in them; at least no more than might meet
in one Assembly, and comply with the measure of Congregational Episcopacy.
Those were counted great Cities which had sixteen or twenty furlongs in
circumference. And even such Cities might be so well inhabited, that they could
not all meet in one Congregation for Christian Communion. But this compass was
never accounted great, though some other circumstances might render such Cities
considerable; but hereof, he says, he has given instances before, and those
instances have been examined. Yet here he adds four instances more. Pelusium a
Metropolis of a great part of Egypt, Strab. l. 17.
was but twenty furlongs in circumference. That Pelusium was accounted a great
City in Strabo's time, or was Metropolis of any part of Egypt, is only an
imagination of our Author, which is always very favorable and subservient to
his notion. This place had indeed in very old times been very great: And
Manetho Ap. Joseph. cont. Appion. p. 921. Ed. Frob. Marsh. Can. Chron. p. 107.
reports, that it had a Garrison of two hundred and forty thousand men; and
then it must have a wider circumference than Strabo speaks of. (...). Diod.
Sic. l. 16.
Diodorus Siculus therefore calls it an ordinary Town with respect to that
condition of which our Author speaks, and uses a diminutive name of City to
express it. Tanis was once a great place, and Metropolis of a Nomus, and is
styled a great City by Strabo; Strab. l. 17.
yet Jerome Hieron. Ep. ad Evag.
makes it an instance of one of the meanest Cities of Egypt. Phocaea Prim. ep.
p. 66.
one of the greatest Cities in Aeolis had no more, as Livy Duum millium and
quingentorum passuum spacium murus amplectitur. Live. D. 4. l. 7.
describes it. This instance has been examined already, and our Author is
destitute of any authority for making this a great City. I am sure Eusebius
(...). Eusebius. Praepar. l. 4. p. 157.
mentions the place with some slight, as if it had been some condescension to
take notice of them. Sebaste built by Herod, designing to make it comparable to
the most eminent Cities, was no longer than twenty furlongs. Yet it was not the
compass, but the magnificence of this City that made it equal to the most
eminent. For in Stephanus (...). Steph.
it is mentioned with some diminution, and called a small City; and it is
familiar with Josephus to magnify the works of Herod something beyond the
justness of History. Byzantium is the last instance of a great Town of little
circuit; but how unfortunate our Author was in this allegation, I have showed
already, and take no delight to expose mistakes, which his too great
addictedness to his notion so often betrays him to. I have in the preceding
Chapter given instances of several sizes of Cities accounted great, and the
lowest of them double to what our Author would make a general standard for the
measure of great Cities. I will add a few here to compare with the additional
instances he thought fit to produce by way of Reserve. Xenophon Xenoph. Exp.
Cyri. l. 3. Larissa on the Tigris. (...).
in his expedition of Cyrus, mentions some Cities, with the character of Great.
He gives the circuit but of two, of which the least was two parasangs, the
other four. Now a parasang Herodot. l. 5.
containing thirty furlongs, the least of these was seven miles and an half in
compass, the other double. Dicaearchus Dicaearch. (...) Ex. Haeschel. p. 172.
gives the measure of Thebes in Baeotia, and makes it seventy furlongs, i. e.
near nine miles in compass; and is so particular in giving the figure of the
City, and the nature of the soil about it; that there is no doubt, but he was
an eye witness of what he relates. Yet there is another fragment, that goes
under the name of the same Author, and is written in verse, that makes (...).
p. 166.
it but forty three furlongs about; which better suits with its condition in
latter times, which was far below its ancient greatness, and what it was in the
age of Dicaearchus who was Aristotle's Scholar. Chalcis in Eubaea was likewise
seventy furlongs in circumference, as the same Author Dicaearch. (...). p. 176.
reports; which agrees well with what Strabo (...). Strab. l. 10.
relates of this place, at the time of which Dicaearchus speaks. For about the
time of Alexander's expedition into Asia, the Citizens of Chalcis enlarged
their walls, and took in Canethus and Eurypus. But to return to our Author.

Prim. ep. p. 66. 67.
Such great Cities (seeing the largness assigned them was thought sufficient to
make one Metropolis) they were very few. What he takes for an extraordinary
measure, was so far from being accounted so, that it is to be rather accounted
little than great; and what he fancies to be rare, was but the size of ordinary
Towns. Those which were any thing remarkable for greatness, having above double
the compass; and many reckoned no prodigies, having four times as much. But the
remark that follows, deserves pity rather than discussion. That whereas there
was but one Metropolis in a Province, there were twenty, sometimes forty more
inferior Cities under it. And the Council of Chalcedon Conc. Chalc. Act. 12.
declares it to be against the Ecclesiastical Rules to have two Metropoles in
one Province. But what Council was ever so vain as to Order that there should
be but one great City in a Province; or if a Metropolis should happen not to be
very large, that no City within its resort should presume to be greater than
the mother Town? Nice was Strab. l. 12.
the old Metropolis of Bithynia, yet Nicomedia was Dio. Or. ad Nicom.
much the greater City, and in time carried away the Metropolitical
pre-eminence. Caesarea Conc. Chalc. Act. 13.
was the Metropolis of Palestine, and yet Aelia or the Gentile Jerusalem was
not inferior to it. Nor did Arrian: Exp. Alex. l. 2. p. 159.
Gaza and Azotus, and in Constantius his reign Geogr. vet. Gotofr.
Lydda and Ascalon cease to be great Cities, because they were not Metropoles.
Old Byzantium Herodian. l. 3. Codin. l. 1. c. 20. Parochia Heracliensis
Ecclesiae. Gelas. Epist. 13. ad Ep. Dardan.
was under Heraclea, at least wise in Ecclesiastical affairs; and yet it was
accounted then the greatest City of Thrace. Antioch was the Metropolis of
Syria, Strab. l. 16.
and yet the Cities of that Province were generally very great and populous,
though not equal to their Mother City. There were but very few Metropoles so
small as those Mr. Clerkson has picked out; but he is willing the Reader should
imagine that this is the greatest size of Cities. To very little purpose he
observes, that Lesbus was Metropolis of thirty Cities, and is forced to strain
the words of Strabo, Strab. l. 13.
without any occasion, or doing any service to his cause. For that Author says,
that Lesbus and Cuma were as it were the Mothers of thirty Cities, i. e. all
the Cities of Eolis, which had been about thirty; but before Strabo's time many
of them were lost. And to what end is all this? Were they then all inferior to
Lesbus, because it was their Mother? What did not Syracuse outgrow Corinth? and
Carthage surpass Tire? and Marseilles exceed Phocaea? Was it not usual for
Colonies to excel their mother Cities? And even of these thirty Cities, who can
tell how few remained to be Bishops Seats, or how large they were? Nor does
this notion of a Metropolis concern the present point, which is only about the
chief Cities of Provinces. But the greediness of snatching any thing that to a
hasty view may have some resemblance of an argument, is apt to carry Learned
Men sometimes very far from their purpose. To as much purpose he takes notice,
Prim. ep. p. 67.
that in Phrygia there were above sixty Cities; yet the same Author mentions
but two that were great. Strabo does indeed mention two, as the greatest Cities
of the greater Phrygia; but this does no more imply that the rest were little,
than he who should say that Amsterdam and Leyden were the greatest Cities in
Holland, would imply, that the rest of the Cities of that Province were but
small, and like our Buroughs or Market Towns. In Laconica he notes, that there
were thirty Cities in Strabo's time, -- all little Towns, save Sparta. He had
noted this before, and I have showed that these were in effect but Villages
belonging to Sparta; and of all these thirty, there were scarce three of them
Bishops Seats in the middle of the fifth Century; nor does it appear there ever
had been any more.

Prim. ep. p. 67.
Some of those great Cities had but few Inhabitants: And he instances in
Laodicea, which had but few Inhabitants in Strabo's time, because it was
subject to Earthquakes; and then reckons up several Cities of the East subject
to the same calamity, and twelve famous Cities that in Tiberius his Reign were
in one night destroyed by Earthquake in those parts. I am very sorry to find a
man, who pretends to be serious, trifling with the most dreadful of God's
Judgments. He might with as much reason have brought in as many more that had
been dispeopl'd by the Plague, and then urge that some great Cities were not
populous. It is not long since Naples shook; yet he would be thought a strange
kind of reasoner, that should thence infer, that it is not a populous City.
Antioch has been several times in a manner totally overthrown with
Earthquakes, yet still was soon after filled with Inhabitants; and these
Countries which our Author chooses for his instances, were famous for their
fecundity and their people, and were not forsaken, though it pleased God
sometimes to chastise them with Earthquakes. And what part of the World is
there, where men can be safe from that danger? nay, the most populous and
fruitful parts of the World have been most afflicted with this evil: Whether we
must look for the reason in the nature of the Soil, or in the Justice of God.
For wickedness increasing in proportion to men, and places as they grow more
populous, becoming more wicked, may be therefore more exposed to such strokes
of vengeance. It is probable, says Mr. Clerkson, Prim. ep. p. 68.
Neocaesarea was not very populous, considering what Theodoret Theod. l. 4. c.
22. Ed. Vales.
reports of those banished thither by Valens (who was not wont to choose
desirable places for the punishment of such) they all died there in a short
time through the hardships of the place. They were not always mean and ill
inhabited places, that were chose for the confinement of banished persons. Paul
Bishop of Constantinople Vit. Paul. apud. Phot. Cod. 257.
was banished to Thessalonica, Thessalonica. (...). Strab. l. 7. Zosim. l. 1.
c. 29. 43. l. 2. c. 21.
a City very large and populous; and the hardships of the place, which our
Author mentions out of Theodoret, was no other than the coldness of the
Country, that did not agree with the Clergy of Antioch, which Valens sent
thither from a warmer Climat. It is strange, our Author thinks, Prim. ep. p 68.
if Caesarea in Cappadocia were very populous, since the Situation of it, as
described by Strabo, was neither safe, nor healthful, etc. It is a vain thing
to oppose remote conjectures against known fact; Caesarea. (...). Soz. l. 5. c.
4. (...). Justin. Nov. 30.
for how incommodious soever our Author may fancy the Situation of that City,
which for so many ages has been the Capital Geogr. vet. Gotofred.
of Cappadocia; yet it has ever maintained an eminent character of a very great
and populous City. The inundation of the neighboring River did sometimes
streighten them. But this was rare; Basil. ep. ad. Theodos. Coteller. Mon. T.
2. p. 98.
and what was wanting in their next neighborhood, was abundantly supplied by
Galatia and other Countries. If one should suppose a City to be placed in a
Province, where nature has furnished neither stones nor timber, and the soil
scarce capable of corn; a City that has no fresh water within a good distance,
nor ground under it firm enough to bear any great building, and scarce more
stable than a morasse; Our Author would think it strange there should ever be
people enough in such a place, to make up one competent Congregation; and yet
these are the circumstances of one of the most populous Cities now in Europe.
Prim. ep. p. 68.
Of Heraclea one of the most considerable Cities of Aetolia, Livy tells us,
That there was a Castle by it as well inhabited. But whether that Castle which
joined to the City were very great and populous, or the City small and of few
inhabitants, is uncertain; but the circumstances of the Siege, and the defense
that was made, while the Romans attacked the place incessantly day and night
for four and twenty days, make it more probable, that this was a populous Town.
And when it was taken by surprise, and the people fled to the Castle, the
place, says Livy, Live. l. 36. c. 22. Polyb. Excerpt. leg. c. 13.
could scarce hold, much less maintain them. And surely if there were so many
people in the Town, that a great Castle could scarce hold them, it would be
very difficult to find one Church that could hold them all. So that this place
will do little service to our Author's design. But to proceed.

Prim. ep. p. 68.
A City was counted sufficiently populous if it had six thousand inhabitants.
So Joseph. B. Jud. l. 1. c. 16.
Herod ambitious to have Sebaste not inferior to the most renowned Cities, took
care it should have six thousand inhabitants. Six thousand men with their
servants and families is a pretty competent beginning for a great City; and the
sum that so many families would make, upon the lowest computation, would make
ten very great Congregations. But that this number made a City esteemed
populous, is not according to the opinion of ancient time, but of our Author.
What numbers of people the Cities of Palestine had in Josephus his days, we may
best understand from the Historian himself. Galilee, says Josephus, (...). Jos.
B. J. l. 3. c. 4.
was so well inhabited, that Cities were very frequent and thick, and a great
multitude of Villages so populous, that the least of them had more than fifteen
thousand inhabitants. And the same Author Id. l. 2. c. 42. 43.
affirms, that within Galilee alone he armed in the beginning of the War a
hundred thousand men: And that in a certain Sedition in that Country, as many
came together in four and twenty hours time: That in that tumult there came no
less than forty thousand from Tarichea (...).
which was not the greatest City of Galilee. In Japha Jos. l. 3. c. 35.
a City of the same Region, there were about thirty thousand killed and taken.
But this was but a small place in comparison of others; of Tiberias, the which
was the chief, and Sepphoris, which is sometimes called by Josephus Jos. B. J.
l. 3. c. 3.
the chiefest of Galilee. Josapat, the Town which Josephus defended against the
Romans, had a prodigious number of People; Jos. B. J. l. 3. c. 23.
for there were forty thousand killed, twelve hundred only made captives, and
the Women and Children saved. The great Cities of Phaenicea inhabited by the
Syrians, were very populous; as appears by the number of the Jews that were
destroyed there in the beginning of their revolt. The people of Caesarea Jos.
B. J. l. 2. c. 33.
destroyed twenty thousand Jews who lived in that City. The people of
Scythopolis Id. l. 2. c. 34.
massacred thirteen thousand. Those of Damascus Et c. 41.
ten thousand. So populous were those Cities where the Gospel was first
preached, and the first Christian Congregations established. In Syria the
Cities were no less populous; and in most parts of the World, unless when wars
or other calamities happened to dispeople. The places accounted Cities were
much more populous than our Market Towns, or what our Author represents. Selge,
a small City in Pisidia is said, Strab. l. 12.
with good Government to have increased to twenty thousand Men: And accordingly
we find Polyb. l. 5. p. 579.
that it was able to send out a considerable Army. Then it might well bear the
title of a great City, which Arrian Arrian. Exp. Alex. l. 1.
gives it. How much aftertimes abated of these matters, I do not know. But
Zosimus (...). Zosim. l. 5. p. 539. Ed. Cellar.
mentions it in terms of diminution. Aspendus, reckoned but a mean City of
Pamphylia, was yet able Polyb. l. 5. p 580.
to send four thousand Men to the relief of Pednelissus when it was Besiged by
an Army from Selge. Fregellae, a City in Italy, not very memorable for
greatness; yet how populous it was at one time, appears sufficiently from the
complaints Fregallas quoque millia iv. familiarum transijsse a se Samnites and
Peligni querebantur. Live. l. 41. c. 8.
made by the Samnites and Peligni, to the Roman Senate, that within a short time
four thousand Families had removed from them to Fregellae. Heraclea in Doris
was never named among great Cities; though the Colonie sent (...). Marcian. Her.
p. 25.
thither from Laconia consisted of ten thousand Men. Xenophon Xenoph. Exp. l. 5.
while he had the greatest part of his ten thousand together, thought of
building a City, and settling somewhere near the Euxin Sea; but when they
divided, then he left off those thoughts; the number not being competent for
such a purpose.

And to conclude, Memnon, in his History Memnon apud. Phot. cod. 220.
of Heraclea Pontica, speaks of that company that Thrasymedes had got together
to repeople that City, after it had been destroyed by the Romans, as a poor and
miserable remain, and so disproportioned to their former numbers, although
these gleanings made up about eight thousand Men. Placentia and Cremona, most
eminent Cities, says our Author, had each of them six thousand persons decreed
by the Romans to be their Inhabitants. Symps. Chr. pt. 5. p. 112. I do not
scruple taking any Authors, when I know the matter to be true; though for facts
so remote, it would be more decent, as well as more satisfying, to direct us to
Writers something older than Simpson. These Colonies then which were drawn Live.
l. 21.
in the first year of the second Punic War, were indeed considerable beginnings
for those Cities; but they had scarce deserved the title of most Eminent,
Ascon. Pedian. in Orat. Cic. in L. Pis. Vel. Paterc. l. 1.
if they had not increased much beyond this number. Now the improvement of
these Cities was so great, that they might justly be called Eminent. For
Cremona Dio. Cass. l. p. 740. Tacit. H l. 3.
when it was Sacked by the Army of Antonius, Vespasian's General, had fifty
thousand Citizens slain, and a great many more that escaped. Such was the
difference between the circumstances of it when it was so eminent, and those of
its first Plantation. Besides a Colony of six thousand Men is not so mean a
thing, as I have already showed, since Women and Children, and Servants are to
be added to this number, which in ordinary places may be four or five times as
many, in very rich Cities may be double or treble this proportion. Nor are we
to imagine that the places, into which Colonies were sent, were altogether
empty, and had no inhabitants; for this was very rare, although the Colonies
had all the power, as well as the propriety of the place and Country adjoining.
And if in our Cities only Freemen were to be reckoned; those which we might
expect to find exceeding populous, would afford but very few thousands. Or if
we should judge of a County by the Freeholders-Book, we must fall very short of
the true number of the people; and yet this way which our Author takes, is not
very unlike these. But of the Roman and Greek Colonies and Cities, I shall have
occasion to speak more particularly, when I come to consider the Teritories of
ancient Cities. Prim, ep. p. 69.
Thirty seven Cities yielded to Alexander near Porus' s Country, some of which
had five thousand, some ten thousand inhabitants, Justin. l. 12. c. 7. Curtius
l. 8. c. 20. Mr. Clerkson's references are not very exact here; nor do his
Authors say that for which they are quoted, though some others do. Nor does it
much concern the present question, how populous the Indian Cities might happen
to be; though the writers Arrian. Exp. Alex. l. 5. p. 351. Ed. Blancardi.
of Alexanders Expedition do commonly represent them as extraordinary, when
they give a particular account of those places. Only in one Province they
happened not to be very great, and much short of the common measure of that
Country. And therefore Q. Curtius Ad magnam deinde (ut in ea regione) urbem
pervenit. Q. Curt. l. 9. c. 1.
speaking of a great City in those parts, adds this qualification, great for
that Country; or if we understand this in respect of the Roman World, this
instance of Indian Cities will still be more frivolous. That which follows is
more to the purpose, if it were but true, Prim. ep. p. 69.
That Conqueror (says our Author) Building a City near the River Indus, which
he called after his own name Alexandria, though it sufficiently peopled with a
thousand persons, Strab. l. 15. I must complain here again for want of
exactness: For Strabo, in the Book cited, has no such thing. But Diodorus
Siculus (...). Diod. Sic. l. 17.
speaking of that Alexandria, tells us, that the Founder furnished it with ten
thousand inhabitants; which agrees much better with the genius of that great
Prince, and the character of the other Cities built by him and called by his
name. For to pass by that of Egypt, as more generally known; The Alexandria on
the Tanais was Q. Curt. l. 7. c. 6.
sixty furlongs, or seven miles and an half in circuit: And that at the foot of
Mount Caucasus, Id. l. 7. c. 3.
had seven thousand old Macedonian Soldiers assigned to it; and the other
Soldiers then discharged had the liberty to settle there. And now from these
instances he has produced, let the Reader, judge, whether many of their great
Cities contained no more than might come together in one Assembly.

After all the pains our Author has taken to reduce the greater part of ancient
Cities to the lowest measure and number possible, some it seems, will still
remain obstinate, and refuse to comply with the Congregational Model. I was
afraid he had prepared Earthquakes for such places as these, since he could not
bring them to his Rule. But since he has thought fit to save the Cities and the
Men, and to take a gentler method of dealing with them, let us give attention.

Prim. ep. p. 69.
As for Cities that were greater and more populous. -- In them the Christians
for some ages were no more than could assemble in one place, the inhabitants
consisting most of Heathens with Jews, and those of the Christian profession
that were not of the Communion, nor would assemble with the Bishop. I will not
deny, that for some ages the number of Christians were inferior to that of the
Heathen. But then this being allowed, it will not follow that all the
Christians in the greatest Cities might assemble in one place of worship; for
some Cities were so great, that a hundred Churches could not receive all the
people. Suppose therefore in Rome for instance, a million of Souls, which I
think is the lowest estimate that was ever made of that People. If for the
three first ages but a tenth part was Christian, not twenty Churches, such as
the Christians were provided of at that time, could suffice. In London, though
those of the Communion of the Church of England be much the greatest number,
and make up the gross of the People; yet the Dissenters, were they willing to
join in one Congregation, would not be able to meet in one place. And their way
of service makes them more capable of great Congregations than the Primitive
Christians; since generally speaking, they seem to have no other public act of
Religious Worship, but to hear. Nay, there is scarce any one Sect of them so
mean, but would think themselves Persecuted, should all of that Sect within the
compass of London be stinted to one place of meeting. Amsterdam may exceed
London in number of Sects, though it be inferior to it in number of people; the
Jews there inhabit one good quarter, the Papists are so numerous, that I have
heen informed, they have near thirty Chapels within that City; the Lutherans
there have several Churches; to say nothing of other Sects that are very
numerous. Yet those of the established Religion are reckoned the greater part,
and require many Churches for their Worship. But to return to the Primitive
Christians.

That we may better conceive the state of the Christians in the first three
ages, let us consider how it was possible for them to thrive, and at last to
become Masters of the Roman Empire under all those great discouragements to
which they were all the while subject. They had seldom any friends in Court;
and there are but two Reigns in all that time, in which they had any
countenance; but were frequently set upon by the Emperors, and persecuted with
full intent of utter extirpation. They could make no Faction in the State, for
the roots of popular government had been plucked up, and the government of the
Empire was too absolute to bear any thing of that nature. They had no power in
the Army, for there were but few of them employed that way, and generally
speaking, they did not like the service. Yet for all this, in less than three
ages they possessed themselves of the Empire, and gave laws to the Heathen. Now
if we speak humanly of this matter, we can resolve it into no other cause than
the great number of the Christians. It must be confessed, that the providence
of God was wonderful in preserving and raising this meek and simple people; but
the means he chose were the same he had taken before in Egypt for the
deliverance of Israel: he increased them exceedingly, and so made them stronger
than their enemies.

The numbers of the Christians were great from the beginning: And what was said
of our Savior in Judaea, became true in a great part of the World, that all
the World did run after him. This Tacitus and Pliny do affirm early. This
Tertullian sets out with great ostentation toward the beginning of the third
Century. But these Testimonies, with several others, have been urged already,
Vindicat. Prim. chapter p. 54. 55, 458, 499, 500. etc.
and need not to be insisted on in this place. I will add only one passage more
to the same purpose out of Maximin's (...). Eusebius. H. E. l. 9. c. 9.
Letter to Sabinus, where he sets out the occasion of that great Persecution
under Dioclesian. Dioclesian, says he, and Maximian, my Fathers and my Lords,
seeing all people almost to have forsaken the worship of the Gods, and to have
joined themselves to the Christians, had rightly ordered, that those who had
forsaken the Religion of their Gods, should undergo exemplary punishment. Now
this being the confession of an Enemy, ought to have the greater weight; and we
cannot doubt, but in the beginning of that Persecution the Christians were
become the greater part of the Roman Empire. And therefore in the great Cities
they could not meet in one Assembly; and in the chief Cities they could not
have so few as twenty Congregations. But you know the Fable, the Toad could not
conceive an Elephant any bigger than the stretch of his own skin.

Mr. Clerkson Prim. ep. p. 69.
could meet with but one City small or great, for three hundred years after
Christ, whose inhabitants were generally Christians; and that was Neocaesarea,
of whose Conversion Gregory Thaumatargus was the instrument. P. 70.
But for all this, it does not appear that the Christians in that City were
more than could meet together in one place. And to make it probable, that all
the City made but one Congregation, he offers two things. First, That we saw
before that this place was not very populous: And then, that Gregory built but
one Church there; he would doubtless have erected more, if more had been
needful. The first reason has been rejected already, and they must be very easy
that admit it; because eleven Egyptian Bishops were banished to this place,
therefore it had no more people than could meet in one Church. Yet as weak as
this is, the other is no wiser; because Gregory built but one Church, therefore
there were no more. Nay, though he might have built several Parish-Churches, yet
the Cathedral, which by the ancients is called the Church by way of Eminence,
might be only mentioned; and in the great Cities, where we are sure there were
many Churches, they speak of the Church, that is, the Bishops; as if there were
no other in the place, and there was but one Church in any City for some uses
of Religion, that is, for Baptism and Penance. So that to speak properly, and
after the manner of ancient times, there was in a City but one Church, the
other being but Parish-Chappels and Oratories. Gregory therefore might build
but one Church, and yet his City might have many Parish-Congregations. But for
Neocaesarea, we have greater probabilities that it was too populous for one
Religious Assembly. For first, it was the Metropolis of Pontus, and that long
before it was converted by Gregory; as Holstenius Luc. Holsten. in Steph. v.
Neocaes.
proves by a Medal of Severus, which had upon the reverse the age of this City.
In the next place, it was eminent for liberal Studies, which little Towns never
were. And Basil Bas. ep. 64.
relates with what earnestness the Magistrates prayed him to take upon him the
instruction of their Youth. And lastly, the character which the same Father
gives (...). Basil. ep. 75.
it, of being the most Illustrious of Cities, cannot agree with that meaness
under which Mr. Clerkson does represent it.

There is another City in Phrygia, whose inhabitants are said to have been all
Christians. Eusebius. H. l. 8. c. 25. C. 11. Ed. Vales.
and all with the City burnt together; but this was in the fourth Century, in
the Persecution raised by Maximian, Anno. 312. That this was a small Town, we
have from Eusebius: (...).
And he notes farther, that they had Magistrates; but that it had a Bishop,
neither Eusebius nor Lactantius mention; and for ought that appears, it might
belong to the Bishop of some other place. However let the City be as little as
it will, the Bishop might be Diocesan, though all his Town made but one
Congregation.

(c) How predominant Heathenism was in the Cities of the Roman Empire before
Constantine, may be collected, says our Author, in and after his Reign. If it
was spreading and prevalent when the power of it was so much broken, it will be
easy to infer what it was before. It cannot be denied, that Christianity
received very great increase by the favor and the zeal of Constantine; yet it
must be remembered, that the desolations under Dioclesian and his Colleagues were
so great, and the numbers of Christians destroyed, and frighted out of their
Profession, so excessive, that it must be a great while before the Christians
could recover themselves to that condition in which the Persecution found them.
And though under Constantine and his Sons, the Church had a great seeming
increase; yet many of the new Converts being induced by human considerations
and arguments, extrinsick to Religion, made greater show than strength; and in
Julian's reign, when worldly advantages were on the Heathen side, many of these
turned again to their old superstitions; and most of the instances, which are
brought by our Author, to show the number of Heathen after Prim. ep. p. 71.
Constantine, are in that reign: Yet let us hear the particulars.

Prim. ep. p. 71.
That we may afford the greatest advantage to Christianity, let us instance
principally in Palestine, where the Gospel first moving, may in reason be
thought to have made the greatest progress. Some are never to be more narrowly
observed, than when they pretend to offer favor and advantage. I am apt to
believe, that if our Author had found any instances more to the advantage of
his cause, he might have waved this complement to Christianity. Here, he says,
the Gospel first moved, and therefore should have made the greatest Progress.
But the great Revolutions that happened in that Country soon after the planting
of the Gospel, may possibly have rendered the condition of Christianity there
much worse than it was some time after in other Countries; nay worse than it
was in some of the Cities of Palestine in the Apostles time. For instance,
Sebaste, which is Samaria, is brought as an Example of a City much addicted to
Heathenism after Constantine's time; and yet at the preaching of Philip the
Deacon, all the City is said Act. 8.6, 8, 10, 12, 14.
to be converted. Lydda was a City of Judaea, called also Diospolis; and St.
Luke Act. 9.32, 33.
affirms, that it was all converted by S. Peter; All that dwell'd at Lydda
turned unto the Lord. Yet about three hundred years after, Christianity had
made so little progress, that both Villages and Cities there, were exceeding
Heathenish. But we must find no fault, because he pretends to afford
Christianity greater advantage by these Examples.

Gaza, above all the rest, is stigmatized by all as most Heathenish; yet as
Heathenish as it was after Constantine's time, the Bishops of it had many
Congregations before; for Silvanus who suffered Martyrdom in the last
Persecution, is styled by Eusebius, (...). Eusebius. H. E. l. 8. c. 13.
Bishop of the Churches of Gaza. Caesarea too, in our Author's judgment, seems
not much better; and yet there the Bishop had many Churches too in the former
part of Constantine's reign, as his letter to Eusebius (...). Ep. Constable. ad
Eusebius. Theod. l. 1. c. 15.
mentions.

In Palestine therefore our Author mentions many Cities, where there were
Heathens after Constantine's reign; and instances chiefly in those where in
Julian's time the Heathen Party raised tumults, and committed many murders and
barbarities; but this does not prove them to be the major part. For a small
number under the countenance and instigation of the Emperor, may do a great
deal of mischief without opposition. We have a fresh instance, how insolent a
small party may grow, under the countenance of Authority, not quite so
absolute, nor so implicitly obeyed, as that of the Roman Emperors was. And
that the Christians were then, when they endured these indignities, much the
greater number, Sozomen who relates most of those tumults, does plainly show,
and that upon this very account Julian found himself obliged to use artifice
rather than force, in the restoring of his superstition. Julian, says that
Historian, Soz. l. 5. c. 16. (...).
zealous to make Heathenism prevail, was much greiv'd to see it overcome by the
Christian Religion, which was in the general esteem preferred to it; and it
troubled him to think, that his Religion must sink as soon as he is dead. For
though the Temples were opened again, and the old Rites restored; yet he
observed that the wives and children and servants, even of the Heathen Priests,
were generally Christian. From hence it is clear, how the greater part and body
of the People stood affected to Christianity. And though here and there a City
might abound with Heathen, it is no wonder; for where there is a mixture of
Religions, a party which to the whole does not bear the proportion of one to
ten, may in some few places happen to be predominant.

Phaenicia follows Palestine, and these our Author Prim. ep. p. 72.
observes from Theodoret, were madd upon their Idols and idolatrous Rites, and
this observed by Chrysostom in Arcadius his reign. That there were
superstitious people in Phaenicia at that time, I do not deny, and perhaps more
than in most places; but that they were the greater part, or near equal to the
Christians there, does not appear from any thing produced by our Author. Nay,
the contrary appears from that relation of Theodoret, how Chrysostom with the
assistance of a few Monks, pulled down the Heathen Temples of the Country.

In Syria, our Author Prim. ep. p. 73.
meets with Heliopolis, a place singular for superstition and beastliness,
where not one would endure to hear the name of Christ; and Arethusa, he thinks,
was not much better furnished with Christians, because they all joined in the
murdering of their Bishop. Yet in the same Chapter Sozomen assigns the reason
of the Bishops return when he had once fled, because (...). Soz. l. 5. c. 10.
there were many like to be brought in danger upon his account. Apamea is
mentioned to the same purpose, (and this was a Metropolis) says our Author;
here the multitude was only restrained through fear, from hindering the
demolishing of Jupiter 's Temple, Theodor. l. 5. c. 21. But this multitude
might not be Heathen; for the Christians might not be very willing to have the
Temple demolished, which, after the idolatrous service of it had been long
disused, they might be desirous to preserve as an ornament of their City; upon
which account many Temples were spared. Constantine had shut them up, and
forbid sacrifices to be offered in them; and the zeal of the Christians abating
against them, after the idolatrous service had been taken away, and the party
of the Heathen being grown contemptible, it seemed no prejudice to Christianity
to suffer them to stand; and it was only the Monks and the more zealous sort of
Christians, who procured and executed their demolition. To the same purpose our
Author brings in the Inhabitants of Emesa, (another Metropolitical City) Theod.
H. E. l. 3. c. 6.
who turned the Christian Church, newly built, into a Temple for Bacchus. This
too was in Julian's time, and therefore does not prove the Heathen party to be
most numerous in every City where they committed Insolences. He is likewise
mistaken, when he makes Emesa a Metropolitical City, in those times of which he
is speaking. For it was not Car. a S. Paulo Geog. Sacr. p. 304. Not it. Gr. ap.
Car. a S. P. p. 4.
a Metropolis then nor long after, but was under Damascus. Nor was it in Syria,
but in Phaenicia, where Stephanus, Steph. de urb.
and Ammianus Marcellinus Ammian. Marc. l. 24. c. 26.
place it. The latter reckoning it among the great and fair Cities of that
Country, and equal to Tire and Sydon and Berytus. But many Authors confound the
bounds of Syria, and some times Seld. de Dijs Sir. c. 1.
account Phaenicia as part of it. Nor was this the unhappy temper of some
particular places only, says our Author, Prim. ep. p. 74.
as appears by that of Sozomen; Sozom. l. 6. c. 34.
both that which is called Coelosyria, and the upper Syria, except the City of
Antioch, was long before it came over to Christianity. If it was late before
these Countries received Christianity, they are but sorry instances in the
present question concerning primitive Bishops. For where there were no
Christians at all, it is in vain to enquire for the bounds of Episcopacy. But
this observation turns against our Authors own notion. For if there were some
entire Provinces that had not yet received the Christian Religion in the middle
of the fourth Century; those which had received the Gospel, must consequently
be more generally Christian: Since in the gross, the Christians at that time
are allowed to have been the greater part of the Empire. But that passage of
Sozomen must not be taken too strictly; for then it will not be true. For it is
not true, that all Syria, excepting Antioch, did not receive Christianity till
late. For St. Paul had planted several Churches there; and the Apostolical
Council of Jerusalem Act. 15.23. -- 41.
addressed their Synodical Epistle, not only to Antioch, but to the Brethren in
Syria and Cilicia; and St. Paul in one of his visitations, is said to go
confirming the Churches of Syria. In the second Century there were many
Christians in that Country, for whose sake Bardesanes wrote his books in the
Syrian language; and in particular he is said by Eusebius Eusebius. H. E. l. 4. c.
30.
to have had many followers. In the Persecution under Dioclesian, Eusebius. l. de
Mart. Palest. c. 13.
Syria is reckoned among other Provinces that had suffered for Religion; and
some time after Athanasius Athan. ep. ad Antioch. T. 1. p. 580. Id. Apol. 2.
reckons several Bishops of Syria who suffered upon his account. So that
Sozomen must be understood of the remoter parts of the Country, bordering upon
Persia and Arabia, where these Monks, of whom he speaks as the Converters of
that Country, lived. For these he says Sozom. l. 6. c. 34.
converted all the Syrians, and many Persians and Saracens. Now to deliver up
this Country entirely as it were, to the Heathen, our Author adds, that, in
Antioch it self the Heathen in Valens his time publicly celebrated Idolatrous
Rites, etc. This was by the permission of that Emperor; who that he might more
safely persecute the Orthodox Christians, gave liberty to all other Religions.
And if in the greatest City of this Kingdom the Papists should by public
permission celebrate the Mass; it would be but a poor argument, that they make
the greater part of the people. But of Antioch there will be occasion to say
more hereafter. In Arabia, Moses being sent Bishop there, found but few
Christians; that is, the Saracens under Queen Mavia had but few Christians,
when that Bishop was sent to them. And to as much purpose he might have added,
that the Inhabitants of the Cape of Good Hope were not then converted. And to
the same purpose is the instance of Milles in Persia, who could not persuade
one in the City, for which he was ordained, to become Christian. Yet both in
Arabia and Persia there were great numbers of Christians. For in Persia in
Constantine's time, the Persecution of Sapores found and destroyed an infinite
multitude; there were sixteen thousand Persian Martyrs, whose names were
recorded by their own Countrymen and their neighbors of Syria. But besides
these, there were others innumerable, whose names were lost. In some parts of
Arabia Eusebius. H. E. l. 6. c. 33. Id. l. 8. c. 12.
Christianity was received betimes, and furnished Martyrs for the last
Persecution.

Prim. ep. p. 74.
And now having viewed all the next neighbors of Palestine, but Egypt, let us
touch there also. So speaks our Author, who walks about like a Persecution,
diminishing the number of Christians wherever he comes. Here Memphis, a
Metropolitical City in Jerome 's time, was Metropolis of the Egyptian
superstition; on Ezekiel. 9. While there remained any Egyptian superstition, it is
no wonder that Memphis should be the Metropolis of it; for there of old was the
residence of Apis, and this was their holy City; though it follows not from
this expression, that the greater part of the Inhabitants were of that
superstition. Hieron. in Ezekiel. l. 9. c. 30.
Our Author mistook the reference of the Centuriators, from whom he transcribes
this as well as several other instances; and refers to the ninth Chapter of the
Prophet, whereas it is the ninth book of the Commentary. In Antinoe, he
observes, Prim. ep. p. 75.
there was a Bishop; but very few assembled with him, the Inhabitants of the
City were Gentiles, -- and the Island, into which the two Macarij were
banished, had not one Christian. To these instances of Egypt, our Author is
pleased to be so kind as to give the answer himself, that they were remoter
parts, and far from the place where Christianity was first embraced.

But there is one thing more may be observed upon this occasion. The account of
many of the places, in which our Author finds few or no Christians, comes from
the Monks, who are said to convert them; and for my part I am much inclined to
suspect, that they were apt to represent places as Heathenish, to give
themselves the reputation of converting them by their miracles. And though we
are told, they found all things wild; yet in a little while they made it like
Eden, and converted (...). Socr. l. 4. c. 24. (...). Soz. l. 6. c. 34.
all to a man; so that Island was reduced: So the Syrians. But of Bucolia, a
Region near Alexandria, in Ortelius, this is Jerome 's character, in Bucolia
nullus est Christianorum, Vit. Hilar. Notwithstanding the authority of
Ortelius, our Author might have let this place too pass among the remoter parts
of Egypt; for Scaliger Scalig. Animad. in Eusebius. Chron. p. 18, 19.
places it beyond, and distinguishes it from the Country of the Egyptians, and
withal sets it beyond the bounds of the Roman Empire. For Heliod. Aethiop. l.
1. c. 2.
these barbarous people gave great trouble to the Roman Prefect, who guarded
that part with a strong Garrison, which was named from this wild people against
whom they were placed. This agrees with their character in Jerome, Barbara and
ferox natio Bubulcorum seeds erat. Vit. Hilarion.
that they were a fierce and a barbarous nation. Prim. ep. p. 75.
But that which Hilary fixes on the whole Country, is not much more favorable;
Egypt is full of Idols, and worships all kind of monsters for Deities, Com. in
Matthew. 1. But this character was given with respect to what it was when our
Savior fled thither, not to what it was when Hilary wrote: As appears plainly
from the words of Hilary, which are these: Herod seeking the death of the
child, Joseph is by an Angel admonished to carry him into Egypt, (in Egyptum
idolis plenam, etc.) into Egypt full of Idols, and worshipping for Deities all
kind of monsters. Where Mr. Clerkson by no very commendable artifice has
changed the words of Hilary, so as they may seem to speak of the present time.
Our Author bids us look a little further into Africa, and there Firmicus, he
says, in Constantine 's time affirms, that a great part of the Africans did
worship Juno and Venus. If our Author had looked but into the Title page of
Fermicus; he would scarce have told us of this Writers affirming this matter in
Constantine's time, when the Book is dedicated to Constantius and Constans,
after they had been Emperors a considerable time. And if he had looked into
the book, we had in all probability escaped this instance. The truth is, the
Centuriators deceived him; and he seldom looked farther upon this head of the
remains of Heathenism. Firmicus Assyrij and pars Afrorum Aerem, ducatum habere
elementorum volunt -- nomine Junonis and Veneris consecrarunt. Jul. Firmic. de
err. prof. Rel.
then affirms, that a part, not a great part, of Africa worshipped the Air
under the names of Juno and Venus, without any reflection upon the time in
which he wrote, but only giving an account of the variety of Gentile
superstition. But Mr. Clerkson is vain enough to be pitied, when he comes to
refine upon this mistake, and to comment upon an Author he had not seen. We are
told then, that he, i. e. Firmicus, means that part of Africa then known, and
that was it in which the Gospel had found some entertainment. It were very
strange if he should mean an unknown part, or that any place then not known
should come into his mind. But that Writer gives not the least intimation what
part that was; only by the wariness of the word we may conceive, that this was
not the general opinion of the Heathen of Africa. However he finds long after
this, Cod. Afric. can. 58. ed. Zon. 64.
that in most maritime places of Africa, and other parts thereof, Idolatry was
in use; and he adds this remark, that most of their Cities were maritime, and
those usually most populous. In the first place, that Canon does not speak as
he makes it; for it is not most, but many maritime places. Then for Cities
there is not a word, but of Country farms and Villages there is; as if the poor
remains of Heathenism had been now driven out of the Cities and most eminent
Towns, and retired to the obscurest places of the Country. And that Heathenism
was now in a very low and expiring condition in that Country, appears from the
expression of that Canon, (...).
in which the African Bishops desire the Emperors that the Relics of Idols
might be destroyed. Whereupon Zonaras Zonar. in Can. 64.
notes, that the Gospel having enlarged its self, the tail of the Dragon could
only move, for the head of it had been bruised before. To conclude then with
Africa, This may be the reason, our Author Prim. ep. p. 76.
thinks, why there were but five Bishoprics in the Province of Tripolis, when
they were so numerous in other Provinces; and it is suggested by one of their
Councils, Interjacere videntur Barbarae Gentes.
those parts of the Country were taken up with Heathens. He guesses in the
dark, and like a Man who had never seen those Canons he speaks of. Tripolis was
the remotest of the African Provinces Eastward, and was bounded by Ara
Philenorum, where the Egyptian Diocese began. It had but five Bishops, and no
African Canon gives any reason for it. The likeliest is, that the Donatist
Faction had no great party there, and so it remained content with that number
of Bishoprics, which had been anciently established there. But in some African
Councils Can. Carth. 14.
that require many Bishops to be present at Ordinations, and that all attend
Synods, they make some abatement in respect of this Province, that but one
should be required to attend Synods from that Province. And when some required
that no Bishop should be ordein'd without ten or twelve Bishops to assist;
Aurelius Can. Carth. 54. (...).
observes, that in Tripolis and Arzua it would be impossible, because there
were but five, and they were encompassed with barbarous Nations, so that they
could not be assisted easily from other Provinces; and those barbarous Nations,
said to lie between them and the other Bishops, is made a reason why the
ancient form should continue, and three Bishops be sufficient for Episcopal
Consecration. Now when our Author says those parts of the Country were taken up
by Heathen; it is said of the Country about Tripolis, and not of the Province
it self; and therefore it can be no reason of its having few Bishops; since
those neighboring Pagans did not hinder their multiplying of Bishops, but only
intercept the communication between them and the other Provinces.

Prim. ep. p. 76.
In the West, he offers but one instance or two. In Turin the Heathen were so
prevalent, that the Christians were not suffered to choose a Bishop after
Gratian's decease, Greg. Turin, l. 10. c. 43. This Turin is, I suppose, Tours
in France. And Gregory, Bishop of that place, does indeed in the last Chapter
of the tenth Book of his History, make a recapitulation of the Bishops of that
City, of whom Gratian was the first, who according to that Author, Greg. Turon.
was sent thither from Rome in the first year of Decius, which answers the year
of Christ 253. according to Baronius; H. l. 10. c. 31.
but 249, according to Bishop Pearson. Ann. Cypr. Anno. 249.
When this Gratian dyed, the Sea is said to have been void seven and thirty
years; but no reason is there assigned for so long a vacancy. But Gregory seems
to be afraid, there should be many Christians in that part of Gaul before
Martin came to convert the Country. Yet in Gaul they could not but be
exceeding numerous; since they suffered Lactant. de Mort. Persec. ss. 16.
so little in Dioclesian's Persecution, and must consequently become the common
refuge of the Christians that fled from other places. But to make short work,
and so offer all the rest in one. In Rome it self in the fourth Century, the
Senate, the Nobles, and the greatest part of the people were given up to
Heathenish Superstitions. And for this, he refers his Reader to the
Centuriators. They have indeed several instances to prove that there was a
great party of Heathen in that City in the fourth Century. But none of these
make it evident, that the greatest part of the Romans were then Heathen, unless
it be a passage of St. Jerome, Hoc errore, and pessima consuetudine vetustatis
multarum provinciarum urbes laborant. Ipsaque Roma orbis domina. -- Ut tam
intrantes quam exeuntes domos suas inoliti semper commoneantur erroris. Hieron.
In Esa. c. 57.
which as it is produced by those Collectors, would make them all Heathen. For
they make him say, that the Image of the tutelar Deity is worshipped in every
house in Rome. But he seems to represent this as a relic of Heathen
superstition, that stuck in many places, and was retained even among
Christians; and therefore brings it as a parallel instance to match the
superstition of the Jews, which they learned from their neighbors. But that
the greater part of the people of Rome were Christians toward the end of the
third Century and the beginning of the fourth, we have a plain testimony from
Eusebius, (...). Eusebius. H. E. l. 8. c. 14.
who speaking of Maxentius, says, that at first he counterfeited himself a
Christian to please and flatter the people of Rome. Yet Mr. Clerkson is of
another opinion, and tells Prim. ep. p. 76.
us, that a little before, the Christians were but a small part of Rome; when
with general acclamations the people cried out, Christiani tollantur duodecies,
etc. Baron. Anno. 301. ss. 3. But this evidence falls short upon several
accounts. First, the authority of it is not very good; it is taken from the
acts of Savinus, of which Baronius published some part: But they are entire in
Baluzius Baluz. Miscel. l. 2. p. 47.
his Miscellanies. Baronius Anno. 301. 18.
vouches them for sincere and good: and Baluzius Baluz. Not. in Pass. S.
Savini. p. 463.
gives them the same character. But there are some marvelous passages which may
make one, who is not very credulous, to doubt; such Pass. S. Savini. ss. 5. 9,
10, 11.
as the breaking of the Idol of Jupiter, made of Coral, by this Martyr, while
he was under examination; his restoring sight to the Nephew of Serena; his
healing and converting of Venustianus president of Tuscia, and some other
things that taste of Fable. But to let these Acts pass for authentic, it does
not follow from the clamor of the people at the Circensian games against the
Christians, that the greatest part of Rome was Heathen. For those who were
present at those sports, were generally Heathen. The Christians thinking
themselves forbid by their Religion, to go to such shows. So this allegation
yields but a poor argument against the number of the Christians; since the fact
is not very certain, and the consequence far from being good. However, our
Author Prim. ep. p. 77.
finds that long after this, the Romans were generally Heathen. For
Constantine, after he had been Emperor twenty years, expressing his
detestation of the Heathenish Rites, -- Incurred the hatred of the Senate and
People of Rome, and was reproached in a manner by all the People, Zosim. l. 2.
And this is assigned as the cause, why he thought of transferring the Imperial
Seat. This indeed is said by Zosimus, a zealous advocate for Gentile
Superstition, and the only design of whose History is to set up the Apostate
Julian for a Hero, and to disparage all the actions of Constantine and the
Christian Emperors; and to this purpose he has made a History as fabulous as
his Religion, especially where that is concerned. And therefore it is no
wonder, if such a one stretch beyond truth in the magnifying his party, and
make all the Roman people of his side. That he translated his Imperial Seat,
might not be occasioned by the prevalence of Heathenism in Rome; for Dioclesian
had done Nicomediam studens urbi Romae coaequare. Lact. de Mort. Pers. ss. 7.
cum libertatem populi far non poterat, prorupit ex urbe. Id. ss. 17.
the same thing not long before, and made a prodigious expense upon Nicomedia,
with a design to render it equal to Rome, that had indeed disobliged him, but
it could not be by being too Heathenish, but by that Liberty, or rather
Insolence, which the People used toward their Emperors. Now in Constantine,
whether it was pique, or desire of glory, to be the founder of a new Rome; or a
nobler design for the safety of the Empire, to remove the Imperial Seat, and
consequently the best and quickest strength of it, nearer to the Barbarous
Nations that were then most powerful, is not easy to say at this distance; but
for Christianity's sake we ought not to take the reason of an enemy, and
especially one of so profligate credit as Zosimus was. But within less than
twenty years of Constantine's reign, the Christians of Rome had forty Churches,
as we are informed by Optatus Optat. Milev. l. 2.
Bishop of Milevis, a writer of that age. And in the later end of that Century
S. Augustine excuses the practice of St. Peter's Church in Rome, which was
objected against his Reformation in Hippo, upon this account, that it was
remote from the Bishop. For when St. Augustine Quod remotus sit locus a
conversatione Episcopi and in tanta civitate sit magna Carnalium multitudo.
August. ep. 29. Ed. Bened.
had resolved to break that custom of Feasting in the Church on Ascension-day,
against the general inclination of his people; it was objected, that it was the
practice of St. Peter's Church in Rome, which he excuses from its distance from
the Bishop: As appears from one of his Epistles, lately published by the French
Benedictins.

To make proof of Diocesan Episcopacy in the first ages, it is not requisite
that all the World should be Christian, nor that the greater part of every
City, where a Bishop was placed, should consist of believers. There were some
Cities so populous, that if but the twentieth part were Christians, they must
have divided into several Congregations; and there were several others so
great, that a tenth part of them would have exceeded the measure of a
Congregation. And therefore where the proportion comes to rise nearer to an
equality, or to exceed it; most Cities must have more than one assembly, though
they were confined to one Bishop. Nor was the City all that appertained to the
Bishops care; but all the Christians of the territory were of his flock, who
were too numerous, and too remote to come to the Bishop's Church upon all
occasions of Religion. Yet some Cities from the beginning, others in the third,
and several in the middle of the fourth Century are known to have been entirely
Christian. Edessa Holsten. in Steph.
was the metropolis of Osroena, and the Seat of the Kings of that Country; but
is more renowned for being wholly Christian, even from the beginning of
Christianity: and for this reason was avoided by Julian in his Persian
expedition. Eusebius (...). Soz. l. 6. 1. (...). Eusebius. H. E. l. 2. c. 1.
bears testimony of this place, that from our Saviors time it had been
altogether Christian, and so continued to the age he wrote in. And whether the
story of Abgarus, and the pretended Letter of our Savior to him, be true or
false; yet this is certain, that this whole City was Christian very early, and
consequently had several Congregations and Churches under one Bishop; as
Sozomen Soz. l. 6. c. 18.
mentions it to have had. Neocaesarea in Pontus was all Christian in the third
Century. And a little Town in Phrygia was destroyed upon that account in the
beginning of the next. In the reign of Julian, Caesarea the greatest City in
Cappadocia was entirely Christian, and for that reason suffered not a little
vexation from that Apostate, who disfranchised it, and confiscated all the
goods belonging to the Churches of the City or Territory appertaining to it.
And this was an old grudg; for he hated (...). Sozom. l. 6. c. 4.
this place mortally from the beginning, as having long before destroyed the
Heathen Temples. Nisibis the noble bulwark of the Roman Empire, a City so great
and populous, (...). Zoz. l. 3. c. 33.
that when Jovian had by a dishonorable Treaty with the Persians given it
away; the Citizens beseech him, that they might defend themselves against all
the power of Persia; and they did not doubt, but with their own force, and at
their own expense, they might be able to preserve the the place, Ad defendendos
penates se solos sufficere sine alimentis publicis and milite -- ut experti
sunt saepe. Ammian. Marc. l. 25. c. 9.
as they had often done. This City was altogether Christian; and therefore,
Julian (...). Soz. l. 5. c. 3.
upon an irruption of the Persians, threatened to leave them out of his law and
protection, and that he would never set his foot in such a profane place where
his Gods were not worshipped. And all other Cities, that were generally
Christian, are said to have the same reception, when they had any occasion to
sue for favor. Samosata Samosata Civitas ampla and illustris. Ammian. Marc. l.
14. (...). Joseph. B. J. l. 7. c. 28.
the greatest City, and the Royal seat at Commagena, was not only altogether
Christian, but all Orthodox and Catholic in Valens his time. For Theod. H. E.
l. 4. c. 15.
when Eusebius their Bishop was banished, and one Eunomius an Arrian put in his
place, neither rich nor poor, nor young nor old would go into his Church, or
have any communication with him. Majuma the Port of Gaza, was made a City by
Constantine the Great, and called Constantia, because all (...), Soz. l. 2. c.
5.
the people turned Christians, though before they were extremely addicted to
Idols. And that we may not think this a mean place, because it had always been
dependant on a City; the Church of that place is represented (...), Soz. l. 5.
c. 28.
as very great from the multitude of people and wealth. And that this place had
several Churches and Altars belonging to it, we are informed by one who was
well acquainted with the place, who tells (...), Soz. l. 5. c. 3.
us, that when this Diocese was taken out of that of Gaza, the bounds of their
respective Territories were laid out, and what Altars or Churches should belong
to each. Upon the same account of total conversion to Christianity, in
Constantine's time, Constantina Soz. l. 2. c. 5.
in the same Country had its name; and very many (...).
Cities in the same manner, of their own accord, and without any compulsion
from the Emperor, left their Idols and became Christian; pulled down their
Temples, and built Churches. In Antioch, one of the greatest Cities of the
world, the generality of the people were Christians; and for this we have a
witness, who cannot be suspected to magnify their number; it is Julian the
Apostate, (...). Julian. Misopog.
he had offended so many of that City, he had almost said all; the Senate, the
rich, the common people; and these were angry with him, for the greatest part,
or rather all, since they had chosen Atheism; so the Apostate called the
Christian Religion; and all this because he adhered to the the Gentile
superstition. And how universal the neglect of the Heathen rites was then in
Antioch, the same Author makes a sad complaint. For when he had come upon the
feast of Apollo, to do sacrifice in Daphne, the people of Antioch had provided
no sacrifice for that occasion, nor taken the least notice of the feasts; and
therefore chides Id. Misopog.
with the Senate for putting such an affront upon their peculiar God. And then
bestows his raillery upon them, as if they were grown so poor, that they were
not able to buy a sacrifice, their wives having bestowed all upon the
Galileans. In short, so small was the devotion of that great City toward their
Patron Apollo; that the poor Heathen Priest was forced to bring his goose
himself, and to provide his own sacrifice. Constantinople was a Christian City
from its first foundation, (...). So^. l. 2. c. 3.
having never been polluted with Idols; and the generality of the Citizens
being Christians, required many Churches to assemble in. Constantine built
several, and of the rest some were built by the Bishops, others by the people
of the place; and the goodness and charity of the Christian inhabitants there
were so great, that they gained many of the Jews, and almost all the Heathen to
become Christians. And even in Arabia, where Mr. Clerkson could find few or no
Christians in Valens his time, the great and vast City Bostra, for so Ammianus
Marcellinus Civitates ingentes Bostra, etc. Ammian. Marc. l. 14. c. 2.
calls it, was at least half Christian; as Titus the Bishop of the place gave
out, who is quoted for it by Julian Julian. Ep. ad Bostren.
the Apostate. Nay, some Countries are said to be generally Christian, before
the end of the third Century. So Eusebius (...). Eusebius. H. E. l. 9. c. 8.
represents the Armenians, against whom Maximin declared War upon that account;
and while he endeavored to force them to Idolatry, instead of friends and
confederates, he made them enemies. So wonderfully did the word of God prevail;
that to use the words of Eusebius, Eusebius. Praepar. Ev. l. 1. p. 12, 13.
whole myriads of men and women and children, of bond and free, of Barbarians
and Greeks, in every place and City and Country, in every Nation under Heaven,
learn the precepts of our holy doctrine, and become the Disciples of Christ.

Prim. ep. p. 78.
Nor is our Author contented to reduce the Primitive Christians to a small
number, and to render them a mean party in respect of the multitude of the
Heathen, even after they were become their masters; but he brings in yet
further abatements at the foot of his account, for Jews and Heretics. The
Jews, says he, were numerous in these Cities, and there was no part of the
Roman Empire without multitudes of them. This he proves chiefly out of
Josephus. But all those Testimonies are too early for the present purpose; and
the Synagogues of Jews, that S. Paul met with in almost every City where he
came, were so far from diminishing the numbers of Christians, that their
increase was generally from hence. Here the Apostles usually preached the
Gospel, till they had changed the Synagogues into Churches. Under Trajan and
Adrian the Jews were very numerous, and their numbers might then tempt them to
revolt; but the destruction which they brought upon themselves, was so great,
such numbers slain, that they seemed to be near extirpation. After this they
were so low, that for some ages they are not mentioned for any enterprise. In
the mean time the Christians increased daily, till they prevailed over both
Jews and Heathen. And St. Austin Plures enim jam Christiani sunt, quam si
Judaei simulacrorum cultoribus adjungantur. Aug. de Util. Cred.
makes the Christians in his time, to be more numerous than Jews and Idolaters
put together; not confining his comparison within the Empire, but making it
general; and consequently taking in all the barbarous Nations within his
knowledge.

Yet in the fourth Century Mr. Clerkson brings an instance or two, to show that
in some places the Jews were numerous. In Constantine 's time, says he, Prim.
ep. p. 80.
they possessed Diocaesarea and Tiberias; Diospolis also, and many other Towns;
and were so numerous as to raise a war against the Emperor, Soz. l. 4. c. 6.
That the Jews were numerous in that age, especially about Palestine, cannot be
denied; and that they had several Towns entirely to themselves, Socrates, Socr.
l. 2. c. 3.
and Epiphanius Epiph. Haer. 30. ss. 11.
and other Writers affirm. But then these Towns wholly inhabited by Jews, are
without this question; for these make no abatement of the number of Christians
in Cities, where they had Bishops and Churches. It will be of some use, upon
this occasion, to clear a passage of Epiphanius, which Petavius had mistaken.
In the relation which Epiphanius gives of Count Joseph the Jew, among other
things he makes him say, that Ellal the Jewish Patriarch at the point of death
sent for the Bishop of Tiberias, and was baptized of him. Whereas then there
was neither Bishop nor Church nor Christian in Tiberias; and therefore instead
of Bishop of that place, he should have rendered (...). Epiph. Haer. 4.
a Bishop in the neighborhood of Tiberias. For it was there that the Patriarch
resided, and sent for some Bishop of a neighboring Town. And that the words
are thus to be rendered, will be clear from what the same Joseph says a little
after. When Constantine had conferred upon him the honor of a Count, he bid
him beg what favor he pleased; but asked only this, that he might have the
Emperor's commission (...). Epiph. Haer. n. 11.
to build Churches in the Cities and Villages of the Jews, where there were
none; because there was neither Heathen, nor Samaritan, nor Christian among
them; and especially in Tiberias, and Diocaesarea, and Nazareth, and Capernaum.
For in these places they would not suffer any of another Nation to live among
them. Now as these places are not for Mr. Clerkson's purpose, while they were
wholly possessed of Jews; so neither will the objection last long, after
Churches were built in them. For Aur. Vict. in Constantio: (...). Cedren. ad
an. 15. Constable.
these Jews revolting against Constantius, and setting up a Tyrant of their
own, one Patricius, were totally destroyed by Gallus, and Diocaesarea razed to
the ground.

But the Jews also were numerous in these Cities, i.e. where the Heathen are
supposed by him to be the major part; and there was no part of the Roman Empire
without multitudes of them. The ancient instances out of Josephus I pass by, as
too early, and not to the present purpose. But one thing he offers, that ought
not to be omitted, that, Prim. ep. p. 81.
Chrysostom seems to signify, that in his time, they were as many as the
Christians in that City, i. e. in Antioch; for he exhorts each of the
Christians to reduce one Jew to the Christian profession. To say the truth,
this inference does not so much as seem to be reasonable. For first Chrysostom
could not speak to all the Christians of Antioch together, though his voice had
been as great as his eloquence; and to strain this expression to the utmost, if
it should suppose the Jews as many as those he addressed his discourse to, yet
would they be no more than one Christian Congregation, which might possibly be
two or three thousand when Chrysostom preached; though that great man sometimes
in his Sermons complains of the smallness of his auditory. But this is not
necessary. For the language of a Preacher is not to be examined by the rules of
an accountant; nor when he exhorts every one to convert his man, is he supposed
to be telling of heads, and comparing of parties. But since the Jews would
admit no public exhortation then, as they do endure in some places since for
forms sake; this zealour Preacher for the advancement of Christianity, and the
saving of Souls, might direct his people, as they have occasion, to deal
privately and apart with the Jews, and to endeavor every one to gain his
convert.

And this I have said to show the inconclusiveness of Mr. Clerkson's arguments.
But in truth the whole is a downright fraud. For St. Chrysostom in the place
cited, directs not every Christian to convert his Jew; but every zealous and
faithful Christian to endeavor to reclaim or convert his brother, and that
whether Heathen, or Jew, or (which he there chiefly intends) negligent
Christian. A little before he had lamented the carelessness of Christian
masters, who permitted their wives or servants to frequent the Theaters, or the
Synagogues of the Jews; when it was in their power to restrain them, and by
that influence which they had over them, dispose them either to embrace the
Christian Religion, or more strictly live up to the rules of it, if already
embraced. For this frequenting of the Jewish Synagogues in these persons, arose
not from the belief of the Jewish Religion, but from the same vanity which
induced them to frequent the Theaters, that is, the pleasure of seeing pompous
and even theatrical ceremonies practiced in them. For so Chrysostom argues
with them. Tell me, what is it that you run to see in the Synagogue of the
Jews? To hear men sound with trumpets? For it appears, that the Jews retained
that custom, and strived to perform it with great art, in their religious
service; which might draw great numbers of idle persons, whether Christians or
Heathens, to hear them. Such persons ought no more be supposed to have been
Jews, than all those to have been Papists, whose vain curiosity tempted them to
enter the Popish Chapels in the last reign.

As for the Jews dispersed over the Empire, it does not appear they were in any
City so numerous as to bear any near proportion to the inhabitants of the
place. Of old indeed in Alexandria, and some Cities of Syria, they were
exceeding numerous: But then they were original inhabitants of those places,
and not strangers. But in the fourth Century, of which we are now speaking,
though every where almost there were some, yet were there not very many in any
one place, excepting their own Country. We may judge by what we see now; there
is scarce any great Town of trade in Europe, where there are not some Jews. And
in many Countries they may be said to be numerous; but still they bear no
proportion to the Natives. And I do not know, whether there be any City in
Europe where they are so many in proportion to the other people, as one to an
hundred. And this is so small a matter, that it does not deserve any
consideration. It is as if in the computation of what water a river may
discharge in a day, a man should be scrupulous to make allowance for the
drinking of a few Horses.

When he had brought Christians very low, by great favor and partiality
toward Heathens and Jews; he thinks fit at last to divide this small party,
and with a true spirit of a Dissenter, to draw away as many as he could from
the Communion of the Bishop. To this purpose therefore he tells Prim. ep. p. 81.
us, There remains another sort of people, inhabitants of these Cities, to be
taken notice of, whose numbers made the Christian assemblies thinner, and the
Bishops flocks less numerous. -- Such as were called Heretics or Sectaries;
these were many, and had Bishops of their own. So that there were several
Bishoprics in one City. There is scarce an age since the Apostles, in which
the Predictions of St. Peter and St. Paul, that there would be Heresies, were
not sadly accomplished. Yet it pleased the same providence, that checks the
increase of noxious and venemons Creatures, to put likewise some stint to the
growth and spreading of this evil, and to lessen the mischief of these Wolves
in sheeps clothing, by not permitting them to multiply into too great numbers.
So that St. Austin Aug. de Util. Cred.
even in the midst of Afric, the most divided with Sects of any Christian
Country in that age, does not stick to affirm, that the Catholic Christians,
were more than all the Sectaries put together. And Sozomen Sozom. l. 2. c. 32.
observes, that all other Heretics, but the Novatians, from the very beginning
were but few. The Novatians therefore Mr. Clerkson chooses to insist on, and
from their number to let the Reader judge of the rest. Prim. ep. p. 82.
For by the multitude of them we may conjecture what all the rest, put
together, would amount to. Let us therefore try, what deductions these may make
from the Diocese of the Orthodox Bishop. He tells us then, that they were many
from first to last: And that they had a Diocese in Rome, and Alexandria, and
Constantinople, where it continued with public liberty longer. And to make
short, they had Bishops and Churches in many other places. But to come near,
and to make some guess of their number, he tells us, at Constantinople, their
Churches were more confirmed and enlarged under one Chrysanthus their Bishop.
And in Rome, Innocent took many Churches from them: And Celestine deprived them
of more. And to conclude, till that time they had mightily flourished at Rome,
having many Churches and great multitudes of People. What, had these Novatians
then many Churches in one City? I had almost been tempted to think by Mr.
Clerkson's former discourse, that one Church had been sufficient for all the
Christians of the greatest City in the Empire; and yet it seems one single Sect
could not be content with one Church, but they must have many under one Bishop.
Well then, these were Dissenters, and they may have what they please; and yet
we shall see in the next Chapter, how hard he is toward Catholic Christians,
for these must be no more than may meet in one place, even in Rome and
Constantinople. We expect no favor then; but let us not be pressed to death,
while we are willing to plead. There were, he says, in the fourth Century
several Sects: Of these the Novatians the most numerous: These in Constantius
his time had Socr. l. 2. c. 38.
three Churches in Constantinople, under one Bishop. The Catholic, or
established Christians before this time upon a very low computation, were
twenty times as many; and these with all the Country Parishes of that Diocese,
had but one Bishop: yet they are to have but one Church, if our Author may have
his way. Rome and Constantinople are a great way off; and the times of which
our Author speaks, were very remote from ours. But let us try whether we may
not comprehend this matter without travel or much reading, and make London the
Scene of our Discourse; for as great and populous as it is, it may receive no
disparagement by the comparison with old or new Rome. Now in London there is a
Sect or two ambitious of being thought to have some resemblance to the
Novatians; and that they may not be displeased, let them be more numerous;
instead of three Churches, let them have ten Meetings. The other Sects who can
speak of numbers too, may have their assemblies as convenient as they please,
and not crush or hurt one another for want of room; yet the Bishop of the place
will scarce be able to assemble his flock, even of the City, in any one Church,
though Paul's were finished: For if you should happen to be late on Sunday
morning; go to St. Clements, and there is no room; go to St. Martins, and its
all full; go to the Abbey, and you can scarce come within hearing; and at St.
Gile's, you will be thronged; and if you walk to St. Andrews, you may have no
seat. I might add near a hundred Congregations more within the lines, of which
many are as considerable as these I mentioned, and all this in a City which is
much inferior for number of people to those old ones of which our Author
speaks. You may see therefore by this, how much thinner a multitude of Sects,
and some of them numerous, will render the Bishops flock, in such great Cities
as we have been speaking of; and what mighty abatements are to be made in the
number of the Church Christians, upon the account of three Conventicles of the
Novatians, in a City that wanted not much of a million of Souls. But we have
made no allowance for Heathen, which in the fourth Century were numerous, and
now are grown rare. But the sluggish and irreligious brutes in our greatest
Cities may be reconed against them, and our account remain as it was; and I am
afraid that about London there may be more of these, than there were Heathens
in Constantinople.

I need not show, says our Author, Prim. ep. p. 83.
how predominant Arrianism was in the greatest part of the Christian World.
Ingemuit totus orbis, and Arrianum se esse miratus est. When it possessed the
whole Orient, having none to oppose it but Athanasius and Paulinus. Adv. Joh.
Hierosol. That the Arrian party or faction was very great under Constantius and
Valens, is certain; but that the Sect was very numerous, I find no reason to
believe. I am sure the passage of St. Jerome, which is much oftener cited than
understood, intends no such thing; but the quite contrary. For Jerome (l)
speaking of the Council of Rimini, endeavors to show that the Bishops there
were Orthodox: that they confirmed the Nicene Faith; that they condemned
Arrianism; that they left out the word Consubstantial, not because they
condemned the sense of it, but for accommodation, and because it seemed to give
offense; that they pronounced anathema on all those who denied Christ to be
eternal God, or affirmed him to be made of nothing. Wherefore thinking they had
done well and wisely, they return home in great hopes that the East and West
were now reconciled, and that this small alteration had begot an eternal Peace.
But when the Arrians had obtained their point, and had excluded the word
Substance out of the Creed, they began to proclaim Sine conscientia Haeretici
ferebantur.
their Conquest, and to triumph as if the Nicene Faith had been abolished. Then
the Bishops began to perceive the trick. So that the whole World wondered to see
it self become Arrian; not that they were really so; but only that they had
been imposed upon by fair pretenses, to give the Arrians some advantage, for
which they were sensibly grieved; and therefore as soon as they Usiae nomen. --
quia in Scripturis, aiebant, non invenitur, and multos simpliciores novitate
sua scandalizat, placuit auferri. Non erat curae Episcopis de vocabulo, cum
sensus esset in tuto. Hieron. adv. Lucif.
found their mistake, some immediately joined Communion with the Confessors in
Banishment; the rest as soon as they had opportunity, renounced all Communion
with the Arrians, and were received into the Church; not as Heretics returned,
for they never had been Heretics, but as persons deceived by fair words to
join with those who were indeed secretly Heretics: But their expressions
Sonabant verba pletatem, nemo venenum insertum putabat. Hieron. adv. Lucif.
bore a fair construction, and their words were Catholic; and it seemed Cur
damnassent eos qui Arriani non erant? Id.
unreasonable they should be condemned for Arrians, who had never been so. This
passage then of Jerome is brought in by Mr. Clerkson, directly against the
intention of the Author.

Nor is it any more to the intent of the present question, or any way
serviceable to our Author's purpose, which is to render the flocks of the
Bishops of those times thinner. for the flocks of these Bishops did all adhere
to them: and when Cum omnes populi Sarcedotes suos diligentes, paene ad
lapides, and interemptionem deponentium eos convaluerint. Hieron. adv. Lucif.
some persons, of more zeal than discretion, attempted to depose some of them,
and ordein others in their place; their people were so concerned, that they
were ready to stone those obtruders.

The same answer is to be made to the other passage of St. Jerome, that in the
East there were but Athanasius and Paulinus to oppose the Arrians: Not that all
the rest, or the greater number were Heretics, or would not oppose the Doctrine
of Arrius; but those two only did in an eminent manner oppose the designs of
these Heretics, which were covered over with specious pretenses of peace and
sincerity of belief, so as to impose in a manner upon the whole Church. But the
number of that Sect is no more to be taken from the party they once prevailed
upon to join with them, against a few Bishops, whom they traduced as Authors of
all those public distractions, which they themselves had caused, and pretended
that the Faith was not concerned; than the numbers of our Sects are to be
estimated from the interest which upon some occasions they can make against
some great men, who seem to stand most in their way, and to give the greatest
obstruction to their designs.

In all Constantine's time the Arrians had no separate Congregations, excepting
what the Author of the Sect made for a little while in Alexandria. And when
Bishops and whole Provinces took parties in this quarrel; the separation was of
one City or Province from another, and not of the people from their respective
Bishops; and in a little time, all acquiesced in the Decree of Nice, Socr. l.
1. c. 26.
which received no open contradiction during the reign of Constantine; Eusebius.
vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 57.
and prodigious accessions being made to the Church under that reign, the
Cities must be thronged with Christians, and the generality of Bishops, even in
respect of the Towns where they resided, must be Diocesan. All Sects were very
inconsiderable in his time, being suppressed by public authority, and all
their Meetings forbid by the Emperor's Edicts; Eusebius. vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 63,
64, 65, 66.
which had that effect, that the greatest part joined themselves sincerely to
the Church, and all the rest in appearance, so that there remained no meeting
of Dissenting Christians in all the Empire; and even the Novatians were
comprehended in the same Law.

Under the next reign the Arrians covered themselves with a pretense of owning
no other Doctrine but that already established in the Church, and laid all the
blame upon Athanasius, as a man of a restless and turbulent spirit, that would
not suffer the Church to be in peace. Nor were there many separate
Congregations upon this account, the people generally following the Bishops set
over them, under a persuasion that they were sound as to the Faith; and for
those Bishops who were displaced, care was taken, that they should be thought
to suffer not upon the account of their Faith, but of some other high
misdemeanors. In some few of the greatest Cities there were tumults on this
occasion; but in general there was a submission to public order; and a great
part of the World was carried away, not by the doctrine, but the dissimulation
of the Arrians. Yet still the Episcopal Dioceses remained as they were, without
any considerable seperations. When Athanasius died, its said, there were but
few Arrians in (...). Socr. l. 4. c. 22.
Alexandria. In Basil ep. 72. (...).
Basil's time, there were but very few in comparison of the whole infected with
that disease. At Rome there were scarce any. And (...). Socr. l. 2. c. 2.
in the West they were hardly known otherwise than by report, till the Goths
had planted themselves in that part of the Empire. So that the Orthodox Bishops
were not reduced to a single Congregation by the separation of the Arrians;
their Cities only being supposed to make up their whole Dioceses. Our Author is
liberal, and will not insist upon the prevailing of the Donatists; and
therefore I need not say that the case of Afric was singular, being torn into
very small Dioceses: and yet even in that, there were some large, some free
from the Donatists, and had no other Bishop but that of the established Church;
as appears by several answers of the Bishops in the Conference at Carthage. Nor
will he tell us, how the Macedonians did abound, in many places. Nor will he so
much as name the other numerous Sects, which had their distinct Churches and
Bishops; so that there were sometimes four or five of several persuasions
seated in that City. I have, I think, made allowance enough for them all; and
yet in great Cities left more Churches for the Bishops, than all the
Conventicles of Sectaries thrice told would amount to.

Now to sum up this evidence, and Prim. ep. p. 84.
to draw this Discourse into an issue: Suppose we a City forty furlongs in
compass, (than which there were few bigger) let us allow half to Heathens, and
a third or fourth to Jews and Novatians; and the proportion left Christians
will not exceed the dimensions of a small Town, etc. But we have taken notice
of some Cities of more than forty furlongs, that were wholly Christian. I have
mentioned others exceeding great, in which there were but very few Heathen. I
have instanced in some that had no Dissenters or Sectaries; and showed in
general, that all the World over, those who were without the pale of the Church
of all Sects, were nothing so considerable as our Author would represent them.
And here we might conclude this Chapter, but for the particulars which follow,
and require further examination.

When our Author had made the largest allowances, for Heathens, and Jews and
Sectaries, as if they had been all to poll for the Dissenters, and left the
Catholic Christians so destitute, that there seemed to be no place left them
in the greatest Cities; he thought Prim. ep. p. 84.
it might be more satisfactory yet, to make this evident in some particular
Cities; and those of the greater, nay, some, of the greatest. Berytus, he says,
was an eminent City, -- and yet it had but one Church in Julian 's time, which
was then burnt by Magnus. (...). It is not one of the Churches, but the Church
of Berytus, Theod. l. 4. c. 20. If our Author had been a little better versed
in the language of the ancient Church; he could not have thought this instance,
or his deduction from it, very satisfactory. For the Church in Ecclesiastical
Writers does not denote the only Church, or signify to the exclusion of any
other; but expresses only the Cathedral or Bishops Church. And that this may be
clear beyond all cavil, I will offer some passages, where the same expression
is used, in Cities known to have a great number of Churches. Alexandria is
allowed by all to have had many Churches in the beginning of the fourth
Century; and the testimony of Athanasius, Athan. Apol. 2.
and Epiphanius, Epiph. Haer. 69.
sets it beyond contradiction: yet Gregory the Arrian Bishop is said (...).
Socr. l. 2. c. 14.
to be removed, because he had become odious to the people, for the burning of
the Church. He says not one of the Churches, would our Author reason, but the
Church; yet for all this there were many other Churches in that City. To the
same purpose, when Athanasius was forced to fly from Alexandria, the Soldiers
are said (...). Athan. Apol 2. p. 717. Socr. l. 2. c. 11.
to encompass the Church, without any distinction which it was; and the Bishop
said to be driven out of the Church, intending only the principal Church, and
that which was called so by way of eminence; which is sometimes styled the
great Church. So Theodorus Lector Theod. Lect. l. 1. p. 553. Ed. Val.
speaking of Gennadius Bishop of Constantinople, takes notice, that he was the
first that appropriated to the City Parishes all the oblations that should be
made in them; whereas before the great Church carried away all. And Nicephorus
Niceph. H E. l. 15. c. 22.
speaking of the same thing, calls it the Catholic Church. In the same manner
likewise, is Epiphanius Epiph. Haer. 69.
understood by Valesius, H. Vales. in Theodor. Lect. p. 162.
when he speaks of the Catholic Church of Alexandria. And thus perhaps may
Cornelius his expression in Eusebius be best understood, that in the Catholic
Church there ought to be but one Bishop. For although in one City there may be
many Parish-Churches, appointed for the use of the several quarters where they
are placed; yet is there but one common, or general or Catholic Church in one
City.

Rome had many Churches, when the schism of Vrsicinus happened to divide it;
and long before that time there were no less than forty. Yet Socrates (...).
Socr. l. 4. c. 29.
speaking of the ordination of Vrsicinus, observes that it was not done in the
Church, but in a private place of the Church, called Sicine, or Sicininus;
Ammian. Marcell. l. 27. c. 3.
that is, in the Church of Sicininus, which was but an obscure place, in
comparison of the great Church.

In Constantinople there were many Churches from the beginning. Yet in
Constantius his time, Socrates (...). Socr. l. 2. 16.
speaks of the Emperors order to drive Paul out of the Church of that place,
and to put Macedonius into possession of it. Wherefore (...). Socr. ibid.
after Paul was sent to banishment, the Prefect took Macedonius, and brought
him toward the Church; and when they came near to the Church, and the people
strove to get into the Church. Though all the while it is notorious, Socr. l.
2. c. 12.
there were many Churches in the place, though this was then the Cathedral. Or
if our Author may fancy this City still to have but one Church; yet we have the
same language long after, even in Chrysostom's time, who upon his return is
said Socr. l. 6. c. 16. Pallad. Vit. Chrysostom. p. 15, 16, 24, 25. Chrysostom. Ep. ad
Innocent.
to be brought by the people to the Church. And by this time sure there must be
many Churches in that City; or some unkown destruction must have befaln those
magnificent houses of God in that place, so much celebrated by some of the
Writers of that age. So the inference our Author draws from this expression,
the Church of Berytus, to the exclusion of all other Churches, proves a
mistake. But he proceeds to observe farther, Prim. Ep. p. 85.
that Tire was one of the most illustrious Cities of the East; -- yet Paulinus
Bishop there in Constantine's time, had but so many under his Episcopal charge,
(...), p. 276. (...), p. 285.
as he could take a personal notice of their souls, and accurately examine the
inward state of every one, -- acquainting himself thoroughly with the condition
of all those souls that were committed to him. And that you may be sure that
all this is just and exact, without Hyperbole, he quotes his Author, as the
Panegyrist in Eusebius informs us, l. 10. c. 4. It is usual in Panegyricks to
raise things beyond nature, and the strictness of truth; and it is allowed, as
long as the proportions and resemblance of the things so represented are
preserved. What therefore if Eusebius by all this citation should intend only
to commend the diligence and the penetration of that Bishop of Tire, that he
had the gift of discerning spirits, and of judging aright, whose repentance was
sincere, and therefore to be received into communion; whose conversion was
unfeigned, and therefore to be admitted to baptism; who was best qualified for
the respective offices of the Church? If he should mean no more by these high
expressions, he would not exceed much the allowances given to such kinds of
discourse; and I think they are more to blame, that would force a complement
into a Syllogism. It is scarce worth the while to say so much as is necessary
for the illustration of this passage, only to show at last, to how little
purpose it was alleged. Yet since this instance of Tire comes in among the
rest, because he esteemed it more satisfactory than ordinary, I m st beg the
Reader's patience to explain the matter. Eusebius Eusebius. E. H. l. 10. c. 4. p.
376.
in his Panegyric, delivered at the Dedication of the Church of Tire, commends
not only the fabric, but the spiritual Church, or the Christians of that City.
And this Temple, says the Panegyrist, is very great indeed, and worthy of God.
The inside of this Temple, who can describe? who can look into it but the great
high Priest, who alone has authority to enter into this Holy of holies, and to
search the secrets of the heart? And happily it may be given to one more in the
second place, and by way of substitute, that is, to him who sits there, the
leader of this noble Army. To him therefore, as a high Priest after Christ, it
may be lawful, to look into the most secret parts of your souls; or as Mr.
Clerkson translates, to take a personal notice of your souls, and to examine
the inward state of every one. Now Eusebius says not the least word that
Paulinus had but so many under his charge, that he could look into all their
souls; but (...), Eusebius. l. 10. c. 4. p. 385.
that it was lawful for him to do so, to be an inspector or Bishop of their
souls. And this to be understood with respect to the Bishops office, who
received the public confessions in the Church, and was the Judge of the
sincerity of the profession, as far as Ecclesiastical Discipline was concerned.
And all this might be said, although he had had forty Parish-Churches within
his City. Valesius mentions a marginal note of some Greek set against this
place, in a Manuscript that he had seen, detesting it as a wicked and
blasphemous passage. He thought Eusebius had spoken those things of Christ
which he directed to the Bishop. But though there are some expressions below
the majesty of Christ; yet are there others, that are something too high to be
offered to man. The other passage out of the same Oration, that speaks of
Paulinus, as, thoroughly acquainting himself with all those souls committed to
him, will appear as little to our Author's purpose; if we do but observe what
goes before it. For Eusebius speaking to those who had defiled their
consciences in the Persecution, by complying with the wicked decrees of the
Persecutors: And you, says he, whose consciences a little while ago were
polluted, and overwhelmed by profane commands, have your minds now cleansed by
the terrors of God's law, and are by him committed to the Bishop; who as he is
otherwise of excellent judgment, so has he a singular sagacity in judging of
the thoughts of souls. These words then are directed to such as had fallen in
the late Persecution, and were now in the state of Penitents, or had lately
been so. And it is with respect to them, that the discretion of the Bishops is
commended, that he can see into the very secret of their hearts, and
distinguish between the hypocrite and the sincere. And Paulinus his case is
very singular, if his whole Church consisted of none but Penitents; it must be
thin indeed, for these were scarce reckoned within the Church. So little to the
purpose is this satisfactory instance; and so far it is from proving that for
which it was produced, that the Bishop of Tire had but so many under his
charge, as he could take personal notice of their souls.

Prim. ep. p. 85, 16.
Synnada is the next instance; where our Author fancies, that all the people
were no more than one Church would contain; which he thus endeavors to prove.
Agapitus the Macedonian Bishop on a sudden turns Orthodox, and calling together
the people under him, persuades them to it. This done with a great multitude,
(...). Socr. l. 7. c. 3.
yea with all the people, he hastens into the Church. But with what people? of
the City? Socrates says no such thing, nor could they be aware of what was
doing in the Macedonian meeting. The people then that went with him, were no
other than those who were with him, whom he persuaded to receive the true
faith. For as soon as he had done persuading them, immediately he went out; and
it seems his persuasion was so effectual, that a great multitude, or rather the
whole people, went with him toward the Church. This is what Socrates says, and
this is the most rational way of understanding him. But though he should mean all
the people of the Town, or all the Christians; yet he does not say that one
Church could contain them, but that this Bishop went with them toward the
Church. Whether they could all get in, or join with him, is still uncertain,
for any thing that Author says. But the truth is, though it should have been
affirmed expressly of all the people of the City, yet can it be understood no
otherwise than such expressions generally are, only for a great and unusual
concourse. And after all, this Bishop was a Diocesan, for he had many Churches
belonging to him, as is noted by Socrates (...). Socr. l. 7. c. 3.
in the same place.

(x) Cyzicus follows, as great a City, says our Author, as any in Asia, for
which he quotes Strabo and Florus; to which I will add, that it was no less
considerable under Constantius. For Gotofred's old Geographer (...), Geogr.
Vet. Gotofr.
says, that for its greatness and situation it surpasses all praise. Now it
cannot but grieve one to think, that such a noble City should be so disaffected
to the Christian Religion, that after the middle of the fourth Century it
should seem to our Author, Prim. ep. p. 87.
that all the Christians in this City were no more than could meet together in
one place, to hear the recantation of Eleusius. This is sad indeed; but since
our Author is apt to diminish Christians sometimes without reason, let us
examine this matter a little farther; for possibly this may be no truer than
the rest. This Eleusius, he says, being frighted into a subscription to
Arrianism, declared before them all, the force that was put upon him, (...),
coram universo populo, in the hearing of all the people, Socr. l. 4. c. 16. But
this expression, though translated into seventy languages, will never prove
that all the Christians in Cyzicus were present at this Recantation, or that
they could all meet in one Church. Such phrases as these, all the people, all
the multitude, are to be always limited by the place and other circumstances,
expressed or supposed in the discourse. When our Savior spoke in the Temple,
Luke 19.48,
all the people are said to be Prim. ep. p. 86.
very attentive, and to hang upon him; not all the people of Jerusalem surely,
but only the people there present. So the woman, who with a religious
confidence touched the hem of our Saviors garment, is said to declare to him
before Luke 8.47.
all the people, how she was healed. When Boniface was chosen Bishop of Rome,
it is said Acclamatione totius populi asseruimus. Baron. An. 419. n. 13.
to be confirmed by the acclamation of the whole people. It was now in the
fifth Century, and the Roman Christians too many to be any longer suspected for
a Congregational Diocese. When the people cried Anathema upon Nestorius in the
Church of Mocius in Constantinople, it is said to be done (...). Ep. ad Orthod.
ap. Conc. Ephesians.
by the united voice of all the people of the City. And when Ep. Syn. C. P. ad
occid. apud Theod. l. 5. c. 9. (...).
Nectarius was chosen Bishop of Constantinople, it is said to be done in the
presence of the Emperor, and by the suffrage of the whole City. And now surely
one Church could not hold all the Orthodox Christians of that City; for at this
time Gregory Nazianzen lets the Synod know, that he had filled all the Churches
of that City, though now another reaped the crop for which he had labored.
There may be instances of this kind produced without end; for it is the common
language of all the world, to say a thing was done in the presence of all the
people, when only the people who are present are intended, and not all the
people of a City or of a Country, or all the Christians of a place. And it is
seldom that any Writer uses any word of limitation upon these occasions, as
Cyprian De plebis, quae tunc adfuit, suffragio. Cypr. Ep.
in one place does, speaking of the election of Cornelius, that it was by the
suffrage of the people that were then present; when this is understood of
course, and needs no word of caution to suggest it.

So that all the people, which our Author fancied to comprehend all the
Christians of Cyzicus, did signify but those who were present, without any
regard to the number of Christians in that place. And that they had more than
could meet in one Church, we may reasonably infer from the multitude of
Churches said to be in that City at the same time. For when Eleusius was put
out, and Eunomius thrust into his place, he is said Sozom. l. 6. c. 8.
to possess himself not of one Church, but of the Churches of Cyzicus. Now to
make it more likely, that there were but few Christians in this great City, he
takes notice, Prim. ep. p. 86.
that in Julian 's time the greatest part of the Citizens were Heathen, the
City sending their Deputies to him, (as about other affairs) so for the
re-edifying of their Idol Temples. This Act does not necessarily conclude the
Heathen to be the major part. Few men in place, and countenanced by an
Emperor, may procure such a Petition as this in the name of a City, when much
the greater part might be far from liking it. We have instances of this nature
fresh in our remembrance, and perhaps too odious to be mentioned. Besides there
were Jews and Novatians, and Arrians here; and so there might be very great
numbers, and yet twenty Churches not be sufficient to receive the Christians of
the established Religion.

It must be confessed, that all other Cities must be delivered up to the
Congregational pretensions, if Constantinople may be reduced to a single
Church. And Mr. Clerkson fancied he had discovered the weakness of the
Christians of this place, by a passage in Theodoret. Prim. ep. p. 87, 88.
In Alexander 's time, -- the Christians were no more than could all meet
together; so Theodoret informs us, (...), l. 1. c. 14. i. e. the Bishop of the
place performed divine service with all the Brethren: what! with all the
brethren of Constantinople? No; but with all the brethren there assembled. The
import of this expression has been considered already, and this very passage
has received Vindicat. Prim. Chapter pref.
an answer long since. But afterward, he observes, many falling off to
Arrianism, the remainder made but (...), a little flock. This does not prove
but before this defection the Bishop of Constantinople's flock was very great,
and required many Churches to assemble in. And after this defection, the Arrian
Bishop, whom most of the Christians followed, had many Churches and
Congregations under him. For the people in many places not understanding the
danger of the Arrian Communion, did not think it necessary to separate, and
therefore continued to repair to those Churches whither they used to resort
before. So that the Episcopacy of the place remained Diocesan, though it
happened to be placed in wrong hands. And soon after the people were recovered
from these wolves, and delivered to faithful shepherds. Yet even then Mr.
Clerkson can find but one Congregation there; for in the time of Theodosius
Junior, it seems all amounted to no more than one Church could contain, if
Socrates deceive us not, l. 4. (it should be the 7th) c. 23. (...), i. e. all
the City became but one Church. It is a dangerous thing I see, to venture upon
a figure, if men will be such rigid exactors of litteral sense. The Historian
might fancy he had spoken eloquently, when instead of saying, that there was a
great confluence of people to the Church, he chose to express himself thus,
that the whole City became one Church. But the poor man is taken up short, at
his word; and if he do not make it out, that the greatest City then in the
world, was not literally one Congregation, he must pass for an extravagant
Writer, and one that deceives us. Yet though it should happen that all the
City, or all the Christians, had not been there to a man; it is not Socrates
that deceives us, while he uses a form of speech generally Prim. ep. p. 88.
allowed and understood; but it is Mr. Clerkson deceives himself, when he
snatcheth such expressions as this against all fair ways of understanding, to
give evidence to his notion. Those who give themselves up to serve an opinion,
are apt to catch at any thing they meet for a weapon to defend it; and this
Tyrant is so absolute, and the Slave so fond, that there is no place left for
examination or doubt; nor can that pertinent question of the Prophet Is. 44.20.
is there not a lie in my right hand, obtain any hearing.

I have already showed the greatness of this City, which our Author would
reduce to a single Congregation, that even in Constantine's time it was equal
to the greatest of the Empire. I have showed, that this was a Christian City
from the foundation, and the people generally devoted to the Religion of their
Founder. That in Constantine's time Sectaries could not lessen the Church of
the Bishop in that place, since they were not only discountenanced in that
reign, but by the Edicts of the Emperor obliged to go to Church, which they
generally did observe; some sincerely, and the rest by outward compliance. The
Arrians, or Eusebians had then no separate Congregations; they made then indeed
a faction, but not a schism in the Church; and labored with all their interest
to restore those to Communion, who had been cast out by the censures of the
Church, upon the account of those opinions. I have showed, how that Emperor
built Theod. H. C. l. 1. c. 6.
very great and many Churches there, because few were not sufficient to receive
the multitude. And now if so great a City, so affected to Christianity, can
make but one Church after all; what Preacher (...); Arist. Polit. l. 2.
can there be found, what voice sufficient for such an assembly, what Temple
capacious enough to receive it? S. Sophia is accounted the greatest of
Christian Churches, that the Sun ever shined on. And I remember to have Sub
Bajazethe triginta sex millia, qui illud religionis ergo adirent numerata
fuisse Ant. Maevanius author est. Geo. Dousa. de Itin. C. P. no. p. 37.
read that in Bajazets reign, six and thirty thousand Turks visited that Church
in one day; though I can scarce believe, as vast as that Church was, that it
could hold so many together. Yet even this number comes far short of the
Christians in Constantine's time, and much shorter yet of the Christians of
Constantinople under the younger Theodosius, when Paganism was every where
expiring, if not quite extinguished, and the Arrians and other sects reduced to
the Church, and that City arrived to its highest point of greatness; yet even
then our Author can afford the Bishop but one Congregation.

Prim. ep. p. 88.
At Ancyra the chief City of Gallatia, our Author takes notice that there were
many sects, by which that Church was torn in pieces. All this may very well be,
and yet more than one Congregation remain to the Bishop. The same thing may be
said of several of our Cities, inferior perhaps to Ancyra; and yet those of the
established Religion, notwithstanding the variety of the Sects, require many
Churches to assemble in. Prim. ep. p. 89.
The like may be said of Caesarea, the chief City in Mauritania (the reason
here is like the rest) because St. Augustine desired a public Conference with
the Donatist Bishop of that place, Suis omnibus civibus praesentibus. Possid.
vit. Aug. c. 14. i. e. frequentissima plebe praesente. Aug. gest. cum Emer.
init.
all the Citizens being present. I wonder our Author has not reduced all the
World to a Congregation, since it is usual to say, that a thing is done before
all the World, in the face of the World, and the like: and therefore, what need
all our Independent Congregations, since these expressions may reduce the whole
World to a single Conventicle? When our Author observes, that this was the
chief City in Mauritania, and might have taken notice that it was Oppidumque
ibi celeberrimum Caesarea. Plin. l. 5. c. 2.
a renowned place from its first foundation by Claudius, and grew up to be one
of the chiefest Cities in Afric, and had In Ecclesia majori congregat. Aug.
Gest. cum Emer. init.
at this time many Churches of the Catholic Communion: he should have a little
mistrusted such a phrase as this, that implies no more, than that the
Conference should be public, and that all, who would, might be present at it.

Tiberias, and Diocaesarea, and Sepphoris, which our Author mentions, because
they had each but one Church, have been already considered. They consisted only
of Jews, who would suffer no other Nation or Religion to mix with them.

Prim. ep. p. 86.
At Diocaesarea in Cappadocia, which in Nazianzen is (...), there was but one
Church. Ep. 49. But Nazianzen (...). Greg. Ep. 49.
says no such thing. He uses all the credit he had with Olympius, the Governor
of that Province, to spare this City, which had extremely offended him, and to
that degree, that he was resolved to disfranchise and destroy it. And among
other arguments, he makes use of his own liberality toward that City, having
lately built a Church there; and therefore prayed that the Temple he had so
lately erected there, might not become a receptacle of wild Beasts. But gives
not the least intimation, that this was the only Church in that great City.

Prim. ep. p. 90.
At Constantia, the Metropolis of Cyprus, and other Cities of that Island,
there was no plurality of Churches. For this he cites Petavius, whose inference
has been already examined; and there is nothing new added here to require
further reply.

At Neocaesaria, and other Cities in those parts, but one Church. This he
proves from the thirteenth Canon of Neocaesarea, that forbids a Chorepiscopus
to officiate in a City Church; from which Petavius would infer the Cities had
but one Church. But there might be a hundred Churches there, for ought that
expression may imply.

We are at last come to the end of this Chapter; in which our Author has taken
all ways to diminish the Christians. He has been very bountiful to Schismatics
and Heretics, that the Bishop's Flock might not increase beyond his new model.
But we must not wonder at his liberality toward these to the detriment of the
Bishop. But rather than any City should have more Congregations than one of the
same Communion, he gives the rest to the Devil. And to that purpose he is
beyond measure bountiful toward Heathen and Jews; Heightens their number, as
if he were of the faction; especially in Julian's time, having perhaps some
secret respect for them, because they generally took the part of Schismatics
and Heretics, against the Catholic established Church.

CHAP. V.
THe unjust Steward in the Gospel, being called to give up his accounts, and
then to be discharged, provided for himself at the expense of his Lord; and
cutting off considerably from the sum owing to his Master, procured himself a
retreat among the debtors. Yet in this unrighteous contrivance he observed some
measure, and reduced a hundred but to fourscore, and fourscore to fifty. But
Mr. Clerkson in the account he makes of his Master's substance in ancient
Cities, is much more profuse toward the debtors; and in some places, of a
hundred does not leave ten. But in this he has chosen to follow the injustice
rather than the wisdom of the Steward: for when his defalcations come to be so
unlikely and extravagant, it is impossible the reckoning should pass. Had he
insisted only on lesser Cities, that for three or four ages the Christians in
them might not exceed one Assembly, the account might have passed without any
suspicion, though the evidence even for this be defective. But when in the
greatest Cities of the World he sets down but one Congregation to the account
of Christ, and will not allow scarce five of a hundred to belong to our Lord,
the misreckoning is too manifest, and does not carry so much as the appearance
of truth.

The increase of Christianity is represented by the Scripture of the New
Testament, and by the Writers of the ages immediately succeeding, as wonderful
and unexampled; and considering the supernatural abilities it pleased God to
confer upon the first Preachers, it might be expected that their Doctrine should
make a greater progress, than those that come recommended only by ordinary and
human means of persuasion. Yet if we take Mr. Clerkson's reckoning of
Christians for the three first ages, and compare it with the growth of Sects
among our selves within this last age; we must conclude, that there is scarce a
Sect within our remembrance, which has not proportionably to time and place,
made much better progress than the Christian Religion ever did. Since in the
greatest Cities there are few Sects but make several Assemblies for Worship;
though the greatest Cities with us, are much inferior to the greatest in ancient
times. And if the Quakers, a Sect scarce forty years standing in the World, are
yet grown so numerous, that in London they have several places for meeting; it
would seem to be a strange and incredible disparagement to the Christian
Religion, not to have prevailed so much in Rome for the space of three hundred
years, though St. Paul preached there for a considerable time, and there was a
flourishing Church before he was brought thither. However our Author, to leave
no exception against the Congregational Rule, Prim. ep. p. 91. 92.
finds enough to make it seem probable, that the greatest of those Cities had
no more Christians under one Bishop, than are in some one of our Parishes. And
to begin with Rome, about the year 236, (...).
all the faithful in Rome did meet together in one place, to choose a Bishop in
the place of Anterus. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 29.

I have already upon other occasions showed the import of these expressions:
all the people, all the brethren, all the City, etc. and how unreasonable it is
to require exactness of testimony from phrases of amplification. If we must
conclude, that all the faithful in Rome, without any allowance or exception,
did meet in one place in the third Century to choose a Bishop, and therefore
there were no more than could Assemble in one place; It will follow from the
very same phrase, that in the fourth, fifth, and sixth Centuries, and so
forward, there was but one Congregation in Rome, after it was become Christian.
For in the fourth age, Felix and all the Roman Clergy, Praesente populo Romano.
Marcel. and Faustin. L. 16. Prec.
in the presence of the people of Rome, swore they would not choose any other
Bishop, while Liberius lived. In the next, Dataque oratione respondit omnis
populus Amen. Lib. Pont. in Vigil.
all the people are said to answer Amen to the Prayer which Vigilius their
Bishop made. Pelagius is said, in St. Peter's Church in Rome, to have gone up
into the Pulpit, and satisfied Satisfecit cuncto populo and plebi, quia nullum
malum fecisset contra Vigilium. Lib. Pont. in Pelag.
all the people, that he had done Vigilius his predecessor no harm. Gregory the
Great is said to be chosen by Gregonium Diaconum plebs omnis elegit. Greg.
Turon. l. x. c. 1. Joh. Diacon. l. 1. c. 39. 40.
all the people; though at that time in Rome there were neither Heathen nor
Sectaries to make any abatements in the Bishops flock. Nay, if our Author will
insist rigidly upon this phrase, all Israel in the time of Samuel was no more
than could meet in one place to hear Samuel, who is said 1 Samuel 12.1.4.
to speak to all Israel; and they answer him, that he had neither oppressed nor
defrauded them. But our Author proceeds.

Prim. ep. p. 92.
They were no more after Anno. 250, than could all together, in the Church,
importune Cornelius for the readmission of the Ordeiners of Novatian: The whole
people interceeding for him. (...). Eusebius. l. 6. c. 43. Our Author, according
to his usual ingenuity, has left out a word, that spoiled his argument, and
limited this expression. For Cornelius does not say, that all the Christian
people of Rome importuned him; (...).
but that all the people, that was present with him, did interceed. They were
no more than could concur in an Epistle to salute their Brethren at Carthage,
Salutant vos fratres, and tota Ecclesia, Cypr. ep. 3. As though the general
salutation of a Church could not be sent, without the actual concurrence of
every member. How many public acts bear the name of the people, though the
twentieth part was not present when they were made? Or shall we fancy that all
the Citizens of Rome met in one Assembly, to pass every order that bears the
title of Senatus Populusque Romanus? Prim. ep. p. 93.
They were no more than Cornelius could read Cyprians Letters to, in their
numerous Assembly, amplissimae plebi. They were no more than could all be
present about consultations about matters of concernment, etc. Consultis
omnibus and ipsis stantibus laicis. Cypr. ep. 26. A Bishop may communicate
Letters and Propoposals concerning Ecclesiastical Discipline in a full
Congregation, and to all the people then present; and yet this cannot imply
that there are no more Christians, or no other Congregation in that City.
Whatsoever is done in public, and before a Congregation that is unlimited, is
in the common way of speaking, said to be done before all the Community.

I meet with nothing, says our Author, Prim. ep. p. 93.
that makes any show of a probability, that their numbers were more at that
time, but Cornelius his Catalogue of Officers, -- and the number of the poor,
which were fifteen hundred. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 37. This passage has not hitherto
received any answer, that made so much as a show of probability: And that which
our Author replieth to the number of Officers, has been long since Vindic.
prim. chapter p. 51.
showed to be frivolous. As to the number of Officers, the show will vanish,
Mr. Clerkson fancies, if it be considered, that it was the custom of those
ancient times to multiply Officers beyond what was necessary; yea, so much,
that, as Nazianzen (...) Greg. Naz Or. 1.
tells us, the Officers were sometimes as many as they had the charge of. It
might be excusable in Mr. Baxter to confound times of persecution with times of
settlement, and the middle of the third Century with the latter end of the
fourth, for he was too hasty to be curious, and looked not the date of the
Fable; so it happened upon a time, or shortly after, he was contented. But from
Mr. Clerkson something might be expected more exact: what! will this show of
probability vanish; and no likelihood that there were more Congregations in
Rome than one, remain from six and forty Presbyters in Cornelius his time,
because it was the custom of Nazianzen's times to multiply Officers beyond what
was necessary? Forty six Presbyters were never accounted necessary to one
Congregation, even in the most prosperous times of the Church; nor can any
instance be given of so many relating to one Assembly in any age accounted
ancient, though it might be fashionable then to multiply Church Officers. But for
this we are at a greater certainty, for Cornelius Eusebius. H.E. l. 6. c. 43.
assures us, that this number was not for state, nor for form, without use and
necessity; but exceeding necessary, and that upon the account of an infinite
and numberless people. And if the multitude of Christians in Rome was then so
great as to require forty six Presbyters; we may make some guess at the
proportion they might have to the people of Rome, after it had been entirely
converted, in the fifth and sixth Centuries; for in those times the Presbyters
of Rome were scarce a third part more than those in the Catalogue of Cornelius,
as we may gather from the subscriptions of the Presbyters in the Roman Synod.
Romans 1. sub. Symmach. Subs. Pres. 67.
Council. Nay, in one Synod, Cum Episc. omnibus and Romans Eccl. Presbyteris.
Greg. Reg. l. 4. ep. 44.
under Gregory the Great, there are but thirty four Presbyters that subscribe.
I do not intend to say, that two thirds of that City was then Christian; but
the Christians of that place under Cornelius seem to be at least two thirds, in
respect of all Rome in after ages, when it was much diminished from its ancient
greatness, and when it seems to have no more than seventy Parish Presbyters.
This number therefore of forty six Presbyters, all necessary for so great a
people as the Christians of Rome then were, makes it evident, notwithstanding
the frivolous exception of our Author, that the believers of that City could
not all assemble together upon any religious occasion, and that the Church
there must consequently be distributed to several Parishes and Congregations.

Prim. ep. p. 94.
As to the other, how to compute the numbers of the Roman Church by the number
of the poor, I know no better way than to observe what proportion there was
betwixt these in other places. But the ground of this exception is a mistake:
For Cornelius does not say, that the number of all the poor Christians in Rome
was but fifteen hundred; but that so many were maintained by the public stock
of the Church, besides the necessary Officers. Now there might be many more
poor maintained, some by Relations, others by private Charities; and it is
plain from the account that Chrysostom gives of the poor of Antioch, and the
number in the Church-Book, that those that were maintained by the Church, were
but a small part in comparison of the whole number of the poor. For exhorting
the rich men to contribute toward the maintenance of the poor, he observes how
easy it would be to provide for them. For the Church, says he Chrysostom Hom. 66. in
Matthew. p. 421. 422.
maintains many Widows, and Virgins, and Prisoners, and Sick, and Clergy: the
number of those upon the role maintained by the public stock of the Church, is
about three thousand. Now the income of the Church is scarce equal to one of
the lowest of those accounted rich. If therefore but ten such rich men would
dispose of their Estates, as the Church does, there would not be a poor man in
all Antioch unprovided: Nay, if all the rich men would but give a tenth part to
Charity, it would answer all occasions. So that upon the computation of
Chrysostom, the Church did not relieve above a tenth part of the poor. And yet
this must be more in proportion than the Roman Church can be supposed able to
do in Cornelius his time, when it had no other revenue than the oblations of
the Faithful; whereas in Chrysostom's time, besides these, it was endowed with
great possessions, and was maintained from the rents or product of her Estate;
the Capital remaining undiminished, as he observes in the same place.

Our Author having laid this false foundation, proceeds to build upon it in
this manner, That at Constantinople, Chrysostom computes the poor to have been
half as many as all the other Christians there. At Antioch the same Father
supposes the poor a tenth part. The first is unreasonable, and without example
in any City: the latter multiplies the poor that stand in need of relief, I
think, beyond what we can find in any rich City, such as Antioch was; yet upon
this foot let us reckon. The fifteen hundred Roman poor we will suppose,
according to Chrysostom, to be the tenth part of the poor Christians of the
place. The sum will be fifteen thousand. These multiplied by ten, will make an
hundred and fifty thousand. And this may be supposed about a seventh part of
the inhabitants in Rome of all ages and conditions. And considering the great
ostentation, which Tertullian makes of the numbers of the Christians in the
beginning of this age, and the great increase they received in the time
intervening between Tertullian and Cornelius, under Alexander Severus, and
Philip; I cannot but think I set their proportion too low, when I reckon them
but a seventh part. I cannot pass by one passage in the same Homily of
Chrysostom, that I cannot reconcile with his supposition, that makes the poor
of Antioch the tenth part of the City. When he had divided the people into ten
parts, he makes one to consist of rich Men, another of very poor Men, the other
eight to consist of such as had competence of estate, and were neither very
rich nor very poor. Yet having made this distribution, he says, that if the
poor were divided between those who were rich, and those who were not poor,
there would not one poor Man fall to the share of fifty or a hundred: whereas
according to his distribution, there will be a poor Man left between nine. I
cannot think Chrysostom so little skilled in Arithmetic, as to commit a
mistake in so obvious a reckoning. I had rather suspect the reading in this
place of the tenth part, which with small variation, may be reconciled with the
following computations. But having not the countenance of any Critic, nor the
authority of any Copy, I am content to leave it as I find it. However as it
stands, it does but small service for the diminishing of Christians in ancient
times.

Alexandria follows, dressed up in a magnificent character, Prim. ep. p. 96.
the greatest after Rome, the Mart of the World, and the top of Cities. But
presume not ye Christians to take too much upon you; for these glorious things
belong to Jews and Heathens, and it is but a small skirt of this Macedonian
cloak that comes to your share. Nay, since you are found so inconsiderable in
so great a place, this very instance will preclude all your pretensions to
number and greatness in all other Cities. Here our Author undertakes to show,
that the Christians were not more than could meet in one place, and thinks fit
to skirmish at first with arguments so slight, that he himself does not think
fit to insist on them. In the latter end of the third age, Dionysius calls the
Church (...), and a scrupulous member of it, (...). I cannot but commend his
discretion, for not insisting upon such things as these; though, I think, the
alleging of them argues more of diligence than judgment. For though this
critical observation should be allowed, that the Church of Alexandria is
sometimes called a Synagogue; the consequence that our Author makes, that
therefore there was but one Assembly of Christians in that City, is invisible.
But the misfortune is, that Dionysius says no such thing. For he calls not the
whole Church of Alexandria by that name: But relating the case of a person who
was troubled in conscience concerning his Baptism, says, (...). Eusebius. l. 7. c.
9.
he did partake of the Communion of the Faithful, and assembled with them. But
whether there was then but one Church or Congregation in Alexandria, or
several, cannot be deduced from that expression; and all it imports in that
place, is only that the person was in full and entire Communion: and so the
same Author uses the word in his Epistle (...). Eusebius. l. 7. c. 7.
to Philemon a Roman Presbyter, when he speaks of Heretics, who did outwardly
communicate with the Church. The other passage, which our Author will not
insist upon, seems to surpass the former in impertinence. The place of their
panegyrical assembly (which was their greatest of all) was in his time a place
of no great reception, not only a field and a desert, but a ship, an inn, or a
prison. Wonderful! that a field and a desert should not be places of great
reception; and that the Christians must be accounted few, because they chose
such places for their assembly, where not only the Church of one City might
assemble, but Nations might inhabit. But to let this pass, and to consider the
pertinence of this allegation. Dionysius speaking of the calamitous estate of
the Christians of Alexandria, scattered by persecution from the Heathen, and at
the same time visited with a pestilence, and comforting his brethren from the
consideration of the approaching festival of Easter; To others, says he, Eusebius.
H. E. l. 7. c. 22.
this may scarce seem a Festival; and to the Heathen, neither this nor any
other can be accounted such, though it might have a greater appearance of
happiness. For now grief and lamentation fill every place, and there is not a
house, in which there is not one dead; and I would to God there were but one
dead in a house. However, we Christians cast out and persecuted, and put to
death, even then kept the Feast, For the place of every ones affliction, was to
him a place of solemn assembly; the open field, the wilderness, the ship, the
inn, the prison, where each happened then to be in this time of dispersion, was
to him a Church.

If I had a mind to trifle, I might urge this for proof, that the Christians of
Alexandria had several panegyrical assemblies, if it may be said without
solecism, at the same time, and in the several places mentioned by Dionysius.
But I have neither inclination nor forehead to follow our Author in this way of
discourse; nor is it in every ones power to recommend for fair probabilities,
what he cannot but know to be nothing to the purpose.

Prim. ep. p. 97.
But Athanasius in his Apology to Constantius about Anno. 355, makes it
evident, beyond all contradiction, he being accused for assembling the people
in the great Church before it was dedicated, makes this part of his defense,
That the confluence of the Pascal Solemnity was so great, that if they had met
in several assemblies, the other Churches were so little and straight, that
they would have been in danger of suffering by the crowd. -- And it was better
for the whole multitude to meet in that great Church, being a place large
enough to receive them all together. This passage has been often urged and
answered by several hands; so that I might spare my self the labor of any
farther reply, than referring to those books in which it has been examined;
especially since our Author has thought fit to add nothing new, but words of
assurance and ostentation, that it is evident beyond contradiction, and to take
notice of nothing that has been offered to impeach this irrefragable evidence.
However, to avoid cavil, I am content here again to take it into examination.
And first, though it should be yielded to our Author, that it is certain from
this passage, that all the Christians in Alexandria were present in this
assembly; yet will it not be of that service to his notion, as he might imagine.
Suppose then the flock of Athanasius reduced so low, that one great Church
might receive it all. If this should proceed from some late accident, and be
owing to such separations as had been lately made from the Communion of the
Church; it can be of no use, either for the proving of Congregational
Episcopacy in elder times, or for the discovering of the proportion of
Christians in other Cities. Suppose the Dissenters should prevail so far in
some one Diocese with us, as to leave the Bishop no more people than might be
crowded into one of the greatest Cathedrals of the Kingdom; it would surely be
but a sorry argument, that the constitution of our Episcopacy is
Congregational, or that we have no Diocese greater than may assemble in one
Church. This, according to Mr. Clerkson, No Evidence for Dioces. Episc. p. 47.
was the case of Alexandria in Athanasius his time. At the first breach
Meletius had many more adherents than Peter; and from that time to Athanasius,
the Meletians had such encouragements, that their numbers were not like to be
impaired. And as for the Arrians, if we may take the measure of the people by
their Officers, they were more numerous than the Catholics in this City; for
Theod. H. E. l. 4. c. 22. Soz. l. 1. c. 15.
of nine, (it should be nineteen) Presbyters and Deacons which the Church of
Alexandria had, eleven embraced Arrianism. There are many mistakes in what is
here advanced concerning the Meletians and the party of Arrius; but the course
of the argument must not be interrupted. In these circumstances the Arrians
might well outvie the followers of Athanasius in numbers, and these declined
as the others increased. Now if the party of Athanasius, which in Mr.
Clerkson's judgment was inferior in number to the Arrians, was yet so great, as
to fill all the Churches in Alexandria, and could not have met in any one
Church before that vast fabric was erected by Constantius; the Arrians,
surely, who are supposed to be the greater party, must divide into many
Congregations, and live in the Diocesan way, especially in the time of Gregory,
who seems to have joined the Arrian and Meletian party; for by Epiphanius
(...). Epiph. Haer. 69. n. 2.
he is styled both Arrian and Meletian. For though that Sect divided from the
Church upon a point of Doctrine, yet did they not pretend to make any alteration
in Discipline, and had but one Bishop in a City, how great soever it might be.
So that our Author, while he lessens the Catholics of Alexandria, does
unawares make the Arrians not a Congregation, but a Diocese. Nor is it any
advantage to the Congregational fancy, to streighten the Catholic Christians
within the walls of one Church, while his indulgence to other Christian Sects
permits them to increase beyond his Rule, and to grow up into a Diocesan
stature.

Having considered the consequence of this passage of Athanasius upon a kind
supposition, that it proved the thing for which it was produced; I proceed to
show, that this Testimony does not certainly evince, that the Christians of
Athanasius his Communion were no more than could meet, or actually assembled in
that great Church. Mr. Baxter Chapter Hist. p. 10.
is not so rigid in his inference from this Testimony, as to contend, that
every Christian of Alexandria was present in that assembly. I do not hence
gather, says he, that every man woman and child was present. And to him this
only seems hence plain -- that the main body of them could meet and hear in
one assembly. But all things are not equally plain to all people. For if all
the other Churches in Alexandria could not receive this Congregation, I am
afraid they could not all hear, unless it were the Amen, which they all
pronounced aloud; and that indeed might be heard from far. For in Alexandria,
besides this great Church, Epiphanius Epiph. Haer. 69. n. 2. (...).
names nine more; and adds, that there are other Churches besides, which he had
probably named with the rest, if they had been but few. Nor can they well be
conceived much fewer than twenty; for in Rome Optat. l. 2.
there were above forty in the beginning of Constantine's reign. Suppose then a
Congregation, that twelve Churches could not contain, which though much
inferior to this new Cathedral, yet had some of them served the Bishop of the
greatest City in the world after Rome and his Congregation: It will be scarce
possible, to conceive how all that multitude should hear; especially since I do
not find, that in those days any Church had scaffolds, or galleries; but all
the people stood in the Area, and nothing raised above the floor, but the
Bishop and Presbyters seats, and such places from whence any of the Church
Officers spoke or read to the people. It is not therefore so plain as it seemed
to Mr. Baxter, that all could hear in such an assembly as this.

Now where a multitude is so numerous, that the greater part cannot be
partakers of the service for which they are assembled, it seems to be no longer
one Congregation, since it cannot attain that purpose which brings them
together. And therefore is a Congregation for show and solemnity, and not for
edification and religious service. Nor can any bounds be assigned to such an
Assembly; for a Nation may be brought together in that manner. And therefore
when a multitude, though crowded together in one place, becomes incapable of
attaining the end of Religious Assemblies, it has out-grown the Congregational
standard, as much as if it were dispersed in forty distant places. At a
Coronation, all the people in Westminster Abbey may be thought but one
Congregation; yet the greatest part hear no more of what is said, than those
who are ten miles off. They may join in one common acclamation, as that
Alexandrian Assembly did in an Amen; so they might though they were twenty
times as many. So that such a notion of a Congregation runs on to infinite. And
that of which we are speaking, being in all probability of this sort, it
exceeded the bounds of the pretended Primitive Episcopacy, and is of no use in
the present question.

However the whole multitude met in the great Church, which was large enough to
receive them all. But what multitude? all the Christians of the City? No, Mr.
Baxter will not say that. Or all that were willing, or had opportunity to
attend the public devotions of the day? Athanasius says not that neither; but
that there was so great confluence, that the Parish-Churches could not hold
them. But there was no other Congregation of Athanasius his Communion in
Alexandria on that Easter Day, beside this great one; for the universal Harmony
and Concurrence of the people had not been so visible, if (...).
they had met in parcels; and therefore there were no such meetings. Still the
question recurs, what people? all the Alexandrians of his Communion? Nothing he
says can be extended so far, or made to comprehend any more than the multitude
assembled at that time, with intention to be present with the Bishop. This is
all the people, and all the multitude, that he mentions in this part of his
defense. But these were all his flock; for universal Harmony of all the people
was visible. This may be said of any general Congregation assembled from all
parts, though all individuals, nor perhaps half of them do not appear. For Leo
the Great about the middle of the fifth Century, speaks to his Congregation in
the same manner, though in all probability not the twentieth part of the
Christians of Rome were present. In you, says he, In vobis pietatem Christianae
unitatis agnosco, sicut enim ipsa frequentia testatur. Intelligitis enim
honorem totius gregis celebrari per annua festa Pastoris. Leo. Sermon. Anniv. 3.
I can plainly see the piety of Christian unity, as your confluence does
declare; and you understand that the honor of the whole flock is celebrated in
the Anniversaries of the Pastor.

Now to make up this image of Christian unity, it was not necessary all the
people of the City should flow to the Bishops Church; but only that the
Congregation should be very great, though not so as to exclude all others.
Notwithstanding this expression, there might be several other Assemblies in
that City at the same time. Nor was it otherwise at Alexandria, as we may judge
by a passage in the Bishops Defense. He was accused for having dedicated a
Church, which the Emperor had built, without his order; because the holding of
the Pascal Assemby there was a sort of Dedication. But the Bishop protests
(...). Apol. ad Constable. p. 682.
to the Emperor, that he was so far from any such design, that this very
Assembly was altogether accidental; for he had given the people no notice nor
summons to meet there. Now the Parish Presbyters of Alexandria cannot well be
supposed to leave their Churches unsupplied, upon a presumption that all the
people would assemble with the Bishop; and they could not but know, that his
Church could not hold a tenth part of them; for all the Churches in the City
could not receive them all, and this new Church, not yet finished or dedicated,
they could not think of. Therefore in all probability they assembled their
Parishes then, as they did on other times; unless we may fancy, that on Easter
they always attended the Bishop; and so for all the Easters before this, left
much the greatest part of the people without any service on that solemn time.
For but few of them could crowd into the Bishops Church, before that great one
was built; and the number of the Catholic Christians had been greater, than
were at this time of which we are speaking. To conclude, all the Alexandrians
of the Catholic Communion were not present with their Bishop in the new
Church. Those that came, made a very great multitude, and such as the other
Churches could not hold, considering they had each a Congregation already.
These could not be dispersed in the other Churches without danger. These were
proper to represent Catholic unity; and in short, were a Congregation suitable
to the time, though it might not comprehend all the Christians of that great
City.

Our Author goes on to prove the Church of Alexandria no more than could meet
in one Congregation. Prim. ep. p. 98.
Alexander, the Predecessor of Athanasius, assembled the whole multitude in
the Church called Theonas, the other Churches being all strait and little. But
still this multitude is not said to be the whole of the Alexandrine Church, but
only of the Bishops Congregation.

There is yet another kind of proof, which he thinks, might be as satisfactory
to some; and refers to Mr. Baxter's Chapter History, p. 9, 10. Here I must own my
self of his opinion, for both are equally satisfactory; and this to which he
refers has been Vindic. Prim. Chapter p. 58.
sufficiently answered.

He thinks the Premises so evident, that there is no need of Dionysius 's
observation; that Alexandria in his time was not by much so populous as of old,
the old men being more in number formerly, than both old and young in his days.
If there was no need of this observation, he is the more inexcusable, for
attempting to put upon his Reader without any necessity. If any one should
undertake to prove, that London is not so populous now as it was a hundred
years ago, because a great Mortality happened there about five and twenty years
since, and at the end of that pestilence all sorts of Inhabitants might not
then equal even the old men a few years before; such a poor juggle would not
pass upon Children. But in facts more remote, there is a sort of men that take
liberty, and depend upon the ignorance of their Readers; And this observation
is an instance of that practice. For in Dionysius the Bishop of Alexandria's
time, there happened first a fatal sedition in that City, and an infinite
number of people was slain; the carcasses of these corrupted the air and the
water, and begot a Pestilence mortal beyond all example; and this reduced the
City so low, as that Bishop then represents it. But it soon recovered from that
calamity, as great Cities commonly do, and maintained its rank for some time,
as the second City of the Empire.

In Antioch, he observes, Prim. ep. p. 99.
the Christians in the first age were no more than could all meet together in
the House of Theophilus, as appears by the Author of the Recognitions, which
though falsely ascribed to Clemens, is ancient; nor will it be easy to find a
reason why the following passage should be forged. Theophilus -- domus suae
ingentem Basilicam Ecclesiae nomine consecravit, in qua omnis multitudo ad
audiendum verbum conveniens, etc. l. 10. To some sort of people no evidence
comes amiss; Fable and Forgery grow Authentic, if they seem favorable to
their cause. The Recognitions are on all hands given up for an idle forgery,
feigned without any aim or tolerable guess of the condition of the Apostolic
times. I have some reasons to suspect, that this Book is not so old as it is
generally imagined; and it carries several marks of the fourth Century, of
which it is not necessary to take notice in this place. But it is not easy to
find a reason, why this passage should be forged; nor indeed why he has forged
all the rest of his Book; nor is it necessary. For many will lie out of gaiety
of humor and to please their fancy, without any other reason to move them. But
he that has not reason enough to discern this to be a Fable, has certainly very
little to spare.

Prim. ep. p. 100.
When Paulus Samosatenus was Bishop of this City, our Author observes, there
was but one house, (...).
where the Church did meet, of which he would not give up the possession. And
this he contends was not the Bishops house, but the house where the Church did
meet, and is presently after called (...). Eusebius. l. 7. c. 30.
the Church. The Translator that he blames for calling it the Bishops house,
must be Christophorson, or Musculus; for Ruffinus and Valesius render it the
House of the Church. Now whether it were the Church, or the House of the
Bishop, is not very clear, nor very material. For to be sure the Church had a
House where the Bishop assembled; and they might have twenty Parish-Churches
more, for ought appears from this place. But that which our Author infers, that
one House was then sufficient, otherwise they might have had more, proceeds
from his usual acuteness. The Church needed but one common House for the
Bishops Assembly, to which they all belonged; but they might have many Houses
appropriated to Parishes, and certain regions of the Town; which could not be
called the Houses of the Church in general, but only of such a part.

Prim. ep. p. 100.
In the fourth Age all the Christians there could meet together for the choice
of Eustathius, (...), says Theodoret, l. 1. c. 7. This has been answered so
often already, that I am ashamed to repeat so obvious and plain an answer any
more. What proportion of Antioch was Christian in Eustathius his time, may be
guessed from the influence his deposition had upon that City, which according
to Mr. Clerkson, was but four years after his being Bishop of that place. The
sedition, says Sozomen, Soz. l. 2. c. 19.
was so great, that the whole City was in danger of being destroyed, the
Christians upon this occasion being divided into two parts. If an Independent
Congregation in London should happen to have such a difference about their
Pastor; it would scarce move a sedition in the City, or endanger the safety of
it in so high a manner. After this our Author represents the low condition of
the Orthodox Christians in Antioch, while the Arrians were masters (...). Socr.
l. 3. c. 9.
of the Churches, that they made but a mean Congregation. Yet all the while the
Arrian Bishops there were Diocesan, and had many Churches in that City, which
had belonged once to the Catholic Christians, and did still of right appertain
to them, and before the end of that Century were actually recovered to the true
faith and their old rightful Possessours.

Prim. ep. p. 103.
Carthage next to the Cities forementioned, was one of the greatest of the
Empire. -- Yet there were no more Christians in that Church about Anno. 220,
than could meet together in one place for Church-administration. For this he
tells us there is evidence enough in Tertullian; which at present I will not
further take notice of, than in the observation of a great Antiquary, the
Bishop of Orleans. Our Author speaks of Tertullian in this place, like one who
had not looked in him; for he has not one word of the Church of Carthage in
that place, on which Albaspineus makes his observation, and what is worse, that
Bishop has not a word about Carthage. All this is nothing but a vision that
happened to our Author in the dark, when he talked of Books without consulting
them. Tertullian Tertul. ad Uxor. l. 2. c. 4.
disputing warmly against Christian Women marrying of Heathen Men, proposes
many great difficulties, to which such Women will be exposed, and what
hindrance such a Marriage must needs be to all Christian Offices. If the Wife
purpose to perform the Station, the Husband appoints a Bath: If she ought to
observe a Fast, her Husband appoints an entertainment: si procedendum est; if
she be to go abroad upon charitable and Christian visits to the poor and sick,
the business of her family is then extraordinary urgent. It happened that some
Papists laid hold on that word, and fancied they had found their Procession in
Tertullian; which Albaspinaeus makes bold to expose, showing that in those days
there was but one Church in a place, and that generally a small one, and
without ornament. Which I am very willing to grant, for generally speaking so
it was, and most Towns had but one Church. But for Carthage, and Cities of that
magnitude, they might differ from the generality in this, as they did in
dimension and multitude of people. That Carthage had many Christian assemblies
in Tertullians time, we need no other proof than the account he gives Scapula
of the number of Christians in that City. Tertull. ad Scapulam.
If they should offer themselves to Martyrdom, what could thou do with so
many thousands of people, when Men and Women, every sex, every age and
condition should offer themselves? What fires, what swords would be sufficient
to destroy them? How much must Carthage suffer, which then would be decimated
by thee? Every one would suffer in his Relation or his Friend; and there might
appear among the sufferers persons of thy own rank, and of the highest quality.
If thou will not spare us, spare thy self; if thou will not spare thy self,
spare Carthage. All this must appear very absurd, and provoke the derision of
the Heathen; if this multitude so populously set out, might be summed up in one
assembly, and that no great one: Since the Christians had not the convenience
of great and capacious Churches at that time, and might not be very willing to
raise extraordinary Fabrics, lest they should expose themselves too much to
the observation and envy of their enemies. He who is not yet persuaded that
there was no more than one Congregation of Christians in Carthage, when
Tertullian wrote this, let him, if he thinks fit, make himself the Advocate of
some Sect in London that makes but one Congregation, and plead their cause in
this Harangue, and then see how well it will fit them.

Now if the Christians in Carthage were so numerous in the beginning of the
third Century, that it is incredible they could meet in one Church, and such a
Church as the condition of those times could bear; the forty years that follow
must exceedingly increase their numbers, since they were the most favorable
that the Church met with in the three first ages. And in Afric especially,
where Mr. Dodwell Dissert. Cypr. xi. ss. 48. 52.
finds no Persecution from the tenth year of Severus, Anno 202, to the first of
Decius, Anno 250. And in general, Origin observes the increase of Christians
within this time to be extraordinary, and much greater than it had been in
former times; (...). Orig. Cont. Cells. p. l. 3. p. 120.
because they were not then oppressed by the Emperors, as they had been
formerly; (...).
and the rigours of the Heathen against them had for a long time ceased. This
long peace, though it corrupted the manners of the Christians, yet it added much
to their numbers; as Cyprian Disciplinam longa pax corruperat. -- populi
aliquando numerosi lamentanda jactura. Cypr. de laps. p. 123.
observes, who speaking of the Christians of Carthage before Decius his
Persecution, extols their numbers, while he bewails the ruin of those who
yielded to the enemy. Yet Prim. ep. p. 104.
In Cyprians time, in all Church administrations and transactions of moment in
the Church and Bishopric of Carthage, all the people were to be present: Tota
fraternitas, plebs Universa, stantes Laici; as he declares every where in his
Epistles: And how all could be present, if they were more than could meet
together, is not intelligible. Alas! how difficult is it for some men to
understand the plainest things in the World, when they have no mind to it. It
is an incomprehensible figure of speech it seems, to say, that what is
transacted in an Assize, is done before the whole County: and yet there is
scarce any Hall so large as to hold the people of one Hundred, much less a
whole County; and still people will talk after this unintelligible rate. But of
this Topic we have said more than enough. To the same effect is that of
Optatus, concerning the Election of Caecilian, suffragio totius populi. And the
deductions he makes upon the account of the Donatists in Carthage, so as to
leave the Catholic Christians but one Congregation, are by much too liberal to
the Schismatics. For it is known to every body that has but looked into St.
Austin, that those of the Catholic Communion in that City had many and great
Churches for their assemblies in the fourth Century.

To the four greatest Cities of the Empire, our Author Prim. ep. p. 106.
thinks fit to add Jerusalem, although far inferior in greatness, -- because of
the many thousands converted there by the Apostles. -- But I have showed, that
of those five thousand Converted, the twentieth part cannot in reason be
accounted inhabitants of the City. What he has said of this matter, has been
examined at large. In Jerusalem many accessions of Converts are mentioned in
the beginning of the Acts, which he does account for; and all this in a few
years, before the calling of the Gentiles, and the Conversion of St. Paul. Nor
did the progress of Christianity in Jerusalem stop where St. Luke breaks off
his relation of the numerous Conversions: but before the destruction of that
City and the Jewish Nation, we are told by Hegesippus, Apud Eusebius. l. 2. c. 23.
that the Scribes made an uproar, and cried, that the whole City was in danger
of becoming Christian. Their apprehensions had been very childish, if the
Christians had not yet increased beyond one Congregation, when the Rabbis will
have near five hundred Synagogues to have been in Jerusalem at that time. About
forty years after, this Church consisted of no more than Pella, a small City,
could entertain, together with its own inhabitants. What might happen to this
Church a few years before the destruction of Jerusalem, is altogether unknown:
But that not long before it was very flourishing, we learn from the Acts and
Hegesippus. If Persecutions or Apostacies had diminished it a little before
that fatal Revolution, we are not to take the measures of it from such a
calamitous state. Nay, this story of the transmigration to Pella comes from no
certain Authority. And Valesius Annot. in Eusebius. l. 3. c. 5.
hints his mistrust of it, when he observes that Eusebius quotes no Author, and
probably took all this matter from Tradition, which is no very certain way of
conveying any thing to posterity. Nor is it unlikely Epiph. Haer. Nazar. n. 7.
Id. de Pond. and Men's. n. 15. Joseph. Scalig. Anim. in Eusebius. p. 212.
that this story should come from the Nazarens, who dwelt about Pella and in
the Region of Decapolis; who to give themselves greater credit, might pretend
to be the remainder of the Apostolic Church of Jerusalem. Prim. ep. p. 107.
Not long after, they settled in the ruins of a part of that desolate City; no
fit place to entertain multitudes, where they had a few houses and a little
Church; and therefore one would judge they could not be very many. The story of
these houses and Church, and several Synagogues in Mount-Sion, that escaped in
the first desolation, are all Jewish Fables, and inconsistent with our Saviors
Prophecy of that City, that one stone should not be left upon another, as
Scaliger Animadv. in Eusebius. Chron.
has observed: and any one may see it, who will but read the story in
Epiphanius, who to make this little Church yet more venerable, places it in
that spot of ground where the house stood, in which the Apostles were assembled
after the Ascension of our Lord.

Our Author, to be revenged of this Church of Jerusalem for growing so fast at
the beginning, and giving trouble to his Brethren of the Congregational way by
those many thousand Converts which they could not conveniently bestow in one
assembly, resolves at last, if not to extinguish it, yet to reduce it to the
next degree to utter dissolution, by the Edict of Adrian, Prim. ep. p. 108.
which excluded all Jews, not only from Jerusalem, but all the territory round
about it. So that if the Church then at Jerusalem were either wholly, or for
the greatest part constituted of Jews, it was either quite dissipated or
greatly diminished. And be it which he pleases, so it be not taken for a
judgment upon it for transgressing the bounds of the Congregational way, and
updoing a notion of Primitive Episcopacy: It was certainly a great fault in the
first Church in the World, and at the very beginning to become Unprimitive.

To show compassion, he is willing Prim. ep. p. 109.
to take the more favorable sense, by which it is not quite dissolved, but
reduced to a very small compass, and very few members, those only of the
believing Gentiles, -- which were so few, that they are not thought fit to be
brought to account, by him who gives the best account of the state of the
Church in those days. Now, to what purpose is all this learned Discourse? The
Church of Jerusalem was either quite dissolved, or much diminished by that
Edict that forbid the Jews to come into that City. What then? Is this then an
instance to judge other Churches by, when the case is singular, and common to it
with no other Church? What if he had thought fit to take the other opinion,
that it was quite dissipated, must we have concluded that there had been no
Christian Congregation in the World? Yet in conclusion, there is nothing
produced to show, whether it had many, or but one Assembly. And in truth, there
is no mention made of it for some time: which might not happen from the small
number of Christians, but the loss of Records. For many Cities greater than
Jerusalem, of which there is little doubt to be made, that they had Churches
very early, are in the same Case. How many Bishops of Carthage do we know
before Cyprian? Nor is there any account given of that Church after his death,
until the Ordination of Caecilian. It is not surely because the Christians
there were so few, as not to be thought fit to be brought into account.

Prim. ep. p. 109. 110. (...). Eusebius. l. 6. c. 9.
It is like their numbers increased before Narcissus was Bishop there in the
third age: Yet then they were not so many, but that the whole multitude could
meet with their Bishop at the Pascal Vigil. Although this expression, the whole
multitude, do not import so universally as our Author would have it: Yet here
it is not used by Eusebius with any respect to the City, but to the
Congregation assembled with Narcissus. For in a Pascal Vigil, as the
traditional story went, the Oil happened to fail; whereupon the whole multitude
was troubled, i. e. the multitude present. Whether it was great or little,
whether it consisted of all, or not a fortieth part of the Christians of that
City, cannot be guessed from this passage.

Prim. ep. p. 110.
Nay, in Cyrill's time, which was in the fourth age, Anno 353, it seems they
were no more than could assemble in one place. For the people, as Sozomen
relates it, astonished at an Aparition in the air, all leave their houses, --
and Men Women and Children meet in the Church. Hist. l. 3. c. 4. It should be
l. 4. c. 5. Sozomen speaks there, not of the Christians only, but of all the
people of the City; for astonishment and fear seized upon all. And if our
Author would deal rigidly with him, he must find a Church that may hold all the
Inhabitants of a great and a populous City; for such was it now grown, by the
kindness and devotion of the Christian Emperors, and by the multitude of
Christians who resorted thither from all parts to visit the Sepulcher, and
other places rendered venerable for having been the scene of some of the most
important actions of our Savior. But I think it is easier to make some
allowance to such general expressions, than to find a Church in Jerusalem at
that time, capacious enough to receive all the men women and children of that
City.

CHAP. VI.
I Have followed the tract of Mr. Clerkson's discourse through Villages and
Cities, from the smallest to the greatest, in search of Primitive Episcopacy;
and must confess, that he has labored hard, partly by diminishing of ancient
Cities, and especially by lessening the Christians, to prove that no Bishop had
in his City a greater flock for three or almost four Ages, than could assemble
in one Church. How well he has performed this undertaking, I dare not take
upon me to say, being too far engaged in the dispute to be a Judge of his
performance. Yet should all his Testimonies amount to a full evidence of the
fact, that the greatest Cities for so many Ages, had no more Christians than
might join with the Bishop in one Assembly, he falls short of the main point,
which is not, whether the Bishop had more Congregations than one in the place
of his Residence, but whether in his whole Diocese he had no more. I know some
Bishops who reside in places, that can scarce furnish a decent Congregation,
and yet have more than a hundred within their Diocese. And in some of our
Cities I make no doubt, but the whole people, making common allowance for
necessary Absents, might be contained within the walls of the Cathedral; yet
this is but a small part of the Bishops flock. If therefore in ancient times,
when Mr. Clerkson fancied there was another species of Episcopacy, the case was
the same, or not very different; all the pains he has bestowed in the reduction
of Cities into a single Congregation, and all the Earthquakes and Pestilences
which he called to his assistance to lessen the number of the people, might
have been spared. What Country or Territory the ancient Bishops had besides the
City where they lived, comes now under examination. And if it shall appear by
testimonies unexceptionable, that the ancient Cities had large Territories; and
that these Territories were under the Bishop of the City; and that the people
there were too numerous, and too far distant to be able to come to the Bishops
Church; then I hope, we shall be no more troubled with this new way of
measuring ancient Bishoprics by the compass of the City wall. Here then lies
the stress of the Question concerning Primitive Episcopacy. And I cannot but
observe, that Mr. Clerkson's diligence was not either so great in this part, or
nothing could be found to give so much as a pretense to streighten the bounds
of those Territories which were under the Bishops Jurisdiction, no less than
the City where he lived. Yet something he thinks fit to say to this point,
which I am now to consider.

Prim. ep. p. 110, 111.
It may be alleged, that not only the City and (but) a large Territory
belonging to it, and the Villages therein made up the Bishops Diocese. Answ. If
the Christians in the Villages -- increased them -- beyond the capacity of
personal Communion, it must be in the greatest Cities, or else no where. The
consequence is not very evident; for some very little Cities had great
Territories, as Cyrus where Theodoret was Bishop; of which more anon. And
Capua, that was a very great City, had Cic. Or. contr. Rull.
once no Territory at all, as it happened to some other Cities in Italy, whose
Territories the Romans took away. However let us hear how it was. It was not so
at Carthage, where all the People belonging to Cyprian, met frequently; which
is plain by a hundred passages in his Epistles. What, all the people from the
Country Parishes? The Reader may depend upon it, that there is not the least
title either in the Epistles, or any Tract of Cyprian to that purpose: And
those passages that he refers to, are only general expressions, all the people,
all the Brotherhood, etc. which have been already considered. Nor can it be
conceived possible; for though we have not the measure of all the region
belonging to Carthage, yet are there some hints that are sufficient to disprove
this. A place ten miles distant from that City, was reckoned Procop. Vand. l. 2.
not only in the Territory, but in the Suburbs of it; and from the distance was
called Decimum. And it is not very likely, if there were any Christians there,
that they were obliged to go to Carthage upon all Religious occasions. And that
at this time, the places that went under the name of Suburbs, and were at some
distance from the City, had their Assemblies apart from the City Bishop to whom
they belonged, we may learn from the Testimony of Dionysius (...). Eusebius. H. l.
7. c. 11.
Bishop of Alexandria, and the note of Valesius, Ji qui in Suburbijs illis
manebant, non cogebantur ad majoris Ecclesiae conventus accedere. Vales. Anot.
that the people who dwelled in remoter Suburbs, were not obliged to go to the
great Church, i. e. of the City. And Bethlehem, which was but six miles from
Jerusalem, and belonged to the Bishop of that City, did not go up to the
Bishops Church so much as at Easter; as we are informed by Jerome, Hieron. adv.
Joh. Hierosol.
who on that feast did once present some Candidates for Baptism to the
Presbyters of that place. Yea in the fourth Age it was not so in Alexandria, as
our Author Prim. ep. p. 111.
fancies; and refers us to that panegyrical Assembly, which Athanasius excuses
to Constantius. What, all the Christians of the Diocese of Alexandria in that
Church? Those of Strab. l. 17.
Nicopolis equal to a City? Those of (...). Athan. Presb. Libell. apud Conc.
Chalc. Act. 3. Strab. l. 17.
Canopus reckoned it self a City, and twelve miles from Alexandria, and within
that Diocese? What all the people of Mareotes? Athanas. Apol. 2. p. 793.
where there were fourteen Parish-Presbyters and thirteen Deacons. These had
some ten Villages, some more within their respective Parishes; so that we may
reckon upon near a hundred Villages at least in this place. It is very strange,
that all these places added as an Appendix to the Christians of Alexandria,
should not make more than one Congregation; or that those people should travel
so far to assemble with their Bishop, when they could not promise themselves
any room, the City Churches being small, and the great one not yet dedicated;
especially since we have showed before, that they were not obliged to it. I am
afraid, if the notion which our Author served, had required that all the
Christians in Egypt should have been no more than could have met in one
Assembly, that he would have found some Panegyrical Assembly should have
comprehended them all.

He tells us how he had showed before, that the Christians in such Cities were
no more in the first Ages than the Inhabitants of an ordinary Town, such as
some of our Market Towns; when we know, that not only those of the Town, but
many Villages (sometimes near twenty) belonging to it, can and do meet
together. All he has showed has been examined: And this which he adds of his
own knowledge, concerning Market Towns with twenty Villages belonging to them,
I will take upon his credit, though I think such instances very rare. Yet after
all, this will not reach the point in question, nor answer the Territories of
ancient Cities, which were much larger than Mr. Clerkson would have us believe
they were. Not content with this, he thinks it advisable to add something for
more satisfaction.

Prim. ep. p. 112.
For first, either the Territory was little, and so it was indeed for the most
part. There are some will have it taken for granted, that the Territories of
Cities were very large, -- and they had need presume it to be exceeding large,
so as it may bear some proportion to a Northern Diocese. I do not desire to
have a thing taken for granted which I can so easily prove, and hope to do so
effectually in this matter, that there will be no place left for exception or
cavil; and I do not doubt, but some Territories of ancient Cities will appear
not inferior to some of the Nothern Dioceses, and to the generality of the
Bishoprics of this kingdom, which are not the least in this part of the world.
Prim. ep. p. 113.
The Circuit of one of our Country Parishes (yea of two together) they will
scorn as unworthy the repute or name of a Bishops Diocese; yet the Territories
of the Cities where the Apostles planted Churches -- amounted not to more, if
so much. God forbid any should scorn those bounds, which were set by the
Apostles and first planters of Christianity. Yet those, upon whom Mr. Clerkson
reflects, have reason to scorn so undeserved an Imputation. Some men are not
well, unless they can reproach their betters; their choler works upward and
must be vented at their mouth, or else they cannot live. But the present
Question is, how far those bounds extended, that were set by the Apostles and
their Successors.

Prim. ep. p. 113.
Shall we take an estimate of the Territory of other Cities, by that of the
Levites Cities? Why not? since many of them were Royal Cities, and may be
supposed to have the largest allowance. There are many reasons, why this
estimate ought not to be taken, of which I cannot think our Author ignorant.
First, the Levites had another sort of Inheritance among their Brethren, that
is, the Tithes; and for that reason they may be reasonably supposed to have a
shorter Territory. And the use, for which those Suburbs were given the Levites,
show that it needed not to be as large as those of the Cities of other Tribes;
for they were given them only Jos. 21.2.
for their Cattle, this Tribe having no Tillage, because it received the Tithes
of the rest of Israel. Besides, not only the Cities of the Levites, but those
of the other Tribes, are very improper instances in this question. For the Age
of Moses is so distant from that of Christ, and the circumstances of the world
so different; that no estimate can be taken of one by the other. The Cities,
which the children of Israel divided between the Tribes, when they possessed
themselves of Canaan, were above twenty times as many as they had under that
title in our Savior's time. For in Moses his time it seems every small Town
passed for a City; but in that of our Savior it was otherwise. And as the
Cities were then greater, and less numerous, so was their Territory
proportionably more large; at leastwise in the sense of the present Question.
That some Cities of the Levites were Royal, is not to the purpose; for if they
were all to have the same measure of Suburbs, according to that Agrarian Law of
Moses, Jos. 21.
of two thousand Cubits on each side, it can signify nothing that once they
had been Royal Cities; for then their Suburbs might not have the same bounds,
as they had afterward when they became the possession of the Levites. How small
a Territory the City Tire might have when Mr. Sands was there, belongs not at
all to our Question, which is put much higher, concerning the general use of
ancient times. But in truth, Mr Sands says not that the Territories of Tire
extended no farther than six miles in length and two in breadth; but only that
when he was in those parts, the Emir of Sidon had given it with so much of the
adjacent Country to his Brother.

Prim. ep. p. 114.
Or shall we be determined by Crete, the place whether the Text insisted on for
this purpose leads us? I am content; so our Author do not confound the Fables
of Homer with the History of St. Paul. But here again he talks of his hundred
Cities; and then certainly the Territory of each must be very small. But this
has been so often answered, that I am afraid to venture upon another
repetition. This Island is computed by some old Authors in Strabo, Strab. l. 10.
who are commended for exactness, to be three hundred miles long, and about
fifty broad; and those Plin. l. 4. c. 12.
who say the least, want but thirty miles of this reckoning: And about the time
of the Council of Chalcedon, all the Island had but eight Bishops. In latter
times Volateran reckons ten, and Cluverius but nine. For the hundred Cities, I
can only say with Solinus, Centum urbibus, sicut perhibent, qui prodigi lingua
largiti sunt. Solin. Polyb. c. 17.
that they were prodigal of their language, who speak of so many in Crete.

Prim. ep. p. 114.
If we go farther, where Cities were not great, the Territory was not large,
these being -- commonly proportionable. This was no rule, as we shall show by
several instances; and our Author could not but know of one. For Antioch upon
Maeander, which he brings as an instance of a mean City, is in that very place
which he cites, said (...). Strab. l. 13.
to have a great Territory on both sides of the River. Prim. ep. p. 114.
Nor could it be large, where Cities were numerous, and stood near together; --
no room there for a Territory. It was seldom that Cities stood so close, but
there was room for such a Territory, that the people required distinct
Congregations, and could not with any convenience repair to the City Church.
And it will appear even from those Countries, where Cities stood thickest, that
the Bishops were Diocesan. Laodicea, he observes, Prim. ep. p. 115.
and Hierapolis, both Metropoles, are but six miles distant; nor can it be
thought their Territory was large other ways: for there were other Cities,
which must have their Territories too, nearer them any way than they were to
one another. Our Author is here more liberal of his assertion than proof; and
about matters at so great a distance one cannot be blamed as too scrupulous, if
he require some competent Testimony.

Prim. ep. p. 115.
But we need go no farther for satisfaction than the notion of a Territory, as
it is universally agreed on. With all my heart: For if the notation of the
word, or the definition of the thing, be sufficient to give satisfaction; I
shall be very willing to wave the trouble of surveying the Country, or turning
over the Terriers of every particular City. Pomponius so defines it;
Territorium est Vniversitas agrorum intra fines cujusque Civitatis, intra quos,
prout ait Siculus Flaccus, jurisdicendi jus erat. And it was called a
Territory, because the Magistrate within those bounds had a jus terrendi, i. e.
summovendi. And those Magistrates were punishable, who exercised any
Jurisdiction, or used the ensigns of their authority beyond the limits of the
Territory of their Cities. So far it is very well. But it does not yet satisfy
us about the main Question, how large these Territories usually were. Now
therefore our Author begins to infer: by which it appears, the Territory
reached no farther than the Jurisdiction of the City Magistrates. This is
allowed; but how far that was, is still the Question.

At last he draws to the point. How many Cities can be showed us in the Roman
Empire, where the Jurisdiction reached further than it does in our Cities? When
shall we see any proof, that ordinarily it was of more extent? With us it is
known to be commonly of no more extent, than the circuit of one of our Country
Parishes. How much farther does the authority of the Mayor of Lincoln or
Winchester or Canterbury reach? No more is their Territory. Alas, after all our
reading and quoting of Greek and Latin Authors, are we come to demand a proof,
that the Territories of Greek and Roman Cities were larger than those of ours?
I cannot believe Mr. Clerkson so ignorant of a matter so obvious in almost all
the Authors he quotes. But perhaps he might be willing, that others should
fancy of this matter, not as it really was, but so as might be most
advantageous to the Congregational notion. Now since he requires proof of a
thing so plain; I will comply with the importunity, though to the learned
Reader it may not seem so necessary. I will begin with Amasea, the City of
Strabo, Amasea. Ponti.
who may be allowed as a competent witness for the measure of the Territory of
his own Town. Then follows my Country, says the Geographer, (...). Strab. l. 12.
the Territory of Amasia, the best and the greatest of all Territories. And we
cannot wonder at such expressions, when we hear the particulars. From the
River, says he, begins a Valley something narrow at first, and then opens and
grows wider, (...). Strab. ibid.
which makes up that field, that has its name from a thousand Villages. And
this is not all; but he names other Regions beyond this, belonging to the same
City, as far as the River Halys: all this on the North side; and the length of
the Territory that way, was five hundred furlongs, which makes above sixty
miles. Another way it is (...). Id.
longer, and reaches to Babanomus and Ximene, which likewise reaches to Halys.
This, says he, is the length of it, the breadth is from North to South; but he
does not express the measure any otherwise than from the City Northward; which
he reckons 500 Stadia. I hope this Territory is of greater extent, than my Lord
Mayor's Liberties, and goes something farther than from Newgate to Holborn
Bars. Nor do I believe the Mayor of Lincoln or Canterbury will vye with this
City for extent of Jurisdiction.

Cyzicus.
Cyzicus, though a greater City than Amasea, had a less Territory: yet such it
was, that it does not seem inferior for extent, to many of our Bishoprics. It
was seated in an Island of the same name, which belonged to it, which was five
hundred furlongs in compass. Yet besides this (...).
it had a great Territory, partly ancient, and part acquired by their service
in the Roman wars: that part of Troas that was beyond the river Asopus, and the
Country about Zeleia, and the Plain of Adrasteia, and part of the Country about
the lake of Dascelis.

Antioch had (...). Lib. de vit. sua. p. 2. (...). etc. Liban. Antioch.
a great Country belonging to it, Antioch
and many Villages that were equal to Cities. How great a Country does it
possess, says Libanius, when several Villages belonging to it, are greater and
more populous than many Cities? Daphne remains in the condition of a Suburb;
yet if it vye with Cities, it would surpass them upon many accounts. Nor is it
without reason, that Libanius magnifies the Territory of Antioch; for it Strab.
l. 16. Theod. ep. 42.
reached on one side to the Region of Cyrrus, which was two days journey, or
fifty miles distant; and perhaps it might reach as far on other sides,
excepting that toward the Sea, which according to Libanius Liban. Antioch. p.
339.
was but fifteen miles from the City. Theodoret mentions many Monks, who lived
in several parts of the Region of Antioch. Asterius, who lived in the Country
about Gindarus, which was (...). Theod. Rel. Hist. in Julian.
a very great Village, and belonged to Antioch, though in older times it had
belonged to the region of Cyrrus, and is called a City by Strabo. Str. l. 16.
The same Author (...). Theodor. vit. Sim. Prisci.
mentions one Simeon, who is said to have wrought a miracle in some Village
near the Mountain Amanus, which did not only fill all the neighborhood of that
place with fear and astonishment, but the whole City likewise; I mean, says he,
Antioch, for that place belonged to it: so that by this Expression we cannot
judge it to be very near.

Thebes.
Beotia was five hundred furlongs or sixty two miles in length, and about four
and thirty miles in breadth, according to Dicaearchus; Dicaearch. (...). p. 167.
yet since Epaminondas his time, it was all but the territory of Thebes. Attica
was a great Country, and Dio. Chrysostom. Orat. 46.
all of it the territory of Athens ever since Theseus his time. Athens.
Lacedaemon.
Lacedaemon Arist. Polit. l. 2.
had a territory sufficient to maintain thirty thousand foot, and fifteen
hundred horse. All Arcadia was but the territory of Megalopolis. And Elis, though
no great City, had so large a Country belonging to it, that many Country
Families for several generations did never see the City to which they belonged;
which Polybius ascribes partly (...). Polyb. Hist. l. 4. p. 468.
to the largeness of the region, partly to the simplicity of their manners.
Miletus, when it was taken by the Persians, had a large Country belonging to
it, (...). Herodot. l. 6.
which the Conquerors divided; that part that was near the City, the Persians
took to themselves; that which was remote, they gave the people of Pedasa. And
after this, the Region belonging to that City received great accession of
territory, when Dio. Chrysostom. Or. 46.
all the small neighboring Colonies of the Milesians in Aeolis and Troas and
about the Hellespont, leaving their own small Cities, went and settled at
Miletus, and increased the dependencies of that City by the addition of their
several regions. The territory of Byzantium joined to that of Perinthus, and
was therefore added to that City by Severus; Herodian. l. 3. ss. 19. (...).
Xiphil. in Severo.
yet these two Cities are above threescore miles distant one from the other, as
we find in Antonius's Itinerary: which as to this distance agrees exactly with
the Itinerary of Jerusalem. Caelenae, or Apamea in Phrygia, is commended by Dio
(...). Dio. Chris. Or. 35.
for the many Towns that belonged to it, which wanted nothing of Cities but the
Title: and Apamia in Syria appears yet more considerable for its territory, as
it is described by Strabo. (...). Strab. l. 16.
It has a very great and fertile Region belonging to it, and pastures for
cattle of prodigious extent. Many Towns, that had been accounted Cities, were
but in the nature of Villages to this City. Secoana (...).
was a fortress in this territory, where Tryphon the Tyrant was born. Larissa,
(...). Strab. l. 16.
and several other great places, that Strabo names, were but the dependencies
of Apamea. In this Country Seleucus Nicator kept five hundred Elephants and a
great part of his Army. Here the succeeding Kings kept their Studds, and had
thirty thousand Mares in this region for Breed. These were Greek Cities and
Colonies. We will in the next place give some instances of the Roman, and
compare their territories with the Liberties of our English Cities.

Mantua and Cremona.
The territory of Cremona was divided between the Veterans, sent thither by
Augustus; and not being sufficient for the number, Usque ad eum locum
Octavianus Musca perticam militarem porrexerat. Limitator ab Augusto datus, i.
e. per quindecim millia passuum agri Mantuani, cum Cremonensis non sufficeret.
Serve. in Virg. Eclog. 9.
Octavianus Musca, who had the ordering of that Colonie, took fifteen miles
from the territory of Mantua, which suffered not for any offense of its own,
but only by an unfortunate neighborhood, Mantua vae miserae nimium vicina
Cremonae. Nor was this all that belonged to it; for Alphenus Varus the
Surveyour had order to leave the City three miles on every side, to be measured
from the wall; which he is said Cum jussus tria milla passus a muro in diversa
relinquere ut octingentos passus aquae qua circumdata est, admetireris. Or.
Corn. in Alphen. apud Serve. in Eclog. 9.
to observe with such a malicious exactness, that he took near a mile of water
with which the City was encompassed into the reckoning, as he is reproached by
one Cornelius. So we have a territory of above twenty miles belonging to an
ordinary Town. And even that small part that remained, is much more than what
belongs to our Cities; and less than this, they did not usually leave, Termini
nunquam ambiguum receperant circa ipsum oppidum, sed extra tertium milliarium
Lex Caesariana operata est. Comment. Claud. Caes. de Colonijs. Ed. Rigalt.
when they thought fit to punish any Town by depriving it of its Region. Such a
poor remnant was left to Ameria upon the like occasion; for Caesar's law
operated not within three miles of the City, as we learn from Claudius his
Commentaries. Mantua was but a small place, and much inferior to Cremona, which
was a great Colonie long before this calamity, and in all likelihood had a much
longer territory than Mantua. We have had occasion to speak of that place
before, about the number of Roman Colonies sent thither, which Mr. Clerkson
disparages because it was no more than six thousand: Whereas it must be no
ordinary territory, that will serve such a number, according to the usual
proportion of distributing the territory of a Colony. For every one of those
Planters had a portion of Land allotted them, and were as so many freeholders
among us; and we may take a certain estimate of the Regions belonging to such
Roman Plantations from such instances of Agrarian distribution, which happen to
be preserved.

Bononia
Bononia was a Roman Colony, and those who were first sent thither Tria millia
hominum sunt deducta, Equit. 70 jugera, caeteris 50. Live. l. 37.
were but three thousand: yet the territory divided between them was very
great, as will appear from the lots of each Soldier. Every Footman had fifty
Acres, every Horseman seventy: but reckonning all as Foot, there will arise a
sum of a hundred and fifty thousand Acres, which alone would be a Country
equal to many of our Counties. And when you have added the public estate,
which always had a considerable portion on these occasions, the Officers, who
had always double to the common Soldiers, besides the wastes and unprofitable
Land which must be supposed within such a compass; such a territory will vye
with our greater Counties. Thureum had Sigon. de Antiq. Jure. Ital. l. 1.
Onuphr. Descript. Imp. Romans l. 3. Live. l. 34. Strab. l. 6. Apustio autore,
tertia pars agri adempta.
three thousand Foot and three hundred Horse sent to it as a Colony; the
Footmen had forty Acres a piece, the Horsemen double; which comes little
short of the reckoning of Bononia. This indeed was thought too much for the
number of people, and therefore a third part was taken off; yet still the
territory was very large. The Veterans, who had served Scipio Africanus, were
drawn Live. l. 31.
to Venusia, which had a great Territory, but had been dispeopled in the Wars
of Hannibal; the Soldiers had each two Acres for every year they had served in
those Wars. But the greatest yet is that of Aquileia, Sigon. de Antiq. Jur.
Ital. l. 1. Live. l. 39. and 40.
whither three thousand Foot and three hundred Horsemen were sent for a
Colony. The Foot had fifty Acres each, the Centurions double, the Horsemen
seven-score. In more remote Provinces the Territories of their Colonies seem to
be yet larger, there was more Land to spare: and Nec tantum terrae occupaverunt
quod colere potuissent, sed quantum in spe colendi reservavere. Sicul. Flav. de
Condit. Agr. p. 3. Ed. Rigalt.
when they first planted in a Conquered Country, they did not only take in so
much of the Country, as that new Colony could use, but according to their hopes
of future increase. The Colonies of Julius and Augustus, who had a great number
of Legions to provide for after the Civil Wars were ended, seemed to surpass
the rest. The one peopled Carthage and Corinth, and several other places of
principal reputation abroad, besides the Cities of Italy; the other threw in
all Achaia in a manner, for a territory of Patrae, and many places that were
Cities, and were memorable in story for considerable actions, he drew into his
new City. The Territory of it was above forty miles long, as we may gather from
the description of Pausan. Achaic. p. 429. 431. 440. 441.
Pausanias. Nicopolis (...). Strab. l. 10.
had the same fortune, and a great number of the neighboring Cities, and all
that belonged to them made up but the Territory of that City. In Gaul, Nismes
was remarkable for Territory and the extent of her jurisdiction, and upon that
account is (...). Sct. (...). Strab. l. 4.
preferred to Narbo. It had, as Strabo takes notice, four and twenty Villages:
which sounds something oddly, as if the Territory of Narbo, the chief of that
Country, had not so many Villages under it, or as if it were an extraordinary
thing. But the word, which is translated Village, had a peculiar signification
in that Country, as Caesar Nam omnis Civitas Helvetia in quatuor Pagos divisa
est -- hic Pagus unus, etc. Caes. de Bell. Gall. l. 1.
informs us. The whole Community or Country of the Helvetians, says he, was
divided in quatuor Pagos, and one such division as this within the memory of
our Fathers, killed L. Cassius the Roman Consul, and put his Army under the
yoke. And the same Pagus, which was the people of Zurich, Caesar had the
fortune to defeat the first of all the Helvetians; so that four and twenty of
these divisions must be accounted very extraordinary, since so great a Country
as Helvetia had but four. Du Chesne therefore renders the word, not Villages,
but Communities. The Hundreds, into which our Counties are divided, may in some
measure express it; which are usually named from some Village that might be the
chief of the division, when it was first made. To conclude, Zela in Pontus was
enlarged (...). Strab. l. 14.
by Pompey, by the accession of several Towns which he drew into it, and to
make this City complete, he added many Prefectures to its Territory.

I know it is a thing of ill same to put questions to the Dead; and therefore I
will not so much as return those demands of Mr. Clerkson, that call for proof
of one of the plainest things in the World: That Tria erant urbium spacia,
maenia, pomaeria, Territoria, 1. Muris. 2. Vicinia Murorum, ultima
jurisdictione civitatum fimebantur. Gotofred. in l. 5. de legate. fund. Cod. Th.
the Jurisdiction of the Roman and Greek Cities reached farther than that of
ours, unless there may be a new scruple about the City Officers having
authority over the Territory; which I think can scarce happen to a Man that has
read a Latin Author.

Nor is it evident only from a few Instances, that some ancient Cities had
large Territories; but the largeness of it is employed in the word it self: For
as Aristotle observes of a City, that the very name signifies a competence of
measure; so is it in respect of the Territory that appertains to it. By Ager,
which is the usual word for Territory, We understand, says St. Augustine, Agri
autem nomine non Castella tantum, verum etiam Municipia, and Coloniae solent
vocari extra Civitatem, quae caput and quasi matter caeterarum. Aug. de Consens.
Evang. l. 3. c. 24.
not only Castles, or Burgs, but Municipia, or Corporation Towns, and Colonies
without the City, which is the head and as it were the Mother of the rest. And
the old Gloss Territorium, (...). Gloss. vet.
renders it by the Land of a Colony. And whoever reads the Author. de Re Agr.
Ed. Rigalt.
Agrarian Writers, will soon perceive, though they speak only in the general,
that it is not a Parish or a few Villages they are dividing. When Justinian
divided Aquae in Dacia Ripensi, from Meridianum, he allows Aquensis autem
Episcopus habeat praesatam Civitatem and omnia ejus Castella and Territoria and
Ecclesias. Nov. 11.
the Bishop of Aquae not only his City, but all the Castles or Burgs and
Territories and Churches, that belonged to it. One would not easily imagine,
this to be the description of one of our Country Parishes. And Plato and
Aristotle (...). Arist. Pol. l. 7. c. ^.
as often as they mention what Territory is to be allowed, require it should be
not only sufficient for all the Inhabitants, but that it should answer all
public occasions of peace and war, and yield the Citizens such a competence,
that they might live at their ease. For he forbids his Citizens to meddle with
the plow; but to leave (...).
that to be done by servants or Country people. Nor were the proper parts of
his City of Artizans neither; but of Soldiers and Magistrates, and such as were
proper for Council. And these being in his supposition to be numerous, were to
be supported from their estates in the Territory of the place, which therefore
must be supposed of great extent. In short, the general notion of the thing
does not admit the narrowness of Mr. Clerkson's conceit; and the word it self
speaks something that is proportionable to the greatness and distinction of a
City.

The difference between the constitution of ancient Cities, and those of later
ages in this part of the world will appear; if we consider first, that they
were greater communities, not confined within the walls of one Town, but
stretched over all the adjacent Country. For the Jurisdiction of the City
Magistrate reached as far as the community; for the City was the head and
supreme part of it, all the Magistrates within the Territory being subordinate.
Nor was this all, but (...). Dio. Chrysostom. Or. 30.
the Citizens were proprietors of that Territory, who commonly lived in the
City, and left the Villages to their Slaves, or to such Country people that
were in the nature of Tenants under a servile Tenure. The title was in the
City, though particular Citizens had the possession; nor could any, as I think,
have a right to possess any estate in that Territory, who was not first free of
the City. The greater Villages, which answer our Buroughs, had Magistrates of
their own, but subordinate to those of the City, and generally chose by the
City; as Frontinus Frontin. de limit. Agr. p. 57.
informs us; and I think I have observed already upon another occasion. And
lastly the ancient Cities were greater in their design, which was generally
military; and there was scarce any so mean, that had not some provision for
war. The Greek Colonies in the midst of barbarous Nations, were like so many
Camps; and the Romans filled all their conquests with Cities of their own
people, with a design of securing the Countries they had subdued. Now as it is
natural to all things to beget after their own likeness; so the Greeks and
Romans did in this respect. For Greece consisting of many Cities independent,
propagated their kind, as far as their Arms or their Ships carried them. And
Rome from a small City, becoming mistress of a great part of the world, planted
every where little models of it self; and shared the world between its
Colonies, as so many children. And where they could not fill all the Country,
they preserved such Cities as they found, and every where encouraged the people
by their example, to form themselves into such communities. So that generally
speaking, all the Roman dominion was parcelled out into Cities and Territories
that belonged to them; whole Provinces were effectually represented by the
Deputies of the Cities of it. And though in some places there might be exempts,
yet in general thus the Roman Dominion was digested.

Upon this constitution Christianity was superinduced, and the Churches of
Christ being so many communities, and having some resemblance to Cities, so far
as to take their name from the civil assemblies, grew up according to the shape
of those civil communities in which they were planted, and had the same common
bounds and measure with them. So that when the whole lump was leavened, and all
the people were reduced to the obedience of faith; the Church and the City in
respect of their matter were the same. The rules indeed and the ends of the
City of man and the City of God, were very different, and stood as wide
asunder, as Heaven is from the Earth; but the same people were both the
Citizens and the Christians. The Church and the City had one and the same
Territory; and as far as the Jurisdiction of the civil Magistrate reached, so
far was the Diocese of the Bishop extended. Our Savior having left no rule
about limits, the Apostles made no new distributions, but followed the form of
the Empire, planting in every City a complete and entire Church, that consisted
not only of the Inhabitants of the City, but of the Region belonging to it. If
any were converted, and if their distance or number made them incapable of
repairing to the City-Church upon all their Religious occasions, they had
Congregations apart, and subordinate Officers to attend them, as it was in the
civil disposition; our Savior having appointed several Orders in his Church,
and the Apostles propagating those, and appointing some new, as occasion
required. Only, as in greater causes, the Country people sued in the City
Courts; so likewise in such causes of Religion, that concerned the whole
community, such as that of receiving in, and turning out of the communion, the
Christians of the Territory were under the authority of the City-Church. Hence
it is, that the Canons of ancient Councils mention a Territory belonging to
every City Bishop. The thirty fourth Canon (...). Can. Ap. 34.
of those called Apostolic, forbids a Bishop to do any thing without the
concurrence of his Metropolitan, but what related to his own Diocese, and the
Territories under it. And the ninth of Nice, that provides so favorably for
the Puritans when they should return to the communion of the Church, supposes
Bishops to have a considerable Diocese besides their City. For by this it is
ordered, that if a Bishop of the Puritans should embrace Catholic Communion,
and there were another Bishop of the Catholic Church in the same City, that
then (...). Can. Nicen. 8.
the Puritan should either retain the title of a Bishop in the same City, if
the other did think fit, or else be received as a Presbyter. But least this may
have the appearance of two Bishops in the same Town; some place is to be
provided for him, that he may be either a Chorepiscopus, or a Presbyter in the
Country. The Synod of Antioch forbids the Presbyters of the Territories to send
Canonical letters; and in another, gives the Bishop of the City full authority
(...). Can. Antioch. 9.
to order Ecclesiastical affairs, not only in his City, but in the whole
Territory that belongs to it, to ordain Presbyters and Deacons, to exercise
Jurisdiction, within the extent of his Diocese. And in the next Canon forbids,
(...). Can. Antioch. 10.
the Chorepiscopi to ordain Presbyters or Deacons in the Country, without the
consent of the Bishop of the City, to which they and the Territory did belong.
The Council of Elvira speaks of Deacons Diaconus regens plebem. Can. Eliber. 77.
that had Country cures, and that the Bishop, to whom they belonged, was to
perfect those who were baptized by these Curees, by confirmation.

Basil Basil. ep. 192.
salutes the Country Clergy of the Diocese of Nicopolis distinct from those of
the City; and Theodoret who had a Diocese forty miles square, reckoned (...).
Theod. ep. 42.
his Episcopacy of divine institution, and that his large Territory as well as
his City, was committed into his hands by God. Theodosius Bishop of Synnada is
said to drive the Macedonian Heretics not only out of his City, but (...).
Socr. l. 7. c. 3.
out of all his Territories. And Eustathius Basil. ep. 73.
overthrew all the Altars of Basilides in all the Territory of Gangrae. And
Synesius writing to the whole Church of Ptolemais, addresseth to the people of
the City, and to those of the Country Parishes that belonged to it. It would be
an endless labor to allege all the instances of this nature; since nothing is
more obvious and occurs more frequently in Ecclesiastical Writers.

I have showed how great Territories belonged anciently to the Greek and Roman
Cities; how unlike their constitution was to ours, and especially in this
respect: I have also showed, that the civil and Ecclesiastical Territories were
the same; and Mr. Clerkson confesses it. His demands therefore concerning this
matter receive a full answer; and the proof which he (...). Synes. ep. 11.
required not without intimation of despair, made good, and beyond all
reasonable exception.

To make this matter yet more clear, I will instance in some Bishoprics whose
extent are known, or so much at leastwise, as discovers them to be Dioceses
consisting of many Country Parishes, besides the City Churches. I will begin
with the Bishopric of Theodoret, because the limits of it have been described
with greatest exactness and particularity. The Diocese of Cyrus was forty miles
in length, and as much in breadth: And Theodoret Theod. ep. 42.
proceeds to describe it so minutely, that he sets down the number of acres,
together with the condition and tenure of the land. There were fifty thousand
free from any service, ten thousand belonging to the Fisc, about fifteen
thousand more subject to taxes, but unable to pay according to the proportion
then set. So that this instance seems clear beyond all exception. And as to the
Ecclesiastical state of this Territory, in his Epistle to Leo he says, Theod.
ep. 113.
there were eight hundred Churches in it, all belonging to his care. Yet some
have endeavored to take off the evidence of this Epistle to Leo, when it was
urged by the learned Bishop of Worcester. Mr. Baxter suspects it, because it
came from the Vatican Library; and Mr. Clerkson No evid. of Dioc. Ep. p. 39.
suggests the same suspicion. But this frivolous cavil has been answered by
the same hand that alleged the instance.

I will take the liberty to add only this, that it happens fortunately to this
Epistle, that it has an ancient voucher, and a clear testimony in the next age
after it was written. For Liberatus Quos secutus Theodoretus Papae suggessit,
quanta mala pertulerit, -- rogans ut tali causae subveniretur. Liber. Brev. c.
12.
makes mention of it, and informs us, that Theodoret wrote to Leo, suggesting
how much he had suffered of Dioscorus, and desiring, that for the remedy of
these evils another Council might be called. And Constat. ex ep. p. 113, 116.
Garner. in Liber. p. 83.
Garnerius in his observation upon this place, directs us to this Epistle to
Leo. Mr. Clerkson instead of eight hundred Churches, constantly reads eighty,
without so much as giving notice, that it is only his conjecture. But be the
number how it will, we must lay aside all thoughts of Congregational Episcopacy
in this Region.

Another exception against this instance is offered by Mr. Clerkson, No evid.
of Dioc. p. 39.
that this was not a Diocese, but a Province; and that Theodoret was a
Metropolitan. And for this he quotes the learned Author, whose testimonies he
pretended to answer; although he expressly says, that this is not to be
understood of the Province but of the Diocese of Theodoret. The truth is, Cyrus
was no Metropolis, nor was Theodoret Primate of the Province, but under a
Metropolitan, as he affirms in one of his Epistles: They sent, says he, (...).
Theod. ep. 16.
letters of summons, as to other Metropolitans, so likewise to ours. And this
was Alexander Bishop of Hierapolis, the Metropolis of Euphratesia, who
subscribes among the Metropolitans in the Oriental Synod Act. Conciliab. Ephesians.
in Ephesus. In those subscriptions all the Metropolitans have their quality
marked, and Theodoret subscribes as a simple Bishop. Stephen the successor of
Alexander, subscribes in the Synod of Constantinople under Gennadius, as
Metropolitan of the Province of Euphratesia: as I find in a Manuscript of the
Bodley Library. For the subscriptions of that Council are wanting in all
editions: and in that Manuscript there are but thirty four names, whereas
seventy three Bishops are said to be present; and the same person is a
subscriber to the Council of Chalcedon. Theodoret Hypomnest. Theodoreti ad.
Alexand. Metrop. ep. 34. Ed. Garnerij. ad Alexand. Prove. Euphr. Metrop. ep. 68.
ut ubicunque jubeas conveniamus. Theod. ep. 81. ep. 82. Omnes enim and ut
Patrem and Dominum reveremur. ep. 89
does acknowledge Alexander for his Metropolitan, in several of the Epistles
published by Lupus and Garnerius; and sends to him to appoint where the Bishops
of his Province shall meet; and an assembly of the Bishops of that Province
make a profession of acquiescing in what he should propound; and that they
would observe him as their common Father and their Lord. And Andreas Bishop of
Samosata, speaking in the name of his Brethren of the Province, owns Licet enim
instar capitis in omnibus nos praecellas. Ep. 84.
him as their head, and that he had in all things a pre-eminence. Long before
this, Hierapolis is named as the head of Commagena or Euphratesia; for it is
the same Province, as Ammianus Marcellinus Commagena nunc Euphratensis
clementer adsurgit; Hierapoli vetere Nino, and Samosata, civitatibus amplis
illustris. l. 14. c. 8.
observes. In the Council of Chalcedon, Theodoret was no Metropolitan; as
appears by his subscription Theod. ep. 94. 161. Ed. Lupi.
in the middle of the Bishops of the Province, of whom the greater part were
present. So that this fancy of Mr. Clerkson, that the passage of Theodoret in
his Epistle to Leo, is to be understood of his Province and not of his Diocese,
appears evidently to be destitute of all foundation. Cyrus was indeed called
Hagiopolis in later times; but the Province never bore that name, as it seems
to do in the Greek Notitia of Car. a S. Paulo: but the word was removed by the
negligence of Copists from the City to the Province, the City being in the
Manuscript Copy, as well as Print, placed at the top of a column, and having
two names, one of them was set higher than the line of the column, and so
joined to the title of the Province. But in that Notitia, as well as in the
description Miraeus. Not. Episc. l. 3. p. 142.
of the Empire by Hierocles, Cyrrus is placed under Hierapolis. In succeeding
times indeed it came to be an Archbishopric; but Honorary only and without
any Suffragans, as several other Cities of the same Province did.

The next instance shall be the Diocese of St. Augustine; who mentions a Castle
called Fussala, with a Territory belonging to it, forty miles from Hippo
Regius; which never had a Bishop of its own, but belonged to the Diocese of
Hippo. Against this clear testimony, Mr. Clerkson No evid. of Dioc. p. 27.
has offered some exceptions, which I shall examine. St. Austin, says he,
signifies plainly, that there were more Bishops in the Territory of Hippo, when
Ecce interim Episcopos nostros qui sunt in Regione Hipponensi convenite. Aug.
ep. 68. Ed. Frob.
he moved Januarius the Primate of the Donatists, that they would meet together
with the Catholic Bishops that were in the Territory. Although it should be
granted, that there were several Bishops in that Region; yet does not this make
St. Austin's Diocese less than forty miles in length; since he affirms Ad
Paraeciam Hipponensis Ecclesiae pertinebat.
expressly, that this Fussala belonged to the Diocese of the Church of Hippo;
and it is very unlikely that there were other Dioceses between: so that the
Territory of Hippo on that side, must belong to the Bishop of the City. This
exception then cannot impeach that testimony of St. Austin concerning the
extent of his Bishopric; for it might be so long one way, allowing more
Bishops to be in the Region. But after all, this passage alleged by Mr.
Clerkson does not prove, that the Region of Hippo had any more Bishops than St.
Augustine; for the Bishops mentioned to be in that Territory, were the Bishops
of the Province, who were at that time met there, as they had done before. Vos
modo conveniatis qui eorum Conventionem ante. Ep. 68.
A Council being assembled, it was ordered you should be summoned to appear:
and again from the Council our Bishops sent to the Emperor. The Donatists are
entreated to meet the Catholic Bishops, which before they neglected to do; who
being now assembled there again, the Schismatics are urged to come to a
conference with them. So that these Bishops were not in the Region of Hippo, as
in the place of their Residence, but as in a place of Synodical meeting.

He excepts No evid. of Dioc. p. 29.
likewise against Mutugenna, which was produced as an instance of a Country
Parish in the Diocese of Hippo; because he finds a place of the same name to
have two Bishops at the Conference of Carthage; as though there might not be
two places in Africa of a name; whereas that Village, of which St. Austin
speaks, is expressly challenged by him as belonging to his care, and so had no
other Bishop.

Another suggestion he offers against St. Augustin's being Bishop of the Region
of Hippo, because he does not say to Caecilian the President, that he was
Bishop of that Diocese (which the Dr. represents as a Region of large extent)
but only that he had the Episcopal charge of Hippo. And was that Father obliged
to reckon up all his Parishes to that President? Or did not his being Bishop of
Hippo, suppose him likewise Bishop of all the Diocese belonging to it? Or
because he does not mention his Territory to this Person, therefore he does not
say upon any occasion, that he was Bishop of the Diocese? If he was Bishop of
the Church of Hippo, he was so consequently of all the Region appertaining to
that Church. And that there were Regions belonging to it, he says plain enough,
though not to Caecilian, yet to another Magistrate. This will be most
advantageous to the Catholic Church, says that holy Bishop; Aug. ep. ad
Marcellin. 159.
Germanicenses ad curam humilitatis nostrae pertinent. Aug. ep. 251. Ed. Bened.
or that I may not seem to pass the bounds of my own dispensation, this will be
most advantageous to the Church of the Diocese of Hippo. And speaking of a
place called Germanicia in that Diocese, affirms, (e) that it belongs to his
care; and in another place, that Visitandarum Ecclesiarum ad meam curam
pertinentium necessitate profectus sum. Vide ep. 74, 212, 236.
he had Churches under his care which he was obliged to visit.

To diminish this Bishopric of Hippo yet farther, Mr. Clerkson shows, that St.
Austin was so far from having all the Region under his Jurisdiction, that he
had not the whole Town; the Donatists had a Bishop there. This indeed is true
of the former part of St. Augustin's Episcopal administration: but after the
Imperial Rescript, which followed the Conference at Carthage, Hippo had no
Donatists; for all returned to the communion of the Church. For so I think, St.
Austin in his Epistle to Vincentius may most commodiously be understood; where
speaking of his former opinion, which was against using any compulsion for
reducing men to the communion of the Church, he confesses, that experience
has altered his judgment in that point. Aug. ep. 48.
The instance of my own City was urged against me, which was once wholly
Donatist, but now converted to Catholic unity by the fear of the Imperial
Laws, which now so utterly detests your pernicious animosity, that she might
seem never to have been infected with it. So that after all these exceptions,
St. Austin's Diocese remains undiminished.

Caesarea in Cappadocia had a Diocese of so vast extent, that few of our
Northern Bishoprics can equal it. For Basil the Bishop of that City, had Greg.
Naz. Carm. de viti sua.
fifty Chorepiscopi in his Diocese, who were his deputies for the
administration of discipline in lesser causes in the remoter part of his
Diocese. Cappadocia was Strab. l. 12.
about four hundred miles in length according to Strabo, and above two hundred
in breadth. Caesarea was placed in the middle of this great Country, and was at
first the Metropolis of the whole; and when the Country was divided into two
Provinces, the greatest share remained under the ancient and greatest
Metropolis. Yet in this tract, which cannot be conceived less than two hundred
and fifty miles, there were but Colligere feci Episcopos sub me constitutos,
sunt enim duo. Ep. Capp. pr. ad Leon.
two Bishoprics, besides that of Caesarea, i. e. Thermae and Nyssa. Basil
(...). Bas. ep. 264.
excuses himself to Eusebius Bishop of Samosata, for not writing to him, by
some great Persons, who had been in Caesarea; because he was then upon his
visitation. And in another place speaks of a Country Parish of his Diocese,
called Venesa, where he ordained one Glycerius a Deacon, to assist (...). ep.
412.
the Presbyter of that Parish. And he reproves the Chorepiscopi of his Diocese,
for suffering the Presbyters of Country Parishes to make what inferior
Church Officers they pleased; and therefore orders Ep. 181.
a list of all the inferior Officers of Country Churches to be brought to him,
and that none be made thereafter without his consent. There is likewise another
Village called Dacora, mentioned by Sozomen Soz. l. 7. c. 27.
in the Territory of Caesarea, where Eunomius Philostorg. l. 10.
was born and buried; and Julian ordered Soz. l. 5. c. 4.
a search to be made for all the goods, not only of the Churches in Caesarea,
but of all the Churches of the Diocese.

Tyana, the Metropolis of the second Cappadocia, had a considerable Diocese
belonging to it. Euphrantas Bishop of that City mentions Praedium autem quod
dicitur Pasa, -- duodecim milliarijs distat Tyanensis Metropoleos, and sub
eadem Civitate est usque hodie. Ap. Conc. C. P. 2. Coll. 5.
one George of Pasa, who lived in Gregory Nazianzen's time; and notes, that
Pasa was a Country place twelve miles from Tyana, and belongs to that City,
says he, to this very day. But this Diocese must be much more considerable than
this passage speaks, as well as the rest of Cappadocia. The whole Country, as I
noted before, was about four hundred miles in length, and two in breadth, which
makes a sum of eight hundred square miles. Now in all the Country, there were
in the middle of the fifth age, but eleven Bishoprics, and then it was all
Christian. So that every Bishop, one with another, may have a Diocese that
wants not much of a hundred miles square; which can be matched by but few in
our Country, besides Lincoln. But because the division of Dioceses is generally
unequal, as the Territories of Cities were, some of these will fall out to be
vastly great, and others but of moderate extent. Nor is there any place for
suspicion, that Bishoprics were sunk or united in this Country; for it was so
far from that, that several of these few were erected in the fourth Century.
Sasima was made a Bishopric by Basil, which before belonged to Caesarea or
Tyana: for Gregory's expression is ambiguous. From Tyana it was two and thirty
miles distant; from Caesarea above a hundred. And upon second thoughts, it
seems to me, rather to belong to the first; for it was nearer to it, and within
its Province, and given up by Basil, who desires Bas. ep. 88.
Anthimus the new Metropolitan to take care of it. Nazianzus too was a
Bishopric raised in the fourth Century, as we may learn from Nazianzen, (...).
Greg. Naz. Or. 19. in Patr.
who says, that the place had but one Bishop before his Father.

In the Council of Ephesus, one John subscribes Johannes Episc. totius Lesbi.
Iren. Traged. Contest. quorund. Ep. sub 28.
himself Bishop of all Lesbus. The Island according to Strabo Strab. l. 13.
was eleven hundred furlongs, which wants not much of seven score miles in
compass. Nor had this Bishop summed up all his titles; for his Successor
Florentius, in the Council of Chalcedon, writes Florentius Episcopus Lesbi,
Tenedi, Prosilenes, Aegialorum, per Euelpistum Chorepiscopum subscripsi. Conc.
Chalc. Act. 1^.
himself Bishop of several other Islands. Now if one City cannot have Territory
enough in the judgment of the Congregational Antiquaries, to make a large
Diocese; two ancient Cities with their Territories, may surely yield a Diocese
of many Congregations. And in the Council of Ephesus Conc. Ephesians. par. 2. Act. 1.
there were several Bishops, who had two Cities within their Diocese. Timothy
was Bishop of Fermissus and Eudocias. Athanasius was Bishop of Diveltus and
Sozopolis. And in Europa there are many instances of this nature; and the
Bishops of that Province affirm, that it had been so immemorially. There is an
old custom, say they, Vetus mos viget in Provincijs Europae. -- Olim and ab
initio Ecclesias illas nunquam praedictae Civitates proprios Episcopos
acceperunt. Conc. Ephesians. par. 2. Act. 7.
in the Provinces of Europa, that every Bishop should have as it were two
Bishoprics under him, i. e. two Cities. So one had Heraclea and Panium;
another Bizya and Arcadiopolis; a third had Caele and Callipolis; another had
Subsadia and Aphrodisias. They add, that it had been so of old, and from the
beginning; and desire the Council to prevent any Innovation, which the
Metropolitan might attempt, out of displeasure against his Provincials, who in
that Synod happened to go against him. Nice in Bithynia had several Regions
belonging to it. Conc. Chalc. Act. 13.
Tattaeus and Doris, and that which was afterward called Basinopolis by Julian,
was till then accounted a part of the Diocese of Nice. In Egypt, the Territory
of Alexandria has been already mentioned; and in Pentapolis, Ptolemais had
many Country Churches, as I have already observed out of Synesius: (...).
Synes. Catast. p. 301.
and he complains, that all the Churches in Ampelitis, that was under him, were
burned down; distinguishing, as I conceive, the Ampelitis which was under him,
from that which belonged to Cyrene. For there were two Regions in Pentapolis of
that name, as we are informed by Agrotas in Stephanus. And Eutychius, who is an
Author in favor with those that reject Bishops, says, that Theophilus made one
of the three Brothers, who afterward gave him so great trouble, a Bishop
Episcopum in aliquot Egypti urbes constituit. Eustych. Annat. p. 540.
of several Cities in Egypt. But the Bishop of Tomi surpasses all the rest for
extent of Diocese; his Bishopric was made up of the whole Province of Scythia,
which had many Cities in it, as we are told by Sozomen. Sozom. l. 6. c. 21. L.
9. c. 17.


The Territories of many other Cities are mentioned by Christian Writers, with
respect to their Ecclesiastical as well as Civil dependence. Bethelia was a
Village in the Territory of Gaza, very great and populous; and by the account
Sozomen Sozom. l. 5. c. 15. (...). Soz. l. 6. c. 32.
gives of it, might become a City. It had many Churches and Monasteries in it,
built by the Ancestors of that Historian.

Another Village, called Capharcobra, is mentioned by the same Author belonging
to this City. And if the Bishop of Gaza had but one Church in his City, he must
have many in the Territory belonging to it: for before Constantine's time,
Silvanus is styled Bishop of the Churches of or about Gaza. In the same Country
Eleutheropolis (...). Soz. l. 9. c. 17. l. 6. c. 32. 7. 29.
had a Territory, and several Villages of it are mentioned; Caphar, and
Besanduca where Epiphanius was born: Cela once a City, and Berath Satia, where
the bones of the Prophets Habakkuk and Micah are said to be found.

In the middle of the fifth Century, Bishops were grown much more numerous than
in the foregoing Ages; and therefore their Bishoprics were of less extent.
Yet then in many Provinces of the Empire the Dioceses were very large, which we
may learn, by comparing the number of the Bishops in several Provinces, with
the measure of the Country. Labbe the Jesuit has published an ancient Copy of
the subscriptions of the Council of Chalcecedon, which he found among the
Papers of Simond. In that Copy, the subscribing Bishops are digested according
to their Provinces, and the Metropolitans set down the names of all that were
absent. So that in several Provinces we have the whole number of Bishops. And
within a few years after this Council, we have the Synodical Epistles of many
plenary Provincial Councils. If therefore we can have any certainty concerning
the limits of those Countries, we may easily find out a common measure for the
Dioceses. I have already showed how large the Dioceses of Cappadocia were upon
this foot; and I have occasionally mentioned Crete, the Circuit of the Island
being known and the number of their Bishops. Cyprus too has been computed, but
it was by the Notitia of Leo, which has three Bishoprics more than were in
the time of the Council of Chalcedon; for then all the Bishops of that Island
were but ten, of whom six were present at the Council, and three absent. Yet
about this time did Sozomen live, who observed, that in Cyprus there were
Bishops in Villages.

Where nature has made the bounds of Countries, they remain always the same;
and a computation of the largeness of Dioceses in such places from the number
of them will be certain. But where limits are arbitrary, and depend only upon
the agreement of men, they are frequently changed: and a Country may still
retain the same name, though the limits have been often altered. However in the
present question, which does not require exactness, we have such notices of the
distance of places left in ancient descriptions, as give sufficient evidence of
the greatness of ancient Dioceses in many Countries. In the Province of
Helenopontus there were but five Bishops, as appears Sancti itaque Provinciae
nostrae Episcopi, convenientes in unum. Conc. Chalc. P. 3.
by their Synodical Epistle to Leo: yet was this Country of very great extent,
as we may judge by the distance of those Episcopal Cities. For Sinope was
Strab. l. 12.
a hundred and twelve miles from Amisus, or a hundred and thirty according to
Pliny; Plin. l. 6. c. 2.
and that little less from Zela; and that place as far from Amasea. The
Territory of this last City joined to that of Zela, and was above sixty miles
in length that way, as we have noted already. Iborea seems to be on the borders
of Cappadocia, and to be the same with that mentioned by Gregory Nyssen. Greg.
Nyss. Or. in 40. Mart.
So that the Bishoprics of this Province cannot come short of the Northern,
which Mr. Clerkson fancies to have no equals in ancient times.

In Pontus Polemoniacus, there are but four Bishops subscribers Ep. Synod.
Pont. Polem. Conc. Chalc. P. 3.
to the Synodical Epistle of that Province. The Bishop of Trapezus, who
belonged to that Province, was not there. Now if we consider the distance
between these Episcopal Cities, the Dioceses must be judged unmeasurably great.
For from Polemonium to Trapezus there are Plin. l. 6. c. 3. Ptolom. l. 5.
about two hundred miles. Cerasus is in the middle, between those two Cities.
Neocaesarea is above a hundred miles within the Land; from which Comana is
about sixty miles. The Province of Europa Conc. Ephesians. Act. 7. ep. Synod.
took up the greatest part of Thrace; yet the Bishops here were but few, the
Dioceses being very large, as we have observed before. Old Epirus was
eightscore miles in length; and by the Episcopal Towns there in the fifth
Century, we may find the bounds of the Province were not much altered. Yet in
this long Tract, there were Nostrum omnium Sacerdotum etc. Ep. Synod. Epir. vet.
but eight Bishops under the Metropolitan of Nicopolis. Anchiasmus, or
Onchesmus, is about a hundred miles from Nicopolis; Hadriana was further:
Buthotum was twenty miles short of those, and Dodona about fifty from the
Metropolis. Corcyra was one of the Bishoprics, an Island forty five miles in
length. New Epirus which took up a good part of Illyricum, Tractatum habentes
omnes Episcopi in vestra Epiro constituti. Ep. Synod. ep. Nor.
had but six Bishops under the Metropolitan of Dyrrachium. Some doubt has been
made, Ubb. Emmius descript. Graec.
which was the old Epirus, and which the new; but the Titles of these Synodical
Epistles, as well as the ancient Notitiae, set that point out of all
controversy. In Greece it self, where Mr. Clerkson thought Bishoprics had
been like our Parishes, they are found to be of great extent, the face of that
Country having been much altered from what it had been in ancienter times. It
would be endless to pursue such instances as these over the Roman Empire, nor
is it at all necessary; for these are sufficient to show the measure of ancient
Dioceses, when their number was at the greatest.

It must be confessed, that in some Countries, where Cities stood thick, there
were more Dioceses in proportion, than in the Provinces already mentioned. But
then such Countries were generally very populous, and what they wanted in
measure, they made up in number; and even there the Dioceses did consist of a
great number of such Parishes as ours generally are. The Hellespont was well
furnished with Cities, and not a little Province. Yet were there in all Conc.
Chalced. Act. 6. Ed. Labb. ep. Synod. ad Leon.
but sixteen Bishops under the Metropolis of Cyzicus, of whom ten were present
at the Council of Chalcedon, and six absent, for whom the Metropolitan
subscribed. Asia, properly so called, and that which was immediately under
Ephesus, had as many Bishops in proportion to the measure of the Country, as
any Province in the Empire; yet here if we proceed upon a common measure, the
Dioceses will not be so contemptibly small. I know that Asia signifies very
ambiguously, and takes in sometimes more and sometimes fewer Countries; but
that does not concern the present question; for the subscriptions of the
Council of Chalcedon do sufficiently discover the extent of this Province. It
reached from Ephesus to Assus, and to Ilium, if we may depend upon that
reading; but Arch Bishop Usher Geogr. Disquis. touching Asia l. 4. p. 23.
has excepted against it, and not without reason. However it reached to Troas,
and the line wants not much of two hundred Miles, comprehending all Jonia and
Aeolis, and all North to Troas. But then it must be considered, that this
Country consists of a multitude of large Peninsulae, which adds much to the
content. For instance, from Ephesus to Smyrna in a direct line is but forty
Miles; but by Sea round the Peninsula, and coasting from Town to Town, it is
two hundred and seventy five. In all this Province there were forty Bishops in
the fifth Century, of whom there were eighteen present at the Council of
Chalcedon, Conc. Chalced. Act. 6.
and the two and twenty who were absent, subscribed by their Metropolitan. In
so large a Country, and so full of Cities and People, it would be something
difficult to dispose of them all in forty Congregations.

But the extent of ancient Dioceses remains still visible in France. Scaliger,
who was not apt to take the measures of ancient times and things by his own,
was of opinion, Regnorum vices multa in hac Divisione immutarunt. Sed Status
Ecclesiasticus, tam in orient quam in occidente ejus, integra vestigia
hactenus retinuit. Not. Gal. ap. Duchesne. p. 28. T. 1.
that although that Country had undergon many Revolutions as to civil Government,
yet the Ecclesiastical State still retained some entire footsteps of the
ancient division of the Empire; therefore he chooses to proceed according to the
Ecclesiastical Dioceses or Bishoprics of that Country; for in so doing, he
judged, he should keep to the ancient Notitia of the Roman Empire. All that he
observed Id. p. 29.
of alteration, was only the new Bishoprics. But these cannot be any
hindrance, as long as it is known from what Dioceses those new Bishoprics were
taken; for the old Dioceses were so much the less. It is well known the
Dioceses of France are not like our Parishes; and yet the greatest part of them
remain as they were thirteen hundred years ago. And here Learned Men think Si
uspiam alibi in Gallia certe videre licet, Provincias and Diaeceses Episcopales
-- per Christianos primum institut. Marg. Not. ep. p. 10.
the Dioceses have the same bounds they had when they were first set by the
Christians, according to the Disposition of the Empire. Those that are the
smallest, in that Kingdom, are likewise the latest. For in the first Aquitain
Pap. Masson. Not. ep. Franc. ap. Duchesn. T. 1. p. 57.
there were four new Bishoprics erected by Pope John XXII. taken from the
neighboring Cities. In the second Aquitain, the same Pope made Id. p. 61.
the same number. In the Diocese of Toulouse he erected six. So that contrary
to Mr. Clerkson's notion, the old Dioceses are still the largest, and the new
Papal erections draw nearest to his Congregational way; as is evident in this
Country of which I am speaking, as well as in Italy. The East and West of
France, as Scaliger notes, have retained their Bishoprics in their ancient
form, and there they are the most unlike our Parishes and the imagination of
Mr. Clerkson. So it is needless to go to Asia, and Syria, and Arabia, to look
for the bounds of ancient Dioceses which have been lost so long ago; when we
have so clear and full evidence nearer home. Yet these Bishoprics of France,
as large as they seem to be, are much less than they were in the Primitive ages
before Constantine; if we may depend upon the opinion of a very Learned Man,
Potuerunt ab initio binae civitates, ab uno regi Pontifice, etc. Bucher. Belg.
Romans l. 8. c. 15.
and a good Judge of such matters. For before Contantin's time, says Bucherius,
although there were many Christians in Gaul, there were but few Bishops; for it
is possible that two Cities might be under one Bishop, as afterward Bologne
and Teroanne, Cambray and Arras, Tournay and Noyon, had but one Bishop for two
Cities. For as it is certain, that some Cities in that Country had Bishops
before Constantin's times; so it is as certain, that several had none till the
time of his Sons. This was the case of Angier, and some other places mentioned
in the same Author, which he proves by the number of Successions. For instance,
Defensor, who was one of the Ordainers of St. Martin, was the first Bishop of
Angier. There were but ten Bishops of Vermand before Sophronius, who subscribed
in the Synod of Orleans Anno 511. And Silvanus was but the ninth Bishop of
Senlis, who was also present at the same Synod. And the same Author proves
Buch. Belg. Romans l. 8. c. 10.
that in the two Belgic Provinces the Bishoprics preserved the same bounds
from Constantin's time to the last age, when Pius the Fourth erected new Seas;
and certainly there are few places in the World, where there were longer
Bishoprics.

It is evident beyond all reasonable doubt, that the number of Bishops in the
three first ages was far less than in those that followed. Nor have I met with
any who called this in question, but Mr. Seldon. He indeed being in great
distress for his Arabian Fabler, who brings above two thousand Bishops to the
Council of Nice, to save the credit of his Author, suggests, Seldom in Eutych
Orig. p. 83. 84. 85.
that in Constantin's time; and before, Dioceses had other bounds, and
Bishoprics were more numerous and of less extent, than in the succeeding ages,
when Christianity was established by Law. That the bounds of ancient
Bishoprics are altogether unknown, and those which follow the civil
distribution of the Provinces of the Empire, are new. He mentions and
recommends Berterius and Salmasius concerning the Suburbicary Regions upon this
occasion; but I do not find they have any thing to his purpose, or that they
were of his opinion. It is strange a person of so great reading should advance
a notion concerning ancient times, against the general opinion of Learned Men,
without any testimony from Antiquity to give it countenance; especially when
there are so many things in the Writers of the third and fourth Centuries, that
seem to overthrow it. What! did not the Church before Constantine follow the
civil disposition? How then came the Bishop of Alexandria to have jurisdiction
over Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis, so long before the Council of Nice; for there
it was confirmed as an ancient and immemorial Custom? How came the Bishop of
Rome to challenge the Suburbicary Regions by the same prescription? And before
this, How came Cyprian to preside in the general or provincial Synods of
Africa, but in the right of his City? He was not long a Bishop, and could not
preside by his Seniority, which in the other Provinces of Africa took place
after the rights of Metropolitans had been settled in all the other parts of the
Empire. How came Cornelius to assemble the Bishops of Italy, and to preside
when he was so young a Bishop, but by the pre-eminence of his City? These
things are so obvious, that they cannot be avoided. As to the number of
Bishoprics, what can be more plain, than that they were generally according to
the number of Cities? Those Provinces which had most Cities, had most Bishops.
But in the general, it is evident that the number of Bishoprics was much less
before Constantine, than since. Africa makes this clear beyond contradiction;
and whoever compares either the Provincial or general Synods of that Country in
Cyprian's time, with those that followed in the next age, will quickly be
convinced. The general Synod under Cyprian, concerning the Rebaptizing of
Heretics, had but eighty seven Bishops, of whom there were four subscribed
from the Province of Tripolis, two present, and two by proxy, who in all
probability were all of the Province; which in the next age, when Bishops were
multiplied every where else in Africa beyond all example, had but one more; and
it cannot be well doubted, but other Provinces sent in the same proportion. For
this was one of the most remote; and is spared by following Synods upon that
account, as to the number it is to send to Synods. Athanasius, in the middle of
the fourth Century, affirms, that Mareotes, a large Region belonging to
Alexandria, never had a Bishop, but always belonged to the Bishop of the City.
Why? but because it was part of its Territory? So this fancy of Mr. Seldom is
disproved by undoubted Evidence; and the contrary is too plain to be disputed.

The Christians in the first three ages were dispersed over the Empire, so that
there was hardly a Town where there were not some; and those, if they had no
Bishop, had a Presbyter or a Deacon for Divine Service. Now the fewer Bishops
are found in those times, the more of these Subordinate Officers must be
acknowledged. Of these there was not one independent from some Bishop; and
therefore the fewer Bishops, the more Congregations they must have under their
inspection. And therefore if we compare the account Tertullian gives of the
number of the Christians, and their dispersion in all manner of places; we must
conclude the Dioceses of the first ages to be larger than of those that
succeeded, if not for multitude, at leastwise for extent and number of smaller
Congregations. In the fourth and fifth Centuries we read of many new
Bishoprics erected; but of no old ones united or sunk: And those Canons, which
forbid the making of Bishops in Villages, do expressly except those where there
had been any before. So that by the rules of these ages in which Mr. Seldom
supposes an alteration, the number of the old Bishoprics could not be
diminished; and it is plain by many instances, that they were increased.

Nor could this pretended change of the bounds of Dioceses in the fourth
Century be made without great clamor and disturbance: for there never was an
age of greater animosity among Christians; the parties were very watchful, and
cried out upon every the least Innovation. What complaints must we have heard,
if all the Dioceses in the Empire must have been cast, as it were, in a new
mold; and so many by this reduction must have lost either the whole, or part of
their Bishoprics? If any thing of this nature had been so much as attempted;
it is impossible but some account must have been left of it, by an age so much
abounding in Writers.

However it is sufficient for our present purpose, that the Bishops of the
first ages were Diocesans, and had many of them more Congregations than one
within their Dioceses. Before the end of the third Century, Manes is said
Epiph. Haeres. 66. n. 13.
to have disputed with Archelaus Bishop of Caschara in Mesopatamia, where it
seems the people were generally Christians; for they were so provoked by the
Blasphemies of that Heretic, that they were ready to stone him. Wherefore
Manes forced out of that City, went into (...).
a Village that belonged to it, at a considerable distance, as the
circumstances of the story suggest, where there was a Parish-Presbyter named
Tryphon, who had the care of that Parish. So that the Parishes of the Territory
had no Bishops, but Presbyters under the Bishop of the City. In the Prefecture
of Arsinoe, where Nepos had been Bishop, there were many Country Parishes under
Presbyters, who belong to that Bishop, as (...). Eus. H. l 7. c. 24.
Dionysius of Alexandria relates. And it is usual within the three first
Centuries, to mention many Churches belonging to one Bishop. Mark is said
Eusebius. H. l. 2. c. 16.
to have gathered several Churches in Alexandria; and Julian, one of the
Bishops of that City, is said Id. l. 5. c. 9.
to have had the oversight of the Churches of Alexandria; the same thing is
said Id. l. 6. c. 2.
of Demetrius, and Dionysius, Id. l. 6. c. 35.
and Peter, Bishops of that place. So Basilides is styled by Dionysius, Eus. H.
l. 7. c. 26.
Bishop of the Churches of Pentapolis; Silvanus Bishop Id. l. 8. c. 13.
of the Churches of Gaza, and another of the same name of the Churches of
Emesa, and Meletius Bishop Id. l. 7. c. 32.
of the Churches of Pontus; which style cannot in any constructon suit a Bishop
of a single Congregation.

After having cleared the main point in question, it may seem needless to take
any farther notice of Mr. Clerkson's Discourse. For having little or nothing of
fact to alledg farther, he proceeds to draw Corollaries only from what he had
said before, and walks forward in great security and confidence that he had
proved his point. How different his fancy of antiquity is from the truth and
reality of the matter, does by this time, I hope, sufficiently appear. However
I will follow him still; and when he offers any thing that has the countenance
of an Argument, it shall not pass without some notice taken of it.

Prim. ep. 116.
If the Territory were large, he fancies the Christians were but few in
Villages, because those were last of all converted: Hence Heathen Idolaters
were called Pagani. But the Apostles preached and made Converts in the Country
as well as the City, according to Clemens. And Tertullian boasting of the
numbers of Christians, affirms, there was no Village nor place without them in
his time. But when the Cities became entirely converted, the Heathen retired
into the Country; and though they were but few in comparison of the Christians,
yet there they were most numerous. He tells us Prim. ep. p. 117.
there were many Villages in the fourth age, in which there were no Christians,
very many in which there were but few, and but few in comparison, in which all
were Christians. The affirmation of a man who is an humble servant to a new
notion, concerning distant matters of fact, makes but bad payment. Thus
therefore he proves it. If a Village wholly Christian had not been a rarity,
even in Jerome's time, why does he make it a singular observation of Jethura?
Hieron. de Loc. Hebr.
Villa praegrandis Jethura, habitatoresque ejus omnes Christiani sunt. Surely a
reason may be assigned without making this matter such a rarity. And St. Jerome
in the same place does suggest it, when he observes that it is situate in
Daroma, near Malatha. For in that part it seems there were not many Pagans, but
Jews. For in Daroma there was Hieron. de Loc. Hebr. in Eschemo.
a great Village of the Jews called Eschemo; this being some remote part where
it seems they retired, and for that reason it might be observed of Jethura,
that it was all Christian.

Prim. ep. p. 117.
When Christians in the territory were many, yet being disposed, as generally
they were, under other Bishops than him in the City, his Diocese had no
enlargement thereby. How far this is from being true, is sufficiently evident
from the instances given of the Dioceses of City Bishops; and Mr. Clerkson
alleges nothing for proof, but the Bishops of Hippo, who only met there in a
Synod, as we have showed before. Prim. ep. p. 119.
He mentions Aug. Civ. Dei. l. 22. c. 8.
a Bishop in the Castl^ Sy^ica near to Hippo, but not in the Region* for he
expressly distinguishes, and says it was near the Colony of Hippo. He mentions a
few African Bishops in the Territories of Cities; but we have already showed,
that it was Schism erected those Bishops in Villages, and that from the
beginning it was not so. Basinopolis, whi^^ was once a Village and made a City,
was taken out of the Diocese of Nice, and was no longer under the jurisdiction
of the Nicene Bishop. And so was Ely, and Peterborough, and Oxford, taken from
the Diocese of Lincoln; and yet the remainder is still enormously great. He
tells us too, of a Bishopric raised in the Precinct of Caesarea in Cappadocia,
but at a great distance from it; and half a dozen more Dioceses might have been
well spared out of Caesarea. At last he comes to Prim. ep. p. 121.
the territory of Rome, if that be it, which was under the Provost of the City.
It was well he demurred upon this point, for that indeed was not the Territory,
but the Province of the City, and consisted of several Provinces. And the
Bishops there, though they were many, were not of the Congregational way. Nor are
all the Bishops he finds in the Roman Provincial, in the Province of Rome,
within the distance of an hundred miles: but of this a large account has been
given. He notes farther, That there was not one Parish or Church in the
Territory of Rome, that belonged to the City Bishop. And for this he cites
Innocent's Epistle to Decentius, cum omnes Ecclesiae nostrae intra civitatem
constitutae sunt. If the Bishop of Rome had no Country Parish, then the
neighboring Bishops had the more. But we are not to conclude this too hastily;
for it is not very certain, where that which he called the City ended, nor yet
what sort of Churches he speaks of; for he had Presbyters in other places
besides those in the Churches of Rome, and such as consecrated the Sacrament
themselves, and consequently had Congregations; for then there were no private
Masses. and to these he did Nec nos per caemiteria diversa constitutis
Presbyteris destinamus. Et Presbyteri eorum Consecrandorum jus habeant. Innoc.
ad Decent. Prim. ep. p. 122.
not send the Sacrament consecrated, because they had authority to do it
themselves; and these as well as the other were in his Diocese. To this he adds
some instances of Bishops, whose jurisdiction was confined within their Walls,
Some in Italy, And that of Dublin, when John Papyron the Popes Legate came over.
But all these are new, and that of Dublin is so too; Usher's Relig. of the
Irish. p. 83.
for that being a Norman Colony, and the Irish possessing all without the walls
of the City, the Norman Bishops Jurisdiction could extend no farther than the
possession of his own people.

To this he adds a mavelous remark, that the word (...).
by which some will have him to understand a Diocese, is frequently said to be
in the City. And of this expression he cites many examples; as if this implied,
that out of the City there was no Diocese. But let that instance of Alexandria
answer for all the rest, since it is produced to this purpose. For besides the
City, Athanasius affirms, the Bishop had Mareotes a Region containing many
Country Parishes, and that there never had been so much as a Chorepiscopus to
govern those Churches; but that they were under the immediate Jurisdiction of
the Bishop of Alexandria. We are farther told, Prim. ep. p. 123.
that the Apostles designed there should be such Bishops, as they instituted,
in Country Towns, and not in Cities only. If he means by such Bishops,
Presbyters only; then indeed not only every Church, but every Congregation
required such; but the Bishops of the Apostles Ordination had the care of many
Congregations. And it is plain in Scripture, that such general Officers they
did appoint, and they themselves were of that kind. Some Prelatists, he
observes, will have Bishop and City to be adequate; but he will have it, that
Church and Bishop should be so; for it is not the City, as such, requires a
Bishop, but because it had a Church in it. It is true; but the narrowness of
the Independent spirit confounds a Church with a Congregation. For as in the
civil community of a City, there were several subordinate Assemblies, yet but
one (...) properly so called, which was endued with the authority of the whole
Body: So it might be in the Churches planted by the Apostles. Where therefore
there was one competent Church, there was a Bishop; but this might consist of
several Congregations. The Church of Jerusalem may be still mentioned to this
purpose, after all Mr. Clerkson's attempts to diminish it. The number of
Converts there was too great for one Congregation, Acts 11.22.
yet they all made but one Church; and so it was where ever Christians
increased in the same proportion. And therefore I hope to be excused, if in
this case I take the practice of the Apostles and of the Church in succeeding
ages, to be safer Interpreters of their design, than the novel conjectures of
men addicted to singularity. The instance of Majuma the Port of Gaza, is
directly against the purpose for which it is brought; for it had no Bishop till
it was a City. And one thing in this citation of Mr. Clerkson concerning it,
deserves to be noted. For where Sozomen says, that the bounds of each Diocese
were appointed, and what Altars should belong to each; our Author thought fit
to change the number, and to write distinct Altar, as agreeing better with his
notion; though this way does not agree well with common honesty and good faith.
The weak objection which he makes for Episcopal men, and the suitable answer he
returns to it, are not worth notice. For here he speaks only to himself; and I
do not wonder he should argue so weakly for us, when his arguments against us
are so harmless. So the Mother of Sisera and her wise Ladies, did doubt and
reply, and fancy Triumphs, when the day was lost.

The difference between the modern and ancient models is apparent, as Mr.
Clerkson thinks, in England and Ireland. The ancient model of Episcopacy in
England is something hard to find. For the Saxons being Pagans, when they
subdued this Country, and driving the old Inhabitants into the remote corners
of it; all the bounds of civil and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this
Kingdom were lost. But the model he speaks of, is that of Gregory the Great,
who had no more design to plant Congregational Episcopacy in England, than he
had to make it Independent. He intended twelve Bishops for the Province of
York, as Mr. Clerkson observes; but that might have been done, and the Dioceses
be large enough. For that Province then reached from Humbre to the Frith of
Edinburgh; and about the year 681. had five Bishops (however Mr. Clerkson
affirms, that for many ages it had no more than three) and every one of them
had Dioceses of very great extent. Those in the South were not all so great,
but yet comprehended many Congregations; and some of them [as Canterbury,
London and Rochester] do remain still under the same limits that were at first
appointed them by Augustine the Archbishop. How they stood before the coming of
the Saxons, is now beyond all memory; and there is little hope left of making
any new discovery in this matter, which has been treated by so many great men,
and diligent inquirers into the Antiquities of their Country. Marcianus
Heracleota Peripl. p. 92.
reckons fifty nine Cities in Britain, which I suppose he took out of Ptolomy.
Ptol. l. 2.
Many of these are placed in Scotland, and about forty remain for England and
Wales. If they observed the general rule of the Church, the number of their
Bishops might be equal to that of their Cities; and so their Dioceses would be
much too wide for Mr. Clerkson's purpose. But it seems this number was reduced
afterward. Forbid Bed. H. E. l. 1. c. 1.
mentions but twenty eight, when he would set out the most flourishing
condition of this Country in the Roman times. As for the Canon of the Synod of
Herudford for augmenting the number of Bishops, which Mr. Clerkson insists on,
there was good reason for it. For at that time there were no more than seven
Bishops in all the Saxon part of Britain, which then reaching to the Frith of
Edinburg, was as large as all England and Wales joined together are now.

The ancient model in Ireland is as little known: for the Legends of St.
Patrick are but sorry evidence of the ancient state of the Irish Church, and
that Fable has been already examined. In Phaenicia indeed the Latins did reduce
the Bishoprics to a lesser number in the twelfth Century; because the
condition of that Country was much altered, and most of the ancient Episcopal
Cities destroyed, or the people Mahometans. But that it was the humor of that
age, instead of multiplying to reduce Bishoprics, is only a fancy of Mr.
Clerkson. For I have showed the practice of Italy at that time to be quite
contrary; where instead of reducing, they raised a great number of new
Bishoprics, and have been increasing of them ever since. Nor does it serve to
any purpose to produce the Patriarchat of Antioch, so different in the time of
the Latins, from what it had been anciently; since the condition of those
Countries had been much altered, and the Christians were reduced to a very
small number under the long and heavy Tyranny of the Mahometans.

Mr. Clerkson bestows a whole Chapter to confirm his notion of the smallness of
ancient Bishoprics, by repeating those observations he had already made: That
all the people should be present at the election of Bishops; that the Bishop
was to examine the state of the Penitents; that he was to preach to all the
Brethren; that there was but one Communion table in a Diocese. All these have
been answered already; and it is evident by many instances, as well as the
necessity of the thing it self, that the Christians of the Country had distinct
Congregations, and settled Presbyters to attend them, all in subordination to
the City Bishop; that their Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper were
administered there by those Presbyters; that, as for Discipline and
Confirmation, the Bishop visited those places in person; that those
Congregations were not obliged to repair to the City-Church, so much as on
Easter or the most solemn Festivals. These things are as plain as words can
express. Athanasius, Basil, Augustine, and several others give an account of
their visitations. And Jerome Hieron. Cont. Lucif.
cannot deny it to be an ancient custom, that the Bishop of the City should
visit the Villages and Buroughs and remote places of his Diocese, to confirm
those who had been baptized there by Presbyters or Deacons.

There is nothing more precarious, and more destitute of the appearance of
truth, than the deduction our Author makes of the progress of Diocesan
Episcopacy, and the rise of it, from the destruction of the Congregational
model. Prim. ep. p. 191.
A Bishop of a Country Parish would be striving to get another Parish under
him. The third Council of Carthage, Can. 46. takes notice of such Bishops.
Nothing can be more directly against his purpose than that Canon; by which it
appears, that such Country places as had Bishops, were of new erection; that
they had been ever before parts of a greater Diocese, Quae exempta de fasce
multarum, sola meruit honorem Episcopatus suscipere. Can. 46.
and taken out of a multitude which belonged all to one Bishop; that some of
these new Bishops challenged other parts of the Diocese out of which their
Bishopric was taken, besides that which was appointed them. So that the design
of Mr. Clerkson is defeated by his own evidence. For whereas he would suggest,
that Dioceses did rise by the incroachment of the Bishop of one Parish upon
another, and by joining Parish to Parish: The quite contrary appears from the
place alleged; that the Bishop of one Parish, as he calls him, was raised by
crumbling of ancient Dioceses; and that the other Parish, which he is said to
challenge, was not such a one as had a Parish Bishop to it self, but was part
of a Diocese consisting of many such; and that this large Bishopric was the
ancient, the small an innovation. I perceive that conscience does not always
operate alike in those who pretend so great niceness. For while they take
offense and start at a trifle, they make no scruple of sins of unfaithfulness;
and represent that as truth and reality, which in their own conscience they
know to be otherwise.

Prim. ep. p. 191.
When a Bishop had part of a City, he was unsatisfied till he had got the
whole. Thus Flavianus at Antioch would not suffer a Bishop to be made to
succeed Evagrius, that he might have the City entire to himself. One may be apt
to imagine, that in ancient time Antioch was divided between many Bishops, and
that this Flavianus was the first ambitious man, who would have the City entire
to himself. Whereas before the Schisms that distracted the Church of that
place, the City had ever had but one Bishop. But the Arrians having the
possession of the public Churches, and being established there by authority,
the Catholic Party which was very low there at that time, happened Socr. l. 3.
c. 6. 9. Soz. l. 7. c. 15.
to be divided; Meletius being Bishop of one part, and Paulinus of the other.
This being against the rule and constant practice of the Church, it was agreed
to put an end to this irregularity, by uniting all, when one should die, under
the Survivor. Flavianus broke this agreement; for when Meletius died, he
procured himself to be made Bishop in his stead, against Paulinus who was the
Survivor. And he likewise dying, his party chose Evagrius in opposition to
Flavianus; who when that Competitor was dead, endeavored to hinder the
ordination of a successor. And this is the story, which Mr. Clerkson thinks
fit to bring as a proof, how a Bishop of a part of a City was unsatisfied till
he had the whole; as if it were the rule or allowed practice of the ancient
Church, to divide a City between many Bishops.

Prim. ep. p. 192.
When a Bishop had a great City, yet some Village in the vicinity he could not
endure should be exempt from his Jurisdiction. Majuma found this to its
trouble. This had always been under Gaza, until it was made a City by
Constantine. So that its separation from the Diocese of Gaza was the
Innovation. Its dependence upon that Bishop, was its ancient and primitive
state; and the Bishop of the City did not desire to make a new accession to his
Bishopric, but to recover what had been taken from it.

Prim. ep. p. 192.
Not satisfied with one City, some would have two. So four Bishops in Europa, a
Province of Thrace, got each of them two Cities under him. Yet is it positively
affirmed of those Cities, that they had always belonged to one Bishop; this was
their primitive constitution. It is possible some of them were but lately made
Cities; and having been Villages before in the Territory of another City, they
continued in their Ecclesiastical subjection, after they were made Cities. Yet
these were afterward parted; so far were succeeding Ages from reducing the
number of Bishoprics. For Arcadiopolis, which was joined to Byzia in the
Council of Ephesus, and there affirmed to have been so immemorially, under
Justinian had a Bishop of its own; as we find by the subscriptions Not. Graec.
Leon. in Append. Geogr. Sacr.
of the fifth Synod. Panium, joined to Heraclea, was afterward divided from
it, and made a distinct Bishopric; had a Bishop of its own in the Council
under Menna. Conc. C. P. sub Menna. Act. 2.
So that this instance, as well as the rest, proves directly contrary to the
purpose for which it is produced. That which follows, concerning the
incroachment of one Metropolitan upon the Province of another, I am not
concerned to take notice of; since it does not belong to the present question.

Having abused so many Testimonies of ancient Writers, directly against the
intention of the Authors, to countenance his dream of Congregational
Episcopacy, he does not think fit to conclude without Prim. ep. p. 197.
taking notice, what thoughts some of the best and most eminent Bishops of the
fourth and fifth Ages, had of a very large Bishopric. And thereby, he thinks,
he shall perceive, that if the Church could have been ordered according to the
principles, desires and endeavors of the most pious and conscientious; their
Dioceses would not have been so execessively numerous in the fourth or fifth
Ages, above what they were in the third. By Dioceses being numerous, I suppose
he means the number of people belonging to each Diocese; for otherwise it will
destroy what he contends for, Dioceses being by so much more large as they are
less numerous. Chrysostom, he says, may satisfy us here. What? In his judgment
and conscience was he against a large bishopric? bred in the Diocese of
Antioch, than which there were few greater in the world, and receiving the
orders of Deacon and Presbyter in that Church. Afterward removed from thence
to be Bishop of the Imperial City; having so many Congregations in the City, so
many Parishes in the Country, such a number of Provinces under his
Jurisdiction, as made the better part of the Eastern Empire: Does he express
his conscience against a very large Bishopric? Surely a person of so exalted
eloquence could not be guilty of such a solecism; his Chair would have born
testimony against him, and refuted all his Sermon. If this was his conscience,
why did he not divide? Why did he not appoint one Bishop in Sycae, another in
Hestiae, where Constantine had built a Church that might have become a Bishop?
Or if these places were too near, why did he not erect new Bishoprics in the
remoter part of his Territory, or in his Provinces; since as Patriarch, he had
sufficient authority to make what number of Bishops he pleased? He deposed
indeed a great number of unworthy Bishops, and ordained others in their places;
but there is no account of any new erections of his in Market Towns and
Villages. And his friends make bold to censure Theophilus, for making Bishops
in small places, where there had been none before. It is therefore very
mavelous, that the conscience of so great and holy a person should declare
against his own practice, and condemn a large Bishopric, while himself was
possessed of one of the largest in world, without discovering the least desire
or endeavor to part it between several Congregational Pastors. As for his
Principles, he had no other in this matter than the rule and practice of the
Church. One City, according to his principles, could have but one Bishop; and
therefore he seems to be startled at St. Paul's direction, to the Bishops and
Deacons of Philippi. What, more Bishops than one, says he, in one City? No, by
no means: therefore he concludes they were received not Bishops in the sense of
the word in his times, but Presbyters only. And therefore according to his
principles, if a City were never so great, it ought to have but one Bishop.
However let us hear what Chrysostom says in the places cited by Mr. Clerkson.

Tell me, says that excellent Bishop, Chrysostom. in Act. 3. p. 655. Ed. Savil.
what can a multitude avail us? Will thou understand, that the desirable
multitude are the Holy, not the many? -- What care I for the multitude? What
advantage is in them? But here is no comparison between a great Bishopric and
a small, as such; but between many bad and few good. And in this case
Chrysostom's judgment cannot be contested; it is clear, that we are to go by
weight, not by number. The people of Constantinople, as they were exceeding
numerous, so they were very dissolute; and this holy Bishop flamed against the
vices of the place, with a zeal becoming his character. He is not content only
to reprove and to rebuke with authority; but threatens to use the utmost of his
spiritual censures, against those that disgraced Christianity by their wicked
lives. In this Resolution of reforming his people, he bids defiance to all
discouragements and opposition. Some urged the multitude of offenders against
him, that too rough dealing might drive them to join with Sectaries. But this
did not at all abate the resolution of the Bishop: He scorns the multitude upon
this account, and cries, what care I for a multitude? It was far from his
intention to cast off this multitude, or to divide them into several distinct
Congregations under other Bishops; but his design was to reform their lives,
and to build up and adorn the Church committed to him with many that were good,
with a multitude not only numerous, but approved. And for this purpose he
offers himself a sacrifice, and is content to be cut off, so that he might gain
many to Christ. If Chrysostom had proceeded upon the principles of Mr.
Clerkson; he must have given his discourse another turn, and said, that since
one Bishop is not sufficient for so great a people, and a hundred and fifty
Persons are a charge more than one can well discharge; it is fit that you choose
your selves Pastors after your own hearts, and enter into Covenant with them.
For this great dissoluteness proceeds from the excessive greatness of the
flock, and the disproportion that is between it and the ability of a single
Shepherd. For this Diocesan way is an innovation, and raised upon the ruin of
ancient discipline. Wherefore separate your selves, for I will not undertake
the charge of above a hundred and fifty souls. To this effect he must have
expressed his conscience, if his principles had been the same with Mr.
Clerkson's. But he on the contrary lays claim to the whole flock, numerous and
disordered as it was; he thought himself bound in conscience to endeavor the
reformation of it, and to use fullness of Episcopal authority to reduce them.
He does not complain that they are many, but that they are unprofitable; would
they but reform their lives, let them be as numerous as they please; for the
greater their number, the greater would be his joy. So far is Chrysostom from
expressing his conscience against large Bishoprics in the places cited by Mr.
Clerkson.

Nor do his other Arguments drawn out of the Sermons of Chrysostom, come any
thing nearer to the point. The Episcopate, says he, Prim. ep. p. 203, 204.
is so called from the inspecting all. He ought to be an Overseer of all,
bearing the burdens of all; he had need of many thousand Eyes. -- He ought to
go the rounds night and day, more than any Commander in an Army. We must give
account of all their souls, when we have been defective in any thing. I wonder
if any Bishops can ever be saved, considering the greatness of the threatening,
and their negligence. All this is very true, but not to our Author's purpose.
Bishops are certainly accountable for those who perish by their neglect of
their proper Office. But then the duty of a general overseer is not the same
with that of a subordinate Office. A Parish Presbyter will not be condemned for
not performing the duty of a Master of a Family, nor a Bishop for not doing the
office of a Presbyter to all the particulars of his Diocese. But these words
are to be understood with analogy to the nature of the Office of which they are
spoken; but the measure of the Office cannot be taken from those expressions. A
General must go the Rounds, and so must a Bishop too: But it follows not
therefore, that a General ought not to command more Men than a private Captain,
or that a Bishop ought to have no more Parishes than a Presbyter may supply.

What inferences are to be drawn out of this topic concerning the great ness
of the Episcopal charge, and the dreadful condition of those who do not
faithfully discharge it, may better be learned from Chrysostom Chrysostom. in Heb.
Hom. 34.
than Mr. Clerkson. Now since the account to be given of that Administration is
so dreadful: He wonders that any should be so forward to desire it. It is
strange, that Men should be so ambitious of a high station indeed, but withal
so hazardous; that they should solicit, nay, intrude upon such a charge, and
reckon it a desirable promotion to be raised to a Precipice, where without the
greatest care and circumspection in the World they must fall headlong. And
certainly what he says to that effect, with a heat and eloquence inimitable, is
sufficient, one would think, to mortify the most impotent Ambition in the World.

Another inference, which Chrysostom draws from the consideration of the danger
to which the Bishop's Office does expose him, is, that therefore the People
under his charge ought to respect and to love him: Knowing then, says he,
Chrysostom. in Joh. Hom. 86.
the greatness of his danger upon your account; You on your part ought
proportionably to love and to observe him. While the Pilot is encouraged, all
is safe; but if he be reproached, and hated, and hindered, all is in danger to
be lost. So a Bishop, if respected, can go on in the business of his high and
necessary Office, with cheerfulness and comfort: But when he is discouraged
with the frowardness and evil disposition of those under his Direction, his
hands are weakened, the People are exposed to the mercy of the waves. He
proceeds farther to show the respect due to that Office, even under the
supposition of Mal-Administration. For our Savior advised the Jews to observe
the Scribes, because they sat in Moses his Chair, tho their actions were not
suitable to the dignity of their Station: But the Bishops have a more
honorable Chair, for they sit in the Chair of Christ.

Had the notion of Congregational Episcopacy ever come into the thoughts of
Chrysostom, these inferences had been very unsuitable. For then instead of
advising the People to reverence and obey their Bishop, who exposed his Soul to
so much danger by taking upon himself the care of them all, he must have
advised, as Mr. Clerkson and his Brethren would have done, that they would
separate from him, for they were too many for the oversight of one Bishop: He
could not Preach to them all: He could not Visit nor Comfort them all: There
were Men of as great gifts willing to receive them in elect Congregations;
these should look into the inward state of the Soul, and the secrets of their
Families: As for the Bishop he had more than he could look well after, and it
was not fit that they should swell his accounts too high by adding to his
charge. If Chrysostom had the same thoughts of a large Bishopric with Mr.
Clerkson, such must have been his Discourse. But he was far from changing the
ancient bounds, or desiring Bishops in consideration of the danger of so great
a charge, to divide their Dioceses till they should be reduced to the
Congregational Model; much less did he suggest to the People, that they should
subdivide, since their Bishops would not restore the pretended Primitive
Episcopacy.

I cannot omit one passage out of Chrysostom, which Mr. Clerkson either
mistook, or was willing to pervert to his purpose. But as it is cited, it is
directly contrary to the sense and words of the Author; Chrysostom. in Tit. Or. 1.
p. 384.
He that has the charge of a great City, see how great a flame he exposes
himself too. -- For all the things that are not acted by him he shall be
responsible. Now Chrysostom among other dangers, to which the Episcopal
Function is exposed, reckons it none of the least, that he is to Ordein other
Bishops. And therefore if for friendship or other reasons he shall promote an
unworthy person, and commit to him the care of a great City, how great a flame
does he expose himself to? He is guilty of all the Souls the other shall
destroy, and shall be responsible for all the things that are acted by him. Mr.
Clerkson has added here a small word that makes great alteration of the sense,
it is [not] and has perverted the whole passage from the Ordeiners to the
persons Ordained; and to make all fit, he is forced to change the words. Had he
been to represent the danger of those Ordeiners, he would not only have made
them responsible for the miscarriages of unworthy Bishops, but charged upon
them as an unpardonable neglect, that they did not Ordein many Bishops for
every great City, since one, tho never so diligent, must be insufficient for
the charge. But this Chrysostom could not think of. For tho he is said to have
foretold some things, yet the notions of the Independents, as well as the Sect,
were at too great a distance from him to be foreseen.

It seems to me matter of great astonishment, to see Men pretending to a
Conscience so nice and scrupulous in Religion, to deal with so little Faith,
and to abuse the most moving and lively eloquence of ancient Preachers, and
words as it were of fire, only to make a little false light, to abuse the
ignorant and simple into a belief, that Novelty is ancient, that Schism is
Catholic Unity, and that Chrysostom, the great Patriarch of the Imperial City,
was in his Principles and desires an Independent. Lord! How long shall mean
delusions be permitted to have so powerful and prevailing influence? How long
shall the Wolf possess the Sheep against their Shepherds, and break into the
Folds under the disguise of Sheeps-cloathing? How long shall the deluded People
have eyes and not see; and the Souls, for which Christ died, be under the power
of Deceivers? How long will it be, ere the Hypocrite be disrobed; and the
People see through the disguise of those who abuse them? Surely there will come
a time, when God will hear the Prayers and Expostulations of his Servants: When
the faithful Shepherd shall gather together those that are scattered, and bring
back those that are gone astray: When he shall carry them on his shoulders
rejoicing and triumphing in the disappointment of the beasts of prey. But who
shall live, when this comes to pass? Blessed surely shall their Eyes be, who
enjoy the sight; a joyful and pleasant thing beyond expression it will be, to
see brethren dwell together in Unity.

I should have concluded here, but that my Author continues to abuse his Reader
after the same manner in another Chapter, which conteins, for the most part,
such allegations as he had produced before; but something more being added, it
seemed necessary to add some brief reflections.

Prim. ep. p. 217.
When the Bishop could not be content with a moderate charge, but extended it
to such a largeness, that it became ungovernable by him; This pretended ruling
was no longer government but anarchy: as Isidore speaks of a Bishop of his
time. l. 3. cap. 319. That this is said of a Bishop, does by no means appear
from that Epistle: but the circumstances direct us to understand it rather of a
Civil Judge than of a Bishop. Under such a ones government, says Isidore, which
was anarchy rather than government, punishment went before accusation: for
being an unreasonable man, it is no wonder he should act so preposterously, and
pervert all methods of Justice. But that this was a Bishop, or had a large
Bishopric, and would not be content with a moderate charge, but extended it to
such a largeness to be ungovernable, Mr. Clerkson did not find in Isidore, but
in his sleep: for surely his Conscience must be a-sleep, when he knowingly
perverts the words of ancient Authors, to impose upon the World. With the same
integrity he uses Basil 's words: Through this ambition of governing all, all
Church government came to nothing. de Sp. S. c. ult. This governing all, which
makes the passage look as if it were directed against large Bishoprics, is not
in Basil; but without this addition Mr. Clerkson might think the citation would
not be to his purpose. The place deserves to be taken notice of: and when I
have represented it as it is in the Author, let the World judge who is most
concerned in that reproach. Every one, says that Father, (...). --
will be a Divine, tho his Soul be blemished with ten thousand spots. Hence it
is, that those who are given to change, strengthen their Faction. Impatient
ambition invades the high places of the Church without call or ordination;
despising the Economy of the Holy Ghost, and all the precepts of the Gospel.
(...).
Hence it is, that there is so much rushing upon the Offices of the Church,
every one intruding into those sacred places; and through that ambition Anarchy
has seized the Church, and the people are left without government. Hence it
is, that the exhortations of the Bishops are vain and ineffectual, because
every one is more forward to rule others than to obey; his ignorance and his
pride possessing him with a vain opinion of his own abilities. Bas. l. de Sp.
S. c. 30. p. 225.
Here is not the least notice taken, whether the Bishoprics were little or
great; much less is this confusion charged upon their too great extent. It is
ambition only that is here reproved, and the impatience of those, who when they
could not in a regular way advance themselves to the government of the Church,
became Bishops of their own making.

Upon a supposition that a Primitive Bishop had but one Congregation, Mr.
Clerkson proceeds to show, that every Congregation, which is always adequate to
a Church in his notion, had a right of ordering it self, and appointing what
rites it thought fit. And to that purpose he observes out of Socrates and
Sozomen, that in several parts of the World there were different usages and
customs. But is there any instance in antiquity of people that separated from
their Bishop and their own Church, because they would not comply with the
customs and rites received there? For instance, in Rome it was customary to
fast on Saturday; In other Countries they fasted the day before. Now did any
Roman Christian forsake his Church, because they did not fast on Friday? Or did
any African part Communion, because the Saturday was not observed there as it
was in Rome? S. Augustin's judgment in this point is well known, and
universally approved. He directs every Christian to comply with the rites and
customs of the Church where he happens to be, tho he find some things different
from the usage of his own Church. The reverence, which the Primitive Christians
had for the Forms in which they were brought up, raised in them some scruple,
when they came to observe those of other Churches to be different. But as to
their own particular rites and usages proper to each respective Country, they
were so peaceably and religiously observed, that they were never made a
pretense of Separation, or so much as the occasion of a Controversy. Some
differences indeed did arise very early between Churches of different
Countries, about the time of Easter, and rebaptizing of Heretics; but in the
conclusion, every one adhered to his own way, which he thought the best; and he
was generally blamed, who took upon him to prescribe to the rest. Let us
suppose therefore in this case an African Christian, who had lived some time in
Rome, and taken a liking to the peculiar usages of that Church, should after
his return home disparage the received order of his own Church; and to show how
much he had improved by Travel, endeavor to introduce foreign Customs: What
treatment think you would such a one have received from S. Augustine, or S.
Cyprian? Such a troubler of the peace and order of the Church would soon find
himself cast out by the severest censures, unless they might think it more
advisable to send him to the Exorcist. This was plainly the case between the
Church of England and the first Dissenters. Some of the English Exiles took I
know not what fondness to the usages of some Protestant Churches abroad, and a
strange dislike to their own way: They returned home with foreign manners, and
set them up in opposition to the order of their own Church, and at last parted
Communion upon this pretense. It is not here a place to enquire into their
reasons, or to make a comparison between what they chose and what they
rejected. This only I may be bold to say, that their Schism is without example,
either in ancient or later ages. For who ever separated from the Church of
Geneva, in favor of some peculiarities he might have seen in Zurich? Or what
Frenchman forsook the Communion of the French Churches, because they had some
Ceremonies different from those of Holland? Or did a Hollander ever run out of
the Church, because the Preacher was uncovered, out of pure zeal to the custom
of France, where the Preacher took the same liberty with the Congregation, of
being covered too? Our Church does not pretend to prescribe to any other; nor
does she think it reasonable any other should prescribe to her: but as all
other Churches use their discretion in appointing what rites they think most
meet, so does she; and is the only Church in the World, that I know, forsaken
upon that account. Yet Mr. Clerkson Prim. ep. p. 223.
tells us, that we ought to be cautious of charging one another with Schism for
such things wherein the ancient Churches are like to be involved in the same
Condemnation. As tho ancient Churches had any thing parallel to the case of our
Dissenters, or indeed any other Church. Sure I am, that the instances alleged
by Mr. Clerkson, are very wide of it; as I have showed already. For we charge
no other Churches with Schism, because they have not the same rites that we
use; nor do we so much as condemn the Dissenters upon that account. But in this
we charge them with Schism, that they have departed from the Communion of our
Church upon the account of rites; and they indeed condemning us by their
Separation upon that reason, do truly involve the ancient Churches in the same
condition.

To make the end answer the beginning, Mr. Clerkson concludes with a manifest
calumny. Hereby, says he, Prim. ep. p. 226.
it appears, with what judgment and charity some among us will have none to be
true Churches, that want Diocesan Bishops; -- they hereby blast all the
Churches in the Apostles times and the best Ages after, as no Churches. --
Herein they are as wise and friendly, as if one to secure the height of his own
Turret, should attempt to blow up all the Houses in the best part of the world;
nay they blow up their own too. It is neither wise nor friendly to charge men
with absurd opinions, of which neither they, nor perhaps any other were ever
guilty. What witness, what evidence of this matter? What Books or conversation
ever betrayed so great a weakness? I never yet heard of any man, who made it
essential to a Bishop to have many Congregations under them. The Papists have
several Bishops with a very small flock, and such as one Parish Church may
contain. They have others who have not so much as one Congregation, nor perhaps
one Christian within their Diocese. But we may guess at the men our Author
intends; they indeed distinguish, with all the ancient Churches, between a
Bishop and a Presbyter: But for the measure of Episcopal Churches, They
willingly subscribe to S. Jerome's Ep. ad Evagr.
judgment, that the Bishop of Eugubium is no less a Bishop than he of Rome; and
the Bishop of Tanis is as much a Bishop as he of Alexandria; since it is not
the greatness of the City, but the Ordination, that makes a Bishop. In the
Primitive times and those next succeeding, the extent of Dioceses were very
different. In Scythia Soz. l. 7. c. 19.
there was but one, though many Cities; and in some places there were Bishops
in Villages. Some Cities had very large Territories belonging to their Bishops,
others but small; yet all this while, these Bishops accounted themselves all of
equal authority, though their Dioceses might be very unequal; and never broke
Communion upon that account. But if some Presbyters should attempt then to
separate from their Bishops, and to set up Altar against Altar; they incurred
the censure Can. Ant. 5.
of all Christian Churches, and were shut out of Catholic Communion by
universal consent. As to matter of fact, it is plain, that in the Primitive
times there were no Churches without Bishops, such as were acknowledged
different from Presbyters. And Ignatius Ign. Ep. ad Tra^.
is bold to say, that without a Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons, it cannot be
called a Church. But as for those who separate from their Bishops, whose
doctrine they acknowledge to be sound, and set up Churches, and make Ordinations
in opposition to them, and the whole establishment of a National or Provincial
Church, These I shall not scruple to Unchurch; since in this I have not only
the suffrage of antiquity, but the consent of all Protestant Churches on my
side.

In France, while the Reformed Religion stood there, if any departed from the
established order of those Churches, they were excommunicated; and if they
should attempt to set up separate Congregations, they would have been accounted
no Churches. Hist: Eccles. de Bez. T. 2. l. 6.
How zealous they were of the Orders appointed in their Synods, will
sufficiently appear from the case of Morelli, and the proceedings against him.
Nor is it otherwise in Holland or Germany, or wherever the Reformed Religion
is received; they unchurch all, who upon such frivolous pretenses, as our
Dissenters use against us, would leave their Communion.

By this notion of Primitive Episcopacy, Mr. Clerkson Prim. Ep. p. 23^.
thinks, that some mistakes concerning Episcopal Ordinations, of ill
consequence, may be rectified. A Bishop in the best ages was no other than the
Pastor of a single Church; a Pastor of a single Congregation now, is as truly a
Bishop. -- Why they should not be esteemed to be duly ordained, who are set
apart by a Pastor of a single Church now, I can discern no reason, after I have
looked every way for it. It is the hardest thing in the world for some men to
see a reason that makes against them; and the fear of finding it, makes them
commonly look where they are not likely to meet it. However it does not seem to
be so difficult a matter to assign a reason in the case proposed. It is not the
being Pastor of one or many Congregations, that makes a Bishop, but the Order.
For a Presbyter may be the Pastor of a Congregation, and in the Primitive times
there were many such; but this does not make him a Bishop. Nay, the
Chorepiscopi were Pastors of many Congregations, and yet these were not
Bishops. If these in ancient times should have proceeded upon Mr. Clerkson's
grounds, and presumed to ordain Presbyters or Deacons or Bishops; the Church of
those times would have made no difficulty to pronounce the Ordinations null.
Ischyras pretended to be a Presbyter, because Colluthus had ordained him; but
Athanasius represents it as monstrous, that one should esteem himself a
Presbyter, who was ordained by one who died himself a Presbyter of the Church
of Alexandria. Nor was Ischyras so absurd as to think, that the Ordination
received from a simple Presbyter would be valid. For in Truth, that Colluthus
was made a Bishop by Meletius, and his name is still in the Catalogue of his
Ordinations; but renouncing his Schism, and those Orders, he was received into
communion as Presbyter; for so he was before he joined with Meletius, and in
that degree he died. Nor can I find in all Antiquity, any one instance of
Presbyters making Ordinations without a Bishop: nay, the Heretics and
Schismatics of old, among all their irregularities, are not charged by any of
this presumption. In the Diocese of Alexandria there were many Presbyters, who
were the Pastors of single Congregations; and so it was in most of the ancient
Dioceses, as we have showed before. In the Province of Scythia, there must be
yet a greater number of such Parish Pastors. Yet none of these are found to
have claimed any right to ordain: and if any of them should have presumed
against the rule of the Church in that particular, the Church of those times
would not only have declared the Ordination null, but a prodigy, and think that
Antichrist was at hand, and the world drawing toward an end, when such new and
unexampled confusions were permitted to arise. What sentence shall we think,
would they have pronounced upon Presbyterian Ordinations, when they did not
stick Can. Nic. 9, 10, 16. Can. Ant. 73.
to rescind Orders conferred by Bishops against the Canons and established
discipline of the Church; and in some cases to Nic. Can. 19.
re-ordain? Aerius, who declared there was no difference between a Bishop and a
Presbyter, is represented by Epiphanius (...) Epiph. Haer. 74. n. 1. 3.
as a prodigy, and his opinion madness, though there is no mention at all of
his Ordinations.

But the case of the Ordinations of our Dissenters is peculiar; and they do
foreign Churches great wrong, when they concern them in their quarrel. For
first, the Independents have no root of Orders, but their Pastors are of Lay
Original extraction. The Presbyterians have Ordination from Presbyters, not
only without, but in opposition to Bishops, against all the established rules
of this Church, against the Laws of the Country, as well as practice of ancient
Churches. And if upon this account we pronounce them void, we do no more than
what all the Protestant Churches abroad would do in the like case. If some
Deacons or Laymen would take upon them to ordain Pastors in the French
Churches, for separate Congregations, in opposition to the received discipline,
settled in their general Synods; I would appeal to any Minister of those
Churches, whether he held such an Ordination valid. And yet by the principles
of those Churches, Laymen may confer orders in some cases, as appears Hist.
Eccles. T. 1. l. 2.
by the first Ordination in Paris, where there was no Presbyter present; and by
the confession of Beza Hist. Eccles. T. 1. l. 4.
in the Conference of Poissy. Nay though a Presbyter deposed by their Synod,
should take upon him to ordain; I still appeal to the Ministers of those
Churches, whether they would account the Orders valid. If we therefore do judge
such Ordinations here, to be nullities, because administered by subordinate
Officers, against the Laws of the Church, in opposition to their superiors,
and against the practice and discipline of the Primitive Christians; we cannot
be thought singular in this judgment: since all ancient Churches would have
done the same thing, and all the Protestant Churches in Europe, in the like
case, would follow our example. It is in vain to cite Jerome and Chrysostom, to
lessen the difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter, because both may do
almost all the same things. Yet is Ordination still excepted, and accounted the
peculiar prerogative of the Bishop. And though in some Churches, Presbyters did
assist the Bishop in ordaining Presbyters, which is likewise the practice of
our Church; yet is there no instance of their ordaining without a Bishop.

FINIS.
Books Printed for James Adamson.
I. VIta Reginaldi Poli, Cardinalis ac Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi; and Acta
Disceptationis inter Legatos Angliae and Galliae in Concilio Constantiensi, de
utriusque Gentis Dignitate and Praerogativa; in Conciliorum Tomis desiderata.
Libri Rarissimi, olim quidem Editi, sed paucis noti, ac nullis facile obvii.
Octavo.

II. Pauli Colomesii Observationes sacrae, Editio secunda, auctior and
emendatior; accedunt ejusdem Paralipomena, de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, and
Passio sancti Victoris Massiliensis, ab eodem emendata: Editio quarta and
ultima long auctior and emendatior. Octavo.

III. The Travels of Monsieur de Thevenot into the Levant. In three parts, viz.
1. Into Turkey, 2. Persia, 3. The East Indies. In Folio.

IV. Mr. Chillingworth's Book, called [The Religion of Protestants, a safe way
to Salvation] made more generally useful by omitting Personal Contests, but
inserting whatsoever concerns the common Cause of Protestants, or defends the
Church of England, with an exact Table of Contents; and an Addition of some
genuine Pieces of Mr. Chillingworth's never before printed, viz. against the
Infallibility of the Roman Church, Transubstantiation, Tradition, etc. And an
Account of what moved the Author to turn Papist, with his Confutation of the
said Motives. In Quarto.

V. A Treatise of the Celibacy of the Clergy, wherein its Rise and Progress are
Historically considered. Quarto.

VI. A Treatise proving Scripture to be the Rule of Faith; writ by Reginald
Peacock, Bishop of Chichester, before the Reformation, about the Year 1450.

VII. Doubts concerning the Roman Infallibility. 1. Whether the Church of Rome
believe it. 2. Whether Jesus Christ or his Apostles ever Recommended it. 3.
Whether the Primitive Church knew, or used that way of deciding Controversies.

VIII. A brief Historical Account of the Behavior of the Jesuits and their
Faction, for the first twenty five Years of Queen Elizabeth's Reign; with an
Epistle of W. Watson a Secular Priest; showing how they were thought of by
other Romanists of that time. Quarto.

IX. A brief Examination of the present Roman Catholic Faith, contained in
Pope Pius his new Creed, by the Scriptures, Ancient Fathers, and their own
Modern Writers. In Quarto.


