'ANTIPPOAA, OR A DEFENSE OF THE Minister OF PENSHERST, In a Case between him
and the Earl of Leycester in Michaelmas Term, 1657.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for the Author, 1660.

(...). OR A DEFENSE OF THE Minister of Pensherst in a case between him and the
Earl of Leycester in Michaelmas Term, 1657.

THE Minister of Pensherst being settled in that Rectory by the Authority of the
Committee of Parliament, April 5. 1650. endeavored in much faithfulness a holy
Reformation there, that he might prepare a people for the Lord; in which work
he found no encouragement from the Earl of Leycester, but was put to much grief
of heart by the Earls opposition: who began a quarrel upon the Ministers denial
of letting his Lordship the Gleab land, (as sometime Ahab fell out with Naboth
about the Vineyard) taking occasion thereupon many ways to oppress him and his
afflicted family. The Lord giving the Minister patience to bear much hard
usage, he made many Christian private Addresses to his Lord-ship to give his
Lordship a right understanding of the ways of God he proceeded in in his
Ministrations, and likewise entreating him to be sensible of his many great
surferings; but no redress being given, and the cause of God suffering much by
his Lordships contests, and doing year after year worse and worse, the Minister
was pressed in conscience, at length to apply the Word of God against the Earl by
name for many public offenses in the public congregation, praying also for
him that God would reduce him from the evil of his ways, whereby he had
offended him and his chosen ones. This the Minister did upon conscience of
duty, respecting that of Saint Paul, Those that sin reprove before all, 1 Timothy
5.2
that others may fear. And wholesome pious rule of holy Augustine, Si quid
vitii in amico deprehender is (says that Father) corripe occulte, si te non
audierit, corripe palam, sunt enimbonae correptiones and plerunque meliores
quam tacita amicitia: and si laedi se putet amicus, tu tamen corripe;
tollerabiliora emm sunt amici vulnera quam adulantium oscula. If thou find
(says that Father) any fault in thy friend, blame him secretly, if he will not
hear thee, blame him openly; for reproves are good, and for the most part
better then friendship that holds its peace; If thy friend complains thou
wrongest him, yet notwithstanding reprove him still, for more tolerable are the
wounds of a friend then the kisses of a flatterer.

Indeed it fell out so, according to that word the Earl thinks himself wronged
in his honor by the Minister, who by a christian admonition endeavored to
repair it; for what could make more truly for his honor then to turn him from
sin to God, and to wash away that stain which was a blot, no badge of honor.
The Earl therefore commences a suit against the Minister, and being subtle in
Lawsuits surprises the Minister at a time when he expected no trouble, and
easily runs him down because he made little or no resistance, but commended
himself to him that judges righteously, the Lord knowing both his work, and
the integrity of his heart therein.

The words the Earl lay to the Ministers charge, were these, that he should say
of the said Earl, That he was a wicked man, a cruel Oppressor, and an enemy to
Reformation.

If the Minist had spoke these very words, might he not sufficiently have
proved the crime? let us scan the words, A cruel Oppressor; does his Lordship
call these a horrid scandal, let it be a scandal worthy to be punished by the
Judges, and let my Lord for ever be guiltless of so horrid a crime; but what
then dorh he say for himself for keeping back the Ministers dues more or less
from year to year for eight years together? For a year or two his Lordship
allows a small part for tithes, for other years nothing: if tithes were not the
Ministers right, why did his Lordship pay any? if they were his right, why did
he not pay all? Is it not oppression to withhold 12 li. per an. for eight or
ten years together from a Minister.

Again, Is it not oppression to plant a Warren next to a Ministers Gleab-land,
and fence it on every side but where it lies to the gleab, whereby the Minister
was damaged for eight years together by the gain of his Lordships Warren ten
pound a year without any satisfaction or commiseration. This was the way indeed
to have the Vineyard when it was denied, and rent free too.

Again, Was it not oppression to seize upon part of the Ministers Gleab, to dig
up and carry away trees from the Gleab at his Lordships pleasure, contrary to
all right and common justice, to arrest the Minister and his servants causlesly
(unless it were because the Minister had too much patience, and would not be
provoked to begin Law with the Oppressor) to vex, and worrie, and disquiet him
in the work of the Ministry. If the common Law of England (alas to much
corrupted) will not account this Oppression, will not God declare against it as
horrible oppression and violence? yea, and will not all good men's consciences
condemn and detest it, if the like were done to themselves? What is this man's
conscience made of, if it sleep and acquit him as righteous after all this?

And for an enemy to Reformation.
If the Earl of Leycestor were not an enemy to the good work of Reformation
endeavored by the Minister, why drew he off, seeing that our Lord Christ
declares, That he that is not for him, is against him? and why were those that
shunned the purifying of Gods ordinances admitted to the Table of the Lord so
freely at his Lordships chapel? if his Lordship had to object against the way
of the Gospel offered to the Church by the Minister in writing, why did he not
disprove it? if his mouth was stopped, was he not then an enemy to that holy
Reformation which he discouraged? yea, was not he an enemy to Reformation that
sent a Copy of the Ministers way and discipline to his Lawyers to see if their
subtilty could pick our a Praemunire of it? Will not the stones and the timber
cry out of the wall and witness against such repugnancy and enmity to Christ
and the precious unblamable way of Gospel worship? if these things do not
evidence the crime which are but lightly touched, worse then these if God
please to give time for inquiry may be made to appear, before the great day of
the Lord come when he must look to be discovered before the world. But the
Minister because he applied the word of God in the Congregation against the
Earls sin in other expressions, not these, therefore he pleaded not guilty; but
the Earl having got witness, and a Jury after his heart at Lent Assizes 1656.
in Kent, Verdict was given for the Plantiffe, 500 li. damages: See yet more
cruelty, cruel man, and yet more cruel Law! why? what did the words deserve
that a Jury of men should give such damages upon them? The Lord chief Justice
Glin professed upon the Bench they were not so much as actionable at Common
Law, and so not worth two pence, and must they be judged at 500 l. that were
not worth two pence? In Queen Mary's days the Statute allowed but 100 li. upon
those that had spoken horrid forgeries and scandals against the King or Queen,
and is 500 li. given for words against the Earl of Leyecster, shall I say not
scandalous? to the quick subversion of an innocent Minister and family indeed,
but who would judge those words (of no public concernment) to amount to the
quick subversion of the Realm, as the Earl prerends in his declaration? see how
sin grows till it be fully ripe; from Enmity to open contests, from open
contests to open bloodshed, and devouring of Gods innocent people, as the
Prophet Micah observes, Ye heads of Jacob and Peers of the house of Israel,
Mic. 3.1, 2, 3
is it not for you to know judgment? who hate the good, and love the evil, who
pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones, who
so eat the flesh of my people, and flay the skin from off them, and they break
their bones, and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as flesh within the
Caldron, as if rage could never be satisfied.

(...). The just God saw all this, and records it against a day of vengeance,
and says, v. 4. Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them:
he will even bide his face from them at that time, as they have behaved
themselves ill in their doings.

When the case was pondered before the Judges of the Upper Bench for an Arrest
of Judgment, the two Judges were divided upon the case, one for the Plantiffe,
the others for the Defendant: so that there was an Arrest for two terms, then
at length is Justice Newdigate put upon the bench, and the scales were turned,
but the Judges having perused the cause, and seeing in their consciences the
grievousness of it, sent three messages to the Earl to stop him from taking out
Execution, or molesting the Minister upon the case: nevertheless the Earl that
drove on so furiously hitherto, could not be persuaded by the Judges to stop
his course, but took out execution upon Execution, three Writs of Fieri facias
within the space of one year, and another Writ in the year following, sezing at
several times the Ministers Corn, and Kine, and Horses, Wood, Hay, Wagons, Bed
and Bedding from under him and his Children, and servants, and all the household
furniture he could light on, even to the poultry about the house, and things of
the smallest consequence that could add a groat to the Inventory, and that in
the bitterest time of Winter, and yet all this is done by the Earl who would
not be accounted cruel. This was an hour of darkness, but yet the Lord ordered
it with such unexpected unseen, and admirable recompense of his love, as that
though we walked in darkness, and saw no light of relief, yet we could trust in
the name of the Lord, and stay upon our God. We are troubled on every side, yet
not distressed, we are perplexed, but not in despair, persecuted, but not
forsaken, cast down, but not destroyed, always bearing about in the body the
dying of the Lord Jesus, that the Life also of Jesus might be made manifest in
our body, for we which live are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake,
that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh.

This was the first case wherein the Peerage enjoyed their privileges after
the act of the Commonwealth which took away the house of Peers; and must this
be the first case whereupon those privileges are built again that were in so
many Presidents laid aside? Must a Minister for reproveing of sin, and his
whole family also, be plundered and destroyed to bear up the unsupportable
burden of this unprofitable greatness; there was cruelty enough before without
Law, and must there be much more mischief framed by a Law? For ever let the
Plantiffe be acquitted, and his cruelty not made mention of in regard of the
transcendent cruelty of such Law. O ye Courts of Justice, ye Thrones of them
that are called Gods, is this to do like God? God says, Relieve the oppressed,
judge the Fatherless, plead for the widow; and do you crush the oppressed,
condemn and destroy the innocent, and outvie in cruelty the man that is
blemished before you for cruelty?

Ye Jurats upon whose account God will set these damages, how could you think
in your consciences 500 li. a just proportion for words; for words not so much
as actionable in the opinion of the Judges? would you think it just that others
should mere the the measure to you again? can you look upon your Verdict, and
hear what has been done upon a spoiled Family, and not say, we are verily more
guilty then the cruel Oppressor.

Ye Honorable Judges, professed Patrons of the afflicted, who should have been
afflicted in the afflictions of Joseph, and as Judah have rescued him; you that
could not imagine any cruelty under a title of honor, or think that your
messages would be of less acceptance and power with the Plantiffe then your
sentence; have not you cause also to say, as Joseph's brethren, Verily we are
guilty concerning our brother in that we saw the Anguish of his soul, when he
besought us, and we would not hear.

The Lord give you to know, and to have true remorse for what you have done,
that it may not be laid to your charge in the great day of the Lord.

You had little reason for what you have done, let us come closer to the
matter, and prove it, that you had no Law neither.

I shall reason it logically and plainly thus,

That Judgment is unjust where there is no Law to warrant it,

But this Judgment has no Law to warrant it,

Ergo, This Judgment is unjust:

If there were any Law transgressed that could give occasion for such a
Judgment, then it must be either the Common Law or Statute Law (for no other
Law is pretended to by the Plantiffe) but neither of these is transgressed,
therefore there is no Law transgressed to ground the judgment upon, and so it
must be confessed to be unjust.

The Common Law can be no ground for this judgment, for it was yielded by the
Judges (the Lord Chief Justice Glin acknowledging it in open Court) that the
words alleged would not bear action at Common Law.

If the Statute Law be transgressed (which were most absurd to say, that words
which by the Common Law are not actionable, should be counted by the Statute
Law to be horrible forgeries, subverting the Commonwealth; by common Law not
worth a farthing, and by Statute Law set up to 500 li.) but I say, if any
Statute of this Nation be violated, the honorable Plantiffe ought to have
mentioned it, and concluded his Declaration Sub forma Statuti; but the
Plantiffe does not mention any Statute Law transgressed, hereupon the Judges of
the Upper Bench were divided in their opinions: Judge Warberton judging the
Declaration void upon this default, though the Lord chief Justice Glin allowed
it.

But let this fault pass, and let it be supposed that the Action be intended
upon the Statute of Richard the second: we shall through Gods help prove that
the words alleged by the honorable Plantiffe cannot be concluded within that
Statute, and thererefore there is no Law to warrant it.

The Statute runs thus.
Anno secundo Rich secundi, Cap. 5.
FOR Devisors of false News, and of horrible and false lies, of Prelates,
Dukes, Earls, Barons, and other Nobles, and great men of the Realm, and also of
the Chancellor Treasurer, Clark of the privy seal, Steward of the Kings house,
Justice of the one Bench, or of the other, and of other great Officers of the
Realm; of things which by the said Prelates, Lords, Nobles and Officers
aforesaid were never spoken, done nor thought, in great slander of the said
Prelates, Lords and Officers, whereby Debates and Discords might arise between
the said Lord, or betwixt the Lords and Commons, (which God forbid) and whereof
great peril and mischief might come to all the Realm, and quick subversion and
destruction of the said Realm, if due remedy be not provided.

It is straightly defended upon grievous pain for to eschew the said damages and
perils, that from henceforth none be so hardy, to devise, speak or tell any
false news, lies, or other such false things of Prelates, Lords, and of other
aforesaid, whereof discord, or any slander might arise within the same Realm:
and he that does the same shall incur and have the pain another time ordained
thereof by the Statute of Westminster, etc.

Now the Argument we draw to prove that this Statute cannot warrant the
judgment, bears three parts, first to prove that the words are not concluded
Sub subjecto Statuti, within the Subject of that Statute.

Secondly, That the words are not concluded Sub materia Statuti, within the
Matter of the Statute.

Thirdly, That the words are not concluded Sub fine Statuti, within the End of
the Statute.

That we may not carry forth this dispute into a volumne, we shall insist only
upon the first of these, That the words are not comprehended within the Subject
of that Statute, and contract all into five Arguments:

Its proved thus, if the honorable Plantiffe be not a person comprehended
under the Subject of that Statute, then are not the words comprehended under
the Subject of that Statute: now that the Plantiffe is not a person
comprehended under the Subject of that Statute, I crave leave to argue thus,

If he be not qualified as the Statute supposes, then is not he a person
comprehended under the Subject of that Statute: here therefore is the main
point, Whether the Earl be qualified, so as that Statute does suppose to make
him Subjestum capax, a Subject capable of the privilege of that Statute; for
if he be not, he cannot have a privilege by this Statute: Let us therefore
fairly debate the point, and we reason thus;

The persons specified in the Statute are Barons of the Realm, as the first
words import, Barons, Nobles, and great men of the Realm: Now those that were
Barons of the Realm, were not titulary Barons, but Parlamentary Barons.

But the Earl of Leycester is no such Parliamentary Baron, as the Act of the
Commonwealth for abolishing the house of Lords intimates; therefore by what
right can his Lordship claim the privilege of this Statute?

The Act for abolishing the House of Peers.
THe Commons of England assembled in Parliament, finding by too long
experienee, that the House of Lords is useless and dangeruus to the people of
England to be continued, have thought fit to ordain and enact; and be it
ordained and enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the
same, that from hence forth the House of Lords in Parliament, shall be, and is
hereby wholly abolished, and taken away. And that the Lords shall not from
hence forth meet or sit in the said house, called the Lords house, or in any
other house or place whatsoever, as a house of Lords, nor shall sit, vote,
advice, adjudge, or determine of any matter or thing whatsoever as a house of
Lords in Parliament.

Nevertheless it is hereby declared, that neither such Lords as have demeaned
themselves with Honor, Courage and Fidelity to the Commen-wealth, nor their
Posterities who shall continue so, shall be excluded from the Public
Counsels of the Nation, but shall be admitted hereunto, and have their free
vote in Parliament if they shall be thereunto elected as other Persons of
interest, elected and qualified thereunto, ought to have. And be it further
ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no Peer of this Land, not
being elected, qualified and sitting in Parliament as aforesaid, shall claim
have or make use of any privileges of Parliament either in relation to his
person, quality, or Estate, any Law, usage or custom to the contrary
notwithstanding:

Die Lunae 19. Martii 1648.
If any will be so perverse and so much opposite to sense, as to say, the Earl
may claim the privilege of this Statute, though he have nothing but an empty
Title (if any such be left him whose Creation stands not in a Title, but in a
work and capacity to serve the State) against this we shall argue from the
very original Creation of Parliamentary Barons, which it recorded thus,

Henry the third out of the multitude of those Barons that were in his time,
whereof some were seditieus, chose out a certain number of good men, and by
Writ called them to Parliamentary Councels: This Rule Edward the first and his
Successors kept to, and thereupon they alone were accounted Barons regni or
Barons of the Realm. Afterward Richard the second, and some Kings after him
created Barons by their patent and putting on of Robes, and both these forms
were in use whiles that order and constitution held, and those that are thus
created Barons, are called Barons Parliamenti or Barons Regni, to difference
them from others that were only nominal or titulary Barons.

These Parliamentary Barons had not only a mere Title or name, but were all of
them by birth Peers of the Realm, Et Consiliarii nati, and were created by the
Kings Writ Ad tractandum de arduis regni negotiis and consilium de iis
impendendum. Now to these belonged the privilege to be judged by their Peers,
to judge upon their Faith and honor, not upon oath to be beheaded for crimes
deserving death, to be free from Arrests and the privilege granted by the
Statute of Richard the second, Now hence the Argument holds firm; that if not
titulary Barons but Parliamentary Barons only, according to the first
constitution were honored with these Privileges, when any Baron ceases to be
Parliamentary, his privildges must cease.

To say therefore that merely titular Barons are capable of this privilege,
were to say, that Henry the third when he instituted this Order of
Parliamentary Baons, in contradistiction to other Barons gave both alike
privileges, and so as amply honored the seditious as the most trusty and
faithful, which were the greatest absurdity that could be imposed; a thing
contrary to the Rules and grounds of true honor.

The second Argument to prove that the Earl is not a Subject qualified, as that
Statute imports, may be offered from well grounded reason; thus,

When the ground of a Privilege is taken away, needs must it be conceived the
privilege it self is therewith taken away; but the ground of this privilege
is taken away, Ergo.

For the minor proposition. The privilege conferred by Statute upon Nobles,
Barons and Peers above ordinary sort of men, must needs have its ground in that
high capacity and native right the Nobles were invested with to serve the
Commonwealth in more eminent manner then ordinary men; and to evince this,
that this was indeed the ground of that privilege, therefore great Officers of
state about the King, who were no Peers, yet of great usefulness, are
privileged also by this Statute as well as Lords and Nobles of the Land; it
being thought meet that men of eminent service above other men should be
endowed with privileges above the common sort of men: but now this ground
fails upon the abolishing the house of Lords, their high capacity for public
service being taken away, how can it be therefore but the privilege also must
fail with it?

Shall my Lord the Plaintiff be in a capacity by a privilege to undo his
poor neighbors, and not in a capacity to preserve them? or can it be imagined
that the Parliament have took away from Peerage its chief power and capacity to
do good, and left nothing but a power to do hurt, a sting to wound, but no balm
to heal? God forbid: till then the plantiffe be re-instated in such a capacity
for public high service, as is meet to be a ground for so high a privilege,
let him forbear to assume it, for I think no man will see reason for it.

Can there be heat in a Chimny when the fire is put out? or water in the
Channel when the fountain is dried up; or light in the horizon, when the Sun is
gone down? or a house remain standing when the foundation is took away? no more
can a privilege remain when the reason or ground thereof is abolished.

The third Argument, A causa finali, from the final cause or end specified in
the Statute, whereupon this privilege was given the Nobles, I reason thus, If
the end or final cause for which this privilege was granted the Peers be
frustrated, the privilege must be also frustrated, but the end for which this
privilege was granted, the Peers seems to be frustrated; Ergo, this privilege
it self must fall, and be frustrated also. Let us then examine the end
wherefore this privilege was given the Nobles, and it is expressed plainly in the
Statute, To prevent disturbance and quick subversion of the Commonwealth.
Scandals of a high nature and horrible forgeries that tend Per se to make
Divisions between Nobles, being laid upon any one of the Nobles of the Realm,
it was thought thereby the whole Commonwealth might quickly be disturbed and
distracted; and therefore such an Offense was to be severely punished.

Its true indeed, as Aristotle observes, it fell out in Syracuse contests
between two chief Magistrates, there endangered the ruin of the whole
Commonwealth: and so it was supposed by this Statute, that contests between
the Nobles and persons in great office, might happily endanger the Commonwealth
by civil wars, and therefore to prevent such differences apt to be fomented by
false reports, carried to and fro to incense the spirits of great men one
against the other: therefore I say was this Statute made.

But now that the house of Lords is abolished, and the Peers cease to be chief
Senators and Officers of State, and have no such public trust as then, the
danger is not now as then; and therefore no ground for the privilege to be now
as then.

The fourth Argument from want of Presidents in the case.

Was there ever any commonwealth, or any age of the world wherein men of great
Titles, and little or no use in public administrations enjoyed, such a
privilege as this is above those that in virtue, wealth and serviceableness to
the State, do far exceed them.

Or is there any one president upon Engish Records, since the Act of the
Commonwealth, for abolishing the house of Lords, to prove that any one of the
Nobles had their privileges allowed them before this case? The Lord Arundel,
Lord Shandois, and others it seems had not their privilege (though desired)
granted them, and what reason that the Earl of Leycester only should have his
privilege granted him? If the old privileges belong to all Peers, why were
they not granted others? If they belong to none, why are they given the Earl of
Leycester? Surely either other of the Nobles, have had much wrong, or this man
has more then his right.

The fifth Argument, to prove that one that ceases to be a Parliamentary Baron,
is no meet subject for the privilege which the Statute of Richard the second
allows, may be drawn from the Act of the Commonwealth in this manner.

THE giving Privileges to the Peers by sitting in Parliament, argues they had
not them before upon account of their Title; for what need has a man to have
that given him, which he has already of his own? Or what privileges does the
Act give the Lords by sitting in Parliament, if they had better without sitting?

Now by the Act of March 19. 1648. it is granted that Peers qualified and
elected to sit in Parliameent, shall have the privileges of Parliament, both
to their Person, Quality, and Estate, and not otherwise.

What are those privileges? If the ordinary privileges of Parliament, then
they had no more privilege then the rest of the Commons of England; if they
were extraordinary privileges belonging to them as Lords, it argues then they
had them not without this grant, upon the score of their dignity and Title,
which is as much as we expect to have granted us, and then it must needs
follow, that their privileges are grounded upon a parliamentary capacity, and
not upon a mere Title.

In the last words therefore of the Act this is clearly expressed, That no Peer
of this land not being elested, qualified, and sitting in Pariiament, shall
claim, have or make use of any privilege of Parliament, either in relation to
his person, quality or Estate, any Law, Usage or custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

The Objections were so frivolous, that were made in this case, that men even
of ordinary capacity and reason would nauseat them as slight, and too light to
weigh a grain in the scales that Justice holds in her hands, and I purposely
omit them as not worthy to trouble the READER farther.

As likewise I wave other Arguments copious and strong, upon the Subject, and
upon the matter, and upon the end of the Statute of Ric. the second, to prove
that these pretended words, (if they had been spoken) yet could not be
comprehended under that Statute.

But these perhaps will be thought clear and sufficient enough to convince that
this Judgment was unjustly given, and cruelly executed; which I leave to the
Lord to redress in his time, beseeching him of his wonted grace to give us all
joy and patience in suffering.

FINIS

