THE BRUISED REED, OR A SERMON Preached at the Cathedral Church of St. ASAPH,
FOR THE Support of weak Christians,

By D. MAVRICE D. D. sometime Chaplain in New College, OXON.



OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER, 1700.

Matthew. 12.20. A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he
not quench, 'till he send forth judgment unto victory.
IF the Scope of this Chapter be seriously considered, it may be of use to
Preachers, and Hearers, (a division, which contains all the Members of the
Church universal, the whole Christian World) for, in the Pharisees here, all
Hearers may see what is to be avoided, and, in Christ, all Preachers may see
what is to be practiced, by what is culpable in the one, and commendable in the
other.

1. The Pharisees entertain hard thoughts of that great Prophet of his Church,
which was sent to bring them from Darkness to Light, and from those devious
paths of Superstition, and Errors, which they ran into, unto the way of Life,
and Salvation. Secondly, This Prejudice against their Teacher was a strong Bolt
upon the Doors of their Hearts, that hindered them from [(...)] receiving the
Truth in the Love of it. Thirdly, They proceed to blaspheme Christ's Doctrine,
and are offended at his Followers, and, from the weakness of the Disciples in
plucking the ears of corn on the Sabbath day, they take occasion to oppose the
Gospel, as if it were a door opened by Christ to Licentiousness, and
Profaneness. Fourthly, They have a cloak for their Malice, namely the strict
command of observing the Sabbath, though indeed it was (as Christ proves) but
their own superstitious Conceit, and false Exposition of the Command, for the
Law allowed of Works of Necessity, such as plucking the ears of corn to satisfy
Hunger, and Works of Mercy, such as healing the man with the withered hand on
the Sabbath day. Fifthly, They were obstinate in their Errors, and would not
be convinced by him, that was Truth it self, though he endeavored it by
Scripture, Reasons, and Examples, and those so strong, and forcible, that they
could not gainsay them. Sixthly, The Prejudice in their Hearts broke out at
their Lips, in calling him a devil, and their Malice was vented in their
Counsels, and Purposes, to kill him; so that (as all the Expositours, that I
have read on the 31. and 32. v. conclude) they stopped not 'till they sinned
against the holy Ghost, which is the unpardonable Sin spoken of there.
Therefore let Hearers take heed lest they give place to the Devil, by
entertaining any Prejudices against the Persons, Conversation, or Doctrine, of
their Teachers, for that (if cherished) will break out into opprobrious
Speeches, and, at last, end in a wilful Opposition to the Truth, against
Knowledge, and Conscience, and in a bidding defiance to the Almighty. Take heed
you stand not against Convictions, and avoid that rock of offense, on which the
Pharisees suffered Shipwreck, but open the windows of your Souls, that the
Light of the glorious Gospel may shine in your Hearts, and that you may walk as
Children of the Light in your Lives.

2. Here is a Pattern proposed to Preachers, the grand Exemplar for us to write
after, the LORD JESUS; and that in the Prophecy, and the History. First, In
supporting the weak Disciples, and defending them against the Aspersions, and
Calumnies of their Adversaries, as you may read in the Beginning of this
Chapter. Secondly, In stopping the Mouths of Gainsayers with invincible
Arguments, drawn from Scripture, Reasons, Authority, and Examples, v. 3, 4,
etc. Thirdly, In Meekness, Patience, and Calmness of Spirit, withdrawing
himself from the hand of Violence, and going where he might do more good, v.
14, 15, etc. Fourthly, In Mercyfulness, and Tenderness to Men's Souls, and
Bodies, in Diligence, and Constancy, in Preaching and doing good, without any
leaven of Ostentation, or vain Glory, v. 15, 16. for he charged them that they
should not make him known. Fifthly, In encouraging, and cherishing the least
measure of Grace, wherever he found it, and using all means to bring it to
perfection, as in the Text, A bruised reed shall he not break, etc. For there
is in the words a Litote, where less is spoken, than is meant, and a double
Metaphor expressing the wonderful Mildness, Gentleness, and Tenderness of
Christ toward his weak Servants, who are so feeble as a Reed, and that bruised
too, not only tossed too and fro, like a Reed, by every wind of temptation, but
bruised, dejected, and cast down, not able to stand, or look up toward Heaven,
being so full of Deadness, and Diffidence, and Despondency. Such weak Believers
he is so far from slighting, trampling upon, and laying aside, (as well he
might, as being unprofitable and useless, for what is a Reed, crushed, and
bruised good for, unless it be for the Fire?) that he will encourage, support,
and strengthen, them.

And, when poor Believers are as smoking flax, having the least Sparkle of
Grace in them, for (as the Proverb is, there is no smoke without some fire,
though it be buried in ashes) Christ will be so far from despising the day of
small things, and extinguishing this Sparkle, that he will cherish, and nourish
it, and blow it to a Flame, [(...), donec pronunciet sententiam, qua se
victorem declaret omnium inimicorum suorum,] 'Till he pronounces the Sentences,
and declares himself the Conqueror of his, and their, spiritual Enemies, that
would really break the bruised reed, and quench the smoking flax.

Having thus stripped the Text of it is Rhetorical Garments, the Observation is
naked and plain, and that is this, The Lord Jesus is very tender of weak
Christians, and exceeding careful to preserve the least measure of Grace in
them. I am not ignorant that some take the Words for Christ's merciful dealing
with troubled Consciences, and afflicted Souls, that are bruised, and crushed
under the sense of Divine Wrath for Sin, that are full of Doubts, and Fears,
touching their everlasting Condition, without any Candlelight of God's
Countenance, and Favor. But I conceive the Metaphor may reach both Senses,
especially the first; and methinks the learned Jesuit Maldonate hits the nail
on the head, when he says, Adeo quiet, and attente ambulabit, ut, etiamsi
super arundinem quassatam ambulet, tamen non confringet, He will tread so
tenderly, so warily, so gingerly, that, though he tread upon a bruised Reed, yet
it shall be no more bruised for him. I proceed therefore to handle the point;
which I shall endeavor to do by showing, I. What is the least measure of
Grace; II. That Christ is tender of such; III. How he does show it; IV. The
Reasons why he does so; V. and Lastly, Apply the whole to our selves.


I. First then I am to show what is that, which we may term the least measure
of Grace, the minimum quod non of Grace, without which a Man cannot, upon
Scripture Grounds, be denominated gracious, and having which he may be assured
that he is translated from death to life, and that he is in the state of Grace,
a Child of God, a new born Babe of Grace, and an Heir in hope of the Kingdom of
Glory.

And truly I find by experience the necessity of meditating upon, and handling
of, this Subject by us Ministers, who are often to deal with sick Persons on
their Deathbeds for to administer unto them some spiritual Physic for the
health of their Souls. It Is the usual Practice, and Method of our grand Enemy,
the Devil, to act the part of Job's Wife, by endeavoring to make a Believer to
curse God before he dies, in presenting him with his Sins in the magnifying,
and multiplying, Glass of the Law, and so tempting him to despair if he can; at
least he will blow out the Candle, that the poor Christian is forced to go to
his Bed of Earth in the dark. This Prince of Darkness will cast a mist between
the Christian's Eye of Faith, and the Sun of Righteousness, that he shall not
be able to see the Light of God's Countenance, and then Death must needs be a
King of Terrors to him. Therefore to be well satisfied in this particular must
exceedingly encourage a Believer, and infinitely comfort him in that day of
Trouble, and Trial, when he is upon the Brink of Eternity, even now entering
into those Mansions of Glory, and Satan treading upon his Heel endeavoring to
send him halting thither, when he cannot shut the Door against him. This
Subject therefore is well worth your Christian Attention, and serious
Consideration. Yet before I proceed to my first Proposal, I must necessarily
premise two things.

1. That it is very difficult for any one to discern in himself whether he has
the least measure of Grace, whether he be this bruised reed or no? though in it
self it is easily discernable, and therefore the Schoolmen distinguish betwixt
Grace in natura sua and Grace in persona gratiosa, Grace in Idea, and Grace in
subjecto; in it is own Nature it is easy to know it by plain Scripture Rules, and
Signs, but, in the gracious Person, it is hard for him, by a reflex act of
Faith, to perceive it, for these Reasons. First, as there is [(...),] a
damnable self Love, and self Conceit, in the ungodly, so is there a self
Prejudice in the Godly; the one is blown up with a false, ill grounded, Hope,
and the other is kept down by a weak Faith; it is therefore equally difficult to
make the one believe he has Grace, as the other to believe he has none: for so
indeed the Scripture describes them; the true Believer is poor in spirit, low,
and vile, in his own Eyes, the greatest of sinners, and the least of all
Saints, and therefore he hungers and thirsts after Righteousness in a deep
sense of the want of it; the other is of a Laodicean temper, lukewarm in his
Devotions, careless in his Profession, being rich, and full, and seeing no need
of any thing, when indeed he wants all things, his Riches are but Emptiness,
the Lord will send him empty away; so we find the proud hypocritical Pharisee
blown up (like the Toad in the Fable) with the wind of self applause, lifting
himself above his Brethren by his odious Comparisons, when the poor humble
Publican, by a serious Reflection on the Infirmity of his Nature, had not so
much Confidence as to look up. Secondly, It Is hard to discern the least measure
of Grace, because false Grace so nearly resembles it. There has been a great
deal of stir kept in the late times about common Grace, and special Grace, true
Grace, and counterfeit, whether they differed gradually, or specifically, and,
if they differed specifically, whether morally, or physically; and many such
Distinctions, and Notions, I think, to little purpose; at last it was
concluded, (by the Combatants) that there was a specifical moral Difference
between them, as between Virtue, and Vice, as Virtue and Vice do differ
gradually, and yet specifically too, as for example, the excessive degree of
Liberality, which is a Virtue, is Prodigality, which is a Vice. But, however
they differ in themselves, it is certain from Scripture, and Examples, that the
true Believer, especially the weak Believer, and the Hypocrite, do differ very
little; yea many times the Hypocrite exceeds the truly pious in outward
appearance, which will appear if we consider the Repentance of Ahab, the Zeal
of Jehu, the Faith, and Joy, that were in the Hearers compared to the stony
ground, and how Herod heard John the Baptist gladly, and did many things, and
there was but one thing lacking in the young Man in the Gospel, to wit his
secret Sin of Covetousness, which was the only Remora, that kept him from
Christ; and so blameless was the outward Conversation of Judas among the
Disciples, that each of them might suspect himself to be the Traitor, as well
as he. This makes many a poor Christian to work out his salvation with fear,
and trembling, and to endeavor to outrun the most refined Hypocrite in the
race that is set before him: and this makes the least measure of Grace so
imperceptible by us. It Is the Lord Jesus alone, that has the fan in his hand,
who will thoroughly purge his floor, and separate the wheat from the chaff.

2. The second thing to be premised is, that, wherever the least measure of
Grace is, there will be a longing desire, and an earnest endeavor after more
Grace, and a constant use of the means appointed for the obtaining of it. But
the hypocritical Professor is contented, if he can keep up a more formal
Profession, and an external Conformity, so far, as to keep up his Reputation
among Men, and he cares for no more. If he knew how much Grace would bring him
once within the Precincts of Heaven, he would never look after one degree of
Grace more. But the truly gracious, like St. Paul, forgets the things, that are
behind, and reaches forward to the things, that are before, and still presses
toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus,
Phil. 3.13, 14. he is as eager for the obtaining of that Perfection of Grace,
which accompanies, the Resurrection from the dead, as he was in persecuting the
Church, wherein he confesses he was mad, and enraged with a furious blind
Zeal, for he expresses both by the same word (...), Acts 20.11. compared with
Phil. 3.14.

And that is the reason why the Acts, and Exercise of Grace are expressed, in
Scripture, in terms of Indigency, and Industry, such as poverty, hunger,
thirst, panting, breathing, running, wrestling, pressing forward, following
hard after, striving, earnest seeking, fighting, resisting even to blood, etc.
Oh, says the true Believer, that I had communion with God, and a sense of his
Favor, and the light of his Countenance upon me! for that would be better than
Life. Oh! had I an Interest in Christ, and the assurance of it, and I should
never grieve more; oh! could I obtain a mortifying, strengthening, Grace, and a
dead blow to every Lust, 'twere enough. This is the Christian's (...) in every
Ordinance. These things, premised, I now come to my first Proposal, viz. to
show what is the least measure of Grace: this I shall do by considering two
things:

1. What Infirmities they are, which do not necessarily exclude it, or with
which it may be consistent.

2. (To come nearer to our purpose) What are it is Effects, without which there
can be no measure of Grace.

As to the first, those Infirmities are chiefly three,

1. The least measure of Grace may consist with a great measure of Ignorance,
for the best and strongest do know but in part, and the great Doctor of the
Gentiles includes himself in the number 1 Cor. 13.9, 12. And Christ's own
Disciples were unacquainted with the very fundamental Principles of Religion,
such as the Resurrection of the dead, 'till they saw it with their Eyes, in
Christ's Resurrection.

2. It may consist with a great many Doubts, and Fears touching our everlasting
Condition; for the assurance of Faith is a Love-token, which Christ sends from
Heaven, but to very few, strong, well-grown Christians; lest it should be
abused to Licentiousness, Slothfulness, and carnal Security; and as much as is
wanting of that (...), (the Apostle speaks of, Heb. 10.22.) full assurance of
Faith, so much of Doubts and Fears are there in the Soul; as it is in hot
Water, whatever is short of the extreme Degrees of Heat, there are so many
Degrees of Cold in it, so it is for Faith, and Doubts. Though Faith indeed, as
it is considered objectively for an Act of the Soul laying hold on Christ,
admits of no Degrees, but considered as an Habit infused, it increases or
diminishes according to the Believer's Care, and Industry: yea it is no hard
matter to prove that Abraham himself, the father of the faithful, did very much
falter in his Faith, Genesis 15.4. The Lord made him a promise of seed by Sarah,
and yet, out of Diffidence of God's Promise, he went in unto his maid; else
certainly, had his Faith been exercised, he might soon have silenced Sarah,
when she made the motion in Genesis 16.2. Behold now the Lord restrained me from
bearing, I pray thee go in unto my maid. And in Genesis 17.18. he discovers the
weakness of his Faith again; for, when God had told him he would give him a son
by Sarah, v. 16. he prays for Ishmael there; and that this proceeded from the
weakness of his Faith appears clearly from the Lord's Answer to that Prayer, v.
19. And God said Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed, and thou shall
call his name Isaac, as if he should say, Why do thou doubt of my Promise,
and misbelieve my Word, and, out of that diffidence of a Child by Sarah, do
thou pray for Ishmael? I tell thee again thou shall have a Son by Sarah, and
that indeed, and of a truth. And how often does Christ upbraid his Disciples
with this? O ye of little faith; and where there is but little Faith, there is
much Doubtings, but none dare deny they had Grace, therefore the least measure
of Grace is consistent with much Doubtings and Fears.

3. There may be the least measure of Grace where there are many, and strong,
Corruptions, as we read of Rahab, Sampson, and others, that were guilty of
repeating the same Sins, and those of the first magnitude, and yet we see them
reckoned among the Faithful, Heb. 11. It Is true the least measure of true Grace
disposseth the old Man of the Heart, that Sin shall not sit on the Throne there
any more, the Believer is not the Servant of Sin, nor allows the least Sin in
himself. In the ungracious Person, Sin, and Satan, rule the roast, and all is
quiet, but, when a stronger than he comes, to wit the Lord Jesus, he is
dispossessed, and so it is no longer Satan's House, he loses his Title, and Sin
is but an Usurper, though it remains there, and thence comes the lasting Combat
betwixt Flesh, and Spirit, having their Vicissitudes of Prevalency over each
other. This made an eminent Champion in Christianity complain, Romans 7.19. For
the good, that I would, I do not, but the evil which I would not, that I do:
how much more prevalent are Lusts in a weak Christian!

But Secondly, As to it is Effects, they are again chiefly three: for,

1. Where there is a measure of Grace, there is a filial Fear of God; which,
when strong Temptations are ready to prevail, will come in to the Soul's
rescue, and make a Believer to say with Joseph, How shall I do this great evil
and Sin against God? against that good God, that has done me good, and not
evil, all my days? against a holy and just God, which cannot abide Iniquity,
and will render unto me, and to every one according to our works? against an
all-seeing God, that see'th in secret, and rewards openly? And, as this Fear
fortifys the Soul against presumptuous Sins, so it spurs the Soul on to run the
ways of God's commandments; and therefore it is coupled with the keeping of
God's Commands, as the cause, and the effect, as the means, and the end, fear
God, that thou may keep his commandments: This fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom, it is the primum vivens, and ultimum moriens, the very
heart of the new Creature, for, as soon as ever spiritual Life is breathed into
the Soul, this Fear and Awe of God mingles it self with all the Thoughts,
Words, and Actions; and this Fear too lays the Top-stone in the spiritual
Building, for we are to perfect holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.

2. Where there is a measure of Grace, there is a desire to fear God, Neh.
1.11. Lord hear the prayers of thy servants, that desire to fear thy name; they
could not say they feared his name, but might boldly say they desired it. And,
as it is in Sin, a Desire, though it proceeds no farther, is a Sin, so gracious
Desires are accepted of God, and the will to do good is taken for the deed. As
Heart-adultery, and Heart-murther, (though terminated in the Will, yet) are great
Sins in the sight of God, so are the gracious Ebullitions and holy Breathings
of the Soul, as precious in his sight, as the other are odious. But, lest any
should turn this Grace of God into Wantonness, you must consider that this
Desire has it is Concomitants, and Properties to attend it, which distinguishes
it from the cold, lazy Velleities of the ungodly, for it is, First, a serious,
hearty Desire, Secondly, a lasting, growing Desire, Thirdly, it is mingled with
Sorrow, that it can go no farther, Fourthly, it is attended with a Restlessness
'till it can proceed to act, Fifthly, it drives the Believer therefore often on
his Knees to beg Strength to do, as well as to will, Sixthly, it is such as is
opposed, and resisted by Temptations, that would quench it, this is the smoking
flax.

3. and Lastly, Where there is a measure of Grace, there is a real Love to the
Children of God, as such; if you love God's Image of Holiness wherever you meet
with it, in the poor, as well as in the rich, it is a sign that you are
translated from Darkness to Light, and from death to life, as says the
Apostle, 1 John 3.14.

II. The Second thing proposed is to show, That the Lord Jesus is tender, and
careful of those that have this small measure of Grace, and this will appear,

1. From his many Promises to such, which are his own Handwriting, and the
weakest Christians may plead them, and, with an humble Boldness, press God to
perform them, for he is faithful who has promised. In Psalm. 40.11. there is a
Prophecy of Christ, where he is compared to a Shepherd, he shall feed his flock
like a Shepherd, he shall gather his Lambs with his Arm, and carry them in his
Bosom, and shall gently lead those, that are with young, and v. 29. He gives
power to the faint, and to them, who have no might he increases strength. Here
are most pregnant Promises of Christ's Care toward weak Believers, they have
his Arms to defend them, and his Bosom to nourish them, his Hands to provide
for them, and his Heart to love them, and, lest they should doubt of this (as
they are apt to do) he farther presses his Truth, and Power, his Faithfulness,
and Goodness, to all that wait on him, but especially the weak, and wearied, v.
28, 29, 31. Ps. 72.12, 13, 14. David prays for his Son Solomon, and, from a
Priest, turns Prophet, in foretelling the Happiness of Solomon's Reign, as the
Type, and of Christ, as the Antitype, the one for temporal, the other for
spiritual. He shall deliver the needy, when he cries, the poor, and him that
has no helper. He shall spare the poor, and needy, and shall save the Souls of
the needy, etc. Psalm. 10.17. Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble,
thou will prepare their heart, and cause thine ear to hear. This Promise is to
such weak humble Christians, that have not Heart to pray; the Lord will prepare
their Hearts, and fill their Mouths; so Ez. 34.16. I will seek that, which was
lost, and bring again that, which was driven away, and will bind up that, which
was broken, and will strengthen that, which was sick: and to these belong all
the Promises that are made to the poor in spirit, the hungry, and thirsty, the
weary and heavy laden, for, as the sense of the want of Grace is Grace, so
these Promises of Peace, Comfort, and eternal Happyness are intayl'd upon it,
Matt. 5.6. Ps. 101.9. Isa. 55.1, 2. Luke 1.53. John 7.47. Matt. 11.28, 29. Rev.
21.6. Rev. 22.17. Ps. 44.3, 4.

2. This appears from the strict Charge he gives his Substitutes, and Deputies,
on Earth, to wit, Magistrates, and Ministers, to take care of them, and be
tender of them, Isa. 49.22, 23. He commands Kings to be their nursing fathers,
and Queens to be their nursing mothers. It was in his own Commission at first,
Isa. 61.1, 2. and he would have his Messengers, and Ambassadors, that speak in
his Name to do the like, to wit, to bring glad tidings to the meek, to heal the
broken hearted, and to comfort them that mourn. The only way that St. Peter was
to manifest his Love to Christ, and make some amends for his shameful Denial of
him, was by his feeding his lambs, John 21.5. and who are those, but young, and
weak Christians, not in respect of Age, and Stature in Body, but in respect of
Growth, and Strength in Grace, and the double charge he gave him calls for his
double Care.

So he commands his Church in Cant. 1.8. to be careful of his Kids, and feed
them beside the Shepherd's tents, and take heed lest they turn aside by the
flock of his companions, that is, be seduced by false Apostles, who pretended
to be his Companions, and Friends, but indeed were his real Enemies, wolves in
sheeps clothing, Zech. 4.10. He expostulates with the People there, and clears
himself, saying, who has despised the day of small things? Not I, neither
would I have any other despise that Temple, which was a Type of the Church of
Christ, and of every Member of it: It was not so glorious as the First Temple,
and therefore the People, that had seen the first, wept, when they saw this,
Hag. 2.3. But the Lord would not despise it.

III. The third Particular is to show how Christ does manifest this Care, and
Tenderness toward weak Christians, this he does, First, By preserving them
from strong Temptations, that are too heavy for them to bear, which well-grown
Christians might undergo; an instance whereof we have in St. Peter, Jo. 21.18.
When he was young, he had his liberty to go whither he would, because his
weakness in Faith could not endure restraint, and hardship, but, when he became
an old, grown, strong, Believer, he should be led in Chains whither he would
not, for then his strength could bear it: when he could reckon his shackles of
Iron, as great Ornaments, as Chains of Gold, and Glory in Tribulation for the
sake of Christ, then should he be loaded with them, and no sooner.

But more particularly he exercises his very tender care of their Weakness, 1.
In not imposing such hard service upon them, as on other of a greater standing
in Christianity, as we see clearly in Christ's tenderness of his weak
Disciples, he grants them an Immunity from the severer duties of fasting, and
watching, when the Baptist's Disciples charged them with the neglect thereof,
Matt. 9.14. Christ makes an Apology for them, v. 15, 16, 17. by comparing their
Weakness to old bottles, that were not fit, nor able, to hold strong new
Liquors, and to old garments, that were inconsistent with new cloth, because
subject to Rents, and Breaches; and so were they to Temptations, and
Discouragements, if put upon such hard services, and saluted with such
unwelcome duties upon the very threshold of their Profession, their entrance
into Christianity.

So does he indulge their Weakness in Matt. 26.40, 41. What could ye not watch
with me one hour? methinks the shortness of the time might lessen the
difficulty of the duty, and yet they were so overcome with Sleep, that they
could not watch one hour; but, for all that, instead of sharply reproving them
for their Sloth, he puts an excuse into their mouths, The Spirit indeed is
willing, but the flesh is weak. So merciful is our high Priest, that, where
the ability is wanting, he will accept the will for the deed. And this was the
reason that he was so indulgent of the Catechumeni, we read of in the Gospel,
Mark 8.1, 2, 3. His Bowels yearn'd within him for Pity, (as the word (...)
signifies) because they were come from far, and, if dismissed them without
Meat, they were in danger of fainting by the way, and so might be deferred from
such an unwelcome profession, that was so displeasing to Flesh and Blood; and
therefore, lest those young Gospellers should be discouraged, he puts his
Divinity on work to feed them.

2. As he will not impose upon them hard services, so he will not expose them
to great sufferings. They need not such thorns in the flesh to keep them low,
as St. Paul had after his high Raptures, and Revelations. If ye seek me, says
Christ, Jo. 18.1. let these go their way, that is, these are yet unfit to
ascend the stage of sufferings, they are not able to act the Tragedy, which I
must under your bloody hands; therefore let these go their way excused; and
suitable to this care, and tenderness, is his Promise, 1 Cor. 10.13. He will
not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape. He is clothed with the same Flesh, and
Blood, as we are, (sin only excepted) and therefore he knows what Mould we are
made of, and so will proportion our burden to our backs.

Here, by the way, I might answer the objection of an afflicted Believer, who
doubts of his interest in Christ from, or by reason of, his heavy Pressures,
and says with Rebeccah, If it be so, why am I thus? If I be a child of God, why
do I feel a Hell in my Soul? as if I were in Hell already; if my Soul be bound
up in the bundle of Life, why am I become a prey to the roaring Lion? as
appears by his continual buffetting of me; but (O believing Soul!) thou
should from thence argue the contrary, and conclude (for thy comfort) from
these strong struglings in thy Soul, that there are two Nations within thee,
such as they in Rebeccah's Womb, the one from Heaven, heavenly, the other from
Earth, earthly, and be sure that at last the elder shall serve the younger,
Nature shall be subdued by Grace; and therefore thou may argue, from the
weight of thy afflictions, that thou art not only a true Believer, but a strong
Believer, whom God loads so heavily, for he will lay upon none but what they
are able to bear.

3. He preserves them from strong Temptations by praying for them, that they
may be able to bear them, and that the bruised reed may never be a broken reed,
and the smoking flax be never quenched; this is the drift of Christ's Prayer
for his Disciples in Jo. 17. and not for them only, but for all Babes in
Christ, that shall be born to him to the end of the World, Jo. 17.20. So Christ
prays for St. Peter, when Satan would have winnowed him, Luke 22.31. The
poisonous breath of that subtle Serpent had soon fanned away this weak Disciple
from Christ's Floor, if Christ had not suddenly interposed by his Intercession,
and so does he still continue his prevailing intercession in Heaven for his
weak Members, that they shall never miscarry as long as he is at God's right
hand to mediate for them; and thus he preserves them from strong Temptations by
not imposing hard services on them, nor exposing them to great sufferings, and
by praying for them.

2. He manifests his tender care of weak Believers by sanctifying their
Weakness to them, that their failings shall be their Advantages, and that they
may be gainers by their losses. St. Peter stood too firm on his own legs, he
was too confident of his own strength, when he tells Christ, that, though all
should forsake him, yet would not he, and yet he was the first that did it,
because he leaned too much on his own staff, which proved to him but a broken
Reed. He had not yet (it seems) learned that great, and hard lesson of
SELF-DENIAL; for, if he had learned to deny himself, he would never had denied
his Master, as he did most shamefully three times.

Therefore does Christ force him to a triple Confession of his Faith in him,
and Love to him, Jo. 21.15, 16, 17. Love thou me more than these? where by
his modest answer you may observe the self Diffidence, and Humility, which he
gained by his Fall, Lord thou know that I love thee. There is now no
self-exaltation above others, he does not say now, though all should hate thee,
yet I will love thee, and cleave to thee; no, but he referrs himself to
Christ's all-seeing eye, who saw more by him, than he could know by himself;
and therefore he would say nothing, lest he should judge amiss; so humble, so
low, so vile, was he become in his own eyes. Thus when a poor Christian is
sensible of his own Weakness, and finds those sons of Zerviah, his Lusts, to be
too strong for him, and therefore fears, like David, to fall one day into their
hands; then does he become a daily petitioner to the great God for strength, he
prays more feelingly, more fervently, and will not be denied; and this is his
strength; so Jacob's wrestling with God is called his strength, Hos. 12.3.

When he sees how slovenly he is in every work, and duty, which God calls him
to, how he bungles in his holiest performances, and has greater reasons, than
the Apostle, Romans 7.18. to say, To will is present with me, but how to perform
that, which is good, I find not, he is filled with self-abhorrence, humility,
and poverty of spirit, which are precious graces in the sight of God. Whereas
naturally we take a pride in our performances, and those duties, which grow
upon Nature's stock, do fill the hypocritical Professor with a vain conceit of
selfrighteousness, and makes him rest in [opere operato] the work done: but, on
the other side, a true Believer, out of self-diffidence, runs out of himself to
Christ, he dares not venture to stay under the roof of his own works, or
duties, but comes up, like the Spouse in the Canticles, from a wilderness of
temptation, leaning on his beloved Christ Jesus, and so continually, with St.
Paul, magnifies God's superabundant Grace toward him, for else he is in
himself but a firebrand of Hell, undone for ever.

3. He manifests this tenderness, and care toward weak Believers, by sending
them help in a time of need, in relieving them at a dead lift: when this
sparkle is even extinguished, then will the Lord wonderfully step in, many
times, to help, as he promises, Heb. 4.16. [(...)] a help in a good
opportunity. The temporal deliverance, which the Jews had from the Assyrians,
Isaiah 37. was a type, and a figure, of that spiritual deliverance, which the
Lord gives this bruised reed, when it is ready to break, when the new Creature
is ready to give up the Ghost: the City Jerusalem was as a woman in travel, the
children were come to the birth, but there was no strength to bring forth; (a
miserable straight!) Then came one of Heaven's deputies as a skillful Midwife
to give them speedy deliverance.

Many are the experiences of the Servants of God of his Providence toward
them, in rescuing them from the very Jaws of the roaring Lion, when he was
ready to devour them, by reclaiming them by some seasonable Providence, when
they were ready to commit some horrid abomination, that would have dishonored
God, and made his enemies to blaspheme, and have wounded their Profession,
their Consciences, and good Names for ever; a passage to this purpose I have
read in the Life of a reverend and godly Divine of this Kingdom, which is so
remarkable, that I cannot omit it; This reverend Minister, being at his house
very late in a winter night, ready to go to his rest, when all his Family were
asleep, a sudden thought took him, that he must go to such a Man's house, that
lived a pretty distance from him; at first he strugled against those motions,
and endeavored to stifle them, as being unreasonable, enthusiastical
impressions, that should move him to go to such a house without any occasion
apparent to him, and that in an unseasonable time of the night (and, for ought
he knew, the suggestions might be satanical) But he could have no rest in his
Spirit 'till he took a Candle, and Lantern, and went, and so knocked at the
Man's door a while before any Body answered, at length the Man of the house
comes, and opens the door; This Minister told him of the strange, and strong,
impulse, that moved him to come thither, and that he had no business; Nay then,
says the poor Man with tears in his eyes, I see the wonderful mercy of God in
sending you hither to rescue my Soul, and Body, from the Devil; for just now
was I (when I had got all my household to their rest) fully purposing, with this
cord, to dispatch my self away, and now, blessed be God for his gracious
providence, in preventing it by your coming. Here was a seasonable help; when
the smoking flax was even quenching, the Lord stepped in wonderfully with relief:
so careful and tender is he of the weakest Christian.

4. By preserving them from false Teachers, and Seducers, 'till they have their
senses to discern between Good, and Evil, between Truth, and Falsehood;
therefore a strict charge is given by him, Cant. 2.15. Take us the foxes, the
little foxes, that spoil the vines, for our vines have tender grapes;
especially care is to be had of weak Believers, which are as tender grapes,
lest the foxes, and little foxes, that is, Heretics, and Schismatics, seduce
them; and here St. Bernard observes touching the Pronouns US and OUR, Poterat
dicere capite [mihi,] sed maluit dicere [nobis,] consortio delectatus, and he
so unites our welfare with his own, that he takes as great care of us, as of
himself, and of the whole Church together, and every particular Member thereof,
from the greatest to the least.

IV. The Fourth Particular to be considered in the handling of this Text, is to
show the Reasons why Christ is so tender of weak Christians, and those are
these.

1. Because Grace may be hindered in it is Growth by such things as the Believer
cannot prevent, as for instance, A Believer may be living in a wicked Family,
where there is no fear of God, and there he has much ado to keep his Sparkle
alive, 1 Kings 14.13. The Lord takes notice of that little goodness, that was
in Abijah in the house of Jeroboam, a little Grace in such a Family went far.
Even so does the Holy Ghost commend that small measure of Piety, that was in
Lot; which surely was but a Sparkle in a sea of Corruption, as we may see by
tracing his Conversation; for first, out of a sinful fear of the filthy
Sodomites, he proffers them his two Daughters for to commit Uncleanness with
them; his Drunkenness, and Incest, recorded in Scriptures, are as a Scylla, and
Charybdis for all Christians to beware, and fear to come near them; the latter
being such a sin, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 5.1. as is not so much as nam d
among the unbelieving Gentiles, much less practiced by them: and one would
think that the commission of one such sin of Incest might terrify the weakest
Believer in the World, that had any fear of God before his eyes, from ever
committing the like again, and not only so, but would make him go mourning all
his days; but we find that the sin of Drunkenness, that opens every door in the
Soul to the spiritual enemy, lets in this abomination again, and that suddenly
too, for the next night he lay with his other Daughter; from both which
incestuous mixtures proceeded the cursed Brood of Moabites, and Ammonites, that
were the greatest scourge of the people of God in all the World, yet, for all
these gross miscarriages, carriages, and great sins, he was still a smoking
flax, and therefore the Lord in mercy passes by his enormities, and,
considering the place of his abode, gives him a grain of allowance for being so
good among a people so bad, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. He has the Epithets of just, and
righteous, and godly, because he was vexed that they were so ungodly. So does
the Lord exercise the same indulgence toward the Church of Pergamus, because
she dwelt in the very confines of Hell, Rev. 2.13. I know thy works, and where
thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is; and where was that? where Godliness
was persecuted, and Idolatry was practiced, together with the community of
Wives maintained, which was the doctrine of the Nicolaitans. Now to hold fast
the Christian Profession, and not to deny the Faith in the Devil's quarters,
was an Argument of a Heaven-born Nature, and therefore God will dispense with
other Weaknesses.

Only, when a Christian's lot is cast into such a wicked place, where Satan
dwells either for false Doctrine, and Worship, or Sodomitical Practices, it is
his duty to bewail it with the Prophet David, Psalm 120.5, 6. Woe is me that I
sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar, my Soul has long dwelt
with him, that hates peace; he longed to be away from them: and so did the
Prophet Isaiah mourn, because he dwelt among a people of unclean lips, Isa. 6.5.

2. Grace may be hindered in it is growth by reason of a Believer's constitution
of Body, for the philosophical Axiom holds true in Grace, as it does in
Morality, mores animi sequuntur temperamentum corporis; for we find choleric
Bodies very apt to fall into immoderate Anger, and unbridled Passion, upon the
least provocation, and are often to seek for that excellent Grace of Patience:
and those, that are phlegmatic, are not so active, and zealous, in the service
of God, as others, that are but of an equal stature in Grace; so the
melancholic cannot rejoice in God, and be so cheerful in holy duties, as
others; and those, that are sanguine, cannot be so serious; and the weak crazy
Bodies cannot spend so much time, and strength in Watching, Fasting, and
Prayer, as those, that are of a stronger constitution, for, without
controversy, though Grace does not depend upon the temper of the Body [quoad esse
and causam] in it is essence and cause, yet it does [quoad esse and exercitium]
as to it is well being, and exercise, and therefore the Lord will not quench the
smoking flax.

3. Grace may be hindered in it is growth by reason of weak gifts, and want of
natural parts, such as Memory to carry away the word, read, or heard, and the
gift of Prayer. A Sigh from such is acceptable to God, for God does not regard
the Logic, nor Rhetoric, nor Arithmetic, but the Divinity, of Prayer: it is
the sincere broken petitions, that flow from a broken heart, that prevail with
God more, than all the gaudy Eloquence of any Hypocrite whatever.

4. A Christian's Grace may be weak for want of the means of Grace, many people
have been unfruitful under, and unthankful for, the word of God, and therefore
the Lord may in Judgment say of them what David said of Gilboa, 2 Samuel 1.21.
Let there be no dew, neither let there be rain upon you: (A dreadful curse!)
And, if a weak Christian chance to be in such a barren Wilderness, the Lord
will bear with his bruised reed, because he has not the means of growth, and
strength, to wit, the milk, and strong meat, of the word. Luke 12.48. Unto whom
much is given, much shall be required, that is, he, that has been planted by
the rivers of waters, and enjoyed powerful Preaching, and plentiful means of
Grace, the Lord does expect from such, an answerable growth in Grace, and
Knowledge; and so without question, he does from you all, that do frequent this
Church; but, if a poor Christian's lot has fallen upon a mount Gilboa, the Lord
will not expect so much from him, but will consider such weaklings in Grace,
that are so for want of spiritual Food, and bear with their weaknesses.

This is the first reason why our Savior is so tender of weak Christians, and
very careful to preserve the least measure of Grace in them, to wit, because
Grace may be hindered in it is growth by such things as the Believer cannot
prevent, and those are, first, A Believer may be living in a wicked Family, as
Abijah was, secondly, It may arise from the temper of the Believer's Body,
thirdly, from the weakness of his natural Parts, fourthly from the want of
means of Grace, as those in Acts 19.2. that knew not whether there was a spirit
or no.

2. The second reason why Christ is so tender, is, because he is the Purchaser
of the least measure of Grace: this smoking flax is the price of Christ's
Blood; and what cost him so dear shall never be lost by his good will: and the
same good will, that he had to spend his Heart's Blood to redeem them, will
surely engage his almighty Power to defend them. This adds weight to the charge
of the Pastors of the Church of Ephesus, Acts 20.28. Take heed unto your
selves, and to all the flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made you
overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
Blood; as if he should say, the meanest among you is of an inestimable value,
no less, than the price of God's own Blood, and therefore see you have an
especial care of them. And, if he lays so great a charge on his Ministers to
look to them, surely he will not forget them himself, but will make it his
constant business in Heaven to intercede for them, that none shall pluck them
out of his hands, whom he paid so dear for.

He, that was made a Priest by God's oath to sacrifice his own Life, to redeem
sinners from Death, continues for ever a priest to intercede for, and procure
them, the full price of his purchase, to wit Grace, and Glory: and this
exceeding great care he takes for weak Believers appeared presently after his
ascension into Heaven by the speedy dispatch he made of his Spirit to the
supply of the weak Orphans at Jerusalem; (for so the Disciples were, 'till he
sent the Comforter unto them, and so he calls them, Jo. 14.18. (...)) and the
Comforter he sent, to wit the Holy Spirit, as soon as he was warm (if I may so
speak) in his seat in Heaven, at God's right hand, to the unspeakable comfort
of them, and us, and all Believers to the end of the World.

3. The third reason is, because this Holy Spirit is the Author of the least
measure of Grace, and therefore will not leave his work unfinished, or neglect
what he has so graciously begun, but, having begotten us again unto a lively
hope, 1 Pet. 1.3, 5. he will keep us by his mighty power through faith unto
salvation. If all the created powers of Heaven, and Earth, were united, and
concentred, in one person, yet he could not so much as make this Flax to smoke,
it is the effect of Divine power, Grace is the product of the Spirit, Jo. 3.5.
and therefore, since the Holy Spirit is the Father of such gracious
dispensations, he will engage the same strength to preserve what he has begot:
Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. We see how soon does the Lord hear Ephraim bemoaning
himself, when he was as a smoking flax, a newly tamed heifer brought to God
under the yoke of Afflictions; his cry soon pierces God's ears, and his ear
affects his bowels, and his bowels awake his power to be his guardian.

When Christ brings a wandering sheep into his fold, he puts it on his shoulder,
and rejoices all the way he brings it home, Luke 15.5. The power of his Spirit
is that shoulder, on which he carries it, the everlasting arms, wherein he
bears his lambs, and those eagle's wings, upon which they are both tenderly,
and securely, conveyed to glory, Ex. 19.4. nay he uses more care, and
tenderness, toward weak Believers, than the strong, because of their weakness,
for the weakest child can call God father, and the more weak, and feeble, the
child is, the greater is the care, and stricter is the eye, and observance of
the mother upon him, what Job says, Job 31.15. the weakest, and most faint,
Believer may say the same of the strongest champion in the Lord's house, did
not one, and the same holy Spirit fashion us in the womb? and if they are once
the workmanship of his almighty hands, then will he make them strong, and
fertile, a little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation,
Isa. 60.22. In a word, the least measure of Grace, being the work of the Holy
Spirit of God, is therefore called [(...)] a new creation, or a new creature,
and be sure none shall be abortive, which he begets, but go on to be an Heir of
Glory, and Christ calls this child of the Spirit by his own name, Gal. 4.19. My
little children, of whom I travel in birth again 'till Christ be formed in you.
This clearly signifies to us, that he will be as careful, and tender, of this
Divine nature, this piece of himself, as if it were himself.

4. The fourth reason is, because the least measure of Grace differs only
gradually from the greatest measure, they are the same in kind, and nature; as
the least drop of water is water, and the least spark of fire is fire;
therefore Christ's care, and love, is not restrained to the degree of Grace,
but extends to the whole species of new creatures, small, and great, weak, and
strong, 2 Pet. 1.1. The Apostle writes to them, that had obtained like precious
faith with us [(...),] it was not equal in degree with his, but, being of the
same nature, and kind, it was of equal price, and value, with God; and
therefore Christ will (being exceeding careful to) keep this heavenly treasure:
Little Grace is a little grain of mustard seed, which grows, and spreads into a
great tree, and it is compared so for it is smallness at first, as well as for
it is growth at last. And, if thou have but the least Grace, I dare tell thee,
that God has done more for thee in that, than if he should in making that,
which is now so weak, as perfect, as the Saint's Grace is now in Heaven; and
that for two reasons. 1. Because it was an act of greater power to work Grace
out of no Grace than to add that Grace by perfectional Grace. There is a
greater gulf between no Grace, and Grace, than between weak Grace, and strong;
between a Chaos, and nothing, than between a Chaos, and the beautiful frame of
this World. The first day's work of both creations is the greatest, and
therefore God will by no means despise the day of these small things, which, as
inconsiderable as we think them to be, are the effect of the same almighty
power, as created the World.

2. It is an act of greater mercy to give us the first Grace in conversion,
than to crown that Grace with Glory; it is a greater favor, and condescension,
in a Prince to marry a poor damsel, than, having married her, to cloth her like
a Princess; he was free to do, or not to do, the former, but now his relation
to her obliges him to do the latter; even so might God have chosen whether he
would have given thee Grace or not at the first, but, having done this, thy
relation to him, and his covenant also, do oblige him to preserve that Grace,
and add more 'till he has fitted thee, as a bride, for himself in Glory,
therefore let the weakest Christian never doubt of Crist's care, and
tenderness, toward him, for he, that has done the greater acts of power, and
mercy, to him, will certainly do the lesser; he, that gave him spiritual life
equal to the best Saint in Heaven in quality, and nature, will surely give it
nourishment, and growth, 'till it comes to perfection, or, as it is in my Text,
'till he bring forth judgment unto victory.

5. The covenant of Grace comprehends the weak, as well as the strong,
Christian, If children, then heirs, heirs of God, and coheirs with Christ,
Romans 8.17. The promise there is not to children grown to this, or that,
strength, or stature, if thou be a child, though in the cradle, the promises
are thy portion, yea thou may plead for his care, and maintenance, 'till
thou possess the inheritance in Heaven, upon thy state, and relation, and not
upon thy weaker, or stronger, Grace. Some Believers have more Grace from
Christ, than others, and so have more skill to improve these promises, than
their weaker Brethren, whereby their present profits, and incomes, from the
promises are greater; but they have no more interest in Christ, than the other,
and consequently the weak Christian's title is as true to the promise, as that
of the strong: though the foot is the lowest member of the body, yet it cannot
say, but that the tongue will speak for it, and the head take care of it, for
the foot is in the body; and so is the meanest Believer in the body of Christ;
therefore those do disfigure the promises, that make them look asquint, with an
eye upon one Believer, and not upon another; whereas they equally belong to
all; He, that believes on the Son, has everlasting life, Jo. 3.36. and who is
meant there? is it he, that believes above doubting? surely no, but we may be
assured of this, that he, that commands us to receive the weak in faith, will
not himself reject them.

6. Grace may be weak in one respect, and yet strong in another; a Christian
may be weak in his active, and strong, and resolute, in his passive, obedience;
Rahab's Faith was but a grain of mustard seed, yet it was of the right kind,
because she held out a professor in Jericho; her godly courage, and hope, were
strong in the Lord, else she had never continued her obedience to the true God
among such a number of Idolaters. A Believer may be wanting in his zeal, and
activity, in God's service, and resisting temptations, in mastering
corruptions, yet, as a tree in winter, he grows downward in humility,
self-abhorrence, and his whole dependence is upon God through Christ, in the
sense of his wants, and so, being deeply rooted in these, the Lord will sooner
dispense with his outward infirmities.

7. The number of weak Believers is far greater, than that of the strong, and
therefore, if Christ takes not special care to carry his lambs in his bosom,
his fold is like to be very empty. There are more sparrows, than Eagles, more
bruised reeds, than Cedars, and more babes in Christ, than strong, well grown,
Christians in God's Family, therefore, if he were not a very tender nursing
Father to these, those eternal mansions of Glory should be like to want
inhabitants.

8, and lastly, Hereby God shows his strength, and power, and so more Glory
redounds to Christ, by this care in keeping alive a sparkle of Grace in an
ocean of corruption, 2 Cor. 12.9. My strength is made perfect in weakness, that
is, not intrinsecally, but declaratively, not made so, but manifested to the
Sons of Men to be so. This cuts the very comb of pride in all, and leaves no
room for self-exaltation, when God is both the founder, and finisher of their
Grace. And that, which highly advances his Glory, is, that he alone holds,
as our Souls, so our Grace, in life. This not only magnifies, but omnifies, his
power, and causes the poor Christian to lay the crown of all his services upon
the head of Christ, and to cry out with St. Paul, It is not I, but the grace of
God, which was with me; and when all is done, and the race is run in glory, to
cast his crown with the elders before the throne of Christ, saying, Thou art
worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, honor, and power, Rev. 4.10, 11. Having thus
done with the reasons, I shall answer an objection that meets me in my way,
which is this, If Christ be so tender of them, why are they so full of fears,
and doubts, and hard thoughts of themselves, touching their spiritual, and
eternal condition, as usually they are?

1. I answer, It is by reason of their ignorance of the nature of Grace, and
their mistakes about the exercises, and operations of Grace, especially by
reason of the motes in their eyes of Faith; they think they have no Faith,
because they want the assurance of faith, (which the Apostle calls (...)) which
is not of the essence of Faith, but a consequent of it, and a reflex act of the
Soul upon it self attained by a long continued course of holy, and close,
walking with God, which few Believers have: but Faith is a recumbant act of the
Soul upon Christ, and is usually expressed by the instance of one, that, having
suffered shipwreck, cast himself upon a floating plank of the ship, and there
sticks in a trembling, doubtful hope of coming ashore.

2. Because they cannot distinguish betwixt Grace in idea, and Grace in
subjecto, in actu signato, and in actu exercito; as in 1 Cor. 13.7, 8, 9, etc.
The wonderful operations of Charity are described there, now, because weak
Christians can find no such effects in themselves, they presently conclude
themselves to be no better, than sounding brass, and tinkling cymbals, mere
empty nothings, and no real Christians; but they ought to distinguish betwixt
this Grace in it is own abstracted nature, and as it is in the subject mixed with
the flesh, and contrary elements of corruptions, and so it is not so operative
in the best of Christians, as being obstructed by it is contrary qualities. Fire
by it self is visible, and active, but not so in the flint, and yet we know it
is there, though concealed under the other elements: so we may judge of Charity,
and other Graces with the mixtures of contrary imperfections, which do retard,
and make them come short of their genuine productions.

3. It is because they compare themselves with the uppermost in Christ's school
for proficiency, and, because they are not such glorious lights in the
firmament of the Church, as St. Paul, St. John, and other Scripture Saints,
therefore, in their own opinion, they are but Meteors, and wandering Stars,
Hypocrites, and Unbelievers. But they should know that, as it is in the Kingdom
of Glory, so it is in the Kingdom of Grace, one star differs from another,
and the members of the body mystical, as in the body natural, are not of equal
strength, and bigness: All Christians should therefore labor to be of the body
of Christ, and not be discouraged, though they be but the meanest finger, or
the lowest toe, for their head will be sure to take care of them, and bring
them at last to himself. We must be sure to get the same Grace, as others, for
truth, though we cannot attain to the same grace for measure, we must try our
selves by the same touchstone, though not weigh our selves in the same balance,
we must be of the same metal as others, though not of the same weight.

4. Because they examine themselves in an unseasonable time, when overcome with
sadness, and black melancholic thoughts: then indeed they are to seek for the
least Grace: But we must consider that, though this self-examination is
necessary, yet it is not at all times to be used.

Having thus briefly dispatched what I at first proposed to speak to, I come
now in the last place to apply the whole.

This truth concerns four sorts of people, 1. The Ministers of the Gospel. 2.
Strong Christians. 3. Weak Christians. 4. Such as are aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel.

1. Ministers should have the same mind in them, as was in Christ Jesus, when
they see a bruised reed, to support it, and carry on the work of Grace in
Christian hearts; we must encourage the weak hearted, and strengthen feeble
knees, for we are the immediate subordinate, outward, agents to do this work
for Christ, and to fulfill this promise of his. Epiphanius calls St. James the
Apostle [(...)] the WALL of the people, and so should we be an impregnable wall
about our people for to defend them (especially at this time of Apostasy) from
Seducers, and false teachers. There are wolves in sheep's clothing, that will
soon make a havoc of Christ's lambs, that will, by their Sophistry, seduce
young Christians, unless we fortify them not only by our constant preaching of
the truth in public, but also by our personal application of that truth to
them in private.

2. Strong Christians should make it appear that they are so by serving the
Lord Christ in this work, and labor of love, by taking their weak brethren by
the hand, and helping them out of the mire of temptations: you know whose
language it was, Am I my brother's keeper? a cursed Cain's: be you therefore
blessed in encouraging the feeble, instructing the ignorant, and confirming the
doubtful; comfort weak Believers against the violence of the persecutor, arm
them against the Sophistry of the Seducer, and, by your exemplary lives teach
them to mortify the flesh, to bridle the tongue, to adorn their profession with
a holy conversation, and to prepare themselves against approaching miseries. In
all your stations, and relations do all the good you can for YOUR LORD'S, and
MASTER'S, sake.

3. Here is a word to weak Christians, here is a cordial for them to restore
their fainting Spirits, when surpised with any fears touching their
persevering to the end of their warfare.

1. Be of good comfort, thy life spiritual, and eternal, is hid with Christ in
God; say not, thou art a bruised reed, for with this will Christ break Satan's
head, and he will not cease 'till he has brought forth Judgment unto complete
Victory in thy Soul. All the power, and malice, of Hell shall not be able to
extinguish the least spark of Grace in any Soul.

2. Take the cup of thanksgiving and call on the name of the Lord, bless God,
whilst thou live, for thy new creation, and preservation; take up David's
language, My soul, praise thou the Lord, all, that is within me, bless his holy
name, what shall I render unto the Lord for all his care, and kindness, his
preservation, and providence? Alas! how soon had Satan winnowed me, if the Lord
had not prayed for me, and upheld me? his almighty arm supported me, else I
had, long ago, inevitably dropped into everlasting burning.

3. Love him with all your heart, with all your soul; all this care, and
tenderness toward you is the fruit of his love; Oh! then let love in him beget
the like love in you, beget an earnest desire to run the ways of his
commandments with great delight; Oh! pant, and breath, after him, and rest no
where, but in the bosom of his love.

4. Be you tender of him, and careful to please him, as the Spouse was, Cant.
2.6, 7. she was weak in knowledge, and in Grace, and therefore Christ's left
hand is under her head, and his right hand embraces her; then she charge her
self in her particular members not to disturb him.

5. Take heed you quench not this smoking flax, your selves, which is done,
First, by negligence, and carelessness in God's service, we must [(...)] stir
up the Grace of God, that is in us, or else it will die of it self, if we do not
blow this fire into a flame it will quench unknown to us. Secondly, By
returning to folly again, this is the water, that quenches the sparkle of
Grace, and is abominable to God, and therefore compared by him to the vomiting
of a dog, and to the wallowing of a sow in the mire. Thirdly, By accompanying
wicked Men, which are as floods of waters, and waves of the sea, to quench this
sparkle, and so termed by the Prophet David in several Psalms; therefore avoid
them, as you would avoid the Devil, for they are his instruments.

4. The fourth use is to strangers from the covenant of promise, that they
would consider what a blessed condition it is to have Christ for a guardian,
and how happy are the people, that are under his tuition; it is impossible to
conceive how wonderfully careful, and tender, he is of the weakest Believer;
the relations of a Shepherd, a father, of a mother, Husband, etc. do prove it,
and preach it. Oh! then let all be hence incited to take him upon his own
terms, that they may be under his care, and tenderness, that he may keep you in
all your ways: defer not therefore to close with him, that you may be thus, and
eternally, happy.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all
honor, praise, and dominion, now and for ever. Amen. FINIS.

