THE PUBLISHER Or Translator of NICHOLAS MACHIAVELS Whole WORKS OUT OF ITALIAN,
faithfully into ENGLISH;

Concerning the following Letter of Nicholas Machiavels, wherein he clears
himself of the Aspersions alleged by some on his Writings: Also, his Judgment
as to Government, whether Monarchy or Democracie be the best. And Lastly,
(though a Papist) shows their wicked and base Errors, both of Popes, Jesuits,
Priests, etc. and that they shall be brought to ruin.

Written by the Author April 1st. 1537.

Printed in the Year 1688.

THE PUBLISHER Or Translator of Nicholas Machiavels whole works out of Italian,
faithfully into English; To the READER, Concerning the following Letter of
Nicholas Machiavels in Vindication of Himself, and the Aspersions put by some
on his Writings.
Courteous Reader,
IT has been usual with most of those who have Translated this Author into any
Language, to spend much of their Time and Paper in Taxing his Impieties, and
confuting his errors and false principles as they are pleased to call them, if
upon perusal of his Writings I had found him guilty of any thing that could
deceive the Simple, or prejudice the rest of Mankind, I should not have put
thee to the hazard of reading him in thine own Language; but rather have
suffered him still to sleep in the obscurity of his own, than endanger the
World; but being very well assured of the contrary, and that the Age will
rather receive advantage than damage by this publication, I did yet think that
it was fit to say something (...) Preface, to vindicate our Author from those
Slanders which Priests and other biased Pens have laid upon him; but still I
thought, that it might prove a bold and presumptuous undertaking, and might
excite laughter, for a person of my small Parts and Abilities, to Apologize for
one of the greatest Wits and profoundest Judgments that ever lived amongst the
Moderns: In this perplexity, I had the good fortune to meet with this Letter of
his own writing; which has delivered not from those scruples, and furnished me
with an opportunity of justifying this great Person by his own Pen. Receive
then this choice Piece with benignity, it has never before been published in
any Language, but lurked for above 80. years in the private Cabinets of his own
Kindred, and the Descendants of his own admirers in Florence, till in the
beginning of the Pontificat of Urbane the 8th, it was procured by the Jesuits
and other busy bodies, and brought to Rome with an intention to divert that
wise Pope from his design of making one of Nicholas Machiavels Name and Family
Cardinal, as (notwithstanding all their opposition) he did, not long after.
When it was gotten into that City, it wanted not those who had the judgment
and curiosity to copy it, and so at length came to enjoy that privilege which
all rare pieces (even the sharpest Lybels and Pasquils) challenge in that
Court, which is to be sold to Strangers, one of which being a Gentleman of this
Country brought it over with him at his return from thence in the year 1645,
and having translated it into English, did communicate it to diverse of his
Friends, and by means of some of them, it has been my good fortune to be
capable of making thee a present of it, and let it serve as an Apology for our
Author and his Writings, if thou think be need any. I must confess I believe
his works require little, but rather praise and admiration; yet I wish I could
as well justify one undertaking of his not long after the writing of this
Letter; for we find in the Story of those times, that in the Month of August
following, in the same year 1537. this Nicolo Machiavelli (except there were
another of his name) was committed prisoner to the Bargello, amongst those who
were taken in Arms against Cosimo at the Castle of Monte^rurli, notwithstanding
all his complements in this Letter to that Prince, and professed obligations to
him; if this be so, we must impute it to his too great zeal, to concur with
thedesires of the universality at that time, in restoring the Liberty of their
Country, which has so far dazel'd the judgments even of great and wise Men,
that thou see many grave Authors amongst the Ancients have even commended and
deifyed the ingratitude and treachery of Brutus and Cassius. But certainly this
crime of his would have been much more unpardonable, if he had lived to see his
own Prophecy fulfilled in the Persons and Descendants of this great Cosimo,
for there was never any succession of Princes since the World began, in which
all the Royal Virtues and Qualities necessary to those who rule over Men, were
more eminently perspicuous than in^very individual of this line; so that those
people have as little cause as ever any had to lament the change of their
Government; their great Dukes having been truly Fathers of their Country, and
treated their Subjects like Children, though their power be above all
limitation, above all sundamental Laws; but they having no Law, are a Law to
themselves. I cannot choose but instance in some few of their Benefits to their
people, first the making the River Arno Navigable from Pisa to Florence in a
year of Dearth, that so the poor might be set on work and have Bread, and the
Traffic or both Cities infinitely facilitated, their making at their own
charge a Canal from Livorne to Pisa, their erecting at Pisa a famous
University; paying the Professors who are eminent for Learning, and discharging
all other incidencies out of their own Revenue, besides the raising stately
Buildings for Schools and Libraries, their founding a renowned Order of
Knighthood, and keeping the Chapter in the same City; and ordering a
considerable number of Knights constantly to reside there, both which intended
and performed by them, to increase the concourse, and restore the wealth to the
once opulent Inhabitants of that place. Their new Building, fortifying and
enfranchizing Livorne, that even by the abolishing their own Customs they might
enrich their Subjects, and make that Port (as it now is) the Magazine of all
the Levant Trade. And lastly, Their not having in 140 years ever levied any new
Tax upon their people, excepting in the year 1642. to defend the Liberties of
Italy against the Barbarians. These things would merit a Panegyric if either
my parts, or this short Advertisement would admit it, I shall conclude then
after I have born a just and dutiful testimony to the merits of the Prince who
now governs that State, in whom (if all the Princely virtues and endowments
should be lost) they might be found and restored again to the world: As some
ingenious Artists in the last Age, retrieved the Art of Sculpture by certain
has relievos remaining on some Pillars and Walls at Rome; The Prudence,
Magnanimity, Charity, Liberality, and above all the humanity, courtesy, and
affability of the Prince, though they exceed my expressions, yet they are
sufficiently known, not only to his Subjects (the constant objects of his care
and goodness) but even to all Strangers, more particularly to our Nation, he
having undertaken a troublesome Journey to visit this Kingdom, and to make it
witness and partaker of his transcendent generosity and bounty, which he has
continued ever since, as can be testified by all who have had the honor to
wait upon him in his own Country, or the good fortune but to see him in ours. I
my self who have been so happy to be admitted into his presence, and have been
honored since in having his Highness my customer for many choice Books to
increase (not his knowledge, for that is beyond receiving any addition by
Books) but his curiesity and his Library, do think my self bound in Duty to
take this poor opportunity of testifying my gratitude and devotion to this
excelient Prince. As to this Letter I have nothing more to say, but that thou
may see how right this Author was set in Principles of Religion, before he
could have the information, which we have had since from the Pens of most
Learned and Rational Controversists in those points, and wherefore thou may
admire the sagacity of his Judgment. Read him then, and serve GOD thy King,
and thy Country, with the Knowledge will teach thee. Farewell.

NICHOLAS MACHIAVELS Letter to ZANOBIUS BUONDELMONTIUS, In Vindication of
himself and his Writings.
THE Discourse we had lately (dear Zeno. bio) in the delightful Gardens of our
old deceased Friend Cosimo Rucellai, and the pressing importunity of Guileo
Silviati, that I would use some means to wipe off the many Aspersions cast upon
my Writings, gives you the present trouble of reading this Letter, and me the
pleasure of writing it; which last would be infinitely greater, if I were not
at this day too old, and too inconsiderable, and by the change of our
Government wholly incapable of performing, either with my Brain or my Hand, any
further service to my Country; for it has ever been my opinion, that whosoever
goes about to make Men publicly aquainted with his Actions, or Apologize to
the World for Imputations laid upon him, cannot be excused from vanity and
impertinence, except his Parts and Opportunities be such, as may enable him to
be instrumental for the good of others, and that he cannot archieve that
excellent end, without justifying himself from having any indirect and base
ones, and procureing trust from Men, by clearing the repute of his Justice and
Integrity to them. But although this be far from my case; yet I have yielded
(you see) to the entreaty of Guilio and the rest of that Company, not only
because I am sufficiently (both by the restraint of our Press, and the
discretion of the person I write to) assured that this Letter will never be
made public; but for that I esteem it a duty to clear that excellent Society,
from the Scandal of having so dangerous and pernicious a Person to be a Member
of their Conversation; for by reason of my Age, and since the loss of our
Liberty, and my Sufferings under that Monster of Lust and Cruelty Alexander de
Medeci, set over us by the Divine vengeance for our sins, I can be capable of
no other Design or Enjoyment, than to delight and be delighted in the company
of so many Choile and Virtuous Persons, who now assemble themselves with all
security, under the Happy and Hopeful Reign of our new Prince, Cosimo; And we
may say, that though our Commonwealth be not restored, our Slavery is at an
end, and that he coming in by our own choice, may prove (if I have as good
skill in prophesying as I have had formerly) Ancestor to many renowned Princes,
who will govern this State in great Quietness, and with great Glemency; so that
our Posterity is like to enjoy case and Security, though not that Greatness,
Wealth, and Glory, by which our City has for some years past (even in the most
factious and tumultuous times of our Democracie) given Law to Italy, and
bridled the Ambition of Foreign Princes. But, that I may avoid the Loquacity
incident to old Men, I will come to the business. If I remember well, the
exceptions that are taken to these poor things I have published, are reducible
to three;

First, That in all my Writings, I insmuate my great Affection to the
Democrical Government, even so much as to undervalue that of Monarchy in
respect of it, which last I do, not obscurely in many passages, Teach, and as
it were, Persuade the People to throw off.

Next, That in some places I Vent very great Impieties, slighting and velifying
the Church, as Author of all the misgovernment in the World, and by such
contempt make way for Atheism and profaneness.

And lastly, That in my book of the Prince, I teach Monarchs all the execrable
Villainies that can be invented, and instruct them how to break Faith, and to
oppress and enslave their Subjects.

I shall answer something to every one of these; and that I may observe a right
Method, will begin with the first;

Having lived in an Age when our poor Country and Government have suffered
more than^ges and revolutions, than ever did perhaps be^^^ any People in so
short a time, and having had till the taking of Flarence, my share in the
managing of Affairs, during almost all these Alterations; sometimes in the
quality of Secretary of our City, and sometimes employed in Emhass^^^s abroad;
I set my self to read the History of Ancient and Modern times, that I might by
that means find out whether there had not been in all Ages the like
Vicissitudes and Accidens in in State Affairs, and to search out the causes of
them, and having in some sort satisfied my (...) therein, I could not abstain
from scribbling something of the two chief kinds of Government, Monarchy and
Democracy, of which all other forms are but mixtures, and since neither my
^^arts nor Learning could arrive to follow (...) steps of the Ancients, by
writing according to Method and Art, as Plato, Aristotle, and many others have
done upon this subject; I did (...) my self to make slight observations upon
both, by giving a bare character of a Prince as to the Monarchical frame, and
as to the Popular choosing the perfectest and most successful of all Goverments
of that kind upon Earth, and in my Discourses upon it, following the order of
my Author, without ever taking upon me to argin problematicallie, much less to
dici^^^ which of these two Governments is the best: i^ from my way of handling
matters in my discourses upon Livy, and from those incomparable Virtues and
great Actions we read of in that History; and from the Observations I make, men
will conclude (which is, I must confess my opinion) that the excellency of
those Counsels and Achievements, and the improvement which Mankind, and as I
may so say, Humane Nature it self obtained amongst the Romans, did proceed
naturally from their Government; and was but a plain eflect and consequence of
the perfection of their Common wealth: I say if Readers will thus judge, how
can I in reason be accused for that? it would become those who lay this blame
upon me to undeceive them whom my Papers have misled, and to show the World to
what other causes we may impute those admirable effects, those Heroic
qualities and performances, that integrity and purity of manners, that scorning
of riches and life it self, when the public was concerned: If they please to
do this, they will oblidge my Readers, who will owe to such the rectifying
their Judgments, and not at all offend me, who have reasoned this matter
impartially and without passion; nor have positively affirmed any thing. But,
what if this part of my accusation had been true? Why should I be condemned of
Heresy, or indiscretion of preferring a Common wealth before a Monarchy? Was I
not Born, Bred, and employed in a City, which being at the time I write, under
that form of Government, did owe all wealth and greatness, and all prosperity
to it? If I had not very designedly avoided all dogmaticalness in my
observations (being not willing to imitate young Scholars in their
Declamations) I might easily have concluded from the premises I lay down, that
a Democracy founded upon good Orders is the best and most excellent Government,
and this without the least fear of confutation, for I firmly believe, that
there are none but Flattorers and Sophisters would oppose me, such as will rest
Aristotle, and even Plato himself, to make them write for Monarchy, by
misapplying some loose passages in those great Authors. ^^ nay, will tell their
Readers, that what is most like the Government of the World by GOD is the best,
which wholly depends upon his absolute Power; to make this comparison, run with
four feet, these Sycophants must give the poor Prince they intend to Deific, a
better and superior Nature to Humanity, must Creat a necessary dependence of
all Creatures upon him, must endue him with infinite wisdom and goodness, and
even with Omnipotency it self. It will be hard for any man to be misled in
this Argument by proofs wrested from Theology, since whosoever reads
attentively the Historical part of the Old Testament, shall find that GOD
himself never made but one Government for Men, that this Government was a
Common wealth (where in the ^^nchadrim or Senate, and the Congregation or
^opular Assembly had their share) and that he ^hanifested his high displeasure
when the rebelli^us people would turn it into a Monarchy; but that I may not
stricke upon the rock I profess to shun, I shall pass to that which is fit
indeed to be wiped off, and which if it were true, would not only justly expose
me to the hatred and vengeance of GOD, and all good men, but even destroy the
design and purpose of all my Writings, which is to treat in some sort (as well
as one of my small parts can hope to do) of the Politlcks. And how can any man
pretend to wrire concerning Policy, who destroys the most (...) sential part of
it, which is obedience to all Governments? It will be very easy then for
Guilio Salviati, or any other Member of our Society, to believe the
Protestation I make, that the animating of private Men either directly or
indirectly to disobey, much less to shake off, any government how despotical
soever, was never in my Thoughts or Writings; those who are unwilling to give
credit to this, may take the pains to assign in any of my Books, the passages
they imagine to tend that way, (for I can think of none my self (that so I may
give such persons more particular satisfaction; I must confess I have a
discourse in one of my Books, to encourage the Italian Nation, to assume their
ancient valor, and to expel the Barbarians, meaning (as the ancient Romans
used the word) a^ Strangers from amongst us; but that was before the Kings of
Spain had quiet possession of the Kingdom of Naples, or the Emperor of the
Duchy of Milan; so that I could not be interpreted to mean that the people of
those two Dominious should be stirred up to shake off their Primces, because
they were Foreigners, since at that time Lodovic Sforza was in possession of
the one, and K. Frederick restored to the other, both Natives of Italy; but my
design was to exhort our Contrymen not to suffer this Province to be the
Scene of the Arms and Ambition of Charles the 8th. or K. Lewis his Successor,
who when they had a mind to renew the old Title of the House of Anjou to the
Kingdom of Naples, came with such force into Italy, that not only our good were
plundered, and our Lands wasted, but even the liberty of our Cities and
Government endangered, but to unite and oppose them, and to keep this Province
in the hands of Princes of our own Nation, this my intention is so visible if
the Chapter it self, that I need but refer you to it. Yet that I may not answer
this imputation barely by denying, I shall assert in this place what my
principles are in that which the World calls Rebellion, which I believe to be
not only rising in Arms against any government we live under but to acknowledge
that word to extend to al^ claindestine Conspiracies too, by which the peace
and quiet of any Country may be interrupted, and by consequence the Lives and
Estates of innocent Persons endangered. Rebellion then so described, I hold to
be the greatest crime that can be committed amongst men, both against Policy,
Morality, and in foro Conseientiae; but notwithstanding all this, it is an
offense which will be committed whilst the World lasts, as often as Princes
tyrannize, and by enslaving and oppressing their Subjects, make Magistracy,
which was intended for the benefit of Mankind, prove a Plague and Destruction
to it; for let the terror and the guilt be never so great, it is impossible
that Humane Nature, which consists of Passion as well as Virtue can support
with patience and submission the greatest cruelty and in justice, when ever
either the weakness of their Princes, the unamity of the People, or any other
favorable accident, shall give them reasonable hopes to mend their condition,
and pro^ide better for their own interest by insurrection. ^o that Princes and
States ought in the Conduct of their Affairs, not only to consider what their
^cople are bound to submit to; if they were inpired from Heaven, or were all
Moral Philoophers; but to weigh likewise what is probable de facto to fall out,
in this corrupt age of the World, and to reflect upon those dangerous Tumults,
which have happened frequently not only upon oppression, but even by reason of
Malver^ation, and how some Monarchies have been wholly subverted and changed
into Democracies by the Tyranny of the Princes; as we see (to say nothing of
Rome) the powerful Cantons of Switzerland brought by that means a little before
the last age, to a considerable Commonwealth, courted and sought by all the
Potents in Christendom. If Princes will seriously consider this, I make no
question but they will Rule with Clemency and Moderation, and return to that
excellent Maxim of the Ancients (almo^^ exploded in this Age) that the interest
of Kings and of their People is the same, which truth (...) has been the whole
design of my Writings to convince them of.

I am charged then, in the second place, with Impiety, and villifying the
Church, and so to make way for Atheism. I do not deny but that I have
frequently in my Writings laid the blame upon the Church of Rome, not only for
all the misgovernment of Christendom; but even for the Depravation and almost
total Destruction of Christian Religion it self in this Province; But that this
Di^course of mine does, or can tend to teach Men impiety, or to make way for
Atheism, I peremptorily deny: And although for proof of my innocence herein, I
need not but refer you and all others to my Papers themselves, as they are now
published (where you will find all my Reasons drawn from Experience, and
frequent (Examples cited, which is ever my way of Arguing) yet since I am put
upon it, I shall in a few lines make that matter possibly a little clearer; and
shall first make protestation, That as I do undoubtedly hope, by the Merits of
CHRIST, and by Faith in Him, to attain Eternal Salvation; so I do firmly
believe the Christian Profession to be the only true Religion now in the World:
Next, I am fully persuaded, that all Divine Verities, which GOD then designed
to rach the World, are contained in the Books of holy Scripture, as they are
now extant and received amongst us. From them I understand that GOD created Man
in purity and innocence, and that the first of that Species, by their frailty,
lost at once their integrity and their Paradise, and entailed sin and misery
upon their Posterity; that Almighty GOD to repair this ^oss, did out of his
infinite Mercy, and with unparalled grace and goodness, send his only
begotten Son into the World, to teach us new truths, to be a perfect example of
virtue, goodness, and obedience, to restore true Religion, degenerated amongst
the Jews into Superstition, ^orinality, and Hypocrisy, to die for the
Salvation of Mankind; and in fine, to give to us the holy Spirit, to regenerate
our Hearts, support our Faith, and lead us into all truth. Now if it shall
appear that as the lusts of our first Parents did at that time disappoint the
good intention of GOD, in making a pure World, and brought in by their
disobedience the corruptions that ar^ now in it. So that since likewise the
Bishops of Rome, by their insatiable ambition and avarice have designedly, as
much as in them lves, frustrated the Mercitul Purpose He had, in the happy
Restoration He intended the World by H^ Son, and in the renewing and reforming
of H^mane Nature, and have wholly defaced, and spoiled Christian Religion, and
made it a Worldly and a Heathenish thing, and altogether ^^capable, as it is
practiced amongst them, either of directing the ways of its prosessors to
viru^ and good life, or of saving their Souls hereafter^ I say, this do appear
I know no reason why I (...) detesting thus much, and for giving warning to the
World to take heed of their ways, should be accused of Impiety or Atheism; or
why (...) Holiness should be so enraged against the p^^ Inhabitants of the
Valleys in Savoy, and again^ the Albigesi for calling him Antichrist: but to
fi^^ that it is an undoubted truth, I mean that (...) Popes have corrupted
Christian Religion, (...) need but read the New Testament (acknowledg^^ by
themselves to be of infallible truth and the^e we shall see, that the Faith and
Religion pre^^ched by Christ, and settled afterward by his Apostles, and
cultivated by their Sacred Epistle^^ is so different a thing from the
Christianity th^^ (...) now professed and taught at Rome, that we should be
convinced, that if those. Holy Men should be sent by GOD again into the World,
they would take more pains to confute this Gallimaufry, than ever they did to
preach down the Tradition of the Pharisees, or the Fables and Idolatry of the
Gentiles; and would in probability suffer a new Marryrdom in that City under
the Vicar of CHRIST, for the same Doctrine which once animated the Heathen
Tyrants against them. Nay, we have something more to say against these
Sacrilegious pretenders to GODS power; for whereas all other false worships
have been set up by some politic Legislators, for the support and preservation
of Government, this false, this spurious Religion brought in upon the ruins of
Christianity by the Popes, has deformed the face of Government in Europe;
destroying all the good principles, and Morality left us by the Heathen
themselves; and introduced in stead thereof, Sordid, Cowardly, and impolitick
Notions, whereby they have subjected Mankind, and even great Princes and
States, to their own Empire, and never suffered any Orders or Maxims to take
place where they have power that might make a Nation Wise, Honest, Great or
Wealthy: This I have set down so plainly in those passages of my Book which are
complained of, that I shall say nothing at all for the proof of it in this
place, but refer you thither, and come to speak a little more particularly of my
first assert^^ that the Pope and his Clergy have deprvied Christian Religion.
Upon this subject I could in^^nitely wish, now Letters begin to revive agai^^
that some Learned Pen would employ it sel^^ and that some person versed in the
Chronolig^ of the Church (as they call it) would deduce o^^ of the
Ecclesiastical Writers, the time and ma^^ner how these abuses crept in; and by
what A^^ and Steps this Babel that reaches at Heaven, w^^ built by these Sons
of the Earth; but this mat^^ as unsuitable to the brevity of a Letter, and
(...) deed more to my small Parts and Learning, shall not pretend to, being one
who never hithe^ to studied or write of Theology, further than (...) did
naturally concern the Politics; therefore shall only deal by the New Testament
as I have done formerly by Titus Livius, that is, mak^ observations or
reflections upon it, and leav^ you and Mr. Guilio, and the rest of our Society
to make the judgment, nor citing like Preachers, the Chapter or Verse; because
the reading of Holy Scripture is little used, and indeed hardly permitted
amongst us. To begin at the top I would have any reasonable man tell me whence
this unmeasureable power, long claimed. and now possessed by the Bishop of
Rome, is derived, first of being CHRIST'S Vicar, and by that (as I may so say)
pretending to a Monopoly of the Holy Spirit (which was promised and given to
the whole Church, that is, to the Elect, (...) Saints) as is plain by a clause
in St. Peter's Ser^^on, made the very same time that the mira^ulous gifts of the
Spirit of GOD were first given ^o the Apostles, who says to the Jews and
Gen^iles, Repent and be Baptized every one of you in the ^ame of Jesus Christ
for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, for
this promise ^s to you and to your Children, and to all that are afar ^ff, even
as many as the LORD our GOD shall call. Next, to judge infallibly of Divine
Truth, and to forgive sins as CHRIST did. Then to be the Head of all
Ecclesiastical Persons and Causes in the World; to be so far above Kings and
Princes, as to Judge, Depose, and Deprive them, and to have an absolute
Jurisdiction over all the affairs in Christendom, in Ordine ad Spiritualia; yet
all this the Canonists allow him, and he makes no scruple to assume, whilst it
is plain that in the whole New Iestament there is no description made of such
an Officer to be at any time in the Church, except it be in the Prophecy of the
A^ocalyps, or in one of St. Paul's Episties, where he says, Who it is that
shall sit in the Temple of GOD. showing himself that he is GOD. CHRIST tells
us, his Kingdom is not of this World; And, if any will be the greatest amongst
his Disciples, that be must be serwant to the rest; which shows that his
Followers were to be great in Sanctity and Humility, and not in worldly power.

The Apostle Paul writing to the Christians (...) those times, almost in every
Epistle comman^^ them to be obedient to the Higher Powers, or Mag^^strates set
over them; and St. Peter himself (from whom this extravagant Empire is
pretended t^^ be derived) in his first Epistle, bids us submit o^^ selves to
every ordinance of man for the LORDS sake whether it be to the King, or, etc
and this is en^^ joined although it is plain, that they who go^^ vern'd the
World in those days, were bot^^ Heathens, Tyrants, and Usurpers, and in th^^
submission there is no exception or proviso for Ec^clesiastical immunity. The
practice as well as precepts of those Holy Men shows plainly that the^ had no
intention to leave Successors, who should deprive Hereditary Princes from their
right o^ Reigning for differing in Religion, who without all doubt are by the
appointment of the Apostl^^ and by the principles of Christianity, to be obeyed
and submitted to (in things wherein the fundamental Laws of the Government give
them power) though they were Jews or Gentiles. If I should tell you by what
Texts in Scripture the Popes claim the powers before mentioned, it would stir
you up to laughter, and prove too light for so serious a matter; yet because
possibly you have never heard so much of this subject before, I shall instance
in a few: They tell you therefore that the Jurisdiction they pretend over the
Church, and the power of pardoning sins, comes from CHRIST to St. Peter, and,
from ^im to them. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock (...) will build my
Church, I will give thee the Keys of ^he Kingdom of Heaven; whatsoever thou
shall bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever thou ^halt loose
on Earth, etc. From these two Texts ridiculously applied, comes this great Tree
which has with its branches over spread the whole Earth, and killed all the
good and wholesome Plants growing upon it; The first Text will never by any man
of sense be understood to say more, than that the Preaching, Suffering, and
Ministry of Peter, was like to be a great foundation and Pillar of the Doctrine
of Christ; the other Text (as also another spoken by our Savior, to all his
Apostles, whose sins ye remit they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain they
are retained) are all by the primitive Fathers interpreted in this manner,
wheresover you shall effectually preach the Gospel, you shall carry with you
Grace, and Remission of sins to them which shall follow your instructions; but
the people who shall not have these joyful Tidings communicated by you to them,
shall remain in darkness, and in their sins. But if any will contest, that by
some of these last Texts, that Evangelical Excommunication, which was
afterward brought into the Church by the Apostles, was here presignified by
our great Master, how unlike were those censures to those now thundered out (as
he calls it) by the Pope? these we^ for edification, and not destruction, to
affli^^ the flesh for the salvation of the Soul, that the Apostolical Ordinance
was pronounced for some notorious scandal or Apostasy from the Faith and first
decreed by the Church; that is, the whole Congregation present, and then
denounced by the Pastor, and reached only to deba^ such persons from partaking
of the Communi^on or fellowship of that Church, till Repentance should readmit
him, but was followed by no other prosecution or chastisement, as is now
practiced. But suppose all these Texts had been as they would have them, how
does this make for the Successors of St. Peter or the rest? Or how can this
prove the Bishops of Rome to have right to such Succession? But I make haste
from this subject, and shall urge but one Text more; which is, the spiritual man
judges all men, but is himself judged of none; from whence is inferred by the
Canonists, that first, the Pope is the Spiritual man; and then that he is to be
Judge of all the World; and last, that he is never to be liable to any judgment
himself; whereas it is obvious to the meanest understanding: St. Paul in t^ is
text means to distinguish between a person inspired with the Spirit of God, and
remaining one in the state of Nature, which latter he says cannot judge of
those Heavenly gifts and graces, as he explains himself when he says, The
natural man ^^nnot discern the things of the Spirit, because they are
^^olishness unto him. To take my leave of this matter wholly out of the way of
my Studies, I shall beg of you Zen^bio and of Guilio, and the rest of out
Society to read over carefully the New Testament, and then to see what ground
there is for Purgatory (by which all the wealth and greatness has accrew'd to
these men) what color for the Idolatrous worship of Saints, and their Images,
and particularly for speaking in their hymes and prayers to a piece of wood
(the Cross I mean ( Salve Lignum, etc. and then fae nos dignos beneficiorum
Christi, as you may read in that Office, what color, or rather what excuse for
that horrid unchristian, and barbarous Engine called the Inquisition, brought
in by the Command and Authority of the Pope, the inventor of which, Peter a
Dominican Friar having been slain amongst the Albigesi, as he well deserved, is
now Cannoniz'd for a Saint, and styled, San Pietro Martine: In the dreadful
Prisons of this Inquisition, many faithful and pious Christians (to say nothing
of honest Moral M^ors or Mahometans) are tormented and samish'd, or, if they
out live their sufferings burnt publicly to death, and that only for differing
in Religion from the Pope, without having any crime, or the least misdemeanor
proved or alleged against them, and this is inflicted upon these poor
Creatures, by those who prose to believe the Scripture, which tells us, the
faith is the gift of God, without whose specia^ Illumination no man can obtain
it; and the^ fore is not in reason or humanity to be punish for wanting it: And
Christ himself has so clea^ly decided that point in bidding unlet the ^a^ and
the wheat grow together till the Harves^ that I shall never make any difficulty
^o call h^ Antichrist, who shall use the least persecuti^ whatsoever against
any differing in m^^ers faith from himself, whether the person ^^d senting, be
Heretic, Jew, Gentile, or Mo^bonnet Next I beseech you to observe in reading
the Holy Book (though Christian fasts are doubtl^ of Divine right) what ground
there is for enjoying fish to be eaten (at least flesh to be abstain^ from) for
one third part of the year, by whi^ they put the poor to great hardship, whom
having purses to buy wholesome fish, are subject^ to all the miseries and
diseases incident to a b^^ and unhealthful diet, whilst the rich, and chief^
themselves and their Cardinals, exceed Lucull in their Luxury, of Oysters,
Turbats, tinder Cral and Carpioni brought some hundreds of miles feed their
gluttony, upon these penitential day of abstinence from Beeff and Perk, It may
be will lie in the way of those who observe the to enquire what St. Paul means
when he say That in the latter days some shall depart from the fa^ forbidding
to marry, and Commanding to abstain from ^^eats which God has ereated to be
received with ^banksgiving; but all these things, and many ^her abuses brought
in by these Perverters of ^hristianity, will I hope ^re long be enquired to by
some of the Disciples of that bold Friar, ^ho the very same year in which I
profesied ^at the scourge of the Church was not far off, ^gan to thunder
against their Indulgencies, and ^nce has questioned many tenets long received
^d imposed upon the world. I shall conclude is discourse after I have said a
word of the ^ost Hellish of all the innovations brought in (...) the Popes,
which is the Clergy; these are a ^t of men under pretense of ministering to the
^ople in holy things, set a part and separated ^m the rest of mankind (from
whom they ^ve a very distinct, and a very opposite in^est) by a humane Ceremony
called by a ^vine name; viz Ordination, these wherever ^ey are found (with the
whole body of the ^onks and Friars, who are called the regula^ ^ergy) make a
Band which may be called the ^nizaries of the Papaey; these have been the
causer all the Soloecisms and immoralities in Go^ ^ment, and of all the
impieties and abomina^ ^ns in Religion, and by consequence of all the ^order,
villainy, and corruption we suffe^ ^der in this detestable Age; these men by the
^shop of Rome's help have crept into all the Governments in Christendom, where
there is an^ mixture of Monarchy, and made themselves a third estate: that is,
by their temporalities (which are almost a third part of all the Lands in
Europ^ given them by the blind zeal, or rather folly o^ the Northren people,
who over ran this part o^ the world) stepped into the throne, and wha^ they
cannot perform by these secular helps, and by the dependancy their vassals have
upon them, they fail not to claim and to usurp, and by the power they pretend
to have from God and his Vicegerent at Rome. They exempt themselves, their
Lands and Goods, from all secular jurisdiction; that is, from all Courts of
Justice and Magistracy, and will be Judges in their own Causes, as in matters
of tithe, etc. and not content with this, will appoint Courts of their own to
decide Sovereignty in testamentary matters, and many other causes; and take
upon them to be the sole punishers of many great Crimes, as Witchcraft,
Sorcery, Adultery, and all uncleanness; to say nothing of the forementioned
judicatory of the inquisition: in these last cases they ^urn the offenders over
to be punished (when ^hey have given Sentence) by the secular arm, (...) they
call the Magistrate, who is blindly to ex^cute their decrees under pain of Hell
fire; as if Christian Princes and Governors were appoint^d only by God to be
their Bravo's or Hangmen. They give protection and Sanctuary, to all execrable
offenders, even to Murderers themselves, (whom God commanded to be
indis^ensably puni^^'d with death) it they come with their Churches,
Cloisters, or any other place, which they will please to call holy ground; and
^f the ordinary justice, nay, the Sovereign power, do proceed against such
offenders, they thunder out their Excommunication; that is, cut off from the
body of Christ, not the Prince only, but the whole Nation and People, shutting
the Church doors, and commanding divine offices to cease, and sometimes even
authorizing the people to rise up in Arms, and constrain their Governors to a
submission, as happened to this poor City in the time of our Ancestors, when
for but forbidding the servant of a poor Carmelite Friar who had vowed poverty,
and should have kept none) to go armed, and punishing his disobedience, with
imprisonment, our whole Senate with their Confalonier were constrained to go to
Avignon for absolution, and in case of refusal, had been massacred by the
people. It would almost astonish a wise man to imagine how these folks should
acquire an Empire so destructive to Christian Religion, and so pernicious to
the interests of men, but it will not seem so miraculous to them who shall
seriously consider, that the Clergy has been for more than these thousand
years upon the catch, and a formed united Corporation against the parity of
Religion, and the interest of Mankind, and has not only wrested the Holy
Scripture to their on advantage (which they have kept from the Laty in unknown
languages, and by prohibitin the reading thereof) but made use likewise first
of the blind devotion and ignorance of the Goths, Vandals, Huns, etc. and since
of the am bition and avarice of Christian Princes, stirting them up one against
another, and sending them upon foolish errands to the Holy Land, to lost their
lives, and to leave their Dominions, it the mean time, exposed to themselves
and their Accomplices, They have besides kept Leatning and Knowledge among
themselves, stiffling the light of the Gospel, crying down Moral vertue^ as
splendid sins, defacing humane policy, destroying the purity of the Christian
faith and profession, and all that was virtuous, prudent, regular and orderly
upon eatth, so that whoever would do good, and good men service, get himself
immortal honor in this life, and eternal glory in the next, would restore the
good policy (I had almost said with my Author Livy the sanctity too) of the
Heathens, with all their valor, and other glorious endowments; I say, whoever
would do this, must make himself powerful enough to extirpate this cursed and
apostate race out of the world, and that you may see this is lawful as well as
necessary, I shall say but one word of their calling and original,(...) and
then leave this subject. The word Clergy, is (...) term wholly unknown to the
Scriptures, otherwise then in this sense; a particular People or GOD'S lot used
often for the whole Jewish Nation, who are likewise called a Kingdom of Priests
in some places. In the New Testament the word Cleros is taken for the true
Believers, who are also called the Elect, and often the Church, which is the
Assembly of the Faithful met together, as is easily seen by reading the
beginning of most of St Paul's Epistles, where writing to the Church, or
Churches he usually explains himself, To all the Saints in Christ: sometimes,
To all who have obtained some faith with us; sometimes, To all who in all
places call upon the Name of the Lord Jesus, etc. by which it appears, that
neither the word Church nor Clergy was in those days ever appropriated to the
Pastors or Elders of the flock; but did signify indifferently all the people
assembled to^^^ there; which is likewise the literal construction of the word
Ecclesia, which is an assembly or ^^eeting; in these Congregations or Churches
was performed their Ordination, which properly signifies no more than a decree
of such Assembly; but is particularly used for an Election of any into the
Ministry. The manner was this, sometimes the Apostles themselves in their
Perigrinations, and sometimes any other eminent Member of the Church, did
propose to the Society (upon vacancy, or other necessity of a Pastor, Elder, or
Deacon) some good Holy man to be Elected, which person if he had parts or
gifts, such as the Church could edify by was chosen by the lifting up of hands,
that is by suffrage, and oftentimes hands were laid upon him, and Prayer made
for him. These men so set apart did not pretend to any consecration, or
sacredness more than they had before, much less to become a distinct thing from
the rest of mankind as if they had been metamorphos'd, but did attend to
perform the several Functions of their calling, as prophesying; that is,
Preaching the Gospel, visiting the Sick, etc. and never intermitted the
ordinary business of their Trade or Profession, unless their Church or
Congregation was very numerous, in which case they were maintained by alms or
contribution, which was laid aside by every member, and collected the first day
of the week by the Deacons, this was said to be given to the Church, and was
employed by suffrage of the whole Collective Body to the poor, and to other
incidencies, so far was it from Sacrilege in those days to employ Church goods
to Lay uses. From these words, Church, Clergy, Ordination, Pastor, (which last
has been translated of late years Bishop) you see what conclusions these men
have deduced, and how immense a structure they have raised, upon so little a
foundation, and how easily it will fall to the ground, when God shall inspire
Christian Princes and States to redeem his truths, and his poor enslaved
Members out of their Churches, and to bring back again into the world, the true
original Christian faith, with the Apostolical Churches, Pastors, and
Ordination, so consistent with moral virtue and integrity, so helpful and
concucing to the best and most prudent policy, so fitted for obedience to
Magistraty and Government, all which the world has for many years been
deprived of, by the execrable and innate ill quality, which is insepatable from
priestcraft, and the conjuration or spell of their new invented ordination; by
which they cry with the Poet, Jam furor humanum nostro de pectore sensum
Fxpulit and totum spirant prae cordia Phaebum.
which makes them so Sacred, and Holy, that they have nothing of integrity, or
indeed of humanity left in them. I hope I shall not be thought impious any
longer, upon this point, I mean for vindicating Christian Religion from the
assaults of these men, who having the considence to believe, or at least
profess themselves the only instruments which God has chosen or can choose to
teach and reform the world (though they have neither Moral virtues, nor natural
parts equal to other men for the most part) have by this pretense prevailed so
far upon the common sort of people, and upon some too of a better quality, that
they are persuaded their salvation or eternal damnation depends (...) believing
or not believing of what they say. I would not be understood, to dissuade any
from honoring the true Apostolical Teachers, when they shall be re established
amongst us. or from allowing them (even of right, and not of alms or courtesy)
such emoluments as may enable them cheerfully to perform the duties of their
charge, to provide for their Children, and even to use hospitality as they are
commanded by St: Paul. But this I will prophecy before I conclude; that if
Princes shall perform this but siness by halves, and leave any root of this
Clergy or Priestcraft, as it now is, in the ground or if that famous Reformer,
fled some year since out of Picardy to Geneva, who is of to great renown for
learning and parts, and who promises us so perfect a Reformation, shall not it
this model wholly extirpate this sort of men then I say I must foretell, that as
well the Magistrate as this Workman, will find themselves deceived in their
expectation, and that the least fibra of this plant will over run again the
whole Vineyard of the Lord, and turn to a diffusive Papacy in every Diocese,
perhaps in every Parish: So that God in his mercy inspire them (...) cut out
the core of the Ulcer, and the bag of the imposture, that it may never rankle
or feste any more, nor break out hereafter, to diffusive new corruption and
putrefaction through the body of Christ, which is his Holy Church, (...) to
vitiate and infect the good order and true (...) licy of Government.

I come now to the last branch of my charge, which is, That I teach Princes
villainy, and how to ^^^^ive and oppress their Subjects, In which accusation I
am dealt with as poor Agnolo Canini was, who as they report, being a very
learned practiser of the Laws, and lest the only man of this profession (one
Autumn) in our City, the rest of the Advocates being fled into the country for
fear of a contagious Disease which then reigned, was commanded by our Judges to
assist with his counsel both parties, and to draw Pleas as well for the
Defendant as the Plantiff, else the Courts of Justice must have been shut up.
In the same manner my accusers handle me, and make me first exhort and teach
Subjects to throw off their Princes, and then to instruct Monarchs how to on
slave and oppress them; but I did not expect such ingratitude from mine own
Citizens, or to be served as Moses was, when he was upbraided for killing the
Fgyptian, by one of his own people for whose sake he had done it, whereas he
believed they would have understood by that action, that he was the person whom
God intended to make use in delivering them from the horrid slavery they were
then under. If any man will read over my Book of the Prince with impartiality
and ordinary charity, he will easily perceive, that it is not my intention
therein to recommend that Government, or those men there discribed, to the
world; much less to teach them to trample upon good men, and a that is Sacred
and Venerable upon earth, Law Religion, Honesty, and what not; if I have been a
little too punctual in designing these Monsters, and drawn them to the life in
all their lineaments and colors, I hope manking will know them the better to
avoid them, m^^^ Treatise being both a Satyr against them, and (...) true
Character of them: I speak nothing o^ great and honorable Princes, as the
Kings o^ England, France, and others; who have the Sta^es and Orders of their
Kingdoms with excellent Laws, and Constitution, to found and maintain their
Government; and who reig^^ over the hearts as well as the persons of their
subjects; I treat only of those vermin bred out of the corruption of our own
small Common wealths and Cities, or engendered by the ill blast that come from
Rome, Olivaretto da Fermo, Borgi^^ the Baglioni, the Bentivoglio, and a hundred
others who having had neither right nor honorable means to bring them to their
power, use is with more violence, rapin, and cruelty upon the poor people, than
those other renowned Princes show to the Boars, the Wolves, the Foxes, and
other savage beasts which are the objects of their chase and hunting: whosoever
in his Empire over men is tied to no other rules than those of his own will and
lust, must either be a Saint to moderate his passions, or else (...) very Devil
incarnate; or if he be neither of these, both his life and reign are alike to
be very short; for whosoever takes upon him so execrable an employment as to
rule men against the Laws of nature and of reason, must turn all topsie turvy,
and never stick at any thing, for if once he halt, he will falls and never rise
again: I hope after this I need say little to justify my self from the calumny
of advising these Monsters to break their faith, since to keep it is to lose
their Empire, faithfulness and sincerity being their mortal enemies, and
Vguccione della Fagivola to one who upbraided him, that he never employed
honest men; answered, Honest men will cut my throat, let the King use honest
men, meaning the King of Naples, who was established in his Throne, and had
right to it. But that I may have occasion to justify my self against a little
more then I am accused of, I will confess, that in a work where I desired to be
a little more serious, than I was in this Book of the Prince, I did affirm,
that in what way soever men defended their Country, whether by breaking or
keeping their faith, it was ever well defended, not meaning in a strick moral
sense, or point of honor, but explaing my self that defacta the infamy of the
breach of word, would quickly be forgotten and pardoned by the world; which is
very true. Nay, what if I had said that good success in any interprizes (a far
less consideration than piety to our Country) would have cancelled the bleam of
such perfidy as Caesar (whom I compare to Cataline) used toward his fellow
Citiz^ns, not only not detested by posterity, but even crowned with renown and
immortal fame; insomuch as Princes to this day) as I have observed elsewhere)
think it an honor to be compared to him, and the highest pitch of veneration
their flatters can arrive at is to call them by the name of one who violated
his faith, and enslaved his Country. I hope that in showing as well these
Tyrants as the poor people who are forced to live under them, their danger,
that is by laying before the former, the helish and precipitous courses they
must use to maintain their power, by representing to the latter, what they must
suffer, I may be instrumental, first, to deter private Citizens from attempting
upon the liberties of their Country, or if they have done it, to make them lay
down their ill gotten Authority; and then to warn the rest of the Nobility and
people, from these factions and malignancies in their several commonwealths and
Governments, which might give hope and opportunity to those who are ambitious
amongst them, to aspire to an Empire over them. However it prove, I hope I am
no more to be blamed for my attempt, then that excellent Physician of our
Nation is, who has lately taken so much pains to compose an excellent
Treatise, of that foul Disease which was, not long since, brought from the new
world into these parts; wherein though he be forced to use such expressions as
are almost able to nauseate his Readers, and talk of such Ulcers, Boyles,
Nodes, Botches, Cankers, etc. that are scarce fit to be repeated, especially
when he handles the causes of those effects, yet he did not intend to teach or
exhort men to get this Disease; much less did he bring this lamentable
infirmity into the world, but discribes it faithfully as it is, to the end men
may be detered, and avoid the being infected with it, and may discern and cure,
whenever their incontinence and folly shall procure it them. I shall say no
more in this matter; but to conclude all make a protestation, that as well in
this Book, as in all my other Writing, my only scope and design is to promote
the interest and welfare of manking, and the peace and quiet of the world, both
which I am so vain as to believe, would be better obtained and provided for, if
the principles I lay down were followed and observed by Princes and People,
than they are like to be by those Maxims which are in this Age most in vogue.
For my self I shall only say (and call you all to witness for the truth of it)
that as by my Birth I am a Gentleman, Chief Magistrate.
and of a Family which has had many Consaloniers of Justice in it; so I have
been used in many employments of great trust, both in our City and abroad; and
at this hour am not in my Estate one penny the better for them all, not should
I have been, although I had never surfered any losses by the seizure of my
Estate in the year 1531, for my carriage it has ever been void of faction and
contention, I never had any prejudice against the house of Midici, but honored
the person of all those of that Family whom I knew, and the memory of such of
them as lived before me, whom I acknowledge to have been excellent Patriots and
Pillars of our City and Commonwealth. During the turbulent times of Piero, and
after his expulsion out of Florence, though my employments were bu^
Ministerial, my advice was asked in many grave matters, which I ever delivered
with impartiality and indifference, not espousing the heady opinions of any,
much less their passions and animosities; I never sided with any Party further
than that the Duty of my charge obliged me to serve the prevailing Party, when
possessed of the Government of our City; this I speak for those changes that
happened between the flight of the laid Pien^ de Medici, and the horrid
Parricide committed by Clement the 7th. upon his indulgent Mother, joining with
his greatest enemies, and uniting himself with those who had used the most
transcendent insolence to his own person, and the highest violence and fury the
Sun ever saw to his poor Courtiers and Subjects, and so accompained he might
sheath his Sword in the bowels of his own desolate Country. At that time, and
during that whole Siege, I must confess I did break the confines of my
Neutrality, and not only acted as I was commanded barely, but roused my self,
and stirred up others haranguing (in the Streets and places of the City) the
People to defend with the last drop of their Blood, the Walls of their Country,
and the Liberty of their Government; taking very hazardous Journeys to
Ferrucio, and then into the Mugello and other parts, to bring in Succors and
Provisions to our languishing City, and acting as a Soldier (which was a new
profession to me) at the age of above sixty, when others are despensed from it.
For all which, I had so entire a satisfaction in my mind and conscience, that I
am persuaded this cordial made me able to support the sufferings which befell me
after our Catastrophe, and to rejoice in them so far, that all the malice and
cruelties of our enemies, could never draw one word from me unsuitable to the
honor I thought I merited, and in some sort enjoy, for being instrumental to
defend (as long as it was possible) our Altars and our Hearths. But all that I
have undergone, has been abundantly recompensed to me by the favor and
courtesy) of the most excellent Signior Cosimo, who has been pleased to offer
me all the prefer ments the greatest ambi^ion could aspire to which I did not
refuse out of any scruple to serve so incomparable a Prince, who see early
years manifest so much courage, humanity, and prudence, and so fatherly a care
of the public good, but because I was very desireous not to accept of a charge
which I was not able to perform, my years and infirmities having not brought me
to a condition in which I am fitte^ to live in a Cloister then a Palace, and
made me good for nothing but to talk of past times the common vice of old Age:
So that I did n^^ think it just or grateful to reward this exce^lent person so
ill for his kindness, as to give him (...) useless Servant, and to fill up the
place of a fat better. This is all I think fit to say of this matter I choose to
address it to you Zenobio, for the constant friendship I have ever entertained
with you and formerly with your deceased Father, the companion of my Studies,
and ornament of our City. And so I bid you farewell,

The first of April, 1537.

