A TREATISE OF THE GOUT.

Written Originally in the French Tongue, By THEODOR TURQUET, DE MAYERNE,
Knight, Baron of Aubonne, Councellor, and chief Physician to the late KING and
QUEEN of ENGLAND.

Englished for the general Benefit, By Thomas Sherley, M. D. Physician in
Ordinary to his present Majesty Charles the II.

Whereunto is added, Advice about Hypochondriacal-Fits, by the same Author.

London, Printed for D. Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultrey, 1676.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
HAving perused this ensuing Treatise of the Gout, (which fell but lately into
my hands) I found it not only so Ingenious, but so Solid and Useful a Work,
that I thought it much pity, it should remain locked up from the knowledge of
those worthy persons of our own Nation, which languish under the affliction of
this torturing Disease; and therefore I have taken the pains to present you
with it in our Native Language: I was the more encouraged to do this, because
both the Principles and Method which this worthy Author makes use of, are not
only very rational, but consonant for the most part with those of my own, which
I had assumed many years before I had a sight of this Book; the usefulness of
which Method and Principles (though not in all particulars the same with my
own, especially the Medicines; yet having the same tendency) I can recommend by
way of Analogy from my own practice, which has been employed about the Persons
of diverse of eminent Worth, Learning, and Dignity in this Kingdom; not only by
way of giving ease in, and shortning the Paroxysm, or Fits of the Gout, but by
returning the Parts to their Tone, Strength, and Vigor, after the Fits are
past, and also by preventing the otherwise too frequent returns and assaults of
this Disease: All which I do assert (whatever the opinion of some others may be
to the contrary) not only may probably be done, but that I have actually done
it to Regular and Judicious Persons, with a constant and laudable success. And
all this not (as some erroniously suppose) by hindering Nature from discharging
the Gouty humor upon the joints, which indeed was a dangerous way, but by
actually and really removing the Diseasie-Product, and carrying on the
Offending matter by rationally-compos'd, safe, and easy Medicines; by this
means hindering the Disease from recruiting it self, and getting head; and by
this Method, I have preserved some, diverse years together, in a Vigorous and
healthy state of Body. Wherefore (I say) finding this worthy Author so nearly
concurring with my own Sentiments, I thought it would be an Obliging Service to
the Sick, if I exposed this Tract to the public view of the English Reader;
and that for these Reasons: First, To comfort such as groan under this
Distemper, and to remove the prejudice which some men have endeavored to
implant in them; as if there were no remedy in this Disease but Patience, and
nothing to be done, but to Groan. Secondly, To satisfy the desires of many,
which I know thirst after the Works of this dead Hero in Physic, Sir Theodor
Mayerne, (whose Fame nevertheless can never die,) and yet none of them has
hitherto come to light, though, as I have been credibly informed, before his
death he had fitted a large Volum for the Press, with which we have not been
blessed, by reason of the disagreements and Lawsuits of his Heirs: For the
aforesaid reasons I have put out this Treatise, in the doing which, I have had
a greater consideration of thy interest, Reader, than my own; for which, if you
have a grateful mind, you must acknowledge that I am

Your Real Friend, Thomas Sherley.

A TREATISE OF THE GOUT.
AMongst those Afflictions and Diseases which molest Humain bodies, and portend
their early dissolution, and Exit, before the fatal and determinate time, the
Gout above all others deserves our Compassion; for this cause, that it is
reckoned by many men (though very erroniously) amongst those Diseases that are
absolutely incurable: So that the Sick person is left with a Prognostic: And
the endeavors of Physicians in this Disease, is only employed about the
mitigation of pain, by the application of Topical or outward Medicines to the
grieved part; they striving rather to please their Patients desires, than to
perform their own office and duty: for most Physicians are more desirous by
compliance to gain themselves Credit, than to procure the Health of the
Patients, committed to their care, they being only intent upon pacifying their
cries; the possibility of restoring their Patients to their perfect Health,
does not so much as once come in their thoughts.

And if this Disease be narrowly examind, without doubt it will hardly seem to
deserve a slighter censure; for its Cause proceeds with so slow and
Tortoise-like a pace, that it gains ground, and is augmented by degrees, not
produceing its full effect, until it has first wrought the parts into a
depraved (...), or distemperature by means of the included humors, and then by
often errors in Diet, and an intemperate Life, it gets to so vast a height,
that the Sick seems to be placed (as it were) upon the brink of a Precipice,
where beholding the magnitude of the accumilated matter, and the length of the
way which must of necessity be gone back before there can be a return to former
health; they are frighted, and cast away all hope, and take up an aversion and
loathing to all sorts of Remedies. Add to this, that the Gout seeks out Rich
and Great men's Houses, and there it fixes its chief Fortress, (or Garrison) to
whose commands (the Fates so pleasing) all such yield obedience, in so much
that you cannot extort an assent from such men, to those precepts which are
requisite for the recovery of their healths.

But it is not at all true, that God has Created Nature a Stepmother, and
destitute of help, or that there is any disease (whose (...), or Essence, does
not consist in a mere privation) which does not admit of a Cure: But if the
singular Nature of the Disease, or its cause does withstand a Cure, we may
endeavor to give help, even to such (though they refuse to be governed by the
Precepts of Physicians,) either by metigating the fierceness of their pain, or
by preventing the frequent returns of their Paroxsysm's, or Fits; and at last,
by taking care lest the parts by omitting their usual Offices, and by long
Idleness, grow torped, and become unfit for the employments they are designed
for: And that these scopes or intentions may be obtained by Art, in any subject
whatsoever, is most certain; if the Patient be yet capable of receiving the
benefit of those Medicines which are to be applied, and is not already come to
the ut-most and last extremity.

That we may with the more clearness, manifest the nature and quality of the
Gout, we are not to regard the division of the humors into four parts; for
though they appear distinct when they are voided from a humain body, we are to
look deeper into the thing, and to consider that all the Excrements of the body
do admit into themselves, and contain in their Composition, Salt. Especially
the Liquid humors, as Urine, and Sweat, whose thinner parts being discussed
into Vapors, there will remain a saline Sediment: From hence we may infer that
Salt; as long as it continues within the bounds and proportions allotted it by
Nature, is inoffencive; but when it exceeds that, and abounds, whether it be
Liquid, and mixed with its dissolvent, or separated from it, and be coagulate,
or become solid, it cannot be accumulated together in the body without hurt.
For, as in the Macrocosme, or greater World, there are diverse sorts of Salts,
of which some are sweet as Sugars; others sower as Vitriolet Salts; some are
bitter as the Salt of Soot; others truly Salt, as Sea Salt, and Salt-Gemme;
others Volatile, as Sal-Armoniack; others insipid, of which sort are those
which are contained in Pibbles, Gravel, and other stones: So likewise in the
Microcosme, or body of Man, there are generated Tartarous Salts, which
according to their native proprieties, and disposition, produce distempers,
which from thence are called Tartarous Diseases, which in respect of their
material cause, and peculiar dispositions, are divided into two sorts; the one
taking its origin from the solution, the other from the coagulation or
concretion of these Tartarous Salts; which disposition is nourished, and
furthered much by the distemperature of the parts, upon which the native heat
acts according to the degrees of their proper Essence, and essential mixtion;
and so either dissolves these Salts, as it does in the Livers of those which
are Hydropical; or it does cause a Concretion, as it happens in the Kidneys,
and Bladder, of those which are Obnoxious to the Stone.

The four first Elements, (or the four humors) being dismissed, let us pass
over to the Examination of their Succedana's, or those principles constituted
in their place, which by the Spagirists or Chemists, (who resolve sublunary
bodies into their principles by the help of their fires,) are asserted to be
three: They calling whatsoever is watery, and volatile, Mercury; and styling
all that is fat and devourable by fire, Sulphur; and giving the name of Salt to
all the fixed and dry parts, separated from the impure and dead Earth.

This Salt is of the nature of Balsom, which the body being deprived of, it
certainly becomes putred. Wherefore, since there is a constant dissolution, and
dissipation of this triple substance, these principles require to be restored
and repaired; for we are nourished by the same things of which we are
constituted: But the Elementary substances which we receive to sustain our
selves, are various, both in their composition and temperament; and in every
sort of aliment, one of the aforesaid principles does always abound above the
rest, wherefore it is a necessary consequence then, that whosoever uses such
Meat, in which Salt does radically abound, he shall experience in himself the
increase of the same Principle.

And here we may admire Divine Providence that has ordered the serous humor
(an Excrement of the first Concoction) to be Liquid; in which, when the Aliment
is dissolved into the form of Chyle, there is made a separation of the
(aforesaid) three substances, and the Salt is almost all dissolved by that
Ichorous Liquor* which being mixed with the blood, it becomes a Vehicule to it;
and thus being transmitted with it to the smallest parts of the body, it serves
them instead of a Balsom; and the overpluss of it, constituting the Lixiviate
body of the Urine, flows out at the place destinated for its Excression; and
if there be any unuseful and superfluous parts of it left behind, after the
third Concoction is performed, they are sent off by Sweat; or else seeking an
Exit by insensible transpiration at the Pores, it degenerates into thick scurfe
and foulness, sticking to the skin.

And this happens in those bodies which are well constituted, whose faculties
are vigorous, and their functions performed without defect; but if by default
of the parts, or through ill Diet, Nature be oppressed, and the Secretions and
Expulsions of Excrements be slowly performed, then of necessity this Salt will
accumulate and gather it self together upon the parts, and abounding in
quantity, whereas before it preserved them like a Balsom from Putrefaction: Now
on the contrary, wheresoever it is conveyed, and remains, (although it be
dissolved, and of a liquid form, like Brine) yet it inflames the parts, and
villicates and gnaws them, exciting pain.

Moreover, since the natural proportion betwixt the dissolvant, and the thing
to be dissolved is such, that the most subtle Liquor, will hardly receive into
it self above the fourth part (of any thing) in proportion to its self; if the
Salt exceed in the aforesaid watery Latex, or Liquor, then of necessity it will
be stopped in its passages and Vessels, in which it will grow together, and be
coagulated into different sort of Stones, according to the nature of the
predominant Salt.

And here we may consider the various Concretions which happen in the bowels of
the Earth; as also those which are made by Art: For Allom, when it coagulates,
has one form, Saltpeter another, Sea Salt another, and Sal-Armoniack another,
different from all these: Nay, he that shall remove his contemplations from the
Coagulations of Salts, to those which happen to Stones and Marcasits, (or
Minerals), he shall find several of them so elaborately formed according to
Geometrical Rules, that he will be forced to acknowledge that Art is outdone
by Nature. Upon this subject, read what the Translator of this Treatise has
writ in his Philosophical Essay of Putrification; Printed Anno, 1672.


From what has been said, we may infer, that Tartarous Diseases are the
offspring of a certain Native, (or Seedy) disposition of generating their
like; or rather (as I may say) a powerful separating and assimulating of that
Salt which we call Tartar from the Aliments, (which is contained in them) or if
you will, the vicious and evil disposition of the aforesaid Aliments
(indiscreetly taken into the body) overcomeing the Tone of the Faculties, and
depraving the Functions, which at length, through the frequent concourse of
these Procatartick, or procuring causes, must necessarily be oppressed and
overwhelmed: Wherefore these sort of Diseases, are either Hereditary, and
transmitted by Parents infected with the same Infirmities, to their Children,
or accidentary, and engendered in us by our own default.

According to the Philosophical Axiom, received opinion, or Dogma, the
definition of the Gout is thus stated. That it is a painful solution of the
continuety of the Ligaments and Nervous parts (which are very sensible)
incompassing all the joints, introduced upon them by the sharp and biteing
quality of a certain Tartarous matter, or Salt, separated from the mass of
Blood, and transmitted to those parts (as being most weak and aptest to receive
it,) together with its proper Vehicule the serous humor; that being unuseful to
nutrition, and unfit to coagulate into flesh.

This definition of the Gout acknowledges but one cause of it, and shows the
devision of it into a hot and cold Gout, to be futile or vain. Yet does not
this hinder, but that the Arthretick (or Gout) pains may be mitigated by the
application of remedies of a contrary nature: But then it is to be considered,
that the Spirits, together with that humor which predominates above the rest,
and is generated by the Temperament of the body, does flow to the part grieved
with pain, (in aid thereof.) And so in a Phlegmatic temperament the pained
parts are whitish, and swell without inflammation; and in the Sanguine and
Choleric, their pains are cruel and great, and require sudden relief: But in
whatsoever sort of Gout it be, the pains do never cease (I spoke not of the use
of Narcotticks, or stupifying Medicines here) until the Salt the Parent and
cause of the pain be diluted by some gentle Liquor (a good Diet being
instituted, as the forbearing of Wine, and using to drink Water impregnated
with the virtue of such things as are usually given in Fits of the Gout) or
else a diversion of those humors be made, which impetuously rush upon the
parts; and then that Salt, if it be Volatile, will be discussed into the habit
of the body, or outward parts; or at length it will be tempered and mitigated
by internal Medicines, such as are Sugar of Lead, and Salt of Tartar.

I omit the opinion of those, who derive the Original of the Gout from the
Liver, or Brain: For in my judgment, the first fountain of its material cause,
is in the Stomach; which afterward is from thence derived, and by all the
Genus venosum, (or Veins) poured out upon, (and rendered habitual to,) those
parts afflicted. (Either by hereditary right, or ill Diet:) which parts attract
the acrimony of the humor, which insinuates it self into them, as being very
weak, and therefore prone to receive, and suffer, and less apt to resist its
power.

For every pain of the Joints, is not to be called the Gout, but that only
which proceeds from the aforesaid Tartarous matter, and brings forth this
effect; leaving upon the parts a great debility after the pain is gone.

There is a sort of wandering Gout, called by the English, Ninning; it is
Erratick, and shifteth place, sparing no joint, but invading all of them
successively, and oftentimes possessing several of them at once; whose
set-time, (the inflammation being finished) is determined by Hippocrates to be
forty days. This arises from a general Cataclysme, or flood of humors, which
happens in Plethorick, or full bodies, abounding with such serous watery
humors; which falling into the caveties of the Joints, prove afflictive to the
adjacent parts, more upon the account of their filling, and stretching them,
than from their being accrimonius. This depraved Diathesis falls not under this
disquisition here; since it is easily taken away, either by frequent
Phlebotomy, (or bleeding) or else by large Evacuations with Hydragogol, or
water-purging Medicines; which means make a revultion and subduction of the
peccant and offencive humors.

But dismissing this Distemper, let us remove our discourse to that trucculent
and rebellious Disease, particularly called Podagra, which Hippocrates,
according to certain conditions, pronounces either curable or incurable, lib.
2. Praedict. (says he) De Podagra haec dico, quicunque aut senes sunt, aut
circa articulos calculos tophaceos Concretos habent; aut aerumnose viunt, aut
siccam habent Alvum, hi Omnes sani humana art fieri non possunt, quantum ego
novi: Sanant quidem hos Optime Dysenteriae si successerint, sed etiam aliae
eliquationes valde prosunt, quae ad internos locos repunt: Qui vero juvenis
est, and circa articulos nondum tophaceos callos habet, concretos, and accurate
vivit, and laboris amans esti and Alvum bonam habet, ad obediendum pro
studiorum ratione, hic sani Medicum intelligentiam habentem nactus, sanus fieri
poterit. (That is), concerning the Gout, I say, That those which are old, and
have soft stones gathered about their Joints, or live Debauchly, or are bound
in their Bellies, all these cannot be cured by humain Art, as far as I know.
But such are best cured by a Bloody Flux; also other sorts of Purgations, which
carry the humors inwards, are very advantageous to them: But he that is young,
and has not yet any Stony Concretions about his joints, and lives a very
regular life, and is a lover of labor, and has a loose Belly, and ready to
obey directions; these certainly may be cured by a careful and understanding
Physician.

I trusting to the Oracle of this great Man, do believe the Gout may be
prevented and hindered, even in those which have it Hereditarily, though not in
every individual person: But in such, in whom it is in its first beginnings,
and before it has left, and deposited any stony sediment in the Caveties of
the Joints; and by its native efficacy, has hardened the glutinous liquor of
those parts into a stone. These I say, I believe are capable of a cure: This
seems to be rashly spoken, yet it is most true; if Gouty persons would but
observe the first Aphorism of Hippocrates, which teaches that the Physician
ought not only to do his duty, but the Patient, and those which are about them,
and assist them, should do theirs also. For outward causes must also conspire
toward this Cure.

As to the prevention of this Disease, Galen handles it perfunctorily, and
slightly, supposing it sufficient to use Purging and Blood-letting in the
Spring and Fall; adding to these a regular course of Diet: And this he thinks
is not only sufficient to prevent it in those who have not yet been seized with
it, but also for those who have already been afflicted with it: But we add,
that the concurrence of many other things is requisite; of which sort, Diet
justly challenges the first place, for such nourishments ought to be chose
which are Euchymick and Eupeptick, that is, of good juice and easy digestion;
commanding the Patient to forbear all sorts of Foods that are Glutinous,
Tartarous, or impregnated with Salt, and such as are easily Coagulated. The
kinds of which are to be learned out of such Books which treat of useful or
noxious Diet. Drink is of great moment in this affair, which because it serves
to dilute the meat, it therefore affords the principle matter to the Ichorous
Excrement, (of which we have discoursed before.) If this participate much of
the aforesaid Tartarous matter, without doubt it attracts to it self (from its
similitude of substance), the like matter contained in the Aliments, and
therefore promotes the increase of the Gout. For Viscous and thick drinks, of
which sort are Beer and Ale (which have not worked well) are very apt to
coagulate, and do easily produce the Stone: As on the other side, simple
drinks, and uncompounded, and such as have little of Salt matter in them, are
less prone to generate these kind of Diseases: From hence those which drink
water, so it be unmixed, are less subject to the Gout; chiefly Rich men, who
out of curiosity cast clean Flints and Pibbles into the Wells and Fountains,
from whence they draw their Waters; for these stones cover themselves with the
Musilage and Slime, which the water by running through the Earth, had
contracted and brought along with it; and these being removed, they cast in
others: or they make use of Rainwater received in Cisterns filled with Gravel.
Mead, made with Rainwater, well purified, and thoroughly wrought, till it
become clear, and leave nothing in the bottom, is of excellent use; and this
may be made Medicinal by adding of Cephalic, Neurotic, and Arthretick Herbs;
(that is) such as are appropriate to the Head, Nerves, and Joints; of which
sort are Bettony, Ground Pine, Cowslips, Primroses, and the like.

Wine taken in to large quantities, turbid, and not sufficiently freed from its
Tartar, is very hurtful; both because from the constant, and too much use of
it, the native heat is dissipated, the Concoction of the Stomach impeded,
(chiefly of flesh-meats, which in this liquor grow hard;) as also the Liver is
offended, and accride, and serous blood generated, the Brain rendr'd weak, and
the strength of the Nerves impar'd, Cathars and Defluxions provoked, whose
matter being condenc'd in that Region, falls perpendicularly upon those parts
of the body that are under it, and destroys all that it meets with, chiefly
those parts which are weak.

Amongst Wines, some are of that nature, that, although they seem watery, yet
they prick the Tongue and Palate; such abound with a Vitriolin Tartor, sharp,
pontick, and pricking: Others are of a more generous kind, and abound with more
plenty of spirits, whose strength is quickly abated by mixing them with water;
and these chiefly infest the Brain, as the other do the Joints: But there is an
Artificial way found out, to take away the hurtful vapors of such Wine, and
this is performed by transcolating or straining it by a double glassinstrument,
called by the French Montevin; and with this Engine, it is deprived of its
superfluous Tartar, pouring into it any liquor endowed with a precipitating
faculty; of which sort is Oil of Tartar, (by the help of which, Wine inclining
to be sour, is sweetened) also the solution of Litharige, or Sugar of Lead,
made with Vinegar: The solution of Crystals, made by often repeated
reverberations, and extinctions in Nettle-water, and dissolved with the Accid
Spirit of Turpentine, according to Art.

But it is hard, and tedious, to use medicated meats and drinks at our Meals:
Those therefore which cannot refrain from Wine, let them elect those which are
less hurtful and Oligophorick; diluting them well with water, not taking more
than is needful, and abstaining also from too plentiful feeding. Let this be
the first, or prime rule of health, not to satiate themselves with Food, nor
over-burthen the strength of the Stomach with a superfluous (...), or fullness,
by which means the native heat will act upon the subjects committed to its
charge without trouble, and this is healthful. Nor ought there more new Food to
be taken in, till the former be concocted: Also let their Diet be simple, and
the chief Sauce to it, hunger; exciting an Appetite, if it be wanting, by
moderate exercise at convenient hours (that is, before, not after meat,) by
which the drowsy heat will be excited, even as fire covered with ashes, is, by
stiring it up.

But since we have mentioned Exercise, whose Essence consists in motion, we may
bring in under this head, Frixtions, or Rubbings, as well of the whole Body, as
of the Joints: These open the Pores, draw out the superfluous matter which (is
suppressed,) and call back the natural heat to the parts; which is the chief
instrument and Master workman of the Faculties: Wherefore, because there is no
nourishment which does not contain some impuritys in it, which turns to
Excrement, we must take care that these superfluities be Evacuated by the
natural passages, (or Emunctiorys) in convenient quantityes, and at fitting
times; which if Nature perform not, Art must supply that defect, carefully
regarding that the Belly be kept loose. And that the Stomach never abound with
impurities or filth: So that the first concoctions may not be as it were a
Ferment to the rest, which would give a Salt accrimony to the succeeding
Aliementary juice.

To perform these intentions, certain familiar Medicines conduce much; such as
are Pilulae Mastichinae, Macri, Aloes impregnated with diverse juices; also
Stomachical, Epatick, and other gentle Medicines, which we call Eccoprotick:
It Is of great concern to examine well, if the Urine answer in proportion to the
Drink that is drank; for if it do not, it is very requisite to take Potions, and
other forms of Diuretic Medicines, at convenient times; that is, betwixt
Meals. Of which sort is the Vinous Liquor, which is made with fully ripe
Juniper Berries bruised and boiled in water, adding a little Yeast or Mustard
to it, to promote the Fermentation. Or there may be taken a little of the red
liquor made according to Art, by digesting Spirit of Wine upon Salt of Tartar.

To provoke Sweat is also wonderful beneficial; whether it be procured by
exercise, or by going once or twice in a month into a Hot-House; some times
also taking Glysters when the Stomach is empty.

Let them avoid all extremities of the Weather, chiefly cold and moist Air,
carefully defending their Joints from it. Let both their Sleep and Watchings be
moderate; for the excess of either is hurtful. The same judgment is to be
given of Venery, which is extremely offensive to Gouty People; for experience
does testify, that the Salt and Nitrious humors, with which those which have
the Gout do abound, are often stirred up by these kind of conflicts: Concerning
which, a certain person being asked which was the most convenient time to
perform them in; he presently answered, Whenever any man desires to make
himself weak. Lastly, if a moderation be to be observed in all those things
which concern the Body, much more ought it to be so in those things which
relate to the Mind; for the assaults of it will destroy the Organs of the Body,
unless they be governed by the motions of reason.

Behold a short (...), or description, of the principle Cannons of Diet, to be
observed by those which have the Gout; as also of such things which ought to be
avoided by the Gouty. By way of prevention from this evil, we will subjoyn some
remedies, (chiefly such as are Purgative) by which this evil, happily whilst it
is in its first beginnings, (and as they say, in the Herb) may be taken away,
or avoided, by drawing off its cause before it break out into act, and fall
upon those parts, in which, it uses to exercise its Tyranny and Butchery.

Vomits are the most precious Prophylacticks, or preventer of the Gout which
may be largely provoked by the help of Emetticks, where the joints are yet lax
and limber, and the Disease is at the door, and ready to fall upon them. And
this may be done both to those Gouty persons, which have had former fits, and
to those which have not yet sustained any; and govern themselves; not
submitting to the advice of Physicians, but indulge their own genius, (most
commonly) to the destruction of their health.

Amongst the Classes of Vomits, this is the most tried, and never given without
success, viz. The infusion of Crocus Mettalorum, made into a fine Powder, well
washed, and steeped in two, or three Ounces of White Wind, for the space of 24.
hours, giving the straining of it, with an ounce of simple Oxymel; in a
morning, upon an empty Stomach, taking a little fat broth after every
provocation to Vomit. But this kind of Medicine performs it is Operations with
some violence, and therefore is not equally convenient for all Constitutions,
but only for such as are fitted by nature for it: But it takes away the Disease
by the Roots, neither is it ever given in vain; and although it be accompanied
with some trouble, and molestation, yet is it innocent and harmless, so it be
administered in a seasonable, and convenient time.

Clean white Vitriol given to the quantity of a Dragme, dissolved in
Barley-water, or else given in any Conserve; and drinking upon it, a great
draught of the same water, in which a large quantity of Liquorish has been
boiled, does wash, and also strengthen the Stomach, in tender and easy bodies:
And in such cases, in which the humors are not to be drawn from the farthest,
or remote parts of the body. The Emultion also of 25. or thirty grains of
Cataputia, or Spurge (the greater sort) being made with the Broth of a Chicken
strained, or else with Barley-water, sweetened with Sugar, adding two or three
Almonds, is very good in this case.

There is another sort of Vomits; very useful, and less difficult: And that you
may apprehend the reason of this the better, we are to remember what was said
before, That the primitive matter of the Gout, is generated in the Stomach.
It Is the Opinion of the Arabians, that it is convenient to be Drunk once in a
month: And this would not be so much amiss, if it left us the use of Reason,
and did not turn us into the nature of Swine. But this advice will agree well
enough with Debauchee's, and Glutonous persons, who devour all things without
distinction: Let these once, or twice in a month, stuff their Stomachs above
measure, with variety of Meats, chiefly such as is fat; drinking upon it more
than ordinary of what sort of Liquor they please; so loaded, let them remain
quiet for one hour; after which, let them walk half an hour gently: at last,
putting their Fingers into their Throats, let them provoke themselves to Vomit,
and to throw up, not only the meat they have eaten, but also the formerly
collected Slime sticking to the sides of the Stomach, and which (after eating
almost to Vomiting) does mix it self with the Aliment, and is diluted by the
Liquors, and drink which is drank: For Nature endeavors every single
concoction, to collect what she finds in the hollow of the Stomach, that she
may convert it into the form and substance of Chyle, and afterward change it
into Blood: In some there is required a longer time to perform this in, (almost
two hours) according as the Stomach does more slowly obey the act of
Chylification. As to the Motion which was required as necessary before the act
of Vomitting, that is sufficiently made out by Navigation; which as Hippocrates
notes, (and common experience confirms) does help to provoke these kind of
Evacuations.

Besides Vomiting, it is necessary to Purge the body, having premised before a
preparation of it, with brisk and spirituous Medicines, which (...), and with
power, act upon such sort of Tartars; of which kind are the sour Spirit of
Vitriol, of Sulphur, and of Salt, which may be exhibited in any so^t of Liquor,
or Conserve, or otherwise: Also the Cream, Salt, and Spirit of Tartar, prepare
the matter for Expulsion.

Purges which are peculiar for the Gouty humors, are truly Hydragogol, or
purgers of water, of which there are a vast number. Syrup de Rhamno, that is,
Syrup of Bucks-horn, is esteemed a Specific against this Disease, and is to be
taken immediately before Meat; the Dose of it is two or three Ounces.

Cream of Tartar is a most useful Medicine; if you add to it 10, 12, or 15,
grains of the Extract, or Rosin of Scamony (precipitated in Rose Water,)
dissolving them together in White wine, or taking them in Broth, with a drop
of the distilled Oil of Cinnamon; also Cydonium Laxativum, or the purging
Quinces of Lions is of the same effect. Also Iallop root taken to the quantity
of a Dragme; or four scruples in White Wind, is a pleasant and useful remedy:
nor of less virtue are the Berries of Dwarfe-Elder, and the Oil made of them by
boiling and pressing. Electuarium Caryocostinum is singularly commended: But
the most powerful of all remedies is Mercurius-dulcis, which may be happily
given to the quantity of a scruple, adding by way of Stimulation, and that it
may not make too long a stay in the body, 23. or 25. grains of Pilulae
Cochiarum Minorum, faithfully made up; adding for correction, a few leaves of
Gold, and a few drops of the distilled Oil of Rosemary, Anniseeds, or Cynamon.

Let not very generous Medicines be used too often, but only in the beginning
of the Spring and Fall: But Vomits only ought to be frequently used, as was
said before; and also the Pills called Pilulae Usualium.

Niter, or Salt Peter, does belong to the Classis of Evacuators, for it sends
forth the Tartarous substance by the way of the Kidneys and Bladder, which
matter does easily Coagulate into Stones, in such as are inclined to the Gout.
Let it be taken in the wain of the Moon, to the quantity of a Dragme, or two,
in Sugared Barly-water: Also Antimonium Diaphoreticum fixum, prepared Crollius
his way, is good to provoke Sweat, when given with Rob, or the thickened juice
of Elder-Berries, once or twice in a month, according as the party is
full-body'd, or irregular in his Diet, going into a Hot-House, or being in Bed
when it is taken.

As to the rest do as it is in the Adage, Take care to keep your Head and Feet
warm; and in other things, live as the Bruits do; (that is) eat at convenient
hours, and avoid plentitude or fullness. He that observes the aforesaid rules,
though he be naturally inclined to the Gout, shall hardly be seized with it, so
that these things be performed carefully, and in order.

Now it is time to afford help to those which are actually afflicted with the
Gout: And that these may receive manifest relief and help, I have found, (and
am confirmed in it,) by often repeated experiments; either by prohibiting the
fits, or hindering their often, or frequent returns, cutting off the length of
them, or mitigating the fierceness of the pain, or by sooner restoring strength
to the joints and other parts, made weak by the length of the disease.

To the defense of such, besides those general and necessary Indications: 1. Of
Evacuating the Tartarom matter, drawing it away from its original Fountain, the
Stomach, at the beginning. 2dly. Preparing the same by all temperate means. And
3dly. Excluding the matter so prepared, by Purgation. And 4thly. Of drawing off
the greatest part of it, by the way, and Vessels designed for the Excresion of
Urine. But 5thly. Moreover, the superfluous matter is to be dissipated by
Exiccating and Obsorbiant things. 6thly. By procuring (by the way of
interception,) a Consumption of that part of the matter which has escaped the
power of other Medicines. 7. Blunting the accrimony of the Salt in the parts
offended. 8thly. Dissolving it into vapors, whilst it yet remains under a
liquid form. 9thly. If necessity require it, to fix and condence the same in
the place from whence it flows. 10thly. Pain sharply urging to it, to lay it
asleep by Narcottick Medicines, which perhaps may seem a Paradox to some men.
11thly. By strengthening the joints betwixt the fits, by which they will not be
so subject to Defluxions for the future; and this is to be performed by
applying of strong Roboraters betwixt the fits. 12thly, and lastly, (if it may
be done) dissolving the aforesaid Matter and Salt, before it be thoroughly
hardened in the Joints; and if possible, let this be performed at the beginning
of its Concretion. For to Cure the knotted Gout, there are no less remedies
requisite than the Philosophers-Stone, or Medea's Bath, in which Jason put off
his old Age, and became young.

But Vomits ought to precede all these things, as being the most necessary of
them all; of which we have discoursed before: but whether they are to be made
use of seldom or often, necessity, and the orderly, or erregular manner of Diet
will teach. But this Eradicating Vomit of Crocus Metellorum, or of Salt of
Vitriol, is conveninent of it self, and may be used at any time. When the other
forementioned things are only to prevent this Disease in those which have
never yet been afflicted with it. It is also convenient oftentimes to provoke
Vomiting after Supper, the Stomach being filled with Meat; the trouble of which
is recompensed to the Sick, and amended by the Rest of the following Night. Let
this kind of Evacuation be made use of, at least once in a month, as being a
most efficacious help, chiefly in the Spring and Fall; or if necessity require
it, at the beginning of every Season.

This is worthy our Remark, That the Salts commonly called Alkalys (which are
made of Vegetables by Calcination) do dulcifie the most Corrosive and pungent
Spirits; amongst which sort of Salts, or Alkallys, Salt of Tartar is the most
powerful. The same thing does happen in our Bodies, in which the Salts are
acuated by their spirituous substances: but if their points be broke and
blunted by Alkalys, then they become weak and inoffensive. Neither can the use
of Salt of Tartar be hurtful to any body, taken in Broth, or else in some
Conserve of Bettony, of Ground Pine, or of Cichory: for let it be taken under
what form soever, it is highly beneficial to those which have the Gout; not
only because it tempers the salt matter, but because, it also brings forth the
Salt and Tartarous Matter, (the cause of this distemper) by Urine. The Salt of
Ground Pine, Bettony, Wormwood, Dwarf-Elder, etc. produce the same effect.
Sugar of Lead may be safely taken inwardly, with appropriate Conserves, and it
does actually mitigate and sweeten (the humors) as its taste does witness: but
it takes off, and abateth Venerial desires (perhaps much to the advantage of
the Gouty Patient.) These sort of Medicines ought to be exhibited in the Wain
of the Moon, having before made use of the gentler kind of Eccoprotick, or
easy purging Medicines.

We have discoursed above of the Purging Medicines that are most convenient in
the Gout; to which we will add this Specific; to wit, our Arthretick Powder,
which ought to be used once in a month, from the quantity of a Dragme to four
Scruples, about the full of the Moon, when the humors most abound, and are
turgent; and this according to the Magnitude of the Disease, having a respect
to the strength of the Patient. Those which are Plethorick, or full body'd, and
greatly afflicted with the Gout, such may use to take it at suspicious times,
(when they expect a fit) one, or two days before the New of the Moon; taking it
either in the fat Broth of a Capon, Cream of Barley, White Wind, or Whey; to
drink a draught of which, after the taking of the Medicine, is Convenient.

. The rasepings of a humain Skull unburyed, and the roots of Turbith,
Hermodactyls, Iallop, Sena-leaves, Cream of Tartar, Diagrydium, (i. e.)
prepared Scamony. Cloves, Ana.. j. Mix them and rub them in a Mortar to a fine
Powder. Bairus, an Italian Physician, does highly extol Caryocostinum, whose
Ingredients, since they are very hot, and its Operation a little too vehement,
I think it scarce safe for dry bodies, but only for very cold and moist ones; so
that my before described Powder, may supply the place of this, and all other
Purges, excepting Mercury, whose energy and power exceeds all others: We have
spoken before of the manner of exhibiting it, that it ought to be joined with
such things as will cause it to work quickly, such as are Pilulae Cochiae
Minores, and the like Purgers, which have Colocynthidy, Scamony, and black
Ellebor in them; out of which, if you please, you may prepare an extract of the
consistance of Pills to be mixed with Mercury.

If any one be already seized with a fit of the Gout, then is it very desirable
that he be delivered from it, or at least that he be less (or mildlier)
afflicted with it. Such after universal purging of the three Regions of the
Body, and having used a Sudorifick Diet, let such (I say) use for the space of
a years time together, the following Pills; which although they cause no
sensible Evacuation, yet by the long and uninterrupted use of them, they send
forth the Tartarous matter by Urine, (of the usefulness, or convenience of
which has been treated before) by a faculty altogether Specific; upon which
thing the Physician ought always to be intent, let his method be what it will:
It also strengthens the joints.

. Powder of Ground Pine,. ss. Spanish Liquors,. ij. Bettony,. 1. ss. The Stones
of Medlars,. iij. all being beaten into a subtle powder, with a sufficient
quantity of Venis-Turpentine, make a Mass for Pills, which are to be taken
every day, from a. j. to a. j. ss. or two Dragmes, three hours before eating,
walking, or using gentle exercise after them.

The Basis, or foundation of this remedy, is the Chamapytis, or Ground Pine,
which many mix alone with Turpentine; others add Bettony, the use is as before.
The year being expired, use this Remedy every Spring and Fall, for the space of
thirty or forty days together; observing this, that if the Belly be loose, then
leave Nature to her own work, with whom the Medicine will conspire. But if it
be otherwise, then provoke it with the usual Pills: or at the same time taking
stronger Purgers (if it be requisite) as is before said; in the mean time,
shunning an ill Diet, and having a care that what one hand has built up, the
other does not pull down.

Obsorbients are endowed with a manifest quality, and power of drying; to
which, if Specificks be added, their effects will be more brisk, lasting, and
noble: This faculty is in all sorts of Bones, whether they are Calcined or not,
but humain bones of the same kind with those parts which are afflicted, are
more efficatious, by reason of their similitude.

. Of the aforesaid Bones,. iij. Crude Hartshorn, Calcined Hartshorn, of each
two parts; Crab's-eyes finely powdered, one part; of the powder or mealy Pith,
of Sarsaparilla, four parts; rub them all into a Powder, to which, if you
please, you may add the Seeds of Annise, Fennel, Coriander, Cinnamon, Amber,
Mosk, but in small quantities, and only to procure a pleasant smell or taste:
take Morning and Evening a whole spoonful of this (at a good space from eating)
after the Gouty person does desist from the use of the aforesaid Pills of
Ground Pine, or in the intermediate times when he does not take them.

Issues made (by burning) in the Arms or Legs, do intercept those humors which
flow to the joints, and bring them forth another way, and are a great comfort
and relief, both as to the preservation from, and Cure of the Gout, especially
if the sick party do not observe a good Diet; in which case they must of
necessity admit of them.

Now follows those Remedies which respect urgent pain. To the inquiring after
which, the Physicians industry is forced, by reason of the impatience of the
Sick, and the vehemence of their pain. Let there be called to mind then what
was formerly said, viz. That Agile, moveable, and Acid, or sour particles of
saline matter, being mixed amongst themselves, do mutually temper each other;
and by doing so, they take off the pains of the Gout.

The Lixiviums, or Leys made with the Ashes of Coleworts, Vinebranches,
Potashes, Tartar, and the like Alkallisate Salts, do all of them agree in the
faculty of mitigating of pain; chiefly if they be mixed with Vitriolin
substances, in which is hid an Anadine Sulphur, and a Salt endowed with a
powerful discussive virtue. White Vitriol dissolved in distilled water of
Coleworts; also Lead (by its native sweetness) take off the Mordacety and
biting of the Gouty Salt, being outwardly applied with the beforementioned
Colewort-water: as also does Fern, in whose Ashes lurks a Salt of excellent
virtue: The Phlegm of White Vitriol, and the water of Froggs Spawn, and the
like Liquors, (to which oftentimes Narcotticks are added) are useful upon a
double account, both because they take off the sense of pain (of which beneath
you shall hear farther) and also by means of their sulphurous Nature, with
which they temper the humors.

The greatest part of those which endeavor to give help in the Gout, do very
improperly make use of Medicines in the form of Cataplasmes, or Poultesses;
from whence there is more hurt then advantage received; because they shut up
the Pores, which ought rather to be opened: and this we should labor to do,
that so the Lixivium may draw forth the matter whilst it is yet in a liquid
form. To the obtaining of which end, Apoplectical waters are to be applied,
(which are so much commended by Authors) and are composed of the forementioned
Salts and Vitriols.

Oxoronia Swingeri; also the water of Urine, and Vitriol, long macerated,
putrifi'd, and digested together, these are highly beneficial. Camphor is also
of excellent use in easing of pain, for it opens, penetrates, attinuates,
digests, and promotes insensible transpiration, upon the account of its subtle
Particles; it is usefully applied with the aforesaid waters, and that in the
most intence and extreme pain.

I have seen some dissolve Opium, digest, and afterward distill it, and apply
these sort of mixtures with much advantage to the joints, even in the extremest
hight of pain; the efficacy of this is advanced by the addition of Camphor: In
this particular these recited helps are sufficient, although others no less
generous may be produced and prescribed.

Sleep puts a stop to all Evacuations but Sweat: And therefore where the
Defluxion is vehement, and the pain intence, there is nothing more grateful and
beneficial than to procure it: Nor can any thing come in competition with
Laudanum, of which there may be exhibited two, three, or four grains at the
hour of sleep, nay many nights successively; for by rest and quiet, the humors
will be concocted, Nature recovers her strength, and arises to overcome her
Enemies. There are other somniforous Remedies Succedanous to Laudanum, but that
excels them all.

The greatest part of Physicians rise up against, and oppose the use of
Narcotticks, and stupifying Medicines; pretending there are other helps more
safe to take off the vehemence of pain; and in their Opinion, it is better not
to abate the pains at all, or to stop the Complaints, and Cries of the Sick,
then to render them weak and feeble, by these sort of Medicines: This is
certainly a very pleasant thing, and ought to be taken for a plausible excuse,
as if by the use of these Medicines, so great an imbecility and weakness could
be brought upon the Sick person and his joints. It Is true, Narcotticks taken
inwardly, if they be not aptly and carefully used, are not without danger;
because unseasonably given, they do (as I may say) cause a kind of Congelation
in the Brain, and introduce upon the Spirits, an (...), or stedfastness, not by
reason of refrigiration, but by a fixing quality, which is the issue of the
Luxurient Sulphur contained in these Medicines; from whence there is induced an
immobility upon the animal Spirits, hindering their influx; and from thence,
Death by suffocation follows; but where there is extreme pain, nothing of this
need to be feared: For it is certain, that one day of extreme pain does inflict
more weakness upon the Nerves, then the application of Topical Medicines,
(though they be Narcotticks) can procure in six days time.

But let us suppose that by these means some sort of stupor, or numbness, does
remain upon the parts, there are thousands of Remedies, able and powerful
enough to remove, and wash off that fault; as Baths, Fomentations, Plasters,
Hot houses, and others, which perform this in a short time; add to this that
Narcotticks outwardly applied, being joined with their Antidotes, and
Correctors, are harmless and inoffencive.

Almost all Authors make use of Henbain in vehement pains of the Gout: And some
assend to the use of Opium: If the Spleen be grown very hard, we apply Hemlock
to it, without the least danger; which is also very usefully laid upon the
Eyes, although they are so near the Brain: I for my part do not fear (happy
success having always approved of it) to make use of both these Plants, in the
form of a Poultis, joining to them Cassia, Camphor, Saffron, Sperma-Celi, and
humain Fat, which is a most excellent Anadine in this case.

The pain being pacified, we are to come to the use of Roborating and
strengthening means; amongst which, Wine is the best, which as outwardly
applied, it is very beneficial and friendly to the Nervous parts; so inwardly
taken, it is highly injurious and offensive to all the propagations of the
Brain; as the Membrains, Merves, Marrow, etc.

Those that would be enabled to resist the Assaults of the Gout, must of
necessity make use of such Medicines as have a faculty to, dry, and strengthen
the Nervous parts, whose Tone and native Temper, require to be preserved by
their like. Paulus Aegineta, an Ancient and Learned Physician, advises to rub
the joints of Gouty people, with a linement made of Salt and Oil, which
Medicine is very useful, the pains being first abated; but its chief excellency
consists in preventing the Gout. This Oil is prepared with yellow Violets,
(they usually call it Cherinum) by the repeated infusion of fresh Flowers in
it, by which it becomes most excellent, especially if there be added to it the
Flowers of Mullin.

. of the said Oil, lb. j. decrepetated, (that is Calcined) Sea Salt, ground
upon a Pouphiry to a most subtle powder, of white-Venis-Sope, of each four
Ounces; mix them, and make an Ointment, like Nutritum: With this, in the
Evening anoint all the joints, chiefly the hands and feet, which are more
Obnoxtious to these pains than the other parts: Then afterward, going to bed,
put on Socks and Gloves. I knew a certain Learned Physician, who had been
afflicted with the Gout thirty years, (this was Monsieur Quartier, Physician to
the Duke of Bollion:) he lived as many years more, and the residue of his life,
(for he was above a hundred years old when he died) by the benefit of the
above-described Linement: And ten years before his Death, he was seen to walk
as firmly, as if he had never been afflicted with this Disease of the Gout.
Perhaps many will think the method of Cure by a strict Diet, a tedious way,
because thus their pains and care are never at an end. And it is superfluous
(say they) to prescribe such a course to Country people that use much exercise,
and live soberly. And for the Rich, they hate to take pains, and trouble
themselves, and have all things done for them by the help of their Servants,
and debauch when they please, yet will not regard these Rules, or endure any
method that is tedious.

The Fit being over, it is comcom to use Emplastrum Diachalciteos, which truly
is innocent, but of little advantage. There are better Medicines commonly to be
had, as the Plaster of Hermodoctyls, the Majesterial Plaster of Red-lead,
(called Emplastrum Sandicis.) Gum Caranna, dissolved with Spirit of Wine; and
Tacamahacca are of singular use and virtue: Emplastrum of Bettony, with
Mastich, Storax, and Benzoin, dissolved with Spirit of Wine are very good:
Balsom of Dwarf-Elder made with Earthworms, Sucking-puppies, and a little
Salt, is most excellent. Baths and Fomentations made with Neurotick herbs,
(that is such as strengthen the Nerves and Brain) boiled in a ley of
Steel'd-water and Red-Wine, with Salt, Sulphur, and Allom, do wonderfully
Corroborate: Milk of Allom is singularly good, and is thus prepared.

Aqua Vitae, (or Brandy) lb. j. The Whites of six new-lay'd Eggs, shake them
along-time together, with three or four big lumps of Alom, in a well-glaz'd
Earthen-Pot; (it is sufficient to agitate and stir it about:) The Medicine will
be more Efficatious if there be first infused Nervous herbs in the Brandy, such
as Marjarom, Sage, Rosemary; but if this be warmed with the White of the Eggs
in it, they will grow hard, and it will separate into Curds; it is therefore
better to warm them single, both that, and the red Wine, (that is the best
Aligant, if you can procure it;) and the Vessels being took off from the fire,
to add a double or treble proportion of the other, though Allom Milk; and to
dip Linnen-cleaths in this, and apply them warm to the parts; but what need any
more, since the aforesaid things are sufficient.

They do but make themselves ridiculous, who undertake to dissolve the knots of
the Gout; for if they be once thoroughly hardened, to attempt this, is to wash
the Blackamore: But whilst the matter is yet Viscous and Slimy, I think the
thing not altogether impossible, if we can attain a remedy that will enter into
it, and does agree with the matter in similitude of substance; and such an one
is Sal-Armoniack, both that which is Natural, and that which is Arteficial, and
compounded of Soot and Urine; but the volatile Salt of Urine, made pure by
often subliming, exceeds it in efficacy.

The Pores of the parts being sufficiently opened, by the help of a Bath, a Hot
house, or a Lixivium, or Ley made with the Scoria or yellow dross of the
Regulur of Antimony; (whose Sulphur is a powerful attractor, and has a great
dissolving faculty.) Let there be taken Salt of Urine, mixing it with the best
Spirit of Wine, and foment the joints with this mixture. Oil of Arsenick does
digest this slimy matter, and draw it to the superficies of the skin; neither
is there any Medicine can equal it upon this account, if a little of it be
mixed with May Butter, or some other Fat, and the joints be lightly anointed
with this, it sometimes dissipates these Tumors, and causes a certain viscous
matter to sweat forth at the Pores, which looks like Fat; and many times there
will arise Pustels, which pour out drops of water, not unlike Eggs exposed to
the fire.

But the main point about the use of this remedy, consists in this, That you
make not too much have: For to effect this, there is most commonly required the
space of twelve or fifteen days time. Some as Dariolus attempt the opening the
parts about the joints with a Cautory. And before the matter is hardened, they
usefully apply Blistering-Plaisters: But I am of opinion, that the former
advice is unnecessary, and that such as oppose the antecedent cause of the
Disease with inward remedies, may well forbear the use of outward ones; or at
least may abstain from these painful ones, for it is cruel to add affliction to
affliction.

Before I conclude, I will say somewhat to Blood-letting, which ought to be
performed by way of prevention in full Bodies, and such as live highly and
plentifully: Open a vein in the Arm, of such in the Spring and Fall. In
Melancholy Constitutions, open the Haemorrhod Veins; and in Women, procure
their Courses if they be stopped. Galen undauntedly affirms, that it is a
present remedy in the highest Pains, most violent Defluxions, and great
Inflammations: These three many times meet together in the first assaults of the
Gout. And in such a case, according to the urgent necessity, who will deny but
that it is often to be ordered? And since this remedy is of that high
usefulness, I beseech you, what can there be of more hope, of greater
certainty, and of less hazard? But whether this, or Purging, is to be preferred
in urgent pains, is a question? although Barius asserteth of himself, that
being extremely afflicted with the Gout, by taking in the height of his pains,
of his Electuary Caryocostinum, he always was restored to the liberty of his
feet, in so much, that of himself, without any body to support him, he was able
to go from his Close stool.

I faithfully give Credit to what he says; for he was a Learned, Ancient, and
Experienced Physician: But yet it certainly appears that Gouty persons either
should not be purged in the height of of their pains; or that this should be
done (...), by carrying the mass, and heap of humors, that increase this
Disease another way. This danger may be prevented, if the same day the Purge is
given, there be exhibited at Night a Dose of Laudanum, as has been said
before; by which the Orgasmus, or oppressive swelling of the humors is stayed,
the Spirits fixed, and at length the cause being diminished, the Disease does
abate, and Nature is restored to her former liberty.

These Rules being laid down, it will not be difficult to bring into use, more
particular Remedies, besides the aforesaid Specificks; but the great number of
them would frighten the Sick, and cause Confusion, both in the mind of the
Physician, and those that assist the Sick: And though I have mentioned a great
many Medicines, yet it is none of my intention that all of them should be used
to the same party: (or upon the same Subject,) for it is the part of the
Physician to Elect those which he judges most convenient for him that is Sick:
For Medicinal Advices ought to be directed by the Masters of that Art, who will
give advice for the right and most opportune use of them; and from this the
usefulness (and advantage of the Sick) arises; otherwise a Medicine is as a
Sword in the hand of a Mad man; and if any one, who is ignorant of this Art,
intend to employ and make use of them, they will find themselves deceived by
their ill mannaging of them: Let such learn to know, that the whole quality of
the Cure is chiefly profited in the Election of a fitting time, which is a
thing not obvious to every body, but only to those which have acquired
gray-hairs in the Operations of this Art; and this knowledge is not gained in a
day, nor a year.

Before I conclude, I think fit to give you notice, that this Tract was
Extorted from me by a Friend, and was written by me in favor and respect to
him, to satisfy his Curiosity rather than necessity. Artem Experientia fecit,
Exemplo Monstrate viam.
Art from Experience does flow;
Example, us the way does show.


FINIS

