Machivael's DISCOURSES Upon the First Decade of T. LIVIUS, Translated out of
the Italian.

To which is added His Prince.

With some Marginal Animadversions Noting and Taxing his ERRORS.

By E. D.



LONDON, Printed for G. Bedell, and T. Collins; and are to be sold at their
Shop at the Middle Temple Gate in Fleetstreet 1662

To the most Noble and Illustrious JAMES Duke of Lenox, Earl of March, Baron of
Setrington, Darnly, Terbanten, and Methuen, Lord great Chamberlain and Admiral
of Scotland, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of his
Majesty's most honorable Privy Council in both Kingdoms.
I Offer here to your Graces patronage my best endeavors, discovering at large
their imperfections, in what I can claim mine in this work. For which however I
may have incurred the blame of some, as unable to do the Author, I have
undertaken, his full right, but rather by my rude style wronging his original
luster; yet perhaps, with others more moderate, I may find favor and good
acceptance, as well for my choice of the Author, whose worth will somewhat
bear me out, as because I have contributed hereunto what I ought, which can be
no more then what I could. Mine Author was a Florentine, whose national
attribute among the Italians is subtilty, and whose particular eminence in
cunning has styled the most cunning, as his Sectaries, Machiavillians. Nor
has this workman taken in hand a work unproper for his skill, being the
discovery of the first foundations, and analyzing of the very grounds upon
which the Roman Commonwealth was built, and afterward rose to such glory and
power, that neither before nor after all the ages of the world ever afforded
the like example.

This book I conceived, I might not unfitly present your Grace with, as unto
whose service I owe my self and what I can, and whom as well for neereness of
blood, as affection and favor, his Sacred Majesty may most probably employ in
this our ship of State near the helm, to the end it may in some part serve for
your experience, as a good sea-card, whereby you may become able and expert, as
well in the entrances and passages into all creeks and harbors of quiet, as in
the discovery and avoidance of all rocks and shelves; for as at sea it is
always seen, that in a stormy and tempestuous time, the master dares not trust
the rudder in the hand of others then such as are the best approved and
experienced Mariners; so, in all States we find, that however in time of peace
and quiet, alliance, blood, and favor have a main stroke in matter of
preferments and employments too yet when the times grow perplexed with perils
and difficulties, true worth and experience are sought after, and then of
value. No climate is so benign, as to afford a perpetual calm, and therefore
your Grace may do well to enable your self for the service of your Prince and
Country, that being called for into the steerage in turbulent times, not
favor, only may give you a place there, but use find you necessary, whereunto
if I could contribute a poor mite, I had done enough.

Notwithstanding however my Author, in what he has done well, has far
excelled others, yet is he not without his blemishes and errors to; which, as
well as I was able to discover them, I have marked, and thereunto added some
observations, taking (as I think) all his notorious errors in this book:
Wherein I may have committed faults too, which you may be pleased to pass over,
as no strange thing, but accept rather the duty of

Your Graces humblest servant, EDWARD DACRES.

A Table of the Arguments of each several Chapter.
WHat were in general the beginnings of every City, and especially that of
Rome. Chap. 1. How many kinds of Commonwealths there are, and what was that of
Rome, Chap. 2. Upon what occasions the Tribunes of the People were created in
Rome, whereby the Commonwealth became more perfect, Chap. 3. That the
disagreement of the Senate and people of Rome made the Commonwealth both free
and mighty. Chap. 4. Whether the people or the Nobility are the the better
guardians of liberty, and which have greater occasions of being tumultuous,
either they that strive to enlarge the State, or they that endeavor but to
maintain it. Chap. 5. Whether in Rome there could have been such a State
founded as would quite have taken away the hatreds between the people and the
Senate. Chap. 6. How useful accusations are in a Republique for the
maintenance of liberty; Chap. 7. Accusations are not more beneficial to
Commonwealths then Calumnies pernicious. Chap. 8. How needful it is, that he
who frames anew the laws, and lays new fonndations of a Commonwealth, be alone
without Companion or Competitor. Chap. 9. As the Founders of a Commonwealth or
Kingdom are praiseworthy, so the beginners of a Tyranny deserve much infamy.
Chap. 10. Of the Romans Religion. Chap. 11. Of what importance it is to hold a
worthy esteem of Religion; and that Italy for having faild therein by means of
the Church of Rome has gone to wrack, Chap. 12. In what manner the Romans
availed themselves of their Religion, in ordering the City, in undertaking
their designs, and stopping of tumults Chap. 13. The Romans interpreted their
auspices as necessity. required, and with discretion made a show to observe
their Religion; yet upon occasion they neglected it; but if any did rashly
contemn it, they punished him. Chap. 14. The Samnites for the extreme remedy to
their broken state, have recourse to Religion. Chap. 15. People accustomed to
live under a Prince, if by any accident they become free, have much ado to
maintain their liberty. Chap. 16. A disorderly people getting their liberty,
cannot keep themselves free without great difficulties. Chap. 17. In what
manner, in a corrupted City; a free state may be maintained, being gotten; or
how when they have it not, it may be gotten and well ordered. Chap. 18. A very
mean Prince may easily subsist, succeeding a brave and valorous Prince; but a
mean one following one that is mean, brings a state into great hazard. Chap.
19. Two continued successions of valorous Princes work great effect, and
Commonwealths well ordered, of necessity have valorous successions: And
therefore are their gains and increases great. Chap. 20. What blame that Prince
or Republique deserves that wants soldiers of his own subjects. Chap. 21. What
we may observe in the case of the three Horatij Romans, and the three Curiatij
Albans. Chap. 22. That the whole fortune ought not to be laid at stake, where
the whole forces try not for it: and for this cause it is often hurtful to
guard the passages. Chap. 23. Commonwealths well ordered appoint rewards and
punishments for their people, and never recompense the one with the other.
Chap. 24. Whosoever would reform an ancient state in a free City, let him
retain at least the shadow of the old customs. Chap. 25. A new Prince in a City
or Province taken by him, should make innovations in every thing. Chap. 26. It
is very seldom, that men know how to be altogether mischievous, or altogether
good. Chap. 27. For what reason the Romans were less ungrateful to their
Citizens, then the Athenians. Chap. 28. Whether of the two be more ungrateful,
people, or a Prince. Chap. 29. What means a Prince or Republ should use to
avoid this vice of ingratitude, and what a Commander or Citizen to be free from
their danger. Chap. 30. That the Roman Commanders were never extraordinarily
punished, for any error committed, nor at all punished when either by their
ignorance, or upon some unlucky resolution taken by them, the Commonwealth
suffered. Chap. 31. A Prince or Republ. should not defer to do good unto men,
until their necessity require it. Chap. 32. When an inconvenience is grown in a
state or against a state, it is better to bear with it for a while, then
presently to struggle with it. Chap. 33. The Dictators authority did good and
not harm to the Commonwealth of Rome, and how authorities which the Citizens
take upon them of themselves, and not those that are given them by the peoples
free voices, are hurtful to the government. Chap. 34. The reason why in Rome
the creation of the Decemvirate was hurtful to the liberty of that Republique,
notwithstanding that it was made by public and free voices. Chap. 35. The
Citizens who have possessed the greatest charges in the Commonwealth, ought not
disdain the less as unworthy of them. Chap. 36. What distastes the Agrarian law
gave in Rome, and that it is very ^ff^^sive to make a law in a Commonwealth,
that looks far backwards, and yet goes directly against an ancient custom of
the City. Chap. 37. Weak Commonwealths are hardly drawn to a certain resolution
and know not how to determine, and the course they ordinarily take, they are
rather forced too, then choose of themselves. Chap. 38. The same accidents are
seen to befall several People. Chap. 39 The creation of the Decemvirate in
Rome, and what therein is to be noted, where among many other things is
considered, how by the like accident a Republique may be preserved or
suppressed. Chap. 40. Of humble to become proud, of merciful cruel, without
passing through the due means between these extremes, argues indiscretion, and
turns not to advantage. Chap. 41. How easily men may be corrupted. Chap. 42.
They that fight for their own glory, are the good and faithful soldiers. Chap.
43. A multitude without a head is unprofitable, and a man should not first
threaten, and afterward demand the power. Chap. 44. It is a matter of very
evil example, when he that makes a law, neglects the observing of it: and it
is very dangerous in a State, to make a continual practice of cruel executions.
Chap. 45. Men arise by degrees from one ambition to another, and first they
aim no further then that they themselves suffer no harm of others, afterward
they strive to be able to hurt others. Chap. 46. Men though they are deceived
in generalities, yet are they not so easily beguiled in particulars. Chap. 47.
He that would not have a Magistracy given to one that is base and lewd, let him
cause it to be demanded either by one that is very base and very lewd, or by
one that is very noble and very good. Chap. 48. If those Cities, that have had
their beginning free as Rome, have found difficulty to make laws, that can
maintain them so; those that have had their beginning immediately servile, find
almost an impossibility. Chap. 49. The power of stopping the public actions
of the City, should not be given into the hands of one Council, or one
Magistracy. Chap. 50. A Commonwealth or Prince should make a show to do that
of a free mind, which indeed mere necessity compells them to do. Chap. 51. To
stay the insolence of one that grows powerful in a Commonwealth, there is no
way more secure and less offensive, then to seize beforehand, and so prevent
him of those ways, by which he attains to that power. Chap. 52. The People
deceived by a false show of good, oftentimes seek their own ruin, and great
hopes and large promises do easily move them. Chap. 53. What authority the
presence of a great and worthy personage has to appease and quiet the rage of
a multitude. Chap. 54. How easily things are ordered in a City where the people
is not corrupted; and that where a parity is, there is no place for a
Principality; and where that is not, a Republique cannot be. Chap. 55. Before
strange accidents and changes befall a City or Country, usually there are some
prodigies that forerun them, or men that foretell them. Chap. 56. A Common
people united are strong and vigorous, but taken apart and separated, vile and
contemptible. Chap. 57. The multitude is more wise and constant then a Prince.
Chap. 58. What confederation or league is rather to be trusted; either that
which is made with a Republique, or that is made with a Prince. Chap. 59. How
the Consulship and every other magistracy in Rome, was given without respect of
age. Chap. 60.
The Table of the second book.
Which contributed more to the Romans in the conquest of their Empire, either
their virtue or their fortune. Chap. 1. What people the Romans had to make war
withal, and how obstinately they fought for the defense of their liberty.
Chap. 2. Rome became a great City, by ruining those that were near neighbors
unto her, and by admitting strangers without difficulty to share in her
dignities. Chap. 3. Republiques have taken three particular courses to amplify
and enlarge their states. Chap. 4. That the changes of Religions and languages,
together with the chances of floods and pestilences, abolish the memory of
things. Chap. 5. How the Romans proceeded in making of war. Chap. 6. How much
land the Romans allowed to each man they sent out to inhabit their Colonies.
Chap. 7. The occasions, wherefore people leave their own native soyles, and
invade other countries. Chap. 8. Upon what occasions wars are begun among
Princes. Chap. 9. Moneys are not the sinews of war, according to the common
opinion. Chap. 10. It is not a match wisely made, to join alliance with a
Prince, whose credit is greater then his strength. Chap. 11. Whether it is
better for a Prince fearing to be assaild by his enemy, himself first to begin
the war with him, or to expect while it comes home to him. Chap. 12. That men
rise from poor and small beginnings to great fortunes, rather by the help of
guile then force. Chap. 13. They are often deceived who think with humility to
overcome pride. Chap. 14. Weak States are always irresolute in their
determinations; and slow deliberations are always hurtful. Chap. 15. How much
the order used by our soldiers in these modern times, differ from those of the
ancients. Chap. 16. What esteem our modern armies ought to have of artillery,
and if the opinion which is generally conceived of it be true. Chap. 17. How by
authority taken from the example of the Romans, and from the use of the ancient
military discipline, the foot is more to be esteemed then the horse. Chap. 18.
That conquests in Republiques not well governed, and that proceed not according
to the Roman valor, procure rather their ruin then advancement. Chap. 19.
What hazard that Prince or Commonwealth runs, which is served by auxiliary and
mercenary soldiers. Chap. 20. The first Rector that ever the Romans sent to any
place, was to Capua four hundred years after they began to make war. Chap. 21.
How erroneus many times the opinions of men are, when they give their judgments
touching great affairs. Chap. 22. How much the Romans in giving judgment upon
their subjects, whenever occasion was offered that constrained them
thereunto, avoided the middle way, and rather betook themselves to one of the
extremes. Chap. 23. Fortresses in general do more harm then good. Chap. 24. It
is a wrong course, to assail a City fallen into discord, thinking by means
thereof to become master of it. Chap. 25. Contempt and contumely begets a
hatred against them that use it, without any return of advantage to them. Chap.
26. Prudent Princes and Commonwealths ought to be content with the victory, for
oftentimes when that suffices not, they lose it. Chap. 27. How dangerous a
thing it is for a Republique or Prince, not to revenge an injury done against
the public State, or against a private person. Chap. 28. Fortune blinds men's
eyes, when she will not suffer them to prevent her designs. Chapter 29. Republiques
and Princes that really are mighty, seek not by moneys to make alliance with
others, but with their valor and repute of their forces. Chap. 30. How
dangerous a thing it is to give credit to men that are banishd out of their
Country. Chap. 31. How may ways the Romans used to make themselves masters of
Towns. Chap. 32. That the Romans gave their Commanders of their armies, free
and large Commissions. Chap. 33.
The Table of the third book.
FOr the maintenance of a Religion or Commonwealth long in being, it is
necessary oftentimes to reduce them to their first grounds. Chap. 1. It is a
very great part of wisdom sometimes to seem a fool. Chap. 2. That it was
necessary for preservation of the new gotten liberty, to put Brutus his sons to
death. Chap. 3. No Prince lives secure in his Principality, while those are
living who were despoyled of it. Chap. 4. What it is that makes a Prince lose
his Kingdom, which he injoys by right of inheritance. Chap. 5. Of
Conspiracies. Chap. 6. From whence proceeds it, that of the changes from
liberty to slavery, and from slavery to liberty, some are without blood, others
exceeding bloody. Chap. 7. He that will make alteration in a Republique, must
consider the subject he is to work upon. Chap. 8. How a man must of necessity
change with the times, if he will always have good success in his
undertakings. Chap. 9. That a Captain cannot avoid battle when his enemy will
fight in any case. Chapter 10. He that has to deal with many, however that he be
the weaker, provided that he can but support their first violence, overcomes.
Chap. 11. That a wise Commander upon his own soldiers, should lay all manner of
necessity to fight, and take it, as much as he can, from his enemies. Chap. 12.
Whether more trust is to be reposed in a good Commander having a weak army, or
in a good army having a weak Commander. Chap. 13. New sleights and inventions
that are used in the midst of a fight, and new cries that are heard, what
effects they produce. Chap. 14. That the command of an army ought to be given
in charge only to one, and where there are more, they always err. Chap. 15.
In time of difficulty and peril, true worth and virtue is sought after; and in
calm and quiet times, not their virtues but their wealth, friends and parentage
prefer them. Chap. 16. That he who has received any not able disgrace or
injury done him from a Prince or Republique, should never be entrusted by them
in any employment or service of importance. Chap. 17. There is nothing more
worthy of a Commander, then to be able to discover beforehand and espy out the
enemies practices. Chap. 18 Whether in the government of a multitude, mildness
or severity be of greater avail. Chap. 19. One example of humanity prevailed
with the Falisci, more then all the force of Rome could. Chap. 20. From whence
it came that Hannibal by a manner of proceeding different from that of
Scipioes, wrought the same effect in Italy, which the other did in Spain. Chap.
21. How Manlius Torquatus his rigor, and Valerius Corvinus his mildness gaind
each of them the same glory. Chap. 22. For what cause Camillus was banished
Rome. Chap. 23. The continuation of governments brought Rome into thraldom.
Chap. 24. Of Cincinnatus and many Romans poverties' Chap. 25. How that upon the
occasion of Women, states have been ruined. Chap. 26. How a City at discord in
it self is to be united: and how that opinion is not true, that to maintain
Cities in obedience, it is necessary to keep them in discord, and divided into
factions. Chap. 27. That the Citizens actions ought to be well weighed: for
many times under virtuous and charitable deeds, are laid the fouudacions of
Tyranny. Chap. 28. That the peoples faults grow from their Princes. Chap. 29. A
Citizen, that will of his own authority do any good in his own City, of
necessity must first extinguish all envy: and what order is to be taken for the
defense of a City upon the enemies approach. Chap. 30. Powerful Commonwealths,
and great and worthy personages in all manner of fortune retain the same
courage and the same dignity. Chap. 31. What means some have practiced to
disturb a treaty of peace. Chap. 32. It much furthers an army in the winning of
a battle, to be confident of their own forces and their Generals valor. Chap.
33. What fame, report, or opinion causes the people, to begin to cast their
favors upon a Citizen: and whether a Prince or a People do bestow their
Magistracies with better judgment. Chap. 34. What dangers they incur, that put
themselves forwards as Principals to advise any design, which are so much the
greater, by how much this carries with it the more difficulty and peril. Chap.
35. The reason wherefore the French have been and are thought in combats at the
beginning more then men, and afterward less then women. Chap. 36. Whether
slight skirmishes or battles are necessary before a great battle; and what is
to be done to know a new enemy, when one would avoid those skirmishes. Chap.
37. What manner of man that General ought to be, on whose abilities an army may
confidently rely Chap. 38. That a Commander ought exactly to know scituations.
Chap. 39. How deceit is commendable used against the enemy in time of war.
Chap. 40. That the defense of ones country ought to be undertaken, either with
ignominy or with glory, or whatsoever way it be done, it is well defended.
Chap. 41. Promises extorted by force ought not to be kept. Chap. 42. Those men
that are bred in the same Country, do throughout all ages keep very near the
same nature and dispositim. Chap. 43. By sudden supprisal and boldness many
times more is obtained, then by ordinary means can be gotten. Chap. 44. Which
course is the better in a battle, either at the first to sustain only the
enemies shock and reserve some forces till the latter end to give them a blow
withal, or else as upon themaine to venture all upon the fury of the first
onset Chap. 45. Whence proceeds it that one family in a City holds a long time
the same manners and disposition. Chap. 46. That a good Citizen for the good of
his Country ought to forget all private wrongs. Chap. 47. When we see the enemy
commit a great error, we ought to believe there is some treachery in the
business. Chap. 48. A Republique if one would preserve it free, has every day
neeed of provision of new orders: and in regard of his good deserts that way,
Fabius was termed Magnus, Chap. 49.
FINIS.
MACHIAVELS DISCOURSES UPON THE First DECADE OF T. LIVIVS Translated out of
Italian.
The Preface.
WHen I consider the esteem which is made of antiquity, and that many times
(letting pass further examples) a small piece of an ancient statute has been
bought at a great rate, only to have it at hand, to adorn the house withal,
and that thereby they may be able to cause others, who take delight in the art,
to draw copies thereof, and these likewise endeavor, as lively as they can, to
represent it again in all their works and on the other side seeing the most
virtuous actions that histories relate us, to have been archieved by Kingdoms,
ancient Commonwealths, Kings Captains, Citizens and Lawgivers, and such
others who have undergone much for their Countries good; that these, I say,
have been rather admired then followed, or rather by every one have been so
much avoided, that now the very footsteps of that ancient virtue is utterly
defaced, I cannot but both marvel and grieve: and the rather, because I
perceive, that in matters of process arising in a Commonwealth among citizens,
or in criminal causes, recourse is always made to those judgments and those
remedies which formerly have been ordained and practiced by the ancients; for
the civil-lawes are nothing else, but the opinions given by ancient Lawyers,
which since having been reduced to a method, todirect our Doctors of the Law
now a days, in giving of their judgments: yet for all this in the ordering of
Commonwealths, in the maintenance of States, in the government of Kingdoms, in
ordeining of military discipline, in waging of war, in giving judgment upon the
subjects, in amplifying of the Empire, there are neither Princes, nor
Republiques, Commanders, nor Citizens who ever seek after any of these ancient
patterns, which I persuade my self proceeds not so much from that weakness,
into which the breeding and customs now a days have brought the world, or
from that evil which idleness accompanied with ambition has done to many
Christian countries and Cities, as from their want of the true knowledge of
histories, in that by reading them, they conceive not that meaning nor relish
that tastethey have in them: whence it arises that many who read, take delight
to hear the variety of accidents, which are frequent in them, without further
regard of imitating them deeming that not only hard, but unpossible, as if the
heavens, the sun, the elements, and men were altered from what they were of
old, in the^ir motion, order and power. Wherefore being desirous to withdraw
men from this error, I thought fit to write upon these books of T: Livius,
which have escaped the malice of the times, what I thought, conformable to
modern and ancient affairs, of purpose for the better understanding of them,
that they who shall well peruse these discourses of mine, may there reap that
profit for which end the knowledge of history ought to be sought after. And
however this be a task of great difficulty, yet by the help of those who have
encouraged me to undergo this burden, I believe I shall carry it so far
onwards, that there shall be left for him that comes after me, but very little
way to bring it to a good end.

CHAP. I.
What were in general the beginnings of every city, and especially that of
Rome.

WHosoever shall read what beginning the City of Rome had, who were the
Lawmakers, and how it was founded, will nothing marvel that so great virtue
was continued so many years in the city, and that from thence afterward there
grew so mighty an Empire, to which that Commonwealth attained. And therefore to
discourse first of her birth, I say, that all Cities were built either by the
Natives of the place they were built in, or by strangers. The first comes to
pass when the inhabitants being dispersed in many and small numbers find they
cannot live safe, each one not having strength apart, as well by reason of
their situation, as their small number to resist the violence of those that
would force them; or if they would join together for their defense, the enemy
coming upon them, they cannot do it in time; and when they should be in one
body, they must of necessity abandon diverse of their retreats, and so become a
sudden prey to their enemies: Wherefore to escape these dangers, either of
themselves, or upon the motion of some one of authority among them, they
confine themselves to dwell together, in a place chosen as well for their
better commodity of living as more facility of defense. Of this sort among many
others were Athens and Venice. The first under the command of Theseus, was upon
the like occasions built by the scattered inhabitants: the other, much people
being retired into certain little Islands at the point of the Adriatique Sea (to
avoid those wars which then were beginning in Italy by reason of those huge and
continual inundations of Barbarians upon the declining of the Roman Empire)
began among themselves without the authority of any particular Prince, to live
under those laws they thought most proper for their preservation: which proved
luckily to them, for the long quiet their situation gave them, that Sea having
no outlet, and those people which then afflicted Italy, not having ships to
annoy them, so that every little beginning was sufficient to give them that
greatness they now have. The second sort is, when a City is built by strangers
which are either absolute of themselves, or depend upon others, and such are
colonies which are sent out either by a Commonwealth or Prince to disburden
their Towns of inhabitants, or for the defense of some country which of late
they have gotten, and would safely keep without much expense; of which sort the
Romans built many througouht all their dominions; others were built by some
Prince, not to make his seat there, but for his glory; and so was Alexandria
by Alexander: and because these cities have not their beginning free, they
seldom attain to that greatness, as to be esteemed the head cities of
Kingdoms. The like beginning had Florence (whither it was built by Syllaes
Soldiers, or by chance by the inhabitants of the mountains of Fiesola; who
taking heart upon that long peace the world enjoyed under Octavian, came down
and dwelt in the plain upon the Arne) for it was built under the Romau
government, neither could it in the beginning make greater increase, then what
the Princes favor allowed it. The founders of Cities are then said to be
absolute and free, when any people either led by a Prince, or of themselves,
are forced by contagion, famine, or war to abandon their native Soil, and seek
a new dwelling and these are are content to inhabit the Cities in the Country
they have conquered, as Moses did, or build new, as did Aeneas. In this case
appears the ability of the founder, and the fortune of the City founded, the
which is more or less admirable, as he who gave thereto the beginning was of
greater or or less abilities: which is seen in two kinds; the first in choice
of the situation, the second in making the laws. And because men act some
things upon necessity, others by their own election, and the greater virtue is
there seen where election has the least power; it is to be considered, whether
it were better to choose barren places to build Cities in, to the end men being
forced to labor for their sustenance, might live the better in agreement, the
poverty of their Country giving less occasion of discord, as it was in Raugia:
and in many other Cities built in like places, which choice without doubt would
be wiselier made and more profitable, of men were content to live of their own,
and not seek to rule over others, but seeing it not possible for men to live in
security without force, it is necessary to avoid a barren soil, and to plant
themselves in fruitful places, where they may be enabled by the plenty of their
seat to enlarge and desend their territories against those that would assault
them, and over-master all that would oppose their greatness. And to the end the
riches of the country occasion not too much the ease of the people, it would be
fit to provide that the laws oblige them to take these pains, the situation
does not, and to imitate those who have lived in pleasant and fruitful
countries, and apt to breed men given to Luxury, loath to use that industry
virtue requires, and yet were so wise as to prevent those harms the plenty of
the soil, and so consequently the peoples idleness might cause: having imposed
such a necessity of labor upon those they brought up to be Soldiers, as by
means of their strict discipline, they far surpassed others who because of
their rough and barren countries were borne fierce; such was the Kingdom of
the Egyptians that notwithstanding the countries delicacies, the laws
strictness prevailed so far, as there were bred by them many great personages:
and if time had not worn out their names, it would appear they had deserved
as much praise, as did Great Alexauder, and many others whose memories stories
continue fresh amongst us: and whosoever had considered the Soldans Kingdom,
and the Mamalucks order, with their military discipline, before they were
ruined by Selimus the great Turk, would have seen in that how the Soldiers
were trained up in continual exercises, and therein have known how much they
feared that case to which the goodness of their Country invited them, unless it
had been opposed with severe laws. I avow therefore the choice better in a
fertile place, when that good government takes order for a moderate use of the
abundance. When Alexander the great had a purpose to build a City for his
glory, Dinocrates the Architect came to him and showed him, how it might be
built upon Mount Athos, which place, besides that it would be strong, he could
so order, that the City should be made in form of a man: which would be a
wonder worthy his greatness: and being askd again by Alexander whereupon the
inhabitants should live, answered he had not well advised of that point yet:
whereat having laughed, he left the mountain alone, and built Alexandria so,
that people might resort thither, as well for the farness of the soil, as the
commodity of of the sea, and the River Nilus. Whoever then shall examine the
beginning of Rome, if Aeneas be taken for the first founder, it must be numberd
among the cities that were built by strangers; If Romulus, among those that
were built by the Natives; And in what manner soever It were, it will appear it
had a beginning free of it self without dependence of any; and moreover that
the Laws made by Romulus, Numa, and others, kept it under in an exact obedience
(as hereafter shall be said:) so that neither the fruitfulness of the country,
the commodity of the Sea, the osten victories, nor the vastness of the Empire,
could in many ages corrupt it; but maintained it so eminent for virtue, that
never any commonwealth came near it. And because those exploits she did, and
are recited by T. Livius, were acted upon public or private Counsel, and
either within or without the city, I will begin my discourse upon those things
passed within land done upon public advice, which I shall think worthy of
remarke, adding likewise all the dependences thereupon; with which the first
book or first part shall end.

CHAP. II.
How many kinds of Commonwealths there are; and what was that of Rome.

I Will sorbear to discourse of those cities which have had their beginnings in
subjection under others, and speak of such only as were free in their births
from foreign servi^ude, having had instantly the raines of their own government
in their own hands, either as a Commonwealth, or as a Principality which have
had. as diverse beginnings, so likewise sundry laws and ordinances: for some
either in their beginning, or not long after received their laws from one
alone, and that at once, as the Spartans did theirs from Lycurgus: others had
theirs casually and at several times, and upon occasion, as Rome: so that it is
a great happiness for a Commonwealth to light upon a man of such wisdom so to
order the State, as without need of alteration it may continue in security
under them: as we see that Sparta kept the same without change or any dangerous
tumult above eight hundred years. And on the contrary, that City may in some
degree be termd unhappy, which having not met with a judicious founder, is
forced to give it self a new frame: and of these the more unlucky is that which
is the more amiss: and such is that which together with all its own new
ordinances, has much mistaken the right way to perfection: for it is almost
impossible for those of this degree to be settled again by any accident: those
others although their order be not exact, yet the beginning they have taken
being good, and like enough to prove better, have a good possibility, as may
fall out, to become perfect: but sure it is, 'will never be without danger: for
the multitude seldom agrees to a new law, if it touch any change of government
in the City, unless the necessity of doing it be showed them by some extremity,
which never coming without danger, it is like enough the Commonwealth may be
sooner ruin^d, then brought into good order. Of which that of Florence gives
sufficient proof, which upon that accident of Arezo in the second year was anew
orderd, and by that of Pirato in the twelfth inbroyld again. Intending then to
treat what were the ordinances of the City of Rome, and the accidents that
brought it to perfection, I say, that some, who have writ of Commonwealths,
will have it that there was one of these three kinds of States termed by them a
Principality, another an Aristocracy, and a third a Popular government: and
that they who lay the first grounds of rule and order in a City, ought most to
have regard to some one of these, as it seems fittest to their purpose. Some
others (and that following the opinion of many more wise) think that there be
six sorts of governments; of which three are bad in extremity, and three good
in themselves, but so easy to be corrupted, that even they become pernicious.
Those which are good, are the three aforesaid; the bad are the other three
which depend on these, and every one of them in such sort resemble that which
it ap^ preaches, that they change suddenly from one into the other: for the
Principality easily becomes Tyranny; that of the Nobility falls into the hands
of some few; and the Popular will as easily become tumultuous: so that if he
that lays the foundation of a Commonwealth, ordaines in a City one of these
three sorts, it is but for a small continuance: for it is beyond the power of
any remedy to hinder that it slip not into its contrary, for the resemblances
which in this case there is between the virtue and the vice. These differences
of governments grew by chance among men; for in the beginning of the World,
when the inhabitants were thin, they were scattered abroad for a time like wild
beasts; afterward man kind increasing, they gathered together, and that they
might be able better to defend themselves, they began to cast their eyes upon
him who had the most strength and courage among them, and made him their head
and obeyed him. Hereupon began the discerning of things good and honest from
bad and hurtful: for seeing that if any one hurt his benefactour, it caused
hatred and pity among men, blaming the ungrateful, and honoring the thankful;
and thinking withal that the same injuries might as well be done to themselves;
to avoid the like evil, they betook them to make laws and to make punishments
against the offenders: Hence came the knowledge of justice, which was the
occasion that when they were to choose a Prince, they sought not after him that
was the lustiest, but the wisest and justest. But afterward when they had
their Prince by succession, and not by election, suddenly the heirs began to
degenerate from their ancestors; and forsaking virtuous actions, they thought
that Princes had nothing to do but to exceed others in luxury and wantonness,
and in what belonged to their pleasure: so that the Prince beginning to be
hated, and because he was hated to fear, and passing on beyond this fear to
hurt, hereon grew Tyranny. Thence afterward grew those violences, conspiracies
and treasons against Princes, which were not undertaken by those that were
fearful or weak; but if any surpassed others in courage, valor, wealth, and
birth, those were the actors, not being able to endure the shameful life of
that Prince. The multitude then following the authority of those great ones,
took arms against the Prince; and he being down, they yielded obedience to
these as to their deliverers: and they hating the name of one head alone,
framed a government of themselves, and in the beginning (in regard of the
tyranny past) carried themselves fairly according to the laws they had made,
preferring the public good before their own advantage, and in sum, ruled
and maintained the state with exceeding diligence. This government afterward
falling into the hands of their children, who never knew the change of fortune,
nor had the experience of adversity, not being content to live in a civil
equality, but abandoning themselves to covetousness, ambition, and ravishing of
women, so carried it, that they engrossed in the hands of some few the
government that belonged to the whole Nobility, without any regard of the
state, in so much that it befell to them quickly as to the Tyrant. For the
multitude loathing their government, served it self of any one that had any
design against these governors, and so some there were quickly found that made
head against them, who with the aid of the people put them down. And the
remembrance of the Prince being yet fresh, and of the wrongs they suffered
under him, having taken away this government of few, and being unwilling to
restore that of a Prince, they chose the Popular, which they so ordained, that
neither a few that were mighty, nor one Prince alone should have any power
there. And because all states in the beginning are venerable, this Popular
state subsisted a while but not long, especially when that generation was out
that ordained it: for suddenly they grew licentious, not fearing private men,
nor public Ministers, so that every one living as he listed, they daily did
one another diverse outrages, and at length wereforc'd by necessity, or by the
persuasion of some good man, for to avoid such insolency, to change a new into
a Principality, and so from thence by degrees, they grew exorbitant in their
behavior, and upon the occasions aforesaid: And this is the circle, in which
all states turning about have been and are governed: but seldom do they
return into the self same governments: for hardly any Commonwealth can be of
so long durance as to undergo so many changes, and yet stand afoot: but rather
it comes to pass, the state while it is in tumult, counsel and force then
always failing, becomes subject to some neighboring government which is
better ordered then it self: but were it not for this, a state were always
capable of revolution into these sorts of government: I say then, that all
these kinds are pernicious for the short continuance of the three which are
good; and the malignity of the other three which are bad: Whereupon the sage
Lawgivers having perceived this defect, avoiding each one by it self, chose
one that might partake of all, esteeming that more sound and firm: for the one
guards the other, being that in one and the same City, there was the
Principality, Nobility, and Commonalty as parts of the governments. Among
those, who by such like ordinances have deserved most commendations, is
Lycurgus, who made his laws after such a manner in Sparta, that giving the King
the Nobility, and the people their shares, he composed a government that lasted
above eight hundred years, to his great credit and that Cities quiet. The
contrary befell Solon, who made the laws in Athens, which because it was a
popular state, proved but short lived, and he before he died saw the Tyranny of
Pisistratus begun: and though after forty years his heirs were driven from
thence, and Athens recovered its liberty (because it took again a popular
government according to Solons institutions) it maintained it not above a
hundred years, notwithstanding that to hold it, there were many laws made by
which the insolences of the great men were restrained and the licentiousness of
all in general: which were never provided for by Solon: yet because he
compounded not this with the authority of the Principality as also of the
Nobility, Athens continued but a short time in respect of Sparta. But let us
come to Rome, which though it had not a Lycurgus to put it so in order that it
might long subsist free, yet such were the accidents that chanced in it, by
reason of the disunion of the Commonalty and the Senate, that what their
founder had not provided for, chance did: for if Rome lit not upon the best
fortune, it lit upon the next to the best; for though the first ordinances were
defective, yet they aimed not amiss at the true perfection: because Romulus and
all the Kings made many and good laws and these agreeing to the maintenance of
liberty. But because their design was to lay the foundations of a kingdom, and
not of a Commonwealth, when the City became free, there wanted many things
which were fit to be instituted in favor of liberty, but were never ordained
by those Kings. And albeit their Kings lost rule upon the occasion and by the
means alleged, yet they that expelled them presently setting up two Consuls who
should stand in the Kings stead, chased out of Rome the Regal title only, and
not the Regal power; so that there being in that Commonwealth the Consuls and
the Senate, it was composed only of two of these forenamed qualities, that is
to say, of the Principality and Nobility. There remained only to give the
Commonalty a place in the government, whereupon the Roman Nobility being grown
insolent, upon the occasions (which shall be hereafter told) the people rose up
against them, so that rather then to lose all, they were constrained to allow
the people their part; and on the other side, the Senate and the Consuls were
likewise to continue with so great authority as they might well maintain their
degree in that Commonwealth: and so began the creation of the Tribuns of the
people, after which the state of that Commonwealth became more firm, all the
three kinds of governments having their shares. And fortune did so much favor
them, that though they proceeded from the rule of a King, and of the Nobility,
to that of the people, by the same degrees, and for the same reasons set down
before; yet to give power to the Nobility, they never took away all the
authority from the Royalty; nor was the power of the Nobility quite diminished,
to give it to the people: but being mingled, it made an exact Commonwealth, to
which perfection it came by the departing of the Commonalty from the Senate, as
it shall be showed at length in the two next following Chapters.

CHAP. III.
Upon what occasions the Tribuns of the people were created in Rome: whereby
the Commonwealth became more perfect.

ACcording as it is showed by all those that reason of civil government, and so
every History is full of examples to that purpose, it is necessary that he who
frames a Commonwealth, and ordaines Laws in it, should presuppose that all men
are bent to mischief, and that they have a will to put in practice the
wickedness of their minds, so often as occasion shall serve: and that when any
mischief lies covert for a time, it proceeds from an occasion unknown, which is
not come to light, because trial of the contrary has not yet been made, but
time afterward discovers it, which they say is Father of the truth. It seemed
that there was in Rome a perfect union of the People and Senate, when the
Tarquins were banished, and that the Nobility having laid by their Pride, were
become of a popular disposition, and supportable to every one even of the
meanest rank. This deceit lay hid, nor was the occasion thereof known as long
as the Tarquins lived, of whom the Nobility being afraid, and doubting that
upon their ill treating of the people, they might side with them, behaved
themselves with good respect toward them: But no sooner were the Tarquins
dead, and the Nobility delivered of that fear, but they began to spit against
the people the poison that all this while had lurked in their breasts, and in
all sorts possible to vex and molest them: which thing confirms what I said
before, that men never do good, unless enforced thereto: but where choice is
abundant, and liberty at pleasure, confusion and disorder suddenly take place.
Wherefore it is said, that hunger and poverty make men laborious, and Laws make
them good. But where one thing alone by it self without a Law does good, there,
is no need of the Law: but when that good custom fails, the Law becomes
necessary forthwith. Yet the Tarquins being foiled, who with fear of them kept
the Nobility in awe, it was fit to think out a new way which should work the
same effect the Tarquins did, when they were alive. And so at length after many
broils, tumults, and hazards of breaches between the people and the Nobility,
at length for the peoples assurance, the Tribuns were created, and they bore
such sway and had such credit, that they could always after mediate between
the people and the Senate, and stop the Nobilities insolency.

CHAP. IV.
That the disagreement of the People and the Senate of Rome, made the
Commonwealth both free and mighty.

I Must not fail to discourse upon these tumults, which were in Rome from the
Tarquins death till the creation of the Tribuns; and afterward upon some other
things against the opinion of many, who say that Rome was a very disorderly
commonwealth, and full of such confusion, that if good fortune and military
virtue had not supplied their defects, it would have been inferior to any. I
cannot deny that fortune and warlike discipline were causes of the Roman
Empire: but methinks they do not consider, that where good discipline is, it is
likely too that there is good order, and seldom also happens it but that there
is good fortune. But let us come to the other particulars of that City. I say
that they who condemn the troubles between the Nobility and the people, to me
seem to blame those things which were the first occasion of Romes liberty: and
that they think more of the stirs and noises which arose from those tumults,
then they regard the good effects they brought forth: and that they consider
not, how there are two several humors in every Republique, that of the
Commons, and the other of the great-ones; and how all the laws that are made in
favor of liberty, spring first from their disagreement, as easily we may
perceive it followed in Rome. For from the Tarquins to the Gracchies more then
300. years, the tumults of Rome seldom times caused banishment, and very
seldom blood: Insomuch as no man can well deem these stirs hurtful, nor say
the Commonwealth was divided, which in so long a time through her discord,
banished not above eight or ten Citizens, and put very few to death, nor yet
condemned many in sums of money. Neither can that be termed with reason in any
sort a disorderly Commonwealth, whence we have so many rare examples of virtue:
for good examples proceed from good education and a good education from good
laws, and good laws from those tumults which many unadvisedly do condemn: for
whosoever shall examine the end thereof, shall not find that they produced any
banishment or violence in hinderance of the common good, but laws and
ordinances in benefit of the public liberty. And if any man should allege
that the means were extravagant, and in a manner outragions. To see the people
together cry out against the Senate, and the Senate against the people, to run
tumultuously through the streers, to shut up their shops, and the whole people
of Rome to quit the town, all which things fright even those that read them. I
say that every city ought to have its own ways whereby the people may vent
their ambition, and especially those cities that in matters of importance will
avail themselves of their people; among which Rome had this way, that when the
people would have a law made, either they did some of the things forenamed, or
refused to have their names enrolled for the wars, so that to quiet them,
there was a necessity in some sort to give them satisfaction. And it is but
seldom seen, that the desires of free people tend to the hurt of liberty; for
they arise either from their oppression, or from their suspicion they are
falling into it. And in case these opinions were false, yet is there a means
to rectify them, if some discreet Orator in their assemblies persuade them of
their error; and the people (as Tully says) though of themselves ignorant, yet
are they of capacity to conceive the truth, being told them by any man worthy
of credit, and do easily submit. Wherefore we ought more sparingly to blame the
Roman Government, and consider the good effects issued from that Commonwealth,
which never proceeded but from good causes. And for creating the Tribuns, they
deserve exceeding great praise; for besides the giving to the people their
share of Government, they were ordained as guardians of the Roman liberty, as
it shall appear in the Chapter following.

CHAP. V.
Whether the people or the nebiliry are the better Guardians of liberty; and
which have greater occasions of being tzmvltuous; either they that strive to
enlarge the state, or they than endeavor but to maintain it.

THey who have judiciously laid the foundations of a Commonwealth, have, among
other principal things ordained by them, provided a safeguard for liberty, which
as it is rightly placed, so is it of long or shorter durance. And because in
every Republic there are the Nobility and the Commons, question is made to
which of these two more safely may be entrusted the Guard of liberty. And among
the Lacedaemonians, and in our times among the Venetians it has been given to
the Nobility; but among the Romans it was committed to the peoples trust; and
therefore is it necessary to examine which of these two Commonwealths made the
better choice. And if a man list to argue the case, there want not arguments on
both parts: butif we look to the issue they had, we should yield it to the
Nobility, because Sparta and Venice enjoyed either of them their freedom,
longer then Rome. And coming to argument I say (first taking part with the
Romans) that they ought rather to be entrusted as guardians of any thing, who
are least desirous to usurp it, and without doubt considering the designs of
the nobility and of the people, we must needs confess they are very ambitious
of rule, these only desire not to be oppressed, and consequently affect the
continuance of their freedom, having less hope to usurp it, then the
Nobility; so^ that the people being set as guardians of the Common liberty, it
is probable, they are more careful of it; and being themselves out of hope of
it, will never suffer that it fall into others hands. On the other side, he
that argues for the Spartan and Venetian customs, says, that they who entrust
it with them that are powerful, do two good things at once; the one, that they
rather give a satisfaction to their ambition, that having a greater part in the
Commonwealth, by holding this staff in their hand they have greater reason to
be contented: the other is, that they free the peoples unquiet minds from such
a kind of authority which is the occasion of infinite discords and offenses in
the Commonwealth, and like enough to bring the Nobility to some desperation,
which in time may do much mischief: and they give us Rome it self for an
example hereof, that when the Tribuns of the people had this authority in their
hands, they were not content to have one Consul to be a Plebeyan, but would
have both, and thereupon they would have the Censor and the Pretour, and all
other dignities in the rule of the City: nor was this enough, but led on still
with the same rage, they began in after times to adore those men whom they saw
fit to curb the Nobility, whereupon grew the power of Marius and the ruin of
Rome: and, truly whosoever should sift this matter thoroughly, the one and the
other, would much doubt which he should make choice of for the guardians of
liberty, not knowing which sort of men is more hurtsull in a Commonwealth,
either that which desires to gain the honor it has not, or the other which
endeavors to maintain what they have already got; and at last, whosoever shall
examine the whole thoroughly, will make this conclusion; Either you reason of a
Republic that aims at such a dominion as Rome had, or of one which seeks no
farther then her own preservation. In the fir^ case, it is best to do as Rome
did, and follow her footsteps. In the second, he may follow Venice and Sparta
for those occasions, as it shall be said in the Chapter following. But to
return to the point, what kind of men are the more hurtful in a Republic?
either they that would enlarge the State, or those that are wary not to lose
what they have already gotten; I say that Marcus Menenius being made Dictatour,
and Marcus Follius General of the horse, both Plebeyans, to inquire after
certain conspiracies, which were made in Capua against Rome, authority was also
given from the people to find out those that in Rome by ambition or any
extraordinary way did strive to gain the Consu^ship, and the other great
honors of the City; whereupon the Nobility thinking this authority granted to
the Dictatour as against them, they reported all about Rome that they were not
the Nobles that ambituously sought after dignities by unlawful means, but the
Plebeyans who not confident of their births nor worths, sought by extravagant
ways to attain to those degrees, and particularly accused the Dictatonr; and
so powerful was the accusation, that Menenius in a public assembly, where he
complained of the calumnies the Nobility had laid on him, quit the
Dictatourship, and submitted himself to the trial, which was made before the
People, and after his cause was heard, he was absolved: where it was argued,
whether savored more of ambition, either he that would maintain, or he that
would gain; for the one and the other appetite may occasion very great tumults.
Yet notwithstanding most commonly are they caused by him who already has the
possession, because the fear of losing does breed in them the same desires
which are in those who aim at conquest: because men think they hold not surely
what they have, unless they make a new addition of somewhat else; and besides
this, the larger territories they are Master of, the greater force and power
they are able to employ in bringing their designs to effect; and this also may
we add, that their unlimited and ambitious behaviors kindle in the breasts of
those that have not, a desire to have, or to be revenged on those that despoyle
them, or else to become Lords themselves of that wealth and those honors,
which they see others use ill.

CHAP. VI.
Whether in Rome there could have been ^uch a State founded, as would quite
ha^^ taken away the hatreds between the People and the Senate.

WE have discoursed upon the effects, which the differences, betwixt the
People and the Senate, made. Now they continuing till the Gracchies, where they
occasioned the ruin of the common liberty, some man would wish, that Rome
could have achieved these glorious acts she did, without those jarres in her.
Yet it seems worthy the consideration, to see, if it were possible, so to frame
a State in Rome, as could void all differences^; and if a man would examine
this, he should have recourse to those Republiques, which, without so many
fallings out and bickerings, have been long free, and see, what kind of State
theirs was, and whether Rome were capable of it. An example among the ancients
is Sparta, among the modernes Venice, both by me formerly named. Sparta made it
self a King with a little Senate to govern it. Venice divided not the
government with the names, but in one general term, all those that had a hand
in it were called Gentlemen, which chance rather cast on them, then the
deliberation of their founder: for many inhabitants being met together upon
those rocks, where now stands that City upon the occasions foretold, when they
were grown to such a number, that for them to live together it was necessary
for them to ordain Laws they appointed a form of government, and meeting also
together in Counsel to advise touching the City, when they found themselves of
sufficient number to make up a body politic, they excluded all others who
afterward in process of time should come to dwell there, from all power in
State affairs. And in success of time, finding there were many inhabitants in
the place out of the Government, to give them reputation that governed, they
called them Gentlemen, and the others Plebeyans. So that this order might well
be begun and continued without the dislike of any: for when it was first made,
every one that dwelt at Venice, did equally partake of the Government, so that
none could complain: they, who afterward came to inhabit there, finding the
State settled and limited, had neither occasion nor means to make any tumult:
there was no occasion, because nothing was taken from them: and the means they
had not, because they that governed kept them in subjection, nor trusted them
so far with any employment that they could take authority upon them. Add
hereunto, that they who afterward came to inhabit Venice, were not many, nor
of so great a number, that there was disproportion between the Governors and
those that were governed; for the number of the Gentlemen was either equal to
them, or greater then they were: so that for these reasons Venice could well
begin such a State and maintain it in unity. Sparta, as I said, was governed by
a King and a strict Senate, and might well maintain it self so a long time;
because there being in Sparta but few inhabitants, and they having seized upon
the Government in prevention of those that should afterward come to inhabit
there, and with reputation living in observance of Lycurgus Laws, took away
quite all occasion of discord, so that they might easily continue together in a
long agreement; for Lycurgus by his Laws ordained in Sparta more equality of
estates, and less of dignities; for here poverty was to all alike; and the
Plebeyans less ambitious: for the Magistracies of the City were communicable
only to some few Citizens, and were held apart from the People, neither did the
Nobility ever with their harsh usage make them covetous of them. This eame from
the Spartan Kings, who being placed in that Principality, and set in the midst
of that Nobility, had no surer means to maintain their dignity steadfast, then
to defend the People from injurious oppressions: which made the People, that it
neither feared nor affected the Government, and not having the rule nor fearing
it, the contention they might have with the Nobility was quite avoided, and all
occasion of tumults: and in this sort they might live in peace a long time. But
two principal things caused this agreement; because the inhabitants of Sparta
were few, and therefore might be governed by few: the other, because not
accepting of strangers into their Republic, they had not occasion, either of
being corrupted, or making great increase, so as to become insupportable to
those few that governed them. Wherefore considering these things, it appears;
that the founders of Rome were to have used one of these two expedients, if
they desired to maintain it quicker, like one of these Commonwealths we have
spoken of: either not to employ the common people in War, as the Venetians; or
not admit strangers into the City, as the Spartans: both of which they did,
which gave the people force and increase, and sundry occasions of tumults. So
that if the Roman State grew more quiet, this inconvenient followed, that it
was also weaker; because it disabled it self of the means to come to the
greatness it attained. And therefore, if Rome would take away the occasions of
disagreements, it took away the means of amplifying the State. And in all
humane affairs it is plain, whosoever does thoroughly examine it, that upon the
cutting off one inconvenient, another will straight arise: therefore if thou
would make a numerous and a warlike people to enlarge far the bounds of the
Empire, thou make them of such a temper, that they shall never be maneggiable
at thy will; a^ if thou keptst them weak and disarmed to have them at command:
but if they get the rule into their hand, thou shall not be able to bridle
them; or else become so base, that thou shall be made a prey to what enemy so
e're assaults thee. And for this cause in all our deliberations we ought to
advise, where least inconvenients are, and to take that for the best course:
for there is non^ absolutely free from hazard and suspicion Rome then, like
Sparta, could have made (...) ^rince for life, and a small Senate, but could
nor then, as she, not increase the number of her Citizens, having a desire to
extend her dominions: which was the cause that a King for term of life, and
the little number of Senators, touching their agreement, would have nothing
availd. Whereupon if a man were anew to lay grounds of a Republic, he should
first resolve, whether he would have it extend its power and rule, as Rome: or
confine it self to small limits. In the first case then, he must order it, as
Rome, and give place to tumults and general differences, the best he may; for
without great number of men, and those warlike, could never any Commonwealth
increase, or if it increase, continue. In the second case thou may so order
it, as Sparta or Venice. But by reason that ambition to extend the dominions,
is the poison of such like Commonwealths, their founder ought, as much as may
be, in all those ways forbid them to enlarge themselves; for all such gains
grounded upon a weak Commonwealth, do quite ruin it, as it befell Sparta and
Venice: whereof the first, having subdued as it were all Greece, upon a very
small accident, discovered its own weak foundation: for the Rebellion of Thebes
following, caused by Pelopidas, with other Cities imitating, utterly ruined
that Republic. In like manner Venice, having possessed her self of a great part
of Italy, and the greatest not by force, but by money, and craft, when it came
to make trial of its force, lost all in a day. I should well believe, that the
way to frame a Commonwealth of long continuance, were to order it within as
Sparta or Venice, to place it in a strong situation, and make it of such
resistance, that no man can hope to subdue it on a sudden; and on the
otherside, that it be not so great, to become a terror to the neighbors, and so
likely it may long enjoy its State. For upon two occasions ordinarily men make
War against a Republic; the one, to become master of it, the other for fear it
become master of them. And this way I have spoken of, takes quite away these
two causes; for if it be hard to overcome, as I presuppose it, being well
furnished for defense, it will seldom, or never chance that any can make a
design to conquer it: and if it contains it self within its own limits, and it
be manifest by experience, that in it there is no ambition, it shall never come
to pass, that any for fear interrupt its quiet. And this would the rather be,
if in it were made a Law or order to forbid the amplifying of the State. And
without doubt I believe, that the bringing of things to consist in these terms
and in this equality of temper, were the true civil Government, and the perfect
quiet of a City. But being that all humane things are in continual motion, and
nothing stands firm, they must ever be rising or falling. And to many things
that reason does not persuade thee, necessity binds thee; so that having
settled a Commonwealth able to maintain it self, not augmenting; and necessity
should force it to enlarge it self, it would manifestly loosen its own
foundations, and suddenly bring it self to ruin. On the otherside, if the
heavens should prove so favorable, as to blow away all clouds and tempests of
War, thence would arise that sloth and idleness would either divide them, or
make them effeminate. Which two things together, or either by it self, would
occasion their ruin And therefore, being impossible (as I think) to poise all
things so justly by the balance, or reduce them to this perfection of temper,
it is properest, in founding the Republic, to provide for the most honorable
part, and so to order it, that when necessity shall enforce its enlarging, it
may be able to keep what it has gotten. And to return to our first discourse,
I think it necessary to follow the Roman Ordinances, and not those of other
Common wealths; for to find a mediocrity between the one and the other, I think
it not possible. And those enmities, which should grow betwixt the people and
the Senate, ought to be tolerated, taking them for a necessary inconvenient, to
attain to Romes greatness. For besides other reasons alleged, where the
authority of the Tribunes is proved necessary for the preservation of liberty,
it manifestly appears what great benefit they make in Commonwealths of the
power of accusing, which among other things was committed to the Tribunes, as
in the Chapter following shall be declared.

CHAP. VII.
How useful accusations are in a Republike for the maintenance of Liberty.

THere cannot be a more profitable or necessary power given to those that in a
city are appointed as guardians of the liberty, then is that of accusing the
Citizens to the people, or before any Magistrate, or any council, whenever
they offend in any thing against the free State. This order works two very
useful effects in a Republic. The first is, that the Citizens for fear of
being accused, attempt nothing against the State; and in case they do,
forthwith without any respect given them, are suppres'd. The other is, that it
gives a way to vent the humors that grow in the Cities, in any manner against
any Citizens. And when these humors have not ordinary vents, they burst out
extraordinary ways, and so are the ruin of a Commonwealth. And there is not
any thing renders a Republic more settled and steadfast, then to ordain it in
such a manner, that the alteration of these humors that stir it, have some
outlet, appointed by the Laws; which may be showed by diverse examples, and
especially by that of Coriolanus, which Titus Livius reports: where he says,
that the Nobility of Rome being angry with the people, as thinking them to have
too much Authority, by creation of the Tribunes, who protected them; and Rome
(as some time it chances) being in great want of provisions, and thereupon the
Senate sent for Corn into Sicily, Coriolanus an Enemy of the popular faction
advised, that now the time was come, they had power to chastise the people, and
to take away that Authority which they had laid hold on in prejudice of the
Nobility, by keeping them in hunger and want, distributing the Corn to them.
Which opinion of his they hearing of, took such distaste against Coriolanus,
that had not the Tribunes cited him to appear to defend his cause, the people
had slain him in a tumult as he came out of the Senate. Upon which accident, we
note that which before was said, how fit and useful it is, that the
Commonwealths with their Laws give means to vent the choler, which the
universality has conceived against any one Citizen. For when they have not
these ordinary means, they have recourse to extraordinary; and out of question
these are of worse effect then those. For if by an orderly course one Citizen
be ssuppres'd, although it were wrongfully done, yet follwes thereupon little
or no disorder in the Republic, because the execution is done without any
private man's power, or assistance of foreign forces, which are those, that take
away the common liberty; but by the public and lawful power, which have their
particular bounds, nor any way pass so far as to endammage, the Commonwealth.
And to confirm this opinion with examples, this of Coriolanus from the ancients
shall suffice me; upon which let every one consider, what mischief thereby had
fallen on the Commonwealth of Rome, if in a tumult he had been flain; for
thereupon had grown offenses between particular men; offenses cause fear,
fear seeks defense, for defense men make partisans, and thus parties grow in
Cities, and from them the ruin of Cities. But the matter being ordered by
public authority, they took away all those mischiefs which might have
happened, had it been carried by private power; we have seen in our days what
innovations it has brought on the Florentine Republic, in that the multitude
had no legal means to vent their displeasure against a single Citizen: as it
befell in the time of Franciscus Valorus, who was as it were Prince of the City,
and being by many thought ambitious, and a man that by his insolent and high
stomach would not content himself to live within a civil Government, and there
being no way in the Commonwealth to resist him, unless with some faction
opposite to his, thence it came, that he not doubting other then some
extraordinary means, began to seek favorers of his party, to defend him. On
the other side, they that opposed him, having no ready way to suppress him,
devised some extraordinary ways: insomuch as they came at length to fight, and
where (if by an ordinary course he could have been restrained:) his power had
sunk with his own loss only a now having to use extraordinary means in
breaking it, there ensued not only his, but the ruin of many other Noble
Citizens. There might also be alleged, to confirm our former conclusion, the
accident chanced in Florence, upon the occasion of Peter Soderinus, which
wholly proceeded from the want of means in that Republic, to accuse the
ambition of some powerful Citizens; for, it was not enough to accuse a mighty
man, before eight Judges in a Commonwealth. The Judges ought to be in great
number; for a few do after the manner of two or three; so that if such courses
were taken, either the Citizens would have accused him living ill, and thereby,
without calling the Spanish Army to aid, would have wreak'd their anger on him;
or not behaving himself ill, they durst not have ventured to seek his ruin,
for fear themselves of incurring danger. And so on all sides had ceased that
ravenous cruelty, which was the chief occasion of offense. Whereupon we may
conclude this, that so often as we see foreign forces called upon by any party of
Citizens, we may well believe that in that City there is lack of good,
Ordinances: even lack of that ordinary means to vent without extraordinary
ways the malign humors which grow in men; whereunto it is sufficiently
remedied, by allowing of accusations before many Judges, and withal
countenancing them. Which courses were so well ordered in Rome, that in so many
quarrels between the people and the Senate, neither the one nor the other, nor
any particular Citizen ever intended to avail themselves by any foreign
strength; because they having a remedy at home, were not necessitated to go
seek it abroad. And though the examples above written are sufficient to prove
this, yet I will alledg another, related by Titus Livius in his History: who
reports, that in Clusia, the Noblest City in those days in all Tuscany, by one
Lucumon Aruns was ravished, and he, not being able to work his revenge by
reason of the ravishers might, went and found out the Frenchmen who then
reigned in that place we now call Lombardy and encouraged them to bring an Army
to Clusia, showing them that with their gain they might revenge him of the
injury done him: and if Aruns had seen possibility to have been righted by any
means in the City, he never would have inquired after any barbarous power. But
as these accusations are profitable in a Commonwealth: so are calumnies
unprofitable and hurtful, as it shall appear by our discourse in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
Accusations are not more beneficial to Commonwealths, then Calumnies
pernicious.

NOtwithstanding, that the virtue of Furius Camillus, after he had freed the
City of Rome from the siege and oppression of the Frenchmen, had brought to
pass, that none of the Citizens of Rome thought it took any way from their
credit or degree, to give him place: yet Manlius Capitolinus could not endure
that so much honor and renown should be ascribed to him. Being of opinion, that
touching the safety of Rome, in that he, had defended the Capitol from the
Enemies he deserved as much as Camillus; and in regard of other warlike
glories, he was no way second to him. So that overburden'd with envy, nor being
able to take rest for this man's honor, and perceiving he could sow no discord
among the Fathers, he made his address to the people, scattering among them
diverse sinister opinions. And among other things, he said this also, that the
treasure which was collected for the Frenchmen, and after not given them, was
usurped by some private Citizens; and if it were had again, it might be turned
to the public good, easing the people of their tributes, or some private
debts. These words were of force with the people, so that they began to run
together, and as they listed to raise many tumults in the City: Which thing
much displeasing the Senate, and they taking it for a matter of great moment,
and dangerous, created a Dictatour, that he might examine the case, and bridle
the violence of Manlius. Whereupon the Dictator cited him, and they met in
public one against the other, the Dictator environed with the Nobility,
Manlius with the People, Manlius was demanded, who had the treasure he spoke
of, for the Senate was as desirous to understand as the people. Whereunto
Manlius answered not particularly, but as by excuses, said there was no need to
tell them what they already knew, so that the Dictator caused him to be put in
prison. Hereupon may we observe, how extremely pernicious and damageable are
calumnies, as well in free Cities, as in any other kind of Government; and
therefore to repress them ought not any Law or Ordinance be spared, that may
serve to the purpose. Neither can there be found any better expedient to
extinguish them, then to open many ways to accusations; for as they do much
help a Republic, so calumnies hurt it: and ^on the other part, there is this
difference, that calumnies have no need of Testimonies, nor of any particular
encounter to prove them; so that every one may be caluminated, but not accused;
accusations being tied to certain particulars and circumstances, to
udemonstrate their truth. Men are accused before Magistrates, the People and
Counsels; slandered they are by calumnies, as well in private as in public.
And there slander is most in use, where accusations are nor accustomed, and
where the Cities are loath to receive them. Therefore every founder of a
Republic ought so to order it, that therein any Citizen may be accused without
fear or suspect. And this done and well observed, he ought sharply to punish
the slanderers, who have no reason to complain when they are punished, there
being public places to hear his accusations, whom they in private would have
slandered. And where this part is not well ordered, there always follows much
confusion; for calumnies do provoke and not chastise the Citizens; and those
that are provoked, think to avail themselves rather by hating, then fearing
the things that are said against them. This part (as it is said) was well
ordered at Rome, and always ill in our City of Florence. And as at Rome this
order did much good, so at Florence this disorder did much harm: And whosoever
reads the stories of this City, shall see, how many slanders have from time to
time been devised against those Citizens, who have been employed in the most
important affairs of it. Of one they said, he robbed the common: Treasury; of
another, he failed of such an attempt, being corrupted; and of a third, he ran,
into this or that inconvenient through ambition. From whence proceeded, that on
every side grew hatred; whereupon came division, from division they came to
factions, from factions to ruin. But had there been a means in Florence to
accuse the Citizens, and punish slanderers, that infinite number of calumnies,
that afterward grew, had never followed; for those Citizens either condemned or
assoild that they had been, could never have hurt the City, and would have been
less accused, then they were slandered; every one (as I have said) being not so
readily able to accuse as to slander. And among other things, some Citizens
have served themselves of these calumnies, as steps and helps to their
ambitious ends; who having to encounter powerful men opposed themselves as they
listed, and left nothing undone to work their intent; for taking part with the
people, and confirming them in their evil opinion, already conceived of these,
have made the people their own friends. And though I could bring examples
enough, I will be content with this one. The Florentine Army was in the field
at Lucca commanded by John Guicchiard an able Captain. Either his Government
was so ill, or the success proved so unlucky, that he faild in taking the Town.
So that howsoever the case stood, John was blamed for it, saying, he had been
bribed by the Luccheses: which slander being favored by his Enemies, brought
John to extreme despair. And though to justify himself he offered his
submission to trial and imprisonment, yet could he never wipe away that blur,
because in that Commonwealth there were not the means to do it, whereupon grew
much distaste between John's friends, who were the greater part of the potent
men, and his Adversaries, who were some that desired to make innovations in
Florence. Which matter, upon these and otherlike occasions, increased so, that
thereupon ensued the ruin of that Republique. M. Capitolinus therefore was a
slanderer, and not an accuser, and the Romans showed directly in this case, how
slanderers ought to be punished. For they ought to make them become accusers:
and when the accusation proves true, either reward them, or at least not punish
them; and when false, punish them, as Manlius.

CHAP. IX.
How needful it is, that he who frames anew the Laws, and lays new foundations
of a Common wealth, be alone without Companion or Competitor.

ANd perchance some will think, that I have run too far within the Roman
History, not having made any mention yet, of the founders of that Republic,
nor of the Laws which belonged, either to their Religion, or their military
discipline. And therefore not willing to hold them longer in suspense, who are
desirous to understand somewhat in this case, I say, that many peradventure
will think this a matter of evil example, that the ordainer of a civil
Government, as was Romulus, should first * Without question the end was
ambition, Royalty admitting no companion. Of whom to free himself, it seems
that Romulus stood not much upon how lawful means he used, for Cain-like he
slew his brother, and consented to Titus Tatius his death, without doubt, for
venturing to take part in the Authority. And touching this, it may be Machiavel
will speak truer near the latter end of his 18. Chapt. Where he says,
Because the restoring of a City to a civil and politic Government presupposes
a good man, and by violence to become a Prince of a Commonwealth presupposes
an evil man, for this cause it shall very seldom come to pass, that a good man
will ever strive to make himself Prince by mischievous ways, although his ends
therein be all good; nor will a wicked man, by wicked means, attaining to be
Prince do good, nor ever comes it into his heart to use that Authority well,
which by evil means he came to. And so at the very end of the same 18. Chap.
he concludes, that though the intent were not good, there might be a fair
color set upon it by a good success. Whereby our Politician, however he winds
and turns, comes at length to discover his evil ground he took, that Jus
regnandi gratia violandum est; aliis in rebus pietatem colas, as is that of
Euripides.
have taken his brothers life from him, and after have consented to T. Tacius
the Sabines death, chosen by him his companion in the Kingdom; judging hereby
that his own Citizens might by Authority taken from their Prince for ambition,
or desire to rule, endamage those that should oppose their power. Whose opinion
we should acknowledge true, if we consider nor the end which induced him to
commit this homicide. And we may take this for a general rule, that never or
seldom it chances, that any Republic or Kingdom is from the beginning well
ordein'd or thoroughly new reformed of its old customs, unless the disposing of
it depend absolutely upon the will of one. Nay rather there is a necessity of
it, that that one be absolute, that appoints the manner how, and by whose
understanding all such ordination is regulated. Wherefore a wise founder of a
Republic, who seeks not his own advantage, but the public good; not to
strengthen his own succession, but seeks his Countries profit, ought endeavor
to get the power wholly into his own hands: neither will any man of good
judgment ever blame any extraordinary action he shall put in practice, for the
settling of a good Government in a Kingdom, or framing sure foundations in a
Commonwealth. It holds well together, though the act accuse him, that the
effect excuse him; and when that is good, as it proved to Romulus, it will
always excuse him; for he that uses violence to waste, is blameable, not he
that uses it for redress and order. And therefore ought he be so wise and
virtuous, that the Authority he has possessed himself of, he leave not to
descend hereditarily on another. For men being more inclined to ill then good,
his successor may turn that to ambition which he managed virtuously. Besides
this, though one be fit to ordein a thing, yet its not so ordein'd to last
long, when it rests upon the shoulders of one man; well may it endure, being
committed to the care of many, to whom it belongs to maintain it. For even so,
as many are not proper for the framing of one thing, because all of them hit
not on the true good of it, by reason of their several opinions among them so;
after they have known it, neither agree they to let it proceed to its
advantage. And that Romulus was one of those, who for the death of his brother
and companion, might be excused: and that what he did was for the common good,
and not for his own ambition, it appears, in that he forth with ordained a
Senate, with whom he might take counsel, and by their opinions be advised. And
he, who considers well the Authority Romulus reserved himself, will perceive it
was no more than to command the Armies, when they had resolved on War; and to
assemble the Senate; which was apparent afterward, when Rome became free upon
the banishment of the Tarquins: whereupon the Romans were never brought in any
new order, unless that in lieu of a King during life, they made two Consuls
yearly: Which confirms, that all the first ordinances of that City were more
agreeable to a civil and free Government, then to one absolute and Monarchical.
To verify the thing abovesaid, we might bring many examples, as Moses,
Lycurgus, Solon, and other founders of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, who could
well, having an absolute power in their hands, ordain laws for the common good;
but I will let them pass, as well know. I shall alleadg only one, not so
famous, but well worthy their consideration, who desire to be good Lawmakers:
which is, That Agis King of Sparta advising to reduce the Spartans within those
bounds the Laws of Licurgus had included them; thinking that, because they had
broken out of that strictness, his City had lost very much of the ancient
virtue, and by consequent of force and government, was in the beginning of his
attempts slain by the Spartan Ephores, as one, that aimed to possess himself of
the Tyranny. But Cleomenes afterward succeeding him in the Kingdom, upon his
reading of Agis Records and Writings, which fell into his hands, he understood
his intention, and grew desirous himself, to bring the same thing to pass; but
found it was impossible to do that good to his Country, unless he became
absolute of authority, it seeming to him, by reason of men's ambition, that he
was unable to do good to many, against the will of a few. And taking a fit
opportunity, at length he brought in all the Ephores, and every one else that
could withstand him, and afterward restored into force Licurgus his Laws:
Which deliberation had bin able to have a new revived Sparta, and gained
Cleomenes the reputation Licurgus had, if then the Macedons power had not grown
so vast, and the other Grecian Republic been so weak. For after such order
given, being set upon by the Macedons, and finding himself single too weak to
deal with them, there being none could give him assistance, was overcome; and
his project (though just and commendable) became unperfect. Wheresore, upon the
weighing of all these things together, I conclude, it necessary that a founder
of a Republiek ought alone to have an absolute authority; and that Romulus, for
the death of Remus and Tatius, deserves rather excuse than blame.

CHAP. X.
As the Founders of a Commonwealth or Kingdom are exceedingly praiseworthy, so
the beginners of a Tyranny deserve much infamy.

AMongst all commendable men, those deserve esteem in the first place, who have
taken care in laying the grounds of divine worship, and true Religion: the next
belongs to them who have been the founders of Commonwealths or Kingdoms. After
those are they famous that commanding over Armies have enlarged either their
Kingdom or Country. To these we may adjoyn learned men. And because they are
of different dignities, every one of them are valued according to their degree.
And to all other men, whose number is infinite, we use to give that share of
commendations, which their Art and Skill deserves. On the contrary, infamous
are they and execrable, that are the perverters of Religion, the dissipatours
of Kingdoms and Republics, enemies of virtue and learning, and of any other
art, that brings profit, and renown to mankind; as also are the irreligious,
the mad-braind, the ignorant, the slothful, and base. And there will never be
any so foolish, or so wise, so mischievous or so good, that the choice of the
two qualities of men being made him, will not commend that which is
commendable, and blame the blameable. Notwithstanding seeing that the most
part, as it were, beguiled by counterfeit good, and vain glory, suffer
themselves either voluntarily or ignorantly to be counted in the number with
those that merit more blame then praise^ And having means with their perpetual
honor to frame a Republic or Kingdom, yet affect they a Tyranny; neither are
they advised by this course, what reputation, what glory, what honor, security,
quiet, and satisfaction of mind they fly from, and into what infamy,
dispraise, blame, danger, and unquietness they plunge themselves: And it is
impossible, that, they that live private men in a Commonwealth, or that by
fortune, or by their virtues become Princes, if they read the histories, or
make any account of antiquities therein related, that those private men, I say,
had not rather be Scipioes in their native Country, than Cesars; and those that
are Princes, rather Agesilaus, Timoleon, or Dion, than Nabis, Phalaris, or
Dionysius: for they would perceive these execedingly in all men's hatred, and,
these as much beloved. They would see also how Timoleon and those of his like
had no lefs power in their Country, then had Dionysius or Phalaris; but they
would find also they had far more security. Nor let any be deeeived by Cesars
glory, seeing his memory much celebrated by writers: for they that Praise him,
were corrupted by his fortune, and frighted by the continuance of the Empire,
which being governed under that name, gave not writers leave to speak freely of
him. But he that would know what free writers would say of him, let him look
upon that they say of Cataline: and Caesar is so much the more to be disprais'd,
in that he executed the ill, the other did but intend. Let him see also how
much they praise Brutus; so that not daring to blame the other, because of his
power, they attributed much honor to his Enemy. Let him consider also him that
is become Prince in a Republic, what praises, after Rome was made an Empire,
those Emperors rather deserved, that lived under the Laws, as good Princes,
than they that went a contrary course to them; and he shall find, that Titus,
Nerva, Trajan, Adrian, and Antonius and Marcus had no need of Praetorian
soldiers, nor a multitude of the legions to guard them; for their own virtues,
the good will of the people, and the love of the Senate did defend them.
Moreover he shall see, that the Eastern and Western Armies were not enough to
save Caligula, Nero, Vitellius, and the other wicked Emperors from their
Enemies, whom their vile conditions and damned lives had procured them. And if
their Story were well read over, it might serve to give good instruction to any
Prince, to show him the way of glory and of disgrace, the way of security, and
of distrust. Fot of 26 Emperors, that were from Caesar to Maximinus, 16 were
slain, 10. only died natural deaths. And if any of those that were slain were
good, as Galba and Pertinax, it proceeded from the corruption the predecessor
had left among the soldiers. And if among those, those that died natural
deaths, any were wicked or lewd, as Severus, it was caused by his great fortune
and valonr, which two accompany very few. He shall see also by reading this
Story, how a man may order a good Kingdom: for all those Emperors that
succeeded in the Empire by inheritance, except Titus, were mischievous; those
that were adopted, were all good, as were those five from Nerva to Marcus. And
as the Empire fell upon the heirs, it returned always to its destruction. Let
a Prince be put in mind of the times from Nerva to Marcus, and compare them
with those that went before them, and that followed them; let him choose in
which he would have been borne, or over whether he would have had command. For
in those that were governed by the good, he shall see a Prince live in security
in the midst of his secure Citizens, the world replenished with peace and
justice, the Senate enjoying their authority, the Magistrates their honors,
and the wealthy Citizens their estates, nobility and virtue exalted, and with
these all rest and good. And on the other side all rancour, dissoluteness,
corruption, and ambition extinguished, he shall see a return of the golden
age, where every one may keep and defend what reputation he pleases, and in the
end shall see the world triumph, the Prince reverenced and honored, and the
people in agreement and security If afterward he consider severally the times
of the other Emperors, he shall find the wars made them terrible, and
seditions full of discord; as well in peace as in war cruel; so many Princes
slain with the sword, so many civil, so many foreign wars, Italy afflicted,
and full of new misfortunes, the Cities thereof having been sacked and ruined;
he shall see Rome burnt, the Capitol by her own Citizens defaced and spoiled,
the ancient temples desolated, and their ceremonies neglected, the cities
repleate with adulteries, the sea full of banishments, and the rocks besmeard
with blood. He shall see follow in Rome a numberless number of cruelties; and
Nobility, wealth, honors, and above all, virtue reputed as a most capital
crime. He shall see accusers rewarded, servants corrupted against their
masters, children against their parents, and they, who had not enemies,
oppressed by their friends, and then he shall know very well, how much Rome,
Italy, and the world was beholding to Caesar. And without doubt, if he be borne
of mankind, he will be frighted from imitating those wicked times, and inflamed
with zeal to trace the good. And truly a Prince aiming at glory, would with to
be Lord of a disordered City, not to ruin it wholly, as did Caesar, but to
recompose and restore it, as Romulus. And believe me, the heavens cannot give
men greater occasion of glory, nor men desire it. And if to renew and restore
the frame of a City, there were necessity for a man to depose his Principality,
the man that did not set it in order because he would not fall from his
dignity, should yet deserve excuse. But when he could hold his Principality,
and yet restore the government, he is no way excusable. And in sum, let them be
well advised, to whom the heavens present such opportunity, that either of
these two wales be propounded them, the one that gives them security in life,
and makes them glorious after death; the other that causes them to live in
continual troubles, and leave behind them in everlasting infamy.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Romans Religion.

THough Romulus were Romes first founder, and she was to acknowledge from him
her birth and bringing up; notwithstanding the heavens judging that Romulus his
laws were not sufficient for such an Empire, put it into the Roman Senat's
minds to elect Numa Pompilius to succeed Romulus, that what he left
unfinished, the other might supply. Who finding a very fierce people, and being
desirous to reduce them into civil obedience by peaceable ways, applied
himself to Religion, as a thing wholly necessary to preserve civility; and
ordained it in such a sort, that for many ages there was not such a fear of
God, as in that Commonwealth. Which facilitated much any enterprise, whatsoever
either the Senate, or those brave Roman courages did undertake. And whosoever
shall discourse of the innumerable actions of the people of Rome jointly, and
of many of the Romans by themselves in several, shall perceive that those
Citizens feared more to break an oath, than the laws; as they that made more
account of the power of God, than of man; as it appears manifestly, by the
examples of Scipio and Manlius Torquatus: for after that Hannibal had given the
Romans an overthrow at Canna, many Citizens assembled together, and being
affrighted resolved to quit the country, and go into Sieily; which Scipio
understanding went and found them out, and with his sword drawn in his hand
compelled them to swear, they would never forsake their native country. Lucius
Manlius, that was afterward called Torquatus, was accused by Marcus Pomponius
Tribune of the people, and before the judgment day came, Titus went to find
Marcus, and threatening to kill him if he swore not to take the accusation off
from his father, bound him by his oath: and he though by fear compelled to
swear, yet took the accusation off: and so those Citizens, whom neither the
love to their country, nor the laws thereof could retain in Italy, were kept
by force of an oath they were constrained to take: and that Tribune laid aside
the hatred he bore to the father, the injury he received of the son, and his
own reputation, to keep the oath he took: which proceeded of nothing else, but
the Religion Numa brought in among them. And it is manifest, if a man consider
well the Roman histories, of how much avail their Religion was for the
commanding of armies, to reconcile the common people, to preserve good men, and
to shame the lewd. So that if we were to dispute, to whether Prince Rome were
more obliged, Romulus or Numa; I believe Numa would be preferred; for where
Religion is, military discipline is easily brought in; and where they are
already warlike, and have no Religion, this hardly follows. And it is plain,
that Romulus to order the Senate, and frame certain other civil and military
ordinances, had no need of the authority of a God, which to Numa was necessary,
who feigned to have familiar conversation with a Nymph, who instructed him
wherewith continually to advise the people. And all sprung from this, because
he desiring to settle new orders, and unaccustomed in that City, doubted that
his own authority was not of full force. And truly never was there yet any
maker of extraordinary laws in a nation, that had not his recourse to God; for
other. wise the laws had not been accepted. For many several goods are known by
a wise man, which have not such evident reasons in themselves, that he by
persuasion can quickly make others conceive them. Therefore the wise men, that
would free themselves of this difficulty, have recourse to a God: so did
Lycurgus, so Solon, so many others, whose design was the same with theirs.
Thereupon the people of Rome admiring his goodness and wisdom yielded to all
his purposes. But it is true, because those times were then full of Religion,
and those men rude and gross, on whom he spent his pains, this much facilitated
his designs, being thereby able to mould them into a new form. And without
question, if any one in these days would frame a Republic, he should find it
easier to deal with rude mountainers, who had never known any civility, than
with those who had been accustomed to live in Cities, where the government's
corrupted: and a carver shall easier cut a saire Statue out of a rough marble,
than out of one that has been bungl'd upon by another. Wherefore having well
considered all, I conclude, that the Religion introduced by Nutna was one of
the principal occasions of that cities happiness; for that caused good orders,
good orders brought good fortune, and from their good fortunes grew all the
happy successes of their enterprises: and as the observance of divine worship
occasions the greatness of a Commonwealth; so the contempt of it destroys it.
For where the fear of God is wanting, it must needs be that either that
Kingdom goes to ruin, or that it be supported by the awe it stands in of the
Prince, who may supply the defects of Religion: and because Princes are but
short-lived, that Kingdom must needs have an end quickly, according as the
virtue thereof fails: from whence it comes, that governments which depend upon
the virtue of one man, abide but a while, because that virtue ends with his
life; and it seldom chances that it is renewed by succession, as well says
the Poet Dante.

Rade volte discende per li rami
L'humana probitate and questo vuole,
Quel, che lada, perch da lui si chiami. Virtues continue seldom by descent.
And this to show their spring, the government.
And that his gifts best termed, and by him sent.


Therefore the safety of a commonwealth or kingdom consists not wholly in a
Prince that governs wisely while he lives, but in one that so orders it, that
he dying, it can preserve it self. And although it be easier to work rude and
untaught people to a new course and frame, yet argues it not therefore an
impossibility to prevail with men that have lived in a civil government, and
presume somewhat to understand themselves. The Florentines think not themselves
either ignorant or rude, yet were they persuaded by Friar Jerome Savanarola,
that he talked with GOD. I will not judge whether it were true or not, because
we ought not to speak of such a great personage, but with reverence. But truly
I say, that very many believed him, not having seen any great matter to
perswede them thereto: for his life, doctrine, and the subject he took, were
sufficient to make them credit him. Wherefore let no man be discouraged, as if
he could not reach to what another has heretofore attaind; for men, as we said
in our preface, were born, lived and died, under the same laws of nature.

CHAP. XII.
Of what importance it is to hold a worthy esteem of Religion, and that Italy
for having failed therein, by means of the Church of Rome, has gone to wrack.

THose Princes or those Republics which would keep themselves from ruin, are
above all other things, to preserve the ceremonies of their Religion
incorrupted, and maintain it always venerable. For there is no greater sign of
a countries going to destruction, then to see in it the contempt of divine
worship. And this is easy to be understood, it being once known upon what
ground the Religion is built where a man is born. For every Religion has the
foundation of its being upon some principal thing. The life of the Gentiles
Religion subsisted upon the answers of the oracles, and upon the sect of the
conjecturers and soothsayers: all the other ceremonies, sacrifices, and rites
depended on these. Because they easily believed, that that God that could
foretell thee thy future good or evil, could also send it thee. From hence
came the Temples, the Sacrifices and supplications, and all other ceremonies in
their veneration: for the Oracle of Delos, the Temple of Jupiter Ammon, and
other famous Oracles held the world in devotion and admiration. As they
afterward began to speak in imperious manner, and their falsehood was
discovered among the people, men began to be incredulous, and apt to disturb
all good orders, Therefore the Princes of a Republic or Kingdom should
maintain the grounds of the Religion they hold; and this being done, they shall
easily keep their Commonwealth religious, and eonsequently virtuous and united.
They ought also to favor and increase all those things that advantage it,
howsoever that they think them false; and the rather should they do it, the
wiser they * Ammiratus taxes him, saying, it was rather the opinion of a
cunning and crafty man, then of one that had either any religion or morality in
him, whose plain and simple conditions ought to be free from all fraud and
falsehood; and however the Romans were deceived herein, which cannot be denied,
yet without doubt they never did this, thinking to deceive themselves, or with
intention to deceive others. Thus Ammi. And indeed it savours of Atheism,
bringing the mistress to serve the handmaid, religion to serve policy; as if
the seasons of the year ought to accommodate themselves to men, rather then men
accommodate themselves to the seasons; not considering that Religion propounds
to a man a further end then policy points at. A Prince therefore should be well
aware of such evil devices, believing constantly that the Religion has no
need of help from falsehood, nor can gain any strength by lies.
are and understand the causes of natural things. And because this course has
been taken by many wise men, hence grew the opinion of miracles which are
celebrated even in false Religions; for wise men augment them what beginning so
ever they have, and their authority afterward gives them credit. Of these
miracles there was great quantity at Rome: and among others there was this one;
the Roman soldiers sacking the Vejentes City, some of them went into the Temple
of Juno, and coming to her image asked her, will thou go to Rome? some thought
she nodded, another thought she said, yes. For those men being very religious
(which T. Livius shows, for that entry into the Temple was without tu mult) all
devout and full of reverence, imagined they heard that answer, which
p^radventure they presupposed before ^and would be made them; this opinion and
belief was altogether favored and augmented by Camillus and the other
principal men of the City. Which Religion if it were maintained among the
Princes of the Christian Republic according as by the institutor thereof it
was ordained, the Christian States and Republics would be far more in unity,
and enjoy more happiness far then now they do: nor does any thing give us so
shrewd a conjecture of the declining of it, as to see, that those people that
are nearest neighbors to the Church of Rome, head of our Religion, are the
most inreligious. And whosoever would well consider the original grounds
thereof, and look upon the present use how much this differs from those,
without question he would judge the ruin or scourge thereof were near at hand.
And because some are of opinion, that the welfare of Italy depends upon the
Church of Rome, yet the contrary might rather be proved, considering those that
in the Church of Rome observe not the precepts they ought, but rather
adulterate the holy and Catholic Ordinances which were wont to be kept.
Moreover this comes to pass, because the Church has always held, and still
holds this Country divided: and truly never was any Province either united or
happy, unless it were wholly reduced to the obedience of one Commonwealth, or
Prince; as it befell France and Spain. And the cause that Italy is not in the
same terms, nor has not one Republic or one Prince to govern it, is only the
Church; for having inhabited there and held the ^e^^mporal Government, it has
never been so potent, nor of such prowess, that it could get the rest of Italy
into its hands, and become Lords thereof. And on the other side, it was never
so weak, that for fear of losing the temporal dominion it could not call in a
powerful friend to defend it against him that were grown too puissant in
Italy; as anciently it has been seen by sundry experiences, when by means of
Charles the Great it drove out the Lombards, who had as it were the absolute
power of all Italy; and when in our days it took the Venetians power from them
by the Frenchmens aid, and afterward chased away the French by help of the
Swisses. Therefore the Church being not powerful to subdue all Italy it self,
nor yet suffering any other to master it, has been the cause, that it could
never be brought to have but one head; but has always been under more Princes
and Lords; whereupon is grown such a disunion, and so much weakness, that Italy
has been made asprey not only of powerful Barbarians, but of any the next
assaylant. For which we and other Italians are beholding to the Church and none
else. And whosoever would readily see the truth by certain experience, it were
needful he were of such power, as to send the Court of Rome, with the
authority it has in Italy, to dwell in the Switzers Country, who at this day
are the only people that live, for their Religion and military discipline, as
their ancestors did: and he should find that in a short time the ill orders and
customs of that Court would breed more disorder in that Country, then any
accident else could, that should evergrow there.

CHAP. XIII.
In what manner the Romans availed themselves of their Religion, in ordering
the City, in undertaking their designs, and in stopping of tumulis.

I Think it not out of purpose, to bring some example, where in the Romans
served themselves of their Religion, for the ordering of their City, and the
following of their enterprises. And though many there are in T. Livius, yet I
will content my self with these. The people of Rome having created their
Tribunes of Consular power, and except one, all Plebeians, and it falling out
that year, that there was pestilence and famine, and certain other prodigies,
the Nobility of Rome took hold of this occasion, at the Tribunes new creation,
to say that the Gods were angry, because Rome had abused the Majesty of their
Empire, and that they had no other means to appease them, then to reduce the
election of the Tribunes to the former course. Whence it came, that the people
frighted by this superstition made the Tribunes all of the Nobility. The like
was also in their Conquest of the Vejentes City, that the Commanders of their
Armies did serve themselves of the Religion, to keep them in heart for any
enterprise: for that year the Albanilak being miraculously sweld, and the Roman
Soldiers weari^d with the long siege, and intending to ^return to Rome, the
Romans found, that Apollo and certain other Oracles told them, that that year
the Vej^ntes City should be taken, that the water of the Albanlake should be
poured out: which thing made the soldiers endure the tediousnes, of the war and
the siege, persuaded by the hope they had to take the Town, and were contented
to continue the enterprise; so that Camillus being made Dictatour subdued the
City after ten years siege. And so the accustomed Religion helped well, both
for the taking in of that Town, and for the restitution of the Tribunship to
the Nobility; for without the aid thereof, the one or the other had hardly had
their success. And this other example I must also add to this purpose. There
were in Rome a great many tumults raised upon the occasion of Terentillus a
Tribune, he desiring to make a law, for causes which hereafter we shall declare
in their place. Among the first remedies which the Nobility served themselves
of, was the Religion, whereof they made use two ways: In the first, they made
the Sibill's books be searched, and answer as it were to the City, that by means
of civil discord they should hazard the loss of their liberty that year:
which thing, though the Tribunes had herein discovered their subtilty, yet it
so frighted the people, that it quite took off their eagerness in the pursuit.
The other way was, that when Appius Herdonius with a great number of outlaws,
and slaves, near upon four thousand men, having possessed themselves by right
of the Capitol, so that it might be feared that if the Aequi or Volsci, the
Romans sworn enemies, had approacht the Town, they might have taken it: the
Tribunes not forbearing for all this to continue in their obstinacy, and to
enact the law made by Terentillus, saying this assault of their; feigned, and
not true, one Puhlius Valerius a grave citizen, and of good authority, went out
of the Senate, and told them partly in friendly terms, and partly in
threatening, the dangers in which the City stood, and the unseasonableness of
their demand, and thereby brought the people to swear, they would not forsake
the Consuls command. Whereupon the people being returned to obedience,
recovered the Capitol by force. But the Consul Publius Valerius being slain in
this conflict, there was forthwith another Consul made, one Titus Quintius, who
to keep the people from idleness, and to give no space to think again of
Terentillus his law, commanded them to go forth of Rome with him against the
Volsci, saying that by the oath they had taken not to abandon the Consul, they
were bound to follow him; whereunto the Tribunes opposed, saying, that oath was
made to the Consul now slain, not to him. Yet Titus Livius shows that the
people in awfulness to their Religion world rather obey the Consul^ than
believe the Tribunes, saying these words in favor of the ancient Religion: Men
did not then adays so little reverence the Gods, as now; nor people Nondum
haec quae nunc tenet seculum negligentia Deum venerat, nec interpretando sibi
quisque jus jurandum and leges apras faciebat.
wrest their oaths, nor the laws, to their own ends. Whereby, the Tribunes
doubting then to lose their whole dignity, agreed with the Consul to submit to
his obedience, and that for a whole year they would treat no more of
Terentillus his law, and the Consuls for a year should not draw the people out
to war; and thus the Religion gave the Senate means to overcome that
difficulty, which, without it, they could never have mastered.

CHAP. XIV.
The Romans interpreted their Auspices, as necessity required, and with
discretion made a show to observe their Religion, yet upon occasion they
neglected it; but if any did rashly contemn it, they punished them.

THe Soothsayings were not only (as before we have discoursed) for the most
part, the ground of the Gentiles ancient Religion, but they were also the
occasions of the Roman Republiques welfare. Whereupon the Romans had more
regard of them, than of any order else, and made use of them in their Consular
assemblies, in the beginning of their enterprises, in drawing forth their
armies into the field, in fighting of pitched battles, and in any other action
of theirs of importance either civil or military. Nor ever would they have
undertaken any expedition, till first they had persuaded the soldiers, the Gods
had promised them the Victory. And among the other orders of Soothsayers, they
had some in their Armies, they called Pollarij. And whenever they intended to
fights battle with the Enemy, they would have the Pollarij to make their
conjectures: and when the Chickens peckt, they went to fight with good
Auspaces; and not pecking, they forbear to fight. Notwithstanding when ^ason
showed something was to be done, hough the divination, were averse, yet were
they not scarr'd from it: but, they turned and woond it with such terms and
fashions so properly, that it appeared, they did it not with an contempt of
Religion. Which course was used once in a fight, by Papirius the Consul, which
he had (of great importance) with the Samnites, after which they were much worn
and broken. For Papirius encountering with the Samnites, and perceiving in the
skirmish that the victory was sure, had a mind hereupon to fight a full
battle, and therefore commanded the Pollarij, they should make their
conjectures; but the Chickens not Pecking, and the chief soothsayer seeing the
forwardness of the army to fight, and the opinion the General and all the
soldiers had of the victory, that he might not take away the occasion of well
doing from the army sent back to the Consul, that the soothsayers answered
well; so that while Papirius was ordering his squadrons, some of the Pollarij
having told certain soldiers, that the Chickens had not peckt, they told it to
Spurius Papirius the Consulls nephew, and he again to the Consul; whereto he
suddenly replied, that he should take a care to perform his own duty well, and
that for himself and the army the conjectures were fair; and if the Soothsayer
had told lies, it would turn to his own loss: and that in effect it should
succeed according to his prognostication, he commanded the L^vetenants to place
the Pollarij in the forefront of the battle. Whereupon it chanced that going
forward against their enemies, one of the Roman Soldiers threw a dart, and as
it hap'd, slew a principal Soothsayer: which being come to the Consuls ear, he
said that all things went forward luckily, and with the Gods favor, for the
Army by the death of that liar was purged of all crime, and excused of the
wrath conceived against them. And thus by knowing how to accommodate his
designs to the divinations, he chose to fight, the Army never perceiving that
he had any whit neglected the rites of their Religion. Appius Pulcher went a
contrary course to this, in Sicily, in the first Carthaginian wars; who
desirous to fight with the enemy, caused the Pollarij to make their
divinations; and they answering that the Chickens did not feed, he said, let us
see then if they will drink, and so made them be thrown into the sea, and then
fighting, lost the day. And thereupon he was afterward condemned at Rome, and
Papirius honored; not so much, the one for having won, and the other for
having lost, as the one for having crossed the soothsayers with much discretion,
the other very rashly. Nor was there any other end of this manner of
soothsaying, then to encourage the soldiers to fight, for boldness always wins
the victory: which thing was not only in use with the Romans, but with
forrainers also; whereof I have a purpose to bring an example in the Chapter
following.

CHAP. XV.
The Samnites, for the extreme remedy to their broken State, have recourse to
Religion.

THE Samnites having been sundry times routed by the Romans, and at last
overthrown in Tuscany, their Armies and their Captains slain, and their
confederates overcome, who were the Tuscans, French, and Umbrians: They could
not suhsist, neither by their own, nor their Nec suls nec externis viribus jam
stare potcrant, tamen bello non abstinebant adeo ne infeliciter quidem de
fensae libertatis taedebat, and vinci quam non tentare victoriam malebant.
friends forces, yet they would not quit the war, not regarding though they had
but ill success in the defense of their liberty; but had rather be overcome,
then forbear to try if they could get the victory. Whereupon they put it to
the last proof. And because they knew the obstinacy of the soldiers minds would
help the victory well forward, and to induce them hereto, there was no better
means then Religion, they advised to renew an old sacrifice of theirs by the
help of Ovius Pattius their Priest: which they ordered in this manner; the
folemn sacrifice being made, and amidst the slain beasts, and the altars set on
fire, having caused the chief of the Army to swear never to forsake the fight,
they called the soldiers one by one, and in the midst of those altars enclosed
by many Centurions with their fwords drawn, first they made them swear, they
should not disclose any thing they either heard or saw: afterward with words
of execration, and verses full of horror made them vow and promise to the
Gods, to be ready in whatsoever their General should command, never to abandon
the fight, and kill whomsoever they saw fly; which if they failed in, might it
light upon their family and kindred. And some of them being amazed, and
refusing to swear, were presently slain by their Centurions, so that the rest
that followed them, frighted by the sierceness of the spectacle, swore all. And
to augment the magnificence of their meeting, being sixty thousand men, half of
them were clad with white cloth, with plumes and seathers upon their helmets,
and thus arrai'd they encamped themselves at Aquilonia. Against these came
Papirius, who in his speech to encourage his soldiers, said, Surely their
plumes could make no wounds, Non enim cristas vulnera facere, and picta atque
aurata scuta transire Romanum palum.
nor their painted and golden shields defend the blows of the Roman Pikes. And
to take away the doubt his soldiers had of their enemies because of the oath
taken, said, it was rather a discouragement to them then otherwise; for they
were afraid of their own people, the Gods, and their enemies. And when they
came to the fight, the Samnites were overthrown, for the Roman virtue, and the
fear conceived by reason of their former losses, overcame what ever obstinacy
they could have resolved on by force of their Religion or oath taken. Yet it is
plain, how they thought they could have no other refuge, nor try other remedy,
that could give them hope to recover their lost virtue. Which fully shows, how
great confidence Religion well used can give. And though happily this part would
be fit rather to have place among the extrinsecall matters, yet depending upon
one of the most important ordinances of the Roman Republic, I thought better
to insert it in this place, that I might not be driven to interrupt my
discourse, and have need to return hereunto many times.

CHAP. XVI.
People accustomed to live under a Prince, if by any accident they become free,
have much ado to maintain their liberty.

HOW hard it is for a people, used to live, in subjection to a Prince,
afterward to maintain their liberty, if by any accident they get it, as Rome
did upon the Tarquins banishment, very many examples show us, which we read in
the memorialls of ancient histories. And not without good reason: for the
people is nothing different from a brute beast, which (though fierce of nature
and wild) has been bred always in a den and under command; and though by
ehance it has got loose into the fields, yet not being used to seek the sood,
nor being acquainted with the coverts, where to hide itself, becomes the prey
of the first that seeks to take it, The self-same thing befalls a people used
to live under the government of others; the which not having knowledge to treat
of public desences or offenses, not knowing the neighbor Princes, nor yet
known by them, quickly returns under the yoke, which oftentimes is heavier,
then that which before was taken from their neck; and they come to fall into
these difficulties, though as yet there be not entered among them much disorder.
For a people that is quite debauched cannot for a little while, no not a whit,
enjoy their liberty, as it shall after appear. And therefore our speeches are
not of those people, where corruption is overgrown, but where there is more
good then naught. To this former we may add another difficulty, which is, that
the State that becomes free, procures enemies that side against it, and not
friends to side with it. Those hold together as enemies, who got advantages by
the tyrannical government, feeding upon the Princes riches whereby they used to
help themselves, which being now taken from them, they cannot rest content, but
every one is necessitated to try if he can again recall the Royalty, that so
they may recover their former advancements. They get not, as I have said,
friends to side with them; for the free government propounds honors and
rewards upon some worthy and determinated occasions, otherwise it rewards none,
nor honors none. And when a man has received those honors and those
advantages, which he thinks, he deserved; he acknowledges no obligation to them
that reward him. Moreover, that common good which men reap of free government,
is not known by any, while it is possessed; which is, to enjoy freely ones own
without suspicion, not to doubt of his wives or daughters honors, not to be in
fear for his sons, or for himself. For no man thinks himself beholding to one
that offends him not. And therefore if they come to have a free State, as it is
above mentioned, there arise those that will be partisans against them, and not
side with them: and to prescribe a remedy for these inconvenients and
disorders, which these difficulties might bring us, there is none more potent,
nor sovereign, nor necessary, than to kill Brutus his sonns, who as the Story
shows, were induced together with other young Romans, to conspire against their
native country, for no other reason, than because they could not so
extraordinarily advantage themselves under the Consuls, as under the Kings; so
that they thought the peoples liberty was become their slavery. And he that
undertakes to govern a multitude either by way of liberty, or by way of
Principality, and assures not himself of those that are enemies to his new
State, is not like to continue long. True it is, that I judge those Princes
very unfortunate, who to secure their dominions are to go extravagant ways,
having the vast multitude for their enemies: for he that has but few enemies,
easily and without many offenses secures himself; but he that has the
universality against him, is never out of jealousy; and the more cruelty he
uses, the weaker becomes his power. So that the greatest remedy he has, is to
make the people friendly. And though this discourse be different from the
former, treating here of an exceeding good Prince, and there of a Republic,
yet that I may not return here often upon this occasion, I shall say somewhat
of it, but briefly. And therefore if a Prince would gain the good will of a
people, that was enemy to him (speaking of those Princes, that are become
Tyrants of their native country) I say, he ought to examine first, what the
people desire; and he shall always find, that they desire two things; the one,
to be revenged of him that occasioned their slavery; the other, to have their
liberty restored. To the first, the Prince can satisfy in whole, to the second
in part. As for the first, there is an example to the point. Clearchus a Tyrant
of Heraclea being in banishment, it happened that upon a difference risen
between the people and the nobility of Heraclea, that the nobility, finding
themselves too weak, turned to favor Clearchus, and conspiring with him,
against the will of the people, let him into the Town, and took away the
peoples liberty; so that Clearchus being in a straight between the insolence of
the nobility, whom he could not any way content, nor rectify, and the rage of
the people, that could not endure thus to have lost their liberty, resolved in
one, to free himself of the importunity of the Nobles, and withal to gain the
people. And to this purpose having taken a convenient opportunity, cut in
pieces all the Nobility, to the peoples great satisfaction, And thus he
satlsfy'd one of the desires the people have, that is, to be revenged. But as
for the peoples other desire, to recover their liberty, if the Prince cannot
satisfy them, let him examine, what are the reasons make them desire sreedom,
and he shall find, there is but a small number of them would be free, to
command. But all the rest, which are the many, desire liberty to life securely.
For in all Republics of what manner soever ordered, not above forty or fifty
Citizens attain to the degrees of authority: and because these are but few, it
is an easy thing to be sure of them, either by taking them out of the way, or
by letting them share of such honors, as agree to their conditions, which they
may very well be contented with. Those others, whom it suffices, If they can
live securely, are easily satisfied by making ordinances and laws, wherewith
together with his power, he may comprehend their safety in general. And when a
Prince does this, and that the people perceive it, that by no accident he
breaks those laws, they will begin in a short time to live secure and content.
We have an example of the Kingdom of France, which continues not in quiet by
other means, than that their Kings are tied to many laws, wherein the security
of all his people is containd. And he that was the founder of that State,
ordained, that the Kings should dispose of the wars and the moneys at their
pleasures, but with all other matters they had nothing to do, but they were at
the laws appointment. That Prince therefore or Republic, which secures not
themselves at their entrance into the government, ought at least take hold of
the first occasion, as the Romans did. He that lets that pass, repents himself
too late, of not having done what he should. The people of Rome being not as
yet debauched, when they recovered their liberty, might well maintain it, when
Brutus his sons were slain, and the Tarquins dead, by those remedies, and
orders, which we have at several times recounted. But had the people been
corrupted, neither in Rome, nor any where else, could they have found means
strong enough to preserve it, as in the Chapter sollowing we shall show.

CHAP. XVII.
A disorderly people, getting their liberty, cannot keep themselves free
without very great difficulties.

I think it necessarily true, that either the Kings were to be expelled out of
Rome, or else Rome it self would have grown feeble and of no worth; for
considering how exceedingly the Kings were corrupted, if after that rate two or
three successions had followed, and that corruption that was in them had
distended it self throughout the members, so that they likewise had received of
the corruption, it had been impossible ever to have reformed it. But losing the
head when the body was sound, it might easily be reduced to a free and orderly
government. And this should be presupposed for certain, that a debaucht City
living under a Prince, though that Prince with all his stock be rooted out, yet
can it not become free, but rather fall still into the hands of new Lords, who
continually make an end one of another. And without the creation of some new
Prince, they shall never have an end, unless he by his goodness and valor
maintain them free. But their liberty is of no longer conyinuance than his
life, as was that o^ Syracusa for Dions and Timoelons lives: whose virtues in
several times, while they lived kept that City free; so soon as they were dead,
it fell into the former servitude, We find not a braver example then that of
Rome, which upon the Tarquins banishments, could presently lay hold off, and
maintain that liberty. But Caesar being slain, C. Caligula, Nero, and the
whole race of the Caesar's blotted out, it could not, not only keep, no not so
much as give a beginning to their liberty. Neither did so great variety of
accidents in one and the same city proceed from other, than that, when the
Tarquins were expelled, the people of Rome were not touched with this
corruption, and in these latter times they were thoroughly infected. For then to
settle their minds in a resolution against Kings, it was enough to take an
oath of them, that never any King should reign at Rome. But in the after ages,
the authority and severity of Brutus, with all the Oriental Regions, were not
of force to hold them in disposition to maintain that Liberty, which he like
the first Brutus had restored them. Which sprung from that corruption, which
Marius his faction spread among the people; whereof Caesar coming to be the
Chief, could so blind that multitude, that they could not perceive the yoke,
which he himself put on their neck. And though this example of Rome be better
than any other, yet will I allege to this purpose, some people known in our
days. And therefore I say, that no means could ever bring Milan or Naples to
their freedom, by reason of the infection of all their members. Which appeared
after the death of Philip Visconti, when Milan desiring to recover her liberty,
neither was able, nor knew how to keep it. Yet that of Rome was a great
happiness, that their Kings grow naught suddenly, that they were banished, and
that before the infection was gone down into the bowels of that City, which
was the occasion that those many tumults, which were raised in Rome (men doing
it to a good end) did not hurt, but help the Commonwealth. And we may make this
conclusion, that where the matter is corrupted, laws, though well made, profit
little, unless they have such a maker, that with strong hand forces obedience
to them, till the matter become good: which, whether it has ever happened, I
know not, or whether it be possible it can happen: for it is plain, as a little
before I said, that a City declining by corruption of matter, if ever it
chances to rise again, it is merely by the virtue of one man, who is then
living, and not by the virtue of the generality, that keeps the good laws in
force: and suddenly when that man is dead, it returns to the old guise, as it
came to pass at Thebes, which, by the virtue of Epaminondas while he lived,
could subsist in form of a Republique and government, but he being gone, it
fell into the former disorders. The reason is, because a man cannot live so
long a time as is sufficient to disaccustome them to the ill, and accustom
them thoroughly to the good. And if one man of a very long life, or two virtuous
Governors successively continued, do not dispose of them to good, when one of
them fails, as I have said before, they are presently ruined, unless the other
with many dangers, and much bloodshed recover them out of destruction. For that
corruption and unfitness for freedom, arises from an inequality, that is in
the City: and if a man would reduce it to equality, he must use many
extraordinary ways, which few know or will serve themselves of, as other where
more particularly shall be said.

CHAP. XVIII.
In what manner in a corrupted City a free state may be maintained, being
gotten; or how when they have it not, it may be gotten, and well ordered.

I Think, it will not be out of the way, nor disagreeing to the former
discourse, to consider whether in a City disordered, a free State can be
preserved, that being there a soot already; or not being there, how it may be
attained, and then reduced to good order. Whereupon, I say, that it is very
hard to do the one or the other: and though it be almost impossible to give a
strict rule thereof (because we should necessarily proceed according to the
degrees of the corruption) yet it not being unfit to reason of every thing, I
shall not let this pass. And I presuppose a city corrupted in extremity, from
whence I shall come more to augment such a difficulty, because there are no
laws nor ordinances sufficient to bridle a universal corruption. For as there
is need of laws, to preserve good customs; so, to have the laws well
observed, there is need of good customs. Besides this, the ordinances and
laws made in a Republique at birth thereof, when men were good, serve not to
purpose afterward, when once they are grown vicious. And if the laws vary
being accommodated according to the accidents, seldom or never vary the old
orders of the city: which makes that the new laws suffice nor, because the
orders that continue in force do corrupt. And to lay this part more plain to
the understanding, I say, that in Rome there was the order of government, or
rather of the states, and the laws afterward which together with the
Magistrates did bridle the Citizens. The order of the state was the authority
of the people, of the Senate, of the Tribuns, and of the Consuls the manner of
demanding or creating of Magistrates and the manner of making laws. These
orders little or nothing did they vary among the Citizens; the laws varied
which bridled the citizens, as did that law against adulteries, against
expenses, against ambition, and many others, according as by degrees the
citizens grew corrupted. But the orders of state standing sted. fast, which in
the time of corruption were no longer good, those laws which were renewed
again, were not of force to keep men good, but would have been well helped, if
when the laws were renewed, the orders also had bin changed. And that it is
true that such orders in a corrupted city were not good, it is expressly seen in
two principal heads. As for the creation of Magistrates, and making laws, he
people of Rome gave the Consulate and the other Prime degrees of the city,
only to those that sued for them. This order was in the beginning good,
because none stood for them, but those citizens that esteemed themselves worthy
of them, and to receive the repulse was a shame; so that to be thought worthy,
every one did well. But this way afterward in a corrupted City proov'd very
hurtful; for not the best deserving men, but the most powerful, sued for the
magistracy, and those of small power (howsoever virtuous) forbore to demand
them for fear.

It came not to this inconvenient, at once, but by degrees, as men fall into
all other inconvenients. For the Romans having brought under Africa, and Asia,
and reduced well nigh all Greece to their obedience, doubted no way of their
liberty, and thought they had no more enemies could scare them. Thus far
their security, and the weakness of their enemies workt, that the people of
Rome in bestowing the Consulate, regarded not virtue so much as favor, raising
to that dignity those that could make most friends, not those that knew best
how to subdue their enemies. After, from those that had most favor, they fell
to give them to those that had most power. So that the good, by reason of the
defect of this order, were quite excluded. A Tribun of the people and any other
Citizen might propound a law to the people, and thereupon every Citizen had the
liberty to speak either in favor of it, or against it, before it were
determined of. This order was commendable, while the integrity of the Citizens
held: for it was always well, that every one may give his opinion thereupon,
that the people, having heard every one, may after make choice of the best. But
the Citizens being grown mischievous, this order became naught; for those that
were powerful only propounded laws, not for the common good, but to advance
their own powers, and against those dared none to speak, for fear of these. So
that the people was brought either by falsehood or force to determine their own
ruin. Therefore it was necessary, to the end that Rome in her corrupted age
should maintain her liberty, that as in the progress of her life she had made
new laws, so should she have made new orders: for other orders and other
manners of living ought to be ordained in a good subject, and others in a bad;
nor can the form be like, where the matter is quite contrarily disposed. But
these orders are either to be renewed all of a sudden when they are discovered
to be no longer good, or else by little and little, when their defaults be
taken notice of by every one: I say, that either the one or the other of these
two things are almost impossible. For to renew them by degrees, it is fit a
very wise man should be the cause of it, who should foresee this inconvenient
afar off: and when any of these arise, it is a very likely thing that none of
these men step forth; and when they should they would never be able to persuade
another what they eonceiv'd; because men accustomed always to live in one
manner, will not alter it; and the rather not seeing that evil present, which
is to be showed by conjectures. Touching the innovation of these orders on a
sudden when every one knows they are not good; I say, that this
unprofitableness, which is easily known, is hard to correct; for to effect
this ordinary means serve not, they being rather hurtful; but of necessity
extraordinary remedies are to be put in practice, as violence and war; and in
any case ought a man strive to become prince of that city that he may have
power to order it at his pleasure. And because the restoring of a city to a
politic and a civil government, presupposes a good man; and by violence to
become Prince of a Commonwealth presupposes an evil man, for this cause it
shall very seldom come to pass, that a good man will ever strive to make
himself Prince by mifchievous ways, although his ends therein be all good; nor
will a wicked man by wicked means attaining to be Prince, do good; nor ever
comes it into his heart to use that authority well, which by evil means he
came to. From all these things above written arises the difficulty or
impossibility, that is in corrupted cities, theree to maintain a Republique,
or to create one anew. And when it were to be created or maintained, it were
fittest to reduce it rather toward a popular state; to the end that those men,
who by reason of their insolence cannot be amended by the laws, might in some
manner be restrained as it were by a regal power. And to constrain them by
any other way to become good, would either be a most cruel attempt, or
altogether impossible: As I said before, that Cleomenes did, who that he might
command alone flew the Ephores; and if Romulus for the same reasons slew his
brother, and Titus Tatius the Sabine, but afterward excercised very virtuously
their authority: yet it is to be noted that neither the one nor the other of
them had the subject staind with that corruption, whereof we have discoursed in
this Chapter: and therefore they might intend well; and when they did not, give
color to a bad design with a good success.

CHAP. XIX.
A very mean Prince may easily subsist, succeeding a brave and valourous
Prince: but a mean one following a mean, brings a State into great hazard.

WHen we consider the valor, and the manner of Romulus, Numa, and Tullus
proceedings, the first Roman Kings, we shall find, that Rome hit upon a very
great fortune, having the first King fierce and warlick, the second peaceable
and religious, the third of like courage to Romulus, and a lover of war rather
then peace. For in Rome it was necessary, that in her infancy there should
arise some one to order her in the eourse of civil government; but in like
manner it was afterward needful that the other Kings should betake themselves
again to Romulus his valor, otherwise that City would have become effeminate,
and been preyed on by her neighbors. Whence we may observe, that the
successor, though not of so great valor as the predecessor, is able to
maintain a State by the valor of him that has governed it before, and enjoy
the fruits of his labor: but if it come to pass, either that he be of long
life or that after him there follows no other of like valor as the first, of
necessity that kingdom must go to ruin. So on the contrary, if two of great
valor successively follow one the other, it is often seen, they effect mighty
things, and eternize their names. David was a man for arms, for learning and
judgment excellent: and such was his valor, that having overcome and subdued
his neighbors, he left his son Solomen a peaceable Kingdom, which he might
well maintain by peaceful means, without any war, and happily possess the
fruits of his fathers virtue. But he could not leave it now to Roboam his son,
who not resembling his Grandfather in virtue, nor having the like good hap his
father had, with much ado remained heir to the sixth part of the Kingdom.
Bajazet the Turkish Sultan, although he gave himself rather to peace then war,
yet could he also enjoy his father Mahomets labors; who having as David beaten
all his neighbors left him a settled Kingdom, easy to be continued by peace:
but if his son Selimus, now reigning, had resembled the Father and not the
Grandfather, that Kingdom had gone to wrack. But we see this man like to outgoe
his Grandfathers glory. Whereupon I agree with these examples, that after an
excellent Prince a feeble one may subsist, but after one feeble one a Kingdom
cannot stand with another, unless it be such a one as France, which subsists by
force of her ancient ordinances. And those are weak Princes, that are not in
the exercise of war. And therefore I conclude with this discourse, that such
was Romulus his valor, that it could give space to Numa Pompilius for many
years by peaceful means to govern Rome. But him followed Tullus, who by his
courage recovered Romu'us reputation: after him came Ancus, so endowed by
nature, that he knew how to use peace, and support war. And first he addressed
himself in a peaceable way; but presently when he knew that his neighbors,
thinking him esseminate, undervalu'd him, he considered that to maintain Rome,
he was to apply himself to the wars, and rather follow Romulus his steps,
than Numas. Hence let all Princes, that hold a State, take example, that he
that resembles Numa, shall either keep it or lose it, as the times prove, and
fortunes wheel turns; but he that takes after Romulus, armed as he with wisdom
and force, shall hold it in any case, unless by an obstinate and overmighty
power it be wrested from him. And certainly we may well think, if Rome had
light upon a man, for her third King, who knew not how by arms to recover her
reputation, she could never afterward, or not without much ado, have taken
root, or attained that grow'th she after grew to. And thus whiles she lived
under the Kings, she ran the hazard of ruining under a weak or naughty King.

CHAP. XX.
Two continued successions of virtuous Princes work great effects; and
Commonwealths well ordered of necessity have virtuous succession: And therefore
are their gains and increases great.

AFter Rome had banished her Kings, she was delivered of those dangers which, as
is before said, she hazzarded, a feeble or naughty King succeeding in her. For
the sum of the Empire was reduced unto Consuls, who came not to the government,
by inheritance, or treachery, or by extreme ambition, but by the voices of the
Citizens; and they were always very worthy men, whose virtue and fortune Rome
enjoying, could from time to time attain to her vastest greatness, in but so
many more years, as she had been under her Kings. For we see, that two
continued successions of brave Princes are of force enough to conquer the whole
world, as was Philip of Macedon, and Alexander the great. Which so much the
rather ought a Republic do, having the means to choose not only two
successions, but an infinite number of valorous Princes, who follow one the
other; which valourous succession may always be in every well ordered
Commonwealth.

CHAP. XXI.
What blame that Prince or Republic deserves, that wants soldiers of his own
subjects.

THE Princes of these times, and the modern Republics, who for defenses or
offenses want soldiers of their own, may be ashamed of themselves, and consider
by the example of Tullus, that this defect is not for want of men fit for war,
but by their fault, who had not the understanding to make their men soldiers.
For Tullus, Rome having been forty years in peace, found not (when he succeeded
in the Kingdom) a man that had been ere at war. Yet he intending to make war,
served not himself either of the Samnites or Tascans, nor of others trained up
in arms, but advised as a very prudent man, to make use of his own people. And
such was his virtue, that on a sudden with his discipline he made them very
good soldiers. Truer it is than any other truth, if where men are, there want
soldiers, it is the Princes fault, not any other defect either of situation or
nature. Whereof we have a very late example: For every one knows, how of late
days the King of England assayl'd the Kingdom of France, and took no other
soldiers than his own people. And by reason that Kingdom had not been at war
above thirty years before, it had neither soldier nor Captain that ever had
been at war; yet he nothing doubted with those to set upon a Kingdom furnished
with Captains and good Armies, who had continually born arms in the wars of
Italy. All this proceeded from that this King was a very wise man, and that
Kingdom well governed; which in time of peace neglected not military
discipline. Pelopidas and Epaminondas, Thebans, after they had set Thebes at
liberty, and drawn her out of bondage of the Spartan government, perceiving
well they were in a City accustomed to servitude, and in the midst of
esseminate people, yet made no difficulty (such was their virtue) to train them
up in arms, and with those to go and meet the Spartan Armies in the field, and
overcome them. And he that makes relation of it, says, that these two proved
in short time, that not only in Lacedemon soldiers were bred, but in any other
place where men are bred, if they found any could train them in the exercise.
As it appears that Tullus knew how to train them to the war. And Virgill could
not better express this opinion, nor with other words come near it, where he
says:

-- -- -- Residesque movebit
Tullus in arma viros -- -- -- --
People with peace grown dull, that nere used arms.
Tullus shall soldiers make -- -- -- --
CHAP. XXII.
What we may observe in the case of the three Horatij Romans, and the three
Curiatij Albans.

TULLUS the Roman King and Metius the Alban made an agreement, that that people
should be Lord of the other, whose three, above mentioned, champions vanquished
the others. All the Curiatij, Albans, were slain; there remained alive only
one of the Horatij, Romans; and by this, Metius King of the Albans with his
people became subject to the Romans. And this Horatius the Conqueror returning
into Rome, and meeting one of his own sisters, who had been married to one of
the three dead Curiatij, that lamented the death of her husband, slew her.
Whereupon that Horatius was brought into judgment, and after many disputes
freed, rather at his Fathers suite, than for his own merits, Where three things
are to be considered. One, that the whole fortune of the State ought never be
hazzarded with a part of the forces. The other, that in a City well governed
faults be never made amends for with deserts: The third, that matches were
never wisely made, where a man-ought or can doubt the performance will not
follow. For so much imports it a City to become subject, that a man ought not
believe, that any of those Kings or people would rest content, that three of
their fellow citizens should have brought them to this yoke; of which mind we
saw Metius was: who, though presently after the Romans victory, he acknowleg'd
himself vanquished, and promised obedience to Tullus, yet in the first
expedition they were to meet against the Vejentes, it appeared, how he sought
to deceive him; as he, that was too late aware of his rashness in the bargain
he made. And because we have spoken enough of this third thing to be noted, we
shall speak only of the other two, in the two following Chapters.

CHAP. XXIII.
That the whole fortune ought not be laid at stake, where the whole forces try
not for it: and for this cause it is often hurtful to guard the passages.

NEver was he thought good gamester, that would hazard his whole ^^st, upon
less then the strength of his whole game: And this is done diverse ways. One
is, doing as Tullus and Metius did, when they committed the whole fortune of
their country, and the valor of so many men as the one and the other had in
their armies, to the vafour and fortune of three of their citizens, which were
but a very small part of either of their forces. Nor did they consider, how by
this adventure all the toil their ancestors had taken in ordering the
Commonwealth so, that it might long continue free, and to make the citizens
defenders of their liberty, was all in vain, it being left in the hands of so
few to lose it. Which thing those Kings could not have known how more to have
undervalued. And for the most part they likewise fall into the same
inconvenient, who (upon the enemies approach) intend to keep the hard places
and guard the passages. For this resolution will always be hurtful, unless in
that hard passage thou can bring together all thy whole forces. And in such
case, this course may be well taken. But the place being rough, and it not
being possible to hold all thy forces there, there is loss in it. And to judge
thus I am persuaded by the example I find of those, that when they are
assaulted by a powerful enemy, their country being environed with mountains
and rocky places, have never endeavored to fight with the enemy upon the
passages or mountains, but have gone beyond to encounter them: or when they
would not do this, they have expected them among the mountains, in plain and
easy places and not mountainous; and the reason thereof has been given before.
For it is not possible to bring many men together to the guard of mountainous
places, because provisions for long time cannot easily be furnished, and
because the passages are straight and capable of few, and therefore not
possible to withstand an enemy pressing on with the gross of his army. And it
is an easy thing for the enemy to come on with his gross; because his intention
is but to pass on, and not to stay. And it is impossible for him that awaits
him, to await in gross, having to lodge there for a longer time, not knowing
when the enemy wiil pass in places (as I said) straight and barren. Loosing
therefore that passage which thou had intended to keep, and wherein thy
people and thy army reposed some trust, most commonly there enters such a
terror into the rest of thy people, that without any means to make trial of
their valor, thou art left the loser, and with part of thy forces thou have
lost all thy fortunes. Every one knows with what difficulty Anniball past the
Alps, which divides Lombardy from France, and those, which divide Lombardy
from Tuscany; yet the Romans first expected him upon the Tesin, and afterward
upon the plain of Arezo; and would rather have their army wasted by their
enemies, in places where they might overcome, then bring it upon the Alps,
where likely it would have been destroyed by the malignity of the place. And
whosoever shall with discretion read histories, shall find that very few expert
Commanders have assayd to keep the like passages, for these reasons we have
said; and because they cannot all divide themselves, the mountains being as
open fields, and not having only ordinary and accustomed, but many by-waies,
though not known to strangers, yet to the inhabitants, by whose help thou shall
be guided any way in despite of the opposers. Whereof we can alleadg a very
late example. In the year 1515 when Francis the first King of France intended
to pass into Italy, to recover the State of Lombardy, the greatest ground they
had that dissuaded his enterprise, was, that the Swisses would step his passage
on the mountains, And as after experience showed it, this ground of theirs was
slight. For that King having left aside two or three places kept by them, came
from thence by another way unknown, and was sooner in Italy then any were aware
of him, So that herewith being daunted, they retired into Milan, and all the
people of Lombardy took the French party, having failed in the opinion they
had, that the French men would be stopped on the top of the mountains.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Commonwealths well ordered appoint rewards and punishments for their people,
and never recompense the one with the other.

THE deserts of Horatius had been exceeding great, having by his valor
vanquished the Curiatij. His offense was horrible, having slain his sister.
Notwithstanding such a kind of homicide so much displeased the Romans that it
brought them to dispute, whether they should grant him his life, though his
merits were so great and so fresh: Which thing, to him that looks but
superficially on it, would seem an example of popular ingratitude. Yet he that
shall examine better, and with more consideration inquire, what the orders of
Commonwealths ought to be, shall rather blame that people for having absolved
him, then for having had a mind to condemn him. And this is the reason, For
never any Republic in good ordrr, eancell'd the faults of their citizens with
their deserts. But having ordained rewards for good service, and punishments
for desservice, and having rewarded one when he had done well, if afterward he
commit any offense, they chastise him without any regard to his former merits.
And when these orders are strictly observed, a city continues long free,
otherwise it would soon go to ruin. For if a man grown into great reputation
for some notable piece of service done to the state, should take upon him the
confidence that he could without danger of punishment commit any offense, in a
short time would he become so unreasonably insolent, that the civil state
could no longer consist. It is very necessary, if we would have punishment for
offenses feared, always to reward good deserts, as it appears they did at
Rome. And though the Republique be but poor, and can bestow but little, yet
may the subject well content himself with that little; for so even a small
gift bestowd on any one, for requital of a good, though great, shall find
with him that receives it an honorable and thankful acceptance. The story of
Horatius Cocles is very well known, and that also of Mutius Scevola; how the
one bore up the enemies upon a bridge, till it was cut off behind him; the
other burnt his own hand, for having mistaken, when he meant to have killed
Porsena the Tuscan King. To these for two such notable acts was given by the
publilick two acres of ground to each of them. And mark also the story of
Manlius Capitolinus. To him for having delivered the Capitol from the French,
which were encamped before it, they who together with him were within besieged
gave him a small measure of flour, which reward (according to the then present
fortune of Rome) was large, and of such a quality too, that afterward Manlius,
either moov'd by envy, or his own ill nature, occasioned a sedition in Rome,
and seeking to get the people of his faction, was, without any regard had of
his good deserts, thrown headlong down from that Capitol which he, to his
great renown, had formerly delivered.

CHAP. XXV.
Whosoever would reform an ancient state in a free city, let him retain at
least the shadow of the old customs.

HE that has a mind to reform the state of a City, to bring it into liking,
and the better with every ones satisfaction to maintain it, is forced to keep
the form or shadow of the ancient customs, to the end the people perceive not
the change of them, though indeed they are quite new, and far different from
the fore-past. For they generally satisfy themselves as well with that that
seems to be, as that that is. Nay rather are they many times more moved with
appearances, then truths. And for this cause, the Romans knowing this
necessity, when first they lived free, having in change of one King created two
Consuls, would not suffer them to have more then twelve Lictors, because they
should not outgo the number of those that attend on the King. Moreover, when
the yearly sacrifice was made in Rome, which could not be done without the
presence of the King, and the Romans willing that the people, by the absence of
a King, should not find a lack of any of the old ceremonies, created a head of
the said sacrifice, whom they called the King Priest; who yet was lower in
degree, then the high Priest. So that this way the people was satisfied of that
sacrifice, and never had any occasion by any default in it, to wish their Kings
again restored. And this they all ought to observe, that would cancel the old
manner of living in a city, and reduce it to a new and free course. For being
these novelties somewhat moove men's minds, therefore thou should do well to
call thy wits about thee, and work these alterations in the old mould, as much
as might be. And if the magistrates, both in number, and authority, and
durance, differ from the ancient, at least let them keep the same name: And
this (as I have said) rather ought he to observe, who means to take upon him
an absolute authority, which is called a Tyranny, for he is to innovate every
thing.

CHAP. XXVI.
A new Prince in a city or Province taken by him, should make innovations in
every thing.

WHosoever becomes Prince of a city or state, and the rather, when his forces
are but weak to keep it, and means not to hold it neither as a Kingdom, nor
as a regular Republique, the best expedient he can find, for the maintenance of
that Principality, is, that he (himself being a new Prince) make every thing
new in the state, as it is ordinary in the cities to make new governments with
new names, with new jurisdictions, with new men, and to enrich the poor, as
David did, when he came to the crown. That filled the hungry with good things,
and the rich sent empty away. To build moreover new cities, and to pull down
some that are built, to remove the inhabitants Qui esu^ienre imp(...) it b(...)
and (...)vites (...)isit inanes.
from one place to another, and in some to leave nothing untoucht in that
Province, that there be neither degree, order, nor state, nor wealth, but he
that possesses it, acknowledges it from these. And to take for pattern Philip
of Macedon Alexanders father, who by these means became of a little King,
Prince of all Greece. And he that writes of him says, that he changed his
people from Province to Province, as herds-men change their herds from pasture
to pasture. These courses are very cruel, and against all Christian and humane
manner of living. And every man ought refuse to be a King, and desire rather to
live a private man, then reign, so much to the ruin of mankind. Yet he that
will not use that first way of good, if he will preserve himself, must enter
into this of evil. But men take to certain middle ways, which are very naught;
for they know not how to be all good, nor all evil: as shall be showed for
example in the next chapter.

CHAP. XXVII.
It is very seldom, that men know how to be altogether mischievous, or
altogether good.

POpe Julius the second going in the year 1505 to Bolonia to chase out of that
state the house of the Benticogli, which had held the Principallity of that
city a hundred years, had a mind also to draw John Pagolus Baglioni out of
Perugia, whereof he was a Tyrant, as he that had conspired against all Tyrants,
that were seized of any of the Churches lands: and being come near Perugia,
with this resolution known to every one, stayed not to enter the City with his
Army to guard him, but went in without a guard, notwithstanding that John
Pagolus was therein with much people, which he had got together for his
defense. So that carried forward by that rage wherewith he governed all things,
with his ordinary guard he put himself in his enemies hands, whom afterward he
led away with him, leaving a governor in that city, to keep it for the Church.
By the wise men, that were with the Pope, was noted the rashness of the Pope,
and the base cowardice of John Pagolus; nor could they conceit, whence it came,
that he did not to his perpetual renown suppress then at once his enemy, and
enrich himself with the prey, all the Cardinals being then with the Pope, who
had the best of all their Jewels with them. Neither could any man think that he
abstained either for goodness or conscience sake, that withheld him. For into
the heart of a wicked man, that incestuously conversed with his sister, and
that had slain his cousins and nephews, to rule, there could never enter any
religious respect. Whereupon every one concluded, that men know not how to be
honorably mischievous, nor perfectly good. And where a mischief has in it
greatness, and is generous in some part, they know not how to enter into it. So
John Pagolus, who made no account of being an incestuous and public paricide,
knew not (or to say better) had not the courage, though upon just occasion, to
do an exploit that every one should have admired him for, and he left of
himself an everlasting memory; being the first that had showed the Prelates what
a thing it is to set at naught, him that lives, and reigns, as they did; and
so had done an act, whose greatness had surpast all infamy, and what ever
danger could depend on it.

CHAP. XXVIII.
For what reason the Romans were less ungrateful to their citizens, than the
Athenians.

WHosoever reads the actions of Republiques, shall find in all of them some
kind of ingratitude toward their citizens, but less in Rome, than in Athens,
or peradventure than in any Commonwealth else. And if we would enquire after
the reason thereof, speaking of Rome and Athens, I think it happened, because
the Romans had less occasion to suspect their citizens, than had the Athenians.
For at Rome, considering her from the banishment of her Kings till Sylla, and
Marius, her liberty was never taken away by any of her citizens, so that she
had no great reason to suspect them, or by consequence suddenly to offend them.
The contrary befell Athens; for her liberty being taken from her in her most
flourishing time, and under color of doing her some good, so soon as she
became free, remembering the wrong she had received, and the slavery she had
endured, became a sharp revengeress, not only of her citizens faults, but of
the shadow of their faults.

From hence came the banishment and the death of so many rare men. From hence
the order of the Osteacisme, and all other violence, which in several times by
her was done to the prime of her citizens, And that is very true which those
that write of civil government say, that the people bit^ more siercely, after
they have recovered their liberty, than while they have continually maintained
it. Whosoever then considers what is said, will neither in this blame Athes,
nor commend Rome: but will ^ccuse only the necessity, because of the diversity
of accidents which did arise in this city For he shall see, if narrowly he look
into affairs, if Romes liberty had been taken away, as was that of Athens, Rome
would not have been more pitiful to her citizens, than was Athens. Whereof one
may make a very good guess, by that which chanced, after the banishment of the
Kings, against Collatine, and Publius Valerius: whereof the first (although he
had his hand in the setting of Rome at liberty) was banished, for no other
occasion, than that he was surnamed Tarquin. The other having only given
suspicion of himself, by building a house upon the hill Celius, was like to
have bin banished. So that we may well think (seeing how suspicious and severe
Rome was in these two things) that she would have bin as ungrateful, as
Athens, if, as she in her infancy and before her growth, had bin so much
wronged. And that I need not turn again to this subject of ingratitude, I shall
speak further of it in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XXIX.
Whether of two be the more ungrateful, a people, or a Prince.

ME thinks it is not out of the purpose of our former matter, to discourse,
whether a Prince or people give us greater examples of ingratitude. and the
better to argue this part, I say, this vice of ingratitude grows either of
covereousness or suspicion. For when a people or Prince have sent out a
Commander of theirs, in any expedition of importance, where that Commander
overcoming has gained a great deal of glory, that Prince or people is in like
manner bound to reward him: and if in F^w of reward he disgraces him, or wrongs
him, incited thereunto by avarice, not willing by reason of this coveteousness,
to satisfy him, he commits an error, without excuse, and draws upon himself
everlasting infamy. Yet are there many Princes, who offend in this kind. And
Cornelius Tacitus declares in this Sentence Proclivius est injuriae quod
beneficio vicem exsolvere, quia gratia oneri, ultio quaestui habetur.
the occasion. It is more pleasing to revenge an injury, then to requite a
courtesy: for thanks is thought a burden, but revenge a gain. But when he
rewards him not, but rather hur^s him, not through avarice, but upon suspicion,
then the people or Prince deserves some excuse. And of these ingratitudes
practiced for such cause we read many; for that Commander who valorously has
gained his Lord a Kingdom, by conquering his enemies, replenishing himself with
glory, and his soldiers with riches, of force gets such reputation with his
own soldiers, with his enemies, and his Kings own subjects, that that victory
can no ways sayour well to his Lord that put him in the employment. And
because men's natures are ambitious, and full of suspicion, and know not how to
set limits to their fortune, it is impossible, but that suspicion which grows
in the Prince after that Commanders victory, shall by himself be increased upon
some way or term insolently used; so that the Prince cannot advise himself
otherwise, than to provide for his own safety. And to this end, thinks either
to put him to death, or to take away his reputation, which he has gotten in
his army, or among his people, and withal diligence to show, that his valor
got not the victory, but rather it came by chance, or by the enemies cowardice,
or by the direction of the other Captains, who were together with him in that
employment. After that Vespasian, being in Judea, was by his army declared
Emperor, Antonius Primus, who was then with another army in Illiria, took his
part, and came thence into Italy against Vitellius, who commanded at Rome, and
valorously conquered two Vitellian armies, and made himself, Master of Rome; so
that Mutianus sent by Vespanian found all already gotten by Antonius his valor,
and all difficulties surpassed. The reward Antonius gained hereby, was, that
Mutianus took away his command of the army, and by little and little made him
of no authority in Rome; whereupon Antonius went away to Vespasian, who was yet
in Asia, by whom he was so coldly received, that in a short time deprived of
all dignity he dyed in despair. And of these examples stories are full. In our
days, every one living knows, with what industry and valor Gonsalvus
Ferdinand, warring in the Kingdom of Naples against the Frenchmen for Ferdinand
King of Arragon, brought that Kingdom under his obedience; and how he had for
reward of his conquest, that Ferdinand parted from Arragon, and came to Naples,
and first discharged him of his command of soldiers, afterward took from him
the fortresses, and then brought him away with him into Spain, where a while
after he dyed in disgrace. Therefore this suspicion is so natural in Princes,
that they cannot escape it; and it is impossible they prove thankful to those,
who by victory have under their banners made great conquests. And from that
which a Prince is not free, it is no marvel, nor a thing worthy of greater
note, that a people is not free. For a city living free has two ends, the one
to gain, the other to keep it self free; and it cannot be, but in the one or
the other by excess of love it may err. Touching the errors in getting, they
shall be spoken of in their place: as for the errors in maintaining their
liberty, there are these among others, to hurt those citizens they should
reward, and to suspect those they should repose upon. And though these ways in
a Republique come to corruption, cause great evils, and that many times they
hasten it to a Tyranny, as at Rome it befell Caesar, who by strong hand took
away that, which unthankfulness denied him: yet in a Commonwealth not
corrupted, are they causes of great good, and make it live more free, keeping
men for fear of punishment more virtuous and less ambitious. It is true, that
of all people that ever reigned, upon the causes above alleged, Rome was the
least ungrateful; for of her ingratitude we may say, there is no other
example, but that of Scipio; for Coriolanus and Camillus were banished for the
injury, the one and the other had done the people. But the one was not
pardoned, because he always continued his malicious mind against the people;
the other was not only recalled, but all his lifetime after, adored as a
Prince. But the ingratitude used toward Scipio, grew from a suspicion the
citizens began to have of him, which was never conceived of the others; which
arose first from the greatness of the enemy Scipio had overcome; from the
reputation that the conquest of so long and perrilous a war had given him; from
the quick dispatch of it: from those favors which youth, wisdom, and other
his memorable virtues had gotten him. Which things were so great, that the
Magistrates of Rome feared his authority, more than any thing Which displeased
the grave men, as a matter not accustomed in Rome. And his manner of living was
thought so extraordinary, that Priscus Cato, reputed a man of great integrity,
was the first that stirred against him, and said, that a city could not be
called free, where the Magistrates stood in fear of one citizen. So if the
people of Rome in this case followed Cato's opinion, they deserve that excuse,
which I said before, those Princes and people merit, who through suspicion
prove unthankful. Wherefore concluding this discourse, I say, that whether
this vice be used either through suspicion or covetousness, it shall appear
that the people never put it in practice upon covetousness, and upon suspicion
less than Princes, having less cause to be suspicious, as quickly it shall be
declared.

CHAP. XXX.
What means a Prince or Republique should use to avoid this vice of
ingratitude: or what A Commander or Citizen, to be free from their danger.

A Prince to avoid this necessity of living with suspicion, or being
ungrateful, ought personally go to the wars, as in the beginning did those
Roman Emperors, and in our days the Turk does; and as those that are valorous
have done, and yet do. For overcoming, the glory and the gain is all their own.
And when they are not there in person, (the glory of the action belonging to
another) they think, they cannot well make that conquest their own, unlefs they
put out that glory in another which they themselves knew not how to get, and so
become ungrateful, and unjust. And without doubt greater is their loss, than
their gain; but when either through negligence, for lack of judgment they stay
idle at home, and send out a Commander, I have no other precept to give them,
than what they know of themselves. But I advise that Commander, because, as I
think, he can hardly escape the nips of unthankfulness, that he betake himself
to one of these two expedients; either presently upon his victory let him leave
his army, and put himself into his Princes hands, abstaining from any action
savouring of insolence or ambition, that so he having no occasion given of
suspicion may have reason to reward him, or at least not hurt him: Or when he
likes not to do thus, let him resolutely take part against him, and use all
those means whereby he may think to hold from his Prince what he has gotten,
procuring the soldiers and the subjects good wills; let him make friendship
with his neighbors, possess with his men the strong places, corrupt the Chief
of his army, and assure himself of those he cannot; and this way endeavor to
punish his Lord for the ingratitude he would have used toward him. Otherways
there are not; but (as it was said before) men know not how to be wholly
vicious, nor wholly good. And always it comes to pass, that presently after
the victory, they will not part with their army; behave themselves with modesty
they cannot, and to stand upon defyance in some honorable terms they know not
how. So that being irresolute which way to take, between delay and doubt they
are suppressed. But to a Republique which would avoid this vice of ingratitude,
we cannot apply the same remedy, we may to a Prince; that is, that she go
herself, and not send out in her employments, being necessitated to make use of
some one of her citizens. It suits well therefore, that for her best remedy,
she take the same course the Commonwealth of Rome took, to be less unthankful
then all others. Which grew from her manner of government; for the whole city,
both Nobles and Plebeians being trained up to war, there arose always in Rome
in all ages men of such valor, experience, and reputation, that there was no
occasion to doubt of any one of them, they being many who kept one another in
order. And so long they continued ^iu integrity, and with regard not to make
others jealous of their ambition, nor give occasion to the people to do them
harm, taking them for ambitious persons; for if any one were made Dictator, he
got most honor by it, that laid down his Dictatorship soonest. And so such like
way not being sufficient to raise suspect, could not breed ingratitude. So that
a Republique that would not have cause given her to be unthankful, should
govern her self in the same manner Rome did. And a citizen that would be free
from all their despights, should follow the same steps the citizens of Rome
went.

CHAP. XXXI.
That the Roman Commanders were never extraordinarily punished for any error
committed; nor at all punished, when either by their ignorance, or upon some
unlucky resolution taken by them the Commonwealth suffered loss.

THE Romans, as formerly we have discoursed, were not only less ungrateful,
than other Commonwealths, but also were more pitiful, and more advised in the
punishment of the Generals of their armies, than any else. For if their fault
proceeded from malice, yet they gently chastis'd them; but if it was through
ignorance, they were so far from punishing them, that they rewarded and
honored them. This manner of proceeding was well considered by them; for they
judged it a matter of great importance to those that commanded their armies, to
have their mind free, without any clog upon it, and without any outward
respects to restrain them in their resolutions; because they would not add new
difficulties and danger to a thing by it self hard and dangerous: advising well
that with these hindrances a man cannot bravely execute his designs. For
example, when they sent an army into Greece, against Philip of Macedon, or into
Italy against Anniball, or against those people they first overcame; That
Commander to whom the employment was committed had the vexation of all those
cares that follow such charges which are of weight and importance. Now if to
such cares, this were added, that many examples of the Romans were recorded,
where they had crucified or otherwise put to death those that had lost any
battles, it was impossible, that that Captain among so many suspicions could
resolve any thing courageously. Therefore they deeming these sufficiently
punished with the shame of their loss, they were not willing to startle them
with any more grievous punishment Here is one example, of a fault committed,
and not through ignorance. Sergius and Verginius were encamped against the
Veyans, each of them commanding a part of the army: Sergius was to encounter
the Tuscans, and Verginius was to set upon the other side: It chanced, that
Sergius being assaulted by the Falisci, and other people, endured rather to be
quite rout'd and put to flight, before he would send for aid to Verginius. And
on the other side, Verginius, staying til til he should humble himself, would
rather see the dishonor of his country, and the ruin of the army, than
succor him. A case indeed very exemplary, and of much malice; neither would it
have bin for the Commonwealth of Romes reputation, to have let the one or the
other pass without censure. True it is, that where another Republique would
have punished them with death, this punished them only in a sum of money. The
cause hereof was, not that their offenses deserved not greater punishment, but
because the Romans would in this case, for the reasons already alleged,
continue their ancient customs. And touching errors of ignorance, we have no
better example, than that of Maro; through whose rashness the Romans having bin
broken at Can by Hanniball, where the Republique came endanger to lose her
liberty, yet because it was ignorance, and not malice, they not only did not
chasise him; but honored him, and the whole order of the Senat^rs m^thim upon
the way in his return to Rome; and because they could not thank him for the
battle fought, they thankt him yet that he was returned to Rome, and had not
despaired of the Roman State. When Papirius Cursor would have put Fabius to
death, for having contrary to his command fought with the Samnites, among other
reasons which Fabius his Father brought against the Dictators obstinacy was
this, that the people of Rome, in any loss that ever her Captains had made, had
never done that which Papirius in a victory would have done.

CHAP. XXXII.
A Republique or Prince should not defer to do good unto men, until their
necessity requires it.

ALthough it succeeded happily to the Romans, to have used liberality toward
the people upon occasion of a sudden danger, when Porsenna made war against
Rome, to restore the Tarquins, where the Senate doubting of the people, lest
they would sooner accept of the Kings, than endure out the war; to make
themselves sure of them, they took off from them the taxes of salt, and every
kind of grievance, saying, the poor contributed enough to the common good, if
they did but nourish their children; and thereupon in regard of this benefit,
the people exposed themselves to endure the siege, the famine, and the war. Yet
let none, presuming upon this example, delay to gain the good will of the
people til the times of danger; for it will never prove so well to them, as it
did to the Romans; for the generality will think they have not this good from
thee, but from thy adversaries; and being to fear, that, when that necessity is
past, thou will withhold from them that good which of force thou did them,
they will not think themselves any way beholding to thee. And the reason why
this business succeeded well to the Romans, was, because the State was new, and
not well settled yet; and that people also had seen, that formerly laws had bin
made for their advantage, as that of appeal to the people; so that they might
well persuade themselves, that the good they had, was done them, not so muth
upon occasion of their enemies coming, as from the good disposition of the
Senate toward them. Moreover, the Kings were yet fresh in their memory, by
whom they had bin many ways scorned, and abused. And because such like
occasions seldom fall out, it seldom also comes to pass, that the like remedies
are of use: whosoever therefore sit at the helm in a state, be it either a
Commonwealth, or a Prince, should consider before hand, what contrary times may
come upon them, and what men in their troubles they may stand in need of; and
therefore should live with them always in such a manner, that upon any
accident chancing, they may find them ready and willing to serve their
occasions. And he that governs otherwise, either Prince, or Republique, but
especially a Prince, and afterward upon the exigent, when danger is at hand,
thinks with any benefits to recover or obligemen to him, is much deceived; for
he does not only not secure himself, but hastens his own destruction.

CHAP. XXXIII.
When an inconvenient is much grown, either in a state, or against a state, it
is better to bear with it for a while, then presently to struggle with it.

WHen the commonwealth of Rome grew in reputation, force, and rule, the
neighboring people, who at first were not aware of the harm this new
Republique might do them, began, though late, to know their fault; and desiring
to remedy that which at first they had neglected, nigh forty several people
were joined together against Rome; whereupon the Romans, among the remedies
they were wont to make use of in their extremest dangers, betook them to
create a Dictatour, that is, to give power to one man, that without calling any
Council he might resolve, and without any appeal, he might execute his
resolutions. Which remedy, as then it served to purpose, and was the occasion
they overcame those eminent dangers: so it was always exceeding profitable in
all those occasions, which in the grow'th of the Empire at any time did rise
against the Republique. Upon which accident we are first to discourse, how
that, when an inconvenient that rises either in a Commonwealth or against a
Commonwealth, caused by an inward or an outward cause, is become so great, that
it begins to make every one afraid, the safer course is, to temporise with it,
then strive forthwith to extinguish it. For most commonly it proves, that they
who endeavor to quench it kindle it much more, and suddenly pluck down that
mischief upon their heads, which was then but feared from thence. And of such
like accidents many arise in the Commonwealth, oftener upon inward oceasions
then outward. Where oftentimes, either a citizen is suffered to lay hold of
more forces then is reasonable; or else some law begins to be corrupted, which
is the very nerve and life of liberty. And this error is suffered to pass on so
far, that there is more danger in the remedy, then in the evil. And so much the
harder is it to know these inconvenients at their birth, by how much more it
seems to agree with men's natures, always to favor things in their beginnings:
and these favors are of more force, rather then in any thing else, in those
works that seem to have somewhat of virtue in them, and are done by young men.
For if in a republique any young noble man put forward himself, having in him
extraordinary virtue, all the citizens begin to cast their eyes on him, and
agree together without any consideration to honor him; so that if he has any
touch of Ambition, meeting with those favors nature affords him, and this
accident coming suddenly in place, before the Citizens perceive the errors they
are in, it falls out that they have small means to help themselves. And when
these, that have the remedies in their powers, would put them in practice, they
do but with haste augment his authority. Hereof we might allege sundry
examples; but I will give only one out of our own city. Cosmus of Medici, from
whom the house of Medici in this city took the beginning of their greatness,
came into such reputation, through the favor that his own wisdom and the other
citizens ignorance gave him, that he began to make the state somewhat afraid of
him, so that some citizens held it very dangerous to offend him, and others as
dangerous to let him alone. But Nicholas of Vizzano living at the same time,
who was esteemed a very expert man in civil affairs; and being that the first
error was made is not knowing the dangers that might arise upon Cosmus his
reputation, while he lived, would never suffer, that they should make the
second, which was, that they should endeavor to put him down; judging that such
an assay would be altogether the ruin of their state, as in effect it came to
pass, which was after his death. For those citizens that were left, not
following this advice, made themselves strong against Cosmus, and chased him
out of Florence. Whereupon it followed that his faction resenting the injury, a
while after recalled him, and made him Prince of the Commonwealth; to which
step he could never have climbed, without that manifest opposition. The
selfsame befell Rome with Caesar, whose virtue being favored by Pompey and
others, at length came to change their favor into fear, whereof Cic^ro
witnesses, saying, that Pompey had late begun to fear Caesar. Which fear caused
them to think upon the remedies, and the remedies they used hastened the ruin
of their Commonwealth. I say then, that seeing it is a hard thing to know these
evils when they arise, this difficulty being occasioned by a deceit, wherewith
most things in their beginning do deceive, the wiser way is to dissemble them,
when they are known, then to oppose them. For temporizing with, them they
either are extinguished of themselves, or at least the evil is put off for a
longer time. And in all affairs Princes ought to be well advised, who intend
either to suppress evils, or to oppose their forces and their invasions, that
in liew of hurt they do them not good; and thinking to thrust on forward a
business, they draw it not after them; or instead of choking a plant, they
water is not. And they should well consider, wherein the greatest force
consists, and when they find their powers sufficient to heal what is amiffe,
they should then apply their strongest remedies; or otherwise, let it alone,
nor in any case meddle with it; for it would fall out as before has bin said,
and as it befell the neighbors of Rome; for whom it had bin better, after that
Rome was so grown in strength, with treaties of peace to endeavor to quiet it
and so yet keep it backward, rather then by making a strong war against it,
to force it to new courses, and new defenses. For to what other purpose served
their conspiracy, then to make them more lively, and to think upon new ways,
whereby in a far shorter time they much enlarged their power? Among which,
was the creation of a Dictatour, by which, new order they not only overcame
the dangers that hung over their heads, but it was an occasion to stop very
many misischiefes, which without that remedy the commonwealth must needs have
incurred.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
The Dictatours authority did good, and not harm, to the Commonwealth of Rome;
and how authorities which the citizens take upon them of themselves, and not
those that are given them by the peoples free voices, are hurtful to the
civil government.

THose Romans are by some writer condemned, that found out in that city the way
to create a Dictatour, as a thing that in time might occasion the Roman
Tyranny; alleging, that the first tyrant that was in that city, commanded it
under the title of a Dictatour, saying, that if this had not bin, Caesar could
never with any publque title have given any honest color to his tyranny. Which
matter was never well examined by him that holds this opinion, but believed
without ground. For it was not the name, not the degree of the Dictatour, that
brought Rome into bondage, but it was the authority the Citizens took upon
themselves through the long continuance of their rule. And if in Rome there had
bin wanting the title of a Dictatour, they would have taken another: for forces
will easily gain titles, but not titles forces. And we see it, that the
Dictatour, while he was made according to the public orders, and not by his
own authority, always did good to the city. For those magistrates that are
created, and those authorities that are given by extraordinary courses wrong
the Republiques, and not those that come the rodinary way As it appears it
followed in so long a process of time, that never any Dictatour did otherwise,
then good to the Commonwealth. Whereof there are very evident proofs. First
because to put a citizen in case that he can do hurt, and take extaordinary
authority upon him, we must suppose him to have many conditions, which in a
Republique not corrupted he can never have; for he must be very rich, and have
many adherents and partisans, which he cannot have, if the laws be strictly
observed; and in case they had, such kind of men are so doubted, that the
citizens free votes seldom meet in them. Moreover, the Dictarous was created
only for a time, and not for ever, and only to remedy the present necessity;
for which he was created. And by his authority he had power to resolve by him
what courses to take against urgent danger, and to execute any thing without
calling a counsel, and to punish any one without appeal. Yet could he do
nothing, tending to the diminution of the state, as it would have bin^ to take
away the Senates authority, or the peoples, to disanull the old ordinances of
the city, and to make new; so that, the short time of his Dictatourship meeting
with his authority, which was limited to him, and the people of Rome not
corrupted, it was unpossible he should exceed his bounds, and hurt the city:
and, we find by experience, that he evermore advantaged it. And indeed among
other Roman ordinances, this is one deserves consideration, and worthy to be
reckoned among those which contributed to the enlargement of that Empire: for
without such like course taken, cities could hardly escape out of such
extravagant michiefes; for the ways ordinarily used in Republiques. which more
slowly (being that no counsel, nor magistrate has power of himself to go
through with any matter, but in many things nave need of of one another,
because there goes time in getting together their consents) their remedies are
very dangerous, when they are to cure that which cannot stay for time: and
therefore Commonwealths among their orders should have some such like way; and
the Republique of Venice (which is excellent among these modernes) has
reserved the authority to a few citizens, that in occurrences of importance,
without more advice, all of them jointly of accord may resolve; for when in a
Republique there wants such an expedient, it must needs by keeping the old
customs go to ruin, or to escape it, break them. And in a Commonwealth, it
were to be desired, that nothing should chance, which might call in the use of
extraordinary courses. For though that extraordinary way at that time did good,
yet the example prooves of ill consequence: for the custom is brought in, to
break the old orders at first for good, which afterward under that color are
broken to ill intent. So that a Republique can never be perfect, unless with
her laws she has provided for all things, and for every mischance ordained
the remedy, and tract out the way of her government: and therefore concluding I
say, that those Republiques which in their dangers have not recourse to a
Dictatour, or such like authorities, will always in those heavy accidents fall
to ruin. And, in this new ordinance the manner of making the choice is to be
noted, how judiciously it was provided for by the Romans; for the creation of
the Dictatour being some what a disgrace to the Consulls, the heads of the City
being as well to come under obedience, as others; and presupposing, that some
distaste hereof might arise among the citizens, they ordein'd the power of
making this choice should be in the Consuls; thinking, that when the occasion
came, that Rome should stand in need of this Royal power, they would do it
with a good will, and that they doing it themselves, it would less grieve
them: For the hurts, or any evil that a man brings voluntarily upon himself,
and of his own choice, are far less troublesome, then those that are done
him by another: although that afterward in the latter times, the Romans used
in liew of a Videat Consul ne Respquid detrimenti capiat.
Dictatour, to give such authority to the Consul in these words, Let the
Consul takecare the Commonwealth receive no damage. And to return to our
matter, I conclude, that the neighibouring inhabitants of Rome by seeking to
suppress them, made them not only provide for their defense, but also gave
them the way how they might with more force, better advice, and greater
authority offend them.

CHAP. XXXV.
The reason, why in Rome the creation of the Decemvirate was hurtful to the
liberty of that Republique, notwitstanding that it was made by public and
free voices.

AND it seems contrary to that which was said before, that the authority which
is seized on by violence, not that which is given by suffrages, is hurtful to
Commonweales, as the election of the ten Citizens created by the people of Rome
to make laws therein, who in time became tyrants in it, and without any respect
laid hold on the liberty thereof. Where we ought well consider the manner of
giving the authority, and the time for which it is given: and when an absolute
authority is given for a long time (calling a year or somewhat more a long
time) it will always be dangerous, and will produce either good or bad
effects, according as the persons to whom it shall be entrusted shall prove
good or bad: and if we look into the authority the ten had, and that which the
Dictatours had, we shall find that of the ten far to outreach the other. For
when the Dictatour was created, the Tribuns, the Consuls, and the Senate
remained still in their authority, nor could the Dictatour take it from them
And if he could deprive one of the Consulship, and remove another from the
Senate, yet could he not disanull the whole order of Senators, and make new
laws: so that the Senate, the Consuls, and the Tribuns continuing with their
authority, came to be as a guard upon him, to keep him from swerving out of he
right way. But in the creation of the ten there fell out the clean contrary;
for they cashierd the Consuls and Tribuns and gave authority of themselves to
make laws and every thing else, as absolutely as the people of Rome. So that
being absolute of themselves without Consuls, without Tribuns, without appeal
to the people, and hereby having none to look into their courses, the second
year they had the means, especially moov'd by the ambition of Appius, to
become insolent. And hereupon it is to be noted, that when it is said, that a
power given by free suffrages, never hurt any Commonwealth, we must presuppose,
that the people suffer not themselves to be induced to give it, unless with
due circumstances, and at due seasons. But when, either being deceived, or upon
some other occasion leading them blindsold, they are brought to give it
undiscreetly, and in that kind as the people of Rome gave it to the ten, it
will befall them always, as it did to these. Which is easily proov'd,
considering the causes that held the Dictatours in goodness, and those that
gave the ten occasion of becoming evil. And advising also how those
Republiques have done, that have bin thought well governed, in the giving of
authority for a long time, as the Sparitans gave their Kings, and the Venetians
their Duke; for a man may preceive that in one or other sort they had their
guards upon them, that they who were ill disposed could not at their pleasures
abuse that authority. Nor availes it in this case, that the matter is not
corrupted; for an absolute authority corrupts the matter in a very short time,
gathers friends, and makes partisans, neither is poverty or want of good
kindred a let; for wealth, and every other advantage presently runs after
them, as particularly in the ereation of the ten we shall treat.

CHAP. XXXVI.
The citizens who have possessed the greatest charges in the Commonwealth,
ought not to disdain the less, as unworthy of them.

THe Romans had made Marcus Fabius, and Caius Manlius Consuls, and gained a
very glorious battle of the Veyentes and the Etruscans, where in Quintus
Fabius was slain. the Consuls brother, who had bin consul the year before.
Where we should well consider, how proper the laws of that city were for her
advancement. and how much those other Republique that trace not herfoote steps,
decevie themselves. For though the Romans were zealous lovers of glory, yet
never did they esteem it dishonorable at one time to obey, where other whiles
they had commanded; and to serve in that army whereof they had bin Commanders.
which custom is contrary to the opinion, laws, and courses of the citizens of
our times. And in Venice yet is this error, that a citizen having borne a
great office, esteems it a disgrace to accept of a less, and the city
allows him to refuse it. Which thing though it were honorable for the
private, yet is it wholly unprofitable for the public For a Commonwealth may
expect better performance from, and repose more trust in that citizen, who
descends from a greater charge to undertake a less, then in him that from a
less arises to the command of a greater. Because they cannot with good reason
trust him with their weighty affairs, unless they see men about him of such
reverence and virtue that his inexperience may be guided and directed by their
virtue and authority. And if in Rome there had bin that custom which is in
Venice, and other Republique and modern Kingdoms, that he who had once bin
Consul would never go to the war afterward, but as Consul, many things very
prejudicial to the free government of the state would have grown thereupon;
and through the errors committed by these new men, and by their ambition,
which they might have used with more freedom, not having those grave men about
them, by whose presence they might be so kept in awe, that they should not dare
to step aside: and so they would have become dissolute; which would all have
turned to the public loss.

CHAP. XXXVII.
What distaste the Agrarian law gave in Rome, and that it is very offensive to
make a law in a Commonwealth, that looks far backwards, and yet goes directly
against an ancient custom of the City.

IT is an opinion of the ancient writers, that men are wont to vex themselves
in their crosses, and glut and cloy themselves in their prosperity; and that
from the one and the other of these two passions proceed the same affects: for
at what time soever men are freed from fighting for necessity, they are
presently together by the ears through ambition; which is so powerful in men's
hearts, that to what degree fo^ver they arise, it never abandons them. The
reason is, because nature has created men in such a sort, that they can desire
every thing, but not attain to it. So that the desire of getting being greater
then the power to get, thence grows the dislike of what a man injoyes, and the
small satisfaction a man has thereof. Hereupon arises the change of their
states, for some men desiring to have more, and others fearing to lose what
have they already, they proceed to enmities and war, from whence comes the
destruction of one country, and the advantage of another. This discourse I have
made, because it suffis'd not the Commons of Rome, to secure themselves from
the Nobility by creating the Tribuns, to which desire they were forced by
nenecessity; but that they suddenly, upon the obteining thereof began to
contend out of ambition, and think to share equally with the nobility both in
honors and fortunes, as the things that are in most value with men. Whereupon
grew that disease that brought forth the quarrel touching the Agrarian law.
And in conclusion, caused the destruction of the Roman Republique. And because
Commonwealths well ordered are to maintain the public wealthy, and the
particulars poor, it is likely there was in Rome some defect in this law,
which either was not so exactly framed at the beginning, but that every day it
had need of some revising and amending; or that the making of it was so long
put off, that it became scandalous to look so far backwards; or that being
well instituted at first, in time it grew by use corrupt. So in what manner
soever it were, that law was never mentioned in Rome, but that the whole city
was in a tumult. This law had two principal heads. By one they ordered that no
citizen could possess more then so many acres of ground: by the other, that
the lands which they took from their enemies should be divided among the
people of Rome. It came therefore to thwart the Nobility two manner of ways;
because they that had the greatest states in possessio, were not permitted by
thelaw who were the greater part of the Nobility; and there upon ought not to
enjoy it: and when the enemies goods should be divided among the common people,
they took from the Nobility the means to grow rich. These quarrels then
being taken up against potent persons, and they by their resistance thinking to
defend the public, whenever (as it is said) mention was made of this law,
the whole city was in an uproare; and the Nobility wrought it out with patience
and with diligence, either by drawing an army forth into the field, or by
opposing another Tribune against him that propounded it, or sometimes by
yielding a part, or else by sending a Colony into that place which was to be
divided, as it befell them of the Country of Antium, for which upon a dispute
touching this law, there was a Colony drawn out of Rome and sent into this
place, unto whom the said County was consigned. Where Titus Livius uses a
notable kind of speech, saying, that with much ado they found any one in Rome,
that would give in their names to go to the said Colony, the people being
rather desirous of these advantages in Rome, then to go and enjoy them in
Antium. And the quarrel touching this law continued a good while, till the
Romans transported their arms into the uttermost parts of Italy, and likewise
out of Italy. After which, as it seems, it ceased: which so fell out, because
the fields, which the enemies of Rome possessed, were far apart from the
peoples sight, and in a place where it was not safe to come to cultivate them,
and therefore grew they less desirous of them, and the Romans also did less
use to punish their enemies in that manner. And when they did dispossess any
town of the territory, they there distributed Colonies, so that upon such
reasons this law was laid asleep till the Gracchies time, by whom it being
afterward awaked, quite ruined the Roman liberty. For they found their
adversaries strength doubled; and hereupon kindled such a hatred between the
people, and the Senate, that they came to blows and to blood without civil
mean, or order. So that the public magistrates having no power to give
remedy hereto, nor either of the factions relying on them, they sought private
helps, each party thinking to make a head should defend them. In this
quarrel, and disorder, the people chose Marius, and made him four times
Consul; and so long he continued his Consulship, with small interva's, that he
had power of his own self to make himself thrice more Consul. Against which
pestilence the Nobility having no other remedy, began to favor Sylla; and
having made him head of their faction, they came to civil wars, and after
much bloodshed and change of chance, the Nobility remained conqueror These
quarrels were anew revived in Caesar and Pompeyes time; for Caesar being made
head of Marius his party, and Pompey of Syllaes, coming to fight, Caesar
remained victour; who was the first tyrant in Rome, (so that that city never
after enjoyed her liberty, such beginning then, and end had the Agrarian law.
And although we showed other where, how the discords of Rome between the Senate
and the People preserved Romes liberty, because they sprung from those laws in
favor of liberty, and therefore the end of this Agrarian law may seem
disagreeing to such a conclusion; yet I say, that upon this I no way change my
opinion; for so great is the Nobilities ambition, that if by diverse ways and
sundry means it were not abated in a city, it would suddenly bring that city
to destruction: so that if the strife touching the Agrarian law had much ado
in three hundred years to inthrall Rome; it is like enough it would have bin
brought much sooner into servitude, when the people both with this law, and
also with their other humors, had not always bridled the Nobilities ambition.
We see by this also, how much men esteem wealth rather then honors, because
the Nobility of Rome, if it touched matter of honor, ever gave way to the
people without any extraordinary distasts: but when it concerned their wealth,
so obstinatly did they defend it, that the people to vent their humor had
their recourse to those extravagant ways that are above discoursed of. The
Authors of which disorder were the Gracchi, whose intention ought to be
commended, rather then their discretion. For to take away a disorder grown in a
Commonwealth, and hereupon to make a law that looks fair backwards, is a
course ill advised of; and (as formely it has been said at large) it does
nothing else but hasten that evil to which the disorder guides thee; but
giving way to the time some what, either the mischief comes slower, or of it
self at length before it comes to the upshot) goes out

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Weak Commonwealths are hardly drawn to a certain resolution, and know not
how to determine: and the course they ordinarily take, they are rather forced
to, then choose of them selves.

THere being in Rome a very grievous pestilence, and thereupon the Volsci and
the Equi thinking a fit time presented to bring the city of Rome into
subjection, these two people having got a very great army together, set upon
the Latini and the Hernici, and wasted their country: this the Latini and
Hernici were constrained to give notice of at Rome, and entreat, that the
Romans would undertake their defense: to whom the Romans, exceedingly afflicted
by the plague, answered that they should take a course to defend themselves
with their own forces, because they were not then able to do it. Wherein
appears the magnanimity and wisdom of that Senate, that even in all fortunes
they would reign and give law to those deliberations their vassalls should
make; nor were they ashamed to resolve any thing, when necessity pressed them
to it, though contrary to their manner of living, and the resolutions usually
made by them. This I say, because at other times the same Senate had forbidden
the said people to arm and defend themselves; and therefore to a Senate, whose
judgment had bin weaker then was theirs, it would have seemed an abatement of
reputation, to have granted them such a defense. But they always weighed
businesses in their due balance, and ever chose the lesser ill in lieu of the
greater good: for it agreed ill with them; to see themselves unable to defend
their subjects; and they were as little content, that they should arm without
them, for the reasons alleged, and others also that are evident. Yet knowing,
that in any case upon necessity they were to take arms, having the enemy upon
their backs, they took the more honorable part, and would rather, that what
they were to do, they should do it with their leave, to the end that having
disobeyed upon necessity, they should not be accustomed to disobey voluntarily.
And though this may well appear a course fit for every Republique to take, the
weak and ill advised Common wealths cannot do the like, nor know not how to
stand upon terms of honor in the like niceties. The Duke Valentine had taken
Faeuza, and made Bologna yield to his conditions; afterward desiring to
return from thence to Rome through Tuscany, sent a confident of his into
Florence to ask passage for himself with his army. Hereupon they consulted at
Florence, how to manage this business, nor did any one advise them to grant it
him. Wherein they followed not the course the Romans took: for the Duke being
exceedingly well armed, and the Florentines in a manner disarmed, that they
could not hinder his passage, it had bin much more for their honor, if it had
seemed that he had passd with their license, rather then by force; for there it
was wholly their disgrace, which had bin in part less, if they had carried it
otherwise. But the worst condition these weak Republiques have, is to take to
no resolution, so that what party soever they take, they take it perforce; and
if any good be done them, it is forced upon them, for which they owe no thanks
to their own wisdom. I will give two other examples, that happened in our
days in the state of our city, In the year 1500, when Lewi the 12 of France
had recovered Milan, being desirous to put Pisa into our hands, for the sum
of 50000 ducats, which the Florentines had promised him, after such
restitution, he sent his army commanded by the Lord Beaumont toward Pisa, in
whom, (although he were a French man) yet the Florentines reposed much trust.
This army and Captain came on between Cascina and Pisa, to assail the walls,
where staying some days to give order for the siege, there came some Deputies
of Pisa to Beavmont, who offered to yield up the city to the French army with
these conditions, that upon the Kings word he should promise, not to give them
into the Florentines hands, till after four months, which terms were utterly
resus'd by the Florentines, whereupon ensued, that after a while they left the
siege with disgrace. Nor was that accord refused for other reason, then because
they doubted of the Kings word; although (such was the weakness of their
counsel) that they were forced to put themselves into his protection, though
they trusted him not: nor in the mean while did they consider, that the King
could easier deliver Pisa into their hands, having gotten possession of it,
than promise he would deliver that which he had not yet in his power: wherein
if he had fayl'd, it had bin easy to discover the Kings intention, and so have
spared their cost. In such sort that it had bin a great deal more to their
advantage, had they agreed, that Beaumont should have taken it upon any
promise; as it was seen afterward by experience in the year 1502. when upon
the rebellion of Arezzo, the Lord Jubalt was sent by the King of France with
succors to the Florentines. Who being come near to Arezzo, began to treat
agreement with the town, which upon certain terms would have yielded, as
before the Pisans, but were again refused by the Florentines. Which Jubalt
perceiving, and thinking that the Florentines did little understand themselves,
he began to practice an agreement with them by himself, without admitting the
commissaries into the party, so that he concluded a peace of his own head,
and thereupon entered Arezzo with his own people, showing the Florentines, they
were fools, and understood not the affairs of the world; and if they desired
to have Arezzo in their hands, they should let the King know of it, who could
more easily deliver it them, having his people already in the town, then if
they were without before the walls. In Florence they forbear not to rail upon,
and blame the said Jubalt, till they understood, that if Beaumont had bin like
Jubalt, they should have had Pisa as well as Arezzo. And thus to return to our
purpose, Republiques which will not come to resolution, seldom make any party
much to their advantage, unless they are forced thereupon: because their
weakness will never suffer them to determine, where there is any doubt: and
unless that doubt be cancelled by a neessitie that violently thrusts them
forward, they remain always in suspense.

CHAP. XXXIX.
The same accidents are seen to befall several peoples.

THIS is easily known by any one that considers things present and things long
past, that in all Cities and all peoples there are now the same desires and the
same humors, there were always; So that it is very easy for him that examines
with diligence the things that are past, to foresee the future in any
Commonwealth, and to serve himself of those remedies, which were in use among
the ancients; or not finding of those which were used, to devise new, for the
resemblance these accidents have with the ancient. But because these
considerations are neglected, or not understood by the Reader; or if
understood, not known to him that governs, it follows, that continually in
all successions of ages the same offeeces happen. The City of Florence after
94 years having lost a part of their dominions, as Pisa and other Towns, was
forced to make war against those that held them. And because he that had
them in his hands, was of great power, it came it pass, that they were at
great expense in the wars, without good success. From these great expenses
they proceeded with impositions to grieve the people, and from those grievances
came the peoples murmurings and complaints. And for that this war was ordered
by a Magistracy of ten Citizens, who were called the Council of ten for
the war, they were malic't by the whole body of the City, as the Authors of
the war, and the expenses of the same; and they began to p^rswade themselves,
that by taking away that Magistracy, they should end their wars; so that
having to make new, they would not supply the places, but rather suffering that
Magistracy to expire, they referred their employments all to the Senate: Which
resolution was so hurtful, that not only it ended not the war, (as the
generality was persuaded) but those men being put out of the employment, who
guided it with understanding, there followed such confusion, that besides Pisa,
they lost Arezzo, and many other places, in so much that the people perceiving
their error, and that the fever occasioned the mischief, and not the
Physician, they created anew the Magistracy of ten. The self same humor
grew up in Rome against the name of the Consuls; for the people seeing one
war arise from another, giving them no rest, where they ought to have
attributed it wholly to their neighbors ambition, who d^sir'd to suppress
them, they imputed it rather to the ambition of the nobility; who not being
able in Rome to chastise the people protected by the, Tribunitiall power,
endeavored to draw them our of Rome under the Consuls, and there to oppress
them, where they had no assistance. And hereupon they thought it necessary to
take away the Consuls, or so to limit their power, that they should have no
authority over the people neither at home nor abroad. The first that assa^d to
put that law in practice, was one Terentillus a Tribun, who propounded they
should create five men, to consider the Consuls power, and moderate it. Which
thing much angered the nobility, giving them to think, that the Majestic of the
Empire was wholly declined; and that there was not left to the Nobility any
dignity more in the Commonwealth. Yet such was the Tribuns obstinacy, that the
Consuls name was quite put out, and in the conclusion they were contented after
some other order taken, rather to create Tribuns with Consulan power, than the
Consuls; in such hatred had they their name and their authority. And so they
proceeded a long time, till at length, having known their errous, as the
Florentins returned to the Counsel of ten, so they anew created their
Consuls.

CHAP. XL.
The Creation of the Decemvirate in Rome, and what the rein is to be noted;
where among many other things is considered, how by the like accident a
Republique may be preserved, or suppressed.

HAving a purpose to discourse particularly of the accidents that happened at
Rome upon the creation of the Decemvirate, methinks it is not much out of the
way first to relate summarily the story of that creation; and afterward to
sift out the parts that are in those notable actions; which are many and of
good consideration, as well for those that endeavor to maintain a Republique
free, as for them that intend to bring it under the yoke; for in this discourse
there will appear many errors committed by the Senate, and by the people, in
prejudice of the Common liberty, and many faults made by Appius Chief of the
Decemvirate, lammageable to that tyranny which he had presupposed already
founded in Rome. After many disputes and strifes past between the people and
the Nobility, about the framing of new laws in Rome, whereby they might firmly
establish the liberty of that State, with one accord they sent Spurius
Posthumous with two other Citizens to Athens, for the copies of those laws
which Solon gave to that City, that thereupon they might found the Roman
Ordinances. After their return, they came to appoint the men that were to
examine and frame the said laws. And they ordained ten Citizens for a year, of
which Appius Claudius was one, a cunning and a turbulent man. And that they
might without any respect make such laws, they took away the power of all
other Magistrates in Rome, espeaially of the, Tribuns and Consuls. They took
away also all appeal to the people; so that these new officers became absolute
Princes of Rome. Afterward Appius gained the authority of all his other
companions, by means of the favors the people did him, for he was grown so
popular in his behavior, that it seemed a mervail, how so suddenly he had
changed his nature and disposition, having always before this time bin thought
a cruel persecutor of the common people. These ten governed themselves very
moderately, not having above twelve Lictors, who always went before him that
was Chiese among them. And although they had the absolute authority, yet when
they were to punish any Citizen of Rome for homicide, they cited him in
presence of the people, and made them judge him. They writ their laws in ten
Tables; and before they confirmed them, published them to the general view,
that every man might read and understand them, whereby it might be known if
there were any fault in them, which before their confirmation should be
amended. After this Appius caused a rumor to be spread throughout Rome that if
to these ten Tables an addition of twoothers were made, they would be perfect
So that the conceithereof gave the people occasion to make the Council of
ten again for another year, whereunto the people consented willingly, as
well because they would not have the Consuls anew ^created, as for that they
hoped they might well subsist without Tribuns, these being judges of the
causes, as is aforesaid: It being then agreed to make a new election, the whole
nobility betook themselves to sue for these honors, and Appius was amongst the
foremost of them, and behaved himself in his suit with so much courtesy toward
the people, that all his competitors were jealous of it. Credebant enim haud
gratuitam in tanta superbia comitetem fore.
They did not believe, that he being so proud a man, used all this courtesy
for naught. And being in doubt publicly to oppose him, they resolved to do it
cunningly, and so though he were the youngest of them all, they gave him the
authority to propound to the people the ten that were to be elected, thinking
he would use the same terms others did, not to name himself, being a thing
unusual and disgraceful in Rome. But he took this impediment Illevero
impedimentum pro occasion arripuit.
for an opportunity: And named himself among the first, to the admiration, and
displeasure of all the Nobility; and after named nine others to his own
purpose. Which new creation made for another year, began to show the people and
the Nobility their error; for suddenly, Appius made an end of dissembling to be
what he Appius finem fecit ferendae alienae persc(...).
was not: and began to show his inbred pride: and infected his companions with
his own evil conditions: and to fright the people and the Senate, in exchange
of twelve Lictors, they made a hundred and twenty. The fear was equal in all,
for a while; but they began afterward to give respect to the Senate, and
rudely to handle the Commons. If any one being wronged by one of these Judges
did appeal to another, he was worse abused in his appeal, than in his first
trial. So that the people having perceived their error, began to look the
Nobility in the face with a great deal of sorrow; And thence they took occasion
to seek after their liberty, Et inde libertatis captare auram, unde ser vitutem
timendo in eum statum Remp. adduxerat. Vt ipsi taedio praesentium consules
desiderarent.
from whence by fearing their bondage, they had brought the Commonwealth into
that misery. And the Nobility was well pleased with this their affliction: That
being weary of their present condition, they might desire to have their Consuls
restored. The days came at length that ended the year: the two Tables of the
laws were finished but not published. The ten hereupon took occasion to
continue on their Magistracy, and hold the State by violence, and make the
young Nobility their guard, on whom they bestowed the goods of those they
condemned. With which gifts the youth Quibus donis juventus corrum pebatur, and
malebat licentiam suam, quam omnium libertatem.
being corrupted, loved rather their own licentious life, than the common
liberty. It fell out about this time, that the Sabini and the Volsci made war
against the Romans. Upon which fear the ten began to see the weakness of their
own estate: for without the Senate they could not take order for the war; and
assembling the Senate together they thought they lost their authority: yet upon
mere necessity they took this last course; and having gotten the Senators
together, many of them spoke against the pride of the tenn, and in particular
Valerius and Horatius; and their authority had bin quite abolished, but that
the Senate, of mere envy to the Common people, would not show their authority,
thinking, that if the ten should voluntarily depose their Magistracy, the
making of Tribuns of the people might perhaps be left. The war was then
resolved of, and two armies were led forth commanded by part of the ten: and
Appius staid at home to govern the City. Whereupon it happened, that he fell in
love with Virginia; and when he would have taken her by force, her Father
Virginius to free her, slew her; whereupon ensued diverse tumults at Rome, and
in the armies, which being brought back again and joined with the remainder of
the people at Rome, went apart thence to the holy mount: where they staid, til
the ten had deposed their Magistracy, and that the Tribuns and Consuls being
created, Rome was restored to the ancient form of liberty. It is noted then by
the text, that the inconvenient of setting up a Tyranny grew first upon the
same occasions, that the greater part of Tyrannies ordinarily use to arise upon
in Cities, and this is from the overmuch desire the people have of liberty, and
the excessive ambition the Nobility have to command. And when they agree not to
make a law in favor of liberty, and either party betakes it self to favor some
one, then suddenly starts up a tyranny. The people and the Nobility of Rome
consented to create the ten; and to create them with so great authority, as
they did for the desire they both had, the one to extinguish the memory of the
consuls, the other of the Tribuns. When they were created, the people thinking
that Appius was become of the popular faction, and rudely handled the Nobility,
the people betook themselves to favor him. And when a people is led into such
an error, as to give reputation to any one, because he creates those evil that
they hate, if he has wit, it will always come to pass, that he shall make
himself Lord of that City; for he will wait his opportunity together with the
peoples favor to extinguish the Nobility, and will never endeavor to oppress
the people, till he has quite suppressed the Nobles; at which time when the
people shall perceive themselves to be in bondage, they shall not know whether
to have recourse for help. This course have they all held, that have laid the
foundations of a Tyranny in any Commonwealth. Which if Appius had likewise
held, his tyranny would have bin of longer durance, and not have failed so
quickly; but he went the clean contrary way; nor could a man have done more
undiscreetly, than he, who to maintain a tyranny, made those his enemies that
bestowed it first upon him, and could still make it good, and fought to gain
those to be his friends, who neither agreed to give it him, nor could maintain
it to him, and so lost those that were his friends, and strove to make those
his friends, that could not be so: For though the nobility desire to tyrannize,
yet that part of the nobility that has not a share in the tyranny, is always
enemy to the tyrant; nor is it possible ever to gain them all to his side, by
reason of the nobilities exceeding ambition and excessive avarice, seeing that
the tyrant cannot have so great wealth, nor so many honors, as to satisfy them
all. And thus Appius, forsaking the people, and cleaving to the nobility,
committed a most evident error, and so for other reasons abovesaid; and
because, if a man will hold any thing by violence, he that forces must needs be
stronger than he that is forced. From whence it comes, that those Tyrarts who
have the generality to friend, and the great ones their enemies, are in the
more safety, because, their violence is supported with greater forces, than
that which is favored by the Nobility, and hated by the people: for with the
peoples favor the Forces within are sufficient to maintain themselves, as they
were to Nabis Tyrant of Sparta, when all Greece and the people of Rome
assaulted him, having made himself sure of some few of the Nobility, and
always having the people his friend, wherewith he defended himself: which he
could not have done, if they had bin otherwise. In that other degree, to have
but few friends at home, the forces within suffice nor, but must be sought
after abread: and they are to be of three kinds, the one to have a guard of
strangers, to assure thy person; the other, to have an army in the country,
which may serve the same turn the people could; the third, to hold
correspondence and friendship with thy put issant neighbors, who may defend
thee. And whosoever takes these courses, and observes them rightly, though the
people be his enemy, yet in some sort may he save himself. But Appius could not
by any army make himself master of the Country, the country there and Rome
being one and the same thing; and what he could do, he knew not how to do, and
so perished in his beginning. The Senate also and the people in the creation of
the Decemvira^e committed very great errors. For, though it be formerly said in
the discourse touching a Dictator, that those Magistrates, who are made of
themselves, not those that are chosen by the people, endammage the liberty, yet
the people ought, when they make their Magistrates, take such order in their
making, that they restrain them by some regards from growing wicked. And where
they should set a guard over them, to keep them good, the Romans took it away,
creating that the sole Magistracy in Rome, nullifying all the rest, for the
excessive desire (as we before said) The Senate had to suppress the Tribuns,
and the Common people the Consuls: which blinded them both so, that they
concurred in this disorder: for men (as King Ferdinand said) do oftentimes like
certain lesser birds of prey, who so eagerly pursue the prey, whereunto they
have a natural provocation, that they perceive not a greater bird over their
heads with like eagerness ready to seize on them. The people of Romes error
then is made plain by this discourse, as I propounded it in the beginning, in
going to save their liberty; as Appius his errors also in going to seize upon
the Tyranny.

CHAP. XLI.
Of humble to become, proud, of^ merciful cruel, without passing through the
due means between these extremes, argues indiscretion, and turns nothing to
advantage.

AMong other termsill used by Appius, to maintain his tyranny, it was not of
small moment, to leap too suddenly from one quality to another: for his craft
in deceiving the people, by dissembling popularity, was used to good purpose.
The terms likewise he held to cause a new creation of the ten, were well used:
As also his boldness in creating himself one of them, contrary to the
nobilities opinion It was a course rightly taken, to choose his colleagues to his
own turn: but it was not advisedly done, presently upon this (according as I
said above) to change his disposition at an instant, of a friend to show
himself enemy to the people, of courteous to become insolent, of mild harsh, and
to do this so suddenly, that without any excuse he discovers to all the
falsehood of his heart. For he that has seemed good for a while, and would, to
serve his own turn, become wicked, should come to it by the due degrees; and in
such sort goeon with his occasions, that before the different disposition
deprive him of his ancient favors, it may have given him so many new, that his
authority be no way diminished: otherwise being found unmasked and without
friends, he perishes.

CHAP. XLII.
How easily men may be corrupted.

IT is remarkable also in this matter touching the Decemvirate, how easily men
are corrupted, so that they make themselves become of aquite contrary nature,
though at first good, and well brought up: considering how that youth, which
Appius had taken near to him for guard of his person, began to favor the
tyranny, for a very small profit which they made thereof. And how Quintus
Fabisu, one of the second ten that were chosen, being an excellent man; blinded
with a little ambition, and persuaded by the malignity of Appius, changed all
his good conditions into very bad, and became like him; which being thoroughly
examined, shall cause those that institute the laws of Republiques or Kingdoms
to be more exactin bridling humane desires, and in taking from them all hope of
escaping scot-free whenever they offend.

CHAP. XLIII.
They that fight for their own glory, are the good and faithful soldiers.

IT is considerable also upon the above written treaty, what difference there
is between an army satisfied and contented in it self, fighting for its own
glory, and that which is ill disposed, fighting for other men's ambition; for
where the Roman armies were always wont under the Consuls to be victorious,
under the December. virate they were always losers. From this example may we know
in part the reasons why mercenary soldiers are unprofitable, who have no other
obligation to make them stand true to thee, but some small stipend thou
bestowest on them. Which cannot be a motive so sufficient, or of such weight,
as to gain thee their truth and love so far, as to die in thy behalf. For in
those armies, wherein there is not that affection toward him for whom they
fight, which makes them become his partisans where can never be so much valor,
as to subdue or resist an enemy that has never so little virtue or courage.
And because neither this affection, nor contention can grow in others, more
then in thy natural subject, it is necessary in the maintaining of a state,
whether it be Commonwealth or Kingdom, to arm the native subjects, as we see
all they have done, who with their armies have made any great conquests. The
Roman armies under the Decemvirates were valorous as formerly: but because the
same disposition was not in them, they achieved not the like exploits. But so
soon as the Decemvirate had an end, and they, as free men, began to war, they
took to them again their former courages, and by consequence their undertakings
proved successful, according to their ancient wont.

CHAP. XLIIII.
A multitude without a head is unprofitable: and a man should not first
threaten; and afterward demand the power.

THe Common people of Rome, upon the occasion of Verginius being gone apart
armed into the Holy Mount, the Senate deputed some unto them to demand, by what
authority they had forsaken their Captains and retired into the mountain; and
such was the esteem of the Senates authority, that the people having no head of
their multitude, no man durst make answer. And Titus Livius says, they wanted
not what to answer, but they wanted who should answer: Which thing does
punctually show the unprofitableness of a multitude without a head, and
therefore Verginius perceiving the disorder, sound the expedient of creating
twenty Tribuns of war who should be their head to answer, and confer with the
Senate. And having demanded, that Valenius and Horatius should be sent them, to
whom they would declare their minds, these refused to go, til the ten had
deposed their magistracy: and being come to the mountain where the people was,
the demands were, that they would have the Triburs of the people created again,
and that they might appeal to the people from every magistrate, and that all
the ten should be delivered into their hands, and they would burn them quick:
Valerius and Horatius commended their first demands: and blamed their latter,
as Impious, saying, Crudelitatem damnatis, crudelitatem initis.
You condemn cruelty, and yet you use it your selves. And they were advised to
leave making mention of the ten, and attend only to lay hold of their
authority and power, and afterward they should not want means of satisfaction;
where plainly it appears, how much it savors of folly, and little of wisdom,
to demand a thing, and beforehand to say, I will do ill with it. For a man
ought not herein discover his intention, but first in any case endeavor to be
master of what he desires. For it is enough to ask a man his weapons, without
saying to him, I will kill thee with them, being thou have power, when thou art
possessed of them, to do as thou list.

CHAP. XLV.
It is a matter of very evil example, when he that makes a law neglects the
observing of it: and it is very dangerous in a state, to make a continual
practice of cruel executions.

THe agreement being made and Rome reduced to her ancient form, Verginius
cited Appius before the people, to defend his own cause: whom appearing
accompanied with many of the Nobility, Verginius commanded to be cast into
prison. Appius began to cry out, and appeal to the people. Verginius said, he
was not worthy to be allowed that appeal which himself had destroyed, or have
the people defend him, who had so much endammag'd them. Appius replied, that
they ought not to violate that appeal, which they with such earnest desire had
ordained. For all this he was imprisoned, and before the day of giving
judgment, he slew himself. And though Appius his lewd life deserved any
punishment, yet savor'd it but little of eivil government, to violate the
laws, and especially that which was but then made. For I believe not, there is
any thing of worse example in a Republique, then to make a law, and not observe
it; and the more, when he that makes it breaks it. Florence after the ninty
fourth year having its state reestablish'd by the aid of Friar Ierom
Savanarola, whose writings show his learning, wisdom, and virtue, and having
among other ordinances to assure the citizens, caused a law to be made, that a
man might appeal to the people from the sentences, which for matter of state,
the Eight, or the Seignory should give: which law he long persuaded, and with
much a do at length obtained. It happened that a while after the confirmation
of it, five citizens were condemned to death by the Seignory for some offense
touching the state; and they desiring to appeal, were not suffered, and so the
law not observed. Which more wronged the reputation of that Friar, then any
other accident. For if that appeal was profitable, he should have caused it to
be observed, if otherwise, he should never have so urged the making of it. And
so much more remarkable was this accident, in that the Friar in those many
sermons which he made, after the breach of this law, never either condemned him
that broke it, or excused the breach, as he that would not condemn any thing
that served to his purpose; and excuse it he could not. Which having discovered
his ambitious and sactious mind, took much from his credit, and charged him
with blame enough. It is a very great fault also in a state, every day in the
citizens minds to renew the memory of old wrongs done to this or that man with
new punishments, as it befell at Rome after the Decemvirate. For all the ten,
and other citizens at sundry times were accused, and condemned, so that all the
Nobility were exceedingly affrighted, thinking they would never leave
condemning them, til they had destroyed the whole Nobility. And certainly it
had produced some inconvenient in the city, if Marcus Duellius the Tribun had
not taken order for it. Who made a decree, that for a whole year it should not
be lawful for any man to cite or accuse any citizen of Rome, which assured all
the Nobility. Where we see, how great a hurt it is to a Republique or Prince,
to hold their subjects minds in suspicion and fear with continual persecutions
and punishments: and without doubt a worse course cannot be taken. For men that
begin to doubt of mischief, in any case provide for themselves in their
dangers, and grow bolder, and less respectfull how they venture on novelties.
Wherefore it is necessary either never to hurt any, or the hurt that is to be
done to do at once, and afterward let men enjoy some assurance, that may give
them cause to quiet and settle their minds.

CHAP. XLVI.
Men arise by degrees from one ambition to another: and first they aim no
further, then that they themselves suffer no hurt of others, afterward they
strive to be able to hurt others.

THe people of Rome having recovered their liberty, and being returned into
their former state, or rather greater, insomuch as they had made new laws,
which were as new foundations laid to establish their power, it seemed
probable, that Rome for some while would have bin at quiet; yet by experience
the contrary was seen, for every day there sprung up new tumults and new
disagreements. And because Titus Livius very judiciously gives the reason from
whence they grew, methinks it is not out of purpose, punctually to relate his
words where he says, that always either the people or the Nobility waxed
proud, when the other grew humble; and when the Commons containd themselves
modestly within their bounds, then began the youth of the Nobility to provoke
them with all manner of injuries; nor could the Tribuns much remedy this, for
they also had their shares in the sufferance. The Nobility on the other side,
although well they wot that their youth was too insolent, yet being that
insolency was to be committed by one side, they wished rather their own should
be the actors, then the commonalty. And thus the desire of maintaining the
liberty caused each to proceed so far til they oppressed the other. And the
order of these accidents is, that while men endeavor to be out of fear
themselves, they begin to put others in fear; and that injury which they chase
from themselves, they thrust upon another, as if there were a necessity either
to hurt or to be hurt. Hereby is seen in what manner among other things
Commonwealths come to dissolution, and men rise from one ambition to another.
And as that sentence of Salust put in Caesar's mouth, was very true; That all
evil examples first Quod omnia mala exempla bonis initiis orta sunt.
spring from good beginnings. The first thing that those citizens (as is above
said) endeavor, who behave themselves ambitiously in a Republic, is, not only
to be out of the reach of private men's wrongs, but out of the Magistrates
power. To attain hereto, they seek after friendships, which they gain by means,
in appearance honest, either by supplying their want of moneys, or by
protecting them from those that are too mighty for them. And because this seems
worthy and noble, every one is easily deceived, and thereupon no body seeks to
remedy it, till he presevering in the same course without let, becomes such a
one, that the private Citizens stand in aw of him, and the Magistrates bear him
respect. And when he is grown to this height, and no order first taken for
restraint of his greatness, he comes to be in such terms, that it proves very
dangerous to justle with him, for the causes I have formerly alleged, of the
danger there is to strive with an inconvenient, which is already come to some
growth in a city, because then it is brought to such an exigent, that there is
a necessity to seek either to extinguish it with danger of sudden ruin: or
letting it alone, to submit to the yoke of bondage, unless death or some other
accident prevent it. For being once come to the terms above written, that both
citizens and Magistrates stand in fear to offend him, and his, without much
ado after will they understand their own strength, and hurt at their own
pleasure. Whereupon a Republique among her ways of government ought to use
this, to watch carefully over her citizens, that they have not power under the
color of good to do mischief: and that their reputation be such as may
advantage the Commonwealth, and not wrong it, as in its own place we shall
argue it.

CHAP. XLVII.
Men, though they are deceived in generalities, yet are they not so easily
beguiled in particulars.

THE people of Rome (as is abovesaid) having taken in distaste the very name of
Consuls, and being desirous that Plebeyans might be made Consuls, or their
authority limited, the Nobility, that the Consular authority might as well be
chosen out of the Commons as the Nobility; The people were herewith contented,
thinking to abolish the Consulate, and to have their share in this highest
dignity Hence grew a notable accident, that when they came to create these
Tribuns, which they could have made all Plebeyans, the people chose Quorum
co^i^orum eventus docuit, alios animos in contentione libertatis and honoris
alios secundum deposita certamina incorrup to judicio esse.
them all out of the Nobility; whereupon Titus Livius uses these words: The
event of these assemblies, or Councils, showed, that minds differ much, when
contention is made for liberty or honor, and when all strife being appeased,
the judgments rest clear. And examining from whence this proceeds, I believe it
is from thence that men are more deceived in generalities, than in
particularities. The Common people of Rome thought generally, they deserved the
Consulate, because they were the greatest part of the City, because they
underwent the greater dangers in the wars, because they were they, by force of
whose arms Rome maintained her liberty, and became mighty. And thinking (as is
said) this their desire reasonable, they would have this authority in any case.
But when they came to pass their judgments in particular upon their own men,
they perceived their weakness, and judged that no one of them deserved that,
which raking them all together, they thought they had bin worthy of. So that
being ashamed of them, they had recourse to those that were of merit: At which
resolution Titus Livius worthily marvailing, says thus; This modesty,
uprightness, and greatness of mind, where shall Hanc modestiam equitatemque
Realitudinem animi ubi nunc in uno inveneris, quae tunc populi universi fuit.
you now adays find it in one man, which then was in whole people? In
confirmation hereof, another notable example may be brought which happened in
Capua, after that Hanniball had broken the Roman army at Cannae: upon which
occasion all Italy being in an uproar, Capua was ready to rise too, for the
hatred there was between the people and the Senate. And at that time Pacuvius
Calanus being the principal Magistrate, and perceiving the great hazard they
went to be slain by them, and the city yielded up to Hanniball, now that the
State of Rome was in distress. Afterward he added, that if they would let him
order the business, he would provide so, that they should be both friends; but
he would shut them all up in the Palace, and by giving the people power over
them to chastise them, save them. The Senators yielded to his advice, and he
called the people together, having the whole Senate shut up in the Palace, and
said, that the time was come wherein they might take down the Nobilities pride,
and revenge themselves on them for the injuryes they had received at their
hands, he holding them all prisoners in his keeping: but because he thought
they liked not their City should be without government, it was fit (being they
intended to kill the old Senators) to create new ones first. And therefore he
had put the names of all the Senators in a bag, and so would begin to draw them
forth one by one before them; and so put them to death presently, as soon as
they should have made choice of a Successor. And having begun to take out one,
when he was named, there was a great noise made, calling him a proud, cruel,
and arrogant man. And Pacu(...)vius requiring that they should make an exchange
of him, the whole multitudestood silent. And after a little while one of the
Commons was named: whereat one began to whistle, another to laugh, some to
speak in one sort, some in another. And so followed all the rest one after
another as they were named, being thought unworthy to be made Senators, so that
Pacuvius hereupon taking occasion, sayd' seeing that you judge that this City
must needs be in ill case without a Senate, and you are not agreed to change
your old Senators, I think it would be well that ye were made friends; for this
fright wherein the Senators have bin put will so humble them, that the
courtesy which ye sought otherwhere, ye shall find with them. And hereunto
being agreed, there followed the union; and it was plain, how they were
deceived, when they were forced to come to particulars. Besides, people in
judging generally of affairs and their accidents are beguiled, which they
afterward understand in particular, and perceive the deceit. After the year
1494. the Principal men of the City being chac't out of Florence, and there
being not any orderly government, but rather an ambitious licentiousness, so
that things went from bad to worse, many of the popular faction perceiving the
destruction of the City, and understanding no other cause thereof, they blamed
the ambition of some powerful man, that nourished these disorders, to the end
he might make of it a State to his own purpose, and take away the liberty; and
these men were always in the public places of meeting, speaking evil of many
Citizens, and threatening them, that if ever they came to the government of the
State, they would discover this their treachery and chastise it. It happened
oftentimes, that some of these or the like were preferred to the Principal
Magistracy, and when they were once in the place, and saw things nearer, they
knew well the disorders from whence they grew, and the dangers that hung over
them, and the difficulty to remedy them. And having seen how the times and not
the men caused the disorder, became forthwith of another mind, and changed
their opinion. For the knowledge of things in particular took away that deceit,
which when they considered generally, was presupposed in them: so that they
that had first, when they were private men, heard them speak, and saw them
afterward being preferred to the chief Magistracy stand quiet, thought it came
not from an exacter knowledge of things, but because they had bin carried away,
and corrupted by the great ones. And this befalling many men many times, it
came to a Proverb, that said, these are of one mind in the piazza, and of
another in the palace. Considering therefore this whole discourse, we see, how
a man may quickly open the peoples eyes, for seeing that a generality deceives
them, it is expedient to bring them to descend to particulars, as Pacuvius did
in Capua, and the Senate in Rome. I think also, this may pass for a conclusion,
that no wise man ought to avoid the peoples judgment in particular things,
about the distributions of degrees and dignities: for only in this the people
are not deceived; or if sometime they are deceived, it is very seldom; but a
few men are oftentimes deceived, when they are to make the like distribution:
Nor do I take it to be superfluous, to show, in the next Chapter, the order the
Senate held to clear the peoples judgments in these distributions.

CHAP. XLVIII.
He that would not have a Magistracy given to one that is base and lewd, let
him cause it to be demanded either by one that is very base and lewd, or by one
that is noble and very good.

WHen the Senate was afraid that the Tribuns with Consular authority would be
chosen out of the Plebeyans, they held one of these two courses to prevent it:
either they made some of the best reputed men of Rome stand for the magistracy,
or they used fit means to corrupt some forbid Plebeyan and of the basest
condition, who crept in to be competitor with the Plebeyans that usually of the
best quality stood for it. This last way made the people ashamed to bestow it,
and the first ashamed to refuse it, all which turns to the purpose of our
former discourse: where its showed, though the people be deceived in generals,
yet is it not in particulars.

CHAP. XLIX.
If those cities that have had their beginning free, as Rome, have found
difficulty to make laws that can maintain them; so those that have had their
beginning immediately servile, find almost an impossibility of it.

How hard a thing it is, in the ordering of a Republique to make provision of
all such laws as may keep it free, the proceedings of the Roman Republique does
well show; Where notwithstanding that many laws were made first by R^mulus,
after by Numa, Tullus Hostilius, and Servius, and last by the ten Citizens
created for the like work, nevertheless always in the managing of that city
new necessities were discovered, and it was needful to make new laws: as it
befell when they created the Censours, which was one of those orders that
helped to keep Rome free at that time when she lived in liberty: for being made
Arbiters of the fashions and manners of Rome, they were a special occasion that
Rome held off so long from being corrupted. Indeed in the beginning of that
Magistracy they committed one error creating it for five years: but not long
after wards it was amended by the wisdom of Mamercus the Dictator, who, by a
new law he made, reduced the said magistracy to the terms of eighteen months.
Which the Censour, that were then in office took so much a miss that they put
Mamercus out of the Senate' which thing was much blamed both by the people and
the fathers. And because the story shows not any where, that Mamercus could
defend himself, it must needs be, that either the historian was defective, or
the laws of Rome in this part not perfect: for it is not well, that in a
Commonwealth it should so be ordein'd, that a citizen for publishing a law
agreeable to the liberty they lived in, should be wronged without any remedy,
But returning to the beginning of this discourse; I say, that a man ought to
consider by the creation of this new magistrate, that if those cities that have
had their beginnings free, and were under their own government, as Rome, with
much ado can find out good laws to maintain them free, it is no marvel, that
those cities which have had their beginnings immediately servile, have not found
not only difficulty, but impossibity ever so to order themselves, that they
can quietly come to a civil government, as appears it befell the city of
Florence, because her beginning was in Subjection to the Roman Empire, and
having gotten leisure to breathe, began to make her own laws, which having bin
mingled with the ancient, that were naught, could not work any good effect, and
thus she proceeded in a government for 200 years (as we have by certain
relations) without ever attaining to such a condition, that she could truly be
termed a Republique: and these difficulties which she has had, have those
Cities always had whose beginnings have bin like hers And though many times by
public and free voices ample authority has bin given to some few Citizens to
reform this, yet never have they ordered it to the advantage of the public,
but to serve the turn of their own faction, which has caused more disorder,
then order in the City. And to come to some particular example, I say, among
other things which he that ordains a Republique should consider, is, that he
well advise to what men he gives the power of life and death over his Citizens.
This was well provided for in Rome; for by ordinary course they might appeal to
the people: yet if there were any occasion of importance, where, to delay
execution, by means of the appeal, was dangerous, they had the help of a
Dictator, who had power immediately to execute; which remedy they never used,
but upon necessity. But Florence and other Cities beginning as she did, that is
servile, had this authority committed always to a stranger, who was sent by
the Prince, to this purpose. When afterward they became free, they continued
this authority in a stranger, whom they called their Captain. Which thing,
because he might easily be corrupted by the potent Citizens, was very
pernicious. But afterward this order chagning upon the alteration of the
states, they ordained eight Citizens, to supply the Captains place. Which order
of evil became very evil, for the reasons we have otherwhere alleged, that a
few are always servants of a few, and especially of the most wealthy: from
which the City of Veuice is well guarded, which has ten citizens, who have
power to punish any Citizen without appeal: and because they would not be of
sufficient force to punish those that are potent, though they have the
authority they have ordained the Quarantie, or council of forty: and besides,
they have taken care, that the council of the Pregai, which is the chiefer
council, may punish them: so that, where there is no want of an accuser, they
are never destitute of a Judge, to restrain the great men's insolency. There is
then no marvail (seeing that in Rome ordered by it self, and by so many sage
persons, there grew every day new occasions, whereupon new laws were to be
made in favor of the Common liberty) if in other Cities which have had their
beginnings more disordered, there arise such difficulties that put them quite
past all recovery.

CHAP. L.
The power of stopping the public actions of the city, should not be given
into the hands of one council, or one magistracy.

TItus Quincius Cincinnatus; and Cneus Julius Mentus were Consuls together in
Rome, who upon a quarrel arisen between them two, made a stay in all the
actions belonging to the Republique: which the Senate seeing, persuaded them to
create a Dictator, to the end that might be done, which, by reason of their
discord, was hindered. But the Consuls disagreeing in every thing else, in this
alone were of accord both of them, not to make a Dictator: so that the Senate
finding no other help, desired assistance from the Tribuns, who with the
Senates authority forced the Consuls to obey. Where the profitable use of the
Tribunate is in the first place remarkable, which served to good purpose to
bridle the great men's ambitions exercised not only against the Common people,
but also among themselves: in the next place, that it should never be so
ordained in a city, that a few should resolve of those things that are the
ordinary maintenance of a Commonwealth. For example, if thou give the power
to one Consul to make a distribution of honors and profits, or to a Magistrate
to dispatch some business to be done, it is fit to impose a necessity on him,
that he do it in any case, or so provide that another might and should do it:
otherwise the order would be defective, and perilous, as we see it was in Rome,
unless they could have opposed the Consuls obstinacy with the Tribuns
authority. In the Commonwealth of Venice the great council bestows both the
honors and the profits. It sometime chanced, that the universality upon some
disdain conceived, or by reason of some false suggestion did not make choice
of any successors to the Magistrates of their Cities, nor to their Ministers
of State abroad, which was a very great disorder; for all at once, their Towns
and Cities wanted their lawful Judges; nor could any thing be obtained while
the universality were appeased, or were no longer deceived. And this
inconvenient would have brought those Cities to ill terms, had not some
discreet Citizens otherwise taken order for them. Who having laid hold of a fit
occasion, made a law, that all the Magistrates within or without the City
should continue still in their offices, till new choice were made, and their
successors appointed. And thus they took away from that counsel all
opportunity of enabling them, with the Commonwealths danger, to stop the
public actions.

CHAP. LI.
A Commonwealth or Prince should make a show to do that of a free mind, which
indeed mere necessity compells them to do.

WIse men gain themselves always the thanks of every thing in their actions,
although in truth mere necessity constraines them in any case to do them.
This discretion was well made use of by the Roman Senate, when they resolved
to ad a daily stipend out of the Common treasury to those that served in the
wars; it being then of custom there to serve as their own proper charges.
But the Senate ceiving, that after that manner they could not long make war;
and hereupon neither could they besiege towns, nor lead their armies far
off; and judging it needful they should do the one and the other, they
determined to allow the said stipends, which they did in such a way, that they
got themselves thanks for that, to which they were bound by necessity. And
this present was so acceptable to the people, that all Rome seemed overjoyed
with it, they thinking it to be a great benefit, which they never had hopes of,
nor of themselves had ever sought after. And though the Tribuns did their best
to blot out these thanks, by showing it was a matter of grievance and not of
case to the people, seeing of necessity they were to impose greater taxes on
them, wherewith to pay these stipends, yet could they not prevayle so much, but
that the people took it very thankfully. Which also the Senate augmented by
the course they took in ordering of the tributes. For the greatest and
heaviest were those they laid upon the Nobility, and so were those that were
first paid.

CHAP. LII.
To stay the insolence of one that grows powerful in a Commonwealth, there is
no way more secure, and less offensive, than to seike before hand, and so
prevent him of those ways by which he attains to that power.

We see by the above written discourse, how great credit the Nobility got with
the people, upon the demonstrations make for their advantage, as well by the
stipend appoined, as also by the course they took in imposing the taxes: in
which way if the Nobility had continued, they had wholly avoided all manner of
tumult in that City, and they had taken from the Tribuns the credit they had
with the people, and by consequence their authority. And truly it is not
possible in a Commonwealth, especially in those that are corrupted, by any
better way, less hurtful, and more easy to oppose the ambition of any
Citizen, than to prepossesse those ways, by which a man perceives he takes his
course, to attain that dignity he aims at. Which means if they had put in
practice against Cosmus of Medici, his adversaries had gotten more by the
bargain, than by chasing him from Florence: For if those Citizens that were at
brabble with him had taken the course to favor the people, they had without
any imbroyle or violence taken out of his hands those weapons which were to him
of greatest advantage. Peter Soderini gained himself credit with this only in
the City of Florence, that he favou'd the universality. Which universality
gave him the repute, to be a lover of the Cities liberty. And surely for those
Citizens that envyed his greatness, it was much easier, and had bin a
business of fairer carriage, of less danger and damage to the Commonwealth,
to lay hold before hand of those ways by which he became great, than by
offering to oppose him, lest that in ruining him, the whole remainder of the
Commonwealth also should have fallen to ruin. For if they could have taken
out of his hands the forces whereby he became strong, which they might easily
have done, they could in all their public counsels and resolutions have
opposed him without suspicion or regard. And if any man should reply, that if
the Citizens that hated Peter committed an orrour in not prepossessing the
ways whereby he gained upon the people: Peter also came to commit an error in
not laying hold beforehand of those ways by which his adversaries frighted
him: I answer, that Peter deserves excuse, as well because it was hard for him
to do it, as because the means were not fit for him to use. For the ways by
which he was hurt, were to favor the house of Medici, by which favors they
overmaster'd him, and at last ruined him. Yet Peter could not fairly take his
part, because he could not with any good repute destroy that liberty, over
which he was appointed as guardian; and seeing these favors could not pass in
private, they were suddenly exceeding dangerous to Peter: for what way soever
it had bin that he had bin discovered to be a friend of the Medici, he had
fallen into the jealousy, and incurred the hatred of the people. Whereupon his
enemies had had greater power to suppress him, then formerly they had.
Therefore men ought in every resolution, consider the defects and dangers
thereunto belonging, and not fasten on any one of them, when they carry with
them more danger then profit, notwithstanding that they seem well to tend to
the end propounded: for being otherwise, in this case it would befall them, as
it befell Tullius, who by going about to diminish Marc Antonius his power,
increased it. For Marc Antonius being judged an enemy of the Senate, and he
having got together a great army, good part whereof had followed Caesar's
faction, Tullius to take these soldiers from him, persuaded the Senate to set
up the reputation of Octavianus, and seng him accompanied with the Consuls, and
an army against Marc Antonius; alleging, that so soon as ere the soldiers
that followed Marc Antonius should hear the name of Octavianus, Caesar's
nephew, and that would be called Caesar too, they would forsake the other, and
follow this. So that Marc Antonius being dispossessed of his advantages would
easily be suppressed. Which fell out clean contrary. For Marc Antonius got
Octavianus to his part, who leaving (...)lius and the Senate joined forces with
him. Which thing proov'd wholly the ruin of those great men's party. Which also
it was easy to have conjectured: nor was that credible which Tullius persuaded
himself; but he should rather have made account, that neither that name that
with so great glory had exterminated his enemies, and gained himself the
principality in Rome, nor yet his heirs, or adherents, would ever suffer them
quietly to enjoy their liberty.

CHAP. LIII.
The people deceived by a false show of good oftentimes seek their own ruin;
and that great hope and large promises do easily move them.

WHen the ^yentes City was taken, the people of Rome were possessed of an
opinion, that it would be profitable for them to send half the Romans to dwell
at Veyum: and because that City had a plentiful country about it, frequent
with buildings, and near neighboring to Rome, half of the Roman Citizens
might thereby be enrich't, without giving any disturbance to the civil
government by reason of their near situation. Which thing the Senate and the
graver Romans thought so unprofitable or rather so hurtful, that they freely
professed, they would rather suffer death, then agree to any such matter: so
that the business coming to dispute, did so iorage the people against the
Senate, that they had come to blows and to blood, had not some of the graver
and reverenter Citizens opposed themselves against their fury; whose regard
bridled the people so, that they proceeded not in their insolency. Here two
things are to be noted, the first, (...) people many times deceived by an
imaginary good, cover their own ruin; and unless they be given to
understand, which is the evil, and which the good, by some man they trust, the
Republiques ordinarily run much hazard. And when it so falls out, that the
people has no great confidence in any one, as sometimes it comes to pass,
having bin of late deceived either by things, or men, of necessity they go to
ruin. And Dante, to this purpose, says, in his discourse of a Monarchy:

A populo molte volte grida,
Viva la sua morte amocoia lavita
The vulgar oftimes their own ruin choose
And life for death ignorantly refuse.
From this increduliti(...)ises, that sometimes in Commonwealths good courses
are not taken, as formerly it was said touching the Venetians, when being set
upon by so many enemies, they could not resolve till they were quite ruined, to
gain any of them again, by restitution of what they had wrongfully taken
Whereupon war was made against them, and a conspiracy of the Princes.
Wherefore when we consider here, that which is easy, and that which is hard to
persuade a people to, this distinction is to be made. Either, that which thou
art to persuade them to, represents at the first view gain or loss; or is a
course that carries somewhat in it of courage or cowardice, And when in things
that are propounded to the people, there appears advantage, though cover ly
therebe disadvantage in it; and when it seems courageous, though underneath
there be covertly hid the destruction of the Republique, it will always be
very easy to draw the multitude thereto. And so likewise it will be always
very difficult to persuade them to those courses, where there appears either
cowardice or loss, though when it is better weighed and advised upon, therein
is contained both safety and advantage. And what I have said is confirmed with
very many examples of the Romans, as also with those from abroad, both modern
and ancient. For from hence grew the evil opinion which was raised in Rome of
Fab Max. who could not persuade the people of Rome, that it was profitable for
that commonwealth to proceed slowly in that war, and to sustain and bear up
against Hanniballs violence without fighting: for the people deemed it a base
course, nor had they judgment to discern the advantage there was to be gotten
by it: nor had Fab. reasons sufficient to make it plain by demonstrations: and
ordinarily the people are so much blinded in these opinions of courage, that
though they of Rome had committed that error to give power to him that was
Commander of the horse under Fab. to fight with Hannib. whether F. would or no,
and that by reason thereof the Roman army had like to have bin broken, if F.
had not succourd it, yet this experience served them not, but that they
afterward made Varro C. not for any other worth of his, but because in all
meetings and public places of Rome, he had bragged he would discomfit Han.
whenever he had power given him to do it: whence came the battle and
discomfiture at Cannae, and near upon the ruin of Rome. I will allege one
other To. example. Hanniball had bin in Italy 8. or 10. years, and had filled
the whole country full of bloody slaughters of the Romans, when there came into
the Senate one M. Centenius Penula, a very base fellow, yet he had had some
place of charge in the army; And offered, that if they would give him
authority to leavy an army of voluntaries, in what place soever it were in
Italy, he would in a short time deliver into their hands Hanniball, either
prisoner or dead. The Senate thought his demand very rash, yet they considering
that if it were denied him, and afterward his motion were made known to the
people, that some trouble might arise thereupon, and so the evil will and envy
thereof light upon the Senate, they yielded to him, being content rather to
suffer the hazard of all those that went out with him, then to give any
occasion of raising new discontents among the people, considering how likely
this course was to be acceptable, and how hard to be dissuaded. He went then
with this inordinate and rude multitude to seek out Hanniball, with whom he no
sooner met, but he and all his troops were either slain or routed. In Greece
in the city of Athens, Nicias a very grave and discreet man, could never
persuade the people that it was not for their good to go and undertake an
expedition against Sicily, so that they having resolved thereupon, contrary to
the wise men's likeings, there ensued the whole ruin of Athens. Scipio when he
was made Consul, and that he desired the province of Affricke, promising the
utter ruin of Carthage, whereunto the Senate not agreeing by the advice of
Fabius Maximus, threatened to propound it to the people, as he that well knew
how such like resolutions pleased them. We could also to this purpose lay down
some examples of our own city, as was that of Hercules Betivogli, commander
for the Florentines, together with Antoni Giacomini; after they had routed
Bartolomeus Alvianus at Saint Vincenti, they went to incampe before Pisa, which
enterprise was resolved on by the people upon the brave promises Hercules made
them; though many discreet citizens did no way like of it, yet they could not
hinder it, thrust on by the general desire, which was grounded on the
commanders large promises. I say therefore, that there is not an easier way to
enlarge a Commonwealth, where the people has the authority, then to put them
into brave undertakings. For where the people is of any worth or valor, those
will be always well liked of, and if any man be of different opinion, he shall
not be of force to persuade it. But if hereupon comes the destruction of the
city, thence proceeds also, and most ordinarily the particular ruin of those
citizens who are made the commanders of such like undertakings; for the people
having presupposed the victory, when they go by the loss, never impute it to
their General's evil fortune or want of sufficient forces, but blame him
rather of treason or ignorance, and so either put him to death, imprison or
confine him, as it befell very many Carthaginian Captains, and Athenians. Nor
shall any of the former victories gloriously gotten, afterward shelter them,
for the present mishap cancels the records of all good past: as it befell
Antoni Giacomini our country man here, who not having overcome the Pisans, as
the people presupposed, and he had promised, fell into such disgrace with the
people, that for all his many good services past, he lived rather by the
courtesy of those that having power with the people, protected him, then by any
assurance else was given him.

CHAP. LIVE.
What authority the presence of great and worthy personages has to appease and
quiet the rage of a multitude.

THe second thing remarkable upon the text alleged in the former Chapter is,
that nothing so readily restrains the fury of a multitude enraged, as the
reverence of some grave man coming among them, as Virgil says to the same
purpose, and not without reason.

Tum pietate gravem ac meritis si forte virum quem
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus astant. If then by chance some
reverent man they spy,
They all grow silent, and their ears ap(...)


And therefore that man of worth and merit, that either has the command of an
army, or that abides in a city where a tumult arises, ought represent himself
upon the occasion, with the greatest grace, and in as honorable terms as may
be, cladding himself with the ornaments belonging to his degree and quality, to
gain him the more reverence. A few years ago, Florence was divided into two
factions, of the Frateschi and Arrabiati, for so they were called: and coming
to blows, the Frateschi were overcome, among whom was Paul Antonius Sodorini,
a citizen of great esteem in those days: and the people in the time of those
tumults going in arms to sack his house, Franciscus his brother then Bishop of
Valterra, and now Cardinal, was by chance in his house, who presently having
perceived the stir, and seen the multitude coming, clad himself with his most
honorable vestments and thereupon his episcopal rochet, and so met these armed
people, where by the awfulness of his person and good words he staid them:
Which thing throughout the City for many days was much noted and celebrated. I
conclude then that there is not a more settled nor more necessary remedy to stop
the fury of a multitude, then the presence of such a man, who in his aspect and
worth brings an awful reverence with him. And thereupon we see (to return to
the text formerly alleged) with what obstinacy the Commons of Rome accepted
the party, to go to Veium, thinking it advantageous to them, but never
considering the mischief therein involved; and how being there arose diverse
tumults upon the occasion, there would have bin harm done, had not the Senate
accompanied with many grave and reverent personages restrained their fury.

CHAP. LV.
How easily things are ordered in a city where the people is not corrupted: and
that where a parity is there is no place for a Principallity; and where that is
not, a Republique cannot be.

ALthough that heretofore we have sufficiently treated, what is to be feared
and what to be hoped for of Cities that are corrupted: yet methinks it is not
out of purpose to consider a resolution the Senate took, touching the vow
Camillus made, to give the tenth part of the prey they took from the Veientes,
to Apollo. Which prey being fallen into the peoples hands, seeing they could no
otherwise ever see any account of it, the Senate made an edict, that every one
should publicly produce the tenth part of what he had gotten in the spoil of
Veium. And though this resolution took not place, the Senate having afterward
found out another expedient, and by other means given satisfaction to Apollo
for the people, yet we perceive by these determinations, how much the Senate
trusted in the peoples goodness and how they judged, that there was not one of
them but would punctually bring forth what he was commanded by the edict. And
on the other side, how the people thought not in any part to deceive the edict,
by giving less then was due, but rather to free themselves therefrom, by
showing their open distaste at such course taken. This example with many
others, above alleged, give very good evidence of the great goodness and
religion was in that people, and what might be hoped for of them. And truly
where this goodness is not, little can be hoped for: as we can hope for nothing
in those countries, which in these days we see corrupted, as in Italy above
others, so France and Spain retain a part of the same corruption: and if in
those countries we see not so great disorders as every day arise in Italy, it
proceeds not so much from the peoples goodness (which is very much failed) as
from that they are under one King who keeps them together in union, not only
by his virtue, but by the ordinary course of government in those Kingdoms,
which is not yet quite perverted. This goodness is yet seen in Germany, and
this kind of conscience is also of great force with those people, which is the
occasion that many Republiques continue free, and do so strictly observe their
own laws, that no foreign enemy abroad, nor ambitious man at home, dares offer
to seize on them. And to prove this true, that in those countries there remain
still the marks of that ancient goodness, I will give another example, like to
that abovesaid of the Senate and of the people of Rome. Those Republiques use,
when they chance to have need of any money they lay out for the common good,
that the Magistrates, or the Consuls, having, authority, should tax the
inhabitants of the city one or two in the hundred, of that which every man is
worth. And such a resolution being made according to the order of the town,
every man comes besore thereceivers of that tax, and having first taken an oath
to pay a convenient sum, he throws into a chest, appointed to that purpose,
what in his conscience he thinks he should pay. Of which payment there is no
other witness, but he that pays. Whereby we may well guess at the great good
and religion there is yet left among those men. And we may well think, that
every one pays the due sum; for if it were not paid, the imposition would not
yield that quantity, as those of old time were wont to do: which failing, the
deceit would appear: whereupon they would seek some other means to leavy their
moneys, then this. Which goodness is so much the more to be admired in these
times, because it is very rare, or rather remains only in this country. Which
proceeds from two things, the one, because they have not had much commerce with
their neighbors; for neither have these gone into their countries, nor they
come to visit these, because they have bin contented with those goods, to feed
on those victuals, and to be clad with those wools, which the country affords;
whereby is taken away the occasion of all conversation, and the beginning of
all corruption. For so they could not learn the French, Spanish, or Italian
manners, which nations together corrupt the whole world. The other reason is,
because those Republiques where the common liberty is preserved, and
uncorrupted, do not permit that any citizen of theirs should live after the
manner of a gentleman, but rather maintain among them an equality; and those
that live in that country are cruel enemies to the Lords and Gentlemen. And if
by chance they fall into their hands, they put them to death, as the principal
authors of corruption, and occasions of scandal. And to make plain this name of
gentlemen what it is, I say, that those are called gentlemen, that live in
idleness, yet deliciously, of the profits of their estates, without having any
care to cultivate their lands, or to take any other pains necessary to the
maintenance of man's life. These kind of men are very hurtful in every
Commonwealth, and country; but worse are they, that, besides the foresaid
fortunes, hold strong Castles, and have vassals that obey them. With these two
sorts of men the Kingdom of Naples abounds. the country about Rome, Romagna,
and Lombardia. This is the cause, that in those countries there has never bin
any Republique nor any civil government: for such kinds of men are enemies to
all civil government. And if a man had a mind to bring into such countries the
form of a Commonwealth, he would find it impossible; but to bring them under
some order, if any man had the power, he could take no other course, then
reduce them to a Royalty. The reason is this, because where the matter is so
extremely corrupted, that the laws are not able to restrain it, it is needful
to ordain together with them a greater power, which is the authority of a King,
who by his absolute and extraordinary power may be of force to bridle the
excessive ambition and corruption of the mighty. This reason is verified in the
example of Tuscany: where we see that in a small space of country three
Republiques have long consisted, Florence, Siena, and Lucca; and that the other
cities of that country serve in such a kind, that they have their dispositions
and their orders much like them, and that they would willingly maintain the
common liberty, all this arises from hence, because there are no lords of
Castles in those countries, and never a one, or very few Gentlemen; but such
equality, that an understanding man that has applied himself to the knowledge
of the ancient civil governments, might easily reduce them to a free state. But
their misfortune has bin so great, that as yet they have not lit upon any man
that had either the power or knowledge to put it in execution. This conclusion
then I draw from hence, that he that strives to frame a Republique where there
are many gentlemen, cannot do it, unless he first dspatch them all out of the
way: and he that would erect a Monarchy or a Principallity where there is much
equality, shall never effect it, unless he draws out of that equality many of
ambitious and turbulent minds, and makes them rather gentlemen in effect, then
in title, enriching them with Castles, and possessions, allowing them the favor
of wealth and men, to the end that he being placed in the midst of them, by
their means may maintain his power, and they by his favor preserve their
ambition, and the rest be constrained to bear that yoke which force and nothing
else can make them endure. And there being by this way a proportion from him
that forces, to him that is forced, thereby men continue settled every one in
their order. And because to bring a country to be a Republique which is fit to
be a Kingdom, and of one fit to be a Republique to make a Kingdom, is a
subject worthy of a man of extraordinary judgment and authority; many there
have bin that have endeavored it, but few have bin able to go through with it:
because the weight and consequence thereof partly frights them, and partly so
overbears them, that they fail in their first beginnings. I think the
experience we have of the Republique of Venice will seem a little to contrary
my opinion, that where there are gentlemen, a Republique cannot be instituted:
for there none can partake of the dignities, unless they be gentlemen. The
answer hereto is, that this example makes no opposition against us; for the
gentlemen in that Republique are rather in name, then in effect: for they have
not great revenues out of possessions, and lands, but their great wealth is
founded upon merchandise, and moveable goods; and moreover none of them hold
any Castles, or have any jurisdiction over men: but the name of gentleman among
them is a name of honor and credit, not being grounded upon any of those things
that caused those in other cities to be called gentlemen. And as other
Republiques have all their divisions under several names, so Venice is divided
into the Gentility, and the Commonalty; and their order is, that those are
capable of all honors, these not. Which is not any cause of imbroile among
them, for the reasons we have other where said. Let a Commonwealth then be
there ordained, where allthings are reduced to an equality; and contrariwise,
let a Prince be made, where great inequality is; otherwise shall there be
neither proportion nor continuance.

CHAP. LVI.
Before strange accidents and changes befall a City or a country, usually
there are some prodigies which forerun them, or men that foretell them.

FRom whence this proceeds I know not, but it is evident as well by ancient as
modern examples, that no very heavy accident ever befell any country or City,
that has not bin foretold either by some Diviners, or by some revelations, or
prodigies, or signs from heaven. And not to go too far from home to fetch the
proof hereof, every one knows how long before the coming of Charles the eighth
of France into Italy was foretold by Friar Jerome Savanarola: and how besides
this, it was said throughout all Tuscany, that there were heard in the air,
and seen over Arrezzo, many men in arms skirmishing together. Moreover we all
know here that before Laurens of Medici the old man's death the Duemo or
principal Church was fired with lightning on the top, even to the ruin
thereof. Nor is any man here ignorant how a little before that Peter Soderini,
who had bin made the Florentines chief Standard Bearer for life, was banished
and deprived of his dignities, the Palace was in the same manner burnt with
lightning. A man might allege other examples beside these, but I leave them
rather to avoid tediousness. I shall relate that only which Titus Livius
speaks of, before the the Frenchmens coming to Rome, and that is, how one
Marcus Ceditius a Plebeyan told the Senate, that he had heard at midnight, as
he past by the new way, a voice greater than any man's, which warned him to tell
the Magistrates that the Frenchmen were coming to Rome. The reason hereof I
think fit to be discoursed upon, and treated of by some man well versed in the
knowledge of natural and supernatural things, which I profess not. Yet it may
be, as some Philosophers will have it, that the air being full of spirits, who
by their natural knowledge foreseeing things to come take compassion upon men,
and advertise them by such like signs, to the end they should prepare
themselves for their defense. But however it is, we may find it true, that
always after such strange accidents, new and extraordinary chances befall
countries.

CHAP. LVII.
The Common people united are strong and vigorous, but taken apart and
separated, vile and contemptible.

MAny Romans (the country all about being much ruined and wasted upon the
Frenchmens passage to Rome) were gone to dwell at Veyum, contrary to the
appointment and order of the Senate; who, to remedy this disorder, commanded by
their public edicts, that every one within a set time, under a certain
penalty, should return to inhabit at Rome. At which edicts at first, they
against whom they were directed, scoffed; but afterward, when the time drew
near that they were to obey, they all yielded their obedience. And Titus Livius
uses Ex ferocibus universis singt, metu suo obedientes fuere.
these words: Of fierce that they were all in general, each one out of his
particular fear became obedient. And truly the nature of a multitude in this
particular cannot better be laid open, than here in this Text it is showed: for
the multitude is many times very insolent in their speeches against their
Princes decrees. Afterward when they see their punishment near and certain,
not trusting to one another, they hasten all to obedience; so that it plainly
appears, that a man ought to have regard to the good or ill disposition of the
people toward him; if it be good, to take such order that it may still
continue; if ill, to provide so that it cannot hurt him. This is meant for
those ill dispositions which the people have bred in them upon any other
occasion, than for the loss of their liberty, or for the love of their Prince,
who is yet living. For the evil humors that arise from these causes are
terrible beyond measure, and have need of great remedies to restrain them.
Their other indispositions will be easy, when they have not made choice of any
heads, to whom they may have their recourse: for on oneside, there is not a
more dreadful thing, than a dissolute multitude, and without a head: and on
the other side, there is nothing weaker then it; for though they have their
weapons in their hands, yet will it be easy to reduce them, provided that thou
can avoid the first shock of their fury: for when their rage is a little
appeased and every one considers that he is to return again to his home, they
begin then a little to doubt of themselves, and to take a care for their
safety, either by flight or agreement. Therefore a multitude up in arms,
desiring to escape these dangers, is to make ehoyce of a head out of themselves
who may direct them, keep them united, and provide for their defense, as did
the common people of Rome, when after the death of Verginia, they departed from
Rome, and for their own preservations, they chose 20 Tribuns from among
themselves: which if they do not, there allwaies befalls them that which Titus
Livius says in his above written discourse, that jointly together they are of
strength and vigor; but when each one afterward begins to advise of his own
danger, they become weak and contemptible.

CHAP. LVIII.
The multitude is more wise and constant, then a Prince.

THat nothing is more vain or inconstant than the multitude, as well our Author
Titus Livius, as all other Historians do affirm: for we find it often in the
relations of men's actions, that the multitude has condemned some man to death,
whom afterward they have grieved for and exceedingly wished for again: as we
see the people of Rome did for Manlius Capitolinus, whom after they had
condemned to death, they much desired again. And these are the words of the
Author. The people, after that by Populus brevi, post ^quam ab eo periculum
(...)rat, desiderium (...)
his death they perceived themselves free from danger, wished him alive again.
And in another place, when he shows the accidents that followed in (...)cusa
after the death of Hieronymus, Hie(...) nephew, he says, This is the Haec
natura multitudinis est; aut humiliter servit aut superbe dominatur.
nature of the multitude, that they are either slavish in their obedience, or
insolent in their auihority. I know not, whether herein I undertake not too
hard a task, so full of difficulties, that I must either give it over with
shame, or continue it with blame, having a desire to defend that, which, as I
have said, is accused by all writers. But however it be, I do not judge it, nor
ever will, a defect to defend some opinions with their reasons, without any
intention to use either authority or force. Therefore I say, that of that
defect whereof those writers accuse the multitude, all men in particular are
guilty, and especially Princes: for every one that is not regulated by the
laws would commit the same errors which the loose multitude does. And this we
may easily know, for there are and have bin many evil Princes; and virtuous and
discreet ones but a few. I speak of Princes, that have bin able to break the
bridle that could check them; among whom we reckon not those that were in
Egypt, when in that very ancientest antiquity that country was governed by the
laws; nor those of Spavta, nor those that in our days are in France, which
Kingdom is ordered more by the laws, than any other which in these times we
have knowledge of. And these Kings which grow up under such constitutions are
not to be accounted in that number, from whence we are to consider the nature
of every man by himself, and discern if he be like the multitude: for in
parallel with them, we should set down a multitude in like manner regulated by
the laws, as they are, and therein shall be found the same goodness that is in
them: and we shall see they neither insolently domineere, nor slavishly serve,
as the people of Rome, which whilst the Republique continued uncorrupted,
never served basely, nor ruled proudly, but with their own customs, and
Magistrates held their own degree honorably. And when it was necessary to rise
up against one that were powerful, they did it, as it appeared in the example
of Manlius, and in that of the ten, and others, who went about to oppress them.
And when it was requisite they should obey the Dictators, and the Consuls, for
the common safety, they did it likewise: and if the people of Rome desired
again Manlius Capitolinus being dead, it is no marvail; for they desired his
virtues, which had bin such, that the remembrance of them moved every one to
compassion, and might be of force likewise to work the same effect in a Prince:
for it is the opinion of all writers, that virtue is commended even in ones
enemies. And if Manlius, in the midst of that great desire had bin revived, the
people of Rome would have given the same judgment upon him that they had done
when they drew him out of prison, and condemned him to death. In like manner we
see there were some Princes esteemed wise too, that have put some men to death,
whom afterward they have much desired again; as Alexander did Clitus, and
others of his friends, and Herod Mariamme. But that which our Historian speaks
touching the nature of the multitude, belongs not to that which is regulated by
the laws, as was that of the Romans, but to that which is loose, as was that
of the Syracusians, which committed those errors that men enraged and dissolute
fall into, as did Alexander the Great, and Herod, in the cases aforesaid.
Therefore the nature of the multitude is not more blameworthy, than that of
Princes: for all equally do err, when all without respect have power to err.
Whereof, besides this I have alleged, there are examples enough, as well
among the Roman Emperors, as other Kings and Princes, where we may see such
unconstancy and variation of life, as never was yet seen in any multitude. I
conclude then, beyond the common opinion, which says, that the people when
they have the Principallity in their hands, are various, mutable, unthankful,
affirming that these faul^s are no otherwise in them, than they are in
particular Princes. And if a man blamed both peoples and Princes together, he
might say true; but exempting Princes, he is deceived. For a people that rules,
and is well in order, will be constant, prudent and grateful, as well as a
Prince, or better, though esteemed wise. And on the other side, a Prince
loosened from the law will be unthankful, various, and imprudent, more than
the people: and the diversity of their proceeding arises not from the
diversity of their dispositions (because in all of them it is much after one
manner, and if there be any advantage on either side, it is on the peoples
part) but rather that the one has more regard to the laws under which they
live, than the other. And he that considers the people of Rome, shall find that
for four hundred years the name of a King was hateful to them, and yet were
they zealous for the glory, and common good of their country: and he shall see
many examples among them that witness the one thing, and the other of them And
if any man allege to me the unthankfulness they used toward Scipio, I
answer that which formerly at large was said in this matter, where it was made
plain, that people are less ungrateful than Princes. But as touching
wisdom, and settled stayednesse, I say that a people is wiser and more stayed,
and of more exact judgment than a Prince. And therefore not without cause the
peoples voice is likened to Gods voice; for we see that the universal
opinions bring to pass rare effects in their presages, so that it seems by
their secret virtues they foresee their own good or evil. And touching their
judgment in things, it is seldom seen, that when they hear two Orators,
pleading each of them a contrary part, when they are both of equal worth, but
that they follow the better opinion, and are very capable of the truth they
hear. And if in matters of courage, or in things that appear profitable (as
it was abovesayd) they err, many times also does a Prince err, drawn aside
by his own passions, which are greater in them then in the people. We see
likewise in their choosing of Officers, they make a far better choice then
does a Prince. Nor will a people ever be persuaded to advance to dignity a man
infamous and of a corrupt life, to which a Prince may easily and diverse ways
be brought. We see a people begin to hate some one thing, and continue many
ages in the same opinion, which we see not it a Prince. And of the one and the
other of these two things, the people of Rome shall serve me for witness,
which in so many hundreds of years, in so many electio(...) of Consulls and
Tribuns, never made four choices, whereof they had cause to repent them. And
they hated so much (as I said) the name of a King, that no citizen of theirs
could ever so far oblige them, that if once he affected the Royalty, they
would pardon his due punishment. Moreover we see, that in those cities where
the Principality is in the people, in a short time exceeding great increases
are made, and far greater then those that have bin made under the government
of a Prince, as Rome did after the banishment of her Kings, and Athens after
she freed her self from Pisistratue; which proceeds from nothing else, but
that the peoples governments are better then Princes. Nor will we agree to
this, that all that our Historian says in the text before alleged, or any
where else, opposes this our opinion; for if we shall run over all the
disorders of peoples, and the disorders of Princes, and all the glorious
actions of people, as those also of Princes, we shall see the people far
surmount the Princes in virtue and in glory. And if Princes exceed the people
in ordaining of Laws, in framing a civil government, in making of statutes
and new institutions, yet in the maintenance and preservation hereof the people
go so far beyond them, that they attain to the glory of their founders. And
in sum, to conclude this matter, I say, that as Princes states have lasted
long, so likewise have those of Republiques; and the one and the other have had
need to be regulated by the laws: for a Prince that has the power to do what
he list, commits diverse follies; and a people that can do what they will,
seldom give great proofs of their wisdom. If then the argument be touching a
Prince and a people tied and chained to their laws, a man shall see more
virtue in the People, then in the Prince: but if the reasoning be of the one
and the other loose from the laws, fewer errors will appear in the people
then in the Prince; and those less, and which are capable of greater remedies:
for a good man may easily have the means to persuade with a licentious and
tumultuous people, and so reduce them to reason. But to a mischievous Prince no
man can speak, nor is there any other remedy but the sword. But this is such a
remedy as has no warrant from divine or humane laws, especially when that a
Tyrant is the true and lawful Prince of the country, however that by his evil
government and administration of the affairs he deservedly be termed a Tyrant.
That of David none is ignorant of, Sam. 1. 24. and 5.
Whereupon a man may guess at the importance of one and the others evil: for
if words are of Where he cut off the lappet of Saul's garment, and therefore was
checked by his own conscience. And that in the Psalm, 140. Touch not mine
anointed, etc. Nor do the heathen writers any thing give way hereunto;
wherefore Tacitus says, Ferenda regum ingenia, neque usui crebras mutationes.
Ann. 12. and Quomodo sterilitatem and caetera naturae mala, ita luxum vel
avaritiam dominantium tolerate: Vitia erunt donec homines, sed neque haec
continua, and meliorum interventu pensantur. Hist. 4. I need not allege
others: The troubles that fell upon the Roman Empire when they began to murder
their Princes, however bad, may argue their part: which was when Nero, Otho,
Galba, Vitellius successively were slain, Tacitus speaking of the story he
writ of it, says it was, Opus plenum magnis casibus, arroxpraelijs, discors
seditioni bus, ipsa etiam pace saevum, Hist. 1. For they are much deceived who
promise themselves quiet by means of a Tyrants death: for as Julius Caesar
said, Kingdoms never change them without great combustions, and states suffer
worser michiefes, by not enduring insolent princes. For howbeit both
particulars, and the public also smarts because of this disorder, yet the
life of the Prince is the very soul and bond of the Republique: Rege incolumi
men's omnibus una est, Amisso rapere fidem, says the Poet. This case has bin
argued by diverse at large, and the only remedy is thus concluded on. The
treacle of this venim is prayer and not vengeance: the people oppressed shall
lift up their heart to God, as did the Israelites, when tyrannis'd over by
Pharaoh; for the cruelties of bad Princes come not to pass by chance; and
therefore is it necessary to have our recourse to God, who sometimes for
chastisement sometimes for try all permits them. force to cure the peoples
evil, when as that of Kings requires the sword; there is no man that will not
say, but that where the medicines mustbe stronger, the more dangerous are the
evils. When a people is risen in tumult, the follies which they commit are not
so perilous, nor is there such fear to be had of the present evil, as of
that which may befall, it being possible some Tyrant may grow up in the midst
of that confusion. But during the time of mischievous Princes the contrary
happens; for the greatest fear is of the present evil; and of the time to
come there is hope, men easily persuading themselves, that his evil life may
produce their liberty. So that a man may see the difference between the one and
the other; the desperate fear of the one, is, of the present state; of the
other, of the state into which it may fall. The multitudes cruelties are
exercised against those that they fear, lest they should seize upon the common
good. The Princes against those that they fear, lest they should seek to
recover their own again. But the opinion against the people grows daily, for
every one may freely speak evil of the people without fear, even while they
have the government in their hands. A man speaks not evil of Princes, but
with many fears and jealousies. Nor is it much out of purpose (seeing the
matter draws me to it) to argue in the Chapter following, what Confederacies a
man may best trust to, either those that be made with a Republique, or that are
made with a Prince.

CHAP. LIX.
What Confederation or league is rather to be trusted, either that which is
made with a Republique, or that is made with a Prince.

BEcause every day we have it, that one Prince with another, or one Republique
with another make leagues, and join friendship together, and in like manner
also confederacies are drawn and agreements made between a Republique and a
Prince. I think to examine, which is the firmest league, whereof a man should
make surest account of; either of that with a Republique, or the other with a
Prince. And examining the whole, I believe that in many cases they are alike,
and in some there is some difference: and therefore, that accords made by force
shall not be truly kept thee neither by Prince nor commonwealth. And I think
that when fear comes upon them touching their state, as well the one as the
other, rather then perish, will break their faith with thee, and requite thee
with unthankfulness. Demetrius, he that was ever termed the taker of cities,
had done exceeding much good to the Athenians; it chanced afterward, that
being routed by his enemies, and seeking refuge in Athens as in a city that was
his friend, and much engaged to him, he was not admitted into it. Which grieved
him much more then the loss of his soldiers and army had done. Pompey when
his army was routed by Caesar in Thessaly, fled into Egypt to Ptolomy, who
formerly had bin restored by him into his kingdom, and was put to death by
him. Which things we see had the same occasions: yet more humanity and less
injury was used by the Republique, then by the Prince. Therefore where there is
fear, a man shall find in effect the same faith. And if there be any
Commonwealth or Prince who to keep their faith with thee, expect while they
ruin, it may proceed also from the same occasion. And as for a Prince, it may
well chance, that he is allied to some powerful Prince, who though he then
has not the opportunity to defend him, yet may he well hope, that in time he
may restore him into his state, or else that having taken side with him as
partisan, he thinks he cannot obtain a faithful and fair accord with his
enemy. Of this sort were those Princes of the Kingdom of Naples, that took
part with the French. And for Republiques, of this sort was Saguntum in Spain,
which till it was ruined took part with the Romans; and so was Florence for
siding with the French in the year one thousand five hundred and twelve. And I
believe, having summed up every thing, that in these cases, where the danger is
urgent, there is more assurance rather in the Republiques, then in the Princes:
for though the Republiques were of the same mind and had the same intention as
Princes had, yet for that they move but slowly, it will cause them to stay
longer in resolving themselves, then a Prince will; and thereupon they will be
longer a breaking their faith then he. Confederacies are broken for profit,
Wherein Commonwealths are far stricter in their observance of accords, then
Princes. And we might bring many examples, where even for a very small gain a
Prince has broken his faith; and where exceeding great advantages could not
one whit move a Commonwealth, as was the party Themistocles propounded to the
Athenians, to whom in an oration made them he said, that he could advise them
so, that their country should gain much advantage by it, but them he might not
tell it, for fear of discovering it, for by the discovery the opportunity of
doing it would be taken away. Whereupon the Athenians chose Aristides, to whom
he should communicate this secret, and together with him consult upon it: whom
Themistocles showed how the whole navall army of all Greece was in their hands
under their protection, though entrusted them upon their faith, so that it was
in their power by the ruin thereof to make themselves Lords of all Greece.
Whereupon Aristides told the people that Themistocles advice was exceeding
profitable, but very dishonest. For which cause the people wholly resus'd it,
which Philip of Macedon would not have done, nor those other Princes who seek
their own gain rather, and have made more advantage by breaking their faith,
than by any way else. Touching the breaking of agreements, upon the not
observance of some particulars therein, I mean not to meddle with them, being
ordinary matters; but I speak of those that break upon extraordinary and maine
points. Wherein, by what we have said, I believe the people are less faulty
than the Princes, and therefore may better be trusted than they.

CHAP. LX.
How the Consulship and every other Magistracy in Rome was given without
respect of age.

IT appears by order of the Story, that the Commonwealth of Rome, after that
the Consulship came among the people, bestowed it upon their Citizens, without
regard of years or blood: and indeed they never had respect to age, but
altogether aimed at virtue, whether it were in young, or old. Which we
perceive by the testimony of Valerius Corvinus, who at 23. years of age was
made Consul. And the same Valerius, speaking to his soldiers, said, That the
Consulship was the reward of vertuc, and not of blood. Which thing, Erat
praemium virtutis, non sanguinis.
whether it were advisedly said or no, might require much dispute. And touching
blood, this was yielded to upon necessity, and this necessity that was in
Rome might be in every City that would do the same things Rome did, as
otherwhere is said: for toil, and labor cannot be imposed on men without
reward; nor can their hopes of obtaining reward be taken from them, without
danger. And therefore it was fit timely to give them hope of the Consulship,
and by this hope were they a while fed without having it; at length that hope
served not, but there was a necessity to come to performance with them. But the
City that imployes not their people in any glorious action may treat the
mafter their own manner, as other where it was argued. But that which will
take the same course Rome took, must make this distinction. And grant that it
be so, for that of time there is no reply: nay rather it is necessary; for in
the choosing of a young man into a degree which has need of the discretion of
an old man, it is likely (the people being to make the choice) that some very
worthy and noble action of his preferres him thereto. And when a young man
becomes endowed with such virtues that he has made himself famous by his
heroicke actions, it were a very great wrong, that that City might not serve
her self of him then, but should be put off to expect, till that vigor and
quickness of spirit were grown old and dull, whereof in that age his country
might have made good use, as Rome did of Valerius Corvinus, of Scipio, and
Pompey, and many others, that triumphed very young.

THE SECOND BOOK.
THE PREFACE.
MEN do always commend, but not always with reason, the times of old, and
blame the present: and they take part so much with things past, that they
celebrate not only those ages which they have known by the memory writers have
lest them, but those also, which now being old, they remember they have seen in
their youth. And when this their opinion is false, as most commonly it is, I
persuade my self the reasons that bring them into this error, are diverse. And
the first I take to be, that of matters of old the truth is not wholly known,
and of thoi^ actions most commonly those things are concealed that would bring
any infamy upon the times, but whatsoever advances their credit and glory is
set out with magnificence. For most writers do so much follow the conquerors
fortune, that to make their victories glorious, they not only augment what they
have virtuously done but they so illustrate their enomies actions, that those
that are afterward born in any of their countries, either conquering or
conquered, have cause to admire those men and times, and so consequently are
forced exceedingly to praise and love them. Besides this, men hating things
either for fear, or envic, two very powerful causes of hatred are quite spent
in things that are passed, being they are not able to hurt, nor can give
occasion of envic. But on the contrary part, it comes to pass that those things
that are now in hand, and we see, which by reason of the through knowledge we
have of them, no tittle thereof being concealed from us, and knowing in them
together with the good, many things worthy dislike, hereupon we are compelled
to judge them much Inferior to matters of old, although that in truth the
present deserve far more glory and reputation: this I say, not arguing touching
the arts, which are now brought to such perfection, that the times cannot take
from them, nor add but little more glory to them; but speaking of things
belonging to means lives and manners, whereof the proofs are not very evident;
I answer, that this custom above written of praising and blaming is sometimes
false and sometimes true: for sometimes they must needs light upon the truth;
because all humane things are continually in motion, and either rise or fall.
As we see the civil government of a city or country so ordained by some rare
person, that for a time even by reason of the worth of this man, the State
mends much, and is more and more amplified: he that is then borne in that
State, and commends more the times of old, than those modern, is much
deceived: and the cause of his error proceeds from those things that have bin
formerly said. But those that are afterward born in that City or country,
whose days are only during their decline from their excellence, then err
nor. And I devising with my self whence these things proceed, I think the
world has continued always in one manner, and that in i^ has been always
as much good as evil; but that that good and evil does change from country to
country, as it appears by that which is discovered to us of those ancient
kingdoms, which altered from the one to the other, by change of manners. But
the world continued the same. There was only this difference, that where it
first had placed its virtue in Assiria, it afterward removed it into Media,
then into persia, in so much that at length it came into Italy, and so to
Rome. And if after the Roman Empire there succeeded not any other that lasted,
nor where the world had retired all its virtue together; yet we see it was
spread abroad into several Nations, where men behaved themselves very bravely
and valouroufly, as in the Kingdom of France, the Kingdom of the Turks, and
that of the Sultan; so now adays in Germany, and so among those that were
first of the Saracin sect, which did great exploits, and made themselves
masters of so great a part of the world, after they had destroyed the Eastern
Empire of Rome. In all these Provinces then, after the Romans were ruined, and
in all these sects has that virtue resided; and now in some of them indeed it
may be wished for, but in othersome worthily commended. And he that is borne in
those Countries, and praises the times past more than the present, may be
deceived: but he that is borne in Italy and not in Greece, and is not become
either in Italy, a Tramontan, or in Greece, a Turk, has reason to blame the
times present, and commend the former, for therein were many things made them
marvail, but in these there is nothing can recover them out of extreme misery,
infamy, and disgrace, where there is no observance either of Religion or Laws,
nor of warlike discipline, but they are wholly bespotted with all manner of
filthiness. And so much the more detestable are these vices, by how much they
are most in those that are greatest, who sitting in their Tribunals command
all, and will be adored. But returning to our discourse, I say, that if men's
understandings are corrupted in matter of judgment, touching which age is the
better, the present or that of old, in those things by reason of their
antiquity they could not have such an exact knowledge, as they might have of
their own times, yet should they not be corrupted in old men touching the
judgment of the times of their youth, and old age, having known and seen
equally the one and the other; Which thing would be true, if those men all the
time of their lives continued still at the same state of judgment, and had the
same desires. But they altering, though the times, change not, yet cannot seem
so to men to continue the same, they having other desires, other delights, and
other considerations in their old age, than in their youth: for the strength of
men's bodies, when they grow old, decaying, and their judgments and
understandings increasing, as must needs be, that those things which in their
youths they thought supportable and good, becomes afterward to them growing
old intolerable and hurtful: and where these men ought herein to lay the
fault upon their own judgments, they blame the times. Besides this, the desire
of man being insatiable (because of nature he has it, that he can and will
desire every thing, though of fortune he be so limited, that he can attain but
a few) there arises thence a dislike in men's minds, and a loathing of the
things they enjoy which causes them to blame the times present and commend
those passed, as also those that are to come, although they have no motives
grounded upon reason to incite them thereto. I know not then, whether I shall
deserve to be numbered among them that are deceived; if too much in these
discourses of mine I shall praise the times of the ancient Romans, and blame
our own. And truly if the virtue that then reigned, and the vice that now
reigns, were not more clear than the Sun, I should not speak so freely, for
fear I should incur the censure of that error whereof I have now blamed others:
but the matter being so evident, that every man sees it, I shall with boldness
speak that plainly which I conceive of those and these times, to the end those
young men who shall chance to read these my writings, may avoid the evil of
these times, and prepare their minds to imitate the good of these of old,
whenever their good, fortune shall give them occasion: for it is the duty of
a good man, to reach unto others that good, which by reason of the malignity of
the times, and of fortune, thou have not bin able to do thy self, to the end
that many being given to understand hereof, some of them, whom the heavens
shall more favor, may put it in practice. And having in my former book of
discourses spoken of the Romans deliberations, touching their affairs within
the City; in this we shall treat of those which the people of Rome did,
belonging to the enlargement of the Empire.

CHAP. I.
Which contributed more to the Romans in the conquest of their Empire, either
their virtue, or their fortune.

MAny have bin of opinion, among whom is Plutarch a great Writer, that the
people of Rome were more favored by fortune, than assisted by their virtues, in
gaining their Empire. And among other reasons which he alleadges to that
purpose, he says, it appears by the confession of the same people, that they
acknowledged all their victories from fortune, having consecrated more Temples
to her, than to any other god. And Livie seems to side with this opinion:
because it is very seldom, that he brings in any Roman speaking where he makes
mention of virtue, but that he joins fortune therewith. Whereunto I will not
yield in any terms, nor think I it can be maintained: for if never any
Republique made the same Progress that Rome made; it is because never has any
Republique bin so ordered to make its advantage, as Rome was: for the valor of
their armies gained them their Empire, and their order of proceeding, and their
own manor with that which their first founder likewise devised for them, made
them keep what they had gotten, as hereafter in several discourses shall be
declared. That two strong wars never at the same time met together to shake
their state, they say, it was the people of Romes fortune, and not their valor:
for they had no wars with the Latins, til they had not only beaten the
Samnites, but were fain to undertake a war in defense of them. Neither war'd
they with the Tuscans, til they had first subdued the Latins, and wholly
weakened the Samnices with many routes: whereof if two entire powers (when they
were fresh) had joined together against the Romans, without doubt a man may
easily conjecture that the ruin of the Roman Republique would have followed
thereupon. But however this thing came to pass, it never befell them to have
two strong wars made against them at once, but rather luckily it proov'd, that
when one began, the other ended, and at the end of one another began, Which we
may easily see, by viewing their wars, how they followed in order: for letting
alone those wars which they made before Rome was taken by the Frenchmen, we
see, that whilst they fought with the Aequi and the Volsci, never (so long as
these people were of any considerable power) did any other people set upon
them. They they being conquered, the war against the Samnites began; and though
before the finishing of this war the Latins Rebel'd against the Romans,
nevertheless, when that rebellion followed, the Samnites were in league with
Rome, and with their army helped the Romans to bring down the Latins pride; and
when they were subdued, the war with the Samnites again was revived. But their
forces being broken by diverse defeats given them, the war with the Tuscans
arose; and when that was quieted, the Samni es began anew to stir, upon Pyrrhus
has passage into Italy; when he was defeated, and beaten back into Greece, then
first was kindled the fire of the Carthaginian wars: nor was that quenched til
that all the French, as well beyond, as on this side the Alps, conspired
against the Romans; so that between Pobolonia and Pisa, where now is the tower
at Saint Vincenti, they were vanquished with a very great slaughter. After
this, for the space of 20 years, they had not any war of much importance: for
they had no quarrel with any but with the Ligurians, and the remainder of those
French that werein Lombardie: and so they continued, til the second
Carrhaginian war begin; Which troubled Italy for 16 years space. Which being
made an end of with great glory, that of Macedon sprung up, and was ended, when
that of Antiochus, and afterward that of Asia took their turns. After which
victory, there remained not in the whole world neither Prince nor Republique
that either by themselves or altogether could oppose the Roman Forces. But
before that last victory, he that considers the order of these wars, and the
manner of their proceeding, shall find mingled with their fortune much valor
and wisdom; so that he who examines the occasion of such fortune, shall easily
discover it: for it is very certain, that when a Prince or a people have gained
such a reputation, that neither prince nor people bordering upon him dares by
himself assault him, and is afraid of him, it will always so fall out, that
none of them all will set upon him, unless forced thereto, so that it shall be
at that great Princes choice, to war with which of his neighbors he shall
please, and the rest with little pains to quiet. Who, partly in regard of his
power, partly beguiled by some devices he shall make use of to lull them
asleep, are easily kept from stirring. And for other powerful Princes, who are
more remote and have no dealing with him, they look upon the matter, as a thing
afar off, and nothing belonging to them. In which error they continue so long,
til the fire comes close to their doors: which then being come so near, they
have no means to extinguish it, but only to use their own arms, which suffice
nor, the enemy being now grown exceeding mighty. I will let pass, how the
Samnites stood still and looked upon the Romans, while they overcame the Volsci
and the Aequi: and that I may not be too tedious, I will satisfy my self with
the Carthaginians, who were of great power and estimation, when the Romans
war'd with the Samnites and Tuscans: for even then they were Masters of all
Africa, and had Sardinia and Scicily in their hands, and had the rule of some
part of Spain. Who being that their forces were remote from the people of Romes
confines, never thought of assaulting them, nor of giving succors to the
Samnites, and Tuscans; but as if the Romans increase had bin the Carthaginians
advantage, they made a confederacy with them, seeking their friendship: nor did
they perceive their error committed, til the Romans having subdued all those
peoples that lay between them and the Carthaginians, began to make war with
them for the rule of Scicily and Spain. The self-same befell the French, that
happened to the Carthaginians, and so to Philip of Macedon, and Antiochus; and
every one of them believed (while the Romans were busy with another) that that
other might chance to vanquish them, and that they had time enough, either by
peace or war, to defend themselves from them. So that, I believe, that the same
fortune herein the Romans had, all Princes would have had, provided, that they
proceeded as the people of Rome did, and were of equal valor with them. To
this purpose it would not be unfit, to declare the course the people of Rome
held in their entryes into other Princes countries, but that inour treaty of
Principallities, we have discoursed thereupon at laege. I will only say this in
bries, they always did put in practice to make themselves some friends in the
Countries they came newly acquainted with, who served them for a ladder to
climb up to them, or a gate to enter them, or a tie to hold them; as it
appears, by means of the Capuans they enterd into Samnium, by the Camertins
into Tuscany, by the Mamertins into Scicly, by the Saguntins into Spain, by
Mafinissa into Africa, by the Ae olians into Greece, by Eumenes and other
Princes into Asia, by the Masilians and the Heduans into France. And so they
never failed of the like supports, whereby to facilitate their undertakings,
either in the enlargement of their dominions, or in the maintaining them.
Which, those people that shall observe, shall find themselves in less want of
good fortune, than they who neglect it. And to the end, that every one may know
of what avail our virtue was beyond their for une, in the conquest of their
Empire, we will treat in the Chapter following, concerning the quality of those
people with whom they were to make war, and with what obstinacy they defended
their liberty.

CHAP. II.
What people the Romans had to make war withal, and how obstinately they
fought for the defense of their liberty.

NOthing made it more painful to the Romans to vanquish their neighbors near
about them, as also some other Countries further off, then the affection that
in those days many people did bear to their liberty, which they so obstinately
defended, that they had never bin subdued, but by an excessive valor: for, by
many examples, we know to what dangers they exposed themselves, as well for the
maintenance as the recovery of it; and what revenges they took against those
that had laid hold on it. We know likewise what damages peoples and cities
receive by servitude And whereas now adays, there is only one Country that
can say, she has free Cities in her: in ancient-times people lived very free
in all countries. We see that in those times whereof at this present we speak,
in Italy from the Alps (which make a partition between Tuscany and Lombardy)
even to the very point of Italy, there were many free peoples, as were the
Tuscans, the Romans the Samnites, and many others, that dwelt in the other
parts of Italy: nor does any man relate, that there was any King, besides those
that reigned in Rome, and Porsena King of Tuscany; whose race how it came to an
end, history leaves us no memory. But we plainly see, that at the same time the
Romans went to incamp before Vejum, Tuscany was free, and so absolutely enjoyed
their liberty, and withal so much hated the name of a Prince, that the
inhabitants of Vejum for their defense having made a King among them, asked aid
of the Tuscans against the Romans; but they resolved after many deliberations
taken, to give them none whiles they lived under a King, judging it not right
to defend their country, who of themselves had subjected it to another. And it
is an easy thing to gue^s, whereupon it is that people take such an affection
to their liberty: because we see by experience, that cities have never bin much
amplified neither in domition nor riches, unless only during their liberty. And
truly it is a strange thing to consider, unto what greatness Athens attained in
the space of a hundred years, after she had freed her self from Pisistratus his
tyranny: but above all it is most strange to think unto what greatness Rome
attained after she was delivered from her Kings: The reason thereof is easy to
be understood: for it is no man's particular go^^, but the common good, that
amplifies the city. And without question this common good is not regarded but
in Republiques, for there whatsoever makes for their advantage is put in
practice: and though it turns to this or that private man's loss, yet are they
so many, whom the said good concerns, that they are always able to put it
forward, in despite of those few that suffer by it. The contrary falls our,
when there is a prince; where, most commonly, that which makes for him
endammages the City, and that which makes for the city hurts him; so that
suddenly where a Tyranny * How this will hold with the general and most
received tenent, I cannot see; being that the Prince and the people are said to
make only one politic body; and the welfare of the part cannot be separated
from the good of the whole. Famous is that fable of Aesops, which Menenius
Agrippa made use of, to reconcile the Commons of Rome, upon distaste against
the Senate, gone a part in the holy mount: On a time that in man all things
accorded well together, each particular member advised, and complaind that by
their care and pains all things necessary were sought after, and provided for
the belly, and that the belly only remaind idle amongst them, enjoying, those
delicates which their labor had prepared: and thereupon conspired together that
the hands should not put meat to the mouth, nor the mouth receive it, nor the
teeth chaw it: but thus while in this choler they thought by famine to subdue
the belly, the whole body fainted. Whereby it came to appear that the belly
afforded its service too, and as well gave as received nourishment,
distributing by the veins, throughout the whole body, out of this meat which it
had disgested, the blood well concocted, whereby each part was nourished. Who
is it that feels not, when any part fails, the whole is in disorder? and who
sees not likewise, when any part of the body draws unto it more then its
proportionable nutriture, that the whole pines thereupon? as from the swelling
of the spleen, the health of the whole body is disturbed, and therefore by some
Politiques not unfitly compared to a Princes exchequer, which when it
excessively abounds beggars the whole country. And it is a folly to think
(says a Spauish author) that the poverty of the Comminalty will not redound to
the breaking of private patrimonies, nor can great revenues continue there,
where the Commonwealth is racked to the very bones. All these things serve to
argue the mutual sympathy, as between the head and the members, so between the
Prince and his subjects; and to divide the interest of the Prince from that of
the people, cannot agree with good policy; for as in the natural body it breeds
diseases, so in the politic it produces disorder and destruction.
grows upon a free state, the least ill that can thence result to those
cities, is not to proceed, nor increase more in power, nor wealth: but for the
most part, or rather always, it comes to pass, that they go backward: And if
hap would have it, that a Tyranc should prove valorous, who by his courage and
prowess should enlarge his dominions, there would thence no profit arise to the
Republique, but to him alone: for he cannot advance any of these citizens that
are brave and worthy, over whom he tyrannizes, unless he desires to give
himself some jeulousy of them. Nor can he yet subject or make tributary the
cities that he conquers, to that city which he tyrannizes over; for it is not
for his advantage to make it powerful; it rather makes for him, to hold the
state disjoined, that each town and province acknowledge him, in so much that
of his conquests, he only reaps he good, and not his country. And he hat
would see the confirmation of this opinion, let him read Xenophon in his treaty
of a Tyranny It is no marval then, that the peoples of old did so extremely
harc Tyrants, and loved the free government, and that the very name of liberty
was in such request amongst them: as it happened, when Hieronymus, nephew of
Hiero the Siracusan, was slain in Siracusa: for the news of his death being
brought to his army, which lay not far from the city, they began to rise up in
tumult, and take their arms in hand against them that slew him: but when they
perceived that in Siracusa all cried out liberty, allured with the delight of
that name, they were all appeased, and laid aside their anger conceived against
them that killed the Tyrant, and advised together by what means there might be
ordained in that city a free government. And it is no marvail, that people take
extraordinary revenge of those that have laid hold of their liberty. Touching
which there are many examples, whereof I intend to relate only one, that fell
out in Corcira a City of Greece, in the times of the Peloponnesian wat: where
the province being divided into two factions, one of which followed the
Athenians, the other the Spartans; it came to pass, that of many cities which
were divided among themselves, the one part followed the friendship of the
Spartans, the other that of Athens; it happening so, that in the said city the
Nobility prevailed, and took from the people their liberty; but the people by
means of the Athenians took hear again, and having laid hold on the Nobility,
shut them up into a prison capable of them all, from whence they drew them out
by eight and by ten at a time, pretending to banish them into several parts,
but they put them to death after a cruel manner. Whereof they that remained
having some notice, resolved as much as lay in their power, to avoid this
shameful death; so that armed with what they could get, and fighting with
those that sought to enter, they defende'd the passage into the prison:
whereupon, the people running together uncovered the top of the house, and with
the ruins thereof overwhelmed them. There followed also in the said province
many such other horrible chances, so that we find it true, that people pursue
more agerly the revenge of a liberty once taken from them actually, then of
that which was only contrived in the intention to be plucked from them.
Weighing then from whence it may arise, that in the times of old people
esteemed more of liberty, then now a days, I believe it proceeds from the same
cause which makes men less valiant now adays then formerly, which I think is
the difference of our education from that of old, grounded upon the difference
of our Religion from the ancient: for our Religion having showed * Here Machia.
falsely imputes the cause of men's cowardlinesse to Christian Religion. I need
not allege any battles fought by the Christians, to prove him a liar;
histories frequently affoard us examples, as well ancient as modern, where
they have bin as resolutely fought by the Christians, as ever were any by the
Pagans: nay our own memories may well supply us with some if we want. If we
mark from whence Machiavell takes his argument, it is from that the Pagans
slew a multitude of sacrifices, the sight of which being terrible made men of
the same disposition. By the same reason must it follow that our butchers and
surgeons are more valiant then other men, as who customarily have their hands
imbrued in blood: I may well allow them to be more cruel, and therefore our
laws exclude them from being of the Jury of life and death: but of being more
valiant I never heard they had the reputation.
us the truth, and the true way, causes us less to make account of the honor
of this world; whereupon the Gentiles esteeming much of it, and placing therein
their greatest good, became braver in their actions. Which may be considered
from many of their orders, beginning from the magnificence of their sacrifices
and the poorness of ours, where indeed the pomp is more delicate then
magnificke, but not any action of bravery or fierceness. And with the Gentiles
also there was no want of pomp and magnificence in the ceremonies, but
thereunto was added the action of the sacrifice full of blood and cruelty,
slaying a multitude of beasts; The sight of which being terrible made men of
the same disposition. Besides, the ancient Religion did not beatificate but
only men fraught with worldly glory, as were the Commanders of armies, and
Princes of nations. Our Religion has rather glorified humble and contemplative
men, then those of action. Moreover it has placed the chief good in humility,
and in the rejecting and contempt of worldly things. That other imagined the
chief happiness to consist in the greatness of courage, in the strength of
body, and in all other things fit to make men exceeding valiant: and if our
Religion requires valor in a man, it is rather that he be fit for a strong
sufferance, then for a strong action. This manner of living then, as it seems,
has made the world become feeble, and given it in prey to wicked persons, who
may securely rule over it, as they list, seeing that all men to obtain
paradise, think rather of suffering their wrongs, then revenging them: and
though it may appear, that the world is grown effeminate, and the heavens
disarmed, it proceeds without doubt from the cowardice of men, who have given
an interpretation of our Religion according to their own lazy and idle
dispositions, and not agreeable to virtue: for if they would consider how much
it allows the advancement and defense of ones country, they should see that it
wills, that we should love and honor it, and so prepare our selves that we may
be able to defend it. These kinds of educations then, and false
interpretations, cause that there be not so many Republiques now adays in the
world as were of old. Nor by consequence do we see among people such an
affection to liberty as formerly: although I believe rather the reason hereof
is, because the Roman Empire with its force and power extinguished all the
Republiques and free governments. And though afterward that Empire was
dissolved, yet could not the cities again be restored, and anew ordered in a
civil government, unless it were in very few places of that Empire. Yet
howsoever it was, the Romans in every little corner of the world found, as it
were, a conspiracy of Commonwealths very strongly armed, and very obstinate to
defend their liberties; which shows that the people of Rome without an
extraordinary and rare valor had never made conquest of them. And to give an
example of some member thereof, that of the Samnires shall s^ffice me: who (and
indeed it is admirable, and so Titus Livius avowes it) were so powerful and
warlike, that they were of force, till the time of Papirius Cursor the Consul,
son of the first Papirius, to resist the Romans, which was for the space of
forty six years, after so many routes, destruction of their towns, and so
many slaughters made in their country: especially considering the country then,
where so many cities were, and such a vast number of men, though now almost not
inhabited. And then there was such order, and so great force, that it was
insuperable, had it not bin assaulted by a Roman power. And it is an easy thing
to know, whence that order and this disorder arise, for all that came from the
free manner of living then, and this from the slavery now. For all countries
and provinces which live free in every part, as formerly I said, make exceeding
large progresses: for here we see the people more numerous, because the
marriages are more free, and desired by men: being that every one willingly
begets those children which he believes he can bring up, and nourish, without
doubting their patrimony will be ravished from them; and when he knows they
are borne free and not slaves, so that by means of their virtue they may
become Princes. We see riches likewise increase there in greater measure, as
well those which arise from cultivation, as those which are gotten by the
trades of handicraftsmen: for every one is more provident in gaining and
multiplying of those goods, which, when he has gotten, he believes he shall
peaceably enjoy. From whence it comes to pass, that men even contend who shall
more advance the private and public good; so that the one and the other
increase exceedingly. The contrary hereof follows in all those countries that
live in servitude; and so much the more fail they of their accustomed good, by
how much their servitude is harder. And of all hard servitudes, none exceeds
that which is subject to a free Republique, because ordinarily it is of longest
continuance, and so least hopes there are of being delivered from it: a second
reason is, the end of a Republique is to enfeeble and weaken all other bodies
in her, whereby to augment her own. Which thing a Prince that brings thee
under his rule does not, especially if it be not some Barbarian Prince, a
ruiner of countries, and a destroyer of all civil societyes among men, as are
the eastern Princes. But if any of them have bin instructed in humane customs
and the arts ordinary among men, they most commonly affect equality in the
cities they have subdued, and let them still possess all their arts and
ancient customs; so that, if they cannot increase, as in liberty, they go not
to wrack, as in thraldom, speaking of that thraldom into which cities fall,
when they serve a stranger; for I have formerly spoken enough of subjection to
a native. Whosoever then considers well all that which is said, will not much
marvel at the power which the Samnites had being free, nor at their
weakness into which afterward they fell by servitude. And Titus Livius gives
us good testimony thereof in many places, in Hanniballs wars, where he
declares, that the Samintes being oppressed by one Legion of soldiers, that
were in Nola, sent Ambassadors to Hanniball to entreat him for succors; whose
speeches were to this purpose, that they had for a hundred years warred with
the Romans, serving themselves only of their own soldiers and Captains, and
had many times withstood two Consular armies, and two Consuls, and that now
they were brought so low, they had much a do to defend themselves from one
small Roman legion that was in Nol^^.

CHAP. III.
Rome became a great city, by ruining those that were near neighbors to her,
and by admitting strangers without difficulty to share in her dignisies.

ALL this while Rome waxed great upon the Creseit in terea Roma Albae ruinis
ruins of Alba. Those that intend a city should far enlarge the bounds of
her domnions, ought withal endeavor provide, that she be well fraught with
inhabitants: for without a great multitude of men in her, she will never be
able to grow great. And this is done two ways, either by love or by force: by
love holding the ways open and secure to strangers, that might have a design
to come and dwell in it, to the end that every one might come willingly to
inhabit it; by force ruining and defacing the neighbor cities and sending out
the inhabitants thereof to dwell in thine: all which was punctually observed in
Rome, so that in the timeof the sixth King in Rome there dwelt 80 thousand men
able to bear arms: for the Romans meant to behave themselves like the good
husbandman, who to make a plant grow big, and fructify, and ripen well its
fruits, cuts off the firstsprouts it thrusts forth, that so the virtue thereof
remaining yet in the root of the plant, may shortly after bring forth others
more lively and fruitful. And that this course held was necessary and good for
the founding and enlarging of an Empire, the Example of Sparta and Athens
shows us plain, who being both very warlike Republiques, and furnished with
excellent laws, yet could they never attain to the Roman Empires greatness,
which seemed indeed a little more tumultuary and not so well ordered as they,
whereof can be alleged no other reason, then that aforesaid. For Rome having
enlarged by those two ways the body of her city, was able to put in arms six
hundred and 80 thousand soldiers, whereas Sparta and Athens never exceeded
each of them twenty thousand men. Which proceeded not from that the situation
of Rome was more bountiful then theirs, but only from the different course
they took: for Licurgus founder of the Spartan Republique considering that
nothing could soon take away the power of his laws, then a commixtion of new
inhabitants, did what he could to hinder strangers from living with them; and
that they should neither join matrimonies with them, nor admit them into their
civil government, nor have any thing to do with them, which are the ordinary
occasions of accord among men. He ordained likewise that leather money should
pass current, thereby to take from every one the defire to come thither and
bring any merchandise, or art to them: so that, that city could never grow big
by multiplying her inhabitants. And because all our actions imitate nature, it
is neither possible, nor natural, that the slender body of a tree should bear
a gross bough; therefore a small Republique cannot hold cities nor kingdoms of
greater power and strength then she her self is; and if perchance it comes to
pass that she lays hold on them, it befalls her as it does that tree the
boughs whereof are greater then the body, that sustaining it with much ado,
with every small b'ast it is broken, as we see it happened to Sparta: which
having seized on the rule of all the cities of Greece, Thebes no sooner
rebelled against her, but all the other cities likewise fell from her, and so
remained as the dead trunk of a tree without branches: which could never befall
Rome, having her body and stock so huge, that it was of force with ease to
support any bough whatsoever. This manner then of proceeding, together with
those others which we shall afterward speak of, made Rome exceeding great and
powerful. Which Titus Livius shows in few words where he says, All this
while Rome Crescit in terea Roma Albae ruinis.
waxed great upon the ruins of Alba

CHAP. IIII.
Republiques have taken three particular courses, to amplify and enlarge their
states.

HE that has read the ancient histories with observation, finds that
Commonwealths have three manner of ways to amplify their states. The one has
bin that which the ancient Tuscans followed, to make a league of many
Republiques together, where no one is preserred before the other, neither in
authority nor in dignity; and to make other cities partakers with them in their
gains; just as now adays the Swisses do, and formerly in Greece the Achaeans
and Etolians were wont. And because the Romans had much war with the Tuscans,
the better to show the quality of this first way, I will enlarge my self in
giving notice of them par ieularly. Before the Romans had any great power in
Italy, the Tuscans were very mighty both by sea and by land: and though there
is no particular history that touches their affairs, yet is there some small
remembrance thereof, and some signs left us of their greatness; and we know,
how they sent a colony to the sea coast above, called by them Adria, which
prooved of such renown, that it gave the name to that sea, and the Latins call
it the Adri tick to this day. Moreover we know, that they had conquered all
from Tiber, to the very foot of the Alps, which encompass the whole body of
Italy. Notwithstanding that two hundred years before the Romans grew to any
considerable strength, the said Tuscans lost the dominion of that country
which is now called Lombardy; Which was seized on by the French; who either
driven by necessity, or allured by the delicacy of the fruits, especially the
wines, came into Italy under the conduct of Bellovesus their Captain, and
having defeated and chased out the natives; seated themselves in that place,
therein built many cities, and called the Country Gallia, from the name they
then bare; and this they held til they were conquered by the Romans. The
Tuscans then lived with that equality, and proceeded in the amplifying their
State, in that first manner, spoken of before: and there were twelve Cities,
among which were Clusium, Vejum, Desola, Aretium, and Volaterra and the like;
who by way of league ruled their dominions; nor could they enlarge their
conquests beyond the bounds of Italy, whereof also there was a great part left
untoucht by them, for the reasons which we shall afterward tell. The other
manner is to make allies, yet not so thought, that thou still reservest not to
thy self the principal place in the command and rule and title of all the
exploits, which course was always observed by the Romans. The third manner is,
to make them immediately subjects, and not allies, as did the Spa^tans and
Athenians: of which three ways, this last is altogether unprofitable; as it
appears, it was in the two foresaid Republiques, which, for no other cause went
to ruin, but for possessing themselves of those dominions, which they were not
able to hold. For it is a thing of great difficulty and pains to hold the
government of Cities by violence, especially of those that have bin accustomed
to live free. And if thou be not in arms, and well furnished with good
numbers of soldiers, thou can neither command, nor rule them. And to be able
to do this, it is necessary to make friends and companions, who may assist thee
in multiplying the people of thy City. And because these two Cities, did
neither the one nor the other of these, their manner of proceeding was of no
advantage to them. And because Rome which gives us an example touching this
third manner, did the one and the other, therefore grew it to that excessive
power: and for that she alone took this course of living, she alone therefore
became so mighty: For she having taken to her throughout all Italy many for her
companions to help her, who in many things lived with her upon equal terms;
but on the other side, as is abovesaid, reserving to her self always the seat
of the Empire, and the title of commanding, these their companions (who were
never aware of it) with their own pains and loss of their own blood came to
bring their own necks to the yoke: for when they began to transport their
Armies out of Italy, and to reduce Kingdoms into Provinces, and to make
thosetheir subjects, who for that they were used to live under Kings, were
never much troubled to become Subjects; and receiving Roman Governors over
them, and having bin overcome by Armies, whereof the Romans had the name and
title, they acknowledged no other head, but Rome. So that those allies of Rome
that were in Italy, found themselves on a sudden begirt round by Romes
Subjects, and oppressed by an exceeding vast City, as then Rome was: and when
they perceived the deceit into which they had bin trained, it was too late to
help it, Rome had then gotten such authority with foreign Nations, and was then
of such strength within it self, the people of their City being grown very
numerous and warlike. And although those their companions, to be revenged on
them for these injuries, conspired together against them, yet in a short time
were they losers by the war, making their own conditions worse: for of allies,
they became Subjects. Which manner of proceeding (as is said) has bin observed
only by the Romans: nor can a Republique that would enlarge her State take any
other; for experience has not showed us any course more certain or true. This
way formerly spoken of concerning the leagues, wherein anciently the Tuscans,
Acheans, and Aerosians lived, and which now adays the Swisses use, is the
better way next after that the Romans took: for, it being not possible by it to
grow very great, thou gainest two advantages thereby, the one, that easily thou
drawest no war upon thee; the other, that what thou gettest thou easily
hold. The reason why they cannot grow great, is, because they are disunited
Republiques, and placed in diverse seats; which makes it more difficult to
consult and resolve. And besides, because they are not very greedy of extending
the limits of their dominions; for that diverse Commonalties being to
participate of that rule, they value not so much such conquests, as does a
Republique alone, which hopes to enjoy it all her self. Moreover, they govern
themselves by common advice and counsel, and therefore of force they must be
slower in every deliberation, then they that live within the walls of the same
City. It is plain also by experience, that this manner of proceeding prescribes
it self certain bounds, which it passes not; nor have we any example that they
were exceeded. And these were to join together some dozen or fourteen
Commonalties, and afterward never seek to go beyond that: for being come to
those terms, that they think they are able to defend themselves against every
one, they desire no greater power, as well because necessity does not bind them
to have greater force; as also because they understand not any great profits
that arise from such like purchases, for the causes formerly alleged: for then
of necessity they must either go on forward to make themselves allies, and so
the multitude would make a confusion; or else to make them their subjects: and
because they see herein many difficulties, and no great advantage in holding
them, they make no account of them. Whereupon, when they have attaind to such
greatness, that they think they may live secure, they apply themselves to two
things; the one to entertain others in their protection, and undertake their
defenses, and by these means to draw money from every part, which they can very
easily divide among one another, and the other to serve in the wars under
another, and to take pay of this or that Prince, who gives them wages for their
service, as now adays the Switzers do, and as we read, those we spoke of
before did, whereof Titus Livius bears witness, where he says, that when
Philip King of Macedon came to a parley with Titus Quintius Flamminius, to
treat an accord in presence of a Prercur of the Aetolians, the said Pretour
coming to some words with Philip; was reproved by him for avarice and
infidelity, saying, that the Ae^olians were not ashamed to take pay and serve
in the wars on both sides, so that many times their ensigns were seen in two
contrary Armies. We know withal, that this manner of proceeding by Leagues
has bin always alike, and has prodec'd the same effects. We see also, that
that way of making people become subjects has bin always weak, and brought
forth but small advantages; and when they have exceeded the due mean, they have
gone to ruin, And if this course of making Subjects, be unprofitable in
warlike Commonwealths, surely in those that are disordered, it must needs be
far worse, as in our days have bin the Republiques of Italy. Wherefore we find
that to be the true way, which the Romans held, which is the rather to be
admired, in so much as there was no other example thereof before that of Rome,
nor since has bin any that has imitated it. And touching the leagues, there
are the Switzers only and the Swevian league that follows them. And, as in the
conclusion of this matter shall be said, so many orders observed by the Romans,
as well concerning the affairs within the City, as those without, in these our
times are not only not followed, but made no account of; some of them are
deemed untrue, some unpossble, others nothing to purpose, or unprofitable: so
that whiles we stand still in this ignorance, we become a prey to any that
invades our Country. And though it should seem difficult to imitate the
Romans, yet ought it not seem so, to follow the steps of the ancient Tuscans,
especially to the Tuscans now living: for though they were not able for the
reasons alleged, to make themselves an Empire like that of Rome, yet could
they gain them that power in Italy, that their manner of proceeding would
permit them, which for a long time was with great glory of their rule, and
wars, and with exceeding great commendation of their manners and religion.
Which power and glory was first abated by the French, and afterward quite put
out by the Romans, and so put out, that of this power, which two thousand years
since was very great, at this present we have no memory left. Which has made
me muse, what the cause is that matters are thus forgotten, whereof in the
Chapter following we shall treat.

CHAP. V.
That the changes of Religions and Languages, together with the chances of
floods or pestilences, abolish the memory of things.

TO those Philosophers, who would have made men believe that the world is
eternal, I think one might have replied, that if such antiquity were true, it
would be consequent, that we should have some notice of more then five thousand
years time past, being that it is not apparent, how the remembrances of times
by several occasions were abolished. Whereof part proceeds from men, and part
from heaven. Those that proceed from men, are the changes of sects and tongues:
for when a new sect begins, that is, a new religion, the first endeavor, to
gain it self reputation, is, to blot out the memory of the old; and when it so
falls out, that the founders of the new sect are of a different language, they
easily extinguish it: which thing is known, by considering the ways, which the
Christian Religion used against the Sect of the Gentiles, whereby it has
canceled all their orders and ceremonies, and defaced the whole remembrance *
This is all calumny; for we find not that any have preserved the records of
learning more than the Christians, however much intermixed with Paganisine. I
take it that that these memorials were last in the vast deluges of the Vandals,
Goths, and Hunns, who themselves being barbarous and ignorant, envyed others
learning; and therefore destroyed all the registers of antiquity they could
find: which our Author injuriously imputes to the Christians, being that they
time out of mind, have caused those books to be taught the youth in their
schools and we find that the most esteemd Fathers in the Church were adorned
with that learning, which they are raxed to have persecuted; which serves also
very necessarily for the better understanding and illustrating of Theology, and
affords good arguments many times to our Divines for the conviction of the
Gentiles out of their own writers. Nor do I find there was any other restraint
in those studies, than that men were advised to apply themselves soberly
thereunto, as not being studies to dwell in, but tending rather to the service
of Theology.
of thatancient Theology. It is true, that they attaind not thoroughly to wipe
out the knowledge of the prime men thereof, which was occasioned by their
maintaining of the Latin tongue, to which they were forced, being they were to
write this new Law in it: for if they could have writ it in a new tongue,
considering the other persecutions they made against it, there would have bin
no remembrance left of things past. And whosoever reads what courses St.
Gregory took, and the other heads of the Christian Religion, shall see with
what obstinacy they persecuted all the ancient memorials, burning all the Poets
and Historians works, defacing their images, and destroying every other thing
that gave any lightwww. of that antiquity; so that if to this p^rsecution, they
had added a new language, we should have seen every thing in a short time
forgotten. It is very likely therefore that what the founders of the Christian
Religion did against the sect of the Gentiles, they of Gentilis^^e had done
formerly to the Sect that preceded it: and because the sects in a five or six
thousand years chance two or three times, the memory of things past before that
time is utterly lost. And though yet there remain some remembrance thereof, we
take it as some fabulous thing, whereunto no man gives credit, as it befalls
the story written by Diodorus Siculus, in which though he gives account of a
forty or fifty thousand years, nevertheless is it esteemed (and so I think it
too) a false tail. As for the causes that proceed from heaven, they are such as
extinguish the race of mankind, and reduce to a small number the inhabitants of
part of the world; and this comes to pass, either by pestilence or famine, or
by a deluge of waters; but that of most importance is this last, because it is
more universal, and because those that escape, are all such as live among the
mountains and are simple and ignorant people, who having no knowledge of
antiquity, cannot derive it to their posterity: and if among them any knowing
man chance to escape, to gain himself, reputation and a name, he conceals it,
and alters it at his own pleasure, so that there is left to his successors only
so much as he has bin pleased to commit to writing, and no more. And that
these in undations, pestilences, and famines sometimes come, I believe there is
no doubt, as well because all histories are full of them, as for that we see
this effect of defacing the memory of things, as also becauie it accords well
with reason that it is so: for nature, as in simple bodies, when there is
gatherd together enough superfluous matter, moves many times of it self, and
makes a purgation, which is the preservation of that body; so it falls out in
this mixed body of mankind, that when all countries are stuffed with
inhabitants, that they can neither live there, nor go otherwhere, because all
places are already possessed and replenished, and when the subtilty and
wickedness of man is grown to that fullness it can attain to, it holds with
reason, that of force the world be purged by one of these three ways, that men
being become few, and having suffered much, may live with more convenience and
grow better, whereupon it is nothing strange, that, as it is abovesaid, the
Tuscan nation in old time was very potent, full of Religion and virtue, had
their own manners and their native tongue, which the power the Romans quite
abolished, so that, as it is said, only their name remains still in the memory
of posterity.

CHAP. VI.
How the Romans proceeded in making of war.

HAving discoursed, how the Romans proceeded in enlarging their State, we will
now treat of their proceedings in making of war, and in every one of their
actions it will appear with how great judgment, they left aside the common way
that others went, whereby they might more easily attain the highest pitch of
greatness. The intention of that man, that makes war, either by election or by
ambition, is to get, and keep what he has gotten, and to proceed so there
with, that he may enrich and not impoverish his own country. It is necessary
for him then, both in getting and holding, to take a care not to diminish, but
rather to augment the public profit of his country. He that will do these
things, must follow the way and course the Romans took, who at first made their
wars great and short; for coming into the field with huge armies, all the wars
they had with the Latins, Samnites and Tuscans, they dispatched in a very short
time: and if notice were exactly taken of all those wars they made from the
beginning of Rome, til the siege of Veium, we should find they were all ended,
one in six days, another in ten, and a third in some twenty days space: for
their custom was this; so soon as ever they had discovered the war, they
presently went out with their armies and fought with their enemies, who being
overmaster'd (to save their Country from spoil) yielded to their conditions,
and the Romans condemned them in loss of some of their territories, and those
they turned to their private Profits, or bestowed them upon some Colony they
sent thither, which being seituate upon some Frontier of theirs, became
Guardians of their confines, to the advantage of the inhabitants of that
Colony, who had those fields in possession, and with the profit of the
generality of Rome, that held this guard without expense. Nor could there be
any way more assured, nor of more strength or advantage: for til the enemy went
into the field, this guard was sufficient. And when they went forth strong into
the field to oppress that Colony, the Romans also went out with their forces,
and joined battle with them, wherein having got the day, they laid more heavy
burdens on them, and so returned home. Thus came they by little and little to
great credit among them, and forces in themselves. And this course held they
always, till they changed their manner of proceeding in war: which was after
the siege of Vejum, where to enable them to make a long war they determined to
pay the soldiers, whereas formerly, being that the wars were short, there was
no need to give them pay. And though the Romans gave pay, and that by virtue
hereof they were able to make longer wars, and to make those more remote, they
were forced to stay longer in the field, yet did they never alter from their
first order, to dispatch them quickly, according to the time and place. Nor did
they ever leave sending of Colonies: for besides their natural guise, the
Consuls ambition held them to their first custom of making their wars short;
for being created but for a years time, and thereof to stay at home six
months, they desired to finish the war, that they might triumph. To send
Colonies, the profit and great advantage they made thereof, still prevailed
with them. They altered indeed somewhat touching the spoils, whereof they were
not so liberal, as in former times they had bin; because they thought there was
not so great need, the soldiers receiving their stipends; as also because the
spoils being greater, they intended therewith so to fill the common treasure,
that they might not be constrained upon any enterprise in hand to leavy moneys
upon the City. Which order in a very short time much enriched their treasury.
These two courses then they took, about the dividing the spoils, and sending
of Colonies, caused Rome to grow rich by the war, whereas other Princes and
Republiques, if they find that means to releeve themselves, become impoverishd;
so that it came to this at last, that a Consul thought he might not triumph
unless he brought much gold and silver and spoils of every kind into the
treasury: Thus the Romans by their above written ways, sometimes by making a
quick end of the wars, otherwhiles by drawing them out at length with
discomfitures and invasions and treaties to their advantage, grew always more
mighty.

CHAP. VII.
How much land the Romans allowed to each man they sent out to inhabit their
Colonies.

BY what parcels the Romans did divide the land among them, I believe it is
hard to find out the truth, because I think they bestowed on them more or less,
according to the places, whether they sent the Colonies; and it is credible,
howsoever the case went, and whether soever they were sent, the allowance was
but small. First to the end they might be able to send the more men thither,
they being entrusted with the guard of that country. Besides, because they
living sparingly at home, it agrees not with reason, that they would allow
their men, where wishall to abound much abroad And Titus Livius says, that,
Terna jugera and septunnces viritim divise^ant
when they had taken Veium, they sent a Colony thither, and to each man they
gave three acres and a half and a twelfth part. For besides the things above
written, they judge it was not the quantity of the land that supplied their
wants, but the well c^^tiating of it. And moreover it is very necessary, that
the whole Colony have fields in common, were every one may freely feed his
cattle, and woods from whence to fetch fuel for firing, without which a Colony
cannot well subfist.

CHAP. VIII.
The occasion, wherefore people leave their own native soyles, and invade other
countries.

Seeing that we have formerly discoursed of the manner of proceeding in war
which the Romans used, and how the Tuscans were assailed by the French, me
thinks it were not much from the matter, to show, that there are two sorts of
war made. The one is through the ambitions of Princes, or Commonwealths, who
endeavor the enlargement of their dominions; such as were the wars of Alexander
the Great, and the Romans, and such as now adays every Prince and Potentate
makes one with another. Which wars are dangerous indeed, but yet they do not
wholly chase the inhabitants out of a country; for the Conqueror is contented
only with the obedience of nations, and most commonly suffers them to live
under their own Laws, and enjoy their own goods in their own houses. The other
kind of war is, when the whole people with all their families, rise from a
place, forced either by famine or war, and go to seek a new habitation and new
Country, not out of ambition to command, as the others, but to possess it by
themselves, and to drive thence or destroy the ancient inhabitants thereof.
This kind of war is very cruel and terrible: And touching these wars, Salust
speaks in the end of the Jugurthin, where he says, that when Jugurth was
overcome, the French were perceived to stir, who then came into Italy: and
there he relates, that the people of Rome fought with all other Nations for
rule and command, but with the French every one fought for his life and safety:
For it suffices a Prince or Commonwealth that assails a Country, to destroy
only those that command, whereas these populations must make a general
destruction, being that they will live upon that, which formerly sustained
others. The Romans had three several wars of these, exceeding dangerous. The
first was that when Rome was taken, which was seized on by those Frenchmen,
that (as is above said) had taken Lombardy from the Tuscans, and seated
themselves there; whereof Titus Livius alleges two reasons; The first, as we
said before, is, that they were allured by the pleasantness of the fruits and
the wines of Italy, whereof they had scarcity in France: the second, that the
people in France being exceedingly multiplied, the Country could not seed
them, whereupon the Princes of those places thought it fit, that part of them
should go to seek some new habitation, and that resolution being taken, they
chose for Captains of them that were to depart, Bellovessus, and Sicovessus,
two French Kings, whereof Bellovessus came into Italy, and Sicovessus went into
Spain. Upon the passage of which Bellovessus followed the seizure of Lombardy,
and thereupon the war, which first the French made against Rome. Next this was
that, they made after the first Carthaginian war, when between Piombin and Pisa
they slew more then hundred thousand, French. The third was, when the Germans
and Cimbrians came into Italy, who having overcome several Roman Armies, were
subdued by Marius. The Romans then masterd these three very perilous wars, nor
was there need of less valor than theirs to overcome them: for we see, how that
after the valor of the Romans faild, and their armies lost their ancient
virtue, that Empire was ruind by such like people, as the Goths, Vandalls, and
such others, who possessd themselves of the whole western Empire. Such people
come out of their own Countries, as is above said, compelled thereto by
necessity, which necessity proceeds either from famine, or from some war and
oppression inflicted on them in their own Countries. So that they are
constraind to seek new habitations. And these either are in great multitudes,
and then they break with violence into others countries, destroy the
Inhabitants, possess their goods, make a new Kingdom, and change the name of
the country, as Moses did, and those people likewise that seized upon the
Roman Empire; for these new names, that are in Italy, and in the other
Provinces, grew from nothing else, than that they were so named by their new
Lords. As is Lombardy now, which was called Gallia Cisalpina; France was called
Gallia Transalpina, and now is named of the French; for so were those people
called, that made themselves masters of it. Sclavonia was called Illyrium;
Hungary, Pannonia; England, Brittanny; and many other Countries, that have
changed their names, which it would be too long to recite. Moses also called
that part of Syria, which he made himself master of, Jury. And, because I have
formerly said, that some people are driven out of their own habitations by war,
whereupon they are forced to seek a new, where to seat themselves, I will
allege an example to that purpose, of the Maurusians, ancientiy a people of
Syria; Who having notice of the Hebrews coming, and thinking they could not
resist them, thought it better to leave their Country, than in striving to
save that, lose themselves; And so rising thence with their families, they went
into Affrique, where they sat down, driving out the Inhabitants they found in
those places. And so they, who could not defend their own Country, could yet
take that of others from them. And Procopius, who writes of the war, that
Bellifarius made with the Vandals, that possessed themselves of Affrique,
reports that he read Letters written in certain pillars, in those parts where
these Maurusians did inhabit, thus saying, Nos Maurusij, qui fugimus a facie
Jesus latronis filij Navae.
We are Maurusians who fled from the face of Jesu the robber, who was Son of
Nave. Where the occasion of the departure of these people out of Syria plainly
appears; wherefore these people are very terrible, when they are driven out by
extreme necessity, and unless they be encountered by puissant forces, cannot be
stopd: but when those that are constraind to abandon their Country are not
very numerous, there is no such danger of them, as of those people we spoke,
because they cannot use such violence, but ought rather by some stratagem, make
themselves masters of some strong place, and therein being settled, keep it by
making of friends and allies; as we see Aeneas did with Dido, the Massilians
and others, who all by agreement with their neighbors, where they once set
themselves down, were able to continue. The people that go forth in the
greatest multitudes, and those also that have gone forth, almost all came out
from those parts of Scythia, cold, and poor Countries, where, because there
are men in abundance, and the Country of that condition, that it cannot feed
them all, they are compeld to go forth, having many causes to drive them out,
and nothing to keep them in. And if now for these five hundred years it has
not happend, that any of these nations have made an inundation upon any
Country, it has proceeded from several reasons. The first is, the great
evacuation that Country made in the declining of the Empire, they having since
sent out huge swarms more than thirty several times: the second is, because
Germany, and England, from whence these people came, have their Countries well
mended, so that they are able to live there, with better convenience; and
thereupon not necessitated to change their seat. On the other side, these men
being very warli^, are as it were a Bulwark against the Scythians, who border
upon them, to keep them within their confines and territories: and many times
there chance great risings among the Tartars, who are kept in by the Hungarians
and Polacks: who vaunt, and not without reason, that were it not for their
forces, Italy and the Church had often felt the weight of the Tartars Armies.
And this shall suffice, touching those forenam'd peoples.

CHAP. IX.
Upon what occasions commonly wars are begun among Princes.

THe occasion, that gave beginning to the wars between the Romans and
Samnites, who had beeng long in league together, is very ordinary, and happens
often to powerful Principalities Which occasion, either comes by chance, or
else is offered by him that desires to make war. That which was between the
Romans and Samnites, feil out by chance: for the Samnites intention was not, by
making war first against the Sidicini, and then against the Campani,
afterward to set upon the Romans. But the Campani being oppressed, having
their recourse to Rome, beyond the Romans expectation and the Samnites, the
Campani giving themselves into the Romans hands, they were constraind to desend
them, as their subjects, and take upon them that war, which they thought with
their honor they could not avod: For it seemd very reasonable to the Romans,
not to undertake the defense of the Campani, though their friends, against the
Samnites their friends; but they thought it also a shame not to dessend them,
when they were their subjects; or recommended to their protection, judging that
when they had not taken that defense in hand, they cut off the way from all
others that ever should have a mind to shelter themselves under their power.
And Rome having for her maine end the Empire and glory, and not qui^t, could
not refuse this enterprise. The self same occasion gave beginning to the first
war against the Carthaginians, for the defense of the Massineses, which the
Romans undertook in Sicily; which fell out by chance also. But now the second
war, that grew between them, came not by chance. For Hannibal the
Carthaginian Captains, set upon the Saguntins that were allies to the Romans
in Spain, not so much for to endammage them, as to provoke the Romans to
wars, and to have occasion to fight with them, and so to pass into Italy.
This manner of kinoling new wars has been always usd among those that are
mighty and that have some says joynd, some other respects: for if I desire to
make war with a Prince, and between us some capitulations of peace have
firmly been observed a long time, upon some other title fair justifiable, and
under some other color, I will assail some ally of his, rather than himself,
knowing very well, that in setting upon his alley, either he will resent it,
and so I shall have my intent of moving war against him; or not resenting it,
his weakness shall be discoverd, or his infidelity, in not defending one that
is under his protection; and the one and the other of these two is sufficient
to discredit him, and facilitate my designs. Therefore what we have formerly
said, may be noted touching the taking occasions to move war, out of this
example of the yielding of the Campani; and besides what remedy a City may
have, which cannot by her self alone make her defense, and yet in any case
would not fall into her assaylants hands. Which is freely to give her self
into his hands, who thou have a purpose should defend thee, as the Capuans to
the Romans, and the Florentines to Robert King of Naples, who though he would
not defend them as allies, yet afterward defended them being his subjects,
against the forces of Castruvius of Lucca, who then put them hard to it.

CHAP. X.
Moneys are not the sinews of war, according to the common opinion.

BEcause every one can begin a war at his own pleasure, but not end it, a
Prince should before he undertake an enterprise, measure his own forces, and
order himself according to them; he should also have so much judgment, that
he deceive not himself with the conceit of his own forces; and he shall
always be sure to be deceived when he measures them, either by the situation,
or by the good will of men toward him, his own proper forces on the other
side failing him: for the things aforesaid may increase well thy forces, though
give thee them they cannot; and by themselves alone they are of on worth, nor
nothing avayle without the help of Soldiers fathfull to thee: for great store
of treasure serves to no purpose without that; nor the strength of thy Country,
neither does the faithfulness nor good will of men last; for these cannot be
faithful to thee, thou not having force to defend them. Every mountain, every
lake, every unaccessible place is made plain, where the strong defendants are
wanting. Nay rather moneys are so far from defending thee, that they expose
thee for a prey. Nor is there any thing more false than that common opinion
that affirms Moneys to be the sinews of war, which sentence was first given
by Q. Curtius, in the war between Antipater the Macedonian, and the King of
Sparta; Where he relates, that for want of moneys, the King of Spar^a was
forced to fight, and was broken whereas if he had deferd the battle a few
days, news had come into Greece of Alexanders death, where he had remaind
conqueror without combat. But his treasure failing, and he doubting his Army
would leave him for want thereof, was constraind to hazard the battle;
whereupon Q Curtius says, that moneys are the firews of war; which sentence is
alledgd every day, and followd too by some Princes, not quite so wise as they
should be: for making this their ground, they believe, that this is able to
defend them, if they have treasure enough; and never consider, that if treasure
were of force to overcome, that Darius would have conquered Alexander, the
Greeks masterd the Romans, and in our days the Duke Charles subdued the
Swissers, and not long time since the Pope and the Florentins together would
have found no difficulty in overcomming Francis Maria nephew of Pope Julius
the second in the war of Orbin. But all these above named, were overcome by
those who esteemd not money, but good Soldiers the sinews of war. Among other
things, that Croesus King of Lydia showed to Solon the Athenian, was a treasure
unmeasurable, and asking him what he thought of his power, Solon answerrd him,
he thought him no whit the more powerful for that; for war was made with
iron and not with gold, and some one might come, who had more iron than be, and
take his gold from him. Moreover, when after the death of Alexander the Great,
a vast multitude of French passed over into Greece, and after into Asia, the
French sending Ambassadors to the King of Macedon to treat some accord, that
King to show them his power, and to fright them, let them see his treasure,
where was much gold and silver, whereupon these French, who had in a manner
concluded a firm peace, brake t; their desire grew so great then to take his
gold from him: and so was that King despoyld for that which he had gatherd
together to defend him. The Venetians also, a few years since, having their
treasury full of coin, lost their whole State, being not able to defend
themselves thereby. Wherefore I say, that gold as the common opinion cries it
up, is not the sinews of war, but a good Army of slour Soldiers; for gold
is not sufficient to find good Soldiers, but good Soldiers are able well to
find our gold. As for the Romans (if they would have waged war by moneys
rather tha with the sword) the treasure of the world, considering their vast
undertakings, and the great difficulties they had therein, would not have servd
their turns. But they making their wars with the sword, never found
scarcity of gold; for they had it in abundance brought even into their Camps
by those that stood in fear of them. And if that Spartan King for want of
money, were to hazard the fortune of a battle, that befell him upon the matter
of moneys, which many times has chanced upon other occasions: for it has been
often seen, that when an Army wants provision of victuals, and is
necessitated either to samish or sight, usually they make choice to fight,
because it is greater honor, and where in some sort Fortune has in her power
to savor thee. Moreover, it has often come to pass, that a Commander
perceiving succors coming to his enemies Army, must either fight with them
quickly, and make trial of the chance of battle, or expecting the i^grossing
of the Army, come at length to fight perforce upon many disadvantages.
Besides, it has been seen, as it befell Asdruball, when in the Mar^hes he was
ass^ulted by Claudius Nero, together with the other Roman Consul, that when a
Captain is necsstated either to fly or fight, he always makes choice to
fight; thinking by this bargain, though exceeding hazardous, he may gain; but
in that other he must needs lose in any case. There are therefore many
necessities that can force a Captain beyond what he intended, to resolve to
put it to a battle, among which sometimes may happen the scarcity of moneys,
though not therefore should we esteem moneys to be the sinews of war
rather, than other things, which bring men into the like necessities. We may
therefore resolve the question, that money is not the sinews of war, but good
Soldiers rather. It is true, moneys are necessary in the second place, but it
is such a necessity, which good Soldiers themselves may overcome: for it it
as impossible that good Soldiers should lack money, as by moneys alone to
produce good Soldiers. What we here aver, every History shows us to be true
in many places, notwithstanding that Pericles persuaded the Athenians to make
war with a^l Peloponnesus, declaring, that they might overcome that war
with industry and by force of money; and though in that war the Athenians
sometimes prospeed, yet at last they lost it, and the advice, and good
Soldiers of Sparta prevayld more, than the industry and money of Athens. But
Titus Livius gives us a better testimony for this opinion then any one else,
where discoursing of Alexander the Great, whether if he had come into Italy,
he had been able to vanquish the Romans, he shows there three things necessary
in the war; a great number of Soldiers, and those good, wise Commanders, and
good fortune: where examining, whether either the Romans or Alexander excelld
herein, at length he concludes, without making any mention of moneys. The
Capuans, when they were requird by the Sidicins, to take Arms in their behalf
against the Samnites, should not have measurd their power by their treasure,
but by their good Soldiers: for by taking that course they took to assist
them, after two overthrowes, to save themselves, they were forced to become
tributaries to the Romans.

CHAP. XI.
It is not a match wisely made, to join alliance with a Prince, whose credit
is greater then his strength.

TItus Livius having a purpose to show the Sidicins error in relying upon the
Capuans aid, and the Capuans error also in believing they were able to defend
them, could not express it in more lively terms then these, The Capuans
contributed to the Campani magis nomen in auxilium sidiciorum, quam vires ad
praesidium attulerunt.
Sidicins aid, rather more reputation then forces. Where we may observe, that
those leagues that are made with Princes, who have not either the commodity to
assist thee by reason of the distance of place, or forces to do it, because of
some disorder of their own at home, or for some other occasion, add rather
reputation to them that trust in them, then any strength to their party: as in
our days it befell the Florentines, when in the year 1479. the Pope and the
King of Naples assayl'd them: who being allies of the King of France, drew from
that alliance more reputation to their side, then safe guard: as likely enough
it would befall that Prince now, who under Maximilian the Emperors protection
should undertake any enterprise: for this is one sort of those allyances, which
bring more fame then advantage, as here in this text is alleged, that of the
Capuans brought the Sidicins. Therefore in this point the Capuans committed an
error, in esteeming their own forces greater then they were. And so sometimes
the small discretion men have, causes them when they neither know how, nor have
the means to defend themselves, to take upon them the protections of others
which the Tarentines also did: who, when the Roman army was going to join
battle with that of the Samnites, sent their Ambassadors to the Roman Consul,
to let him understand that they willed there should be peace between those two
people; and how that otherwise they should make war against the party that
should refu^e it. So that the Consul scoffing at this proposition, caused the
triumphs to sound in presence of their ten Ambassadors, and so made his army
march toward the enemy, showing the Tarentins by his deeds and not by words
what answer they deserved. And having now discoursed in this Chapter against
some courses Princes take amiss for others defense, I will in that that
follows speak touching those they take for their own defense.

CHAP. XII.
Whether it be better for a Prince, fearing to be assailed by his enemy,
himself first to begin the war with him, or to expect while it comes home to
him.

I Have heard it disputed sometimes by men well practiced in military
discipline, if there be two Princes near of equal force, and the one that is
the more resolute have proclaimed war against the other, which were the best
course for that other, either to attend quietly in his own confines whiles his
enemy come upon him, or else to go find him at home, and there assail him.
And I have heard them allege arguments on both sides; and those that argue for
this going to assail him, produce the counsel that Croesus gave Cyrus, when
being arrived upon the borders of the Messagetes to make war against them,
their Queen Thomyris sent him word, that he should take his choice, either to
enter into her kingdom where she would awaite him, or if he would rather that
she should come and si^nde him in his own. And when the matter came to
dispute, Croesus advised against the opinion of the rest, to go and seek her
in her own country; urging that otherwise if he overcame her far from her
own confines, he could not take her kingdom from her, because she would have
time to repair her losses; but if he conqur'd her within her own territories,
he might pursue her just upon her slight; and so giving her no time of
recovery, take the state from her. Moreover they allege the advice that
Hanniball gave Antiochus, when that King had a purpose to make wary against
the Romans, where he shows how the Romans could not be overcome but in Italy;
for there another might avail himself of their arms, their wealth, and their
friends also. But whosoever fought with them out of Italy, leaving Italy free
to them, left them that strength, that never would want life to give them fresh
supplies at all occasions. And concluded, that it was easier to take Rome from
them, then the Empire; and Italy, rather than their other provinces. Agathocles
also is alleged, who not being able to support the war at home, assailed the
Carthaginians, who then had made war against him, and brought them to ask
peace. The example of Scipio is likewise urged, who to take the war out of
Italy, assailed Affricke. They that maintain the contrary, say, that he that
would bring his enemy to destruction, should withdraw him from home. The
Athenians are brought for example, who while they made a convenient war at
their own homes, remained victors: but when they departed out of their
country, and transported their army into S^cily, they quite lost their liberty.
They allege the poetical sables withal, where it is showed, how that Anteus
King of Lybia assailed by Egyptian Hercules was insuperable, whiles he staid
for him within the confines of his own Kingdom, but when by Hercules subtilty
he was trained out of it, he lost both state and life. Whereby occasion was
given to the fable of Anteus, that while he was upon the ground, he recovered
forces from his Mother, which was the ground, which Hercules perceiving, took
him up in his arms, and held him from the earth. Modern advices also are
alleged; every one knows that Ferdinand King of Naples was in his days held
a very wise Prince; and some two years before his death fame flying, that
Charles the eight then King of France had a determination to come and assail
him, after he had made much preparation fell sick, when on his deathbed, among
other memorials he left his son Alphonsus, was this also, that he should
attend his enemies coming within his Country, and upon no case should dr^w
any of his forces out of his state, but should await them within his own
confines with his strength entire. Which was not followed by him, but there was
an army sent into Romania, which without any combat, lost both it self and the
state. The arguments, which besides the things abovesaid, are brought on each
side, are these; that he, that assailes, comes on with more courage, then he
that attends, which gives the army more confidence: Besides this, it takes away
from the enemy diverse conveniences of being able to make use of what is his
own; for he cannot help himself upon those subjects, whose houses have first
bin sacked and their goods pillaged: and for having the enemy in the house; the
Prince is constrained to take more care how he wrings money from them, and
vexes them: so that he comes to dry that fountain, as Hannibal says, which
furnishes, him with means to sustain the war. To this may be added, that the
soldiers being in a foreign country, are forced to fight, and of that
necessity makes a virtue, as we have often said; on the other side, they say,
when one awaits his enemy, he does it with much advantage: for without any
discommodity to thy self thou art able to give thine enemy much trouble to come
by his provisions, and other necessaries belonging to an army. Thou can also
better hinder his designs, because thou know the country better then he.
Thou can also encounter him with more forces, because there they may easily
be united, which thou can not draw all from home. Thou can also being
routed, recover thy self with more ease, because many of thy army will save
themselves, in that they have their places of refuge near, as well because the
supplies are not to come from far; thou bringst to the hazard all thy forces,
and not all thy fortune; whereas parting thence thou hazzardst all thy fortune
with but a part of thy forces. And some there have bin who the better to weaken
their enemy, suffer him to enter many days journies into their country, and
take diverse towns, to the end that leaving gatrisons in all of them, he may
weaken his army, and so they may afterward fight with him at more ods. But to
give my opinion herein what I think, I believe, this distinction is to be made;
Either my country is armed, as was that of the Romans, or that of the Switzers
is, or it is disarmed as that of the Carthaginians was, or else that of the
King of France, or the Italians country is. In this case the enemy is to be
kept off from coming in, because thy advantage than consists in thy revenue,
and not in thy men, so that whenever the current thereof is cut off from
thee, thou art quite spoiled; nor does any thing so much hinder thee, as the
war within thy doors. The Carthaginians yield us evident examples hereof, who,
whiles they had their own home free, were able with their revenue to make war
against the Romans, which, when it was assaild, could not supply them against
Agathocles. The Florentines had not any remedy against Castruccius Lord of
^ucca, because he warred with them in their own country, so that they were
feign, for their defense, to yield themselves to Robert King of Naples. But
Castruccius being dead, the same Florentines had the courage to assail the Duke
of Milan at his own home, and wrought so far as to take his country from him;
so much valor showed they in foreign wars, and such cowardice in their
domestic. But when countries are armed, as that of Rome was, and as the
Switzers are, the nearer thou come to them, the harder they are to vanquish;
for these bodies are able to bring together more forces to resist a sudden
violence, then they are to, assail an enemy abroad. Neither in this case does
the authority of Hanniball move me, because his passion, and his own interest,
made him say so to Antiochus; ^r if ^h^ Romans had in that space of time
received those three routs in France, which they had in Italy by Hanniball,
without doubt they had bin quite undone: for then they could not have helped
themselves by the remainders of their armies, nor could they have had those
conveniences to repair their losses, nor made head against their enemies with
such strength as they did. We never find, that to afsail any country they sent
out an army passing the number of 50000. But to defend themselves at home
against the French after the first Punicke war, they armed eighteen hundred
thousand men. Nor could they afterward defeat them in Lombardy, as they did in
Tuscany: because against so great a maltitude of enemies, they had never been
able to draw so great forces so far out, nor fight with them upon the like
advantage. The Cimbrians broke an army of the Romans in Germany, nor could the
Romans any way help themselves. But when they came into Italy, that they once
united their forces together, they presently dispatched them. The Switzers it
is easy to vanquish our of their own Country, whether they cannot send above
thirty or forty thousand men: but to overcome them at home, where they are able
to make a body of a hundred thousand men, is exceeding difficult. I conclude
therefore anew, that that Prince, who has his people armed and addressed for
war, may always well expect a mighty and dangerous war at his own home,
neither let him go to meet it. But he, whose subjects are unarmed, and his
country unaccustomed to war, let him always keep it as far from home as he
can. And so the one and the other, each in their degree, will better defend
themselves.

CHAP. XIII.
That men rise from poor and small beginnings to great fortunes, rather by the
help of guile than force.

I Take it to be very true, that seldom or never it comes to pass, that men of
mean fortunes attain to any high degrees without force or fraud: unless that
dignity, which a man has gotten, came to him by gift, or was cast on him by
inheritance Neither do I think, we ever find, that force alone suffices; but we
often see, that guile alone avails, as he shall clearly perceive, that reads
Philip of Macedons life, and that of Agathocles the Sicilian, and many others
such like, who from very vile and poor fortunes have gained either a Kingdom,
or some other great dignities. Xenophon in Cyrus his life, declares this
necessity of deceit, being that the first expedition which he makes Cyrus to
undertake against the Armenian King, is full of guile, and how by deceit, and
nor by force he makes him seize on his Kingdom; by which Action he concludes
nothing else, but that it is necessary for a Prince, that will atcheive great
matters, to learn to be a cunning deceiver. Besides this he makes him deceive
Ciaxares King of the Medes his Mothers uncle many ways, without which fraud he
shows Cyrus could never have attained to that greatness he afterward came. And
I believe, * Because this whole Chapter tends to show how necessary for a
Princes advantage guile is, and it is again recommended by precept in
Machiavels Treaty of a Prince, I cannot but take notice that here he is
blameable. Dolus an virtus quis in host requir it, is not meant De dolo Malo:
supposed by Machiavel in his Prince Chap. 19. where he persuades a Prince to
use the Lions force, and the Foxes craft. To be able in all Military stratagems
and slights to circumvent the enemy, is one of the most requisite and not able
parts in a Commander: provided there be no breach of Faith, nor Oath violated:
for as Tully says, Est jusjurandum affirmatio Religiosa: quod autem affirmate,
quasi Deo test promiseris, id tenendum est. It is much unworthy of a Prince
(says a worthy late Author) to falsify his word, either to enemy or subject
that it be; and the more villainy is it to use covert fraud, than open
violence, because the enemy lies more open by giving credit to his faith: And
fraus distringit, non dissolvit perjurium. And with how much more solemnity
Princes Oaths are ordinarily taken, me thinks, so much the more sincerity
ought they to carry with them, having drawn together many eyes and ears as
witnesses of their truth or falsehood. I shall conclude then with Tacitus, in
the 4. of his Annal. Caereris mortalibus in constant confilia quod sibi
conducere putant; principum diversa sors est, quibus praecipua rerum ad samam
dirigenda.
that there was never any placed in a low condition that ever came to any great
dignity only by plain force; and ingenuously; though I grant that by guile
alone one well may, as John Galeacius did who took from his uncle Barnard the
state and rule of Lombardy. And that, which Princes are necessitated to do in
the beginnings of their increase, Republiques are likewise forced to, till they
are become mighty; then force alone suffices. And because Rome in every part
lit either by chance or by choice upon all the necessary means to become great,
it failed not also of this, nor in her beginning could have dealt more
cunningly, than to take the course we formerly discoursed of, to make her some
companions; for under this name, she brought many to be her servants, as were
the Latins, and other people near about her: for first she served her self of
their arms in subduing her neighbors round about, and in taking upon her self
the reputation of the state; afterward when she had brought them under
likewise, she came to such growth, that no power was able to withstand her. And
the Latins never perceived their own servitude, til after that they saw the
Samnites twice broken, and forced to agreement. Which victory as it gained the
Romans great reputation with foreign Princes, whereby they heard of the Romans
name, though they never felt their arms: so it bred great envy and suspect in
those that both saw and felt their strength, among which were the Latins: And
so far prevailed this envy and fear, that not only the Latins, but the
Colonies which they had in Latium together with the Capuans by them lately
defended, conspired all against the name of the Romans. And the Latins moved
that war in that manner, as is formerly said, that for the most part wars are
moved, not assailing the Romans, but defending the Sidicins against the
Samnites, against whom the Samnites made war with the Romans leave. And that it
is true, that the Latins stirred upon the knowledge of this deceit, T. Livius
declares it by the mouth of Annius Setinus a Latin Pretour, who told them in
their assembly, thus, For if yet we can endure Nam si etiam nunc sub umbra
faederis aequi servitutem pati possumus, etc.
servitude, under the name of an equal league. Wherefore we find the Romans in
their first growth wanted not that guile, which they had need to make use of,
that from low beginnings aim to mount high, which the more covert it is, is the
less discommendable, as was this of the Romans.

CHAP. XIIII.
They are often deceived, who think with humility to overcome pride.

WE often see that humility does not only not help, but hurt some times,
especially when it is used toward insolent men; who either for envy or some
other occasion, have conceived hatred against thee. Whereof our Historian gives
us good testimony in this occasion of war between the Romans and the Latins:
for the Samnites complaining to the Romans, that the Latins had assaild them,
the Romans would not yet forbid the Latins that war, being desirous nor any way
to incense them. Whereby they did not only not incense them, but made them
become more insolent toward them, so that they sooner discovered themselves
enemies, whereof the words used Tentastis patientiam, negando militem; quis
dubitat exarsisse eos? Pertulerunt tamen hunc doloren; exercitus nos parare
adversus Samnites faeritos suos audierunt nec moy erunt (...) ab^ urbe; unde
laec illi^ nanra modestia nisi conscientia virium and nostrarum and suarum?
by the forenamed: Latin Pretour, Annlus in the same assembly, give good proof,
saying: Te tried their patience in refusing them soldiers; who doubts but they
were angry, yet this disgrace have they sufferd: they have heard we prepare an
army against the Samnites their allies; nor for this stirred they one foot out
of the City: and whence came this modesty of theirs think ye, but from their
knowledge as well of your Forces as their own? And therefore hereby we plainly
see, how much the Romans patience increased the Latins arrogance. Wherefore a
Prince should never agree to descend a whit from his ra^ck, not ever let go
any thing upon accord, if he have a mind to leave it honorably, but only then
when he is able, or when he thinks also he is able to maintain it: for it is
better for the most part (the matter being brought to such terms, that thou
can not let it go in the manner above said) to let it be taken from thee by
force, rather than by fear of forces: for it thou lettestit go for fear, thou
do it to free thy self from war, which most commonly it will not do; for he
to whom with such open cowa^dise thou have yielded this, will not there with
rest satisfied, but take other things from thee also, and will the rather be
incited against thee, in that he values thee less; when likewise on the other
side, thou shall find thy friends more slack in thy defense, esteeming thee
either weak or cowardly. But if thou forthwith upon discovery of thy enemies
intent, gettest thy forces in a readiness, howsoever they be inferior to his,
he will begin to make account of thee, as also will other Princes thy
neighbors abou thee, so that some there will be who will have a mind to aid
thee (thou being in arms) who, if thou had abandoned thy self, would never
have struck stroke for thee. This is meant, when thou have but one enemy. But
in case thou have more, thou shall do very wisely, to render what thou have
belonging to any one of them for to regain him to thee, notwithstanding the war
be discoverd, that thou may take him asunder from the other confederates
thine enemies.

CHAP. XV.
Weak states are always irresolute in their determinations; and slow
deliberations are always hurtful.

IN this very same matter, and in the same beginnings of the War between the
Latins and the Romans, we may observe, that in every consultation it is good to
come to the particular of that which is to be deliberated on, and not to stay
long in doubt, and upon the uncertainty of a thing. Which is manifest in the
consultation the Latins made, when they thought to quit themselves of the
Romans: for the Romans having had some sent of this ill humor that had
possessed the Latins, to be ascertained of the master, and to try if without
arms they could regain those people, gave order they should send eight
Citizens to Rome, to the end they might advise with them. The Latins,
understanding this, and being conscious to themselves of many things done
contrary to the will of the Romans, called an assembly together, to appoint who
should go to Rome, and to give them order what they should Ad summa rerum
nostrarum pertinere arbitror, ut cogitetis magis quid agendum nobis quam quid
loquendum sit; facile erit explicatis consillis, accommodate ^ebs verba.
say. And Annius their Pretour being in the assembly during this dispute,
uttered these words: The sum of our affairs is, as I take it, that ye should
advise rather what we should do, than what we should say; for it is an easy
matter, when things are once resolved on, to put them into fit terms. Without
question these words are most true, and ought to be relished by every Prince,
and every Commonwealth: for during the uncertainly and doubt of that which a
man will do, there is no man knows what he should say: but when the mind is
once settled and resolved of what is to be done, words to the purpose easily
follow. I have the more willingly noted this passage, by reason that many times
I have known that such doubt has much wronged public actions, even to the
loss and disgrace of our Republike. And it shall ever come to pass, that, in
doubtful cases, and where there is need of judgment to deliberate, this
resolution shall be when they are to be advised, and deliberated on by weak
man. No less hurtful also are slick and slow consultations, than these
ambigu^us, especially those that are to be taken in favor of any friend; for
slowness helps no body, and hurts ones self. These resolutions so taken,
proceed either from weakness of courage, or forces, or from their malignity
that should resolve, who guided by their own passtors, to ruin a State, and to
fulfill some desire of their own, s^ff^r not the consultation to go forward,
but rather hinder and cross it. For good Citizens, though they perceive the
whole stream of the people to run the more dangerous way, yet will they never
hinder the delibaration, being that those affairs attend not time. When Jerome
the Tyrant in Syraacusa was dead, there being a great war between the
Carthaginians, and the Romans, the Syracusians put it to question, which
alliance they should take, the Roman or Carthaginian; and such was the
eagerness of the parties, that the matter remained in doubt, and they took to
neither side, til' that Apollonides one of the chief men in Syracufia, in a
very discreet Oration of his, showed that they were not to be blamed that
advised to adhere to the Romans, nor they that would take part with the
Carthaginians, but rather that irresolution and slowness in taking to any side
was detestable; for he saw fully in that ambiguity the ruin of the Republique.
But were it that the party were once made, on which side soe'r it were, a^man
might conceive some good hopes upon it. Nor could Titus Livius more fully show,
than in his part he does, the harm which this hanging in suspense draws after
it. He makes it plain also in this case of the Latins; for the Lavinians being
sought to by them for aid against the Romans, put off the resolut on of it so
long, that when they were just going forth of the town to give succors to them,
news came that the Latins were defeated. Whereupon their Pretour Milonius said,
We shall pay ^ear to the Romans for this little way we have gone: for if at
first they had resolved either to help, or not to help the Latins, not helping
them they had not given offense to the Romans; but helping them, had their aid,
come in time, with the addition of their Forces, they might have gained them
the victory; but by delay loss came every way, as it befell them. And had the
Florentines observed this well, they had never received so many damages nor
troubles by the French, as they had in Lewis the twelfths passage into Italy
against Lodowicke Duke of Milan: for the King treating of such a passage,
sought the Florentines for their consent; and their Agents that were with the
King, agreed with him, to stand neuters, and that the King coming into Italy,
should maintain them in their State, and receive them into his protection, and
gave the City a months time to ratify this. Which ratification was delayed by
some, who in their little wisdom favored Duke Lodowicks affairs, til that the
King was even upon the point of victory, when the Florentines offering the
ratification, it would not be accepted by the King, who knew the Florentines
came by force, and not willingly to his friendship. Which the City of Florence
was to buy out dear, and like enough to have lost the state, as afterward
another time upon the like accident it chanc'r. And so much the worse was the
course they took; for it was of no advantage to Duke Lodowicke, who if he had
bin victour, would have showed more displeasure against them, than did the
King. And though touching the mischief this weakness brings upon a Republique,
we have formerly spoken in another Chapter; yet upon a new occasion offered by a
new accident, I had a mind to repeat it thinking it very specially a matter
worthy to be noted by all Republiques like unto ours.

CHAP. XVI.
How much the orders used by our Soldiers in these modern times, differ from
those of the ancients.

THe Romans fought not a battle in any war they undertook with any Nation, of
greater importance than this with the Latins, in Torquatus and Decius his
Consulship: for in all reason it had followed, that as the Latins by losing it
became Subjects, the Romans should have undergone the same condition, had not
they got the mast^ry; and of this opinion is Titus Livius: for on each part he
makes the Armies equal for their order, valor, resolution, and number; he
makes there this difference only, that the Commanders of the Roman Army were of
more valor than those of the Latins. It appears also that in the ordering of
this battle, there befell two accidents, the like whereof was never seen
before, nor since have we had but rare examples following them: that of two
Consuls, to hold their Soldiers minds firm and obedient to their commands, and
resolute to fight, the one killed himself, the other his Son. The equality
which Titus Livius says in these two Armies, was, because they had both served
in the wars a long time together; they used the^ame language, order, and arms:
for in the ordering of their battle, they had the same manner, and their
Troops and the Captains of them had the same names; there was a necessity
being they were of equal force and valor, that something extraordinary should
happen, that could se^tle and fix the ones resolution, rather than the others:
in which (as otherwhere we have said) consists the victory: for while that
lasts in the combarants hearts, the Armies never turn their backs. And to the
end it might last the longer in the Romans breasts than in the Latins, partly
fortune, and partly the Consuls valor were cause; for Torquatus killed his
son, and Decius himself. Titus Livius, where he shows the equality of their
forces, sets down the whole order the Romans used in their Armies and in
their battles. Which being that he relates at large, I will not rehearse
again, but discourse only upon that I shall think remarkable, and which,
because it has been neglected by all our Captains of later times, has been
the occasion of many disorders in several Armies stand battles. I say
therefore, that out of Livius his words we gather that the Roman Army had
three principal divisions, which in proper terms may be called Squadrons; the
first was of the Hastati, the second of the Prencipi, the third of the Triarij:
and each of these had their horsemen. In the ordering of a battle, they placed
the Hastati for most, in the second place on the right side, upon the shoulders
of those the Prencipi were set, and in the third place yet in the same file,
the riarij came. The horse of all these ranks they placed on the right hand and
on the left of these three battles: which Squadrons of horse from their forms
and Places were called wings: because they looked like the two wings of that
body. They rangd the first Squadron of the Hastati, which was in front, in a
manner close shut together, that it might be able either to force upon, or
sustain the enemy. The second Squadron of the Prencipi (because it was not the
first to fight, but was ordeind to succor the for most, in case it was either
beaten or driven back) this they made not so compact together, but kept their
ranks thin, so that they might receive in to them without disordering
themselves the first Squadron, whenever being pressed on by the enemy, they
were forced to retire. The third Squadron of the Triarij had their ranks yet
thinner than the second; that, if need were, they might receive the two former
Squadrons of the Hastati and Prencipi. The troops then being all placed in
this order, began the fight: and if the Hastati were forced or overcome, they
retired into the thinness of the ranks of the Prencipi, and they united
together, and having made of two battallions one body, undertook the fight
afresh; and if these were beaten back and routed, they fell back into the
thinner ranks of the Triarij, and so all the battallions became one body,
renewd the fight again, where if they vanquished, because they had not other
repair, they lost the day. And because that always when this last quadron of
the Triarij came to try for it, the Army was in danger, thereupon grew his
Proverb, Thematter came so far as the Triarij. The Res redacta est ad
Triatios.
Commanders of our days, as they have abandoned all the other instructions,
and follow nor in any part the ancient discipline, so have they quite neglected
this part, which is of no small importance: for he that so arrang^s his Army,
that in the fight he can three times repair himself, to lose he must have
fortune three times his enemy, and be to encounter a valor sufficient to
vanquish him. But he that stands only on the first shock (as now our Christian
Armies do) may easily lose: for every little disorder, or mean valor, is
able to take from him the victory. That which makes our Armies not able to
recover themselves three times, is, because they have lost the manner of
receiving one Squadron within another: Which comes to pass, because now adays
battles are rangd which one of these two disorders; either they place their
troops at the shoulders the one of another, and make their battle large of
breadth, and thin in depth; which makes it weaker, because there is but small
distance from the breast to the back. And when to make it stronger, they reduce
the troops to the Roman manner, if the first front be broken, not having
order to be receivd in the second, they fall together into a confusion, and
rout themselves: for if that before be beaten back, it falls upon the second;
if the second strives to advance, it is hindered by the first: Whereupon the
first and the second both beating upon the third, causes such a confusion, that
commonly a very little matter destroys a whole Army. The Spanish and French
Armies in the battle at Ravenna, where the Lord de Pors General of the French
forces dyed, which was (according to our times) a well fought battle, was
arranged in one of these forenam'd ways: which is, that one and the other
Army came on with all their people placed to shoulder the one the other, so
that neither army had but one front, and were much more in breadth then in
depth. And this befalls them always, where they have a large plain, as they
had at Ravenna. For knowing the disorder they make in retiring, by placing
themselves in one file, they avoid it when they can, which they do by making
the front large, as it is said. But when the site of the country restraines
them, they remain in the forenam'd disorder, without advising themselves of
the remedy. In which they pass through their enemies countries, they go out
to forage, or venture on any other exploit. And at Saint Regulus in that
occasion of Pisa, and otherwhere, where the Florentines were routed by the
Pisans, during the war which was between the Florentines and that city, for
their rebellion, after Charles the King of France his passage into Italy, those
defeates were caused by nothing else but by their own horse: which being in
vantgard, and by the enemies beaten back into the Florentine foot, routed it,
whereupon all the remainder turned their backs; and Criacus de Borgo, the
ancient general of the Florentine infantery, has said it many times in my
hearing, that they had never bin routed but by their own horse. The Swisses who
are the principal masters of our modern wars, when they serve with the
French, above all things have a care to place themselves on the side, for fear
their own horse driven back should beat upon them. And howbeit these things
seem easy to understand, and very easy to practice, yet has not there been
any of our contemporary Commanders, that would follow these ancient orders, or
amend the modern. And though they have made their Armies tripartite, terming
the one the Vauntguard, the other the Battle, and the last the Rereguard: they
make no other use thereof, but to command them when they are quatered in their
lodgings, but in any service, very seldom it is (as is formerly said) but that
they make all these bodies run one fortune. And because many to excuse their
own ignorance, allege that the violence of the Artillery permits not that many
of the ancient orders be observd, I will argue it in the next Chapter, and
examine, whether the Artillery do hinder the practice of the ancient valor.

CHAP. XVII.
What esteem our modern armies ought to have of artilery, and if the opinion;
which is generally conceived of it, be true.

WHen I consider, besides the things formerly written, how many pitched battles
were fought by the Romans at several times, that general opinion which many
hold, comes into my mind, that if a^tilery had bin used in those days, the
Romans could never so easily have subdued the countries they did, nor have
brought these nations they did, to become their tributaries, nor in any case
could they have made such brave conquests. They say moreover, that by reason of
these guns, men cannot put in practice nor show the valor they could of old.
And then they add a third matter, that it makes it more difficult to come to a
battle now, then formerly; nor can they contain themselves within the orders
of those times, so that in time the war will be all reduced to the artillery.
And being desirous now not out of purpose to argue touching the the truth of
such opinions, and how much artillery has augmented or diminished the force of
armies, and whether they bereave or affoard good Captains occasion to behave
themselves valourously, I will begin to speak concerning, their first opinion;
that the ancient Roman armies would never have made those conquests they did,
had artilery bin then in use. Whereupon I say in answer, that war is made
either in defense or offense. And then we are to examine, to which of these two
parts it does more good or hame. And though reasons may be alleged on both
sides, yet I think, that without comparison the defendant receives more
damage by it, then the assailant. The reason, which hereof I give, is, that
the defendant is either within a walled town, or in the field within trenches:
If he be in a town, either it is but little, as most commonly for tresses are,
or great and large. In the first case, the defendant is quite lost; for such is
the force of artillery, that no wall be it of what thickness it will, but in a
few days is ruined by it. And if those that are within the walls, have not
good room to retire themselves, with retrenchments and fortifications, they
are lost; nor can they support the shocke of the enemy, when he would enter by
breach in the wall, nor has he any help herein of his artillery: for this is
a maxim, that where met can enter in by throngs and with violence, the
artillery cannot keep them off. Therefore the furious assaults of the
Tramontaines it is not possible for the defendant to resist; but the assaults
the Italians give, are well enough endured, who never all in a ^hrong, but
scatteringly come to the fight, which they by a name very fit for the purpose,
call skirmishes. And these that go with this disorder and timcrousnesse to
enter a breach, where artillery is, go to an apparent death, and against them
artillery is a good use: but those who in throngs, when the one presses forward
the other, come to the breach, unless sustained by ditches and ramparts, will
enter any place, and the artillery shall never beat them off; and though some
few of them be slain, yet can they never be so many as can hinder them of
victory. That this is true, we find in many conquests which fortainers have
here made in Italy, especially in that of Brescia: for that town having
rebelled against the French, and the fort holding good yet for the French King,
the Venetians were to support all the violence, that from thence could fall in
upon the town, having all that way guarded with artillery, that descended from
the fortress into the city, some of them being planted against the front,
others upon the flanks, and so in every other place fir. Whereof the Lord of
Fois made not any account, but descending a foot with his troops passed
through the midst of them, and took the town, nor ever appeared it that he
had received thereby any notable loss. So that he who defends a little town
(as it is said) which is walled in, but has not space to retire with
^etrenchments and fortifications, and trusts upon the artillery, is presently
lost. And thou defendest a great town, and have convenience for retreat, yet
without comparison is the artillery more availeable to those without, then
within the walls. First, because thou would with thy artillery annoy those
without, thou must of force raise thy self with it above the level: for while
thou art on the level, every small fence or trench that the enemy makes
secures him, and thou can no ways damage him; so that thou being to raise
thy self, and to mount thy pieces on the curtain of the wall, or some other
way, drawest two difficulties upon thee. The first is, that thou can not
bring ordnance thither, neither of that bigness nor effect, that he without
can, being that great things are not manageable in small spaces. The other is,
that though we grant thou can bring such pieces thither, yet can thou not
make those safe and strong fortifications to secure thy artilery within which
they without can, being upon the plain ground, and having those conveniences,
and that room, they can desire. So that it is impossible for him that defends
a town to keep his artillery mounted on those high places, when those without
have store of great and good pieces. And if he brings them into lower places,
they become for the most part unprofitable, as it is said. So that the defense
of a city is to be made by the bodies of men, as it was the custom of old, and
with the small shot: Whereby if they make any small advantage, in regard of the
small shot, they suffer as much loss, which counterpoises all the good the
artillery can do them: for by them the town walls are all laid flat, and, as
it were, buried in the ditches, so that when the enemy comes to enter by
assault, either because the walls are beaten down, or that the ditches are
filled, he that is within, has more disadvantages thereby, then otherwise he
had. And therefore (as it was formerly said) these instruments of wa^re do more
help the besieger, then the besieged. Touching the third point, which is to
retire into the camp, and there to make intrenchments, to keep off from
battle till some convenience or advantage gotten, I say, that herein thou have
no more help ordinarily to keep thee from fighting, then had the ancients.
And sometimes by reason of the artillery thou have more disadvantage: for if
the enemy come upon thee, and have some small advantage of the field, as it may
easily chance that he gets the upper ground of thee, or that at his arrival
thou have not fully cast up thy trenches, nor covered thy self well with them,
presently he dislodges thee whithout remdy, and thou art forced to come cut of
thy fortifications and fight: which befell the Spaniards in the battle at
Ravenna, who, being fortified between the river Roncus, and a trench they had
cast up, the fence whereof was not of that hight was needful, so that the
French had gotten some small advantage of the ground, were forced by the
artillery out of their fortifications to come to fight. But grant (as most
commonly it should be) that the place where thou have encamped, were higher
then those others whereof the enemies were masters, and that their
fortifications were good and secure in such sort as by means of situation and
other thy preparations the enemy dares not assail thee, in this case they will
be forced to use those means, which of old they were wont, when any one lay
with his army, where he could not be endammag'd, which were to forage the
country and pillage it, to beleager some of the chief towns, to hinder thy
provisions, so that by some necessity thou shall of force dislodge and be
brought to fight, where the artillery, as we shall hereafter show is not of so
great effect. Considering then what sort of wars the Romars made, being in
all most all of them they were assailants, and not defendants, it shall appear
(being that these things above written are true.) that they would have had
greater advantages, and sooner have made their conconquests, had the artillery
bin in those times. Touching the second point, that men cannot make proof of
their valor as of old they might, by reason of the artillery, I say, that it
is true, that where men are to show themselves in scattered troops, they run
more hazard, then when they are to scale a wall or make such like assaults,
where they are not all in one body, but each one a part shows himself. It is
true also that the Captains and Commanders of armies are exposed to more
danger of death, being that then the artillery can reach them in any place; nor
availes it them to be in the hindermost ranks, or environed by their
valiantest Soldiers. Yet we see, that neither of these two dangers do often
endammage much; for places fortified are not easily scaled, nor do they weakly
go to assail them: but if they will take them, they must besieges them, as it
was the custom of old. And where they take their towns by assault, the
dangers now a days are not much greater then they were wont to be: for even in
those times they who defended the towns, wanted not their instruments of war
where with to shoot at their enemies, which (though perhaps they were not of
that violence) yet for slaughter were of the same effect. Touching the death of
Captains and Commanders, in four and twenty years time, that these last
wars have bin in Italy, we have not so many examples, as in ten years the
ancients had: for from Count Lodowicke of Mirandola, that died at Ferrara, when
the Venetians, a few years since, assai'd that state, and the Duke of Nemours,
that died at Cerignuola, there has not any one bin slain by the canon: For
the Lord of Fois was slain by the sword at Ravenna, and not by the Cannon. So
that if men give no particular proofs of their valor, it is not caused by
their canon, but prooeeds from their evil orders, and the feebleness of their
armies, which when they want valor in the gross, cannot then in any particular
make show of it. Touching the third allegation made by them, that they can
never come to join battle, but that the sum of all will depend upon the
artillery, I say that this opinion is utterly false, and so shall it be held by
those who according to the valor of old will employ their armies: for
whosoever will have a good army, must use them in trainings or rather in
battles to come up close to the enemy, and there fall to handy blows with him,
and take him by the collar: and they ought to ground more upon the infantry
then the cavallery, for some reasons we shall here, after allege. And when
they shall rely most upon the foot, and upon these ways we have spoken of, the
artillery becomes quite unprofitable; for more easily can the infantry avoid
the blow of the cannon by coming up close to the enemy, then of old they could
escape the sury of the Elephants, the chariors armed with hooks, and such other
unaccusiomed encounters which the Roman infantry met with, and sound remedy
against, which they would to much the more easily have found against these, as
much as the time is of very short durance in which the artillery can harm
thee, in comparison of of that wherein the Elephan^s and chariots ^id mischief:
for these in the very middle and heat of the battle did put all into disorder;
whereas the artillery hinders thee only before the battle: which hinderance
the infantry easily avoid, either by going covered under the natural site of
the place, or by stooping toward the ground when they shoot: which also we see
by experience is not necessary, especially to escape the canon, which can
hardly be so right levelled, but that if they go high they miss thee, if low
they come short of thee. Afterward when the armies are come to handy blows,
this is more clear then the light, that neither the great nor small shot can do
thee much harm: for if the enemy places the artillery before him, thou may
easily take it; if behind him, it hurts himself before it can touch thee: or if
it be on either side of thee, it cannot so gall thee, but that thou may come
up close to it; whereupon will follow the effect we have said. Nor needs there
much dispute upon this: for we have seen it by the example of the Switzers, who
at Navarra in the year 1513. without arrillery or horse assailed the French
army within their fortifications being guarded with artillery, and yet routed
them being no way hindered thereby: and the reason is, (besides the things
formerly alleged) because the artillery has need to be guarded, if we would
it should make any good execution, either by some wall, or trenches or some
kind of fortifications, and when it fails of these defenses it becomes a prey
to the enemy, and so is made unprofitable, as it comes to pass when it is
defended only by men, or as it may be in field battles, it cannot be placed on
the flank, unless it be on that manner, that the ancients used their
instruments of war, when they placed them without their squadrers, because they
should play from without the ranks; and whenever they were put at, either by
the horse or others they retired behind the legions: whose ever accounts
otherwise of them, does not well understand the use of them, and trusts'upon
that, which may easily deceive him, and if the Turk by the help of his
artillery, have gaind any victory of the Sophy and the So'dan, it was not
occasioned by other virtue of it, then by the affright the unusual noise
thereof put the horse into. Therefore I conclude, coming to the end of this
discourse, that the artillery is prossitable in an army, where there is a
mingle of the ancient valor, without which it avails little against a
courageous army.

CHAP. XVIII.
How by authority taken from the Romans, and from the use of the ancient
military discipline, the foot is more to be esteemd, than the horse.

WE can plainly sshew it by many reasons and examples, how much the Romans in
all military actions did prefer the infantry before the cavalry, and thereupon
grounded the assurance of all their executions, as it appears by many examples,
and among others, when they sought with the Latins near the lake of Regillum,
where the Roman Army giving ground a little, for their succors, the horsemen
were commanded to light and serve a soct whereby they made good the fight and
gaind the victory. Where it is manifest, the Romans had more confidence in them
being a foot, than a horseback, They used the same terms in many other fights,
and sound it always a present help in their dangers. Nor let Hannibals opinion
counterballance this, who seeing in the battle at Canna that the Consuls made
their horsemen light and serve afoot, scoffing at the course they took, said, I
Quam mallem vinctos mihi traderent equites.
had rather indeed they should be delivered bound into my hands. Which opinion
however that it was utterd by a very able man, yet if we are to follow
authorities, we may rather give credit to a Roman Commonwealth, and so many
excellent Captains, that flourished in it, than to one Hanniball alone, though
without this authority the reasons are evident: for a man on foot can go in
many places, where a horseback he cannot: he may be able to instruct them, how
to keep their ranks, and being somewhat confused, how they may be restored
again. It is very hard to make the horse keep their ranks, and when once they
are in disorder, it is impossible to recover them. Besides this, as we see it
among men, so is it among horses; some there are which have but small courage,
others again exceeding courageous. And many times it falls out, that a brave
horse is backed by a cowardly fellow, and sometimes a timorous jade is mounted
by a stout Soldier; and there which way soever it is that this disparitie
follows, arises uprofitableness and disorder. The infantry well united in their
ranks are easily able to rout the horse, and very hardly can they be routed by
them: Which opinion is confirmed (besides many ancient modern examples) by
their authorities who have left us the records of ancient Republiques, where
they show us, how that at first they began to make war a horseback, because
they understood neither the order nor the use of the foot, which when they once
had the knowledge of, they quickly conceived how much more profitable they were
than the horse. But hereupon it follows not that the horse are not necessary in
armies, to discover, and to forage and prey about in the Country, and to
pursue the enemies in their slight, and in part also to oppose all the attempts
of the the adversaries horse. But the groundwork, and the very nerves of the
army, and whereof most account is to be made, is the Infantry. And among the
Italian Princes faults, which have euthral'd Italy to strangers, there is none
greater than that they made no account of this order, and turned all their
regard toward the service of horsemen: Which disorder proceeded from the evil
disposition of the Captains, and their ignorance that governed the State: by
reason that for these twenty-five years last past all the military affairs in
Italy were in the hands of men that had no settled estates, but were Captains
adventurers, serving where they could have pay, who presently devised how they
could maintain their reputation, they continuing in arms when the Princes were
unarmed. And because they could not continually get pay for a good number of
foot, nor had any subjects whereof to serve themselves, and a small number got
them no credit, they be took themselves to horse: for a Captain having pay for
200 or 300 horse, subsisted thereby in good repute, and the payment was not
such, but that those that ruled the State could easily satisfy it. And to the
end this should come on more easily, and to keep themselves the better in
esteem, they took all respect and reputation from the foot, and reserred all to
their cavallery; And so far increased they this disorder, that in the greatest
Army they levied, the least part of them was foot. Which custom, together with
many other disorders intermixed with it, has much weakened the Italian Soldiery,
so that this Country has easily bin trodden under foot by all strangers. This
error, of esteeming the horse more than the foot, is laid open yet more
plainly, by another example of the Romans. The Romans were encamped at Sora;
and a troop of horse having made a sally out of the town to assualt the Camp, a
Captain of the Roman horse went to encounter them with his Cavalry, whereupon
the first shock, meeting breast to breast, it chanced that the Commander of each
troop was slain, and the residue being left without government, and the
skirmish still continuing, the Romans that they might the better vanquish their
enemies, light from their horses, and forced their enemies (if they would
defend themselves) to do the like, wherewith the Romans carried away the
victory. This example could not serve better to the purpose, in showing of how
much value the infantry is, above the horse: for if in other occasions the
Consuls made the horsemen to dismount, it was to succor the foot that were in
distress, and had need of aid. But in this place they light not to assist the
foot, nor to fight with their enemies foot, but fighting a horseback with
horsemen, they thought that though they were not able to master them on
horseback, that alightning they could more easily vanquish them: I will
therefore conclude, that a body of foot in good order and array cannot without
much difficulty be overcome by another body of foot. Crassus and Marchus
Antonius both Romans, made an introde of many days journeys into the Parthians
Kingdom, with a very few horse and a good number of foot, where they
incountred with numberless troops of the Parthian horse. Crassus was left there
dead with part of the Army; Marcus Antonius valorously saved himself.
Nevertheless, in these Roman losses it appears, how much the Infantry exceeded
the horse: for being in an open Country, where there are few mountains, and
very few rivers, and the Seacoast far off, and remote from all convenience,
yet for all this did Marcus Antonius even in the opinion of the Parthians
themselves, very valourously escape, nor ever durst the whole Parthian Cavalry
venture to break into the ranks of his Army. If Crassus perished there,
whosoever well reads his actions, shall find, that he was rather treacherously
beguild, than forced, nor ever in all his disorders, durst the Parthians set
upon him, but always went along by him, to keep in his soldiers from
straggling, and getting of provisions, and by promising fairly, but observing
nothing, brought him at length unto extreme distress. I should think I were to
take much pains in persuading that the valor of the infantry does much excel
that of the horse, but that there are many modern examples which give us a very
satisfactory testimony. And it is well known that 9000 Swisses at Navarra,
formerly alleged by us, went to encounter 10000 horse and as many more foot,
and vanquished them: for the horse could no way harm them, and the foot being
for the most part Gascoignes and ill ordered, they made small account of. We
see likewise that afterward 36000 Swisses, went to find Francis the French
King about Milan, who had an army of 20000 horse and 40000 foot, and a 100 tire
of Ordnance; and though they gaind not the battle at at Navarra, yet they
fought bravely two days together, and when at length they were broken the
moity of them escaped. Marcus Regulus Attilius presumed with his infantry to
encounter not only the enemies horse, but their Elephants; and though his
purpose came not to effect, yet was it not so, but that the valor of his
infantry was such, that he had very good reason to hope he might well overcome
that difficulty. And therefore I answer, that he that would overcome a body of
foot in good array, must oppose them with another body of foot in better order
than they; otherwise he sustains an evident loss. In the days days of Philip
Visconti Duke of Milan, there came down into Lombardy some 16000 Swisses,
whereupon the Duke Carmignuola being then his General, sent him with near upon
a thousand horse and some few foot to encounter them: Who not knowing the
manner of their fighting, went to meet them with his horse, not doubting but
that he could presently rout them. But finding them to stand firm, and having
lost many Soldiers, retired; yet being a very able man, and knowing in new
accidents how to try new ways, having repaird his broken troops, he went
again to meet them, where he made all his armed men a light, and serve on foot,
and so by them having made a head to those of his infantry, he invested the
Swisses, who found no way to help themselves: for Carmignuolaes horsemen bring
lighted, who were well armed, were able with facility to enter into the Swisses
ranks without much hurt: which when they had pierced, they could easily harm;
so that of their whole number there was left only that part alive, that was by
Carmignuolaes courtesy preserved. I believe well that many know this difference
of valor that is between the one and the other of these orders, but so unhappy
are these times, that neither the ancient nor modern examples, nor the
acknowledgement of the error is of force to prevail with modern Princes to
readvise themselves and consider, that to recover the reputation of the
Soldiery of a Country or State, it is necessary to revive again these orders
and entertain them near their persons, to encourage them and allow them means
to live, to the end they may restore to them both life and reputation. But as
we use to forsake these customs, so we leave other orders also formerly spoken
of; whereupon it comes to pass, that the very conquests we make turn to our
losses, and not to the advancement of a State, as hereafter we shall say.

CHAP. XIX.
That Conquests in Republiques not well governed, and which proceed not
according to the Roman virtue, prove rather their ruin, than advancement.

THese opinions contrary to the truth, and grounded on evil precedents, which
have bin introduced by these our corrupt ages, cause men not to stand much upon
straying from old wonted uses. Some thirty years ago, an Italian would never
have bin persuaded, that ten thousand foot in a plain had ever bin able to
assault ten thousand horse and so many more foot, and not only fight with them,
but vanquish them too, as it is plain by the example of the battle at Navarra;
by us sundry times alleag'd. And however that Stories are full of them, yet
would they not have given us credit: and if they had believed us, they would
have said, that in these days men are better armed, and that a squadron of men
at arms would have bin of force to have shocked with a rock, and not only with
a body of foot, and thus with these false excuses they corrupted their
judgments. Nor would they have taken into consideration, that Lucullus with a
few foot routed a 150000 horse that Tigranes led, and yet among those horsemen
there was a sort of them very like our men at arms. And so this fallacy was
discovered by the example of foreign Nations. And as thereby it proves true,
touching the infantry, which is related in Story, so ought it be believed that
all the rest of the ancient orders are true and useful. And when this we re
once credited, Republiques and Princes would fail less, and be of more strength
to resist any force should come upon them, nor hope so much in the flight; and
those that should have in their hands the government of State, would be better
able to guide it, either by way of amplification or by way of preservation, and
would think that to increase the number of their Citizens, and make them as
their associates and not vassals, to send forth Colonies to keep the countries
gained, to make a general stock out of the booties taken, to tame the enemy
with incursions, and by set battles, and not long sieges, to maintain the
public state in wealth, and the private in scarcity, and to be industrious in
keeping the armies in good discipline, are the means to enlarge a Commonwealth
and gain an Empire. And when this way of amplification should not like them,
then should they think that all addition to their state are the ruin of
Commonwealths, and therefore should restrain all ambition, regulating their
City according to their laws and customs, forbidding all inlargments, only
aiming at defenee of what they have, and keeping them under good government, as
the Republics of Germany do, and so have lived free a good while.
Notwithstanding (as otherwhere I have said, when I discoursed touching the
difference there was in the ordering of a State to become fit to conquer; and
the ordering of one to be able to maintain it self) it is impossible, that a
Republic should have the hap to stand quiet, and enjoy her own liberty, with
her small Territories: for though she molest not others yet she shall be
molested her self: she may also have some mind or some necessity in some part
to extend her bounds: and in case she have no enemy abroad, yet may she find
some one at home, as it must needs be always that such be found among a great
many potent citizens, and if those Republics of Germany can subsist in that
manner, and have been able to continue for a time it arises from some
conditions, that are in that Country, and which are no where else sound, nor
could they maintain such a manner of government without them. This part of
Germany, whereof I speak, was subject to the Roman Empire, as were France and
Spain; but when the Empire began to decline, and the title of the Empire was
brought into that Country, the most potent of those Cities began (according to
the baseness or the necessity of those Emperors) to set themselves at liberty,
buying themselves out from the Empire, and reserving thereunto only a a certain
annual rent. Insomuch as by little and little, all those Cities, which he^d
immediately of the Emperor, and were no way in subjection to any Prince, in such
like manner set themselves free. It happened in the same times, when these
Cities bought out their liberties, that certain communalties of the Duke of
Austria's subjects, rebelled agianst him, among which were Tilibourg, the
Swisses and others, who prospering in the beginning, by little and little came
to such growth, that they not only shook off the Austrian yoke, but even became
a terror to all their neighbors, and these are those they call Swisses. This
Country therefore is divided into the Swisses, Republcks, which they call-free
Towns, Princes, and the Emperor. And the reason why among such variety of
governments there arise no wars, or if any do, why they continue not, is that
reverence they yield to the Emperor, who albeit he has no great forces, yet is
held in such esteem among them, that he always reconciles them, and with his
authority interposing himself as Mediator, takes away all discontents: and the
greatest and longest wars that have been there, were those that followed
between the Swisses and the Duke of Austria; and though now for these many
years the Emperor and the Duke of Austria have been one and the same thing, yet
was he never so powerful as to tame the Swisses insolence, where there was
never any means of accord, unless it were by force; nor has the residue of
Germany ever given him much assistance: partly because those communalties
cannot find in their hearts to hurt those that desire to live under a civil
government, as they themselves do and partly because those Princes are not
able, being poor, or will not, by reason that they envy too great puissance.
Those commonalties therefore may live contented with their small dominions,
because they have no occasion (in regard of the Imperial Authority) to wish it
greater. They may live the better in union within their own walls, because
they have the enemy near at hand, who would willingly take any opportunity to
lay hold on them, whenever they should fall into discord: but if that country
were otherwise conditioned, it were fit for them to seek the enlargement of
their State, and so interrupt their own rest: and because otherwhere there are
not the like terms, this manner of living cannot be followed, and there is a
necessity either to strengthen the State by way of leagues, or to amplify it
as the Romans did. And whosoever undertake any other course of government,
seek not their own life, but ruin and desttruction: for many ways, and for
many reasons are conquests hurtful: for it is very possible to gain dominion,
and not strength; and he that does increase his dominions, and yet grows not
in strength, must needs go to wrack. They cannot grow strong, that grow poor
in the wars, although they prove victorious, because their conquests cost them
more then they get by them, as the Venetians and the Florentins did, who have
bin much weaker, when the one commanded all Lombardy, and the other Tuscany,
then when the one was contented with the seaonley and the other with six miles
round of territories: for all this preceeded from their desire to conquer, and
their ignorance to take the right course: and they deserve the more blame, in
that they have very little excuse having seen the ways the Romans went,
because they might have followed their example, being that the Romans without
any pattern to follow, by their own judgment, found out a fit way to go.
Moreover sometimes such gains gotten do no small harm to a well governed
Commonwealth, when either such a city or country is conquered that abounds with
pleasures, where by conversation with them, their manners are learned, as it
happened to Rome at first in the conquest of Capua, and afterward to Hannibal.
And had Capua been of further distance from the City, that the soldiers error
had not had the remedy near hand, or that Rome had been in some part corrupted,
without question that conquest had proved the Roman Republics ruin. And T.
Livius witnesses the same in these words: Even then was Capua little good for
the military discipline, Jam tunc minime sal bris militari disciplinae Capua,
instrun entum omnium voluptatum, delinitos militum animos avertit a memoria
patriae.
which being the instrument of all sorts of pleasures, besotted the soldiers
minds so, that they forgot their native Countries. And truly such like Cities
sufficiently avenge themselves on their Conquerors without fight, or loss of
blood; for by infecting them with their contagious vices, they expose them to
the conquest of whoever assailes them. And Juvenal could not better have
expressed this, then where in his Satyrs he says, that by their conquests of
foreign nations, their minds were possessed with foreign vices, in exchange of
parsimony, and other excellent virtues; Glutrony and luxury making their
habitation there, revenged the Gula and Luxuris incubuit, ^ictunique ulci(...)
orbem.
worlds Conquest on them. If therefore these gettings were likely to have been
dangerous to the Romans, in the times that they proceeded with such wisdom and
virtue, how will they prove to those who go on in much different ways from
them? and who besides the other errors they run into (whereof we have formerly
spoken enough) serve themselves of either mercenary or auxiliary soldiers?
whereupon those mischiefs often befall them, which we shall mention in the
following chap.

CHAP. XX.
What hazard that Prince or Commonwealth runs, which is served by auxiliary
and mercenary soldiers.

IF in another work of mine I had not treated at large of mercenary and
auxiliary soldiers how unprofitable they are, and how very profitable the
native soldiers of the Country are, I would much more have enlarged my self in
this discourse, than now I purpose; but having otherwhere discoursed hereupon
at length, I shall now only point at it. Not yet did I think fit wholly to pass
it over, having found in Titus Livius so large an example belonging to those
soldiers: for auxiliary soldiers are those that a Prince or Commonwealth sends
with their Captains and pay ready furnished in thy aid. And coming to the text
of T. Livius, I say, that the Romans having in several places broken two
armies of the Samnites with their forces, which they sent to succor the
Capuans, and thereby freed them from that war the Samnites made against them,
purposing to return to Rome, to the end the Capuans dispoyl'd of aid should not
a new become a prey to the Samnites, left behind them in the country about Capua
two legions to defend them. Which legions growing corrupt through idleness,
began to be ensnared with the delicacies thereof So that having for gotten
their own country, and the reverence they ought to the Senate, they resolved
to take arms, and make themselves Lords of that Country, which they by their
valors had defended, thinking those inhabitants not worthy to enjoy those
goods, which they knew not how to defend. Which thing, the Romans having had
some inkling of it before, was stopped, and punished by them, as, where we
speak of conspiracies, it shall be showed at large. Therefore I say again, that
of all kinds of soldiers the auxiliaries are the most dangerous; Because
among those, that Prince or Republique that uses them for aid, has no
authority, but only he that sends them: for auxiliary soldiers are those that
are sent th^e by a Prince, as I have said, under the command of his own
Captains, under his own ensigns and pay also, as this army was, which the
Romans sent to Capua. These kinds of soldiers, when they have vanquished,
most commonly pillage as well them that have hired them, as the enemy against
whom they have hired them; and this they do, either through the malign
disposition of their Prince that sends them, or through their own ambition And
however the Romans had no intention to violate the agreement and conventions
made with the Capuans, yet the facility wherewith those soldiers thought
themselves able to take their town, was such that it might have been of force
to persuade them to think of taking the town and State from the Capuans: Many
examples to this purpose may be alleged; but this, and that of the inhabitants
of Rhegium shall suffice me, from whom both lives and town were taken by one
legion of soldiers, which the Romans had there left in garrison. Therefore a
Prince or a Republic should rather take any other course, than seek to bring
auxiliary soldiers into his Country, principally when he is most to rely upon
them: for any accord or agreement (though very hard) to which he shall yield
with his enemy, shall be more tolerable than this. And if things past were well
called to mind, and those that are present well considered on, for one that
has had good success in such a business, a man shall find exceeding many who
have been abused. And a Prince, or an ambitious Republic can never have a
fitter opportunity to seize on a Town or Country, than when they are required
to send their armies for defense thereof. Wherefore he that is so ambitious,
that not only for his own defense, but for offense to another, calls in such
like aids, seeks to gain that he cannot hold, and which also he that gets it
for him, can at his pleasure take from him, But so great is man's ambition, that
if he can fulfill his desire for the present, he is never aware of that evil,
which shortly after may thence redound to him. Nor do the ancient examples
avail any thing with him, as well in this, as in other things we have treated
of: for were men hereby moved, they would perceive that the more freely and
fairly they dealt with their neighbors, and the farther of they were from
making themselves masters of them, the more readily would they offer to cast
themselves into their arms, as hereafter shall appear by example of the
Capuans.

CHAP. XXI.
The first Pretour that the Romans ever sent to any place, was to Capua, four
hundred years after they began to make war.

HOw much the Romans in their manner of proceeding in their Conquests did
differ from those, who now a days enlarge their dominions, we have formerly
discoursed enough, and how they suffered those Towns which they did not utterly
race, to live with their own laws, as well those that yielded to them as
subjects, as those that came under their protection as associates. And in them
they left no marks of the Roman Empire, but tied them to some certain
conditions, which whiles they observed, they still maintained them in their
state and dignity. And we know that these courses were continued till they
began to Conquer abroad out of Italy, and that they reduced Kingdoms and
States into Provinces. Whereof the example is very clear; for the first place
that ever they sent any Preror to was Capua, whether they sent him not through
their own ambition, but upon the Capuans entreaty, who (being they were at
discord one with another) judged it necessary to have a Citizen of Rome amongst
them, that might put them in order again and reunite them. The Antiates also
moved by their example, and constrained by the same necessity required to have
a Prefect sent them. And T. Livius says upon this occasion, and upon this new
way of ruling; That now not only the Roman Quod jam non solum arma, sed jura
Romana pollebant.
arms, but their laws also were in great repute. We see therefore how much
this course taken, furthered the Romans advancement: for those Cities
especially that are accustomed to live free, or to be governed by their own
Citizens, are well enough contented to live in another manner of quiet under a
rule they see not (though it may bring some burden with it too) rather than
under that which they having every day in their view, continually reproaches
them with their slavery. Besides this; the Prince gains hereby another
advantage, that his Officers having not in their hands these judicatures and
magistracies, whereby they were to regulate those Cities, there can no
imputation or aspersion be cast upon the Prince. And hereby many occasions of
calumny and hatred against him are taken away. And that this is true, besides
ancient examples, which we could allege, we have one of late memory in Italy:
for as it is well known (Geneva having been several times possessed by the
French) that King did always (except at this present time) send them a French
Governor, who under him should govern them. For this present only, but upon any
intention of the Kings; but it seemed necessity so ordered it, he has suffered
them to be governed by their own laws, and to have a Genowes for their
Magistrate. And I make no question but that he that inquires which of these two
ways most secures the King for his rule over them, and gives the people most
satisfaction, would the rather allow of this latter. Moreover men cast
themselves the more freely into thy arms, the further off they think thee from
being desirous to rule; and so much the less do they fear thee in regard of
their liberty, by how much the more courteous and familiar thou art with them.
This familiarity and free manner of behavior made the Capuans hasty to ask a
Prerour of the Romans: but had the Romans of themselves made but the least show
they would have sent one thicher, they would presently have been in jealousy
of them, and started from them. But what need we go to Capua and Rome for
examples, having store enough at Florence and in Tuscany? It is well known how
long since it is that Pistotia willingly yielded it self to the government of
Florence. It is as well known also, what enmity has been between the
Florentines and the Pisans, the Luckeses and the Seneses; and this difference
of diposition proceeds not from thence, that the Pistoyeses value not their
liberty, as well as others do, but because the Florentines used these with that
respect they do their own brothers, but the others they treated as enemies.
This was the occasion made the Pistoyeses offer themselves freely to be
governed by them; and the others struggle with all might and main, as yet they
do also, not to come under them. And doubtless, had the Florentines either by
way of alliances or succors grown familiar with their neighbors, and not have
always scared them, they had at this instant been Lords of all Tuscany. But
hereupon I advise not, that arms and force are not to be used, but that they
are to be reserved for the last place, where and when other means will not
serve.

CHAP. XXII.
How erroneous many times the opinions of men are, when they give their
judgments touching great affairs.

HOw false oftentimes men's opinions are, they well see, who are eyewitnesses
of their deliberations, which many times unless they be determined of by able
men, are contrary to all truth. And because that excellent men in corrupted
Commonwealths (especially in peaceable times) both for envy and occasions of
ambition are maligned, such adwise is followed, as by reason of a common error
is well approved of, or such as is put forward by men that aim rather at grace
and favor then the general good. This error afterward is discovered in times
of adversity, and of force recourse is had to those that in times of peace were
utterly forgotten, as in its own place in this part it shall fully be spoken
of. There are also certain accedents where men are very easily beguiled, if not
well experienced in affairs, the present accident having in it self many
likelihoods fit to make that credible, whereof in such a case men are
persuaded. These words are spoken upon that which Numicius the Pretour (after
that the Latins were defeated by the Romans) persuaded them; and upon that
which few years since, many believed, when Francis the first, King of France
came to the Conquest of Milan, which was defended by the Swissers. Therefore I
say, that Lewis the Twelfth being dead, and Francis of Angoulesme succeeding in
the Kingdom of France, and desiring to restore the Duchy of Milan to the
Kingdom whereof the Switzers had of late possessed themselves, by means of
Pope Julius the seconds encouragement, desired to have some aid in Italy, which
might further his undertakings, so that besides the Venetians, whom King Lewis
had gained, he tried the Florentines, and Pope Leo the tenth, thinking his
enterprise much facilitated, by having them to side with him, because the King
of Spains soldiers were in Lombardy, and some of the Emperors forces in Verona.
Pope Leo yielded not to the Kings desire, but by those that counseled him, he
was persuaded (as it was said) to stand neuter, showing him that herein
consisted certain victory: for it was nothing at all for the Churches good, to
have either mighty in Italy, the King or the Swissers. But if he desired to
restore it to the ancient liberty, it was fit to free it from the one and the
other. And because it was not possible to varquish the one or the other,
divided or united, it was not ami's to let them overcome one another, and that
afterward the Church with her allies should assail the conqueror, and it was
impossible to find a better occasion then the present, both being encamped: and
so the Pope having his forces in order, whereby he might be able to present
himself upon the confines of Lombardy, near the two armies under color of
guarding his own state, should there abide till they had fought their battle:
which in all probability (each army being very valorous) could not but prove
bloody to them both and leave the Conqueror so feeble, that the Pope might
easily assail and break him, and thereby he should attain to become Lord of
Lombardy, and only arbitrator of all Italy. And how erroneous this opinion was,
appeared by the event of the matter: for the Swissers being vanquished after a
long fight, the Popes and the Spanish soldiers were so far from assailing the
Conquerors, that they prepared themselves with what haste they could for
flight; which also would have little availed them had it not been for the Kings
humanity or coldness in their pursuit, who sought not after a second victory,
but was contented to make agreement with the Church. This opinion has some
arguments for it, which carry a color of truth, but indeed are far from it:
for it seldom comes to pass, that the Conqueror loses many of his soldiers;
for of them, there are some only slai in the battle, and not in the flight: and
during the heat of the combat, whiles men stand face to face one with another,
few of them fall, especially because for the most part this continues but a
small while. And in case it should last long, and many of the Conquerors should
fall; yet such is the reputation, and terror also, that victory draws with it,
that it far exceeds the damage, that by the death of those soldiers can be
suffered. So that an Army, which upon the opinion, that such a one were
weakened, going to assail it, would be much deceived, unless it were such an
Army that at all times, before and after the victory, were able to deal with
it. In this case the assailing Army may be able according to the fortune and
valor it has to win or lose: but that which had formerly fought, and
vanquished, would have some advantage of the other: Which appears plainly by
the experience the Latins gave us, and the fallacy by which Numicius the
Pretour was abused, as also by the damage which those people brought upon
themselves by believing him, who (when the Romans had vanquished the Latins)
cried out through all Latium, that then was it time to assail the Romans, who
were weakened with the late fight they had with the Latins; that the Romans had
carried away only the name of the victory, but had suffered all other sorts of
damages, even as much as if they had been overcome, and that any small force,
if now a fresh it should assail them, were enough to dispatch them. Whereupon
those people that gave credit to him, levied a new army, and were presently
defeated, and so suffered that loss, which others shall that hold the like
opinion.

CHAP. XXIII.
How much the Romans in giving judgment upon their subjects, whenever
occasion was offered, that constrained them thereunto, avoided the mid way, and
rather betook themselves to one of the extremes.

THe Latins were now reduced (...) Jam Latio is status erat rerum, ut neque
pecem, neque bellum pati possent.
to such terms, that they could neither endure peace, nor maintain War. Of all
unhappy conditions this is the worst, unto which a Prince or Republic can be
brought, that they can neither accept of peace, nor support the War; unto which
those are reduced, who are overmuch offended at the conditions of peace, and on
the other side, if they have a mind to make war, either they must cast
themselves as a prey into the hands of those that aid them, or become a prey to
their enemy. And into these mischances men fall by evil advices and evil
courses, by not having well weighed their own forces, as before it was said:
for that Republique or Prince, that should well weigh them, very hardly would
ever be brought to those terms the Latins came, who when they should not have
made accord with the Romans, made it, and when, they should not have broke
peace with them brake it. Whereby they brought it so to pass that their
agreement and disagreement with the Romans did equally endammage them. The
Latins then were overcome and much broken at first by Manlus Torquatus, and
afterward by Camillus; who having forced them to yield and render themselves
to the Romans, and put Garrisons in all the I owns in Latium, and taken
hostages of them all, when he came back to Rome, related to the Senate, that
all Latium was in the people of Romes hands. And because this judgment is
remarkable, and deserves note, to the end it may be followed, when Princes have
the like occasions given them, I will produce the very words, that Livie put in
Camillus his mouth, which did testify both of the manner the Romans held in
amplifying the State, and that in their judgments touching the State, they
always avoided the middle way, and turned to the extremes: for a government is
nothing else, but to have such a tie upon the subjects, that they either
cannot, or will not hurt thee. This is done either by making thy self fully
sure of them, in taking away from them all means to hurt thee, or by doing them
so much good, that it is not probable they will wish to change their state: all
which is there comprehended; first by the proposition Camillus made, and
afterward by the judgment the Senate gave thereupon. His words were these, In
this consultation, the immortal Gods have given you so much power, that it is
wholly in your hands to choose, whether Latium shall continue still a Nation or
no. And Dij mortales ita vos potentes hujus consilit fecerunt, ut, sit Latium,
an non fit, in vestra manu posuerint. Itaque pacem vobis (quo ad Latinos
attinet) parere in perpetuum, vel saeviendo vel ignoscendo potestis. Vultis
crudelius consulere in deditos victosque, licet delere nomen Latinum. Vultis
exemplo majorum augere re^n Romanam, victos in civitatem accipiendo, materia
crescendi per summam gloriam suppeditat. Certe id firmissimum imperium est, quo
obedientes gaudent. Illorum igitur animos, dum expectatione stupent, seu paena
seu beneficio praeoccupari oporcet.
therefore now may ye for ever procure your selves repose and security from
thence, either by rigor and punishment, or by clemency and pardon; choose ye
whether. Are ye minded to proceed by way of cruelty against those that have
yielded, and are vanquished? ye may indeed blot out the very name of Latium;
But will ye, as your ancestors have done before you, enlarge the Roman Empire,
by receiving into your City those whom ye have conquered? Then have ye here
means to grow mighty to your great glory. Certes that government is of all
other most sure, where the subjects take joy in their obedience. And therefore
it is behoovefull, whiles their minds are in suspense between fear and hope,
to prevent them either with speedy punishment or benefit. To this purpose
followed the Senates deliberation, which was according to the Consuls words;
for calling them Town by Town, before them, those that were of any moment, they
either much benefited, or quite ruined them, granting diverse exemptions and
privileges to those they would do good to, freely making them Citizens, and
giving them security every way. They dismantled the other strong Towns, and
sent Colonies thither, and brought the people from thence into Rome, and so
dispersed them, that neither with their arms nor counsel they could do any more
harm: Nor ever did they make use of any neutral way, in things (as I have said)
of moment. Princes should imitate this judgment given; and hereunto the
Florentines should have intended, when in the year 1502. Arezzo and the valley
of Chiana rebelled; which had they done, they had secured their Government, and
much amplified the City of Florence, and likewise might have given them those
fields they wanted for their sustenance: But they made use rather of that
middle way, which is the most pernicious, in giving judgment upon men, so that
part of the Aretins they confined, part they condemned, and took from all of
them their honors, and ancient degrees in the City, and yet left the City whole
and untouched: And if any Citizen in their Consultations advised that Arezzo
should be dismantelled, and razed, they who seemed to be of the wiser sort,
said it would be a disgrace to the Florentines to raze it; because it would be
thought then that Florence wanted forces to hold them; which are some of those
Reasons that seem to be, but are not true: For by the same reason a patricide
were not to be put to death, not any vile or scandalous person, it being a
shame for that Prince to show that he is not able to bridle such a man alone:
and these kind of men having such opinions, perceive not, how men in
particular, and sometimes a whole City together too, do wrong a State: so that
for others example, and his own safeguard, a Prince has no other remedy, but
uterly to raze it. And indeed the honor consists in the knowledge and power to
chastise, and not in being able to hold a City under still with many dangers:
for the Prince that punishes not him that offends, so that he cannot offend
more, is esteemd ignorant and unworthy. This sentence which the Romans gave, is
confirmed by the judgment they gave upon the Privernates. Where by the Text in
Livie two things may be observed: the one, which is formerly spoken of, that
subjects are either to be obliged by good done them, or else to be quite
extingnish'd; the other is, how much avails the generous conrage of the mind,
and true speaking in the presence of sage and discreet men. The Senate of Rome
was assembled to give their sentence upon the Privernates, who having been in
Rebellion, were by force reduced to the Roman obedience. Many Citizens were
sent from the Privernates to crave pardon of the Senate, who Quam poenam
meritos Privernates censeret. Eas inquam merentur, qui se liberate dignos
censent. Quid si poenam remittimus vobis, qualem nos pacem vobis cum habituros^
spear mus? Si ^onam dederitis, and fidelem and perpetuam; sin malam, haud
diuturnam. Se audivisse vocem and liberi and viri, nec credi posse ullum
populum, aut hominem denique in ea condition, cu^us eum poenite at diutius
quam necesse sit mansurum; ibi pacem; isse fidam, ubi voluntarij pacatisint,
neque eo loco, ubi servitutem esse velint, fidem sperandam esse. Eos demum, qui
nihil praeserquam del ibertate cogitant, dignos; esse qui Romanifiant.
being come before them, were thus asked by one of the Senators, What
Punishment he should censure the Privernates worthy of? Whereunto one of the
Privernates replied, The same that they deserve, who think themselves worthy of
liberty. Whereunto the Consul answered, What if we remit you your punishment,
what peace shall we hope for with you? To which he said again, If it be good
you give us, you shall have it faithfully and perpetually observed, if ill, not
long. Whereupon the wises of those of the Senate, howbeit many were angry
thereat, said, That they had heard a stout and a free man speak; neither was it
credible that any Nation, or any man indeed, would continue any longer, than he
must needs, in such a condition, whereof he repents himself; and there only
was it likely a peace would be inviolably kept, where it was made of their own
good wills and freely; but it was in no case to be hoped for there, where they
were brought into bondage and servitude. and upon these words they decreed,
that the Privernates should be made Citizens of Rome, and honored them with
all the privileges of their Bourgessie, saying, That they finally were worthy
to be Citizens of Rome, who valued nothing else in comparison of their liberty.
So much were these generous spirits taken with this stout and free answer: for,
an answer else would have been false and cowardly. And those that think
otherwise of men (especially such as are used to be free, or to their thinking
are free) are much deceived, and by this deceit are they feduc'd to take wrong
courses for themselves, and of little satisfaction to others: from whence arise
the often rebellions and ruins of States. But to return to our discourse, I
conclude as well by this, as by that judgment given upon the Latins, when
sentence is to pass upon puissant Cities, and that have been accustomed to
enjoy their liberties, it is necessary either utterly to raze them, or by
benefiting of them to oblige them; otherwise it is all to no purpose; for the
middle way here in is absolutely to be avoided, which is dangerous, as it
proved to the Samnites, having enclosed the Romans at the gallows of Gaudium,
when they would not follow that old man's counsel that advised them, either to
let them go with all courtesy and love, or put them all to the sword. But they
taking that neutral way, disarming them, and putting them all to pass under the
gallows, let them go with shame and disdain so that a while after they found by
their own damage how advantageous that old man's advice had been, and how
hurtful their own resolution was, as we shall discourse thereof more at large
in its own place.

CHAP. XXIV.
Fortresses in general do more harm then good.

PEradventure it may seem to the wise men of our times a matter not well
advised on, that the Romans, when they would make themselves sure of the people
of Latium, and of the City of Privernum, never thought upon the building of
some Fortress which might serve for a bridle to hold them in obedience,
especially being it passes for a Proverb in Florence, alleged by our States
men, that Pisa and other such like Cities should be kept with Citradells. And
truly had the Romans been like them, they would have provided for the building
of them: but because they were of another kind of courage, and judgment, and
had another manner of power, therefore they never built any. and whiles Rome
lived free, and observed her own ordinances, and institutions, for the
propagation of virtue, she never built any one to keep under Cities or
Provinces, though it may be, she preserved some of them she found already
built. Whereupon having seen the manner of the Romans proceedings herein, and
that of the Princes of our times, I think to take it into consideration,
whether it be good to build Fortresses, and whether they advantage or wrong him
that builds them. We must consider then, that Fortresses are built either for
resistance against the enemy, or for defense against any tumult of the
subjects. In the first case they are unnecessary, in the second hurtful. And
to give a reason, wherefore in the second case they are hurtful, I say, that
that Prince or Republic that is afraid of his own subjects, and their
rebellion, must needs have his fear arising from the hatred his own subjects
bear him; and that hatred from his own evil carriages, which evil carriages
proceed from thence, either that he believes he is able to keep them under by
force, or from the Princes small discretion: and one of the causes that makes
him think himself able to rule them by force, is the having built these
Citradels, over them: for evil treatings, which are the causes of hatred, for
the most part are derived from thence, that that Prince or Republic has
Cittadels upon them; which (when this is true) are far more hurtful, than
profitable: for first (as it is said) they make thee bolder and more rough
among thy subjects, being that thou have thy security within them: for all
these forces and violences which are in use to bridle a people withal, are of
no value, but these two; either that thou have always a good Army ready to
send into the field, as the Romans had, or that thou do disperse,
extinguish, disorder, and disunite them so, that in no case they can make such
a body as can hurt thee: for be it that thou do impoverish them, They that
are despoiled of their Spoliatis arma supersunt. ^^^or arma ministrat.
goods, have weapons left them. If thou disarmst them, Even rage will find them
weapons. If thou destroyest their heads, and proceedest still to injure the
rest, there will grow up again new heads, as fast as those of Hydra. If thou
buildest Cittadels, they are quite unprofitable in time of peace, because they
encourage thee to wrong them; but in time of war they are of least use; for
then are they assaulted by the enemy, and thy subjects too; nor is it possible
they can resist them both. And if ever they were unprofitable, they are now a
days so, in regard of the Artillery, by reasons of whose fury and violence, it
is unpossible to defend small fortresses, and where there is no place for
retiring with new retrenchments, as formerly has been showed. But I will
dispute this matter more plainly yet. Will thou O Prince with these Cittadels
curb thy Citizens? or will thou whether Prince or Commonwealth that thou art,
bridle a City thou have taken by war? I will address my self to the Prince, and
tell him, that such a Fortress to curb his Citizens cannot be more unprofitable,
for the reasons above alleadgd: because it makes thee prompter, and less
careful how thou do oppress them, which oppression makes them desperate in
attempting thy ruin, and so inrages them, that that Fortress, which is the
cause thereof, can no way preserve thee; so that a sage and good Prince, to
keep himself still good, and that he may not give occasion to, nor imbolden his
children to become bad, will never build fortress, to the end they rely not
upon the Cittadels, but rather upon the hearts of men. And if Count Francis
Storce that came to be Duke of Milan was reputed wise, and yet in Milan he
built a Citadel, I say, that herein he little showed his wisdom, as appeard by
the effect, seeing that Fortress proved rather a disadvantage and loss, then
any safeguard to his heirs: for thinking that by means thereof they might pass
their time in security, and yet injure their Citizens and subjects, they
forbear not any kind of violence; whereupon being grown very odious, they lost
the state, so soon as they were assailed by their enemy. Nor could that
fortress defend them, nor did it any way advantage them in the war, and in time
of peace it had done them much harm; for if there had been no such citradel,
and they for want of discretion only had sharply handled some of their
subjects, they might sooner have discovered the danger, and withdrawn
themselves from it, and so afterward they would have bin able with more
courage to have resisted the French fury, having their subjects to friend
without any fortress, then having them become thine enemies with thy fortress,
which gives thee no help at all. For either it is lost by the treachery of him
that guards it, or is forced by the assailant, or else by famine. And if thou
would that these should avail thee, and help the to recover a state lost,
where only the fortress holds for thee, thou must have an army, wherewith thou
may assault him that chased the from thence. And whenever thou have this
army, thou could not in any wise fail of recovering the State, howsoever
there were no fortress at all; and that the more easily, by how much the
Inhabitants would be more thy friends, then if thou had ill-treated them
through presumption upon thy fortress. And it has been proved by experience,
how that this Cittadell of Milan has little availed either the forces or the
French party in the adversity of the one or other, but has rather brought upon
them many ruins and mischiefs, having never advised, by means thereof, upon
any fair way to keep that state. Guido Vbaldo Duke of Vrbin, son to Frederick,
who in his days was esteemed a great Captain, being driven out of his state by
Caesar Borgia son to Pope Alexander the sixth, when afterward upon a new grown
occasion he returned thither again, he caused all the fortresses to be
demolished that were in the Country, thinking they did more harm then good:
for he having gained men's hearts to him, for their sakes would not abide them;
and in regard of enemies, he saw they were not able to defend him, it being
needful to have a good army in the field to preserve them withal, so that he
resolved to raze them all. Pope Julius, having driven the Bentivogli out of
Bolonia, built a Cittadell there, and caused a governor of his to ransacke them
shrewdly, insomuch that the people rebelled, and he suddenly lost the Citadel,
so that it served him to little purpose, or rather wronged him as much, as
carrying himself otherwise it could have helped him. Nicolas of Castello father
of the Vitelli, returning into his Country from whence he had been banished,
forthwith demolished two several fortresses, which Pope Sextus the fourth had
built there, deeming that not the fortress, but the peoples good wills were
more likely to continue him in his State. But of all other examples, the
freshest and of most remarke in every point, and that which is fittest to show
the incommodity of building them, and the fruit of razing them, is that of
Genua which fell out in these latter times. It is well known how that Genua in
the year 1507. rebelled against Lewis the Twelfth, King of France, who came in
person, and with all his strength to regain it: which being done, he caused an
exceeding strong Citadel to be built there, surpassing in strength all others
that are now adays known: for in regard of the situation, and the other
circumstances belonging thereto, it was impregnable, being placed upon the very
point of a hill, which stretched it self out into the sea, called by the
Genueses, Godefa. And hereby the whole port, and a great part of the Town of
Genua was subject to its battery: It happend afterward in the year of our Lord
God 1512. when the French were driven out of Italy, for all the fortress, Genua
rebelled and Octavian Fregoso recovered the State thereof, who by his industry
in the term of 16 months took it by famine, and as every one believed, so he
was advised by many, to reserve it for his refuge in any accident. But he, as
he was exceeding wise, knowing that they were not fortresses, but men's good
wills that preserved Princes in their state, razed it to the ground, And so
without laying the foundation of his dominion upon the fortress, but rather
upon his own valor and judgment, he has continually held it, and holds it
yet. And whereas a thousand foot were formerly of force to charge the state of
Genua, his adversaries have since assailed it with ten thousand, and have not
been able to hurt him. By this therefore it appears, how the demolishing of the
fortress hurt not Octavian at all, nor did the building of it advantage the
King of France: for when he was able to come into Italy bringing an army with
him, he might recover Genua, though he had no fortress there; but when he could
bring no army with him into Italy, neither could he keep the Genueses in
obedience, though he had a fortress there. It was therefore an expense to the
King to build it, and a shame to lose it, and to Octavian a glory to regain it.
But let us come to those Republiques that raise up fortresses, not in their
native countries, but in those they have conquered. And to show this fallacy,
if that example of France and Genua suffice not, this of Florence and Pisa may,
where the Florentines had built a citadel, to keep that town in subjection:
And never advised themselves, that a City which had always been a prosessed
enemy to the Florentines, having lived free, which has a recourse to liberty
for a color of Rebellion, it was necessary (being desirous to keep her) to use
that manner the Romans had, either to take her as a companion into the state,
or to deface and ruin her: for of what value cittadels are, we saw in King
Charles his coming into Italy, to whom they were yielded, either through the
treachery or cowardice of their governors. Whereas if they had not been, the
Florentines would never have grounded their ability of keeping Pisa still upon
them, nor would the King have been of power that way to have bereaved the
Florentines of that City; and those means, whereby until that time it had been
maintained, would peradventure have been of force to preserve it. And without
doubt they could not have made a worse trial, then that of the fortresses. I
conclude therefore, that for the safety of ones native Country, a strong hold
is but hurtful; and to keep under Towns that are conquered, cittadels avail
little. And hereunto the Authority of the Romans shall suffice me, who
dismantelled the Towns they intended to hold by force, and never built up their
walls; and if any one against this opinion should allege me the example of
Tarentum in ancient times, and in these modern that of Brescia, which places,
by means of the cittadells, were recovered from the subjects rebellion: I
answer, that at the years end Fabius Maximus was sent with the whole Army to
recover Tarentum, who would have been able to recover that, though thete had
been no cittadell there. And though Fabius put those means in practice, yet had
they never been, he would have used some other, which would have produced the
same effect. And I know not what advantage a cittadell yields, that to regain
thee the Town, requires a Consular Army, and a Fabius Maximus for commander,
before it can be done. And that the Romans in any case had recovered it
plainly, appears by the example of Capua, where there was no cittadell, but
they got it by the soldiers valor. But to that of Brescia, I say, that seldom
chances which befell in that rebellion, that the fortress which is possessed
still by thy forces (the Town being fallen into rebellion) should have a great
army to friend and near hand, as was that of the French: for the Lord De Fois
the Kings General being with his army at Bolonia, when he understood the loss
of Brescia, by means of the Fortress indeed recovered the Town. Therefore that
Fortress yet stood in need (to do any good) of such a one as was the Lord of
Fois, and a French army, that in three days might relieve them; so that this
example against those on the contrary side is of small weight: for many
fortresses have been taken in the wars in our days, and recovered by the same
fortune that the field has been taken, and recovered again, not only in
Lombardy, but in Romania, in the Kingdom of Naples, and in all parts of Italy.
But touching the building of sortresses for defense against foreign enemies, I
say, they are not useful to those people, nor Kingdoms, who have good armies
on foot; they are rather unprofitable, because that good armies without
fortresses are of force to keep them: but fortresses without good armies cannot
defend thee. And this we see by experience of those who have been held
excellent in matters of state and government and other things, as we know the
Romans and Spartans were: for if the Romans built no fortresses, the Spartans
did not only forbear from them, but suffered none of their Cities to be walled
in neither, because they would have no other guard but a man's own valor, to
defend him. Whereupon when a Spartan was asked by an Athenian, whether the
walls about Athens were not very fair, he answered him, yes, if all the
inhabitants of the Town were women. To that Prince then that has good armies,
when upon the maritime frontiers of his state he has a fortress, that for some
few days he is able to sustain the enemy, till things are somewhat ordered, it
would sometimes be of small avail, but of no necessity. But when a Prince has
no strong army, fortresses either in the heart of his State, or at his
frontiers, are hurtful, or unprofitable: hurtful, because he easily loses
them, and being lost they make war upon him; or put case they are so strong,
that the enemy cannot take them, they are left behind by the enemies army, and
so they become of no service. For good armies, if they meet not with very sharp
encounters, enter far into their enemies Countries, (...) thout regard either
of Town or fortress they leave behind them: As it was evident in the ancient
Stories, and as we see Francis Maria did, who in these latter times without any
regard of them, left ten of the enemies Cities behind him, to assayl that of
Vrbin, That Prince then that can raise a good army, can do well enough, without
having any strong holds: but he that cannot have an army ready, should never
build any: well may he fortify the City of his abode, and keep it in good
strength, and the Citizens thereof well disposed, whereby he may be able to
support the enemies violence, till either some accord, or some foreign aid come
to his relief. All other designs are expensive in time of peace, and
unfruitful in time of war. And whosoever shall well weigh all this that I have
said, shall perceive that the Romans as they were in all other their affairs
very judicious, so were they very well advised in this judgment they gave upon
the Latins, and the Privernates, where taking no care at all for citadels, they
assured themselves of them by wiser and better ways.

CHAP. XXV.
It is a wrong course to assail a City fallen into discord, thinking by means
thereof, to master it.

IN the Roman Republic the people and the Nobility were so far fallen asunder,
that the Veyentes together with the Eburans by means of their disagreement,
thought they might be able quite to root out the Romans: and having levied an
Army, and forrag'd all the Country of Rome, the Senate armed out Cneus Manilius
and M. Fabius against them, who having brought their Army near to that of the
Veyntes, they forbear not with all insolences and reproaches to revile them,
and disgrace the Roman name, and such was their fool-hardiness and presumptions
that the Romans though then they were ar^ods one with another, came to
agreement, and so coming to the combat, broke and vanquished them. We see
therefore how much men deceive themselves (as formerly we have treated) in the
courses they take, and that many times where they think to get, they lose. The
Veyentes believed, that by getting upon the Romans that were at variance one
with another, they should overcome them, but it proved the occasion of
reconcilement to the Romans, but of ruin to themselves: for the causes of
discord in Republics, is most commonly idleness and peace; and the cause of
union and concord is fear and war. Wherefore had the Veyentes been wise, the
more at variance they had perceived Rome to have been, so much the more should
they have forborne from war against them, and with devices of Peace cast about
how to master them. The way is, to endeavor to be reputed a confident friend
of that City, which is in discord: and whiles they come not to arms, to carry
himself as an Umpire between both parties. And when they do come to arms, to
afford some slow favors to the weaker party, as well to keep them still at
war, and consume them, as to hinder them from doubting that with thy great
forces thou meanest to suppress them, and become their Prince. And when this
part is well played, it cannot fail ordinarily, but that it will directly have
the success thou look for. The City of Pistoya (as in another discourse and
to another purpose I said) came to the Florentines Republic, by no other trick
than this: for it being divided in factions, the Florentines now favoring the
one, and then the other without any imputation of blame from either, brought
them to such terms, that being tired with their tumultuous living, they came
willingly to cast themselves into the Florentines arms. The City of Siena
never changed her State upon the Florentines favor, but when their courtesies
came but thin and small: for when they were frequent and strong, they united
them rather for the defense of the State in which they lived. I will add to
these aforesaid one other example. Philp Visconti Duke of Milan, several times
made war against the Florentines, grounding much upon their disagreements, and
always came off a loser. Whereupon he was wont to say, when he complained of
the evil success of his undertakings, that the Florentines follies had made
him spend two millions of gold to no purpose. Therefore (as it was said before)
the Veyentes and the Etruscans deceived themselves by this conceit of theirs,
and were at last in a set battle vanquished by the Romans. And thus will
others find themselves deceived, whoever shall seek by the like course, and
upon the same occasion to subdu any nation or people.

CHAP. XXVI.
Contempt and contumely begets a hatred against those that use it, without any
return of advantage to them.

I Eeleeve it is one of the greatest parts of wisdom in men, to abstain from
threatening or injuring of any one in words; for neither the one nor other
bereave the enemy of any part of his strength; but the one makes him more wary
of thee, and the other bear more deadly hatred against thee, and devise by all
manner of ways he can to hurt thee. This is plain by the example of the
Veyentes, whereof we spoke in the former Chapter: who to the wrong of making
war against the Romans, added the reproach of words, from which every prudent
Commander ought to restrain his soldiers: so that they are things that incense
and provoke the enemy to revenge, and are no defense (as it is said) against
the hurt he does, insomuch that they are all weapons thrown from thee, which
return again upon thee, Whereof there followed a notable example a good while
since in Asia, where Gabades a Commander of the Persians, having a long while
lien encamped before Amida, and determined upon the tediousness of the siege to
depart, and therefore to that purpose rising with his camp, those of the Town
being come all upon the walls, and grown insolent upon their victory, forbore
no kind of outrage, disgracing, blaming and reproaching the enemy with his
baseness and cowardice: whereupon Gabades being incensed, altered his purpose,
and returned to the siege, where such was their indignation at the contumely,
that in a few days they took and sacked the Town. In the same manner it befell
the Veyentes, who were not content (as is said) to make war against the Romans,
but they rayl'd on them in vile terms, going even to their very trenches to
reproach them, so that they incensed them more with their words then blows:
and those soldiers which were hardly drawn to fight, constrein'd the Consul to
begin to fight, so that the Veyentes suffered, as the others we spoke of
before, for their insolence. Wherefore every good Commander of armies, and good
Governor of Commonwealths is to practice all possible remedies, that these
injuries or reproaches be not used either in the city or the army, neither one
among another, nor against the enemy: for being practiced against the enemy,
there arise from thence the aforesaid inconvenients: and among themselves they
would do worse, when there is no reparation made, which wise and judicious men
have always awarded. When the Roman legions left at Capua conspired against
the Capuans, as in its place shall be related, and a sedition was there
occasioned by this conspiracy, (which was afterward quieted by Valerius
Corvinus) among other constitutions which were made in the agreement, they
ordained very grievous punishments for those that should ever reproach any of
those soldiers with that sedition. Tiberius Gracchus, who during the wars with
Hannibal was made a Captain over some certain number of slaves, whom the Romans
for want of men had put into arms, ordained specially a capital punishment for
any that should object to any of them their servitude: so hurtful a matter (as
it is said) was it thought by the Romans to set men at naught, and reproach
them with any disgrace; for there is nothing so much incenses men to rage or
breeds more hatred in them, whether it be spoken in earnest or in jest. Bitter
taunts when they have too Facetiae asperae quae nimium ex vero traxerunt, acrem
sui memoriam reliquunt.
great a mingle of truth with them, leave behind them a very distasteful
remembrance.

CHAP. XXVII.
Prudent Princes and Commonwealths ought to be contented with the victory: for
oftentimes when that suffices them not, they lose it.

THE using of disgraceful words against the enemy, proceeds most commonly from
an insolency, which either the victory or a false hope of victory incites thee
to: which false hope causes men to err not only in their sayings, but in their
doings also: for this hope when it enters into men's breasts, makes them go
beyond the point, and many times lose the opportunity of having a certain good,
hoping to attain unto a better uncertain good: and because this is a matter
worthy consideration, men often deceiving themselves, to the damage of their
State, I am of advice to show it particularly by ancient examples and modern,
being it cannot so distinctly be proved by reasons. Hannibal, after he had
defeated the Romans at Canna, sent his Agents to Carthage, to give them notice
of the victory, and to demand new supplies. It was argued in the Senate, what
was fit to be done. Hanno an old man and a discreet Citizen of Carthage
advised, to use this victory wisely, and make peace with the Romans, being that
now they might have it upon reasonable terms, having gained a battle; and
that they should not go about to seek for it after a battle lost: for it
should be the Carthaginians design to show the Romans, that they were able to
deal with them, and having gotten a victory, they should take a care not to
lose it for hope of a greater. This course was not taken, but afterward the
Senate of Carthage understood that this was very good counsel, when the
occasion was lost. When Alexander the Great had conquered all the Levant, the
Commonwealth of Tire, famous in those days, and puissant, by reason that their
City was seated in the water, as Venice is, seeing Alexanders greatness, sent
Ambassadors to him to tell him, that they would become his faithful servans,
and yield him what obedience he should desire, but that they would not admit
either him or his soldiers into their Town. Whereat Alexander disdaining, that
any one City should shut her gates against him, seeing he had forced all others
open throughout the whole world, would not accept their conditions, but
rejected them, and forthwith sent his army thither. That Town stood in the
water, and was well provided with victuals, and other munition fit for
defense, so that Alexander after four months spent, considering that one City
took away all that time from his glory, which many other great conquests never
did, and therefore determined to try an agreement, and to grant what they of
themselves had asked. But they of Tire being grown insolent hereupon, not only
refused the conditions, but slew those that came to treat with them. Whereupon
Alexander all enraged at this affront, so stronly assaulted the Town, that he
took it, destroyed it, and slew or made slaves all the men therein. A Spanish
Army came upon the Florentines Territories, to restore the Medici into
Florence, and to lay some taxes upon the Town, being hired hereunto by some
Citizens inhabiting therein, who put them in hopes that as soon as they should
set foot in their Country, they would take arms in favor of them; they
coming into the plain, and none of these discovering themselves to be for
them, because they had want of victuals, tried to make an agreement, whereupon
the Florentines grown proud, would not accept of any, upon which occasion
followed the loss of Prato, and the ruin of that State. Therefore Princes
cannot commit a greater error when they are assailed (in case the assailants
are far more puissant then they) then to refuse all terms of agreement,
especially when they are proffered them: for never will such poor ones be
offered, wherein is not in a good measure comprised his good that accepts them,
and some part of his victory. Wherefore the Tyrians should have satisfied
themselves, that Alexander accepted those conditions he had formerly refused:
and their victory had been great enough, when with their arms in hand, they
had made so mighty a Prince as he to yield to their demands. It should have
sufficed the Florentines also, and they had gotten a good victory too, if the
Spanish army gave way to any of their desires, though they had not fulfilled
all of them; for that armies design was to change the State of Florence, to
take away her devotion to France, and to draw some moneys from her. When of
these three the people had yielded to two, which were the last, and had gotten
themselves but one, which was the preservation of their state, they within had
each of them gained some honor and satisfaction, nor should the people have
troubled themselves for the other two things, one remaining to them; nor should
they have offered, sing they had been sure of a certain victory to hazard it at
fortunes discretion, trying even the extremity thereof, which never any wise
man will endanger himself in, unless it be upon necessity. Hanniball being
departed out of Italy, where he had been very glorious for sixteen years,
recalled by his own country men the Carthaginians, to relieve his native
Country, found Asdruball and Siphax defeated, the Kingdom of Numidia lost, and
Carthage restrained within the compass of her own walls, which had no other
refuge but him and his army: and knowing that was his Countries last hopes, he
would not hazard it, till he had first made trial of all other remedies: nor
was he ashamed to ask peace, judging, that if there was any way to save his
Country, it was by that, and not by war, which being refused him, though he had
been sure to lose, he would not fail to fight, thinking that it might fall out
so, that possible it was for him to overcome, and if lose, it he must lose it
gloriously. And if Hanniball, who was so valorous a captain, and had his army
entire, did require peace, before he would hazard the battle, when he
perceived that in losing it, his country would be subdued, what should another
of less valor and experience then he do? But men run into this error, by not
knowing how to limit their hopes, so that grounded on their own vast conceits,
without weighing their strengths, they are utterly ruined.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How dangerous a thing it is for a Republic or Prince not to revenge an injury
done against a public State, or against a private person.

WHat, indignation may cause men to do, is easily known, by that which befell
the Romans, when they sent the three Fabij for Ambassadors to the French, who
came to invade Tuscany, and in particular Clusium: for the people of Clusium,
having sent to require aid at Rome, the Romans sent their Ambassadors to the
French, to let them know they were to forbear from making war against the
Tuscans, which ambassadors being upon the place, and fitter to play the
Soldiers part, then the Ambassadors, the French and the Tuscans coming to
fight, they ranked themselves amongst the foremost to combat the French, whence
it came, that being known by them, they converted all the hatred they bore the
Tuscans against the Romans, which hatred became greater: for the French by
their Ambassadors having complained to the Senate of this injury, and required
in satisfaction of the damage, that the aforementioned Fabij should be given
into their hands, they were not only not given them, or in any other manner
punished, but when the time of their Assemblies came, they were made Tribuns
with Consular power: insomuch that the French perceiving those to be honored,
that should have been punipunished, took all this as done in despite and
disgrace to them: and thus incensed with rage and disdain they came to assail
Rome, which they took, the Capitol excepted. Which destruction fell upon the
Romans, only for their inobservance of justice: for their Ambassadors having
offended against the law of nations, when they should have been punished, were
honored. Therefore it is worthy consideration, how much every Republic or
Prince should beware of doing the like wrong, not only against a nation, but
also against any particular man: for if a man be exceedingly offended either by
the public, or by any private man, and has had no reparation made him to his
content: if he lives in a Commonwealth, he will seek even with the utter ruin
thereof to avenge himself: if he lives under a Prince, and be a man of any
courage, he will never rest, till in some kind or other he be revenged on him,
however that he knows he draws thereby his own destruction on his head. And to
verify this, there is not a fitter nor truer example, then that of Philip of
Macedon Alexanders Father. In his Court there was a very handsome young noble
man named Pausanias, and of him one Attalus, one of the chiefest men, that was
near about Philip, was inamourd; who having several times tried if he would
yield to him, and finding him far off from consenting to any such thing,
determined to gain that by a trick and by force, which no way else he saw he
could attain to. And having made a solemn invitation, whereat Pausanias and
many other noble men met, after that every one had liberally eat and drink,
caused Pausanias to be taken and brought to some by-chamber, were not only by
force he satisfied his beastly lust upon him, but the more to disgrace him, he
made him be so used by many others in the like manner. Of which injury
Pausanias several times made his complaint to Philip, who having held him a
long time in hope of revenging him, instead thereof made Attalus governor of a
Province in Greece; whereupon Pausanias seeing his enemy honored, and not
punished, converted his indignation not against him that had injured him, but
against Philip that had not avenged him. And on a morning when Philips daughter
was solemnly married to Alexander of Epirus, as Philip went to the Temple to
celebrate the espousals, he slew him between the two Alexanders, the son, and
the son in law. Which example is much like that of the Romans, and is
remarkable for all those that rule, who should never value any man at so low a
rate, as to think (that by heaping injury upon injury) he that is thus wronged
will not devise some way to be revenged, though it be with his own utter loss
and destruction.

CHAP. XXIX.
Fortune blinds men's minds, when she will not suffer them to prevent her
designs.

IF we consider well the course of humane affairs, we shall many times see
things come to pass, and chances happen which the heavens altogether would not,
that order should be taken to prevent. And in as much as this, which I speak
of, befell Rome, where there was so much valor, so much Religion and good
order, it is no marvail if the same thing often fall out in a City or Country
that wants the said things: and because this place is very remarkable to show
the power heaven has over human things, T. Livius at large and with words of
very great efficacy represses it, saying, that the heavens would for some end,
that the Romans should know their power; and therefore caused those Fabij to
err, that were sent Ambassadors to the French, and by their means provokt them
to make war against Rome. And afterward ordaind, that for the suppressing of
that war, there was nothing done in Rome worthy of the Romans, having first
ordained, that Camillus, who only was able to remedy so great a mischief should
then be banished to Ardea. And then the French coming toward Rome, they who
to resist the fury of the Volsci and many their neighboring enemies, had
several times created a Dictatour; now upon the approach of the French never
created any. Moreover, for their choice of Soldiers, it was very weak, and
without any extraordinary diligence: and they were so slow in taking of arms,
that they were hardly time enough to encounter the French at the river Allia,
ten miles from Rome. Here the Tribuns pitched their camp without any ordinary
diligence: not viewing the ground first, neither incompassing it with trench or
pali^ado, making use neither of human nor divine helps. And in ranging of their
battle, they left their ranks so thin and weak, that as well the Soldiers as
the Captains did nothing worthy of the Roman discipline. They fought afterward
without any effusion of blood, for they fled before they were assayl'd: the
greater part went thence to Veium, the other retired to Rome, who never going
into their own houses, went unto the Capitol: so that the Senate taking no
care to defend Rome, did not so much as shut the gates, and part of them fled
from thence, and part got into the Capitol; yet in defense thereof, they had
not such disorder; for they did not cloy it with unusual people, they furnished
it with all the Corn they could possibly get, that it might endure out the
siege: and the greater part of the unprofitable multitude of old men, women,
and children, fled unto the neighboring Towns about, the rest staid at Rome
for a prey to the French. So that whoever should have read of the brave
achievements of that people many years before, and afterward of these times
following them, would have much a do to believe it were the same people. And T.
Livius having reckoned up the aforesaid disorders, concludes thus, So much does
fortune Adeo obcaecat animos fortuna, cum vim suam refringi non vult.
blind men's eyes, when she would not have her force withstood. Nor can this
conclusion be more true. Whereupon men that are always under hard crosses
deserve the less blame, as they that enjoy continual prosperity also merit
less praise; for we shall many times see those led to their destruction, and
these advanced to an extraordinory greatness by some occasion the heavens have
presented in their furtherances hereto, giving means to the one to behave
himself virtuously, and quite bereaving the other of them. And we may well say
fortune does this, for she makes choice of a man (when she purposes to bring
great matters to pass) of such judgment and spirit, that knows how to make use
of those occasions she presents him. So in like manner, when she would bring
horrible destructions upon any Place, she there preferrs men to that purpose,
that they may help to draw on that ruin. And in case there be any that may
prevent these mischiefs, she either brings him to his end, or else deprives
him of all abilities to do any goood. This we very well know by our Authors
discourse, how that fortune for to amplify Rome, and to bring it to that
greatness it attained to, deemd it necessary to scourge it, as we shall
discourse at large in the beginning of the next book following, but yet would
not wholly ruin it. And this appears, in as much as she banished Camillus, but
put him not to death: she made Rome be taken, but not the Capitol: she
ordein'd that the Romaus should not think out any thing of avayle to save Rome;
yet for defense of the Capitol, they wanted of no good advice. To the end Rome
should be taken, she causd the greater part of those Soldiers, that were routed
at Allia, to go to Vejum. And as for defense of the City of Rome, she cut off
all the ways to order it, so she prepared every thing ready to recover it
again, having conducted an entire Roman Army to Vejum, and Camillus to Ardea,
whereby they might be able to make a strong head under the command of a Captain
never blemished with any disgrace of loss yet, and thoroughly whole in his
reputation, for the recovery of his Country. We might here produce some modern
example to confirm what we have said: but because I think it unnecessary,
being this may well suffice, I shall omit it. I avow therefore this to be very
true, as by many histories we may see it, that men may well follow fortune,
but not oppose it; they may well weave her webs, but not break them. Wherefore
let men never abandon themselves, being they know not what shall become of them
in the end, the passages of their fortunes being through crooked and unknown
ways; they should ever hope, and so hoping put on still, and never give over
in despair, whatsoever chance or trouble they be fallen into.

CHAP. XXX.
Republics and Princes, that really are mighty, seek not by moneys to make
alliance with others, but by their valor, and repute of their Forces.

THe Romans were straightly besiegd in the Capitol, and however they looked for
aid from Vejum, and from Camillus, being forced by famine, they came to terms
of agreement with the French, to redeem themselves for a certain sum of money,
upon which agreement, as they were weighing the gold, Camillus, arrived with
his Army, which fortune brought to pass (says our Historian) to the end that
the Romans should not live Ut Romani auro redempti non viverent
redeemd by gold. Which thing is not only remarkable in this part, but in the
procese of this Commonwealths actions, where it is evident, that they never
vanquished Towns with moneys, nor ever bought peace by money, but by prowess in
the wars. Which I think never befell any other Republic; and among other
signs by which a man discerns the power of a State, he is to mark in what
manner it lives with the neighboring States. And when it is so orderd, that
they become tributaries thereunto, to keep friendship with it, there is an
assured sign, that that State is powerful. But when the said neighbors,
though inferious to it, draw money from thence, there is then a great evidence
of the weakness thereof. Read all the Roman Stories, and ye shall see how the
Massilians, the Aeduans, the Rhodians, Hiero, the Siracusan, Enmenes, and
Massinissa Kings joining upon the confines of the Roman Empire, to have
friendship with it, concurred in expenses and tribute at all times that need
was, seeking after no other requital thereof, but to be protected by it. We
shall see the contrary in poor and feeble States; and so beginning at ours of
Florence in the times past, even when the reputation thereof was at the
greatest, there was never a great Lord in Romania, that had not some allowance
from thence, and besides she gave to those of Perugia, and Castella, and to all
the rest of her neighbors. For had this City been warlick and strong, the
contrary would have followd; for all those to have been under the protection of
it, would have given money, and have sought to buy its friendship, and not to
sell their own. Neither have the Florentines alone lived in this baseness, but
the Venetians, and the King of France, who, though a Prince of great Dominions,
lives tributary to the Swisses, and the King of Engl. The cause whereof is, in
that he disarmes his subjects, and because that King and those other
aforementioned had rather enjoy a present profit to rack their people and squeese
them, and avoid rather an imaginary than a real danger, than do such expedients
as would secure and for ever make their States happy. Which disorder, though
some while it may produce quiet, yet in time it proves the cause of want,
losses, and unrecoverable ruin. And it would be too long to relate, how many
times the Florentines, the Venetians, and this Kingdom, have redeemd
themselves even in the wars, and how many times they have subjected themselves
to disgrace, which the Romans were only once like to have done. It would be
tedious to tell, how many Towns the Florentines and Venetians have bought,
whereof afterward the inconvenience has been found, and how that those things
that are bought with gold, men know not how to desend with the sword. The
Romans observd this brave way and manner of living, while they were free; but
after they came under their Emperors governments, and that those Emperors grow
naught, and loved the shade, and could not endure any toil in the Sun, they
began also to redeem themselves, sometimes from the Parthians, sometimes from the
Germans, and now and then also from some others of their neighbors, which was
the beginning of that great Empires ruin. Whereupon arose the like
inconvenients from their having disarmed their people, from whence also
proceeds another greater, that the nearer thy enemy comes to thee, the weaker
he finds thee; for whosoever lives after that manner we have spoken of above,
treats evil those subjects he has within his dominions, because his men are
not so well disciplined in the wars, as to keep the enemy from entering into the
heart of their Country Whence it proceeds, that to keep the enemy off: he
allows some provision of moneys to those Princes or people that border upon his
Country. And thereupon, those States make some resistance upon the confines
only, which when the enemy has past, they have no kind of remedy left: and
they perceive not, that this their manner of proceeding, is quite contrary to
all good order: for the heart and the vital parts of a body are to be armed,
and not the extremities thereof; for it can live without those, but if these be
hurt it dies: but these States keep the heart disarmed, and arm their hands
and feet. What this disorder has done at Florence, has been and is daily
seen: for when any Army posses the frontiers, and enters near to the heart of
the Country, there is no further remedy. We saw not long since the same proof
of the Venetians; and had not their. City been begirt by the waters, we should
have seen an end of it. We have not so often seen this trial in France,
because it is so great a Kingdom, that it has few enemies mightier than it:
nevertheless. when the English invaded that Country in the year 1513. the whole
Country quaked, and the King himself, and every one thought, that one defeat
alone would have been sufficient to lose him the State. The contraty befell the
Romans; for the nearer the enemy approached to Rome, the more able he found the
City to make resistance. And it was evident, when Hannibal came into Italy,
that after three defeats, and the slaughters of so many Captains and soldiers,
they were not only able to sustain the enemy, but to vanquish him. All this
proceeded from that they had well armd the heart, and made small account of the
extremities; for the foundation of their State was the people of Rome; and the
Latins, and the other Towns their allies in Italy, and their Colonies, from
whence they drew so many Soldiers, that with them they were able to fight with
and keep in awe the whole world. And that this is true, it appears by the
question Hanno the Carthaginian put to Hannibals agents, after that great
overthrow at Canna, who having exceedingly magnified Hannibals great acts, were
asked by Hanno, whether any of the Komans were yet come to demand peace, or if
any Town of the Latins, or any of their Colonies had yet rebelld against the
Roman; and they denying the one and the other, Hanno replied, Then is the war
yet as entire as it was at first. We see therefore by this discourse, and what
we have otherwhere said, what difference there is between the proceedings of
Republics now adays, and those of the ancients. We see also hereupon every
day exceeding great losses, and wonderful great conquests: for where men are
but of small valor and resolution, fortune shows much power: and because she
is always various, therefore do Commonwealths and States change often, and
will always change, till at length some one stand up, who is so much a lover
of antiquity, as to regulate her, that she take not occasion to show at every
turn of the Sun, how great her power is.

CHAP. XXXI.
How dangerons a thing it is, to give credit to men that are banished out of
their Country.

MEthinks it is not out of purpose, to treat among these other discourses, how
dangerous a thing it is to trust those that are banished out of their Country,
these being matters that every day are practiced by those that are Rulers of
States; especially seeing it may be proved by a memorable example out of T.
Livius in his history, though this thing be out of his purpose quite. When
Alexander the Great passed into Asia with his Army, Alexander of Epirus his
kinsman and uncle, came with certain troops into Italy, being called upon by
some outlawd Lucans, who put him in hope, that by their means he might become
master of that whole Country. Whereupon it came to pass, that he being come
into Italy upon their word and assurance, was slain by them; their Citizens,
having promisd them their return into their Country, if they slew him.
Therefore should it be considered, how vain their words and promises are, who
are banished their Countries; for, in regard of their word, it is to be
thought, that whenever by other means than thine, they can be restord to
their Country, they will forsake thee, and cleave to others, notwithstanding
all the promises they have made thee. And this is the reason why there is no
hold to their word, because so extreme is their desire to return to to their
native homes, that naturally they believe many things that are false, and some
things out of their own cunning they add; so that between what they think, and
what they say they think, they put thee in such hopes, that grounding
thereupon, thou art brought to a vain expense, or to undertake somewhat that
proves thy destruction. I will satisfy my self with the aforesaid example of
Alexander, and only this other of Themistocles the Athenian, who being outlawd,
fled to Darius in Asia, where he promised him so much, when he should invade
Greece, that Darius undertook the enterprise. But Themistocles not being able
to make good his promises, either for shame or fear of punishment, poisoned
himself. And if Themistocles a rare man committed this error, what should we
think but that they do much more err, who because of their less virtue will
suffer themselves to be more violently drawn by their own passions and desires.
And therefore a Prince ought to proceed very slowly in undertakings upon the
relation of exiled men; for otherwise he suffers either great shame, or damage
by them And because it seldom comes to pass, that Towns and Countries are taken
by stealth, or by intelligence that any one has in them; methinks it is not
much out of purpose to treat thereof in the Chapter following, adding
thereunto by how many ways the Romans got them.

CHAP. XXXII.
How many ways the Romans used to make themselves masters of towns.

THe Romans applying themselves all to the war, did evermore make it with all
advantage possible, as well for the expense, as for every thing else belonging
thereto. From hence it proceeded, that they were always aware of taking of
towns by long sieges, thinking it a matter of great charges, and incommodity,
that surpasses far the profit their conquest thereof can bring. And for this
cause they though it more for their own advantage, to take a town any way else
then by siege. Whereupon in such great and so many wars, we have very few
examples of sieges made by them. The ways then whereby they got their towns,
were either by conquest or yiedling. And this conquest was either by force or
open violence, or by force mingled with fraud. Open violence was either by
assault, without beating the walls, which was to beleagure a town round with an
army: Agred urbem corona
for they environd it, and combatted it on all parts, and many times it proved
so luckily to them, that in one assault they took a town, though a very vast
one, as when Scipio took new Carthage in Spain. Or when this assault served
not, they betook them to break down the walls with their rams, and oher their
warlike engines, or else by some mine or vault they made, whereby they entered
the City, by which way the took the City of Veium; or to make themselves equal
in height with those that defended the walls, they made towers of wood, or cast
up mountains of earth, which leaned upon the wall on the outside, whereby they
might get to the hight of it. Against these assaults, they that defended the
towns, in the first case in regard of their being besing'd round, rannne a more
sudden hazard, and had more doubtful remedies: for having need in every place
of many defendants, perchance either those that they had, were not so many as
could supply every place, or change often to refresh them: or if they could,
they were not all of equal courage to make resistance: and in case the skirmish
had inclined in any part, all had bin lost. Therefore it came to pass (as I
said) that this way lit many times on good success. But when it succeeded not
at first, they did not much more try that way, because it was dangerous for the
army: for the City being able for so long a space to defend it self, the army
could not but grow weak, and hardly be able to withstand any fally of the
enemies from within, and besides the soldiers disordered and wearied themselves
hereby, yet notwithstanding for once, and that on the sudden, they assayld that
way) As for the breaking down of the walls, they made resistance as they do now
adays with new reparations, and against their mines, they made countermines,
and thereby they opposed their enemies either with their arms in hand, or with
other engines, and among others this was one, they filled diverse vessels with
feathers, and set fire on them, which being thus kindled they put into the
Mine, so that by the smoke and stink thereof, the enemy was hindered of entering
thereinto: and if they assail^d them with towers of wood, they sought to fire
them. And for the mounts of earth, they commonly broke open the wall
underneath, whereupon the mount did lean, drawing thence the earth into the
town, whereby they without did raise their mount, so that however they brought
the earth without, being that they within carried it away, the mount came to no
great matter. These ways of assailing cannot be continued long: for they must
either rise from the siege, and seek by other means to make an end of the war,
as Seipio did when being entered into Affricke he assaulted Vtica, but could not
take it, he rose thence with his whole camp, and sought how to overthrow the
Carthaginian armies; or else they must turn again to the siege, as they did at
Veium, Capua, Carthage, and Jerusalem, and other like towns, which they took
by siege. As for conquest by force and fraud, as it befell Palepolis, it chanced
that the Romans, by treating with the inhabitants took some town. But by his
assailing the Romans and others, tried many, but prevailed in few: the reason
is, because every small impediment breaks the design, and impediments easily
happen: for either the conspiracy is discovered before it takes effect; and
without much difficulty it is discovered, as well through their infidelity, to
whom it is communicated, as by the difficulty to put it in practice, being they
are to agreee with enemies with whom they cannot parley, but under some other
color. But in case the conspiracy be not disclosed in the ordering of it,
there arise multitudes of difficulties in putting it in execution: for if
either thou come before the time appointed, or after, all is spoiled, if any
false alarm be given, as was that of the geese in the Capitol; if any usual
order be broken, every little error, or affright taken, spoils the design.
Hereunto may be added the darkness of the night which often puts in fear the
rather those that undertake such perilous things. And the greater part of those
men that are brought upon such enterprises, being unexperienced in the
situation, the country, and the places, whether they areled, become
astonished, disheartened, and confused upon every small accident shall happen;
And every shadow is of force to make them run away. Nor ever was there any more
happy in thief fraudulent night plots, then Aratus Sicioneus, who was as base
and cowardly in any action by day, as he was of worth and spirit in these by
night. Which we may well think was rather through some hidden virtue wherewith
he was endowed, then because there was naturally required in them the more good
luck. Many of these ways are put in practice, few of them come to trial, and
very few take effect. Touching the gaining of towns by yielding, they yield
either of good will or by force: this willingness arises either upon some
foreign necessity, which compels them to fly unto thy protection, as Capua did
unto the Romans, or through a desire to be well governed, being allured by the
good government that Prince holds among them that have given themselves into
his hands: as the Rodians, the Massilians, and other like cities did, that gave
themselves unto the Romans. Touching surrendering up upon force, proceeds either
from a long siege, as is formerly said, or from a continual oppression of
incursions, pillagings, and other hard usages, which when a city desires to be
freed from she yields her self. Of all those said ways the Romans practiced
this last more then four hundred and fifty years to weary out their neighbors
with routs and incursions, and by gaining credit with them, by gaining credit
with them, by means of agreements made, as we have said otherwhere; and upon
that way they always grounded, though they tried all, but in the other they
found things either dangerous or unprofitable. For in a siege, there is length
of time and expenses: in forcible assault, doubt and danger: and in
conspiracies, uncertainty. And they saw, that by the defeat of an enemies army,
sometimes they got a Kingdom in one day, and to take by siege a town that was
obstinate, it cost them many years.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How the Romans gave the Commanders of their armies free and large Commissions.

I Think it fit for him (that by reading of Livies story would make advantage
thereof) well to consider all the ways of the people and Senate of Romes
proceedings: and among other things that merit consideration, his is one, to
see with what authority they sent forth their Consuls, Dictators, and
Commanders of armies, which we see was very great, and the Senate reserved
thing else to themselves, but a power to make new wars, and to confirm peace,
but they referred every thing else to the arbitrament and power of the Consul:
for when the people and the Senate had once resolved on the war, (as for
example sake against the Latins) they left all the rest to the Consuls
discretion, who had free power either to fight a batttel, or to leave it, and
to besiege either this, or any other town else as he pleased. Which things by
many examples are verified, and especially by that which fell out in an
expedition against the Tuscans: for Fabius the Consul having overcome them near
unto Sutrium, and intending with his army to pass the wood Cimina, and go into
Tuscany, he did not only not advise with the Senate, but gave them no notice
at all of it, though he was to make the war in a new country full of doubts
and dangers: which is witnessed by a resolution of the Senate taken directly
against this very course; who having understood of the victory Fabius had
gotten, and doubting he would venture to pass the said woods into Tuscany,
thinking it would be well not to try that war, nor ruin that hazard, sent two
Deputies unto Fabius, to give him notice, they would not have him pass into
Tuscany: who came thither, when he had already past, and gotten the victory,
and in liew of hindering the war, they returned Ambassadors of his conquest and
victory gotten. And whosoever considers these terms, will find them discreetly
used: for if the Senate would have had the Consul to proceed on forwards in
the war, only as they gave him order, they had made him less circumspect, and
slower in his actions: for he would have thought, that the glory of the victory
had not bin wholly his, but that the Senate had participated with him, by whose
counse he had bin governed. Besides this, the Senate then obliged themselves to
advise in things they could not have the means to understand. For,
notwithstanding than among them there were men exceedingly well experienced in
the wars, yet being they were not upon the place, and therefore ignorant of
very many particulars, which are needful for him to know that will advise
well, by interposing their Council, they would have committed many errors. And
for this cause they suffered the Consul to do all of himself, and that the
glory thereof should be entirely his, the love of which they thought would
provoke and encourage him to do well. I have the more willingly marked this
place, because I see that the Republiques now adays, as the Venetian and the
Florentine, understand it not so: and if their Commanders, Proveditours, and
Commissioners are to plant any battery, they will know it first, and advise
thereupon. Which course deserves the same praise the others do, which
altogether have brought them into those miseries they now suffer.

THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I.
For the maintenance of a Religion or a Commonwealth long in being, it is
necessary oftentimes to reduce them to their first grounds.

IT is most true, that all things in the world have an end of their life: but
those things eninjoy that course that is generally ordaind them by heaven,
whichdisorder not their body, but govern it in such a regular course, that
either it changes not, or if it does, it is for the better, and not for the
worst. And because I speak of mixed bodies, such as are Republiques and sects, I
say, that those changes are for the health thereof, which bring them back to
their first beginnings: and therefore are they the best ordered, and subsist
the longest which (by the help of their own orders) may often be renewed, or
that by accident without the same orders attain to the said renovation. And it
is more clear than the light, that these bodies not being renewed, last not;
and the way to renew them is (as is said) to reduce them to their first
beginnings; for all beginnings of Sects, Commonwealths and Kingdoms, must needs
contain some goodness in them, by means whereof they recover their first
reputation and increase: for in process of time that goodness grows corrupt,
and unless something happen, that reduces it to the just mark, that body must
needs be destroyed. And our Doctors of Physic say (speaking of the bodies of
men) That a man daily gathers some ^tidie aggregatur ali^^, quod quandoque get
curatione.
evil, which sometimes has need of cure. This reducing to the beginning
(speaking of Commonwealths) is done either by some outward accident, or by some
prudence within. Touching the first, we see it was necessary, that Rome should
be taken by the French, if we would have her spring again; and thus springing
again, should recover a new life, and a new virtue, and take her self a new to
the observance of religion, and justice, which began in her to be much
blemished, which we may easily gather by the Story of Livie, where he shows
that in drawing gut the army against the French, and in creating the Tribunes
with Consular power, they observed not any religious ceremony: so in like
manner, they did not only not punish the three Fabij who against the law of
nations had fought against the French, but created them tribunes. And we may
well think, that of other good laws also ordained by Romulus, and their other
sage Princes, they began now to hold less esteem than was reasonable, or
necessary to maintain a free government. This foreign blow therefore lit on
them, to the end they should anew betake themselves to all the old orders of
their City, and to show that people, that it was not necessary not only to
maintain religion and justice, but to esteem well of their good Citizens, and
to make more account of their virtue, than of those profits, which they thought
they lost or got by their means: Which we see, came directly to pass; for
presently after Rome was recovered from the French, they renewed all the rites
of their ancient Religion, they punished those Fabij who fought against the Law
of Nations, and afterward made such account of Camillus his virtue and
goodness, that the Senate and all others wholly laying envy aside, gave the
whole government of the Commonwealth into hit hands. It is necessary therefore
(as I have said) that men, who live together in any order, should often revise
themselves, either upon occasion given by outward, or else by inward accidents.
And for these last, they must either proceed from a law, which may take a
review as it were of the men that are in that body, or else from some good man
that may arise among them, who by his example and virtuous actions may work the
same effect, which that law or order can. This good then arises in
Commonwealths, by the virtue of some man, or the force of some order. And
touching this last, those orders that reduced the Roman Republic to its own
beginning, were the Tribuns of the people, the Censors, and all those other
laws, which were made against the ambition or insolence of men, which orders
have need to be quickened by the virtue of some one Citizen, that courageously
joins with them for their execution, maugre the power of those that break
them. The executions whereof, before the sacking of Rome by the French, were
notable, the death of Brutus his sons, the death of those of the Decemvirate,
that of Melius touching the laying down the price of their corn: after the
taking of Rome, was the death of Manlius Capitolinus, the death of the son of
Manlius Torquatus, the execution which Papirius Cursor did upon the Commander
of his Cavallerie, the accusation of the Scipios: which things being they were
extraordinary and remarkable, whenosever any of them did chance, caused men
more strictly to conform themselves to the exact rule; and when these began to
fall out seldom, then began they to give men more leisure to grow naught, and
become more dangerous and tumultuous; for from one to another of such like
executions, there should not pass more than ten years time; for after such a
time men begin again to change their manners and trespass against the laws:
and unless something chance, which anew calls the punishment to memory, and
puts them in fear thereof, there mere together so many delinquents, that
without danger they cannot be punished. To this purpose, they who governed the
State of Florence from 1434. to 1494. said it was necessary every fifth year to
reform the State, otherwise it was hard to maintain it; and they called
reforming of the State, to put that terror and fear in men, which they caused
in them at the first founding of the laws, having then severely punished those
that had offended against their manner of living. But when the memory of that
punishment is once extinguished, men again take the boldness to attempt some
innovations, and speak ill of the present State: and therefore it is necessary
to take order for it by reducing it to the first grounds. Also this bringing
back of Republiques to their beginnings, arises sometimes from the plain virtue
of some one man, without dependence on any law, inciting thee to any execution:
yet are they of so great reputation, and of such remarke, that the good men
desire to follow them, and the bad are ashamed to live contrarily to them.
Those that in Rome particularly worked these good effects, were Horatius
Cocles, Scevola, Fabritius, the two Decij, Regulus, Attilius, and some others,
who by their rare and worthy examples, in Rome wrought the same effect that
good laws and good orders could. And if the forenamed executions of laws
together with these particulars examples had succeeded every ten years in this
City, it had been of necessary consequence that it could never be corrupted:
but as the one and the other of these two things began to fall out seldom, the
corruptions multiplied: for after Marcus Regulus the like example was never
more seen. And though in Rome there arose the two Catoes, yet such was the
distance between him and them, and between them, from the one to the other, and
they remained so alone, that with their good examples they could effectuate no
good thing, and especially the last Cato, who finding a great part of the City
corrupted, could not prevail so by his example, as to better his Citizens And
this may suffice for Republics. But touching Religions, we see also these
reformations are necessary, by example of our Religion: which had it not been
reduced again to its principles by Saint Francis, and Saint Dominique, it would
have been quite defaced: for these by their poverty, and their imitation of
Christ's life, made a new impression thereof in men's minds, which was quite
blotted our thence: and their new rules were so powerful, and now are the
cause that the dishonesty of the Prelates, and the heads of the Religion, do
not ruin it, partly by their living in poverty, and partly by the great credit
they have in confessing the people, and preaching to them, whereby they give
them to understand that it is evil, to speak evil against him that is evil;
and that it is good, rather to live in obedience to them; and if they are
faulty, to leave them to the chastisement of God. And so they offend the most
they can; for they fear not the punishment they see not, and believe not. This
reformation then has and does maintain this Religion. Kingdoms also have need
of reforming and restoring their laws to their first beginnings. And we see
how much good this does in the Kingdom of France; Which Kingdom is governed
more by its laws and customs than any other Kingdom else. Of which laws and
customs, the Parliaments are the principal maintainers, and especially that of
Paris, which restores them again to life, whenever it makes any execution
against a Prince of the Realm, and that they condemn the King in their
sentences: and till this present it has maintained it self, by being an
obstinate executioner against that Nobility: but whenever it should suffer
any of their faults to escape unpunished, and they chance to multiply, without
doubt it would come to pass that either they were to be corrected with great
disorder, or that Kingdom come to a dissolution. Therefore we conclude that
there is nothing more necessary in a politic government, Sect, Kingdom, or
Commonwealth that it be, than to restore it to that reputation which in its
first beginning it had, and take a care that either the customs be good, or
the men good, that they may rather work this effect, that it be not left to
some foreign force to do it: For (however that sometimes it be an excellent
remedy, as it proved to Rome) yet is it so dangerous, that it is in no case to
be desired: And to make it appear to any man, how much the actions of
particular men served to advance Romes greatness, and wrought many good effects
in that City, I will come to the narration and discourse of them, within the
bounds whereof we will conclude this third Book, and last part of this first
decade. And howbeit the Kings actions were great and remarkable, being the
History sets them down at large, we shall omit them, nor speak of them
otherwise, unless it be touching some thing they did belonging to their private
advantage; and here we will begin with Brutus, Father of the Roman liberty.

CHAP. II.
It is a very great part of wisdom, sometime to seem a fool.

NO man was ever reputed so sage or wise for any thing that ever he did, as
Junius Brutus deserves to be accounted for taking upon him the person of a
fool; and though Titus Livius expresses no other but one reason to induce him
thereto, which was to live in security, and preserve his patrimony; yet if we
consider his manner of proceeding, we may believe, that he thus dissembled, to
the end he might be less observed, and have the more convenience to suppress
the Kings, and free his Country, upon any occasion offered. And that he thought
upon this, it appears first in the interpretation he made of Apolloes Oracle,
when he fained to fall down, that he might kiss the ground, deeming thereby
that the Gods favored his designs; and afterward when at the occasion where
Lucretia was slain, among the Father, husband, and other of her kindred, he was
the first that drew the knife out of the wound, and made those that were
present swear they would never more endure in time to come a King in Rome.
From his example are those to learn, that are discontented with any Prince: and
firct they should measure and weigh their own forces: and if they are so
powerful, that they are able to discover themselves as enemies, and openly
make war against him, then ought they plainly go that way, as least dangerous
and the morehonorable. But if they be of such condition, that they are not able
to enter into terms of open hostility against him, then ought they to use al
industry in seeking to gain his favor; and to this effect enter into him by
all those ways that are fit, following him in his sports, and taking pleasure
in all those things they see he delights in. This familiarity first causes thee
to live secure, and without running any hazard, gives thee means to enjoy that
Princes good fortune with him, and lays the way open to thee to satisfy thy
own mind. It is true that some say, they would not stand so near the Princes,
as to be oppressed with their ruins, nor so far off, but that when their ruin
comes, they may be able time enough to rise upon some part of their ruins.
Which middle way would be the truest, were it rightly kept. But because I think
it is impossible, it is meet to reduce it to the two ways above mentioned,
which is either to be at large from them, or cleave close to them. He that
does otherwise, if he be a man of eminent qualities, lives in continual
danger. Nor suffices it to say, I care not for any thing, I desire neither
honors, nor wealth, I will live quietly, and without entering into any faction;
for these excuses are heard, but pass not as current. Neither can men of
quality choose this standing quiet, however that heartily they make choice of it
and without any ambition, because they are not believed in it, in so much as
though they themselves would, yet others will not let them live so. They must
then play the fool as Brutus did; and he plays the fool a great deal, that
praises, and prates to them, is present at, and bears a part in those things
that are against his own mind, to comply with his Princes delights. And seeing
we have spoken of this man's wisdom in recovering of the State, we will now
speak of his severity in maintaining it.

CHAP. III.
That it was necessary, for preservation of the new gotten liberty, to put
Brutus his sons to death.

B Butus his severity was no less necessary than useful to maintain Rome in
the liberty she had gotten, which was of rare example in all memorials of
things happened, to see the Father sit on his Tribunal, and not only condemn
his sons to death, but be present and assistant at it. And this is always well
known to those that read ancient stories, how that after the change of a State,
either from a Republic into a Tyranny, or from a Tyranny into a Republic,
some memorable execution upon the enemies of the present condition is needful.
And he that sets up a Tyranny, and flaies not Brutus; and he that brings in
liberty, and slayes not Brutus his sons, can hardly subsist. And because for
merly we have discoursed hereof at large, I referr my self to what was then
spoken hereof. I shall allege here only one example which was in our times,
and in our Country: that of Peter Soderini, who thought with his patience and
goodness to overcome that passionate desire which was in the sons of Brutus, to
return under another government, but deceived himself therein. And albeit he
by his wisdom perceived well this necessity, and that the way and ambition of
those that should against him, gave him occasion to extinguish them, yet he
never bent his mind to it: for besides his opinion that he was able by patience
and goodness to work out all ill humors, and by liberality toward them, to
wear out any enmity was borne against him, he was of advice (as many times by
discourse he showed some of his friends) that if he would strongly encounter
the oppositions were made against him, and master his adversaries, he had need
take upon him extraordinary authority, whereby he should break the civil
equality among them. Which thing (however that he should never afterward act
tyrannically) would so much affright the multitude, that they would never agree
after his death to create a new standard bearer for life, which dignity he held
fit to put forward and maintain. This respect was wise and good: yet must we
never suffer any evil to continue in regard of a good, being that good may
easily be suppressed by that evil. And he should believe, being his actions and
his intentions were to be judged by their end (in case that good fortune and
life should have accompanied him) that he could have assured every one, how
that what he had done, was for the safety of his Country, not for his own
ambition, whereby he might have been able to regulate things in such a manner,
that no successor of his could do that for evil, which he had done for good.
But the first opinion deceived him, not knowing that malice is not abated by
time, nor appeased by any good turn. So that because he was ignorant how to
imitate Brutus, he lost together with his Country the State, and his own
reputation. And as it is a hard thing to save a free State, so is it not easy
to preserve a Monarchy, as in the Chapter following it shall be showed.

CHAP. IV.
No Prince lives secure in his Principality, while those are living who were
despoyld of it.

THe death of Tarquinus Priscus causd by the sons of Ancus, and the death of
Servius Tullus causd by Tarquinius the proud, show how hard and dangerous it
is, to despoyle any one of a Kingdom, and suffer him to live, though he
endeavor by many favors to gain him. And we see how Tarquinius Prisons was
deceived in thinking legally to possess that Kingdom, in that it was given him
by the people, and confirmed by the Senate. Neither did he believe that disdain
could so much prevail with Ancus his sons, that they would not be satisfied,
with what all Rome was contented. And Servius Tullus deluded himself, in
thinking he could with new obligations gain the good will of Tarquins sons. So
that touching the first, every Prince may well be advisd that he cannot live
sure of his Principality, while they live who were bereavd of it. Touching the
second, every one that is of power may well remember, that never were old
injuries cancelld with new favors, especially when the new favors are less of
value than the wrongs done And without all doubt Servius Tullus was nothing
wise to think that Tarquins sons would patiently endure to be his sons in law,
whose King they thought by right they ought to be. And this desire of reigning
is so great, that it not only enters their breasts, that look to succeed in the
Kingdom, but they also who no ways expect it. As in Tarquinius his wife,
Servius his young daughter, who would wish this rage against that piety she
ought her father, set her husband against him, to take his life from him, and
his Kingdom thereby; so much more accounted she to be a Queen, than the
daughter of a King. If then Tarquininus Priscus and Servius Tullus lost the
Kingdom for not assuring themselves of those upon whose right they had usurpd,
Tarquinius the proud lost it for not observing the ancient Kings Customs, as
shall be showed in the Chapter following.

CHAP. V.
What it is that makes a King lose his Kingdom, which he enjoyes by right of
inheritance.

TArquinius the proud having stain Servius Tullus, and of him no heirs
remaining behind, came to possess the Kingdom securely, having no cause to
fear, those things that had hurt his predecessors. And however his way of
getting the Kingdom had been so extraordinary, and odious, yet had he observd
the ancient customs of the other Kings, he would have been borne with: nor
would the Senate nor the Commonalty have risen against him to wrest the State
out of his hands. He was not then banished because his son Sextus ravished
Lucretia, but for that he had broken the laws of the kingdom, and ruld
tyrannously, having taken all authority from the Senate, and reserved it wholly
to himself, and those affairs, which had been dispatched in public by the
Senate of Rome with general satssfaction, he reduced to be treated in his own
Palace, which gained him both blame and envy: so that in a very short time he
despoyld Rome of all that liberty which she had always maintained under
others. Nor was this enough to make the Senate his enemy, but he provoked the
people also against him, tiring them out in base mechanic services, and such
as were far different from that, wherein his ancestors had imployd them: so
that having replenished Rome with examples of his cruelty and pride, he had now
disposed all the Romans minds to rebellion, whenever occasion should be off
r'd And had not that accident of Lucretia fallen out, so soon as any other
should have chanced, it would have produced the same effect: for if Tarquinius
had lived, as the other Kings did, and Sextus his son had committed that
offense, Brutus and Collatinus would have had recourse to Tarquinius, for
revenge against Sextus, and not to the people of Rome. Therefore let Princes
know, that at the same hour they begin to lose the State, when they begin to
violate the Laws, and and those manners and customs that are ancient, under
which men have lived a long time. And in case they come to lose their State,
and should ever become so wise as to understand with what facility they
maintain their Principalities, who follow good counsel, they themselves would
much more lament their loss and blame themselves more than others would: for it
is much easier to be beloved by the good, than by the bad; and to obey the
Laws, than command over them. And if they would understand what course they
were to take, whereby to put this in practice, and that they are not to undergo
greater labor than to view the lives of good Princes, and take them for
looking-glasses, such as were Timoleon the Corinthian, and Aratus Sicioneus,
and such like, in whose lives they shall find security and satisfaction, as
well of him that rules, as of him that is ruled, they would have a desire to
become like them, being able for the reasons alledgd to do so; for men, when
they are well governd, seek after no other liberty, as it befell the people
that were governd by the two were named before, who were constraind to be
Princes whiles they lived, however they tried many times to retire themselves
to a private life. And because in this and the two precedent Chapters, we have
discoursed of humors stird up against Princes, and of the conspiracy made by
Brutus his sons against their Country, and of those against Tarquinius Priscus
and Servius Tullus: methinks it is not out of our purpose to speak at large
thereof in the following Chapter, being a matter whereof Princes and private
men may worthly take notice.

CHAP. VI.
Of Conspiracies.

I Would not omit to discourse somewhat touching Conspiracies, being they are
dangerous for Princes and private men also: for we see that more Princes have
lost their lives thereby, and States too, than by open war: because few are
able to make open war against Princes, but every one may conspire against them
On the other side, private men enter not into a more dangerous nor rash
enterprise than this: for it is full of difficulties, and exceeding perilous
every way; From whence proceeds it, that many of them are practisd, but few
succeed. To the end there of that Princes may learn to beware of these dangers,
and private men be more fearful to thrust themselves into them, or rather learn
to content themselves to live under that rule which their fortune has allotted
them, I shall speak thereof more at large, not omitting any thing remarkable,
that may serve for instruction of the one or the other. And truly that of
Tacitus is well termd a golden sentence, where he says, that men are to
reverence things past, and submit to what is present; and should wish for good
Princes, but whatsoever they are, endure them: and verily he who does
otherwise, ruins both himself and his Country. We must then (entering into the
matter) consider against whom Conspiracies are made and we shall find they are
plotted against amans Country, or against his Prince, of which two I intend
this present discourse: for touching those that are practiced to deliver a Town
into the enemies hands that besiege it, or that have likelihood with this for
any cause, we have already sufficiently spoken. And we will treat in this
first part, touching that against a Prince: and first we will examine the
reasons thereof, which are many, though one there is of more importance than
all the rest. And this is general hatred: for that Prince, that has provoked
general hate, must needs have net^ed some particulars, somewhat more than
others, insomuch that they long to be revengd on him: and they are the more
incited hereto, by the general hatred they find conceivd against him. A Prince
then ought to avoid these public blames, and how he should behave himself to
avoid them (having treated otherwhere) I will not now middle: for if he beware
well of them, offenses against particulars shall be of small force to hurt him:
one reason is, because Princes seldom light upon men that are so sensible of an
injury as to run such extreme hazard to revenge them; the other is, that though
they were of such resolution, and force, as might serve to do it, yet would
that general good will of men to that Prince withhold them from it. The
injuries must be either touching the fortunes, lives, or honors. Of those that
are touching men's lives, the threats are more dangerous than the execution, or
rather the threats are very dangerous; but in the execution there is no danger
at all; for he that is dead cannot think upon revenge; and those that remain
alive, most commonly leave to think of him that is dead: but he that is
threatened, and sees himself put to a point, either to do or suffer, becomes a
very dangerous man to the Prince, as we shall say particularly in due place.
The fortunes and honors of a man are those two things which excepting this
necessity, touch men more nearely then any other offense, where of a Prince
should be well aware: for he can never strip a man so bare, but that he may find
a kinfe to revenge himself, nor so much dishonor any one, but that he may
still hold an obstinate resolution of vengeance. And touching honors, the
dishonoring of women is of most importance, and after this the scorn and
disgrace of their persons. This armed Pausanias against Philip of Macedon, and
this has put weapons in many others hands against diverse Princes. And in our
days Julius Belanti had no other motive to conspire against Pandulphus the
tyrant of Siena, but only for that he had given him one of his daughters to
wife and afterward taken her away from him, as in its place we shall relate.
The greatest cause the Pazzi had to conspire against the Medici, was, the
inheritance of John Bonrosnei, whereof they were dispossessed by their order.
And another cause, and a very great one too, why men plot treachery against a
Prince, is a desire which they have to free their country, which has bin
seized on by him. This moved Brutus and Cassius against Caesar. This incited
many others against Falaris, Dionysius, and such other usurpers of their
Countries. Nor can any Tyrant free himself from the danger of his humor by
other means then by laying down his Tyranny. And because we find none will do
this, there are but few of them that come not to ill ends; Which gave Iuvenal
occasion to say, Few Tyrants unto Plutoes Court do go, Ad generum Cereris sine
caede and sanguine pauci Descendunt Reges and sic ca morre Tiranni.

But that are thither sent by bloody blow.


The dangers that (as I said before) accompany conspiracies, are great, and
continual: for in such cases there is danger in plotting them, in executing
them, and after they are executed too. Those that conspire, are either one or
more; that of one cannot be termed a conspiracy, but a settled resolution bred
in a man to slay a Prince. This alone of all the three dangers, which
conspiracies hazard, is free from the first. For before the putting it in
execution, it carries no hazard with it, being none is made privy to his
secret, nor is there any danger, that his purpose come to the Princes ear. A
resolution after this sort may happen to be found in any man of any condition,
little or great, Noble or ignoble, familiar or not familiar with he Prince: for
at some times it is permitted to any man to speak with him and; he that comes
to speak with him may vent this passion of his mind. Pausanias, of whom we
have otherwhere spoken, slew Philip of Macodon, as he was going to the Temple
environed with a thousand armed men, and between his own son and son in law;
but he was one of the Nobles, and well known to the Prince. A poor and abject
Spaniard struck Ferdinand King of Spain with a knife in the neck; however the
wound was not mortal, yet hereby it appeared, that he had both courage and
opportunity to do it. A Turkish Priest named Dervis, drew a scimitarre against
Bajazet, father of this present Turk, but hit him not, yet wanted he neither
courage nor commodity for his purpose. Of this sort of resolutions thus bent, I
think there are many, that would do it: for in willing this, there is neither
punishment, nor danger at all, but few venture to act it; and of those that do,
exceeding few or none there are, that are not slain in the act. Therefore no
man willingly will thrust himself upon a certain death. But let us leave
these single resolutions, and come to consider the conspiracies have bin made
by great men, or those that are very familiar with the Prince: for others
(unless they be stark mad) will never offer to conspire: for mean men, and not
familiar with the Prince, want all those conveniences, which are required in
the executing of a conspiracy. First^, mean men cannot find those that will be
true to them: for no one man can apply himself to their wills for any of those
hopes which cause men to adventure upon desperate dangers, so that when they
have enlarged themselves to two or three persons, some one of them becomes an
accuser, and ruins all. But in case they should be so happy, that none should
discover their plots, yet in the execution are they beset with such
difficulties having not free access unto the Prince) that it is impossible, but
that there in they must perish: for if great men, who ordinarily come near him,
are oppressed with such difficulties, which we shall presently mention, it must
needs be that with those these difficulties must perpetually increase.
Therefore men (because where there is loss both of life and fortunes they are
not stark mad) when they find themselves weak, are well aware of what they do:
and when they are very weary of a Prince, they are contented only to curse
him, and expect, while those that are of higher quality then themselves, do
avenge them. And yet in case that any of such like as these should have
assailed any thing, the design they had might well be laudable, but not their
wisdom. We see therefore, that those that have conspired, were all great men,
or familiar with the Prince: Whereof many have conspired, as well being moved
by too many favors, as by too many injuries. As Perennius was against Commodus,
Plautianus against Severus, Sejanus against Tiberius. All these were by their
Emperors so enriched with wealth, and dignified with titles and honors, that
it seemed there wanted not any thing to perfect their power but the Empire it
self, which they meaning not to fail of, betook themselves to conspire against
their Prince, and their treasons all had that end, which their ingratitude well
deserved. However that among those of this sort in these latter times that of
Jacob Apianus against Petrus Gambacorti Prince of Pisa succeeded fortunately,
which Iacobus having had his education and breeding and credit too from him,
afterward took the state from him. Of this sort was that of Coppola in our
days against Ferdinand King of Arragon, which Coppola having attained to that
greatness, that he thought he wanted nothing but the Kingdom, meaning not to go
without, lost his life. And indeed if any conspiracy against Princes made by
great men be ever like to take effect, this was very probable, being made by
one that might have been termed a King for his power and conveniences he had
to work his will. But that greedy ambition which blinds them in their desire to
rule, blinds them as well in the mannaging of this enterprise: for if they know
how to act this villainy with discretion, it were impossible but it should
succeed. A Prince then that would be well wary of conspiracies, should be more
jealous of those to whom he has afforded most favors, then of those to whom
he has done most wrongs: for these want the means, and those have them at
pleasure, and the will is a like; for the desire of rule is as great or greater
then that of revenge. Wherefore they are to confer but so much authority upon
their favorites, that still between it and the Principality they keep a
distance, and leave (as it were) some obstacle in their way; otherwise seldom
falls it out but that it chances to them, as to the forementioned Princes. But
let us return to our order. I say, that being they are to be great men that
plot these treasons, and have easy access unto the Prince, we are to discourse
upon the successes of these their undertakings, what they have been, and point
at the reason that has caused them to prove happy or unhappy. And (as I
formerly said) at three several times, herein are dangers found. In the
plotting, in the acting, and after. Therefore are there very few that prove
lucky: for it is almost impossible to pass all these happily. And beginning to
treat touching the dangers of the the first, that are of most importance, I
say, there had need be much circumspection and advisement, which likewise had
need be seconded by good fortune, that in the contriving and ordering of a
conspiracy, it be not disclosed; for that is done either by relation, or by
conjecture. This relation proceeds from the small faith; or small discretion of
those men with whom thou communicatest thy secret. And it is a thing ordinary
to find but small says; for thou can not communicate it but to thy
confidents, who for love of thee may adventure death, or to men that are
discontented with the Prince. Of confidents, possible it is that one or two may
be found; but when thou openest thy self to more; it is impossible thou
should find them. Besides the good will they bear thee, had need be very
great, to the end they be not affrighted at the punishment and peril they
incur. Moreover men are often deceived touching the love, which thou
beleevest another bears thee, nor can thou ever assure thy self of it, unless
thou have had experience thereof; and to make proof of it herein is exceeding
dangerous; and though thou have had proof thereof in some other dangerous
exploit, where they have stuck close upon thee, yet can thou not from thence
measure them for this, being this danger surpasses all others. If thou
measurest their faith by their discontent against their Prince, therein thou
may easily deceive thy self: For so soon as thou have revealed thy mind to
that malecontent, thou give him a subject whereupon to work again his own
content; and either his hatred had need be great, or thy power with him of much
force to keep him faithful. Hereupon it arises, that very many of them are
discovered and crushed even in the egg; and when one of them among many men
has bin kept secret any time, it has bin thought of as a miracle as was that
of Piso against Nero, and in our days that of Laurence and Julian of Medici,
whereunto above fifty persons were made privy, who met together all to discover
themselves in the execution thereof. As for the discovery for want of
discretion, that falls out when a conspirator is not wary in his talk, so that
a servant or another third person comes take notice thereof, as it befe Brutus
his sons, who in contriving the business with Tarquins Ambassadors, were
understood by a slave who accused them: or else through a certain lightness of
thine own, thou communicatest it to a woman, or a child which thou love, or
some such slight person, as Dimus did, one of those that conspired with
Philotas against Alexander the Great, who told the treason to Nicomacus, a
child which he loved, who presently told it to Ciballinus his brother, and
Ciballinus to the King. Touching discovery by conjecture, we have an example
for it, where Piso conspired against Nero, at which time Sceuinus one of the
conspirators, the day before that he was to slay Nero, made his will, and gave
order that Milichius his freeman should cause his old and rusty dagger to be
scoured; he made all his slaves free, and gave them money; he appointed many
clouts to bind up wounds to be prepared; by which conjectures Milichius being
assured of the business, accused, him before Nero. Scevinus was taken, and with
him Natalis one of the Conspirators, who had bin seen the day before to talk a
good while and privately in his company, who not agreeing concerning the
discourse they held, were forced to confess the truth. So that the treason was
bewraied, and the conspirators utterly ruined. From these occasions of
discovery it is impossible to beware, but that through malice, indiscretion, or
fondness all comes to light, whenever the complotters thereof pass the number
of three or four; and in case that more then one of them chance to be taken, it
is impossible but that it must be so; for two cannot be so well agreed of all
their discourses together, but that in some things they shall jarre. When one
alone that is resolute, is laid hold on, he may through the strength of his
courage, be able to conceal the rest of his accomplices: but then must his
consors show no less resolution than he, in standing firm and not discovering
themselves by flight: for on which side soever courage fails, either on his
that is taken, or his that is at liberty, the conspiracy is disclosd. And the
example alleadgd by T. Livius, is very rare in the treason that was plotted
against Ier lamus King of Siracusa, where Theodorus one of the conspirators
being taken, with a stout courage conceald all his companions, and accused the
Kings friends; and on the other part, all the confederates were confident of
Theodorus his resolution, that not one of them forsook Siracusa, or made any
show of fear, Wherefore all these dangers are to be passed in the ordering of a
conspiracy, before the acting of it. Against which these are the remedies; The
first and truest whereof, or better to term it, the only one is, not to give
leisure to our accomplices to accuse us, nor communicate the matter unto them,
till just when thou meanest to put it in execution, and not before. They who
have thus done, assuredly escape the dangers belonging to the practice thereof;
and oftentimes the others also, or rather have they all had good success: and I
think every one that is wise should endeavor to carry the matter thus. I will
content my self to produce only two examples. Nelematus not being able to
endure the tyranny of Aristorimus, Tyrant of Epirus, assembled together in his
house many of his friends and kinsfolk, and having encouraged them to set
their Country at liberty, some of them required time to be advised and
prepared: whereupon Nelematus causd his servants to shut the doors, and told
those he had called together, That they should either swear presently to do this,
or if not, he would deliver them all prisoners to Aristotimus: whereby all of
them, being moved, swore, and so without more delay, went and put in execution
what Nelematus had orderd. One of the Magi having by treachery seisd upon the
kingdom of Persia, Orthanus a great man had notice thereof, and found out the
deceit, and thereupon conferd with six other Princes of that State, saying, he
was now underraking to vindicate the Kingdom from the Tyranny of that Magician;
and when some of them demanded time, Darius rose up (one of the six that was
called by Orthanus) and said, Either we will all now go and execute this, or
else I will go and accuse you all: so rising all by consent, and not giving any
one time to repent himself, they happily effected what they desired. Like unto
these two examples also, is the course the Aetolians took to put Nabis the
Spartan Tyrant to death, who sent Alessamenes a Citizen of theirs with 300
horse and 1000 foot to Nabis, under color of giving him aid: the secret they
communicated to Alessamenes only; the others that were with him they charged to
obey him in whatsoever matter it were, under pain of banishment. This man went
into Sparta, never communicating his Commission to any, till just he was to put
it in execution, whereupon it fell out that he slew him. They then by these
means escaped the dangers that accompany the plotting and ordering of
Conspiracies; and whoever shall do as they did, shall always be sure to escape
them: And that every one also is able so to do, I will show by the example of
Piso alleged before. Piso was a very great man, and of much esteem, and very
familiar with Nero, on whom we much relied: And Nero went oftentimes to banquet
with him in his gardens: Piso therefore might have procured himself friends of
spirit and courage, and willing too to put such a thing in execution, being a
matter easy for any great man to compass; and when he had had Nero in his
gardens, then communicated the business to them, and with fit words persuaded
them to it, so that they could not have had time to refuse, and impossible had
it bin, but that it must have taken effect. And if we shall examine all the
others we have mentiond, we shall find very few could have bin otherwise
carried. But men that ordinarily do not well weigh the actions of the world,
often commit very great errors, and the greater in those actions, that have
something of extraordiry in them, as this. The matter then is never to be
communicated, but upon necessity, or even at the very acting of it, and yet if
thou will communicate it, let that be but unto one of whom thou have had long
experience, or that therein is interested upon the same reasons thou art. It is
easier to find one man of that condition than many, and thereby also is less
danger. Moreover, when he should deceive thee, there were some means left yet
to desend thee, which could not be where the conspirators are many: for it is
the saying of a wise man, that with one alone a man may speak any thing for one
man; I, is as good as another man's No, provided that nothing be given by thee
under thine own handwriting. And of writing any thing a man shouldbe as wary
as of a perilous rock; for nothing convicts thee sooner than thine own hand.
Plautianus having a mind to skill Severus the Emperor, Antonius his son,
committed the execution of it to Saturninus a Tribune: who purposing to accuse
and not obey him, yet doubting when he should come to the trial, Plautianus
would be believed before him, asked him a note under his hand, that might give
him assurance of his Commission; which Plautianus, blinded with ambition, gave
him, whereupon it followed, that he was accused and convicted by the Tribune,
without which, and certain other tokens, Plautianus had carried it clear
against him, so boldly he denied it. Therefore when one only accuses, there may
be some remedy, especially in case thou be not convicted by any writing of
thiue, or countermarks, whereof a man should be well aware. In Pisoes
conspiracy there was a woman called Epicaris, which formerly had bin one of
Neroes Mistresses, who thinking it would serve well to purpose to join with the
conspirators, one that was a Captain of some galleys, which Nero kept for his
safeguard, opened to him the conspiracy, but not who were the conspirators,
whereupon that Captain contrary to his word given, accused her before Nero; but
such was her boldness in denying it, that Nero was astonished thereat, and
condemned her not. There are then in communicating the matter to one alone two
dangers; the one that the party go not voluntarily to accuse thee, alleging
some proof against thee; the other that he detect thee not constraind and
forced thereunto by torture, having been apprehended upon some conjecture or
suspicion had of him: but in either of these two dangers there is some remedy,
being that in the one it may be denied, by saying the party did it out of
hatred he bore thee; and in the other, by alleging that the extremity of
torture compelled him to utter any thing, though false. It is wisdom then to
make no man privy to such a secret, but rather to order it conformably to the
above alleged examples; or in case thou revealst it, not to exceed one, where
though there be somewhat more danger, yet is there much less than when it is
discoverd to diverse. Near unto this course is, when a necessity constrains thee
to do that to the Prince, which thou see he would do unto thee, which
necessity is so excessive, that it gives thee leisure only to provide for thy
security. This necessity brings the business ordinarily to a good end; and to
prove it, two examples shall suffice me. Cammodus the Emperor did use Lettus
and Elettus, Captains of his guard, among his familiar and principal friends,
and Martia among his chief Concubines and Mistresses: but because sometime he
had been reprehended by them for some things done, whereby he had disgraced his
person and the Empire, he resolve'd to put them to death, and writ in a list
the names of Martia, Lettus, and Eletius, and some others, who the night
following he meant should die, and so put that list under his pillow; and when
he went to rise, a little boy which he loved, playing about his chamber and his
bed, found that list, and going out with it in his hand met with Martia, who
took it from him, and read it, and having seen the contents thereof, sent for
Lettus and Elettus, whereupon they three knowing the danger they were in,
resolved to prevent it, and so without longer delay the night following slew
Commodus. Antoninus Caracalla the Emperor was in Mesopotamia with his Armies,
whereof Macrinus was chief Commander, a man more politic than wa^lick; and as
it comes to pass, Princes that are not good, are always fe^rfull, least others
work against them, what they are guilty to themselves they well deserve;
Antoninus writ to Mate nianus his friend at Rome, that he should inquire of the
Astrologers if any one aspird to the Empire, and should advise him of it.
Whereupon Maternianus writ back unto him, Macrinus was he that aspired thereto;
but the Letter coming first to Macrinus his hand, before the Emperors, and he
thereby perceiving the necessity imposd upon him, agreed with Martialis (...)
Centurion, one of his confidents (whose brother a few days before Antoninus
had slain) that he should kill him, which was luckily done by him. It is
evident then, that this necessity which gives no leisure, works even the same
effect which that course did, I formerly said, Nelematus of Epirus took. We see
also that proved which I spoke of in the beginning of this discourse, that
Princes threats r^tort more mischiefs on them, and occasion more desperate
conspiracies, than the wrongs they do; wheroef a Prince ^ought to take good
heed: for men are either to be well treated by them, or at least to be put out
of doubt of them, that they be not reducd to such terms, as to think they must
of force either kill or be killed: Touching the dangers that are incurrd upon the
execution, they arise either from changing the order given, or from want of
courage in the actor, or from some error the actor commits for want of
judgment, or from the fail of fully perfecting the matter in hand by leaving
some of those surviving who were appointed for death. I think therefore that
nothing so much disturbs or hinders men's actions, as at an instant without
respite of time, to be compeld to alter an order once given, or divert the
course of it a different way from that it was first intended And if this
variation causes disorder in any thing, it is in the actions of war, and such
like matters, whereof we now speak: for in such occasions, there is nothing so
necessary for men to do, as to resolve with themselves to execute fully all
that is looked for at their hands. And if men have a good while bent their
minds to one course or order, and that chance suddenly to be alterd, it must
needs breed some disturbance to them all, and ruin the whole design, so that
it is much better for them to execute any thing according to the order first
given (however that some inconvenient ensue thereupon) then, by desiring to
cancel that, to enter into a thousand inconveniences. This happens when they
have not time to put themselves in order again: for when a man has leisure, he
may go his own way he likes best. The Conspiracy of the Pazzi against Laurence
and Julian of the house of Medi^ia, is well known: the order given amongst them
was this, that they should invite the Cardinal of Saint George to dinner, and
thereat kill them they intended; where they had their appointments who were to
slay these, as those also that were to seize on the Palace, and they that were
to run about the streets, and call the people together to lay hold of their
liberty. It so fell out, that the Pazzi and the Medici together with the
Cardinal being in the Cathedral Church of Florence at Mass, notice was given
that Julian would not dine there that day, which caused the Conspirators to
consult together, and what they were to have done in the house to those of
Medici, they resolved to do in the Church, which gave disturbance to the whole
order: for John Baptista de Monte sacro, would not be guilty of murder
committed in the Church, insomuch as they were forced to change the actors in
every part, who having not time to settle and confirm their resolutions,
committed such errors, that in the very execution thereof they were all ruined.
Courage sails him that is to execute any thing, either through reverence of
the person he is to do the mischief upon, or through the executioners own
innate cowardice. Such is the Majesty and reverence which the presence of a
Prince carries along with it, that it is an ordinary thing for it, either to
mitigate or toaffright an executioner. A Slave was sent to Marius, when he was
taken prisoner by the Minturveses, to kill him, who amazed at the presence of
the man, and at the remembrance of his name proved so cowardly, that he lost
all power to slay him. And if there be such power in the person of a man that
is bound, and in prison, and in a manner choked up with ill fortune, how much
more may we think there is in a Prince that is at liberty at^ir'd in the
Majesty of his ornaments of state, and environed with his train, insomuch that
the pomp thereof is of force to affright, or else with the least courtesy he
shall receive thee, to humble thee again before him. There were some conspired
against Sitalces King of Thrace, and they appointed amongst them a day for the
execution, and met at the place agreed on where the Prince was, but none of
them once moved to hurt him, so that they parted all thence without attempting
any thing, and without knowing what it was that hindered them, but blaming one
another for the fail: into such errors they often fall afterward, in so much
as the treason was discovered, and they suffered punishment for that evil,
which they could, but durst not act. Against Alfonsus Duke of Ferrara, two of
his own brothers conspired together, and used the help of one Giannes a Priest
and Musician belonging to that Duke who many times at their intrety brought the
Duke amongst them, so that it was in their power to kill him; yet never was any
of them so hardy as to do it, whereupon at length being discoverd they suffered
for their wickedness, and want of wit. This negligence could not proceed from
elsewhere then from that of necessity the Princes presence did affright them,
or that some courtesy he showed them humbled them. In such executions an
inconvenient or error many times arises, either for lack of discretion or
courage: for when the one or other of these two once amazes thee, thou art
borne forward in such confusion of thy understanding, that it makes thee both
say and do what thou oughtst not. And that men are thus astonished and
confounded, Livie does very well show it, where he sets forth Alexamenes the
Etolian, as he went about to kill Nabis the Spartan, whereof we spoke formerly,
that when he came to the execution, and discoverd to those that were with him,
what he was to do, T. Livius says these words: He gathers together his wits to
him, which Colligit and ipse animum confusum tantae cogitatione rei.
the consideration of so weighty a matter had somewhat disorderd For it is
impossible, that any man (though of a resolute courage, and accustomed to the
slaughters of men, and use of his weapons) should not be quite astonished.
Therefore choice is to be made of men experienced in such matters, nor should
one commit them to any other, however he be esteemed very courageous: for let
no man that has not formerly made trial of himself, presume too much upon his
courage in the performance of any great exploit. This amazement then may either
cause thee to let thy weapons fall out of thy hands, or such words from thy
month, as may work the same effect. Luciila Commodus his sister had so ordered
it, that Quintianus should kill him. And he awaited Cowmodus in the passage
into the Theater, where with a naked poinard coming up to him, he cried out,
This the Senate sends thee; which words caused him to be first laid hold on,
before he could bring down his arm to strike him. M. Antonius of Volterra
appointed (as we said before) to kill Laurence of Medici, as he came near
him, said, Ah Traitor! which saying of his occasioned the safety of Laurence,
and the wrack of that Conspiracy. Such a matter may be fully perfected, when it
is practiced only against one head, for the reasons alleged: but very hardly
can it well be accomplished against two principals, or rather impossibly: for
it is impossible that one and the like action should succeed at the same
instant in several places: for it cannot be, but whither a man will or no, the
one shall ruin the other, being done at several times. So that if it be a
thing very hazardous and full of danger and small advisedness to practice
against the person of one Prince alone; certainly to conspire against two, is
wholly vain and to no purpose. And were it not for the reverence I bear to the
Historian, I would never believe, that were possible, which Herodian says of
Plautianus, that he gave the charge to Saturninus the Centurion to kill Severus
and Antoninus abiding in several place; for it dissents so much from reason,
that nothing else but this authority would make me credit it. Certain young men
of Athens conspired together against Diocles and Hippias Tyrants of that City,
and slew Diocles; but Hippias that remaind, revenged it. Chiones and Leonides,
Heracleans, that were Platoes Disciples, conspird against Clearchus and Satirus
that were Tyrants; they slew Clearchus, and Satirus that was left alive
punished the fact. And the Pazzi, several times alleged by us, has not the
fortune to kill but Julian alone. Insomuch as every one should be so wise as
forbear to conspire against several principals: for he neither advantageth
himself, nor his Country, nor any body else: but rather they that are left
behind, become more intolerable and fiercer, as Florence, Athens, and Heraclea,
which I spoke of before, know well It is true, that the conspiracy which
Pelopidas practiced to free Thebes his native Country, had all manner of
difficulties, yet it succeeded luckily: for Pelopidas conspired not only
against two Tyrants, but against ten: and not only was he not a confident of
any of theirs, and so had no easy access unto any of those Tyrants, but he was
a rebel: yet for all this came he into Thebes, slew the Tyrants and set the
Country at liberty. Nevertheless he affected all this with the assistance of
one Carrion a Counselor belonging to those Tyrants, by whose means he had easy
access to execute his purpose. Yet let none take example from him: for it was
an enterprise almost impossible, and a miracle it was that it succeeded; and so
it was, and is now esteemed by those writers that celebrate the memory thereof,
as a matter of great rarity, and without pattern. Such an execution may be
hindered by a false imagination, or upon some sudden accident, that arises just
upon the fact. On the morning that Brutus and the other Conspirators purposed
to kill Caesar, it fell out so that he talked a good while with Cn. Popilius
Len^^, one of the Conspirators, whereupon the others seeing this long
discourse, they were in fear least the said Popilius had revealed the
Conspiracy to Caesar, and they were about to attempt to slay Caesar there, and
not expect till he came into the Senate, had it not been that when the
discourse ended, they saw that Caesar made not any extraordinary motion thereat,
and so they settled themselves anew. These false conceits are to be considered,
and weighed with discretion, and the rather, because they are easy to be taken;
for he that has aguilty conscience, easily believes that others talk of him a
word may be herd spoken to another purpose, that may much trouble thy mind, and
make thee believe it touches the matter thou have in hand, and cause thee by
thy flight to discover thine own Conspiracy, or put the action into disorder by
hastening it faster than its time. And this comes to pass the more easily,
where Many are made privy to the Conspiracy. Touching the accidents (because
they fall out unexpected) they cannot be showed but by examples, and make men
wary, according to their rule. ^ulius Belanti of Siena (of whom I have formerly
made mention) for the hatred which he bore to Pandulphus that had taken his
daughter from him, whom he had first given him to wife, resolved to kill him,
and chose this time. Pandulphus went almost every day to visit a kinsman of his
that was sick, and in going thither passed by Julius his house: Who perceiving
this, provided so, that his Conspirators were altogether ready in his house to
kill Pandulphus, as he should pass and having placed them all armed in the
entry, he had one stood in the window, that as Pandulphus should pass, when he
came near to the entry, should make a sign. It chanced that Pandulphus coming,
and the other having given the sign, he met a friend that stopped him, and some
of those that were with him passed forward before him, and hearing the noise of
arms, they discoverd the ambush laid, so that Pandulphus escaped, and Julius
with his confederates were constrained to fly from Siena. The chance of that
meeting hindered the success of that action, and ruined quite Julius his
enterprise. For which accidents (because they are very rare) we cannot find any
remedy, it is very necessary to examine well those that may chance, and help
them as we can. It remains now only, that we discourse of the dangers which
they run after the execution done, which are all but one, and this it is, when
any one is left alive to revenge the dead Prince. There may then his brothers
or his sons be left, or other of his allies to whom the Principality may
belong, and may be left alive by thy negligence, or upon some occasions
(formerly spoken of) that may execute this revenge, as it befell John Andreas
of Lampognano, who together with his Complotters having slain the Duke of
Milan, and there being left alive one son of his and two brothers, they were
ready at hand time enough to revenge his death. And truly in this case these
conspirators are excusable: because they have here no remedy, but when any of
them survives, for lack of good advisement, or through their negligence, then
indeed thereis no excuse to be made for them. Some conspirators at Forly slew
Count Ierolamus their Lord, took prisoners his wife and sons, which were but
little ones; and thinking they could have no security, unless they became
masters of the fortress, which the governor was not willing to give into their
hands; whereupon the Lady Katherine (for so the Countess was called) promised
the Traitors, that if they would let her enter therein, she would cause it to
be delivered up to them, and that they should keep her sons for pledges. They
upon her word thus given, suffered her to enter in, who so soon as she was
within the walls, reproached them with the murder of her husband, and threatened
them with all manner of revenge; and to let them know she had no regard of her
children, she showed them her privy parts, saying she had the means left her to
bring forth others, so that they not knowing what to do, and too late
perceiving their own error, suffered perpetual exile in punishment of their
lack of wit. But of all dangers that can befall after the execution, there is
node moan certain, nor more terrible, then when the people is a friend to that
Prince thou have slain: for against this the conspirators can have no remedy:
for they can never secure themselves. We have Caesar for example hereof, who
because he had the people of Rome to friend, was by their means revenged: for
when they had chased the conspirators from Rome they caused all of them in
several places to be slain. Treasons that are practiced against ones own
Country, are less dangerous for those that work them, then those that are
practiced against Princes: for in the ordering of them the dangers are less then
in the others, and in executing of them they are the same, and after the
execution there is none at all. In the plotting and working them the dangers
are not many: for a Citizen may frame himself so, as to be capable of power,
without manifesting his mind therein or intention to any one; and unless those
his purposes receive some interruption, he may happily proceed in his design:
but if any law made, chance to cross them, he must stay his time, and seek some
other course. This is to be understood of a Republique where in corruption is
entered in some part; for in one not corrupted (no evil beginning taking (...)
place there) these thoughts cannot enter into the heart of any citizen. The
Citizens then may by several means and many ways aspire unto the Principality,
where they run no hazard of being oppressed, as well because Republiques are
more slew then a Prince and stand less in doubt, and ^^h refore are less wary
as also because they carry more respect toward their principal citizens, and
therefore are they the more audacious and more insolent to practice against
them. Few there are but have read Catalines conspiracy written by Salust, and
know how that afterward when it was discovered, Cataline, did not only abide
in Rome, but came into the Senatehouse, and spoke in villainous terms against
the Senate and the Consul; so great was the respect that that City bore to her
Citizens so that when he was departed from Rome, and had his Armies already on
foot, Lentulus nor those others had never been laid hold on, had not there been
letters of his own hand brought against him, which manifestly accused him.
Hanno the most potent Citizen in Carthage, aspiring to a Tyranny, had provided
at the marriage of one of his own daughters to poison all the Senate, and
afterward make himself Prince. When this matter was known, the Senate took no
other order then to make a law which limited the excess of expenses anbanquets
and weddings; such was the respect they bore to men of their qualities. It is
very true that in the executing of a treason against ones native Country, there
is more difficulty, and greater dangers; for very seldom is it, that thy own
forces suffice, being to conspire against so many; for every one has not an
Army at his command, as Caesar Agathocles or Cl^omenes, and such like, who at
one pluck have been able to seize on the Country: for unto such the way is
easy and safe enough, But others that have not such advantages of forces, must
do it either with some slight or artifice, or by the aid of foreign forces.
As for slights and tricks, Pisistratus the Athenian having over come the
Megarenses, and thereby got credit with the people, one morning came out among
them wounded, saying, The nobility through envy had thus wronged him, and asked
leave of them for his defense to have a guard of armd men about him. By this
power he easily attained to such greatness, that he brought Athens under his
Tyranny. Pandulfus Petrucci returned himself with others that were out-lawed
into Siena, and there he had the charge given him over the common guard of
Justice, as a Mecanick office, and which others refused, yet in time those
armed men gave him such reputation, that shortly after he became Lord of the
Town. Many others have used other endeavors, and other ways, and in a short
space, and without danger have attained to the same. Those that by their own
force, or by help of forrain-forces have conspired to make themselves Lords
over their native Countries, have had several successes, as fortune has
befriended them or otherwise. Cataline we spoke of before, was ruined thereby.
Hanno (of whom we formerly made mention) when the poison took not effect, armed
many thousands of his partisans, who with himself were all slain. Some of the
prime Citizens of Thebes, to the end they might become Lords of the Town,
called to their aid a Sparian army, and so took upon them the rule of that
City. So that when we shall have examined all the conspiracies made against a
Country, we shall not find any, at least very few, that in the plotting thereof
have been suppressed, but all of them either have taken effect, or bin ruined
in the execution rather. When they are once acted, they carry not with them any
further dangers, then the nature of a Principality has in it self: for when a
man has once gotten to be a Tyrant, he has his own proper and ordinary
dangers belonging to him, against which there are no other remedies then those
we have formerly touched. This is that which I had to write touching
conspiracies: and if I have discoursed of those only that are executed with
the sword, and not done by poison, it is because they have all the same rule.
It is rue, that those done with poison, are the more dangerous, because they
are more uncertain, for that a man cannot administer by every one, and he must
needs reveal it to him that he makes his instrument; and from this necessity of
revealing it, arises thy danger: moreover upon many accidents a draught of
poison cannot prove deadly, as it befell those that slew Co^modus; for he
having vomited up the poison which they gave him, they were forced to strangle
him, before they could make him dye. Whereupon I judge that Princes have not a
greater enemy then treason; because when a treason is once practiced against
them, it either brings them to their end, or procures them much infamy; for if
it succeeds, they die; if it be discovered, and they slay the traitors, men
always suppose it has been some device of that Princes, to vent his ava^ice
and cruelty against the bloods and estates of those he has put to death. I
would not fail therefore to warn those Princes or Republiques against which
treasons have been devised, that they be wary, when a conspiracy is once
disclosed to them, before they go about to revenge it, but first to pty
narrowly into it, and to seek to understand well the qualities thereof, and
weigh well the conditions of the conspirators, and their own; and when they
find them great and mighty, never to discover them, till they be furnished
with sufficient forces to crush them; for in doing otherwise, they should
discover it to their own ruin: Wherefore they ought to dissemble it with all
possible care; because the conspirators, when they find themselves discovered,
of force are driven to act what they can without respect. We have an example
hereof from the Romans, who having lift two legions of soldiers to guard the
Capuans against the Samnitcs, as otherwhere we have said, the heads of those
Legions conspired together to oppress the Capuans: Whereof notice being given
at Rome, the matter was committed to Rutilius the new Consul, that he should
take order for it, who to lull asleep the conspirators, gave it out, that the
Senate had again confirmed the Capuan Legions abode there: Which those soldiers
giving credit to, and thinking they had time enough to execute their purpose,
they never went about to hasten the matter: And so they stood still, till they
began to see that the Consul separated them one from another, which thing
having begotten suspicion in them, made them discover themselves, and execute
their design. Nor can there be a fuller example on the one or the other part:
for hereby it appears how slow men are in matters, where they think they have
time enough; and how quick, when a necessity drives them to it. Nor can a
Prince or Republique (that would defer the discovery of a treason for his own
advantage) take a better course, then by some device or trick offer the
conspirators shortly some handsome opportunity, to the end that they attending
that, or thinking they have time enough, may give leisure to that Prince or
Commonwealth to punish them. They who have done otherwise, have hastened their
own destruction, as the Duke of Athens did, and William of the family of the
Pazzi. The Duke being become the tyrant of Florence, and understanding that
there was a conspiracy plotted against him, caused without further examining
the matter, one of the conspirators to be laid hold on, which gave and alarm
to the rest, whereupon arming themselves, they took the state from him. William
being a Commissary in the valley of Chiana in the year 1501. having had notice,
that in Arezzo there was a conspiracy in favor of the Vitelli, to take that
Town from the Florentines, presently went to the town, and not considering his
own forces, nor the conspirators, nor taking order to furnish himself with any,
by the Bishops advice, who was his sons, caused one of the conspirators to be
laid hands on, whereupon the first presently took arms, got away the town from
the Florentines, and William of a Commissary was made a prisoner. But when
those conspiracies are feeble, they may and ought without any regard be
suppressed. Yet in any case we must not follow two courses which have been used
in a manner contrary one to the other: The one by the forenamed Duke of Athens,
who to show he believed that he had the citizens of Florence good wills, put
one to death that detected a conspiracy against him: The other by Dion a
Siracusan, who to sound the mind of one whom he had in suspicion, agreed that
Callippus, of whom he was very confident, should make him believe that he were
working a plot against him; but these matters fell out ill for them both. For
the one took all courage away from the accusers, and encouraged traitors; the
other made the way easy to his own ruin, or rather he himself was principal
of the conspiracy against himself, and so it fell out; for Callippus (being
that he could without any respect practice such a thing against Dion) did it so
in earnest, that he took both his life and his State from him.

CHAP. VII.
From whence proceeds it, that of the changes from liberty to slavery, and from
slavery to liberty, some are without blood, others exceeding bloody?

SOme will marvail perchance from whence it comes to pass, that of many changes
which are made from a free State to a Tyrannical, and contrarily, some are with
much effusion of blood, others quite without any: for, as we learn by
Histories, in such like alterations sometimes very many men have been slain,
and sometimes again not one has suffered any injury, as i^ befell in the
change that Rome made from her Kings to Consuls, wherein none but the Tarquins
were banished, without wrong done to any body else. Which depends hereupon; for
that State that is changed, begins first either by violence, or without it: and
when it begins with violence, it must needs begin with doing wrong to many; and
it is necessary afterward that in its destruction, they who have been wronged,
revenge themselves, and so from their desire of revenge proceeds the effusion
of blood and death of many. But when that State is begun by the common consent
of an universality, and thereby has been amplify'd, it has no cause
afterward, when that universality is ruined, to wrong others then the head
only; and of this kind was the State of Rome, and the Tarquins banishment, as
also was in Florence the State which the Medici held, when afterward in their
destructions in the year 1444. none else were hurt but they. And so such like
changes never prove very dangerous; but those rather are very full of danger,
which are wrought by those that endeavor to revenge themselves withal, which
have been such, that they have caused horror even in him that reads them. And
because of examples to this purpose histories are full fraught, I will let this
pass.

CHAP. VIII.
He that will make alteration in a Republique, must consider the subject he is
to work upon.

IT has been formerly treated how that a malicious Citizen cannot work
mischief in a Republique that is not grown corrupted; which conclusion is
confirmed (besides the reasons that then were alleged) with the example of Sp.
Cassius, and of Manlius Capitolinus. Which Spurius being an ambitious man, and
desirous to take upon him extraordinary authority in Rome, and gain the people
to him by doing them many good turns, as was that, to sell them those fields,
which the Romans had taken from the Hermici, this his ambition was desc^yed by
the Fathers, and so much suspected, that when hh spoke to the people and
offered to give them those moneys, which the Corn was sold for, that the
Public had caused to be brought from Sicily, they wholly refused them,
thinking that Spurius meant to give them the price of their liberty. But had
that people been already corrupted, they would not have refused the said price,
but rather have opened him that way to the tyranny, which now they shut against
him. A fuller example hereof Manlius Capitolinus represents unto us; for in him
we see, what excellencies of mind and body, how many brave exploits acted in
defense of a man's native Country, a brutish desire of rule quite rases out:
which (as it appeared) grew in him, through the envy he bore Camillus for the
honors were done him, whereby his understanding was so blinded, as not
considering the manner of Government used in the City, nor examining, whereupon
he was to work, unapt as yet to receive so evil a form, betook himself to raise
tumults in Rome against the Senate, and contrary to the Laws of his Country.
Wherein the perfection of that City is very evident, and the goodness of the
matter thereof; for in his case none of the Nobility, however that they were
very eager defenders the one of another, never stirred in his favor, nor any
of his kindred undertook any thing in his defense: whereas ordinarily when
others were accused, they used to accompany them in a rueful manner, clad in
black, and all sorrowful; whereby they might gain compassion in favor of the
defendant, and with Manlius none of these were seen. The Tribunas of the
people, who were wont to favor those things, which seemed to be moved for the
peoples advantage, and the more they were against the Nobility, so much the
forwarder used to thrust them, in this case held with the Nobility to suppress
a common mischief. The people of Rome exceedingly desirous of their own
advantage, and a great favourer of any thing that thwarted the Nobility,
however they afforded Manlius many favors, nevertheless, when the Tribunes
cited him, and referred his cause to be judged by the people, that people being
become judge of a defendant, without regard condemned him to death. Wherefore I
believe there is not any example in this History more proper to show the
goodness of that Commonwealths orders, then this, seeing that not one of this
whole City moved in behalf of a very valourous Citizen, who as well publicly
as privately had done many worthy acts: because in all of them the love of
their country was of more force than any other regard, and they considered more
the present danger; that depended on him, than his fore-past deserts, so that
by his death they set themselves at liberty. And T. Livius says, This end had
that man, who had he not been born in a Hunc exitum habuit vir, nisi in libera
civitate natus esset, memorabilis.
free State, was worthy of admiration. Where two things are to be considered;
the one, that by other means a man ought to seek after glory in a City
corrupted, than in one that lives strictly according to the civil government;
the other is (which is almost the same with the first) that men in their
proceedings, and the rather in actions of consequence should consider the
times, and conform themselves thereunto: and those that by their evil choice,
or natural inclination disagree with the times, most commonly live unhappily,
and their actions have but ill successes. The contrary befalls those that can
accord with the times: and without question, by the Historians words which we
for merly mentioned, we may make this conclusion, that if Manlius had been
borne in the times that Marius and Silla were, where the matter was already
corrupted, that his ambition could have made some impression therein, he might,
have workd the same effect, and had the same success that Silla and Marius had,
and others afterward, who after them aspird to the Tyranny. So in like manner,
if Silla and Marius had lived in Manlius his days. they had been crushd in the
very egg: for one man may indeed begin with his evil courses and mischievous
ways to debauch the people of a City: but it is impossible that one man's life
can suffice to corrupt it so, that he himself can make any advantage thereof.
And in case it were possible, that in tract of time, he could do it, yet would
it be impossible, in regard of the manner of men's proceedings, who are
impatient, and cannot defer any passion of theirs long. Moreover, they err in
their affairs, and in those especially which they much desire, in so much as
either through their small patience, or through their error, they would venture
upon the executing of their purposes, in counter time, and so come to an evil
end. Therefore is it necessary, if a man would gain authority in a Republic,
and induce some ill for me thereinto, to find the matter already disorderd by
time, and that by little and little, and from age to age is brought into
disorder, which of force comes thereunto, when it is not (as formerly has been
said) refreshd by virtuous examples, or by new ^aws reduced to the first
principles. Manlius ^hen had been a rare man, and famous, had he been borne in
a corrupted City. And therefore should those Citizens that in Republics
undertake any thing either in favor of liberty, or in favor of Tyranny,
consider the subject they are to work on, and from thence conjecture the
difficulty of the work: for it is as hard and dangerous to set free a people
that would live in thral^om, as to inthrall a people that would live free. And
because we have before rouchd, that in all manner of actions men should
consider the quality of the times, and proceed conformably to those, we will
speak of them at length in the Chapter following.

CHAP. IX.
How a man must of necessity change with the times, if he will always have
good success in his undertakings.

I Have many times considered, how the occasion of men's good or evil fortunes
depends upon the manner of the encounter of their proceedings with the times:
for it is evident, that some men proceed in their affairs with violence,
others with regard and wariness. And because that in the one and other of these
two ways, the convenient terms are transgressed, being that they cannot hit
upon the true way; both in the one and the other they fail. But he fails least,
and oftnest lights upon good success, that meets (as I have said) time in its
own way, and always proceeds according as his own nature puts him forward.
Every one knows how Fabius Maximus proceeded with his Army carefully and
warily, far from all that kind of metle and confidence which other whiles the
Romans used; and his good fortune would have it, that this his way agreed well
with the times: for Hannibal being come a young man into Italy, and with a
fresh gale of fortune, and having twice broken the Roman Armies, and that
Republike almost lost all her good soldiers, and therefore being affrighted,
could not light upon better fortune than to have such a Captain, who by his
slowness and wariness should keep the enemy in play with vain delays: Nor
could Fabius have met with times fitter for his ways: whereupon came it to pass
that he grew glorious. And that Fabius did this upon the instigation of his own
nature, and not upon a mere choice, we see that when Scipio desired to pass
over into Africa with those Armies, whereby to make an end of the war, Fabius
much contradicted it, as he that could not go out of his own pace, nor leave
his own custom, so that for all him, Hannibal might have continued still in
Italy; for he perceived not, that the times were changed, and it was needful to
alter the manner of making war. And had Fabius been King of Rome, he might
easily have spoiled that war, because he would not have known how to alter his
proceedings with the alteration of times. But being he was born in a Republike,
where there was diverse Citizens, and diverse humors, as she had Fabius, who was
excellent in those times, when the war was only to be supported; so had she
Scipio in the times when their enemies were to be overcome. Whence arises it,
that a Republike has a longer life, and longer enjoys good fortune than a
principality: because she can better fit her self for several accidents, by
reason of the variety of her Subjects that are in her, then can a Prince: for a
man that is accustomed to proceed in one manner, never alters, as it is said,
and must of necessity, when the times disagree with his way, go to wrack. Peter
Soderini, formerly spoken of, proceeded in all his affairs with mildness and
patience: and he and his Country prospered, while the times agreed with his
manner of proceedings: but when the times fell out so, that it was needful to
break off all patience and mildness, he knew not how to do it: so that together
with his Country he fell to ruin. Pope Julius the second carried himself all
the time of his Pontificate with great violence and rage, and because the times
sorted well therewith, all his undertakings succeeded well. But if other times
had come, that would have required other advice, of force he must have gone to
destruction: because he would never have altered his manner nor order in his
proceedings. And that we cannot change our selves, there are two reasons; the
one because we cannot resist that which our nature is inclined to; the other
is, because when one man in such a kind of proceeding has gone on luckily, it
is impossible to persuade him, that things will prove well, where he proceeds
otherwise. Whereupon it comes to pass, that in one man fortune varies, because
she changes the times, and he changes not his courses. Thence arises also the
ruin of a City, because the orders of Common wealths change not with the
times, as we have treated heretofore at large, but they are flower: for it is a
greater trouble to them to change; and to effect it, they have need of times
which should in a manner take a Republic quite off the things whereby a
thorough alteration should be made in her: for which one man alone suffices not
by changing the manner of her proceedings. And because we have made mention of
Fabius Maximus, who held off Hannibal with delays, I purpose to treat in the
following Chapter, whether a Captain, being desirous to fight a battle with the
enemy in any case, can be so hindered that he do it not.

CHAP. X.
That a Captain cannot avoid battle, when his enemy will fight in any case.

CNeus Sulpitius the dictator held off from Cneus Sulpitius Dictator adversus
Gallos bellum trahebat, nolens le fortunae committere adversus hostem, quem
tempus deteriorem in dies, and locus alienus faceret.
fighting with the French, being not willing to stand at fortunes discretion in
a trial against his enemy, whom time and a strange Country would continually
weaken and consume. When such an error en^ues, where all men or the greater
part of them err, I think it not much amiss mary times to reprove it.
Wherefore though I have formerly several times showed, how the actions about
great matters now adays differ from those of ancient times; yet I think it not
superfluous at this present to repeat it: for if in any part it differs from
the ancient orders, it is especially in military orders, where now is not any
of those things observed, which the ancients made much account of. And this
inconvenient grew first hereupon, because Commonwealths and Princes, have
committed this care to others, and to avoid dangers, have much lai^ aside that
exercise; and if perchance sometime a King in our days venture to go in person,
we believe not therefore that he seeks out any new orders, that are more
commendable: for when they chance to give themselves to that employment, they
do it rather in show of their pomp, then upon any other laudable occasion. Yet
do these commit lesser errors, personally visiting their armies, and keeping in
their own hands the Majesty of their Government, then Republikes do, especially
those of Italy, which trust to others, not understanding any thing in the wars,
or attending to any thing belonging to them: and on the other side, when they
are desirous (whereby they may seem to be Princes) to take any thing into
deliberation, they commit therein exceeding many errors. And however that other
where I have treated of some of them, yet at this present I will not forbear to
tell one of very great importance. When these lazy Princes, or effeminate
Commonwealths send forth any Commander of theirs, the wisest commission that
they think they can give him, is to charge him, that in any case he fight not a
battle, but avoid it, and conceiting with themselves that herein they imitate
Fabius Maximus his discretion, who by forbearing to fight, saved the Roman
State; they understand not that most commonly, this commission is either to no
purpose, or else hurtful. For we must take this for a conclusion, that a
General, that will abide in the field, cannot avoid a battle, when the enemy
will in any case fight. So that this commission is but thus, as if he should
say, fight with thine enemy at his pleasure, and not at thine own. For if a man
will abide in the field and not fight, the surest way is to keep himself fifty
miles off from his enemy at least, and then keep good espiouns, so that if he
chance to bend toward thee, thou may avoid him at leisure. Another course is
to immure himself up in a City; but the one and the other of these two courses
is very pernicious. In the first he leaves his Country in prey to the enemy;
and a valiant Prince will rather hazard the battle than prolong the war with so
much damage to his Subjects. And in the second the loss is evident; for it
must needs be, that retiring thy self within the walls of a Town with thy Army,
thou be besiged, and at length suffer famine, and so be forced to yield:
insomuch as to avoid battle by either of these two means, must needs prove very
hurtful. The course that Fabius Maximus held, to abide in strong places is very
good, when thou have an Army so valorous, that the enemy dares not come to find
thee in thy advantages. Nor can it be said that Fabius avoided fighting, but
rather that he would fight at his advantage. For if Hannibal had gone to find
him, Fabius would have staid for him, and fought with him; but Hannibal durst
not deal with him after his manner. So the battle was as well avoided by
Hannibal as by Fabius; but if one of them had been desirous to have hazarded in
any case, the other had but one of these three remedies, to wit those two we
have before mentioned, or to fly. There are many examples and maxims in the
war, which the Romans made with Philip of Macedon, Father of Perses, to make
good what I say; for Philip being assailed by the Romans, resolved not to come
to battle; and therefore first he thought to do as Fabius Maximus had done in
Italy, and placed himself with his Army upon the top of a mountain, where he
fortified himself all he could, deeming that the Romans had not the heart to
come and find him there; but when they went thither, and fought with him, and
drove him from the mountain, being not able to withstand them, he fled with the
greater part of his people: and that which saved him was the roughness of the
Country, so that the Romans could not follow the pursuit. Philip then being
unwilling to fight, and having pitched his camp near the Romans, had no other
mean but to fly; and having found by this experience, that when they meant not
to fight, it was not enough for them to get upon the top of the mountains; and
having no mind to enclose himself in any Town, resolved to take the other
course, to remove many miles distant from the Romans Camp. Whereupon, if the
Romans were in one Province, they went into another, and so always they went
thither from whence the Romans were parted: and considering in the end, how
that in prolonging the war this way, his own estate declined, and how that his
Subjects were sometimes by himself, otherwhile by his enemies daily oppressed,
resolved to put it to the trial of a day, and so came to a set battle with the
Romans. It is profitable then not to fight, when the Armies have these
conditions which Fabius his Army had, or that then had that of Cneus Sulpirius,
which are, to have an Army so good, that the enemy dares not come and find
thee within thy fortifications, and that the enemy though he be in thy Country,
yet has he not much footing therein, where he may suffer want of provisions;
and in this case the course is advantageous for the reasons Titus Livius
alleges: Unwilling to stand at fortunes discretion on a trial Nolens se
fortunae committere adversus hostem, quem tempus deteriorem indies, and locus
alienus faceret.
against his enemy, whom time and a strange Country would daily weaken and
consume. But in any other case the battle cannot be avoided, but with thy shame
and danger: for to fly (as Philip did) is the same that it is to be routed,
and that with the more disgrace, by how much the less thou have made proof of
thy valor. And however he had the luck to escape, another could not have had
the like, unless he had help by the situation of the Country, as well as he.
That Hannibal was a master in the art of war, I think every one will
acknowledge, and being to oppose Scipio in Africa, if he had seen any
advantage in prolonging the war, without doubt he would have done it, and
peradventure could too (being a good Commander and having a good Army) as well
as Fabius did in Italy. But being he did it not, we may well believe, that some
important reason persuaded him so; for a Prince that has an Army levied, and
sees that for want of moneys or friends he cannot keep them long together, is a
very fool if he ventures not his fortune, before his Army falls asunder; for by
delaying he certainly loses, whereas hazzarding he might overcome. Another
thing there is yet much to be accounted of, which is, that a man ought (even in
his losing) seek to gain glory; and it is more glory, to be overcome by force,
than by any other inconvenient, that may have made thee lose. Therefore it must
needs be that Hannibal was forced by these necessities; and on the other side
Scipio, if Hannibal would have protracted the war, and he durst not have
adventured to go seek him in his Trenches, had not suffered therein, in that he
had already overcome Siphax, and taken so many Towns in Afric, so that he
could have continued there with security and convenience, as well as in Italy.
Which was not so with Hannibal, when he had to deal with Fabius, nor with those
Frenchmen, when they were opposed by Sulpitius. So much the less also can he
avoid the fight, that with an Army invades another man's Country, he must
(whenever the enemy faces him) fight with him, and if he incampes before any
Town, so much the rather is he obliged to fight, as in our days it befell Duke
Charles of Burgundy, who being set down before Morat, a Town belonging to the
Swissers, was assaulted by them and broken: and so it chanced to the French
Army, that incamping at Novarra, was in like manner routed by the Swissers.

CHAP. XI.
He that has to deal with many, however that he be the weaker, provided that
he can but support their first violence, overcomes.

THe Tribunes of the peoples power in Rome was great, and necessary, as many
times we have said: for otherwise it would never have been possible to bridle
the Nobilities ambition, which would much sooner, then it did, have corrupted
that Commonwealth: yet because in every thing (as is often said) some evil
proper to every thing lies lurking in it, which causes new accidents to arise,
it is needful with new orders to remedy them. Wherefore the Tribunitial power
being grown insolent, and terrible to the Nobility, and to all Rome, some very
hurtful inconvenient to the Roman liberty would have risen, if the way had not
been showed by Appius Claudius, whereby they might defend themselves against
the Tribunes ambition: which was that they always found some one among them,
that either was fearful or might be corrupted, or that was a lover of the
common good: so that they disposed him to oppose other men's wills, that desired
to draw forward any deliberation against the Senates will. Which remedy was a
great allay to such an authority, and a long time much helped Rome. Which thing
has made me consider, that whenever many powerful ones are united together
against one that is powerful, though all they together are much more puissant
then he, yet may there much more be hoped for in him alone, though less
powerful, then in those many, though very strong: for (leaving a part all those
things, wherein one alone is able to do more then many, which things are
innumerable) this will always come to pass, that one alone, taking but a little
care, shall be able to disunite those many, and so weaken that body which was
strong. I will not herein allege ancient examples, which are very frequent;
the modern shall suffice me, which have fallen in our days. In the year 1484. all
Italy conspired against the Venetians, who when they were in a manner wholly
lost, and could not any more abide in the field with their Army, they corrupted
Lodwick that then ruled in Milan, and by means of that corruption made an
accord, wherein they not only had again the towns they had lost, but usurped a
part of the state of Ferrara. And thus they that had been loosers in the war,
remained gainers by the peace. A few years past, the whole world conspired
against France; yet before they came to see the end of the war, Spain broke off
from her confederates, and made agreement with her, in so much as the rest of
the confederates also were forced to make their accords too. So that without
doubt, we ought always judge, when we see a war made by many against one, that
that one is like to be a gainer at the end, provided that he be of such valor,
that he is able to sustain the first brunts, and so govern himself with the
time as to attend time: which if he were not able to do, he would run the
hazard of many dangers, as it happened to the Venetians in the eighth year, who
if they could have temporised with the French Army, and so have had time to
gain themselves some of those that were confederated against them, they might
have escaped that destruction, but not having so good an Army, as thereby to
play with the enemy awhile; and hereupon not having had leisure to take any of
them asunder, they were ruined: for we saw, that the Pope when he had what was
his, became their friend, and so Spain, and very willingly the one and the
other of these two Princes would have saved them the state of Lombardy against
France, for fear of making it too great in Italy, if it had been in their
power. The Venetians then might have given a part, to save the rest, which if
they had done in time, that it had appeared it was not of extreme necessity,
and before the beginning of the war, would have been wisely done of them; but
when the wars were begun, it was disgraceful, and peradventure of small
benefit. But before such imbroiles, few of the Citizens of Venice could foresee
the danger, very few the way to help, and none to advise it. But to return
again to the beginning of this discourse, I conclude, that even so as the
Senate of Rome had a remedy to save their country from the Tribunes ambition,
because they were many, so shall any Prince that is assailed by many, find a
remedy, whenever he knows with discretion how to use the convenient means to
disunite them.

CHAP. XII.
That a wise Commander upon his own soldiers should lay all manner of
necessity to fight, and take it, as much as he can, from his enemies.

AT other times we have treated, of what advantage necessity is to hamane
actions, and to what glory they have thereby been promoted; and that by some
moral Philosophers it has been written, that men's hands and tongues two of
their worthiest instruments to ennoble them, would never have worked so
perfectly, nor have brought men's labors to that excellency, whereunto we see
them now come, had they not been thrust forward by necessity. The virtue then
of such necessity being known by the ancient Commanders of Armies, and how
thereby the soldiers minds were made the more obstinate to fight, they used
all their industry, to force them by it. And on the other side, they as well
endeavored, to free their enemies from it; and hereupon many times they opened
that way to the enemy, which they could have shut against them, and shut it
against their own soldiers, which they could have left open for them. He then
that desires, either that a City defend it self obstinately, or that an Army in
the field fight it out resolutely, must try his wits to make an impression in
the breasts of them that are to fight, that such a necessity lies upon them.
Whereupon a discreet Commander that is going to besige a Town, may conjecture
of the facility or difficulty in taking it, by the knowledge and consideration
of the necessity that binds the inhabitants to defend themselves; and as he
finds the necessity urging them to be great, so let him judge it difficult to
overcome them, or otherwise easy. Whence it proceeds, that those Towns which
have rebelled, are harder to be regained then they were at their first
conquest; for in the beginning not having any cause to fear punishment, as not
having offended, they yield easily; but thinking (after they have rebelled)
that they have offended, and hereupon fearing the chastisement, they prove
harder to be recovered. Moreover such obstinacy arises from the innate hatreds
which neighboring Princes and Republiques, bear one to another, which proceeds
from their ambition to rule, and the jealousy of their own state, especially
if they be Republikes as it chances in Tuscany. Which strife and contention
has caused, and ever will, a great difficulty in the mastery of the one or
other. Whereof he that considers well the City of Florences neighbors, and
those of Venice, will not marvel (as many do) that Florence has spent more in
her wars, and gained less then Venice, for this is, because the Venetians never
found their neighboring Towns so obstinate in their defense, as Florence has;
for that all the Towns confining upon Venice have been accustomed to live in
subjection under a Prince, and not free; and those that have been used to
serve, make small account of changing their Lord, or rather many times they
much desire it. So that Venice (however she has had more powerful neighbors
then Florence) yet because she has found the Towns less obstinate against
her, has been able sooner to subdue them then the other could, being environed
round, by free Towns. A Commander therefore should (to return to our first
discourse) when he sits down before any Town, provide with all diligence to
take from the defendants all scruples of such necessity, and conquently such
obstinacy, promising pardon, if they are afraid of punishment: and if they
doubt their liberty is aimed at, show them there is nothing intended against
the common good, but against some few ambitious men in the City, which thing
has, many times facilitated such enterprises and takings of Towns. And though
such colors are easily seen through, and especially by understanding men, yet
are the people ost deceived thereby, who being desirous of the present peace,
shut their eyes against any other, snare that under large promises can be laid
for them. And this way exceeding many Cities have been reduced to servitude, as
it befell Florence in these latter days, and Crassus also with his whole Army,
who though he knew the Parthians promises were not to be credited, which were
made only to take from his soldiers the necessity of defending themselves, yet
could he not keep them obstinate, being blinded by the offers of peace made
them by their enemies, as in particular may be seen in his life, by him that
shall read it. When the Samnites, contrary to the articles of agreement, upon
the ambition of some few had forraged and spoiled the Romans their confederates
fields, and afterward sent Ambassadors to Rome to require peace, offering to
make restitution of all that was taken, and deliver them prisoners the authors
of those broils and robberies, they were refused by the Romans, and sent back
to Samnium without hope of agreement: Claudius Pontius the commander of the
Samnites Army, with a notable oration of his showed, the Romans would have war
in any case; and though for their own parts they wished for peace, yet
necessity made them take the war in hand, saying these words, They justly take
arms that are forced to do so; and piously too Justum est bellum, quibus
necessarium; and pia arma, quibus nisi in armis spes non est.
who have no other hope but in them. Upon which necessity he with his soldiers
grounded his hopes of victory. And to the end I need not return again to this
matter, I think it fit to allege those examples of the Romans, which are most
worthy of remarke; Caius Manilius went forth with an army to encounter the
Veientes, and part of their Army having forced his trenches, Manilius came
speedily with new Troops to sucour his own, and that the Veientes should not
escape, guarded all the passages into the camp. Whereupon the Veientes seeing
themselves shut in of all sides, began to fight with such fury, that they slew
Manilius, and would have otherthrown all the rest of the Romans, if, by the
wisdom of one Tribune, a way for them to escape by, had not been opened. Where
we see that whiles necessity constraned the Veientes to fight, they stood to it
stoutly; but as soon as a way was opened for them, they thought more upon
flying then fighting. The Volsci and Equi having entered with their armies upon
the Roman territories, the Consuls were sent against them, and whiles they were
in fight, the Volscies army, the chief whereof was Vectius Metius, chanced to
to be enclosed between their own trenches, which the Romans were now become
masters of, and the other Roman Army, who seeing they must all either die or
make way by the sword, he spoke thus to his soldiers, Come along with me;
there is neither rampire nor ditch to oppose you, Ite mecum; non murus nec
vallum; armati armatis obstant, virtute pates; quod ultimum and maximum telum
est, necessitate superiores estis.
but men only against men: you are equal to them in valor, and, which is the
last and hardest weapon, your necessity gives you advantage of them. Insomuch
as this necessity is termed by Titus Livius the extremest and greatest weapon.
Camillus the wisest of all the Roman commanders being got within the walls of
the Vejentes City with his Army, whereby to take it more easily, and to free
the enemies from that last necessity of defending themselves gave command so
that the Vejentes heard it, that none should hurt those that were disarmd: so
that having cast all their arms upon the ground, that City was taken with
little or no effusion of blood; Which course was afterward followed by many
Commanders.

CHAP. XIII.
Whether more trust is to be reposed in a good Commander that has a weak Army,
or in a good Army that has a weak Commander.

COriolanus being banished from Rome, went from thence to the Volsci, where
having gotten together an Army to be revenged of his own Citizens, came from
thence to Rome; from whence he was moved to depart, rather for pity to his
mother, than by the Romans forces. Upon which place T. Livius says, that
hereby it is known that the Commonwealth of Rome grew more by the Captains
valors, than the soldiers, considering that the Volsci formerly had been
always losers, and only then had overcome when Co^iolanus was their General:
And how ever that Livie holds such an opinion, yet we see in many places of his
History, that Soldiers without any Captain have given extraordinary proofs of
their valors, and have been better ordered and fiercer after the death of their
Consuls, than before they were slain, as it happend in the Army which the
Romans had in Spain under the Scipioes, which when the two Captains were slain,
was able by its own valor not only to save it self, but overcome the enemy, and
keep that Province for the Republic. So relating all, we shall find many
examples where the Soldiers valor alone has got the day, and many others where
the Generals valor only has done the same effect. In so much as we may well
judge, that either of them has need of the other. And here it is not amiss to
consider first, whether is most to be feared, either a good Army led by an
unskilful Commander, or a good Commander followed by a bad Army. And taking
after Cesars opinion, small account is to be made of the one or the other: for
when he went into Spain against Afranius and Petrejus, who had with them a good
Army, he said he little doubted them, Because he went against an Army that Ibat
ad exerci um sine da(...).
lacked a Commander, showing the Commanders weakness. On the contrary when he
went into Thessaly against Pompey, he said, I go against a Commander without an
Army. Vado ad ducem sine exercitu.
Another thing may be considerd, which is more easy, either for a good
Commander to make a good Army, or for a good Army to make a good Commander;
Whereupon I answer, that the question seems already decided: for more easily
many shall find one, or shall instruct one so that he become good, than one
alone shall many. Lucullus when he was sent against Mithridates, was altogether
unexpert in the war; yet that good Army, wherein were so many good Chieftaines,
quickly made him a skilful Commander. For want of Soldiers the Romans put many
slaves in Arms, and gave order to Sempronius Gracchus to train them, who in a
small time made a very good Army of them. Pelopidas and Epaminondas (as we have
said otherwhere) after they had delivered Thebes their native Country out of
the Spartans bondage, made the Thebans exceeding good Soldiers in a short time,
that they were able not only to sustain', but overcome the Soldiers of Sparta;
so that the case is equal on both sides: for the one being good, may soon find
the other so: yet a good Army without a good head, ordinarily becomes insolent
and dangerous; as was the Macedonian Army after Alexander his death, and
likewise the Veterane soldiers in the civil wars. So that I think, that much
more account is to be made of a Commander that has time and convenience to
train up and arm his Soldiers, than of an insolent Army, having a Captain from
among them tumultuarily made their Chief. Wherefore double glory and renown may
well be ascribed to those Commanders, who have not only taken upon them to
overcome the enemy, but before their coming to fight with them, have to make
them fit for the occasion, disciplind and instructed their Armies well: for
therein appears their vertuo double and admirable; whereas if the charge hereof
were communicated to many, far less account or esteem would be made of them.

CHAP. XIV.
New sleights and inventions, that are usd in the midst of a fight, and new
cries that are heard, what effects they produce.

OF what moment in combats and fights a new accident is, that arises upon any
new matter seen or heard, appears in many places, and especially in that
occasion, where the Romans fought with the Volsci, where Qu^ntius seeing one of
the horns of his Army beginning to fail, began to cry out aloud, that they
should stand firm: because the other horn of the Army was already victorious:
by which words, having encouraged his own, and affrighted his enemies, he
overcame them. And if such vociserations in an Army well orderd be of great
effect, in one then that is but tumultuary and ill disciplind, they must needs
be of much greater: because the whole frame thereof moves by the like wind. To
this purpose I will allege a notable example befaln in our days. The City of
Perugia, a few years since, was divided into two factions, of the Oddi, and the
Bagliori; these raignd there, the others were banishd men, who having by help
of their allies gotten an Army together, and brought it into some Town
consining upon Perugia, by favor of their faction one night enterd the City,
and without being descryd, came to take the Piazza; and because that City has
chains on all the corners of the ways, which kept them bard, the Soldiers
belonging to the Oddi had a man went before them, who with a bar of Iron was to
break the locks of those chains, to the end the horse might pass, and there
being but one only left them to break, which immediately opened into the
Piazza, and now a general alarm being given, and he that broke them, being
oppressed by the multitude that followd him, and not able therefore well to
lift up his arms with his bar, whereby to employ it, chanced to say Stand
back; which word going by degrees, saying back, began to cause the furthest off
to fly, and so by little and little the rest with such force, that they all
routed one another. And thus the design of the Oddi, by occasion of so poor an
accident, became frustrate. Where we may consider, that discipline and order is
not useful in an Army so much for orderly fighting, as that every small
accident put thee not quite into disorder: for, were it for nothing else, the
ordinary multitude is unfit for the wars, because every rumor, every voice,
every noise changes them, and puts them to flight. And therefore a good
Commander, among his other orders, ought appoint those that are to take the
word from him, and to pass it to others, and accustom his Soldiers, so that
they give no credit save only to their own officers, to the end that they tell
them only, what is given them in charge from him: for when this part is not
well observed, many disorders often fall out. Touching the sight of these new
things every Commander ought well bend his wits, to make some show whiles the
battle is in trial, whereby to encourage his own, and dishearten the enemy,
because among those accidents which may give thee the victory, this is the most
effectual. Whereof we allege for testimony the example of Cneus Sulpitius
the Roman Dictatour, who coming to fight a battle with the French, armed all
the poor drudges and rascality of the Camp: and having mounted them upon Mules
and poor Asses with arms and ensigns, to make them seem as if they were
cavallry, he placed them behind a hill, and commanded that at a signal given,
whiles he was in the hottest of the battle they should show themselves to the
enemy, which thing so ordered and done, put the French men in such a fright
that they lost they day. And therefore a good Commander ought to do two things;
the one is, to try some of these inventions to startle the enemy: the other, to
stand so prepared that the enemy offering any such to him, he may be able to
discover and quite frustrate them, as did the Indian King to Semiramis; who
seeing, that King had a great number of Elephants, to affright him, and make
him think she had more her self than he, made a great many of them of Bulls
and Bufaloes hides, and having put them upon Camells, sent them before: but
that King finding out her deceit, turned it upon her not only vain but hurtful.
Mammercus was sent Dictator against the Fidenates, who to affright the Roman
Army, appointed that in the heat of the skirmish a good number of soldiers
should sally forth of Fidenas with lights upon the top of their Lances, to the
end that the Romans taken a while with the novelty of the matter, should fall
into some disorder. Whereupon it is to be noted, that when such devices carry
more truth than appearance with them, they may well be represented to the view
of men, because that having in them a great deal of that which is lively and
likely, their weakness cannot so quickly be discoverd: but when they have more
of fiction in them than of truth, it is better either not to use them, or using
them to keep them off at such a distance that a full discovery of them cannot
suddenly be made, as was that trick of the Muleters Cn. Sulpitius practisd: for
when there is nothing but weakness within them, as they are approached, they
are quickly seen through, and do thee wrong rather than give thee advantage, as
those Elephants did to Semiramis, and the fires to the Fidenates; which however
that at first they a little troubled the Army, yet when the Dictatour came up
to them, and began to cry out, That they might be ashamd to fly from the smoke
like Bees, but that they should rather turn back their slames upon them,
saying, Bnrne out these people of Fidenas with fire, Suis flammis delete
Fidenas, quas vestris beneficijs placare non potuistis.
whose rancorous spirits you could never assuage with all your courtesy. Thus
that device of the Fidenates servd them to no purpose, and so they lost the
fight.

CHAP. XV.
That the command of an Army ought to be given in charge only to one; and where
there are more, they always err.

THe Fidenates having rebelld, and slain that Colony, which the Romans had sent
to Fidenas, the Romans created four Tribuns with Consular power to exact
satisfaction for this wrong done: whereof one being left for the safeguard of
Rome, the rest were sent against the Fidenates, and the Vejentes, who because
they were at variance one with another, brought back disgrace from the service,
though no loss: of the disgrace they were the cause, but that they receivd no
loss, the Soldiers valor was the cause. Whereupon the Romans seeing this
disorder, had their recourse to the creation of a Dictator, to the end one
alone should rectify again, what three had disorderd. Whence we see the
unprofitableness of many Commanders in one Army or Town, that is to defend it
self: and T. Livius cannot more plainly express it, than in these words, here
written; Three Tribuns with Consular power taught us how unprofitable Tres
Tribuni potestate Consulari documento fuere, quam plurium imperium bello in
utile esset: tendendo ad sua quisque consilia, cum alij aliud videretur,
apperuerunt ad occasionem locum hosti.
a thing it was, to have many Commanders in the war; for every one of them
making several parties, and each one thinking his own best, gave opportunity
to the enemy. And however that this is example sufficient to prove the disorder
which a plurality of Commanders causes in the war, yet will I allege some
other as well modern as ancient, for the better declaration of it. In the year
1500. after the reprisal of Milan by Jews the twelfth of France, he sent his
Army to Pisa, to restore it to the Florentines, whether John Baptista Ridolphi
and Luke Antony of the Albizzi were sent Commissaries. And because John
Baptista was a man of credit and years, Luke left the whole government in every
thing unto him. And if he did not discover his ambition in opposing him, yet he
manifested it by his silence, and neglecting and scorning every thing that was
orderd, so that he nothing furtherd the actions of the Camp neither in word
nor in deed, as if he had been a man of no worth. But afterward it appeared
quite contrary, when upon an occasion following, John Baptista was fain to
return to Florence; Luke being left alone showed his abilities, both by his
courage, industry and counsel. All which things were in a manner quite lost in
him, while he had a companion. I will anew produce in confirmation hereof T.
Livius his words, who relating, how that Quintius and Agrippa his Colleague,
being sent by the Romans against the Aequi, the whole disposing of the war was
in Quintius his hands, and says: In the managing of weighty affairs, it is
the safest Saluberrimum in administratione magnarum rerum est, summam Imperij
apud unum esse.
way to commit the main charge to one. Which is clean contrary, to what is now
adays practiced by our Republics and Princes: who use to send into those
places, that they may the better order them, more Commissaries, and more
Commanders than one, which causes much confusion: and if the occasion were
inquired after, why the Italian and French Armies are now adays ruined, we
should find this had been the principal. And it may truly be concluded, that
it is to more purpose to employ one man alone of but ordinary judgment in such
an expedition, then two very able men together with equal commission.

CHAP. XVI.
In times of difficulty and peril true worth and virtue is sought after, and
in calm and quiet times, not men's virtues, but their wealth, friends, and
parentage prefer them.

IT was always and ever will be, that great personages and the worthyest men,
in peaceable times, are of small esteem: for because of envy, following the
reputation which their virtue has gained them, in such times there are many
Citizens, that are ambitious, not only to be their equals, but superiors; and
to this purpose there is a place in Thucydides the Greek Historian, which
serves very fitly, where he shows that when the Athenian Republic came off
victour in the Peloponnesian war, and had taken down the Spartanes pride, and
in a manner subjected all Greece, the Athenians conceited so highly of
themselves, as that they designed the conquest of Sicile also. This enterprise
came to be disputed in Athens: Alcibiades and some other Citizens persuaded it,
as they that little caring for the public good, thought only upon the
advancing their own particular reputations, each one of them having hopes to
be sent Commander in the employment. But Nicias that was the principal among
the best reputed of Athens, dissuaded it: and the greatest reason he alleged
in persuading the people to give credit to his words, was this, because while
he advised them thus that the war should nor proceed, he persuaded them to
that which was not for his advantage; for while Athens was in peace, he knew,
there were many Citizens would go before him; but in time of war he was sure
none could go before, no nor come near him. We see therefore, that in
Republics there is this disorder, in times of peace to make small account of
able men, which thing enrages them two several ways, the one to see their own
degrees fayl them; the other to see unworthy men, and of smaller abilities then
themselves, made their companions or rather their superiors: which disorder in
Republics has caused much destruction; for those Citizens who see themselves
undeservedly despised, and know that quiet times are the occasion thereof,
devise all the ways they can to disturb them, suggesting inducements to new
wars in prejudice of the Commonwealth. And devising what might be the remedies
hereof, we find two; the one to keep the Citizens always poor, to the end that
riches without virtue should not be able to corrupt neither those nor others:
the other to be always so ready for the war, as that they may be able
continually to make war, and may have need always of well reputed Citizens, as
Rome did in her first beginnings; for that City having always some Armies
abroad, there was ever place left to men's virtues, nor could they bereave such
a one of his dignity, that deserved it; or confer it upon another not deserving
it; for in case that such a thing were done, some times upon mistake or for
trial, there quickly ensued such a disorder thereupon and a danger, that all
returned presently into the right way. But these other Commonwealths, that are
not so ordered as she, and that then only make war when necessity constrains
them, cannot free themselves of such an inconvenient, or rather they will
always incurr it, and there will ever some disorder be ready to arise, when
that virtuous Citizen thus neglected is of a revengefull disposition, and has
in the City some good repute and correspondence; and from this the City of Rome
kept her self free a good while. Yet she (after she had subdued Carthage and
Antiochus, as we said otherwhere, being no more in doubt of the issue of her
wars) thought she might give the Command of her Armies to whom she pleased,
not so much regarding their virtues as their other qualities, ingratiating them
with the people: for we see Paulus Emilius had several repulses in demanding
the Consulate, before he was made Consul, till the Macedonian war chanced,
which because it was thought dangerous, by general consent of the City was
committed to him. In our City of Florence after the year 1494. many wars
following, one upon the neck of the other, and all the Citizens of Florence
having made unlucky trial of themselves, the City by chance lit upon one man
who-shewed them the manner how their Armies were to be commanded, which was
Antoni Giacomini: and whiles the wars in hand were perilous, the other
Citizens ambitions ceased; and in the election of Commissary or Commander of
their Armies, he had no competitor stood with him. But when as any war was to
be made where no hazard was, but a great deal of honor and dignity, he found
always so many competitors, that they being to make election of there
Commissaries to beleager Piza, he was left out of the number. And however it
was not perceived evidently, that evil would befall the State, because Antony
was not sent thither, yet may we easily conjecture, because the Pisans having
no means for further defense or sustenance, had Antony been sent thither, they
would before that have been so straightly beset, that they should have
surrendered themselves to the Florentines directions. But they being besieged by
Commanders that understood not how to begirt, nor force them, were so long held
in hand, that the City of Florence bought them, whereas they might have had
them by force. It was likely that such a distaste with Antony might have done
much, and he had need truly of much patience, and so good a disposition as not
to desire revenge hereupon, either with the destruction of the City (if he were
able) or with the wrong of any particular Citizen, where of a Republic ought
to beware, as in the Chapter following we shall treat.

CHAP. XVII.
That he who has received any notable disgrace or injury done him from a
Prince or Commonwealth, should never after be entrusted by them with any
employment or service of importance.

A Commonwealth should be well advised, never to commit any weighty service to
any one, to whom any notable injury has been done. Claudius Nero (who left his
Army which he had lying in front against Hannibal, and with part thereof went
into the Marches to find the other Consul, to combat Asdrubal, before he
should join with Hannibal) had formerly in Spain been encamped against
Asdrubal, and having shut him up in a place with his Army, so that Asdrubal,
was either to fight at disadvantage, or perish by famine, was cunningly by
Asdrubal so long held in hand with certain treaties of agreement, that he
escaped him, and took from him the opportunity he had to suppress him. Which
thing being known at Rome, got him great discredit as well with the Senate as
the people, and he was spoken of very disgracefully throughout the City, to his
great disreputation and despite thereat too: but being afterward made Consul,
and sent against Hannibal, took the course we have said, which was a very
dangerous one, so that Rome was amazed and in tumults, till news arived of
Asdrubals defeat, and Claudius being afterward asked on what ground he
undertook so dangerous a course, where without an extreme necessity he had
hazarded the liberty of Rome, answered that he had done it, because if it
proved lucky, he should recover the glory he had formerly lost in Spain: and if
it fayl'd him, and this course fell out cross, he knew he should be revenged of
that City and those Citizens, who had unthankfully and undiscreetly wronged
him. And when these passions, arising from such offenses, are of such force in
a Citizen of Rome, and in those days before corruption was crept into Rome, we
may well guess how powerful they are in a Citizen of such a City that is not
so regulated nor ordered as she then was: and because to such like disorders
which grow up in Commonwealths, no certain remedy can be assigned, there
follows an impossibility to frame a perpetual Commonwealth for by many
unexpected ways desiruction breaks in upon it.

CHAP. XVIII.
There is nothing more worthy of a Commander, than to be able to discover
before hand, and espy out the enemies practices.

EPaminondas the Theban said, that nothing was more advantageous or useful to a
Commander, than to know the enemies designs and purposes; and because it is
hard to attain to that knowledge. ^he deserves the greater commendations, who
takes such a course that he ghesses it out. And it is not so hard to discover
the enemies purposes as some times to understand his actions, and not so much
his actions, which by him are done a far off, as those present and near hand:
for it has many times chanced, that a fight having continued til night, he
has vanquished that thinks he has lo^, and he lost that thought he had
overcome; which error has caused some to take resolutions clean contrary to
their own good, as it befell Brutus and Cassius, who upon this mistake lost
their war; for Brutus having overcome on his wing, Cassius believed he had
lost, that the whole Army was broken, and upon this error despairing of his own
safety, slew himself. In our days in the battle at Saint Cecily in Lombardy
that Francis the King of France sought with the Swissers, the night overtaking
them, that part of the Swissers, which remained entire, thought they had got
the victory, knowing nothing of those that had been broken and slain. Which
error was the occasion that they themselves escaped not, staying to fight again
on the morning much at their disadvantage: such like error also caused to
mistake, and well near ruined thereby the Popes and the Spanish Army, which
upon this false advice of victory passed the Po, and had it gone never so
little on for warder, had been prisoner to the French, who were the Conquerors.
The like error to this happened in the Romans Camp, and in that also of the
Equi, where Sempronius the Consul was with the Army to enconnter the enemy, and
the battle being joined, the combat lasted while night with variable fortune
on the one and the other side: and night being come, each Army being half
broken, neither of them returned to their quarters, but both of them chose
rather to withdraw themselves unto the adjoining hills, where they thought they
might be^ more secure, and the Roman Army divided itself into two parts,
whereof the one went with the Consul, the other with one Tempanius a Centurion,
whose valor that day kept the Roman Army from being wholly routed; the morning
being come, the Roman Consul, without hearing further of the enemy, retired
toward Rome, and the like did the Equies Army, because each of these thought
the enemy had been victour, and therefore they each withdrew themselves,
without any regard that they left their Camps in prey to the Enemy. It fell
out that Tempanius who was there with the remainder of the Roman Army, retiring
too, learned by certain wounded soldiers of the Equi, that their Captains were
gone and had abandoned their quarters, upon which news he went into the Roman
quarters and saved them, but sacked those of the Equi, and so returned
victorious to Rome: which victory (as we see) consists only in, who has
notice of the enemies disorder. Where we should consider, that it may often
come to pass, that the two Armies which are in front one against another, may
be both in the like disorder, and suffer the same wants, and that after
remains vanquisher that first comes to knowledge of the others necessities.
And hereof I will give a domestic and modern example. In the year one
thousand four-hundred ninty eight, when the Florentines had a great Army about
Pisa, and beleaguerd the Town very strongly, whereof the Venetians having
undetaken the protection, and notseeing any otherway to save it, resolved to
divert the war, by assayling the territories of Florence on the other side;
wherefore with a strong Army they entered by the valley of Lamona, and seized
upon the Village of Marradi, and besieged the Fortress of Castiglione which is
upon the hill above: Which the Florentines perceiving, resolved to succor
Marradi, and yet not lessen their forces which they had about Pisa; so that
having levied new foot, and appointed new horse, they sent them that way, whose
Commanders were Jacobus Quartus of Appian, Lord of Piombin, and Count Rinuccius
of Marcian. These then being come to the hills above Marradi, the enemies lest
beleaguering Marradi, and betook themselves to the Village; where these two
Armies being infront one against the other for some days, both suffered much
for the scarcity of provisions. and other necessaries; and neither daring to
set upon the other, nor either knowing the others wants, both at once resolved
over night to raise their Camps the morning following, and retire, the
Venetian toward Berzighella and Faenza, the other toward Casaglia and Mugello.
the morning then come, and each Camp having begun to send away their
carriages, by chance a woman parted from the Bourg of Marradi, and came toward
the Florentine Camp, being secure enough from wrong, because of her old age,
and poverty, desirous belike to see some of her friends in that Camp, by whom
the Florentine Captains understanding of the Venetian Camps departure, upon
this news grew a little more courageous, and having changed their purpose, as
if they had dislodged their enemies, went out, and took their quarters, and
writ to Florence, they had repulsed and vanquished them. Which victory
proceeded from nothing else, than from having first had notice of their enemies
departure: which notice had it been given on the other side, would have wrought
the same effect against ours.

CHAP. XIX.
Whether in the government of a multitude, mildness or severity be of greater
avail.

THe Commonwealth of Rome was in a combustion, because of the differences
between the Nobles and the Commons: nevertheless as occasion of wars was
offered them, they sent forth with their Armies Quintius and Appius Claudius:
Appius because he was cruel and rough in commanding, was ill obeyed by those
that followed him, so that almost quite broken he fled from his charge.
Quintius by using a mild and gentle behavior toward his soldiers, found them
very obedient, and returned with victory. Whereupon it seems, that to govern a
multitude, it is better to be courteous then insolent, compassionate rather
then cruel. Notwithstanding Cornelius Tacitus with whom many other writers
agree, in a saying of his, concludes the contrary, where he says, To rule a
multitude, severity is of more force then mildness. And In multitudine regenda,
plus paena quam obsequium valet.
devising with my self how each of these opinions may be made good, I say
either thou art to govern men that ordinarily are thy companions, or that are
always in subjection to thee. When they are thy companions, severity or rigor
cannot fully be used against them according as Cornelius argues: and because
the common people of Rome had equal power in the Roman government with the
Nobility, he that became Prince among them for a time, could not rule them with
roughness and rigor. And many time it was evident, that the Roman Commanders
did more good that got the good wills of their soldiers, and held but a gentle
hand over them, then those that by rough handling kept them in a slavish aw of
them, unless they were accompanied with extraordinary endowments, as was
Manlius Tarquatus. But he that commands over subjects (whereof Cornelius
discourses) to the end they grow not insolent, and by reason of thy two great
mildness tread thee not under foot, ought rather betake himself to rigor then
gentleness. But this a so is not to exceed moderation, for fear of incurring
hatred: for it never turns to any Princes advantage to gain the peoples hate.
The way to avoid it is, to lay no hands on the subjects estates: for of blood
(when rapine is not the covert cause there) no Prince is thirsty, unless forced
thereto, which seldom he is: but where rapine is mixed, this necessity comes
always upon them, nor ever want they occasion, nor desire to shed blood, as in
another treaty to this purpose is discoursed at large. Quintius was more praise
worthy then Appius; and yet the saying of Cornelius limited as it ought to be,
but not in the case observed by Appius, deserves approbation. And because we
have spoken of severity and mildness, methinks it is not more then needs to
show, how one action of humanity was of more force with the Falisci, then many
violent acts of hostility.

CHAP. XX.
One example of humanity prevailed more with the Falisci, then all the force of
Rome could.

CAmillus with the Army being set down before the Faliscies Town, and besieging
it, a Pedagogue that taught the children of the chiefest men of the City,
thinking to gratify Camillus and the people of Rome, under color of exercise
going forth with them out of the Town, brought them all into the Camp before
Camillus: where having presented them he said, that by means of them the Town
would forth with be delivered into his hands. Which present was not only not
accepted by ^amillus, but having caused the Pedagogue to be stripped, and his
hands bound behind him, and given to each one of those children a rod in his
hand, caused him to be whipped back again by them with many stripes into the
Town. Which when they of the Town understood, Camillus his humanity and
integrity so much pleased them, that not desiring longer to defend themselves,
they resolved to render up the Town to him. Where it is to be considered by
this true example, how much more a courteous and charitable act works in men's
minds then any one full of cruelty and violence; and how that many times those
countries and cities; that no weapons, nor warlick instruments, nor any other
force of man has been able to open, one action of humanity, piety, chastity,
or liberality has laid wide open. Whereof in stories (besides this) we have
many other examples. And we all see that the Romans by war were not of power to
drive Pyrrhus out of Italy; and yet Fabritius his Frankeness sent him out, when
he discovered to him the offer which a familiar friend of his had made the
Romans to poison him. We see also, that the conquest of new Carthage got not
Scipio Affricanus so much credit in Spain, as the example he gave of his
chastity, when he restored a young woman he took, which was exceeding
beautiful, untoucheed by him to her husband. The fame of which action got him
friendship throughout all Spain. We see moreover how much these virtues are by
the people wished for in great men, and how much commended by writers, both by
those that set forth Princes lives, and those also that give instructions how
they ought to live. Among whom Zenophon takes much painesin showing what
honors, how great conquests, and how exceeding good reputation Cyrus gained by
his humanity and affability, and by abstaining from all actions of pride,
cruelty, luxury, and other vices, which blemish men lives. Yet notwithstanding,
seeing Hannibal by courses contrary to these, gained great fame, and great
victories, I purpose to discourse thereupon in the Chapter following, from
whence this proceeded.

CHAP. XXI.
From whence it came, that Hannibal by a manner of proceeding different from
that of Scipioes, wrought the same effects in Italy, which the other did in
Spain.

I Think, that some men could well marvel, seeing certain Commanders
(notwithstanding that they have led a contrary course of life) bring to effect
the like things, which they have done that lived in the manner above written:
so that it appears, that the cause of these victories depends not upon the
aforesaid reasons; and it seems that those ways gain thee neither more force
nor better fortune, being that glory and reputation may be gotten by contrary
courses. And not to part from the men I have above written of, and the better
to clear what I propounded, I say, as we see Scipio enter into Spain, and by
his humanity and mildness gain the friendship of that whole country, and for
them be adored and admired of those nations: on the contrary side we see
Hannibal enter into Italy, using all contrary ways, which is, by violence,
cruelty and rapine, and all manner of infidelity, work the same effect that
Scipio did in Spain: for to Hannibal all the Towns in Italy rebelled, and all
the people ran after him. And considering whence this may arise, we see therein
many reasous: the first is, that men are desirous of new matters, insomuch as
very often times as well they that live at case, as they who do not, desire
novelty: for (as we said otherwhere, and it is true) men are as well glutted
with good, as afflicted and vexed with evil. This desire therefore opens the
gates wide to every one, that in any Country makes himself the chief of any
innovation. And be he a stranger, they run after him; if of the Country, they
come all about him, they strengthen and favor him, so that in what sort soever
it be he proceeds, he comes to advance exceedingly in those places. Besides
this, men are thrust forward by two principal things, either by love or fear,
so that he as well commands them that makes himself beloved, as he that causes
himself to be feared; and most commonly he is more followed and obeyed that
makes himself be feared, then he that makes himself beloved. Therefore it
little imports a Commander by which of these ways he goes, provided that he be
a Worthy man, and that worth causes him to be of great repute among men: for
when that worth is great as it was in Hannibal and Scipio, it cancells all the
errors they commit, either by the great love they bear them, or the great
fear they stand in of them. For from the one and the other of these two ways
great inconveniences may arise, of force to ruin a Prince: for he that desires
to be too much beloved, any little that he swerves from the true way, becomes
contemptible. And that other who would be too much feared, when he a little
exceeds the mean, grows odious; and to keep the middle way it is not possible:
for our nature will not comport it. But it is necessary to allay these things,
that exceed, with an extraordinary worth, as Ha nibal and Scpio both did: yet
it appeard that the one and the other of them were endamag'd by their manner of
life, for which they were esteemed and valued. The valuation of both of them we
have already spoke of: the damage as for Scipio, was that his own Soldiers in
Spain together with some of his friends mutined against him, which proceeded
from nothing else than because they feared him not: for men are so unsettled that
upon the least overture made to their ambition, they forth with forget all the
good will they owe their Prince for his mildness and courtesy, as did the
aforesaid Soldiers and friends, in so much as Scipio, to remedy this
inconvenient, was constraind to practice that cruelty in some part, which he
had abhorred. As for Hannibal, we have no particular example, where the cruelty
he used, or his small faith did him any harm. But we may well conceive, that
Naples and many other Towns that continued in obedience to the Romans, did it
for fear thereof. This we see plainly, that his wicked manner of living, made
him more odious to the people of Rome, than any other enemy that Commonwealth
ever had: so that, whereas to Pyrrhus (while he was with his Army in Italy)
they discoverd the party that intended to poison him, they never forgave it
Hannibal (though disarmed and banished) till they had made an end of him. These
incommodities then accru'd to Hannibal for being held impious, a breaker of his
faith, and cruel: but on the other side, he thereby got one very great
advantage, which is much admired by all Writers, that in his army (though
composed of several Nations) there never arose any mutiny, neither among
themselves, nor against him. Which we caunot derive from any other cause than
from the terror that grew from his person, which was so great, mixed with the
reputation he gave of his valor, that it kept his Soldiers in quietness and
concord. I conclude then, that it imports not much, in which of these two ways
a Commander proceeds, provided he has so great worth in him, as may well
season the one and the other manner of living: for (as it is said) both in the
one and the other there is defect and danger, when it is not corrected by some
extraordinary endowments. And if Hannibal and Scipio, the one by commendable
means, and the other by detestable courses, wrought the same effect, me thinks
I should not forbear to discourse also of two Roman Citizens, who by several
ways, but both honorable, attaind one and the same glory.

CHAP, XXII.
How Manlius Torquatus his rigor, and Valereus Corvinus his mildness, gaind
each of them the same glory.

AT the same time there were in Rome two famous Captains, Monlius Torquatus
and Valerius Corvinus: who both of equal virtue, had a like triumphed, and
lived in equal credit and reputation in Rome; and each of them (touching the
enemy) had with equal valor gained it; but as for the Armies, and treating of
their Soldiers, they proceeded exceeding differently: for Manlius with all kind
of severity commanded them, without intermitting his Soldiers pains or
punishments. Valerius on the other part in all kinds and terms of courtefie
treated them with a familiar way of affability; for it appears, that the one to
keep his Soldiers in obedience put his own son to death, and the other never
hurt any. Yet in such a differency of proceeding, each produced the same fruit,
as well to the enemies loss, as the Commonwealths profit, and his own
particular; for never any Soldier refused the fight or mutini'd against them,
or in any part disagreed from their wills, however that Manlius his commands
were so rigorous, that all other kinds of commands, which exceeded measure in
everity, were termed Manlian commands. Where we are first to consider, whence
it was that Manlius was constrained to proceed so rigidly: the next is, what
was the cause that these two different ways brought forth the same effect: and
in the last place, which is the better of the two, and more profitable to
imitate. If any man consider well Manlius his disposition, from the time that
T. Livius begins to make mention of him, he shall find him, a very valiant man,
religiously loving his Father and his Country, and exceedingly reverencing his
Superiors. These things we gather from the slaughter of the Frenchmen, from the
defense of his Father against the Tribune, and in that before he went to fight
with the Frenchmen, he went to the Consul, with these words, Without thy
allowance, Injussu tuo adversus hastem nunquam pugnabo, non si certam victoriam
videam.
I will never fight with the enemy; no though I were assured of victory. When a
man then so disposed attains to such dignity as to command, he desires to find
all other men like himself, and his strong courage moves him to command strong
and stout things: and the same (when once they are commanded) will likewise
that they be observed; and the rule is most certain, that when rigid and hard
things are commanded, it is fit with rigor to see them observd; otherwise
would thou find thy self much deciv'd. Where it is to be noted that if a man
will be obeyed, it is necessary he know how to command; and they know how to
command, that make a comparison between their own quality, and theirs that are
to obey; and when they see a proportion, then let them command; but when a
disproportion, let them forbear. And therefore a wise man said, that to hold a
Commonwealth by violence and force, it was needful there were a proportion
between the person forcing, and the party forced: and whenever that proportion
was, there it was credible that that violence would last: but when the party
forced was of more force than the person forcing, it might be doubted that
violence would every day fail. But returning to our discourse. I say, that to
command stout and strong things it is necessary to be stout too: and he that is
of this stoutness, and commands such things, can never by mildness cause them
to be observed: but he that has not this strength of courage, ought beware of
these extraordinary commands, and in those ordinary he may well use his own
humanity: for ordinary punishments are not imputed to the Prince, but to the
laws and customs. We ought then to bebelieve, that Manlius was forced to
proceed so roughly, by his own extraordinary commands, whereunto his own nature
was inclinable, which are very useful in a Commonwealth, because they reduce
the orders thereof to their originals and ancient vigor. And if a Republike
were so fortunate, that she often had (as we have formerly said) some one by
his example to renew and revive the Laws, and not retain them only from
running to ruin, but draw them quite back to their beginnings, she might be
perpetual. So that Manlius was one of those, who by the rigor of his commands
maintained the military discipline in Rome, drawn thereunto first by his own
nature, afterward from a desire which he had that that should be observed,
which his natural inclination had made him ordain. On the other side Valerius
might as he pleased proceed with courtesy, as he, whom it sufficed, that the
accustomed orders were observed in the Roman Armies: which custom (because it
was good) was enough to honor him, and yet not painful to observe; nor did it
force Valerius to punish the offenders, as well because it may be there were
none, as for that if there had been any, they imputed (as it is said) their
punishments to the wonted orders and customs, and not to the Princes cruelty.
So that Valerius had power to cause all humanity and mildness to fl^w from
himself, whereby he might easily gain his soldiers good wills. Whereupon it
came to pass that the one or the other having the same obedience, were able,
though proceeding diversely, to work the same effect. They that would follow
these, may chance to fall into those vices of contempt and hatred, as I said in
my discourse before of Hanaibal and Scipio, which is avoided by an excessive
worth in thee, and not otherwise. It remains now that we consider which of
these ways of proceeding is the more commendable: which I take to be a matter
disputable, because as well the one as other is much praised by writers. Yet
they that write how a Prince should rule his subjects, come nearer to Valerius
then Manlius. And Xenophon, alleged formerly by me, giving many examples of
Cyrus his humanity, accords much with that which T. Livius says of Valerius:
for being made Consul against the Samnites, and the day come he was to fight,
he spoke to his soldiers with that affability and familiarity, with which he
used to behave himself toward them and after such speaking, T. Livius says
these words; There was never any Captain more familiar with his soldiers,
among the meanest of Non alius militi familiatior dux fuit, inter infimos
militum omnia baud gravate munia obeun do; in ludo praeterea militari cum
velocitatis, viriumque inter se aequales certamina incunt; comiter facilis
vincere, ac vinci vultu eodem, nec quenquam aspernari parem qui se offerret;
factis benignus; pro redactis, haudminus libertatis alienae, quam suae
dignitatis memor; and quo nihil popularius est, quibus artibus petierat
magistratus, iisdem gerebat.
them, freely undergoing all services: besides in military exercises, whereas
the soldiers use to contend with their equals either in swiftness or strength,
he himself without change of countenance as graciously and easily lost as won,
nor scorned he any one that offered himself to match him; liberal he was, and
affable, no less mindful of other men's liberties then of his own dignity; and
which is the greatest point of popularity, the same course he took to attain to
his magistracy, the same he followed in executing it. In like manner T. Livius
speaks honorably of Manlius, showing that his severity in putting his son to
death, made the Army so obedient to the Consul, that it was a cause the Romans
gained the victory of the Latins: and he proceeds so far in commending him,
that after this victory, having set down all the order of the battle, and
showed all the dangers which the people of Rome ran, and the difficulties there
were to overcome, he concludes thus, that only Manlius his valor gave the
Romans that victory. And comparing the forces of the two Armies together,
affirms, that that side would have overcome, which soever had had Manlius for
their Consul. So that considering all that writers speak hereof, it would be
hard to give a good judgment hereupon. Nevertheless, not to leave this part
undecided, I say, that in a Citizen living under the laws of a Republike, it is
more laudable and less dangerous to proceed as Manlius did; for that way is
wholly in favor of the public, and no whit regards private ambition; for by
such a course a man cannot gain any partisans, showing himself rigid to every
one, favoring only the common good: for no man behaving himself thus, can get
any particular friends, which we term (as it was said before) Partisan. In so
much that a like manner of proceeding cannot be more profitable nor more
approved in a Republike: the public advantage nothing failing in it, and being
impossible to give thereby any jealousy of private ambition. But in the course
Valerius took it is contrary; for, however that in regard of the public, the
same effects are produced, yet there arise many doubts, by reason of the
particular good will, which this man gains of his soldiers, which in a long
continuance of government might much wrong the common liberty. And if in
public there grew no mischief hereupon, the reason was, because the Romans
minds as yet were not corrupted, nor he long continued in his command. But if
we are to consider a Prince as Xenophon does, we must wholly take to Valerius,
and leave Manlius: for a Prince ought in his soldiers and subjects aim at love
and obedience: that he maintains the old orders, and is esteemed virtuous, will
yield him obedience: and love his affability, humanity, his pity and those
other indowments Valerius had, which Xenophon also writes were in Cyrus: for to
be a Prince wellwilled in particular, and to have his whole Army as
particularly affected to him, agrees well with all other parts of his state.
But in a Citizen, having an Army so to take part with him, this part agrees not
with the rest, which are to oblige him to live under the Laws, and obey the
Magistrates. We read among the ancient stories of the Venetian Republike, how
that the Galleys of Venice being returned home, and a difference arising
between them of the Galleys and the people, whereby an uprear and tumult was
raised, nor could the matter be quieted by force of officers, reverence of
Citizens, nor fear of the principal Magistrates, of a sudden when Peter
Loredanus showed himself to those Mariners, who the year before had been their
Commander, for love of him they departed and left the fight. Which obedience.
begot such a suspicion in the Senate, that a little while after the Venerians
either by im^prisonment or death assured themselves o, him. I conclude
therefore that Valerius his manner of proceeding is profitable in a Prince, and
hurtful in a Citizen, not only to his country, but to himself: to his country,
because those courses prepare a way to tyranny: to himself; for when his
country is suspicious of his proceedings, it is constrained to make sure of him
with his damage. So on the contrary I affirm that Manlins his proceeding in a
Prince is hurtful, and in a citizen profitable, and especially to the country,
and also seldom offends, if now this hatred which thy severity draws after it,
be not increased by suspicion which by means of thy great reputation thy other
virtues charge thee with, as by and by shall be discoursed touching Camillus.

CHAP. XXIII.
For what cause Camillus was banished from Rome.

WE have formerly concluded that by proceeding as Valerius did, a man hurts
both his country and himself. And by proceeding as Manlius did, a man
advantages his country, and sometimes hurts himself. Which is sufficiently
proved by the example of Camillus, who in his manner of proceeding came nearer
to Manlius then Valerius. Whereupon Titus Livius speaking of him, says, His
virtue the soldiers Eius virtutem milites oderant, and mirabantur.
hated, and yet admired. That which caused the admiration of him, was his
carefulness, his wisdom, the magnanimity of his spirit, and the good order in
employing and commanding his Armies. That which got him hatred, was, that he
was more fevere in chastising then liberal in rewarding them. And Titus Livius
alleges these occasions of this hatred. The first was, that the moneys which
were made of the sale of the Veientes goods, he brought all into the treasury,
and divided not together with the spoil among the soldiers. The second, that
in his triumph he made his triumphal Chariot be drawn with four white horses,
where they said that in his pride he strove to equal the Sun. The third, that
he made a vow to give Apollo the tenth part of the prey taken from the
Veientes, which (he desiring to pay his vow) was to be taken out of the
soldiers hands, who already had got possession of it. Where those things are
very easily marked, that make a Prince odious with his people. Of which the
principal is, to bereave them of any profit, which is a matter of much
importance: for the things that carry any profit with them, when a man is
deprived thereof, he never forge^s, and every little necessity puts thee in
mind of them; and because necessities haunt us every day, thou remembrest these
things every day: the other thing is to appear lofty and puffed up with pride,
then which nothing is more odious to the people, especially those that enjoy
their liberty. And however that from that pride and stat^liness of theirs the
people receive no hur^^ye do they always hare them that use it: whereof a
Prince ought to beware, as of a rock; for to procure hatred without advantage,
is but a rash and foolish course.

CHAP. XXIV.
The continuation of governments brought Rome into thraldom.

IF we consider well the proceedings of the Roman Republike, we shall see that
two things were the cause of that Republikes dissolution: the one was
contentions which grew upon the Agrarian law; the other was the continuation of
governments. Which things had they been well seen into in the beginning, and
due remedies applied thereto, their free state would have lasted longer, and
probably have been less turbulent. And however, that as for the prolonging of
any charge we see not that in Rome any tumult was raised, yet in effect we see
how much that authority hurt the City, which the Citizens took upon them by
such decrees. And if the other Citizens, whose magistracies were prorogued, had
been wise and virtuous, as L. Quintius, this inconvenient would never have
fallen out, whose goodness in one example is remarkable: for there being an
agreement made between the Commons and the Senate, and the Commons having
prolonged the Tribunes charges for one year, judging them able to resist the
Nobilities ambition, the Senate would for strife sake, with the Commons, and
not to seem of less power then they, prologue T. Quintius his Consulship: who
absolutely denied this determination of theirs, saying, that they should
endeavor to blot out and cancel evil examples, rather then increase their
number with another evil one; and so would needs have them make new Consuls.
Which goodness and wisdom had it been in all the Cities of Rome, it would never
have suffered the introducing of that custom, to prolong magistracies: and
from thence they would not have proceeded to the continuation of Commands over
Armies, which thing at length ruined that Republike. The first who had his
command continued to him, was P. Philo, who being encamped before the City of
Palepolis, and his Consulship coming to an end, the Senate thinking he had need
upon gotten the victory, sent him no successor, but made him Proconsul, so that
he was the first Proconsul. Which thing (though propounded by the Senate for
the public good) was that which in time brought Rome into bondage: for the
further abroad the Romans went with their Armies, the more thought they such
prorogation necessary; and the more they used it; which thing produced two
inconveniences; the one that a smaller number of men were employed and
practiced in commands: and by this the reputation hereof came to be restrained
to a few: the other was, that one Citizen continuing long time commander of an
Army, got it to himself, and made it of his own faction. For that Army in time
forgot the Senate, and took him only for their head. Hereby it came that Sylla
and Marius could find soldiers that would take their parts against the
Public. By these means could Caesar make himself Lord of his native country.
Yet if the Romans had not prolonged these magistracies and commands, they had
never so quickly attained so great power: and had their conquests been more
slow, they would not so soon have fallen into servitude.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Cincinnatus and many other Roman Citizens poverties.

WE have otherwhere discoursed, that the most profitable ordinance that can be
made in a free State, is, that the Citizens be kept bare and poor. And however
in Rome it appears not what order that was which wrought this effect
(especially considering the Agrarian law had such opposition) never theless it
was seen by experience, that four hundred years after Rome was built, there was
very great poverty: nor is it credible, that other greater order produced this
effect, than to see, that poverty was no bar to any preferment whatsoever, or
any honor, and that they went to find out virtue in what cottage soever she
dwelt. Which manner of living made people less covet wealth. This appears
plain, because when Minutius the Consul besieged with his Army by the Equi,
Rome was exceedingly afraid, least that Army should be lost, so that they
created a Dictator, being the last recourse they had in their difficulties, and
this was L. Quintius Cincinnatus, who at that time was in his little Country
farm, which he then manured with his own hands. Operae pretium est audire qui
iomnia bumana prae divitiis spernunt, re^ue honori magno locum, neque virtuti
putant esse, nisi effusae affluant opes.
Which thing is celebrated by T. Livius in golden words, saying: It is worth
the while, to bear them talk, that value nothing in regard of wealth: nor
think they a man can have access either unto honors or virtue, but where
riches flow abundantly. Cincinnatus was then at plough in his Country Village,
which exceeded not the quantity of four acres of ground, when from Rome
Deputies were sent him by the Senate to let him know the election of his
Dictatourship, and to show him in what danger the Commonwealth then was. He
then having taken to him his gown, came to Rome, and levied an Army, and went
thence and deliverd Minutius; and having broken and despolyed the enemies, and
set him free, would not permit that the besieged Army should partake of the
prey, saying these words, I will not allow thou should partake of th^^ prey,
whose prey thou were to have been: And deprived Minutius of the Consulship, and
made him Lieutenant, telling him, Thou shall stay at this degree, till thou
know how to be Consul. He had made L. Tarquinius General of his horse, who
out of mere poverty served afoot. It is observable (as is said) what honor
they did unto poverty, and how that to a good and worthy man four acres of land
were sufficient to maintain him. Which poverty we see that it was also in the
days of Marcus Regulus: for being with the Armies in Africa, he asked the
Senate leave, he might turn to his Country farm, which was spoiled by his
husbandmen. Where we see two very notable things, the one the poverty, and how
they were conten^cd therewith, and how it sufficed these Citizens to gain
honor from the wars, and the profits thereof they left to the public: for if
they had purposed to grow rich by the wars, it would little have troubled them,
that their fields were spoiled. The other is to consider the generous rage of
those Citizens, who when they were made Commanders of an Army, exceeded any
Prince in magnanimity of spirit, they valued neither Kings nor Commonwealths,
nothing affrighted or terrified them; and afterward when they were returned to
live private men, became parsimonious, humble, and men that themselves
husbanded and took pains in manuting their own small possessions, obedient to
the Magistrates, reverencing their superiors, so that it seems impossible that
the same mind could endure such change. This poverty continued yet till the
days of Paulus Emilius, which were in a manner the last happy days of that
Republic, where a Citizen who by his triumph enriched Rome, notwithstanding
kept himself very poor. And moreover, so much was poverty in esteem, that
Paulus for reward of behaving himself bravely in the war, gave a silver cup to
a son-in-law of his; which was the first piece of Plate he ever had in his
house. It were easy with a long discourse to show, how much better fruits
poverty produces than riches; and that the one has honored Cities, Countries,
and Religions; and the other has been the destruction thereof, had not this
subject been handled several times by other writers.

CHAP. XXVI.
How that upon the occasion of women, States have been ruined.

THere fell out in the City of Ardea between the Nobles and the Commons a
debate by reason of an alliance: where a young woman that was an heir being as
yet to marry, one of the Commons and one of the Nobles woed her at the same
time, and she having no Father alive, her Tutors desired to bestow her on the
Plebeyan, and her Mother on the Nobleman: whereupon such a tumult was raised,
that they came to blows, where the Nobility was in arms in favor of the
Nobleman, and the Commons in favor of the Plebeyan, so that the Commons having
the worse, went out of Ardea, and sent for aid to the Volsci, and the Nobles
sent to Rome. The Volsci were there first, and as soon as they arrived they sat
down before Ardea. The Romans came afterward upon them, and enclosed the
Volsci between the Town and them, so that they forced them (brought to it by
famine) to yield to their discretion. And the Romans entering into Ardea, and
putting to death the principals of the sedition, accorded all the matters of
that City. In this text are many things to be observed. First we see, that
women have been the occasions of many destructions, and have brought great
mischiefs upon the Governors of Cities, and have caused many dissentions in
them. And (as it has been already seen in this our Story) that excess
committed against Lucretia lost the Tarquins their State. That other act
against Virginia deprived the ten of their power. And Aristotle among the
principal occasions he shows of Tyrants destructions, reckons the injuries
they did some others for their women in deflowring and ravishing them, or
defiling their marriage beds; as touching this part, in the Chapter where we
treated of Conspiracies, we spoke at large. I say then, that absolute Princes,
and Governors of Commonwealths are to take no smaller care hereof, but ought
well consider the disorders, which may grow upon such an accident, and remedy
it in time, so that the remedy be neither with the hurt, nor disgrace of their
state, or Commonwealth, as it befell the Ardeates, who for having suffered that
difference to increase among Citizens, came to take part with their several
tactions: and when they would have reunited themselves, were forced to send for
foreign ayds, which is the beginning of a servitude at hand. But let us come to
the other remarkable thing of the manner of reuniting Cities, whereof in the
Chapter following we mean to treat.

CHAP. XXVII.
How a City at discord in it self is to be united; and how that opinion is not
true, that to maintain Cities in obedience, it is necessary to keep them in
discord, and divided into factions.

BY the example of the Roman Consuls, who made a reconciliation among the
Ardeates, the way is showed how, matters are to be composed in a City at
variance; which is no other, nor can otherways be held, then by putting to
death the chief ringleaders of seditions: for of necessity one of these three
ways is to be goneeither to put them to death, as they did, or remove them out
of the City, or cause them to make peace one with another, with assurance given
not to wrong either the other. Of these three ways this last is the most
pernicious, less certain, and most unprofitable: for it is unpossible, where
much blood has been shed, and other like outrages, that a peace made by force
should continue, looking one another in the face every day: and it is very hard
for them to forbear injuring one another, being there may every day be given
amongst them by reason of their daily conversation new occasions of quarrels.
Whereupon a better example cannot be alleged then the City of Pistoya. That
City was divided (as still it is) fifteen years ago, into the Panciatichi, and
the Cancellieri: but then were they in arms, now they have laid them aside.
And after many brabbles among them, they came at length to the shedding of
blood, to demolishing of houses, and pillaging of goods, and to all other
terms of hostility. And the Florentines that were to reconcile them, always
took that third course: and thereupon always arose greater tumults and greater
scandals: So that weary hereof, they came to take that secoud course, to remove
the heads of the factions, some of which they put in prison, others they
confined in several places: in so much as the agreement was able to continue,
and so has done till this present day; but without doubt the safest way had
been the first. But because such like executions have some thing in them of
greatness of spirit and magnanimity, a feeble Republic knows not how to put
them in practice, but is so far there from, that hardly arrives she to use the
second remedy. And these are some of those errors, of which I spoke in the
beginning, that the Princes of our times commit, being to give their judgments
in matters of weight: for they should have a mind to se, how they have carried
themselves, who of old have deliverd their opinions in like cases. But the
weakness of men now a days, caused by their weak education, and their little
knowledge of things makes them esteem those opinions of the ancients partly in
human, partly impossible. Whereas they have certain of their modern opinions,
quite contrary to the truth, as is that, where the wise man of our City a while
ago said, it was neeedfull to hold Pistoia by factions; and Pisa with
Cittadells: nor perceive they how unprofitable the one and the other of these
things is. I will pass over the Cittadels, because formerly we spoke of them
at large, and now discourse of the incommodity that arises from holding the
Towns thou have under thy government, divided into factions. And touching the
former, it is impossible thou can maintain both those ancient factions,
Prince or Republic thou art that governst them: for by nature men are inclined
to take part in any thing that is divided, and to be pleased more with this
than with that; so that the having a faction in that Town discontented with
thee, is a cause that the first war that comes, thou losest it: for it is
impossible to guard a City, that has enemies without dors, and within doors.
If it be a Republic that governes this City, there is no readier way to make
thy Subjects become naught, and to set thy City at variance, than by having in
thy dominions a Town thus at odds; for each faction seeks favor, and each part
strives to gain friends by all manner of corruption, so that two very great
inconveniences arise thereupon: the one is, that thou can never make them thy
friends, because thou can not well govern them, the rule ofttimes varying,
sometimes with the one humor, sometimes with the other: the other is, that that
favoring of sides must needs divide thy Republic. And Blondus speaking of the
Florentines, and the Pistoyeses, tells us certainly, that while the Florentines
thought to reconcile those of Pistoya, they divided themselves. Whereupon we
may easily perceive the evil which grows upon this division. In the year
1501. when Aretium was lost, and the whole vale of Tiber, and that of Chiana
was taken by the Vitelli and the Duke Valentine, there came a Gentleman called
de Lant, sent by the King of France, to cause a restitution of all those Towns
lost to the Florentines again: and this de Lant finding in every one of those
Fortresses men, who when they came to visit him, told him they were of the
faction of Marzocco, he much blamd their division, saying that if in France one
of the Kings Subjects should say he were of the Kings party, he would be
punished: because such a speech could signify no less, than that there in the
Country were people enemies to the King, whereas that King will that all those
Towns be his friends, united in themselves, and without factions. But all these
ways, and opinions disserting from the truth, arise from the weakness of those
that are Princes, who seeing they are not able to hold their States by force
and valor, betake themselves to such like devices, which sometimes when things
are in quietness help somewhat; but if they come to any distress, and that
they have wars, they quickly show them what little trust thereis to be had in
them.

CHAP. XXVIII.
That the Citizens actions ought to be well weighed: for many times under
virtuous and charitable deeds are laid the foundations of a Tyranny.

THe City of Rome being much oppressed by famine, and the public provisions
unsufficient to ease it, one Spurius Melius had a mind, being very rich in
those times, out of his private estate to make provision of Gorn, and feed the
common people to their content. Whereupon the people flocked so thick about him
in favor of him, that the Senate perceiving the inconvenient that grew upon
this his liberality, to suppress it before it took better hold, created a
Dictatour, and set him on his back, who put him to death. Here is to be noted,
that many times those works which seem to be done upon charity and piety, and
no way with reason to be condemned, prove very pernicious and dangerous, when
they are not looked to in good time. And to argue this matter more
particularly, I say that a Republic cannot subsist, nor in, any case be well
governed without Citizens of good credit and reputation. On the other side the
Citizens reputation, is the occasion of Tyranny in a Commonwealth. And if we
will regulate this matter, it must so be ordered, that the Citizens stand upon
such manner of reputation, as may advantage and not endammage the City, nor the
liberty thereof. And therefore the means are to be examined, whereby they gain
reputation, which in effect are two, either public or private. The public
means are, when one by advising well, and doing better for the public benefit,
gains reputation. To this honor the way should be set open to the Citizens,
and rewards given, as well for good advices, as good actions, so that they are
therefore both to be honored and satisfied: for when these reputations are
gotten by these plain and honest courses, they will never prove dangerous. But
when they are gained by particular ways (which is the other means by us
alleged before) they are very dangerous and hurtful. The private ways are
the benefiting this and that other particular, lending moneys, matching with
their daughters, protecting them against the magistrates, and doing them such
other like favors, which make men become factions, and encourage him that is
thus favored by them, to think he may be able to corrupt the public, and
violate the laws. Therefore ought a Republic that is well ordered, give easy
access to those that seek favor by public means, but bar out those that work
by their own private by ways, as Rome did, we see. For in reward of him that
did the public goood service, she ordained their triumphs and all those other
honors, which she bestowed on her Citizens: and to punish those, who under
diverse colors aspired to greatness by private ways, she appointed the
public accusations: and when these would not serve, because the people was
blinded with the show of a false good, she created a Dictator, who by a
Kinglike power should reduce those into their ranks again that were broken
out, as she did to punish Spurius Melius. And when one of these things is left
unpunished, it is of force to ruin a Republic; for hardly upon such an
example may she afterward be brought into the right way again.

CHAP. XXIX.
That the peoples faults grow first from their Princes.

PRinces have no reason to complain of any fault, which the people that is
under their governments do commit: for their faults must needs proceed either
from their negligence, or because they are blemished with the like errors. And
whoever shall run over the nations that in our days have been accounted full
of robberies, and such like offenses, shall perceive they all wholly proceeded
from those that governed them who were of the like condition. In Romania those
Princes in it before they were extinguished by Pope Alexander the sixth, gave
patterns to every one of a most ungodly and unconscionable life: for here a man
might see horrible executions upon every slight occasion, and exceeding great
rapines: Which first grew from the wickedness of those Princes, not from the
mischeivous disposition of the people, as they said: for those Princes being
but poor, and yet having a mind to live as stately as those that were rich,
were necessitated to apply themselves to many rapins, and to practice them
diverse ways, and among other dishonest ways they toook, this was one; they
made laws and forbad some kind of action to be done; afterward they were the
first that gave the occasion to break it, nor ever punished they the breakers
of it, till afterward when they saw many others had committed the same fault,
and then they began to punish the breach, not for any zeal toward the law
made, but for covetousness to recover the penalty: whereupon grew many
inconvenients: and above all this, that the people were impoverished, and no
way amended, and those that were impoverished used all their wits to work upon
those that were their inferior. Whereupon arose all these evils (we have now
spoken of) whereof the Prince was the only cause. And that this is true, T.
Livius shows us, where he relates, that the Roman Ambassadors, carrying a gift
of the spoil taken from the Vejentes to Apollo, were taken by the Corsaires of
Lipari in Sicily, and there brought to land. But Timasitheus their Prince,
having understood, what gift it was, whether it went, and who sent it, though
he were borne in Lipari, yet behaved he himself like a worthy Roman, and told
the people, that it was impiety to lay hands on such a gift, in so much as by
general consent they set the Ambassadors at liberty with all that was theirs:
and the Historians words are these, Timasitheus made all the multitude
religious, which Timasitheus multitudinem religinne implevit, quae semper
regenti est similis.
is done always like a true governor, And Laurence of Medicim confirmation so
this opinion says,

The Princes actions as examples move,
And those as their best patterns men approve. Et quel che sail Signor famopoi
molti,
Che nel Signor son tulti li octri volti.


CHAP. XXX.
A Citizen, that will of his own authority do any good work in his own City, of
necessity must first extinguish all envy; and what order is to be given for the
defense of a City upon the enemies approach.

THe Roman Senate having notice, that all Tuscany had made a new levy of
soldiers, with purpose to endammage Rome, and that the Latini and Hernici, who
formerly had been their friends, were now joined to the Volsoi, the perpetual
enemies of Rome, considered that this war might prove perilous. And Camillus
at that time being Tribune with Consular power, thought all might be well done
without creating a Dictator, if the other Tribunes his colleagues would yield up
unto him the sum and whole command of the Empire, which the said Tribunes
willingly did. Nor thought they (says T. Livius) Nec quicquam de majestate sua
detractum credebant quod majestati ejus concessissent.
it any thing derogated from their Majesty, what they had yielded to his.
Whereupon Camillus having taken this obedience upon their words, commanded they
should inroll three Armies. Of the first he would be general to go against the
Tuscans; Of the second he made Quintus Servilius Conmander, whom he would have
to abide near about Rome, to withstand the Latini and the Hernici, if they
should stir. He gave Lucius Quintius the command of the third Army, which he
levied for the guard of the City, the defense of the gates and the court of
justice, in case any chance should happen; besides this he ordained, that
Horatius one of his Colleagues, should make provision of arms and corn and other
things requisite in time of war. He made Cornelius also his Colleague chief of
the Senate, and over the public Council, to consult upon those things which in
general were to be executed. Thus were the Tribunes in those times disposed for
the good of their Country to command, and to obey. It is noted by the text
here, what a virtuous and prudent man may do, and what great good he may
because of, and how much he may be able to advantage his country, when by means
of his goodness and virtue, he has quite extinguished all envy, which many
times is the cause that men cannot effectuate a good work, the said envy not
allowing them that authority which it is necessary they should have in matters
of importance. And this envy is quite put out two ways; either by some strong
and difficult accident, where every one seeing themselves ready to perish,
laying ambition aside, willingly run to obey him, whom they believe by his
virtue able to deliver them, as it befell Camillus: who having given so many
proofs of his being an admirable man, and having been thrice Dictator, and
performed that place always with the advantage of the public, and no way to
his own profit, had now caused men not to be afraid of his greatness And
because he was so magnanimous, and of such great credit, they thought it no
shame to them to be inferiors to him: And therefore says Titus Livius very
wisely these words, Nor thought they it any things, etc. Another way is envy
blotted out, when either by violence or by course of nature they dye that have
been thy competitors in attaining to any reputation, or greatness; who seeing
the more esteemed then they, it is unpossible they ever should be at rest, or
have any patience. And when they are accustomed to live in a corrupted City,
where their education has not bred any goodness in them, it is unpossible, let
what accident will fall out, that they should ever go back from any thing; and
without doubt to have their wills, and satisfy the waywardness of their minds,
they would be contented even to see the ruin of their native Country. To
overcome this envy, there is no other remedy but the death of those that bear
it: and when fortune is so favorable to that virtuous man, as that those men
dye a natural death, he becomes glorious without giving any scandal, when
without any obstacle or offense he may display his virtues. But when he has
not this good luck, he must devise by any means to take them out of his way.
And before he can do any thing he must practice those ways whereby to overcome
this difficulty. And he that reads the Bible with understanding, shall see that
Moses was forced (if he would have his laws and ordinances proceed) to put a
great number of men to death, who provoked by nothing else but envy, withstood
his purpose. This necessity I deubt that the understanding which he advises
others of, he wants himself: not knowing the meaning of, or not believing the
holy writ; whereby he puts men past suspicion of his Atheism. For what he
alleges of Moses, he must needs take originally from Moses his books, being we
have not any author of that antiquity, as could write any thing of his own
knowledge touching those times. But those Match. seems not to believe further
then served his own humor, reading the Scriptures only to a politic end, not
so much for the strengthening of his belief, as the bettering of his discourse.
Yet however Machiavel did not, I hope others will believe that Moses delivered
to the Israelites the true Oracles of GOD; and that it was not Moses that
punished the delinquents among them, but GOD sending his immediate judgments.
As in the rebellion of Corah and his accomplices, Numbers the 16. Moses did but
city them as to appearance: but GOD immediately sent his vengeance: For the
earth under them opened, verse. 31. And when that wretched fellow gathered
sticks on the Sabbath, Numb 15. Moses awaited till GOD passed^ the sentence
upon him for his death; and the manner thereof, verse. 35. Therefore Machiavell
may justly be taxed for traducing Moses here of more then he has warrant for,
making no other esteem of Moses his bringing the Israelites out of Egypt, and
his leading them through the wilderness, then of Romulus his gathering together
a^scattered multitude, and laying the foundation of that Commonwealth, which
action his courage and ambition of rule and glory thrust him upon; not seeming
to take notice, that Moses was immediately called by GOD, and sent to show his
wonders and judgments against the Egyptians, and to conduct the Israelites
into Canaan (according to GODS promises formerly made to their forefathers)
wherein he behaved not himself either ambitiously or insolently, nor was any
thing done by his own prowess or policy, but merely by the ordinance of GOD.
Friar Jerome Savonarola knew very well, and Peter Soderini chief
standard bearer of Florence knew it also. The one could not overcome it,
because he had not power to do it, which was the Friar, and because he was not
well understood by those that followed him who might have had power to have
done it. But it was not his fault, and his sermons are full of the blames he
lays upon the wise men of the world, and of invectives against them; for so he
terms those envious men, and all that opposed his ordinances. That others
believed that in time, by his goodness, and good fortune, and doing good turns
to some of them, quite to extinguish this envy, seeing himself young enough
too, and then wearing so many new favors, which the manner of his proceeding
afforded him, so that he thought he was able to overcome those many that
enviously opposed him, without any scandal, violence, or tumult. And did not
know that time cannot stay; goodness is not sufficient, fortune changes; and
there is no gift can appease malice. So that the one and the other of these two
went to ruin, and their ruin proceeded either from their ignorance, or their
disability to overcome this envy. The other thing remarkable is the order
which Camillus took both within and abroad for the preservation of Rome. And
indeed not without reason the good Historians (as ours here is) set down
particularly and distinctly certain cases, to the end posterity should learn
how in the like accidents they are to defend themselves. And it ought well be
observed in this text, that there is not a more dangerous nor unprofitable
defense then that which is confusedly made, and with out order, and this
appears by this third army which Camillus caused to be enrolled, and to be left
at Rome to guard the Town: for many would have judged that part superfluous,
where the people is most commonly armed, and warlick; and for this cause a man
would not think it needful to have them enrolled otherwise, but only that it
sufficed to cause them to be in arms as occasion should require. But Camillus
and who else were wise as he was, think otherwise, who never allow a multitude
to take arms, unless by certain order and appointment: Wherefore upon this
example, he that is appointed over the guard of a City, should avoid, as a
rock, the arming of men in confusion, but ought first have those chosen and
registered? which he would have in arms, and whom he would have them obey,
where their rendezvous, and whether to go, and command those that are not
enrolled to abide every man at his own house, for the safeguard thereof. They
that shall take this order in a City assailed, will easily be able to defend
themselves: whoever does otherwise, shall neither imitate Camillus, nor defend
himself.

CHAP. XXXI.
Powerful Commonwealths, and great and worthy personages in all manner of
fortune retain the same courage, and the same dignity.

AMong other matters of magnificence, that our Historian brings in Camillus
speaking or doing, to show how an excellent man ought to behave himself, he
puts these words in his mouth: Neithor did my Dictatorship elevate my courage,
nor has Nec mihi Dictatura animos fecit, nec exilium ademit.
my banishment abated it: By which words we see that great personages are
always the same in all fortunes. And though she varies, now exalting them, and
then bringing them low, they never differ from themselves, but always hold a
constant resolution, so steadily fastened to their ordinary course of living,
that by every one of them it appears that chance has no power over them. Weak
men behave themselves in another manner: for they befoole and besot themselves
in good fortune, attributing all the good they have to those virtues which they
never knew; whence it proceeds that they grow insupportable and odious to those
that are about them; whereupon depends the sudden alteration of fortune, which
so soon as they look once in the face, they fall presently into the other
defect, and become vile and abject. From hence it comes that such manner of of
Princes think rather in adversity how to make an escape, than to stand upon
their defense, as those that for having made evil use of good fortune, are not
prepared for any kind of safeguard. This virtue, and this vice, which I say, is
found in one man alone, we find also in a Republike, of which the Romans and
the Venetians serve us for example. Those former never any bad fortune could
make abject, nor any good fortune insolent, as it manifestly appeared after the
defeat they had at Canna, and after the victory they got against Antiochus: for
upon that defeat, however a very great one, because it had been the third
together, they never grew base upon it, but continued to send forth Armies;
they would not redeem prisoners against the orders they had made, nor send to
Hannibal or Carthage to ask peace, but casting aside all those unworthy
courses, they thought still upon providing for the war, arming for want of
soldiers their old men and slaves. Which thing being known to Hanno the
Carthaginian (as was said before) he showed that Senate what small account they
were to make of that defeat at Canna. And so it appeared, as those hard times
did not affright, nor abase them, on the other part neither did their more
fortunate times puff them up: for, when Antiochus sent Ambassadors to Scipio
to require an agreement, before they came to join battle, or that he had lost
it, Scipio gave him certain conditions of peace, which were, that he should
retire into Syria, and leave the rest to the Romans disposing, which Antiochus
refusing, and coming to battle and losing it, sent again his Ambassadors to
Scipio, with order that he would submit to all those conditions which the
Conqueror should impose on him, to whom he propounded no other conditions than
what he had fomerly offered before the victory, adding these words: That the
Romans if they be overcome, lose not their courages, nor when they overcome
grow they insolent. Clean contrary hereunto we have seen the Venetians do: who
in their prosperity (thinking they had gotten it by their own valor which they
never were guilty of) grew to such an excess of insolence, that they termed the
King of France Saint Marks son, they contemned the Church; and their ambition
all Italy would not hold, but imagined they were to frame a Monarchy like that
of the Romans. Afterward their good fortune abandoning them, and that they
were a little routed by the King of France at Vayla, they not only lost all
their State by rebellion, but a good part of it they gave up to the Pope and
the King of Spain, even through mere baseness and cowardice. And they became
so vile and abject, that they sent Ambassadors to the Emperor, to offer
themselves to be his tributaries, and writ letters to the Pope full of baseness
and submission, whereby to move him to compassion. Into which unhappiness they
fell in four days space, and after a half defeat: for their Army come to battle
and to fight, in their retreat lost near one half of their men, yet so that one
of their Proveditors that escaped, came to Verona with above five and twenty
thousand soldiers between foot and horse: in case that if either the
Venetians, or any of their orders had been of value, they might easily have
recovered themselves, and looked fortune again in the face, and have been ready
either to overcome, or lose more gloriously, or get more honorable terms of
agreement: but the baseness of their spirits caused by the quality of their
orders, nothing good in matters touching the war, made them at once lose both
their State and courage. And so will it always befall any that shall behave
themselves as they did: for this growing insolent in good fortune, and abject
in evil, arises from the manner of thy proceeding, and from the education
wherein thou have been traind up: Which when it is weak and vain, makes thee
like to it self, when otherwise it casts thee in another manner of mould, and
makes thee know the world better, rejoicing less at the good besalls thee, as
also grieving less at the evil comes upon thee: and that which is said of one
man alone, is said also of many that live in the same Commonwealth, who attain
to that perfection, which the order and manner of government thereof will
afford. And though otherwhere we have said, that the foundation of all States
is good military discipline; and where this is not, there can neither be good
laws, nor any other thing good, methinks it is not more than needs to repeat
it again; for to many purposes, in the reading of this Story, we see this
necessity appears, and we see that neither can the soldiers be good, unless
they be traind and practiced, nor can they be trained, unless composed of thy
own subjects: for the wars do not always last, and unpossible it is they
should: therefore is it necessary to be able to practice this military exercise
in time of peace; neither can this exercise be used in regard of the expense,
with others then with thy own subjects. Camillus was gone (as we said before)
with the Army against the Tuscans, and his soldiers ha^ving seen the greatness
of the enemies Army were much amazd at it, thinking themselves too weak to
sustain the violence of their enemies: the rumor of this fearefulness coming
to Camillus his ears, he came forth abroad amongst them, and going about
through the Camp, speaking now to one soldier, and then to another, workt this
opinion out of their heads, and in conclusion, without any otherwise ordering
of his Army, said, Let every man do what he has learned and used Quod quisque
didicit, aut consuevit, faciat
to do. And whosoever shall well consider these terms and the words he said
to them, for their encouragement to encounter with their enemies, shall
perceive that none of these things could be said or done to an Army that had
not first been orderd and exercised as well in peace as in war: for upon those
soldiers that have not learned to do any thing, a Commander cannot rely, nor
believe they can do any thing to the purpose: and were a new Hannibal to
command them, he could not subsist: for a General (during the battle) not
being able to be in every part, unless he have first taken order to have men of
his manner of courage, knowing well his orders, and the ways of his
proceeding, must of force ruin there. If then a City shall be armed and orderd
as Rome, and that every day the Citizens are put to it to make trial in
particular and in general of their own valor, and the power of fortune, it
shall always come to pass, that at any time whatsoever, they shall continue
settled in the same resolution, and keep themselves in the same dignity. But
when they shall be disarmed, and rest only upon the helps of fortune, and not
upon their own valors, they shall change as her wheel turns, and give that
example of themselves, which the Venetians gave.

CHAP. XXXII.
What means some have practiced to disturb a treaty of peace.

CIrcei and Velitre two Roman Colonies being rebelled, in hope that the Latins
would defend them, afterward the Latins being overcome, and so those hopes
failing them, diverse of the Citizens advised, they should send Ambassadors to
Rome, to recommend them to the Senate: which course was hindered by those that
had been Authors of the rebellion, who were afraid least the whole punishment
should fall upon their heads; and therefore to cut off all treaty of peace,
they incited the multitude to take arms, and make an incurfion upon the Rome
territories. And truly when any one desires that a people or Prince should
wholly take their minds off from agreement, there is no truer nor certainer way
than to make them do some foul act against him, with whom thou would not have
the accord made. For the fear of that punishment which he shall think he has
deserved for his fault, shall always keep him off. After the first wars which
the Carthaginians had with the Romans, those soldiers who had served the
Carthaginians in that war in Sicily and Sardinia, when the peace was concluded,
went back into Africa, where not being satisfied for their pay, they made wars
against the Carthaginians, and having chosen two out of themselves for their
heads, Mathus, and Spendius, they took diverse Towns of the Carthaginians, and
sacked diverse. The Carthaginians willing to try any other way then battle,
sent Asdrubal a Citizen of theirs Ambassador to them, who they thought had
some credit with them, having formerly been their General. And he being come,
and Spendius and Mathus desiring to oblige all these Soldiers, never to hope
they could have peace again with the Carthaginians, and to engage them in the
war, persuaded them it was better to kill him, with all the Citizens of
Carthage, which then they had prisoners, Whereupon they not only slew them, but
put them to death with torments, to this villainy adding an edict, that all
Carthaginians, who in time to come were taken, should in the same sort be
slain. Which deliberation and execution made that Army exceeding cruel and
obstinate against the Carthaginians.

CHAP. XXXIII.
It much furthers and advantages an Army in the winning of a battle, to be
confident of their own forces, and their Generals valor.

IT much helps an Army toward the winning of a battle, to make them
confident, that in any case they cannot choose but vanquish. The things that
give them this confidence, are, that they be well armed and well orderd, and be
acquainted one with another. Nor can this confidence or this order be but among
those Soldiers that have been borne and lived together. The Commander also must
be of repute, so that the Soldiers may be confident of his wisdom: and they
shall always be so, when they perceive him to be a man orderly careful, and
courageous, and that maintains well, and with esteem the Majesty of his
dignity: and he shall always be able to do so, while he punishes their
faults, while he tires not out the soldiers to no purpose, keeps his word with
them, shows them an easy way to vanquish the enemy; those things that may
endanger them, conceals from them; or if they be evident, by his speeches
lessons their opinion of them: which things well observed, are a great occasion
of confidence in the Army; and that confidence of victory the Romans used to
make their Armies thus confident by way of Religion: from hence proceeded, that
by their southsayings and auspiees they created their Consuls, they levied
their soldiers, marched with their armies, and fought their battles; and
without having done some of these things, never would a good or discreet
Commander, have put any thing to hazard, deeming that he might easily lose,
unless his soldiers had first understood that the gods were on their side. And
when any Consul or Captain of theirs should have fought contrary to the
auspices, they would have punishd him, as they did Claudius Pulcher. And
however we find this true in all the Roman Histories, yet it is proved more
certain by the words which Livie brings in Appius Claudius speaking, who
complaining to the people of their Tribunes insolency, and showing that by
means of them the auspices and other matters pertaining to Religion were
corrupted, says thus: Let Eludant nunc licet Religionem; quid enim est, si
pulli non pascentur, fi ex cavea tardius exierint, (...) occinuerit avis? parva
sunt haec: sed parva ista non contemnendo, Majores nostri maximam hanc
Rempublicam fecerunt.
them now scoff at Religion; for, what matter is it, whether the chickens
feed, or whether they come slower out of their cage, whether a bird has sung
or no? these, it is true, are all small things: but by not contemning of these
little things, our Ancestors have exceedingly amplified this Commonwealth.
For in these small matters there is force to hold the soldiers united and
confident, which thing is a principal occasion of any victory. Yet must these
things be accompanied with valor, otherwise they will avail little. The
Prenestini having their Army abroad against the Romans, went to incampe upon
the river of Allia, a place where the Romans had been overcome by the French,
which they did to make their own soldiers confident, and to affright the
Romans with the fortune of the place. And though the course they took, was
probable for those reasons we have already said, yet the conclusion of the
matter showed, that true valor fears not every small accident: Which the
Historian says very well, in those words which he makes the Dictatour speak,
who says thus to the Master of his Cavallerie: See thou how they taking
benefit of their Vides tu fortuna illos fretos ad Alliam consedisse. At tu
fretus armis animisque invade mediam aciem.
fortune, have encamped themselves upon the river Allia? But thou making use of
thy Arms and courage assail the very heart of their Army. For a true valor,
a good discpline, and an assurance taken from so many victories, cannot be
extinguished by matters of small moment, nor does any vain matter affright
them, nor one disorder hurt them, as we saw it; for two Manlij being Consuls
against the Volsei, by reason that they had rashly sent part of their Army to
forage, it followed, that both they that were gone and those that staid
behind, were besieged; from which danger, not the wisdom of the Consuls, but
the Soldiers own valor freed them, where T. Livius says these words, The
Soldiers valor even without a Commander was Militum etiam sine rec^ore
stabilis virrus putata est.
thought firm and constant. I will not let pass one term used by Fabius,
being newly entered with his Army into Tuscany, to make them confident, deeming
such a confidence to be the more necessary, now that he had brought them into a
new Country, and to fight with new enemies; who speaking to his soldiers
before the fight, and having told them many reasons, whereupon they might hope
for the victory, said, that he could also tell them certain good things, and
where they might plainly see the victory, but that it was dangerous to disclose
them. Which course as it was discreetly used, so deserves it it to be followed.

CHAP. XXXIV.
What fame, report, or opinion causes the people to begin to cast their favors
upon a Citizen: and whether a Prince or a people do bestow their Magistracies
with better judgment.

OTherwhere we said, that T. Manlius, who afterward was termed Torquatus,
saved L. Manlius his Father from an acccusation, which M. Pomponions Tribune of
the people had made against him. And however the manner of saving him, was
somewhat violent and extraordinary, yet that filial piety toward his Father,
was so acceptable to the general, that it was not only not blamed, but when
Tribune were to be appointed over the Legions, T. Manlius was chosen in the
second place. Upon which success, I believe it fit to consider, what way the
people take to give their judgments upon men in distributing of their charge
that thereby we may see, whether that be true which we formerly concluded, that
the people is a better distributer than a Prince. I say then, that the people
in their distribution follows the report that goes of one by public voice and
fame: when they know him not otherwise by his ordinary behavior, or by
presumption or opinion conceived of him. Which two things have been caused
either by the Fathers of such, who for that they have been great personages,
and of ability in the Cities, it is thought their sons should be like them,
until by their actions the contrary be found: Or else it is caused by the
courses such a one takes, of whom we speak: the best courses and ways that can
be held, are to keep company with grave men, well disposed, and such as by
every one are reputed wise. And because there cannot be a greater mark or
discovery of a man then by the company he frequents, without question he that
uses good company, gains a good name: for it is impossible but that he shall
much resemble them. Or indeed this public reputation is gotten by some
extraordinary and notable exploit, however private, that has proved in thy
hands very honorable. And of all these three things, which in the beginning
gain any one a good reputation, nothing gives if more amply then this last: for
that first of parents, and fathers is so deceitful, that men advance therein
very leisurely, and that is presently quite spent, when it is not accompanied
by the the proper virtue of him that is to be censured. The second way, which
makes thee be known by the company thou usest, is better then the first; but is
much inferior to the third; for until thou have given evidence of thy self by
some worthy exploir, thy repute is wholly grounded upon opinion, which is very
easily cancelled. But that third being begun and grounded upon thy works,
gives thee at first such renown, that needs must it be, that afterward thou
commit many acts contrary thereunto, if thou would disannul it. Therefore
ought those men that spring up in a Commonwealth, take this course, and
endeavor by some extraordinary act to begin their rise. Which many at Rome did
in their youths, either by publishing of a law, furthering the common good, or
by accusing some potent Citizen as a breaker of the laws, by doing such like
notable things, and unwonted, whereof men should have occasion to speak
afterward. Neither are such like things needful only to begin ones
reputation, but they are as necessary for the maintenance and advancement of
it. And to do this, a man had need to renew them again, as Manlius did during
his whole life: for when he had defended his father so virtuously and beyond
the ordinary strain, and by this action taken his first degree of reputation,
after some years he fought with that Frenchman, and took from him that chain of
gold, which gave him the name of Torquatus: nor stayed he upon this, but
afterward in riper years he put his son to death for having fought without his
allowance, however he had vanquished his enemy. Which three actions gave him a
greater name, and throughout all ages make him more famous, then ever any
triumph or victory did, wherewith he was adorned as much as any other Roman.
And the reason is, because in those victories Manlius had very many like him,
but in these particulars he had either very few or none. Scipio the elder got
not greater glory by all his triumphs, then that action of defending his father
upon the Tesin gained him in his youth, and that other when after the defeat
at Canna, courageously with his sword drawn he made many young Romans swear
they would never abandon Italy, as already then among them it was resolved
which two actions were the beginnings of his reputation, which made him a way
to his triumphs of Spain and Africa, which opinion of him was also increased,
when he sent back the daughter to her Father, and the wife to her husband in
Spain. This manner of proceeding is not alone needful for those Citizens, that
would gain reputation, whereby to attain the dignities in their Commonwealth,
but is also necessary for Princes to maintain their credits in their
Principalities: for nothing gives them so great esteem as to yield some rare
examples of themselves, by some deed or pithy saving, agreeable with the common
good, which may evidently prove the Prince either magnanimous, or liberal, or
just; and that he is such a one, that his life may serve for a pattern, and
his wise sayings may be used by his subjects as proverbs. But to return,
whereat we began this discourse, I say' that the people, when they begin to
confer any dignity upon one of their Citizens, grounding upon any of those
reasons before alleged, take no ill ground; but when afterward the frequent
examples of one man's good carriage makes him better known, then is a better
ground taken; for in such case there can never fall any deceit. I speak only of
those honors which are given to men in the beginning, before they be well
known by a certain experience, or that they transgress from one action to
another unlike it; Where both touching the salfe opinion and the corruption,
they always commit less errors, then Princes. And because it may fall out,
that the people might be deceived in the report, in the opinion, and actions of
a man, conceiving them greater then in truth they are, which would not be so
with a Prince, because it is like it should be told him, or that he should be
advertised thereof by some of his Counselors; to the end therefore that the
people want not these advertisements, the good founders of Republics have
ordained, that when the cheisest dignities of Cities are to be bestowed,
whereunto it might prove dangerous to prefer unsufficient men, and seeing the
peoples wills sometimes bent to advance some one unfit, that it may be lawful
for any Citizen, and accounted as an honor to him, to publish in their
assemblies that man's defects, that the people (this notice not failing them)
may the better give their judgments thereupon. And that this was customary at
Rome, the oration which F. Maximus made, witnessed, which he uttered before the
people in the second Punicke war, when at the creation of the Consulls they
took a liking to T. Ottasilius; and Fabius; deeming him unsufficent to marnage
the Consulate in those times, spoke against him, declaring his unsufficiency,
insomuch as he hindered him of that dignity, and converted the peoples favors
to one that deserved it better then he. The people then in the choice of their
Magistrates judge according to the truest marks they can have of men. And when
they can be advised, as Princes are, they run into fewer errors then Princes;
and that Citizen that will begin to seek the peoples favor, must with some
notable exploit gain it, as Titus Manlius did.

CHAP. XXXV.
What dangers they incur that put themselves forwards as principals to advise
any design, which are so much the great, by how much this carries with it the
more difficulty and peril.

HOw dangerous a thing it is for any man to become the ringleader of any new
matter, which belongs to many, and how hard a thing it is to meddle in it, and
bring it on forwards, and make it good being thus brought forwards, would be
too long and too deep a matter to discourse on. Therefore reserving it for a
fitter place, I will only treat of those dangers, which Citizens incur, or
those that advise a Prince, making themselves chief in persuading him to any
weighty and important resolution, so that the Council thereof is wholly
imputed to them: for, men judging things by their events, of all the evil that
arises thereupon, the blame is wholly laid on him as author; and if good come
of it, he is commended for it; but the reward comes much short of the loss is
hazarded. This present Sultan Selimus' termed the great Turk, having made
preparation (as some report, who now come from his Country) for the Conquest of
Syria and Egypt, was encouraged by one of his Bashawes, who was then upon the
confines of Persia, to undertake rather an expedition against the Sophy; by
whose Counsel being persuaded, he went to that enterprise with an exceeding
great army, and coming into a very vast country, where a great part of it is
desert, and rivers very few, and finding there those difficulties, which long
since had ruined many Roman armies, was so distressed thereby, that he lost
there by famine and plague (however that in the war he were the vanquisher) a
great part of his army. Whereupon being errag'd against the author of that
Counsel, he put him to death. We read of many Citizens, that were the
advisers to such and such enterprises, who because these had evil success,
have straightway been banished. Certain Citizens of Rome there were, who as
authors of the advice, stood to have a Consul from among the Commons in Rome;
it happened, that the first of them, that went abroad with their armies, was
defeated. Whereupon it had proved but unluckily to the authors of that
Counsel, had not their party been strong, by whose favor such resolution was
taken. It is then most certain, that they who advise a Republic and they that
Counsel a Prince, are equally brought into these streights; and if they do not
advise those things, which they take to be profitable either for the City or
the Prince without respect, they fail of their duties; and in case they do
counsel them, they run the hazard of their lives, and of their estates; all
men herein being so blind as to judge advices good or evil by the success they
take. And devising with my self by what means they might escape this infamy or
danger, I see no other way, then that they put things forward moderately, and
not take any thing upon them as their own enterprise, and give their opinion
without passion, and defend it also modestly without passion, so that if either
the City or the Prince followthat advice. it may seem they willingly took that
course, and were not drawn thereto by thy importunity. When thou do so, it is
not reasonable that a Prince or a people should seek revenge on thee for thy
counsel, it being not followed against other men's wills: for here the danger
is, that many having contradicted thee, in the unhappy success of thy advice
they will concur in working thy ruin. And if in this case, one should say,
that when he fails of that glory which another gets by being one alone against
many in advising any course, when it proves luckily, we meet here with two
advantages to countervail it: the first is to be quite exempt out of all
danger: the second is, if thou advisest any thing modestly, and by reason of
the opposition made against it, thy Counsel be not taken, and some disaster
follow upon the advice another has given, thou gainest much glory thereby. And
however the glory, which is gotten by mischiefs, befallen thy City or thy
Prince, cannot well be said to be enjoyed, yet is there some account to be made
of them. I believe there is no other advice can be given to men in this part;
for the persuading them to hold their peace, and not give their opinion, would
be a thing very unprotable to the Commonwealth and their Princes, and they
would hardly be able to escape danger; for in a small time would they be
suspected; it might also befall them, as it did those friends of Porse the King
of Macedon, who having been defeated by Paulus Emilius, and flying with a few
of his confidents, it chanced, that in relating things past, one of them began
to tell Perse of many errors committed by him, which were the occasion of his
ruin, to whom Perse turning said, Traitor, and have thou delayed to tell me
it, until now that I have no remedy? and upon these words slew him with his
own hand. And thus he suffered punishment for his silence when he should have
spoken, and for having spoken when he should have held his peace: neither
avoided he the danger, by not giving his advice. Wherefore I believe the rules
above given, are to be kept and observed.

CHAP. XXXVI.
The reason wherefore the French have been and are thought in combats at the
beginning more then men, and afterward less then women.

THe fierceness of that Frenchman who challenged any Roman whatsoever, near the
river Anien, to fight with him, and afterward the (...) (...) him and T.
Manlius, put (...) (...) (...) of that which T. Livius says (...) (...), (...)
the Frenchmen in the beginning of the combat are more then men, and in the end
thereof prove less then women. And weighing well from whence this may proceed,
many believe that naturally they are so disposed, which I think is true: but
hence it follows not that this their natural humor, which makes them so
fierce in the beginning, might not be so ordered by art, as to continue them
fierce till the very conclusion: And for proof hereof, I say, that there are
armies of three sorts: the one where there is both fury and order, for from the
order arises fury and valor, as was that of the Romans; for it appears in all
their histories, that there was a very good order in that army, which military
discipline in tract of time had brought in amongst them. For in a well trained
army, no man is to do any thing but by rule and order. And we find hereby, that
in the Roman Army (from which, insomuch as it conquered the whole world, all
others may take example) they neither ate, nor slept, nor bought, neither did
they any military action nor domestic without the Consuls order: for those
armies which do otherwise, are not right armies; and if they come to make any
trial of themselves in any action, they do it by force of rage and violence,
and not by valor: but where valor is accompanied with due ordinances, it
makes good use of the fury in such manner and in such times that no difficulty
abates it, nor ever quails the courage, because those good ordinances
reinforce the spirit, and the fury, both being still maintained by the hope of
over coming, which never fails while the orders hold firm. The contrary
falls out in those armies wherein is fury and not order, as were those of the
French, who ever faild by little and little For it proved not, that their first
assault prevailed, and that their fury whereon they much relied, was not
maintained by an ordinate valor, not having any thing else, besides that,
wherein to trust, as that grew cool, so they failed. On the other side the
Romans doubting less of dangers by reason of their good orders, not distrusting
the victory, fought resolutely and obstinately with the same courage and valor
as well in the end as in the beginning, or rather enraged by fighting, they
grew still more fierce. The third kind of armies is, where there is no natural
fury, nor accidental order, as the Italian armies are in our days, which are
quite unprofitable: and unless they encounter with an army which upon some
accident chances to run away, they shall never overcome: and without alleging
other examples, we every day see that they give good proofs they have no
valor at all. And because by T Livius his testimony, every one may understand,
how the good s^uldiery ought to be ordered and how the bad is, I will set down
Papirius Cursor his words, having a mind to punish Fabius the commander of the
horse; where he said, Let neither GOD nor man be had in any reverence, nor Nemo
hominum, nemo Deorum verecundiam habeat, non edicta Imperatotun; non auspicia
observentur; sine commeatu vagi milites in pacato and in hostico errent,
immemores sacramenti, licentia sola exauctorentur; infrequentia deserantur
signa, neque conveniatur ad edictum, nec discernatur interdiu, nocte, aequo an
iniquo loco, injussu Imperatoris pugnent; non signa, non ordines servent.
Iatrocinij modo caeca and fortuita pro solenni and sacrata militia sit.
the Generals commands, nor his auspices be regarded; let the soldiers
pillaging up and down for want of provision as well in their friends country as
in their foes, let them casheere themselves, at their pleasures, for, getting
their oaths, let them quit their Ensigns, nor come together at command: let
them fight without the Generals leave by night or by day in place of advantage
or disadvantage, caring neither for rank nor order: and let the sacred and and
solemn rites of warfare become like the blind and obscure tricks and chances of
robberies. By the text here we may easily see whether the warfare in our days,
be blind and casual, or sacred and solemn, and how much it comes short of
resembling that which properly is termed a warfare, and how it differs from a
furious and ordinate warfare as was that of the Romans, or from a furious only
as was that of the French.

CHAP, XXXVII.
Whether slight skirmishes or combats are necessary before a great battle, and
what is to be done to know a new enemy, when one should avoid those skirmishes.

IT seems that in humane actions (as otherwhere we have discoursed) besides
other difficulties, found in bringing any thing to its perfection, there is
always some evil very nearly neighboring to the good: Which so easily grows
up with that good, that it seems unpossible, if a man would enjoy the one, to
be quit of the other. And this we see in all the works of man: and therefore
is that good attained with difficulty, unless by thy good fortune thou be so
assisted, that she by her power overcome this ordinary and natural
inconvenient. The Combat between Manlius T^rquatus and the Frenchman has put
me in mind hereof, where T. Livius says That combat so much imported Tanti ea
dimicatio ad universi bellieventum fuit, ut Gallorum exercitus, relictis trep
de Castris, in Tiburtinum agrum, mox in Campaniam transierint.
the event of the war, that the French Army leaving their Camp in a fright,
went into the Tiburtine Country, and thence into Campania. For I consider on
the one side, that a good Commander ought wholly avoid to do any thing which
being but of small moment, may produce but evil effects in his Army: for to
begin a skirmish or a combat wherein the whole forces are not employed, and
yet the whole fertune is there laid to stake, is a thing savouring too much of
rashness, as I said before, when I condemned the guarding of the passages. On
the other side I consider, that wise and experienced Commanders, when they meet
with a new enemy, and that is of reputatson, are forced before they come to
join battle, to cause their soldiers to make trial of them by light
skirmishes, to the end that beginning to know them, and to have to deal with
them, they may be rid of that terror which the report and reputation of these
men have put them in. And this part in a General is of exceeding great
importance; for there is a kind of necessity in it, which forces thee
thereunte; for thou will think that thou go to thy manifest destruction,
unless thou have first by these small experiences made thy soldiers cast out
that terror, which by means of the enemies reputation had possessed their
minds. Valerius Corvinus was sent by the Romans with an Army against the
Samnites, who were new enemies, and these formerly had never proved the one the
others forces, where T. Livius says, that Valerius caused the Romans. to make
some small skirmishes with the Samnites, That a new Ne eos novum bellum, ne
noves hostis terre. et.
war, and a new enemy might not affright them. Notwithstanding it is a very
great hazard, that thy Soldiers in those skirmishes remaning losers, their
fear and cowardice grow not more upon them, and that effects contrary to thy
purpose follow not thereupon, that is, that thou fright them not, whereas thy
design was to assure them. So that this is one of those things, which has the
evil so near neighboring unto the good, or rather they are so near joined
together, that it is very easy to mistake the one for the other: Whereupon I
say, that a good Commander should be very careful, that nothing arise, which
upon any accident may take away the courage and heart of his soldiers. That
which may be of force to take away their courage, is to begin to lose: and
therefore a man should be well aware of these small skirmishes, and no way
suffer any of them, unless with exceeding great advantage, and certain hope of
victory. Nor ought he undertake to guard any passages, where he cannot bring
his whole Army together. Nor should he keep any Towns unless it be those that
by losing of them, his utter ruin follows thereupon; and those that he
guards, he should take such care both with their defenses and also with his
Army, that whenever the enemy has any design to assail them, he may make use
of all his forces in rescue of them: the others he should leave undefended: for
whenever any thing is lost, that was before abandoned, the Army being yet
afoot, there is neither the reputation of the war lost, nor the hope of
conquest. But when any thing is lost, which thou had purposed to defend, and
every one believe, thou might, defend, there is the damage and loss, and
there thou have in a manner, as those Frenchmen did, by a matter of small
moment lost the whole war. Philip of Macedon the Father of Perse, a warlick
man, and of great esteem in his time, being assavl'd hy the Romans, forsook and
laid wast much of his Country, as he, who because he was wise, thought it more
pernicious to lose reputation by not being able to defend that which he
undertook to defend, then by leaving it in prey to the enemy, to lose it as a
thing neglected. The Romans when after the defeat at Canna, their estate was in
great perplexity, refused many that were under their protection, and so also
diverse of their own Subjects, charging them to defend themselves the best they
could, which are better courses far, than to undertakes defenses, and
afterward nor be able to go through with them; for hereby those friends are
lost, and forces only in those friends. But returning to the small skirmishes,
I say; that yet if a Commander be forced by reason of the newness of the enemy
to make any skirmish, he ought take so much advantage in it, that he run no
hazard to lose it, nor do, as Marius did, which is the better way. Who going
against the Cimbrians, which were an exceeding fierce people, and came to make
a prey of Italy, and wheresoever they came, casting a great terror, because of
their fierceness and multitude, and by reason they had formerly vanquished a
Roman Army, Marius thought it necessary before he came to join battle, to
work somewhat, which might make his Soldiers lay aside that terror, which
the fear of the enemy had put them in; and as a very well advised Commander,
brought his Army several times, where the Cimbrians with their troops were to
pass: And thus within the fortifications of his Camp he would that his
Soldiers should see them, and accustom their eyes to the view of that enemy,
to the end that by seeing a disordinate multitude loaded with baggage and
unprofitable arms, and in part too disarmed, they might reassure themselves,
and grow desirous of battle, which course as it was discreetly practiced by
Marius, so likewise ought it be diligently imitated by others, whereby they
might not be forced to incur those dangers which I mentioned before, nor to
do as the Frenchmen did: Who for a matter of small moment Qui ob rem. parvi
ponderis, trepidi in Tiburtem agrum, and in Campaniam transie^unt.
fled in a fright into the Triburtine Country, and straight after into
Compania. And because we have alleged Valerius Corvinus in this Treaty, in
the Chapter following I intend, by the help of his words, to show what manner
of man a Commander should be.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
What manner of man that General ought to be, on whose abilities an Army may
confidently rely.

VAlerius Corvinus was (as we faid formerly) abroad with an Army against the
Samnites, new enemies of the people of Rome, whereupon partly to assure his own
Soldiers, and partly to make them know the enemy, he caused some of his to
enter into certain light skirmishes with them, nor contented herewith, before
the day of battle would needs speak to his own soldiers, and show with all
efficacy, how little esteem they were to make of such enemies, putting them in
mind of their own and his valor also: where it may be noted by the words that
Livius brings him in speaking, what manner of man a Commander ought to be, in
whom an Army is to have confidence: which words are these; And also to
consider, under whose conduct and auspices you fight; whether he you are to Tum
etiam intueri cujus ductu, auspicioque incunda sit pugna; utrum audiendus
duntaxat magnificus ad hor tator sit verbis tantum ferox, operum militarium
expers, an qui and ip a tela tractare, procedere ante signa, versari media in
mole pugnae sciat: facta mea, non dicta vos milites sequi volo: nec disciplinam
modo, sed exemplum etiam a me petere, qui hac dextra mihi tres consulatus,
summamque laudem peperi.
hearken unto, be only a magnificent exhorter, fierce in words, but not of
prowess to show you any military examples, or else such a one that knows how
to make use of your arms to march before your ensigns, and behave himself
bravely in the thickest of your troops. I would have yon my soldiers to follow
my deeds rather then my words, and not to seek your discipline only from me,
but your example, who by this right hand have gained three Consulships and the
height of honor. Which words well considered teach every man how he ought to
proceed if he would hold the dignity of a Commander; and whosoever shall
otherwise carry it, shall find in time that dignity (when either by chance or
ambition he is raised thereunto) will rather take from him, then any way gain
him reputation: for titles honor not men, but men their titles. And from the
beginning of this discourse we may consider, that if great Commanders have used
extraordinary means to confirm the resolutions of an Army of old soldiers,
when they were to encounter with unaccustomed enemies, how much rather is there
pains to be taken with an army of freshwater soldiers, who never yet looked the
enemy in the face for if an unaccustomed enemy terrifies an army of old
soldiers; much more probable is it that any enemy should affright an army of
new soldiers, Yet we have many times seen all these difficulties overcome by
the exceeding great wisdom of good Commanders, as Gracchus the Roman did and
E^aminondas the Theban, of whom we have spoken otherwhere, who with their
armies of new soldiers vanquished armies of Veteranes, who had been of long
experience. The courses they took, were for many months to exercise them in
counterfeit skirmishes, and train them up in obedience and order, and from
thence they came to employ them with a great deal of assurance in very fierce
battles. Therefore ought no warlike man doubt, but that he may be able to make
good soldiers when he wants not men: for that Prince who has many men, and
wants soldiers, should complain rather of his own sloth and small wisdom,
then of the peoples cowardice.

CHAP. XXXIX.
That a Commander ought exactly know scituations.

AMong other things befitting the General of an Army, is the knowledge of
scituations and countries; for without this knowledge in general and in
particular, the Commander of an Army cannot well effectuate any thing. And
because all sciences, if a man would be exact in them, require practice, this
is one that asks exceeding much practice. And this practice or (as I may term
it) particular knowledge is gained rather by means of hunting, then by any
other exercise. Wherefore the ancient writers say, that those Heroes, that
ruled the world in their days, were brought up in the woods and in frequent
huntings: for the chase teaches thee many things besides this knowledge, which
very much concerns the war. And Xenophon in Cyrus his life shows, that Cyrus
going to assail the King of Armenia, as he gave order for the service, he put
his soldiers in mind that this was nothing else then one of those chaces which
they had many times made in his company. And he told those he sent to lie in
ambush upon the mountains, that they were like unto those that went to pitch
their toiles upon the hills, and those that scowred the plain; that they were
like those that went to put up the beast out of his covert, to the end that
being chased, he fall into the toiles. This is said to show that the chase
according as Xenophon allows of it, has a kind of resemblance of war. And
therefore is such exercise very honorable and well beseeming great personages.
Nor can this knowledge of countries by any fitter means be learned then by way
of hunting: for the chase makes him that frequents it know how in particular
the country lies where he uses to hunt; and when a man has made himself well
acquainted with the site, of one country, he afterward with facility
comprehends that of all other strange Countries: for every Country and every
member of them have some kind of conformity one with another, so that he who
knows the one well, may easily attain to the knowledge of the other. But he
that has never practiced the one, very hardly or never, unless it be by long
experience, can know the other; whereas he that is well versed therein, at the
first cast of his eye knows how that plane lies, or that hill rises, how far
that valley reaches, and all such other like things, whereof for the time to
come he has gained a settled knowledge. And that this is true, T. Livius
shows us by the example of Publius Decius, who being Tribune of the soldiers
in the Army which Cornelius the Consul led against the Samnites, when the
Consul was forced to betake himself to a valley, where the Romans, army might
easily have been enclosed by the Samnites, this Decius perceiving the danger
they were in, said to the Consul, See thou Aulus Cornelius that hill which is
Vides tu Aule Corneli cacumen illud supra hostem? arx illa est spei salutisque
nestrae, si eam (qucniam caeci reliquere Samnites) impigre capimus. Publius
Decius tribunus militum unum editum in saltu collem imminentem hostium castris
osten dit, aditu arduum impedito agmini, expeditis haud difficilem.
above the enemy? that is the strength of our hope and safety, if we, because
the Samnites being blind have neglected it, quickly seize on it. And before
these words uttered by Decius, T. Livius says, Publius Decius the soldiers
Tribune showed a pretty high hill which lay a little higher then the enemies
camp, of hard ascent to men incombred with complete arms, but of easy access
to men lightly harnessed. Whereupon being sent thither himself by the Consul
with 3000 soldiers, and having saved the Roman army, and purposing when night
came, himself to depart, and so to save himself and his own soldiers, he is
brought in thus speaking, Follow me, that yet while it is day light we may
discover what places the enemy guards Ite mecum, ut dum lucis aliquid superest,
quibus locis hosts praesidia ponant, qua pateat hinc exitus exploremus. Haec
omnia sagulo militari amictus ne ducem circuire hosts notarent per lustravit.
and which way we may get out. All these things he went to view clad in a
soldiers cassocke, to the end the enemy should take no notice the Captain
rounded them. He therefore that well considers this whole text, shall see how
profitable and necessary for a Commander it is to understand the natural
scituations of countries; for if Decius had not well known them, he had never
been able to judge what advantage it was to the Roman army to seize upon that
hill; nor could he have been able to discern at such distance, whether thall
hill were accessible or no. And when he had once gotten there upon it, having a
mind to depart and return again to the Consul, being environed round with
enemies, he would never have been able so far off to spy out the passages to
escape thence, and discern which places were guarded by the enemy, so that it
must be of necessity, that Decius had a very exact knowledge, whereby he
brought it to pass that by the taking of that hill, the Roman Army was
delivered, and afterward he himself (being besieged) knew how to find a way of
escape both for himself and those that were with him.

CHAP. XL.
How deceit is commendable, used against the enemy in time of war.

HOwever that the use of fraud in any action be detestable, yet in the managing
of a war it is a thing laudable and glorious, and he is as much praise, that
vanquishes the enemy by deceit, as he that overcomes him by force. And this we
see, by the judgment of those that write the lives of great personages, who
commend Hannibal and others, who have been very notable in such like ways of
proceeding. Whereof because there are many examples every where obvious, I will
not add any. I will say this only, that I mean not, that that fraud is
glorious, which causes thee to break thy faith given, and agreements made: for
that, though it may sometimes gain thee a state or Kingdom, as formerly has
been said, yet will it never get thee any glory But I speak of such a deceit,
which is put in practice against such an enemy that trusts not in thee, and
that consists properly in matter of war: as was that of Hannibal, when at the
lake of Perugia he feigned a flight, whereby he might have enclosed the Consul
and the Roman Army; and when to escape out of Fabius Maximus hishand, he tied
flaming firebrarnds to the horns of his whole heard of cattle. The like unto
which was that, which Pontius the Samnites General practiced to shut in the
Roman Army at the gallows of Caudium, where having placed his army behind the
mountains, he sent many of his soldiers clad like shepherds with much cattle
through the plain, and they being taken by the Romans, and required of where
the Samnites army was, agreed all, according to the order received from
Ponutis, to say that it was gone to the siege of Nocera. Which thing the
Consuls believing, gave them opportunity to shut them up in those precipices of
Caudium, wherein as soon as they entered, they were presently besieged by the
Samnites; and this victory gained by fraud, would have proved very glorious to
Pontius, if he had followed his fathers counsel, who advised either to set the
Romans freely at liberty, or put them all to the sword, and in no case take the
middle way, Which neither gains friends, nor takes Quae neque amicos parat,
neque inimicos tollit.
foes out of the way. Which middle way was always pernicious in matters of
state, as other where it has formerly been said.

CHAP. XLI.
That the defense of ones country ought to be undertaken, either with ignominy,
or with glory, or whatsoever way it be done, it is well defended.

THe Consul and the Roman Army, as is above said, were besieged by the
Samnites, who having propounded to the Romans exceeding dishonorable terms, as
was that to make them go under the gallows, and send them without Arms to Rome;
and hereupon the Consuls standing amazed, and the whole army in despair, Lucius
Lentulus the Romanc Lieutenant said, that, as he thought, no conditions were to
be refused to save their country: for the safety of Rome consisting in the life
of that Army, he thought it good to save it in any case: and that the Country
is well defended, by what means soever it be, either with disgrace, or with
glory: for that Army being saved, Rome might in very good time cancel all that
ignominy; but in case it were not saved, however it should dye gloriously. Rome
and her liberty was utterly lost, and so his advise was followed. Which thing
deserves well to be noted by any Citizen that chances to be called to counsel
his country: for where the deliberation is wholly touching the safty of the
country, there ought no consideration to be had of just or unjust, pitiful or
cruel, honorable or dishonorable, but rather all other respect being laid
aside, that course is to be taken which may preserve the life and maintain the
liberty thereof, which thing is followed by the sayings and deeds of the
French, in defense of the Majesty of their King, and the power of their
Kingdom; for they heat nothing with more impatience, then that it should be
said Such a course was dishonorable to their King; for say they, their King
cannot suffer dishonor in any resolution taken by him, either in prosperous or
adverse fortune: for whether he wins or loses, they commend the action, and say
it was done like a King.

CHAP. XLII.
Promises extorted by force, ought not to be kept.

WHen the Consuls were returned to Rome with their disarmed army, and the
disgrace which was put upon it, the first that spoke in the Senate, that the
peace made at Candium should not be observed, was the Consul S. Posthumous,
saying that the people of Rome was not tied thereunto, but that he himself
indeed was bound, and the rest that had promised the peace; and therefore the
people if they would free themselves from all ties, were to yield up him and
the rest that had promised it with him into the Samnites. hands: and this
conclusion he held with such obstinacy, that at length the Senate was content
therewith, and so sending him and the others to Sanmiam, protested to the
Samnites, that the peace was of no force. And in this case so favorable was
fortune to Pesthumius, that the Samnites held him not; and when he was returned
to Rome among the Romans, he was more glorious by his loss, then Pentius was
among the Samnites by his conquest. Where two things are to be noted. The one
is, that in what action soever glory may be gotten; for in victory it is
ordinarily gained, but in loss, it is obtained either by showing that loss came
not by thy default, or by the atcheivement of some valorous action which may
cancel it. The others is: that it is no dishonor to violate those promises
which by force thou were constrained to make; and always premises extorted
regarding the public, when there is want of strength, shall be broken, and
that without the disgrace of him that breaks them. Wherefore in all histories
we read several examples, and every day in these modern times we see many of
them; and, not only among Princes, promises forced when they want strength, are
not kept, but also all other promises are not observed, when the occasions
fail that moved them to promise. Which if it be a thing commendable or no, or
whether such like ways are to be followed by a Prince or no, it is at large
disputed by us in our treaty concerning a Prince, so that for this present we
shall not touch it.

CHAP. XLIII.
Those men that are bred in the same country, do throughout all ages keep very
near the same nature and disposition.

WIse men are wont to say (and not by chance nor without reason) that he who
will see what shall be, let him consider what has been: for all things in the
world at all times have their very encounter with the times of old, Which comes
to pass, because those things are wrought by men, who were always and are
subject to the same passions; and therefore follows it of necessity, that they
take the same effect. It is true, that their actions sometimes in this province
are more virtuous, then those in that, and so sometimes in that more then in
this, according to the form of their education, wherein those people have
taken their manner of living. It gives a facility also in the knowledge of
future things by those that are past, to see one Nation a long time hold the
same customs and conditions, being either always covetous, or always
treacherous, or having some other such vice or virtue. And whosoever shall read
the things past belonging to our City of Florence, and consider also what has
happened in the latter times, shall find the Germans and French very covetous,
proud, cruel, and unfaithful: for in all these four, several times have they
much wronged our City. And touching their small faith, every one know moneys
were given to King Charles the 8. of France, and he promised to render the
Cittadels of Pisa, and yet he never did it. Wherein that King manifested his
small faith, and muth avarice. But let us pass over these matters of late
memory. Every one may well have heard of that which followed in the war that
the Florentines had with the Vicounts of Milan: when Florence being deprived of
all other expedients, thought to bring the Emperor into Italy, by his
reputation and forces to assail Lombardy. The Emperor promised to bring a good
Army with him, and undertake that war against the Vicounts, and defend Florence
against their whole power, in case that at his rising up in arms the
Florentines would pay him an hundred thousand ducates, and at his arrival in
Italy another hundred thousand; to which agreements the Florentines consented,
and having made the first payment, and afterward the second, he came only to
Verona, and thence returned back again, having not done any thing in their
behalf, blaming them, as if it were their fault, for not having observed the
conditions between them. So that if Florence had not been either constrained by
necessity, or overcome by passion, and had read and known the ancient customs
of the Barbarians, she would never have been neither this time, nor many other
times deceived by them, they having behaved themselves always after one manner,
and in every part, and with every one used the same terms, as it appears they
formerly did to the Tuscans, who being oppressed by the Romans, by reason they
had been several times put in flight by them and routed, and seeing that by
their own forces alone they were not able to make resistance, they agreed with
the French, who dwelt on this side the Alps in Italy, to give them a sum of
money, to oblige them to join their Armies with them, whereby to make head
against the Romans. Whereupon it followed, that they having taken the moneys,
would not afterward take arms for them, saying these they had received, not to
make war upon their enemies, but that they should forbear to forage the
country of Tuscany. And thus the Tuscans through the covetousness and small
truth of the French, were bereft of their moneys and left without the succors
they expected from them. Insomuch as we see by this example of the ancient
Tuscans, and that of the Florentines, that the French have continually used the
same terms: and hereby may it easily be conjectured, what trust Princes can
repose in them.

CHAP. XLIV.
By sudden; surprisall and boldness many times more is obtained, then by
ordinary means can be gotten.

THe Samnites being invaded by the Romans, and their army unable to stand in
the field against them, determined having left their Towns well guarded in
Samnium, to pass with their whole Army into Tuscany, which then had made truce
with the Romans, to try with that passage, if by the presence of their Army
they could induce the Tuscans to take arms again: which they had denied to
their Ambassadors; and in the parley the Samnites had with the Tuscans (showing
what principally moved them to take arms) they used a notable term, where
they said, They had rebelled, because peace was more grievous to Rebellasse
quod pax servientibus gravior quam liberis bellum esset.
these in subjection, then was war to them that enjoy their liberty. And so
partly by persuasions, partly by the presence of their army, they wrought them
to take arms. Where it is to be noted, that when any Prince desires to obtain
any thing of another, he ought (if the occasion will bear it) never give him
time to advise himself, but carry the matter so, that he may see the necessity
of his sudden resolution, which is, when he that is required, perceives that by
his denial, or delay, there may arise a sudden and dangerous distaste. These
terms were seen to have been well used by Pope Julius with the French, and by
De Fois the French Kings General with the Marquess of Mantua: for Pope Julius
having a mind to expel the Bentivolij out of Bolonia; and to this purpose
thinking he had need of the French forces, and that the Venetians should stand
Newtralls; and having solicited the one and the other to this intent, but
received from them a doubtful and various answer, resolved by not giving them
leisure to bring them both to his bent. Whereupon parting from Rome with those
forces he could put together, he went thence toward Bolonia, and to the
Venetians he sent that they should continue Newters, and to the King that he
should send him forces; so that they all being restrained by the small time
they had, and considering that the Pope might with reason take an open distaste
at either their delay or refusal, gave way to his will, and the King sent him
aid, and the Venetians remained newters. De Fois also being with his Army in
Bolonia, and having had notice of the rebellion of Bressia, and being desirous
to go to recover it, had two ways, the one through the Kings own dominions long
and tedious, the other short through the dominion of Mantua; and not only was
he necessitated to pass through the dominions of that Marquess, but of force
was to pass by certain sluices between marish grounds and lakes, whereof that
country is full, which with fortresses and other means were shut up, and
guarded by him: whereupon De Fois having resolved to take the shorter passage,
to overcome all difficulties, and give no time to the Marquess to deliberate,
at the same instant brought his soldiers on that way, and signified to the
Marquess that he should send him the keys of the passage. So that the Marquess
surprised by this sudden resolution, sent him the keys, which he would never
have done, if De Fois had carried himself more cooly in the matter, that
Marquess being in league with the Pope and the Venetians, and having a son of
his in the Popes hands, which things gave him many fair colors to deny him.
But being assailed by the sudden course taken (upon the reasons already
alleged) yielded. So did the Tuscans with the Samnites, having upon the
presence of that Army of Samnium taken arms, which they had otherwise denied
them.

CHAP. XLV.
Which course is the better in a battle, either at the first to sustain only
the enemies shock, and reserve some forces till the latter end to give them a
blow withal, or else as upon the main to venture all upon the fury of the
first onset.

DEcius and Fabius the Roman Consuls were in the field with two armies against
the Samnites and Tuscans, and coming to the skirmish and to join battle
together, it is worth the noting in that service, which of those ways of
proceeding, practiced by those two Consuls, were the better: for D^^ius with
all his force and violence assailed the enemy; Fabius only held them up,
judging the slow assault to be of more advantage, reserving his blow till the
last, when the enemy should have lost his first heat of fight, or rage (as some
term it) where we see by the success that followed, that Fabius his design
took effect better then that of Decius, who tired himself so in the first
onset, that seeing his soldiers ready to turn their faces, to attain to that
glory by death which by victory he could not, in imitation of his father, he
sacrificed himself for the Roman Legions. Which thing when Fabius understood,
that he might gain no less glory by living, then his Colleague had gotten by
dying, put forward all these forces, which he had reserved for the last pinch,
whereby he carried away a very happy victory. From hence is it evident, that
Fabius his manner of proceeding is the more secure and warrantable.

CHAP. XLVI.
Whence proceeds it, that one family in a City holds a long time the same
manners and disposition.

IT seems that not only one City has certain ways and orders different from
those of another City, and breeds men either more hardy or more effeminate, but
in the same City we see the same difference among families: which we find to be
true in every City: and in Rome we read of many examples to this purpose: for
we see the Manlij were hard and obstinate men, the Publicoli courteous and
lovers of the people, the Appij ambitious and enemies of the commonalty, and so
many other families, have had their qualities differing one much from the
other. Which thing cannot proceed from the blood only, for that must needs
alter by reason of the variety of marriages; but it must come from the
education, which one family has diverse from another. For it avails much, that
a youth from his tender years begins to relish well or ill any one thing: for
of necessity it must make an impression, and thereupon give a rule to his
manner of proceeding all the days of his life: and were not this so, it would
be impossible that all the Appij should have had the same will, and been led by
the same passions, as T. Livius rema^kes in many of them: and for the last, one
of them being made Censor, and his Colleague at the end of eighteen months
having (as the law ordered it) deposed his magistracy, Appius would not depose
his, saying that he might hold his yet five years, according to the first law
ordained by the Censors. And however hereupon many speeches were made, and many
tumults were caused; yet was there no help to make him lay it down, maugre the
people and the greater part of the Senate. And whosoever reads the oration he
made against P. Sempronious Tribune of the people, shall note upon that
occasion all the Appian insolences, and the goodness and humanity used by many
other Citizens in obedience of the laws and in their love to their Country.

CHAP. XLVII.
That a good Citizen for the love of his country ought to forget all private
wrongs.

MAnlius the Consul was employed with an Army against the Samnites, and he
having been wounded in a battle, and the Army therefore running some hazard,
the Senate judged it necessary to send Papirius Cursor thither for Dictator, to
supply the want of the Consul; and there being a necessity that the Dictator
should be named by Fabius who was then in Tuscany with an Army, and doubting
that because he was his enemy, he would not name him, the Senators sent him two
Ambassadors to entreat him, that laying aside all private differences for the
public goods sake he would name him. Which Fabius did, moved by the love he
bore his Country; howbeit by his silence, and many other signs, he showed that
nomination pressed him, much. Whereof all those, that would be thought good
Citizens, ought take example.

CHAP. XLVIII.
When we se the enemy commit a great error, we ought to believe there is some
treachery in the business.

FVlvius remaining Lieftenant in the Army which the Romans had in Tuscany, for
that the Consul was gone to Rome by reason of some ceremonies there, the
Tuscans to see if they could draw this man forth, laid an ambuscado near the
Romans camp, and sent some soldiers clad like shepherds with good store of
cattle, and caused them to come insight of the Roman army, who so disguised
came near their very trenches, whereupon the Lieftenant marvelling at this
their presumption, not thinking it a thing reasonable, found such an expedient
as discovered the deceit, and so the Tuscans, plot was spoiled. Here it may
firly be noted, that the commander of an army ought not to give much credit to
an error, which he plainly sees the enemy run into: for there will always be
some treachery lurking, it being not a their (...) reasonable that men should be
so unwary. But oftentimes the desire of victory so blinds men's eyes, that they
can se nothing else, but what they think makes all for their advantage. The
Frenchmen having overcome the Romans at Alia, and coming to Rome, and finding
the gates open, and without guard, stayed all that day, and the next night,
without entering in, fearing some treachery, and not possibly believing, there
could be such cowardice and so small understanding in the Romans, as utterly to
abandon their Country. When in the year 1508 the Florentines besieged Pisa,
Alphonso del Mutola, a Citizen of Pisa, was then the Florentines prisoner, and
promised if he were set free that he would open a gate of Pisa to the
Florentine army, whereupon he had his liberty; afterward as if it had been to
put the matter in execution, he came many times to treat with the commissaries
Deputies, but came not privately nor by stealth, but openly and accompanied by
some Pisans, who stood aside, while he talked with the Florentines: so that a
man might well have guest at his double heart: for there was no probability,
that if the end of this practice had been faithfuly intended, as it was
promised, it should ever have been so openly treated. But the desire the
Florentines had to be masters of Pisa, did so blind them, that by his order
coming to the gate of Lucca, they left there diverse of their Captains and many
others, to their great dishonor, by means of the said Alphonsoes double
dealing with them.

CHAP. XLIX.
A Republic, if one would preserve it free, has every day need of provision
of new orders, and in regard of his good deserts that way Fabius was termed
Maximus.

THere is a necessity (as it has been said ^other where) that every day in a
vast City such accidents, happen as have need of the Physician: and according
as they are of more consequence, so have they need of the wiser Physician. And
if in any City the like: accidents ever happened, it was in Rome, where there
fell out both strange and unexpected, as was that, when it seemed, that all the
Roman dames had conspired to kill their husbands: so many were there that had
poisoned their husbands, and so many that had prepared the poison to give their
husbands. Such like also was that conspiracy of the Baccanalls, which was
discovered in the time of the Macedonian wars, wherein were entangled many
thousands of men and women: and had it not been revealed, it would have proved
very dangerous for that City, or else if the Romans had not been accustomed to
chastise a whole multitude of offenders: for were there not other exceeding
many evident tokens to show forth the greatness and magnificence of that
Republic and power of her executions, yet would it sufficiently appear by the
quality of the punishment she imposed on the offenders. She never stood upon
it, to put to death by way of justice a whole legion at once, and a whole City,
and to confine eight or ten thousand men, with extraordinary hard conditions,
had it been to one man alone, much more to so many. As it befell those
soldiers, who had fought unfortunately at Canna, whom she confined to Sicily,
and laid this on them, that they should never lodge in any Towns, andshould
always eat standing. But of all the other execution, the most terrible was
that decimation of armies, where by lot throughout a whole army one of ten was
put to death. Nor could there, to chastise a whole multitude, a more horrible
punishment be found: for when a multitude offends, where the author is not
certain, all cannot suffer, because they are too many: and to punish one part,
and let the other go scotfree, were to wrong those they should punish, and
those that escaped free would be encouraged to offend another time. But to put
to death the tenth part by lot, when all deserve it, he that suffers, blames
his evil fortune: and he that escapes, is afraid least that another time the
lot may fall on him, and so is wary not to offend. Those empoisoners then and
Baccanalls were punished as their offenses deserved: And however these diseases
in a republic produce evil effects, yet are they not deadly: for that almost
always there is time given to correct them; but there is hardly any leisure in
those that regard the state, which unless they fall under the hand of some wise
man, ruin the City. There was in Rome, by reason of the liberality the Romans
used in bestowing the Burgeouship and freedom of their City upon strangers, so
many new people borne, that they began to have such a part in the suffnages,
that the government began to vary, and parted with those things and from those
men, by whom it was accustomed to walk. Which Q. Fabius, who was then Censor,
perceiving, the placed all these new people upon whom this disorder depended,
under four Tribes, to the end that being reduced into so small spaces they
might not corrupt the whole City of Rome. This thing was well understood by
Fabius, and by him was there a convenient remedy applied without much change:
which was so well accepted by the City, that they always after gave him the
title of Maximus.

Nicolas Machiavel to Zanobius Buondelmontius and Cosimus Rucelayus health.
I Send you a present, which if it answers not my obligations to you, yet
certainly is it the greatest that Nicolas Machiavel could commend unto you: for
herein I have expressed what I know, and what I have learned by a long
experience, and continnal reading of the affairs of the world. And being that
neither you nor any body else can look for more of me, you have no reason to
complain, I have given you no more. Well may you be sorry at the feebleness of
my understanding, being that these relations of mine here are but weak, and at
the error of my judgment, being that I my self several times in my discourses
am deceived. Which being so, I know not which of us is the less beholding the
one to the other, either I to you, who have forced me to wri^e that which of my
own self I should never have undertaken: or you to me, who have given you but
small satisfaction in my writings. Receive this then so, as things should be
taken by friends, where more regard is had to the good will of him that sends,
then to the worth of what is sent. And believe that herein I have one alone
satisfaction, when I think that, however perchance I may have erred in many
circumstances herein, in this alone I know I have not failed in making choice
of you to whom before all others I may dedicate these my discourses, partly
because in thus doing I have showed some thankfulness for the good turns you
have done me, and partly for that me thinks I have quit the common custom of
those that write, who use always to dedieate all their works to Princes; and
blinded by ambition, and covetousness, attribute to him the commendations of
all virtuous qualities, whereas they ought to blame him for what is faulty in
him. Whereupon, that's I may not run into this error, I have made choice, not of
those that are Princes, but of those that for their many good parts might
deserve well to be so: nor of those that are able to bestow preferments,
honors, nor wealth upon me, but of those who though they are not powerful,
yet are they willing to do well for me: for men, if they would carry a right
judgment, should esteem of those that in themselves are, and not of those that
have the means to be liberal; and so of those that understand how to govern,
and not of those that without understanding have the government of a kingdom.
And writers commend rather Hieron of Siracusa when he was a private man, then
Perse of Macedon, when he was a King: For Hieron wanted nothing else of being a
Prince, then a Principality: that other had no part of a King but a Kingdom.
Enjoy therefore that good or that evil which you your selves have desired: and
if you shall continue still in this error, that these my opinions be acceptable
to you, I shall not fail to proceed in the rest of the story, as in the
beginning I made my promise.

FINIS.
Nicholas Machiavel's PRINCE.

ALSO, The life of Castruccio Castracani of Lucca.

AND The means Duke Valentine used to put to death Vitellozzo Vitelli,
Oliverotto of Fermo, Paul, and the Duke of Gravina.

Translated out of Italian into English, By E. D.

With some Animadversions noting and taxing his errors.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Pakeman, 1661.

To the most noble and Illustrious, JAMES Duke of Lenox, Earl of March, Baron
of Setrington, Darnly, Terbanten, and Methuen, Lord Great Chamberlain and
Admiral of Scotland, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of
his Majesty's most honorable Privy Counsel in both kingdoms.
Poisons are not all of that malignant and noxious quality, that as
destructives of Nature, they are utterly to be abhord; but we find many, nay
most of them have their medicinal uses. This book carries its poison and malice
in it; yet me thinks the judicious peruser may honestly make use of it in the
actions of his life, with advantage. The Lamprey, they say, has a venomous
string runs all along the back of it; take that out, and it is served in for a
choice dish to dainty palates; Epictetus the Philosopher says, Every thing
has two handles, as the fire brand, it may be taken up at one end in the bare
hand without hurt: the other being laid hold on, will cleave to the very flesh,
and the smart of it will pierce even to the heart. Sin has the condition of
the fiery end; the touch of it is wounding with grief unto the soul: nay it
is worse; one sin goes not alone but has many consequences. Your Grace may
find the truth of this in your perusal of this Author: your judgment shall
easily direct you in finding out the good uses of him: I have pointed at his
chiefest errors with my best endeavors, and have devoted them to your Graces
service: which if you shall accept and protect, I shall remain

Your Graces humble and devoted servant, EDWARD DACRES.

The Epistle to the Reader.
QUestionless some men will blame me for making this Author speak in our vulgar
tongue. For his Maxims and Tenants are condemnd of all, as pernicious to all
Christian States, and hurtful to all humane Societies. Herein I shall answer
for my self with the Comoedian, Placere studeo bonis quam plurimis, and minime
multos laedere: I endeavor to give content to the most I can of those that are
well disposed, and no scandal to any. I grant. I find him blamed and condemned:
I do no less my self. Reader, either do thou read him without a prejudicate
opinion, and out of thy own judgment tax his errors; or at least, if thou
can stoop so low, make use of my pains to help thee; I will promise thee this
reward for thy labor: if thou consider well the actions of the world, thou
shall find him much practiced by those that condemn him; who willingly would
walk as thieves do with close lanternes in the night, that they being
undescried; and yet seeing all, might surprise the unwary in the dark. Surely
this book will infect no man: out of the wicked treasure of a man's own wicked
heart, he draws his malice and mischief. From the same flower the Be sucks
honey, from whence the Spider has his poison. And he that means well, shall be
here warnd, where the deceitful man learnes to set his snares. A judge who
has often used to examine thieves, becomes the more expert to sift out their
tricks. If mischief come hereupon, blame not me, nor blame my Author: lay the
saddle on the right horse: but Honey, soit qui mal y pense: let shame light on
him that hatched the mischief.

Nicholas Machiavelli, to the Magnificent Laurence son to Peter of Medicis
health.
THey that desire to ingratiate themselves with a Prince, commonly use to offer
themselves to his view, with things of that nature as such persons take most
pleasure and delight in: whereupon we see they are many times presented with
Horses and Arms, cloth of gold, precious stones, and such like ornaments,
worthy of their greatness. Having then a mind to offer up my self to your
Magnificence, with some testimony of my service to you, I found nothing in my
whole inventory, that I think better of, or more esteem, than the knowledge of
great men's actions, which I have learned by a long experience of modern
affairs, and a continual reading of those of the ancients. Which, now that I
have with great diligence long workt it out, and thoroughly sifted, I commend to
your Magnificence. And however I may well think this work unworthy of your
view; yet such is your humanity, that I doubt not but it shall find acceptance,
considering, that for my part I am not able to tender a greater gift, than to
present you with the means, whereby in a very short time you may be able to
understand all that, which I, in the space of many years, and with many
sufferances and dangers, have made proof and gaind the knowledge of. And this
work I have not set forth either with elegancy of discourse or style, nor with
any other ornament whereby to captivate the reader, as others use, because I
would not have it gain its esteem from elsewhere than from the truth of the
matter, and the gravity of the subject. Nor can this be thought presumption, if
a man of humble and low condition venture to dilate and discourse upon the
governments of Princes; for even as they that with their pensils design out
countries, get themselves into the plains below to consider the nature of the
mountains, and other high places above; and again to consider the plains below,
they get up to the tops of the mountains; in like manner to understand the
nature of the people, it is fit to be a Prince; and to know well the
dispositions of Princes, suits best with the understanding of a subject. Your
Magnificence then may be pleased, to receive this small present, with the same
mind that I send it; which if you shall thoroughly peruse and consider, you
shall perceive therein that I exceedingly wish, that you may attain to that
greatness, which your own fortune, and your excellent endowments promise you:
and if your Magnificence from the very point of your Highness shall sometime
cast your eyes upon these inferior places, you shall see how undeservedly I
undergo an extreme and continual despite of Fortune.

THE PRINCE, Written by Nicholas Machiavelli, Secretary and Citizen of Florence.
CHAP. I.
How many sorts of Principalities there are, and how many ways they are
attained to.

ALl States, all Dominions that have had, or now have rule over men, have been
and are, either Republiques or Principalities. Principalities are either
hereditary, whereof they of the blood of the Lord thereof have long time been
Princes; or else they are new; and those that are new, are either all new, as
was the Duchy of Millan to Francis Sforce; or are as members adjoined to the
hereditary State of the Prince that gains it; as the Kingdom of Naples is to
the King of Spain. These Dominions so gotten, are accustomed either to live
under a Prince, or to enjoy their liberty; and are made conquest of, either
with others forces, or ones own, either by fortune, or by valor.

CHAP. II.
Of Hereditary Principalities.

I Will not here discourse of Republiques, because I have otherwhere treated of
them at large: I will apply my self only to a Principality, and proceed, while
I weave this web, by arguing thereupon, how these Principallities can be
governed and maintained. I say then that in States of inheritance, and
accustomed to the blood of their Princes, there are far fewer difficulties to
keep them, than in the new: for it suffices only not to transgress the course
his Ancestors took, and so afterward to temporise with those accidents that can
happen; that if such a Prince be but of ordinary industry, he shall allwaies be
able to maintain himself in his State, unless by some extraordinary or
excessive power he be deprived thereof; and when he had lost it, upon the least
sinister chance that befalls the usurper, he recovers it again. We have in
Italy the Duke of Ferrara for example hereof, who was of ability to resist the
Venetians, in the year 84. and to withstand Pope Julius in the tenth for no
other reason, than because he had of old continued in that rule; for the
natural Prince has fewer occasions, and less heed to give offense, whereupon
of necessity he must be more beloved; and unless it be that some extravagant
vices of his bring him unto hatred, it is agreeable to reason, that naturally
he should be well beloved by his own subjects: and in the antiquity and
continuation of the Dominion, the remembrances and occasions of innovations are
quite extinguished: for evermore one change leaves a kind of breach or dent, to
fasten the building of another.

CHAP. III.
Of mixed Principalities.

BUt the difficulties consist in the new Principality; and first, if it be not
all new, but as^a member, so that it may be termed altogether as mixed; and the
variations thereof proceed in the first place from a natural difficulty, which
we commonly find in all new Principalities; for men do willingly change their
Lord, believing to better their condition; and this belief causes them to take
arms against him that rules over them, whereby they deceive themselves,
because they find after by experience, they have made it worse: which depends
upon another natural and ordinary necessity, forcing him always to offend
those, whose Prince he newly becomes, as well by his soldiers he is put to
entertain upon them as by many other injuries, which a new conquest draws along
with it; in such manner as thou find all those thine enemies, whom thou have
endammaged in the seizing of that Principality, and afterward can not keep
them thy friends that have seated thee in it, for not being able to satisfy
them according to their expectations, nor put in practice strong remedies
against them, being obliged to them. For however one be very well provided with
strong armies, yet has he always need of the favor of the inhabitants in the
Country, to enter thereinto. For these reasons, Lewis the twelfth, King of
France, suddenly took Milan, and as soon lost it; and the the first time
Lodwick his own forces served well enough to wrest it out of his hands; for
those people that had opened him the gates, finding themselves deceived of
their opinion, and of that future good which they had promised themselves,
could not endure the distastes the new Prince gave them. True it is, that
Coutreys that have rebelled again the second time, being recovered, are harder
lost; for their Lord, taking occasion from their rebellion, is less respective
of persons, but cares only to secure himself, by punishing the delinquents, to
clear all suspicions, and to provide for himself where he thinks he is weakest:
so that if to make France lose Milan the first time, it was enough for Duke
Lodwick to make some small stir only upon the confines; yet afterward, before
they could make him lose it the second time, they had need of the whole world
together against him, and that all his armies should be wasted and driven out
of Italy; which proceeded from the forenamed causes: however though both the
first and second time it was taken from him. The general causes of the first
we have treated of; it remains now that we see those of the second; and set
down the remedies that he had, or any one else can have that should chance to
be in those terms he was, whereby he might be able to maintain himself better
in his conquest than the King of France did. I say therefore, that these States
which by Conquest are annexed to the ancient states of their conquerors, are
either of the same province and the same language, or otherwise; and when they
are, it is very easy to hold them, especially when they are not used to live
free; and to enjoy them securely, it is enough to have extinguished the Princes
line who ruled over them: For in other matters, allowing them their ancient
conditions, and there being not much difference of manners betwixt them, men
ordinarily live quiet enough; as we have seen that Burgundy did, Britany,
Gascouy, and Normandy, which so long time continued with France: for however
there be some difference of language between them, yet can they easily comport
one with another; and whosoever makes the conquest of them, meaning to hold
them, must have two regards; the first, that the race of their former Prince be
quite extinguished; the other, that he change nothing, neither in their laws
nor taxes, so that in a very short time they become one entire body with their
ancient Principality. But when any States are gaind in a Province disagreeing
in language, manners, and orders, here are the difficulties, and here is there
need of good fortune, and great industry to maintain them; and it would be one
of the best and livelyest remedies, for the Conqueror to go in person and
dwell there; this would make the possession here of more secure and durable; as
the Turk has done in Greece, who among all the other courses taken by him for
to hold that State, had he not gone thither himself in person to dwell, it had
never been possible for him to have kept it: for abiding there, he sees the
disorders growing in their beginnings, and forthwith can remedy them; whereas
being not there present, they are heard of when they are grown to some height,
and then is there no help for them. Moreover, the Province is not pillaged by
the officers thou sendest thither: the subjects are much satisfied of having
recourse to the Prince near at hand, whereupon have they more reason to love
him, if they mean to be good; and intending to do otherwise, to fear him: and
foreign Princes will be well aware how they invade that State; insomuch, that
making his abode there, he can very hardly lose it. Another remedy, which is
also a better, is to send Colonies into one or two places, which may be as it
were the keys of that State; for it is necessary either to do this, or to
maintain there many horse and foot. In these colonies the Prince makes no great
expense, and either without his charge, or at a very small rate, he may both
send and maintain them; and gives offense only to them from whom he takes their
fields and houses, to bestow them on those new inhabitants who are but a very
small part of that State; and those that he offends, remaining dispersed and
poor, can never hurt him: and all the rest on one part, have no offense given
them, and therefore a small matter keeps them in quiet: on the other side, they
are wary not to err, for fear it befalls not them, as it did those that were
dispoild. I conclude then, that those colonies that are not chargeable, are the
more trusty, give the less offense; and they that are offended, being but poor
and scattered, can do but little harm, as I have said; for it is to be noted,
that men must either be dallyed and flattered withal, or else be quite crushed;
for they revenge themselves of small damages; but of great ones they are not
able; so that when wrong is done to any man, it ought so to be done, that it
need fear no return of revenge again, But in lieu of Colonies, by maintaining
soldiers there, the expense is great; for the whole revenues of that State are
to be spent in the keepingof it; so the conquest proves but a loss to him that
has got it, and endammages him rather; for it hurts that whole State to remove
the army from place to place, of which annoyance every one has a feeling, and
so becomes enemy to thee; as they are enemies, I wis, who are outraged by thee
in their own houses, whenever they are able to do thee mischief. Every way
then is this guard unprofitable. Besides, he that is in a different Province,
(as it is said) should make himself Head and defender of his less powerful
neighbors, and devise always to weaken those that are more mighty therein, and
take care that upon no chance there enter not any foreiner as mighty as
himself; for it will always come to pass, that they shall be brought in by
those that are discontented, either upon ambition, or fear; as the E^olians
brought the Romans into Greece; and they were brought into every country they
came, by the Natives; and the course of the matter is, that so soon as a
powerful Stranger enters a country, all those that are the less powerful
there, cleave to him, provoked by an envy they bear him that is more mighty
than they; so that for these of the weaker sort, he may easily gain them
without any pains: for presently all of them together very willingly make one
lump with that he has gotten: He has only to beware that these increase not
their strengths, nor their authorities, and so he shall easily be able by his
own forces, and their assistances, to take down those that are mighty, and
remain himself absolute arbitre of that Country. And he that plays not well
this part, shall quickly lose what he has gotten; and while he holds it, shall
find therein a great many troubles and vexations. The Romans in the Provinces
they seized on, observed well these points, sent colonies thither, entertained
the weaker sort, without augmenting any thing their power, abated the forces of
those that were mighty, and permitted not any powerful forreiner to gain too
much reputation there. And I will content my self only with the country of
Greece for example hereof. The Achayans and Etolians were entertained by them,
the Macedons kingdom was brought low, Antiochus was driven thence, nor ever
did the Achayans or Etolians deserts prevail so far for them, that they would
ever promise to enlarge their State, nor the persuasions of Philip induce them
ever to be his friends, without bringing him lower; nor yet could Antiocbus his
power make them ever consent that he should hold any State in that country:
for the Romans did in these cases that which all judicious Princes ought to do,
who are not only to have regard unto all present michiefs, but also to the
future, and to provide for those with all industry; for by taking order for
those when they are asarre off, it is easy to prevent them; but by delaying
till they come near hand to thee, the remedy comes too late; for this malignity
is grown incurable: and it befalls this, as the physicians say of the hectic
fever, that in the beginning it is easily cured, but hardly known; but in the
course of time, not having been known in the beginning, nor cured, it becomes
easy to know, but hard to cure. Even so falls it out in matters of State; for
by knowing it aloof off (which is given only to a wise man to do) the mischiefs
that then spring up, are quickly helped; but when, for not having been
perceived, they are suffered to increase, so that every one sees them, there is
then no cure for them: therefore the Romans, seeing these inconvenients af^ar
off, always prevented them, and never sufferd them to follow; for to escape a
war, because they knew that a war is not undertaken, but deferred for another
advantage; therefore would they rather make a war with Philip and Antiochus in
Greece, to the end it should not afterward be made with them in Italy, though
for that time they were able to avoid both the one and the other, which they
thought not good to do: nor did they approve of that saying that is ordinarily
in the mouths of the Sages of our days, to enjoy the benefits of the present
time; but that rather, to take the benefit of their valor and wisdom; for time
drives forward every thing, and may bring with it as well good as evil, and
evil as good. But let us return to France, and examine if any of the things
prescribed have been done by them: and we will speak of Lewis (...) not of
Charles, as of whom by reason (...)he long possession he held in Italy we
better knew the ways he went: and you shall see he did the clean contrary to
what should have been done by him that would maintain a State of different
Language and conditions. King Lewis was brought into Italy by the Venetians
ambition, who would have gotten for their shares half the State of Lombardy: I
will not blame his coming, or the course he took, because he had a mind to
begin to set a foot in Italy; but having not any friends in the country, all
gates being barred against him, by reason of King Charles his carriage there,
he was constrained to join friendship with those he could; and this
consideration well taken, would have proved lucky to him, when in the rest of
his courses he had not committed any error. The King then having conquered
Lombardy, recovered presently all that reputation that Charles had lost him;
Genua yielded to him, the Florentines became friends with him; the Marquess of
Mantua, the the Duke of Ferrara, the Bentivolti, the Lady of Furli, the Lord of
Faenza, Pesaro Rimino, Camerino, and Piombino, the Luc^heses, Pisans and
Sieneses, every one came and offered him friendship: then might the Venetians
consider the rashness of the course they had taken, who, only to get into their
hands two Towns in Lombardy, made the King Lord of two thirds in Italy. Let
any man now consider with how small difficulty could the King have maintained
his reputation in Italy, if he had followed these aforenamed rules, and secured
and defended those his friends, who because their number was great, and they
weak and fearful, some of the Church, and others of the Venetians were always
forced to hold with him, and by their means he might easily have been able to
secure himself against those that were mightiest: but he was no sooner got into
Milan, than he took a quite wrong course, by giving aid to Pope Alexander, to
seize upon Romania, and perceived not that by this resolution he weakened
himself, ruining his own friends, and those had cast themselves into his bosom,
making the Church puissant, by adding to their Spiritual power, whereby they
gaind their authority, and so much temporal estate. And having once got out of
the way, he was constrained to go on forward; insomuch as to stop Alexanders
ambition, and that he should not become Lord of all Tuscany, of force he was to
come into Italy: and this sufficed him not, to have made the Church mighty, and
taken away his own friends; but for the desire he had to get the Kingdom of
Naples, he divided it with the King of Spain: and where before he was the sole
arbitre of Italy, he brought in a competitor, to the end that all the ambitious
persons of that country, and all that were ill affected to him, might have
otherwhere to make their recourse: and whereas he might have left in that
Kingdom some Vice King of his own, he took him from thence, to place another
there, that might afterward chase him thence. It is a thing indeed very natural
and ordinary, to desire to be of the getting hand: and always when men
undertake it, if they can effect it, they shall be praised for it, or at least
not blamed: but when they are notable, and yet will undertake it, here lies the
blame, here is the error committed. If France then was able with her own power
to assail the Kingdom of Naples, she might well have done it; but not being
able, she should not have divided it: and if the division she made of Lombardy
with the Venetians, deserved some excuse, thereby to set one foot in Italy; yet
this merits blame, for not being excused by that necessity. Lewis then
committed these five faults; extinguished the feebler ones, augmented the State
of another that was already powerful in Italy, brought thereinto a very
puissant forreiner, came not thither himself to dwell there, nor planted any
colonies there: which faults while he lived, he could not but be the worse for;
yet all could not have gone so ill, had he not committed the sixth, to take from
the Venetians their State; for if he had not enlarged the Churches territories
nor brought the Spaniard into Italy, it had bin necessary to take them lower;
but having first taken those other courses, he should never have given way to
their destruction; for while they had been strong, they would always have kept
the others off from venturing on the conquest of Lombardy. For the Venetians
would never have given thoir consents thereto, unless they should have been
made Lords of it themselves; and the others would never have taken it from
France, to give it them: and then they would never have dared to go and set
upon them both together. And if any one should say, that King Lewis yielded
Romania to Alexander, and the Kingdom of Naples to Spain, to avoid a war; I
answer with the reasons above alleged, that one should never suffer any
disorder to follow, for avoiding of a war; for that war is not saved, but put
off to thy disadvantage. And if any others argue, that the King had given his
word to the Pope, to do that exploit for him, for dissolving of his marriage,
and for giving the Cardinals Cap to him of Roan; I answer with that which
hereafter I shall say touching Princes words, how they ought to be kept. King
Lewis then lost Lombardy, for not having observed some of those terms which
others used, who have possessed themselves of countries, and desired to keep
them. Nor is this any strange thing, but very ordinary and reasonable: and to
this purpose I spoke at Nantes with that French Cardinal, when Valentine (for
so ordinarily was Caesar Borgia Pope Alexanders son called) made himself master
of Romania; for when the Cardinal said to me, that the Italians understood not
the feats of war; I answered, the Frenchmen understood not matters of State:
for had they been well versed therein, they would never have suffered the
Church to have grown to that greatness. And by experience we have seen it, that
the power hereof in Italy, and that of Spain also, was caused by France, and
their own ruin proceeded from themselves. From whence a general rule may be
taken, which never, or very seldom fails, That he that gives the means to
another to become powerful, ruins himself; for that power is caused by him
either with his industry, or with his force; and as well the one as the other
of these two is suspected by him that is grown puissant.

CHAP. IV.
Wherefore Darius his Kingdom taken by Alexder, rebelled not against
Alexanders Successors after his death.

THe difficulties being considered, which a man has in the maintaining of a
State new gotten, some might marvel how it came to pass, that Alexander the
great subdued all Asia in a few years; and having hardly possessed himself of
it, died; whereupon it seemed probable that all that State should have
rebelled; nevertheless his Successors kept the possession of it, nor found they
other difficulty in holding it, than what arose among themselves through their
own ambition. I answer, that all the Principalities, whereof we have memory
left us, have been governed in two several manners; either by a Prince, and all
the rest Vassals, who as ministers by his favor and allowance, do help to
govern that Kingdom; or by a Prince and by Barons, who not by their Princes
favor, but by the antiquity of blood hold that degree. And these kinds of
Barons have both states of their own, and Vassals who acknowledge them for
their Lords; and bare them a true natural affection. Those States that are
governed by a Prince and by Vassals, have their Prince ruling over them with
more authority: for in all his country, there is none acknowledged for
superior, but himself: and if they yield obedience to any one else, it is but
as to his minister and officer, nor bear they him any particular good will.
The examples of these two different Governments now in our days, are, the
Turk, and the King of France. The Turks whole Monarchy is governed by one Lord,
and the rest are all his Vassals; and dividing his whole Kingdom into diverse
Sangiacques or Governments, he sends several thither, and those he chops and
changes, as he pleases. But the King of France is seated in the midst of a
multitude of Lords, who of old have been acknowledged for such by their
subjects, and being beloved by them, enjoy their preheminencies; nor can the
King take their States from them without danger. He then that considers the one
and the other of these two States, shall find difficulty in the conquest of the
Turks State; but when once it is subdued, great facility to hold it. The
reasons of these difficulties in taking of the Turks Kingdom from him, are,
because the Invader cannot be called in by the Princes of that Kingdom, nor
hope by the rebellion of those which he has about him, to be able to
facilitate his enterprise: which proceeds from the reasons aforesaid; for for
they being all his slaves, and obliged to him, can more hardly be corrupted;
and put case they were corrupted, little profit could he get by it, they not
being able to draw after them any people, for the reasons we have showed:
whereupon he that assails the Turk, must think to find him united; and must
rather rely upon his own forces, than in the others disorders: but when once
he is overcome and broken in the field, so that he cannot repair his armies,
there is nothing else to be doubted than the Royal blood, which being once
quite out, there is none else left to be feared, none of the others having any
credit with the people. And as the conqueror before the victory could not hope
in them; so after it, ought he not to fear them. The contrary falls out in
Kingdoms governed as is that of France: for it is easy to be entered by the
gaining of any Baron in the Kingdom; for there are always some malcontents to
be found, and those that are glad of innovation. Those for the reasons alleged
are able to open thee a way into that State, and to further thy victory, which
afterward to make good to thee, draws with it exceeding many difficulties, as
well with those that have aided thee, as those thou have suppressed. Nor is it
enough for thee to root out the Princes race: for there remain still those
Lords who quickly will be be the ringleaders of new changes; and in case thou
art not able to content these, nor extinguish them, thou losest that State,
whenever the occasion is offered. Now if thou shall consider what sort of
government that of Darius was, thou shall find it like to the Turks dominion,
and therefore Alexander was necessitated first to defeat him utterly, and drive
him out of the field; after which victory Darius being dead, that State was
left secure to Alexander, for the reasons we treated of before: and his
successors, had they continued in amity, might have enjoyed it at ease: nor
ever arose there in that Kingdom other tumults, than those they themselves
stirred up. But of the States that are ordered and grounded as that of France,
it is impossible to become master at such ease: and from hence grew the
frequent rebellions of Spain, France, and Greece against the Romans, by reason
of the many Principalities those States had: whereof while the memory lasted,
the Romans were always doubtful of the possession of them; but the memory of
them being quite wiped out, by the power and continuance of the Empire, at
length they enjoyed it securely; and they also were able afterward fighting
one with another, each of one them to draw after them the greater part of those
provinces, according as their authority had gained them credit therein: and
that because the blood of their ancient Lords was quite spent, they
acknowledged no other but the Romans. By the consideration then of these
things, no man will marvel that Alexander had so little trouble to keep
together the State of Asia; and that others have had such great difficulties to
maintain their conquest, as Pyrrhus, and many others; which proceeds not from
the small or great valor of the conqueror, but from the difference of the
subject.

CHAP. V.
In what manner Cities and Principalities are to be governed, which, before
they were conquered, lived under their own Laws.

WHen those States that are conquered, as it is said, have been accustomed to
live under their own Laws, and in liberty, there are three ways for a man to
hold them. The first is to demolish all their strong places; the other,
personally to go and dwell there; the third, to suffer them to live under
their own Laws, drawing from them some tribute, and creating the rein an
Oligarchy, that may continue it in thy service: for that State being created by
that Prince, knows it cannot consist without his aid and force, who is like to
do all he can to maintain it; and with more facility is a City kept by means
of her own Citizens, which has been used before to live free, than by any
other way of keeping. We have for example the Spartans and the Romans; the
Spartans held Athens and Thebes, creating there an Oligarchy: yet they lost it.
The Romans to be sure of Capua, Carthage, and Numantia, dismantell'd them
quite, and so lost them not: they would have kept Greece as the Spartans had
held them, leaving them free, and letring them enjoy their own Laws; and it
prospered not with them: so that they were forced to deface many Cities of that
province to hold it. For in truth there is not a surer way to keep them under,
than by demolishments; and whoever becomes master of a City used to live free,
and dismantells it not, let him look himself to be ruined by it; for it
always in time of rebellion takes the name of libetry for refuge, and the
ancient orders it had; which neither by length of time, nor for any favors
afforded them, are ever forgotten; and for any thing that can be done, or
ordered, unless the inhabitants be disunited and dispersed, that name is never
forgotten, nor those customs: but present^ly in every chance recourse is
thither made: as Pisa did after so many years that she had been subdued by the
Florentines. But when the Cities or the Provinces are accustomed to live under
a Prince, and that whole race is quite extirpated; on one part being used to
obey; on the other, not having their old Prince; they agree not to make one
from among themselves: they know not how to live in liberty, in such manner
that they are much slower to take arms; and with more facility may a Prince
gain them, and secure himself of them. But in Republiques there is more life
in them, more violent hatred, more earnest desire of revenge; nor does the
remembrance of the ancient liberty ever leave them, or suffer them to rest: so
that the safest way, is, either to ruin them, or dwell among them.

CHAP. VI.
Of new Principalities, that are conquered by ones own arms and valor.

LEt no man marvel, if in the discourse I shall make of new Principalities,
both touching a Prince, and touching a State, I shall allege very famous
examples: for seeing men almost always walk in the paths beaten by others,
and proceed in their actions by imitation; and being that others ways cannot
be exactly followed, nor their virtues, whose parterue thou set'st before
thee, attain^d unto; a wise man ought always to tread the footsteps of the
worthiest persons, and imitate those that have been the most excellent: to the
end that if his virtue arrive not thereto, at least if may yield some savor
thereof, and do as good Archers use, who thinking the place they intend to
hit, too far distant, and knowing how far the strength of their bow will
carry, they lay their aim a great deal higher than the mark; not for to hit
so high with their arrow, but to be able with the help of so high an aim to
reach the place they shoot at. I say, that in Principalities wholly new, where
there is a new Prince, there is more and less difficulty in maintaining them,
as the virtue of their Conqueror is greater or lesser. And because this
success, to become a Prince of a private man, presupposes either virtue, or
fortune; me thinks the one and other of these two things in part should
mitigate many difficulties; however he that has less stood upon fortune, has
maintained himself the better. Moreover it some what facilitates the matter in
that the Prince is constrained, because he has not other dominions, in person
to come and dwell there. But to come to these who by their owu virtues, and not
by fortune, attained to be Princes; the excellentest of these are Moses, Cyrus,
Romulus, Theseus, and such like; and though of Moses we are not to reason, he
only executing the things that were commanded him by God; yet merits he well
to be admired, were it only for that grace that made him worthy to converse
with God. But considering Cyrus, and the others, who either got or founded
Kingdoms, we shall find them all admirable; and if there particular actions
and Laws be thoroughly weighed, they will not appear much differing from those
of Moses, which he received from so Sovraigne an instructor. And examining
their lives and actions, it will not appear, that they had other help of
fortune, than the occasion, which presented them with the matter wherein they
might introduce what form they then pleased; and without that occasion, the
virtue of their mind had been extinguished; and without that virtue, the
occasion had been offered in vain. It was then necessary for Moses to find the
people of Israel slaves in Egypt, and oppressed by the Egyptians, to the end
that they to get out of their thraldom, should be willing to follow him. It
was fit that Romulus should not be kept in Albia, but exposed presently after
his birth, that he might become King of Rome, and founder of that City. There
was need that Cyrus should find the Persians discontented with the Medes
government, and the Medes delicate and effeminate through their long peace.
Theseus could not make proof of his virtue, had not he found the Athenians
dispersed. These occasions therefore made these men happy, and their excellent
virtue made the occasion be taken notice of, whereby their country became
enobled, and exceeding fortunate. They, who by virtuous ways, like unto these,
become Princes, attain the Principality with difficulty, but hold it with much
ease; and the difficulties they find in gaining the Principality, arise partly
from the new orders and courses they are forced to bring in, to lay the
foundation of their State, and work their own security. And it is to be
considered, how there is not any thing harder to take in hand, nor doubtfuller
to succeed, nor more dangerous to manage, than to be the chief in bringing in
new orders; for this Chief finds all those his enemies, that thrive upon the
old orders; and has but luke warm defenders of all those that would do well
upon the new orders, which lukewarm temper proceeds partly from fear of the
opposers who have the laws to their advantage; partly from the incredulity of
the men who truly believe not a new thing, unless there be some certain proof
given them thereof. Whereupon it arises, that whenever they that are
adversaries, take the occasion to assail, they do it factiously; and these
others defend but cooly, so that their whole party altogether runs a hazard.
Therefore it is necessary, being we intend thoroughly to discourse this part, to
examine if these innovators stand of themselves, or if they depend upon others;
that is, if to bring their work to effect, it be necessary they should entreat,
or be able to constrain; in the first case they always succeed ill, and bring
nothing to pass; but when they depend of themselves, and are able to force,
then seldom it is that they hazard. Hence came it that all the prophets that
were armed, prevailed; but those that were unarmed, were too weak: for besides
what we have alleged, the nature of the people is changeable, and easy to be
persuaded to a matter; but it is hard also to settle them in that persuasion.
And therefore it behooves a man to be so provided, that when they believe no no
longer, he may be able to compel them thereto by force. Moses, Cyrus, Theseus,
and Romulus would never have been able to cause their Laws long to be obeyed,
had they been disarmed; as in our times it befell Friar Jerome Savanarola, who
perished in his new constitutions, when the multitude began not to believe him;
neither had he the means to keep them firm, that had believed; not to force
belief in them that had not believed him. Wherefore such men as these, in
their proceedings find great difficulty, and all their dangers are in the way,
and these they must surmount by their virtue; but having once mastered them,
and beginning to be honored by all, when they have rooted those out that envied
their dignities, they remain powerful, secure, honorable, and happy. To these
choice examples, I will add one of less remark; but it shall hold some
proportion withthem, and this shall suffice me for all others of this kind,
which is Hiero the Sitacusan. He of a private man, became Prince of Siracusa,
nor knew he any other aid of fortune than the occasion: for the Siracusans
being oppressed, made choice of him for their Captain, whereupon he deserved to
be made their Prince: and he was of such virtue even in his private fortune,
that he who writes of him, says, he wanted nothing of reigning, but a Kingdom;
this man extinguished all the old soldiery, ordaind the new; left the old
allyances, entertained new; and as he had friendship, and soldiers that were
his own, upon that ground he was able to build any edifice; so that he endured
much trouble in gaining, and suffered but little in maintaining.

CHAP. VII.
Of new Principalities, gotten by fortune, and other men's forces.

THey who by fortune only become Princes of private men, with small pains
attain to it, but have much a do to maintain themselves in it; and find no
difficulty at all in the way, because they are carried thither with wings: but
all the difficulties arise there, after they are placed in them. And of such
sort are those who have an estate given them for money, by the favor of some
one that grants it them: as it befell many in Greece, in the cities of Jonia,
and Hellespont; where diverse Princes were made by Darius, as well for his own
safety as his glory; as also them that were made Emperors; who from private men
by corrupting the soldiers, attaind to the Empire. These subsist merely upon
the will, and fortune of those that have advanced them; which are two voluble
and unsteady things; and they neither know how, nor are able to continue in
that dignity: they know not how, because unless it be a man of great
understanding and virtue, it is not probable that he who has always lived a
private life, can know how to command: neither are they able, because they have
not any forces that can be friendly or faithful to them. Moreover those States
that suddenly fall into a man's hands, as all other things in nature that spring
and grow quickly, cannot well have taken root, nor have made their
correspondencies so firm, but that the first storm that takes them, ruins
them; in case these, who (as it is said) are thus on a sudden clambred up to be
Princes, are not of that worth and virtue as to know how to prepare themselves
to maintain that which chance has cast into their bosoms, and can afterward
lay those foundations, which others have cast before they were Princes. For the
one and the other of these ways about the attaining to be a Prince, by Virtue,
or by Fortune, I will allege you two examples which have been in the days of
our memory. These were Francis Sforza, and Caesar Borgia; Francis by just means
and with a great deal of virtue, of a private man got to be Duke of Millan; and
that which with much pains he had gaind, he kept with sma(...)do. On the other
side Caesar Borgia (commonly termed Duke Valentine) got his state by his
Fathers fortune, and with the same lost it; however that for his own part no
pains was spared, nor any thing omitted, which by a discreet and valorus man
ought to have been done, to fasten his roots in those Estates, which others
arms or fortune had bestowed on him; for (as it was formerly said) he that
lays not the foundations first, yet might be able by means of his extraordinary
virtues to lay them afterward, however it be with the great trouble of the
architect, and danger of the edifice. If therefore we consider all the Dukes
progresses, we may perceive how great foundations he had cast for his future
power, which I judge a matter not superflnous to run over; because I should not
well know, what better rules I might give to a new Prince, than the pattern of
his actions; and however the courses he toook, availd him not, yet was it not
his fault, but it proceeded from an extraordinary and extreme malignity of
fortune. Pope Alexander the sixth, desiring to make the Duke his son a great
man, had a great many difficulties, present and future: first he saw no way
there was whereby he might be able to make him Lord of any State, that was not
the Churches; and if he turned to take that from the Church, he knew that the
Duke of Milan, and the Venetians would never agree to it; for Faenza and
Riminum were under the Venetians protection. Moreover, he saw that the arms of
Italy, and those whereof in particular he might have been able to make some
use, were in their hands, who ought to fear the Popes greatness: and therefore
could not any ways rely upon them: being all in the Orsins and Colonies hands,
and those of their faction. It was necessary then, that those matters thus
appointed by them should be disturbed, and the States of Italy disordered, to
be able safely to master part of them, which he then sound easy to do, seeing
the Venetians upon three considerations had used the means to bring the French
men back again into Italy: which he not only did not withstand, but furthered,
with a resolution of King Lewis his ancient marriage. The King then past into
Italy with the Venetians aid, and Alexanders consent; nor was he sooner arrived
in Milan, than the Pope had soldiers from him for the service of Romania, which
was quickly yielded up to him upon the reputation of the Kings forces. The Duke
then having made himself master of Romania, and beaten the Colonies, desiring
to hold it, and proceed for ward, two things hindered him: the one, his own
soldiers, which he thought were not true to him; the other, the French men's
good wills; that is to say, he feared that the Princes soldiers, whereof he had
served himself, would fail him, and not only hinder his conquest, but take from
him what he had gotten; and that the King also would serve him the same turn.
He had experience of the Orsini upon an occasion, when after the taking of
Faenza he assaulted Bolonia, to which assault he saw them go very cold. And
touching the King, he discovered his mind, when having taken the Duchy of
Vrbin, he invaded Tuscany; from which action the King made him retire;
whereupon the Duke resolved to depend no more upon fortune, and other men's
arms. And the first thing he did, was, to weaken the Orsini, and Colonnies
factions in Rome: for he gained all their adherents that were gentlemen, giving
them large allowances, and honoring them according to their qualities with
charges and governments: so that in a few months the good will they bare to the
parties was quite extinguished, and wholly bent to the Duke. After this, he
waited an occasion to root out the Orsini, having before dispersed those of the
family of Colonnia, which fell out well to his hand; and he used it better. For
the Orsini being too late aware, that the Dukes and the Churches greatness was
their destruction, held a Council together in a dwelling house of theirs in the
country adjoining to Perusia. From thence grew the rebellion of Vrbin, and the
troubles of Romania, and many other dangers befell the Duke, which he overcame
all with the help of the French: and having regained his reputation, trusting
neither France, nor any foreign forces, to the end he might not be put to make
trial of them again, he betook himself to his sleghts; and he knew so well to
disguise his intention, that the Orsins, by the mediation of Paul Orsine, were
reconciled to him, to whom the Duke was no way wanting in all manner of
courtesies whereby to bring them into security, giving them rich garments,
money, and horses, til their own simplicities led them all to to Sinigcllia,
into his hands. These heads being then plucked off, and their partisans made
his friends, the Duke had laid very good foundations, to build his own
greatness on, having in his power all Romania with the Duchy of Vrbin, and
gained the hearts of those people, by beginning to give them some relish of
their well being. And because this part is worthy to be taken notice of, and to
be imitated by others, I will not let it escape. The Duke, when he had taken
Romania, finding it had been under the hands of poor Lords-who had rather
pillaged their subjects, than chastis'd or amended them, giving them more cause
of discord, than of peace and union, so that the whole country was fraught
with robberies, quarrels, and other sorts of insolences; thought the best way
to reduce them to terms of pacification, and obedience to a Princely power,
was, to give them some good government: and therefore he set over them one
Remiro D' Orco, a cruel hasty man, to whom he gave an absolute power. This man
in a very short time settled peace and union amongst them with very great
reputation. Afterward the Duke thought such excessive authority served not so
well to his purpose, and doubting it would grow odious, he erected a civil
Judicature in the midst of the country, where one excellent Judge did Preside,
and thither every City sent their Advocate: and because he knew the rigors past
had bred some hatred against him, to purge the minds of those people, and to
gain them wholly to himself, he purposed to show, that if there was any cruelty
used, it proceeded not from any order of his, but from the harsh disposition of
his Officers. Whereupon laying hold on him, at this occasion, he caused his
head to be struck off one morning early in the market place at Cesena, where he
was left upon a gibbet, with a bloody sword by his side; the cruelty of which
spectacle for a while satisfied and amazed those people. But to return from
whence we have digressd: I say, that the Duke finding himself very strong, and
in part out of doubt of the present dangers, because he was armed after his own
manner, and had in some good measure suppressed those forces, which, because of
their vicinity, were able to annoy him, he wanted nothing else to go on with
his Conquest, but the consideration of of France: for he knew, that the King,
who now, though late, was advised of his error, would never suffer him: and
hereupon he began to seek after new allyances, and to waver with France, when
the French came toward Naples against the Spaniards, who then besieged
Gagetta; and his design was only to be out of their danger, which had been
effected for him, had Pope Alexander lived. And thus were his businesses
carried touching his present estate. As for the future, he had reason to doubt
lest the new successor to the Papacy would not be his friend, and would
endeavor to take that from him that Alexander had bestowed on him; and he
thought to provide for this four ways: First by rooting out the races of all
those Lords he had dispoyled, whereby to take those occasions from the Pope.
Secondly, by gaining (...) the gentlemen of Rome, whereby he might (...) able
with those to keep the Pope in some awe. Thirdly, to make the College of
Cardinals as much at his devotion as possibly might be. Fourthly, by making of
so large Conquests, before the Popes death, as that he might be able of himself
to withstand the first fury of his enemies. Three of these four at Pope-
Alexanders death he had effected, and the fourth (...) had near brought to a
point. For of those Lords he had stripped, he put to death as many as he could
come at, and very few escaped him: he gaind him the Roman Gentlemen: and in the
College he had made a great faction. And touching his new Conquest, he had a
design to become Lord of Tuscany. And he had possessed himself already of
Perusia, and Pombin, and taken protection of Pisa: and so soon as he should
have cast off his respect to France (which now he meant to hold no longer)
being the French were now driven out of the Kingdom of Naples by the
Spaniards, so that each of them was forced to buy his friendship at any terms;
he was then to leap into Pisa. After this Lucca and Siena were presently to
fall to him, partly for envy to the Florentines, and partly for fear. The
Florentines had no way to escape him: all which, had it succeeded with him, as
without question it had, the very same year that Alexander died, he had made
himself master of so great forces, and such reputation, that he would bave been
able to have stood upon his own bottom, without any dependence of fortune, or
resting upon others helps, but only upon his own strength and valor. But
Alexander died five years after that he had begun to draw forth his sword: and
left him settled only in the State of Romania, with all his other designs in
the air, sick unto death, between two very strong armies of his enemies; and
yet was there in this Duke such a spirit and courage: and he understood so
well, how men are to be gaind, and how to be lost, and so firm were the grounds
he had laid in a short time, that, had he not had those armies upon his back,
or had been in health, he would have carried through his purpose in spite of
all opposition; and that the foundations he grounded upon were good, it appeard
in that Romania held for him above a month, and he remained secure in Rome,
though even at deaths door: and however the Baglioni, Vitelli, and Orsini came
into Rome; yet found they none would take their parts against him. And this he
was able to have effected, that if he could not have made him Pope whom he
would, he could have hindered him that he would not should be Pope. But had he
been in health when Alexander died, every thing had gone easily with him; and
he told me on that day that Julius the second was created Pope, that he had
forethought on all that which could happen, in case his father chanced to dye,
and for every thing provided its remedy, this only excepted, that he foresaw
not that he himself should at the same time be brought unto deaths door also.
Having then collected all the Dukes actions, me thinks I could not well blame
him, but rather (as I have here done) set him as a pattern to be followed by
all those who by fortune and others arms have been exalted to an Empire. For
he being of great courage, and having lofty designs, could not carry himself
otherwise; and the only obstacle of his purposes was the brevity of Alexanders
life, and his own sickness. Whoever therefore deemes it necessary in his
entrance into a new Principality, to secure himself of his enemies, and gain
him friends, to overcome either by force, or by cunning, to make himself
beloved, or feared of his people, be followed and reverenced by his soldiers,
to root out those that can, or owe thee any hurt, to change the ancient orders
with new ways, to be severe, and yet acceptable, magnanimous, and liberal; to
extinguish the unfaithful soldiery, and create new; to maintain to himself the
armities of Kings and Princes, so that they shall either with favor benefit
thee, or be wary how to offend thee; cannot find more fresh and lively examples
than the actions of this man. He deserves to be found fault withal for the
creation of Julius the second, wherein an evil choice was made for him: for, as
it is said, not being able to make a Pope to his mind, he could have withheld
any one from being Pope; and should never have consented that any one of those
Cardinals should have got the Papacy, whom he had ever done harm to; or who
having attaind the Pontificate were likely to be afraid of him: because men
ordinarily do hurt either for fear, or hatred. Those whom he had offended, were
among others, he who had the title of St. Peter ad Vincula, Colonna, Sr.
George, and Ascanius; all the others that were in possibility of the Popedom,
were such as might have feared him rather, except the Cardinal of Roan, and the
Spaniards; these by reason of their alliance and obligation with him, the other
because of the power they had, having the Kingdom of France on their party;
wherefore the Duke above all things should have created a Spanyard Pope, and in
case he could not have done that, he should have agreed that Roan should have
been, and not St. Peter ad Vincula. And whoever believes, that with great
personages new benefits blot on the remembrance of old injuries, is much
deceived. The Duke therefore in this election, was the cause of this own ruin
at last.

Till we come to this seventh Chapter, I find not any thing much
blameworthy, unless it be on ground he lays in the second Chapter; whereupon
he builds most of thiis Fabric, viz. That Subjects must either be dallyed or
flatterd withal, or quite crushed. Whereby our Author advises his Prince to
support his authority with two Cardinal Virtues, Dissimulation and Cruelty. He
considers not herein that the head is but a member of the body, though the
principal; and the end of the parts is the good of the whole. And here he goes
against himself in the twenty sixth Chapter of his Rep. l. 1. where he blames
Philip of Macedon for such courses, terming them very cruel, and against all
Christian manner of living; and that every man should refuse to be a King, and
desire rather to live a private life, than to reign so much to the ruin of
mankind. The life of Caesar Borgia, which is here given as a pattern to new
Princes, we shall find to have been nothing else but a cunning Carriage of
things so, that he might thereby first deceive and inveigle, and then suppress
all those that could oppose or hinder his ambition. For if you run ever his
life, you shall see the Father Pope Alexander the sixth and him, both imbarqued
for his advancement, wherein they engaged the Papal authority, and reputation
of Religion; for faith and conscience these men never knew, though they exacted
it of others: there was never promise made, but it was only so far kept as
servd for advantage; Liberali ey was made use of; Clemency and Cruelty, all
alike, as they might serve to work with their purposes. All was sacrificed to
ambition; no friendship could tie these men, nor any religion: and no marvel:
for ambition made them forget both God and man. But see the end of all this
cunning: though this Caesar Borgia contrived all his business so warily, that
our Author much commends him, and he had attaind near the pitch of his hopes,
and had provided for each misadventure could befall him its remedy; Policy
showed it selefe shortsighted; for he foresaw not at the time of his Fathers
death, he himself should be brought unto deaths door also. And me thinks this
Example might have given occasion to our Author to confess, that surely there
is a God that rules the earth. And many times God cutts off those cunning and
mighty men in the hight of their purposes, when they think they have near
surmounted all dangers and difficulties. To the intent that the living may
know, that the most high rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to
whomsoever he will, and sets up over in the basest of men. Daniel. 4. 17.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning those who by wicked means have attaind to a Principality.

BUt because a man becomes a Prince of a private man two ways, which cannot
wholly be attributed either to Fortune or Virtue, I think not fit to let them
pass me: howbeit the one of them may be more largely discoursed upon, where
the Republics are treated of. These are, when by some wicked and unlawful
means a man rises to the Principality; or when a private person by the favor
of his fellow Citizens becomes Prince of his country. And speaking of the
first manner, it shall be made evident by two Examples, the one ancient, the
other modern, without entering otherwise into the justice or merit of this
part; for I take it that these are sufficient for any body that is forced to
follow them. Agathocles the Sicilian, not of a private man only, but from a
base and abject fortune, got to be King of Siracusa. This man borne but of a
Potter, continued always a wicked life throughout all the degrees of this
fortune: nevertheless he accompanied his lewdness with such a courage and
resolution, that applying himself to military affairs, by the degrees thereof
he attained to be Praetour of Siracusa, and being settled in that degree, and
having determined that he would become Prince, and hold that by violence and
without obligation to any other, which by consent had been granted him: and to
this purpose having had some private intelligence touching his design with
Amilcar the Carithaginian, who was imployd with his army in Sicily, one morning
gatherd the people together and the Senate of Syracusa, as if he had some what
to advise with them of matters belonging to the Commonwealth, and upon a sign
given, caused his soldiers to kill his Senators, and the richest of the
people; who being slain, he usurped the Principality of that City without any
civil strife: and however he was twice broken by the Carthaginians, and at
last besieged, was able not only to defend his own City, but leaving part of
his own army at the defense thereof, with the other invaded Affrique, and in a
short time freed Siracusa from the siege, and brought the Carthaginians into
extreme necessity, who were constraind to accord with him, be contented with
the possession of Affrique, and quitt Sicily to Agathocles. He then that should
consider the actions and valor of this man, would not see any, or very few
things to be attributed unto Fortune; seeing that as is formerly said, not by
any ones favor, but by the degrees of service in war with many sufferings
and dangers, to which he had risen, he came to the Principality; and that he
maintaned afterward with so many resolute and hazardous undertakings. Yet
cannot this be termed virtue or valor to flay his own Citizens, betray his
friends, to be without faith, without pity, without religion, which ways are
of force to gain dominion, but not glory: for if Agathocles his valor be
well weighd, in his enturing upon, and coming off from dangers, and the
greatness of his courage, in supporting and mastering of adversities, no man
can see why he should be thought any way inferior even to the ablest
Captains. Notwithstanding his beastly cruelty and inhumanity with innumerable
wickednesses, allow not that he should be celebrated among the most excellent
men. That cannot then be attributed to Fortune or Virtue, which without the one
or the other was attaind to by him. In our days, while Alexander the sixth
held the sea, Oliverotie of Fermo, who some few years before had been left
young by his parents, was brought up under the care of an uncle of his on the
mothers side, called John Foliani, and in the beginning of his youth given, by
him to serve in the wars under Paulo Vitelli: to the end that being well
instructed in that discipline, he might rise to some worthy degree in the
wars. Afterward when Paulo was dead, he served under Vitellozzo his brother,
and in very short time, being ingenious, of a good personage, and brave
courage, he became one of the prime men among the troops he served in: but
thinking it but servile to depend upon another, he plotted by the aid of some
Citizens of Fermo (who liked rather the thraldom of their City than the
liberty of it) and by the favor of the Vitelli, to make himself master of
Fermo; and writ to John Foliani, that having been many years from home, he had
a mind to come and see him and the City, and in some part take notice os his
own patrimony; and because he had not imployd himself but to purchase honor,
to the end his Citizens might perceive, that he had not vainly spent his time,
he had a desire to come in good equipage and accompanied with a hundred horse
of his friends and servants; and he entreated him that he would be pleased so to
take order, that he might be honorably received by the inhabitants of Fermo,
which turned as well to his honor that was his uncle, as his that was the
nephew. In this, John faild not in any office of courtesy due to his nephew:
and caused him to be well receivd by them of Fermo, and lodged him in his own
house: where having passed some days, and stayed to put in order somewhat that
was necessary for his intended villainy, he made a very solemn feast, whether
he invited John Foliani, and all the prime men of Fermo: and when all their
cheer was ended, and all their other entertainments, as in such feasts it is
customary, Oliverotto of purpose moved some grave discourses; speaking of the
greatness of Pope Alexander, and Caesar his son, and their undertakings; where
unto John and the others making answer, he of a sudden stood up, saying, that
those were things to be spoken of in a more secret place, and so retired into a
chamber, whether John and all the others Citizens followd him; nor were they
sooner set down there, than from some secret place therein came forth diverse
soldiers, who slew John and all the others: after which homicide Oliverotto
got a horseback and ravaged the whole town, and besieged the supreme
Magistrate in the palace, so that for fear they were all constraind to obey
him, and to settle a government, whereof he made himself Prince; and they
being all dead who, had they been discontented with him, could have hurt him;
he strengthened himself with new civil and military orders, so that in the
space of a year that he held the Principality, he was not only secure in the
City of Fermo, but became fearful to all his neighbors; and the conquest of
him would have proved difficult, as that of Agathocles, had he not let himself
been deceivd by Caesar Borgia, when at Sinigallia, as before was said, he took
the Orsini and Vitelli: where he also being taken a year after he had
committed the parricide, was strangled together with Vitellozzo (whom he had
had, for master both of his virtues and vices.) Some man might doubt from
whence it should proceed, that Agathocles, and such like, after many
treacheries and crueltyes, could possibly live long secure in his own country,
and defend himself from his foreign enemies, and that never any of his own
Citizens conspired against him, seeing that by means of cruelty, many others
have never been able even in peaceable times to maintain their States, much
less in the doubtful times of war. I believe that this proceeds from the
well, or ill using of those cruelties: they may be termd well used (if it be
lawful to say well of evil) that are put in practice only once of necessity
for securities sake, not insisting therein afterward; but there is use made of
them for the subjects profit, as much as may be. But those that are ill used,
are such as though they be but few in the beginning, yet they multiply rather
in time, than diminish. They that take that first way, may with the help of
God, and men's care, find some remedy for their State, as Agathocles did: for
the others, it is impossible they should continue. Whereupon it is to be noted,
that in the lay ing hold of a State, the usurper thereof ought to run over
and execute all his cruelties at once, that he be not forced often to return
to them, and that he may be able, by not renewing of them, to give men some
security, and gain their affections by doing them some courtesies. He that
carries it otherwise, either for fearefullnesse, or upon evil advice, is
always constraind to hold his sword drawn in his hand; nor ever can heerely
upon his subjects, there being no possibility for them, because of his daily
and continual injuries, to live in any safety: for his injuries should be
done altogether, that being seldomer t^sted, they might less offend; his
favors should be bestowd by little, and little to the end they might keep
their taste the better; and above all things a Prince must live with his
subjects in such sort, that no accident either of good or evil can make him
vary: for necessity coming upon him by reason of adversries, thou have not
time given thee to make advantage of thy cruelties; and the favors which then
thou bestowest, will little help thee, being taken as if they came from thee
perforce, and so yield no return of thanks.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Civil Principality.

BUt coming to the other part, when a principal Citizen, not by villainy, or
any other insufferable violence, but by the favor of his fellow-citizens
becomes Prince of his native country: which we may term a Civil
Principality; nor to attain hereunto is Verue wholly' or Fortune wholly
necessary, but rather a fortunate cunning: I say, this Principality is climbed
up to, either by the peoples help, or the great men's. For, in every City we
find these two humors differ; and they spring from this, that the people
desire not to be commanded nor oppressed by the great ones, and the great ones
are desirous to command and oppress the people: and from these two several
appetites, arise in the City one of these three effects, either a Principality,
or Liberty, or Tumultuary licentionsnesse. The Principality is caused either by
the people, or the great ones, according as the one or other of these factions
have the occasion offered; for the great ones seeing themselves not able to
resist the people, begin to turn the whole reputation to one among them, and
make him Prince, whereby they may under his shadow vent their spleenes. The
people also, not being able to support the great men's insolences, converting
the whole reputation to one man, create him their Prince, to be protected by
his authority. He that comes to the Principality by the assistance of the great
ones, subsists with more difficulty, than he that attaines to it by the peoples
favor; for he being made Prince, has many about him, who account themselves
his equals, and therefore cannot dispose nor command them at his pleasure. But
he that gains the Principality by the peoples favor, finds himself alone in
his throne, and has none or very few near him that are not very supple to
bend: besides this, the great ones cannot upon easy terms be satisfied, or
without doing of wrong to others, where as a small matter contents the people:
for the end which the people propound to themselves, is more honest than that
of the great men, these desiring to oppress, they only not to be oppressed. To
this may be added also, that the Prince which is the peoples enemy, can never
well secure himself of them, because of their multitude; well may he be sure
of the Nobles, they being but a few. The worst that a Prince can look for of
the people become his enemy, is to be abandoned by them: but when the greatones
once grow his enemies, he is not only to fear their abandoning of him, but
their making of a party against him also: for there being in them more forecast
and craft, they always take time by the forelocks whereby to save themselves,
and seek credit with him who they hope shall get the mastery. The Prince
likewise is necessitated always to live with the same people, but can do well
enough without the same great men; he being able to create new ones, and
destroy them again every day, and to take from them, and give them credit as he
pleases: and to clear this part, I say, that great men ought to be considerd
two ways principally, that is, if they take thy proceedings so much to heart,
as to engage their fortunes wholly in thine, in case they lie not always
catching at spoil, they ought to be well honored and esteemed: those that bind
themselves not to thy fortune, are to be considerd also two ways; either they
do it for lack of courage, and natural want of spirit, and then should thou
serve thy self of them, and of them especially that are men of good advice;
for if thy affairs prosper, thou do thy self honor thereby; if crossed, thou
needst not fear them: but when they oblige not themselves to thee of purpose,
and upon occasion of ambition, it is a sign they think more of themselves than
of thee: and of these the Prince ought to beware, and account of them as his
discoverd enemies: for always in thy adversity they will give a hand too to
ruin thee. Therefore ought he that comes to be Prince by the peoples favor,
keep them his friends: which he may easily do, they desiring only to live
free from oppression: but he that becomes Prince by the great men's favor,
against the will of the people, ought above all things to gain the people to
him, which he may easily effect, when he takes upon him their protection: And
because men when they find good, where they look for evil, are thereby more
endered to their benefactour, therefore grows the people so pliant in their
subjection to him, as if by their favors he had attaind his dignity. And the
Prince is able to gain them to his side by many ways, which because they vary
according to the subject, no ^ertaine rule can be given thereupon; wherefore we
shall let them pass I will only conclude, that it is necessary for a Prince to
have the people his friend; otherwise in his adversities he has no help.
Nabis Prince of the Spartans supported the siege of all Greece, and an
exceeding victorious army of the Romans, and against those defended his native
country and State, and this sufficed him alone, that as the danger came upon
him, he secured himself of a fewer; whereas if the people had been his enemy,
this had nothing availd him. And let no man think to overthrow this my opinon
with that common proverb, that He who relyes upon the people, lays his
foundation in the dirt; for that is true where a private Citizen grounds upon
them making his account that the people shall free him, when either his enemies
or the Magistrates oppress him: In this case he should find himself often
deceived, as it befell the Gracchyes in Rome, and in Florence George Scali: but
he being a Prince that grounds thereupon, who can command, and is a man of
courage, who has his wits about him in his adversiryes, and wants not other
preparations, and holds together the whole multitude animated with his valor
and orders, shall not prove deceived by them, and shall find he has laid good
foundations. These Principalityes are wont to be upon the point of falling when
they go about to skip from the civil order to the absolute: for these Princes
either command of themselves, or by the Magistrate; in this last case their
State is more weak and dangerous, because they stand wholly at the will and
pleasure of these Citizens, who then areset over the Magistrates, who
especially in adverse times are able with facility to take their State from
them either by rising up against them, or by nor obeying them; and then the
Prince is not at hand in those dangers to take the absolute authority upon him:
for the Citizens and subjects that are accustomed to receive the commands from
the Magistrates, are not like in those fractions to obey his: and in doubtful
times he shall always have greatest penury of whom he may trust; for such a
Prince cannot ground upon that which he sees in peaceable times, when the
Citizens have need of the State; for then every one runs, and every one
promises, and very one will venture his life for him, when there is no danger
near; but in times of hazard, when the State has need of Citizens, there are
but few of them then, and so much the more is this experience dangerous, in
that it can be but once made. Therefore a prudent Prince ought to devise a way
whereby his Citizens always and in any case and quality of time may have need
of his government, and they shall always after prove faithful to him.

CHAP. X.
In what manner the Forces of all Principalities ought to be measured.

IT is requisite in examining the quality of those Principalities, to have
another consideration of them, that is, if a Prince have such dominions, that
he is able in case of necessity to subsist of himself, or else whether he has
always need of another to defend him. And to clear this point the better, I
judge them able to stand of themselves, who are of power either for their
multitudes of men, or quantity of money, to bring into the field a complete
army, and ioyn battle with whoever comes to assail them: and so I think those
always to stand in need of others help, who are not able to appear in the
field against the enemy, but are forced to retire within their walls and guard
them. Touching the first case, we have treated already, and shall add somewhat
thereto as occasion shall require. In the second case, we cannot say other,
save only to encourage such Princes to fortify and guard their own Capital
city, and of the country about, not to hold much account; and whoever shall
have well fortified that town, and touching other matters of governments shall
have behaved himself toward his subjects, as has been formerly said, and
hereafter shall be, shall never be assaild but with great regard; for men
willingly undertake not enterprises, where they see difficulty to work them
through; nor can much facility be there found, where one assails him, who has
his town strong and well guarded, and is not hated of his people. The cities of
Germany are very free; they have but very little of the country about them
belonging to them; and they obey the Emperor, when they please, and they stand
not in fear, neither of him nor any other Potentate about them: for they are in
such a manner fortified, that every one thinks the siege of any of them would
prove hard and tedious: for all of them have ditches and rampires, and good
store of Artillery, and always have their public cellars well provided with
meat and drink and firing for a year: besides this, whereby to feed the common
people, and without any loss to the public, they have always in common
whereby they are able for a year to employ them in the labor of those trades
that are the sinews and the life of that city, and of that industry whereby the
commons ordinarily supported themselves: they hold up also the military
exercises in repute, and hereupon have they many orders to maintain them. A
Prince then that is master of a good strong city, and causes not himself to be
hated, cannot be assaulted; and in case he were, he that should assail him,
would be fain to quit him with shame: for the affairs of the world are so
various, that it is almost impossible that an army can lie incampt before a
town for the space of a whole year: and if any should reply, that the people
having their possessions abroad, in case they should see them a fire, would not
have patience, and the redious siege and their love to themselves would make
them for get their Prince: I answer that a Prince puissant and courageous, will
easily master those difficulties, now giving his subjects hope, that the
mischiief will not be of durance; sometimes affright them with the cruelty of
their enemies, and other whiles cunningly securing himself of those whom he
thinks too forward to run to the enemy. Besides this by ordinary reason the
enemy should burn and waste their country, upon his arrival, and at those
times while men's minds are yet warm, and resolute in their defense: and
therefore so much the less ought a Prince doubt: for after some few days, that
their courages grow cool, the damages are all done, and mischiefs received,
and there is no help for it, and then have they more occasion to cleave faster
to their Prince, thinking he is now more bound to them, their houses having for
his defense been fired, and their possessions wasted; and men's nature is as
well to hold themselves obliged for the kindnesses they do, as for those they
receive; whereupon if all be well weighed, a wise Prince shall not find much
difficulty to keep sure and true to him his Citizens hearts at the beginning
and latter end of the siege, when he has no want of provision for food and
ammunition.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning Ecclesiastical Principalities.

THere remains now only that we treat of the Ecclesiastical Principalities,
about which all the difficulties are before they are gotten: for they are
attained to either by virtue, or Fortune; and without the one or the other they
are held: for they are maintaind by orders inverterated in the religion, all
which are so powerful and of such nature, that they maintain their Princes in
their dominions in what manner soever they proceed and live. These only have an
Estate and defend it not; have subjects and govern them not; and yet their
States because undefended, are not taken from them; nor their subjects, though
not governed, care not, think not, neither are able to aliene themselves from
them. These Principalities then are only happy and secure: but they being
sustained by superior causes, whereunto humane understanding reaches not, I
will not meddle with them: for being set up and maintained by God, it would be
the part of a presumptuous and rash man to enter into discourse of them. Yet if
any man should ask me whence it proceeds, that the Church in temporal power
has attaind to such greatness, seeing that till the time of Alexander the
sixth, the Italian Potentates, and not only they who are entitled the
potentates, but every Baron and Lord though of the meanest condition, in regard
of the temporality, made but small account of it; and now a King of France
trembles at the power thereof; and it has been able to drive him out of Italy,
and ruin the Venetians; and however this be well known, me thinks it is not
superstitious in some part to recall it to memory. Before that Charles King of
France past into Italy, this country was under the rule of the Pope,
Venetians, the King of Naples, the Duke of Milan, and the Florentines. These
Potentates took two things principally to their care; the one, that no
forreiner should invade Italy; the other, that no one of them should enlarge
their State. They, against whom this care was most taken, were the Pope and the
Venetians; and to restrain the Venetians, there needed the union of all the
rest, as it was in the defense of Ferrara; and to keep the Pope low, they
served themselves of the Barons of Rome, who being divided into two factions,
the Orsini and Colonnesi, there was always occasion of offense between them,
who standing ready with their arms in hand in the view of the Pope, held the
Popedom weak and feeble: and however sometimes there arose a courageous Pope,
as was Sextus; yet either his fortune, or his wisdom was not able to free him
of these incommodities, and the brevity of their lives was the cause thereof;
for in ten years; which time, one with another, Popes ordinarily lived, with
much ado could they bring low one of the factions. And if, as we may say, one
had near put out the Colonnesi, there arose another enemy to the Orsini, who
made them grow again, so that there was never time quite to root them out. This
then was the cause, why the Popes temporal power was of small esteem in Italy;
there arose afterward Pope Alexander the sixth, who of all the Popes that ever
were, showed what a Pope was able to do with money and forces: and he effected,
by means of his instrument, Duke Valentine, and by the ocasion of the French
men's passage, all those things which I have formerly discoursed upon in the
Dukes actions: and however his purpose was nothing at all to enlarge the Church
dominions, but to make the Duke great; yet what he did, turned to the Churches
advantage, which after his death when the Duke was taken away, was the heir of
all his pains. Afterward succeeded Pope Julius, and found the Church great,
having all Romania, and all the Barons of Rome being quite rooted out, and by
Alexanders persecutions, all their factions worn down; he found also the way
open for the heaping up of moneys, never practiced before Alexanders time;
which things Julius not only followed, but augmented; and thought to make
himself master of Bolonia, and extinguish the Venetians, and chase the French
men out of Italy: and these designs of his proved all lucky to him, and so
much the more to his praise in that he did all for the good of the Church, and
in no private regard: he kept also the factions of the Orsins and Colonnesi, in
the same State he found them: and though there were among them some head
whereby to cause an alteration; yet two things have held them quiet; the one
the power of the Church, which somewhat affrights them; the other because they
have no Cardinals of their factions, who are the primary causes of all the
troubles amongst them: nor shall these parties ever be at rest, while they have
Cardinals; because they nourish the factious both in Rome, and abroad; and the
Barons then are forced to undertake the defense of them: and thus from the
Prelates ambitions arise the discords and tumults among the Barons. And now
has Pope Leo his Holiness found the Popedom exceeding puissant, of whom it is
hoped, that if they amplified it by arms he by his goodness, and infinite
other virtues, will much more advantage and dignifie it.

CHAP. XII.
How many sorts of Military discipline there are and touching Mercinary
soldiers.

HAving treated particularly of the qualities of those Principalities, which in
the beginning I propounded to discourse upon, and considered in some part the
reasons of their well and ill being, and showed the ways whereby many have
sought to gain, and hold them, it remains now that I speak in general of the
offenses and defenses, that may chance in each of the forenamed. We have
formerly said that it is necessary for a Prince to have good foundations laid;
otherwise it must needs be that he go to wrack. The Principal foundations that
all States have, as well new, as old, or mixed, are good laws, and good arms;
and because there cannot be good laws, where there are not good arms; and
where there are good arms, there must needs be good laws, I will omit to
discourse of the laws, and speak of arms. I say then that the arms,
wherewithal a Prince defends his State, either are his own, or mercenary, or
auxiliary, or mixed. Those that are mercenary and auxiliar, are unprofitable,
and dangerous, and if any one holds his State founded upon mercenary arms, he
shall never be quiet, nor secure, because they are never well united,
ambitious, and without discipline, treacherous, among their friends stout,
among their enemies cowardly; they have no fear of God, nor keep any faith with
men; and so long only defer they the doing of mischief, till the enemy comes to
assul thee; and in time of peace thou art despoyled by them, in war by thy
enemies: the reason hereof is, because they have no other love, nor other cause
to keep them in the field, but only a small stipend, which is not of force to
make them willing to hazard their lives for thee: they are willing indeed to be
thy soldiers, till thou go to fight; but then they fly, or run away; which
thing would cost me but small pains to persuade; for the ruin of Italy has
not had any other cause now a days, than for that it has these many years
relied upon mercenary arms; which a good while since perhaps may have done
some man some service, and among themselves they may have been thought valiant:
but so soon as any foreign enemy appeared, they quickly showed what they were.
Whereupon Charles the King of France, without opposition, made himself master
of all Italy: and he that said, that the causes thereof were our faults, said
true; but these were not those they believed, but what I have told; and because
they were the Princes faults, they also have suffered the punishment. I will
suller show the infelicity of these arms. The mercenary Captains are either
very able men, or not: if they be, thou can not repose any trust in them: for
they will always aspire unto their own proper advancements, either by
suppressing of thee that art their Lord, or by suppressing of some one else
quite out of thy purpose: but if the Captain be not valorons, he ordinarily
ruins thee: and in case it be answered, that whoever shall have his arms in
his hands, whether mercenary or not, will do so: I would reply, that arms are
to be employed either by a Prince, or Commonwealth. The Prince ought to go in
person, and perform the office of a commander: the Republic is to send forth
her Citizens: and when she sends forth one that proves not of abilities, she
ought to change him then; and when he does prove valorous, to bridle him so by
the laws, that he exceed not his commission. And by experience we see, that
Princes and Republiques of themselves alone, make very great conquests; but
that mercenary arms never do other than harm; and more hardly falls a
Republic armed with her own arms under the obedience of one of her own
Citizens, than one that is armed by foreign arms. Rome and Sparta subsist^d
many ages armed and free. The Swissers are exceedingly well armed, and yet very
free. Touching mercenary arms that were of old, we have an example of the Car
thagians, who near upon were oppressed by their own mercenary soldiers, when
the first war with the Romans was finished; however the Carthagians had their
own Citizens for their Captains. Philip of Macedon was made by the Thebans
after Epaminondas his death, General of their Armies; and after the victory, he
took from them their liberty. The Milaneses when Duke Philip was dead,
entertaind Francis Sforza into their pay against the Venetians, who having
vanquished their enemy at Cara^aggio, afterward joined with them, where by to
usurp upon the Milaneses his Masters. Sforza his father, being in Joan the
Queen of Naples pay, left her on a sudden disarmed; whereupon she, to save her
Kingdom, was constrained to cast her self into the King of Arragon's bosom.
And in case the Venetians and the Florentines have formerly augmented their
State with these kind of arms, and their own Captains, and yet none of them
have ever made themselves their Princes, but rather defended them: I answer,
that the Florentines in this case have had fortune much their friend: for of
valorous Captains, which they might any way fear, some have not been victors,
some have had opposition, and others have laid the aim of their ambitions
another way. He who overcame not, was John Aouto, of whose faith there could no
proof be made, being he vanquished not; but every one will acknowledge, that,
had he vanquished, the Florentines were at his discretion. Sforza had always
the Bracceschi for his adversaries, so that they were as a guard one upon
another. Francis converted all his ambition against Lombardy. Braccio against
the Church, and the Kingdom of Naples. But let us come to that which followed
a while ago. The Florentines made Paul Vitelli their General, a thoroughly
advised man, and who from a private fortune had rose to very great reputation:
had he taken Pisa, no man will deny but that the Florentines must have held
fast with him; for had he been entertained in their enemies pay, they had no
remedy; and they themselves holding of him, of force were to obey him. The
Venetians, if we consider their proceedings, we shall see wrought both warily
and gloriously, while themselves made war, which was before their undertakings
by land, where the gentlemen with their own Commons in arms behaved themselves
bravely: but when they began to fight by land, they lost their valor, and
followed the customs of Italy; and in the beginning of their enlargement by
land, because thee had not much territory, and yet were of great reputation,
they had not much cause to fear their Captains; but as they began to extend
their bounds, which was under their Commander Carminiola, they had a taste of
this error: for perceiving he was exceeding valorous, having under his conduct
beaten the Duke of Milan; and knowing on the other side, how he was cold in the
war, they judged that they could not make any great conquest with him; and
because they neither would, nor could cashier him, that they might not lose,
what they had gotten, they were forced for their own safeties to put him to
death. Since they have had for their General Bartholomew of Berganio, Robert
St. Severin, the Count of Petilian, and such like: whereby they were to fear
their losses, as well as to hope for gain: as it fell out afterward at Vayla,
where in one day they lost that, which with so much pains they had gotten in
eight hundred years: for from these kind of arms grow slack and slow and weak
gains; but sadden and wonderful losses: And because I am now come with these
examples into Italy, which now these many years, have been governd by mercenary
arms, I will search deeper into them, to the end that their course and
progress being better discoverd, they may be the better amended. You have to
understand, that so soon as in these later times the yoke of the Italian Empire
began to be shaken off, and the Pope had gotten reputation in the temporality,
Italy was divided into several States: for many of the great cities took arms
against their Nobility; who under the Emperors protection had held them in
oppression; and the Pope favored these, whereby he might get himself
reputation, in the temporality; of many others, their Citizens became Princes,
so that hereupon Italy being come into the Churches hands as it were, and some
few Republics, those Priests and Citizens not accustomed to the use of arms,
began to take strangers to their pay. The first that gave reputation to these
soldiers was Alberick of Como in Romania. From his discipline among others
descended Brachio and Sforza, who in their time were the arbitres of Italy;
after these followed all others, who even till our days have commanded the
arms of Italy; and the success of their valor has been, that it was overrun
by Charles, pillaged by Lewis, forced by Ferdinand, and disgraced by the
Swissers. The order which they have held, has been, first whereby to give
reputation to their own arms to take away the credit of the Infantry. This
they did, because they having no State of their own, but living upon their
industry, their few foot gave them no reputation, and many they were not able
to maintain; whereupon they reduced themselves to cavalery, and so with a
supportable number they were entertained and honored: and matters were brought
to such terms, that in an army of twenty thousand soldiers you should not find
two thousand foot. They had moreover used all industry to free themselves and
their soliders of all pains and fear, in their skirmishes, not killing, but
taking one another prisoners, and without ransom for their freedom; they
repaired not all to their tents by night, nor made palizado or trench
thereabout, nor lay in the field in the summer: and all these things were thus
contrived and agreed of among them in their military orders, whereby (as is
said) to avoid pains and dangers, insomuch as they have brought Italy into
slavery and disgrace.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Auxiliary Soldiers, mixed, and native.

THe Auxiliary forces, being the other kind of unprofitable arms, are, when
any puissant one is called in, who with his forces comes to assist and defend
thee; such as in these later times did Pope Julius use, who having seen the
evil proof of his mercenary soldiers in the enterprise of Ferrara, applied
himself to the Auxiliaries, and agreed with Ferdinand King of Spain, that with
his Forces he should aid him. These arms may be profitable and advantageous
for themselves; but for him that calls them in, hurtful; because in losing,
thou art lest defeated; and conquering, thou becomest their prisoner. And
however that of these examples the ancient stories are full fraught; yet will I
not part from this of Pope Julius the second, which is as yet fresh: whose
course could not have been more inconsiderate, for the desire he had to get
Ferrara, putting himself wholly into strangers hands: but his good fortune
caused another cause to arise, that hindered him from receiving the fruit of his
evil choice; for his Auxiliaries being broken at Ravenna, and the Swissers
thereupon arriving, who put the Conquerors to flight beyond all opinion, even
their own and others, he chanced not to remain his enemies prisoner, they being
put to flight, nor prisoner to his Auxiliaries, having vanquished by other
forces than theirs. The Florentines being wholly disarmed, brought ten thousand
French to Pisa for to take it, by which course they ran more hazard, than in
any time of their troubles. The Emperor of Constantinople, to oppress his
neighbors, brought into Greece ten thousand Turks, who when the war was ended,
could not be got out thence, which was the beginning of Greeces fervitude under
the Infidels. He then that will in no case be able to overcome, let him serve
himself of these arms; for they are much more dangerous than the mercenaries;
for by those thy ruin is more suddenly executed; for they are all united, and
all bent to the obedience of another. But for the mercenaries to hurt thee,
when they have vanquished, there is no more need of time, and greater occasion,
they not being all united in a body, and being found out and paid by thee,
wherein a third that thou make their head, cannot suddenly gain so great
authority, that he can endammage thee. Insumme, in the mercenaries their sloth
and laziness to fight is more dangerous: in the auxiliaries their valonr.
Wherefore a wise Prince has always avoided these kind of arms, and betaken
himself to his own, and desired rather to loss with his own, than conquer
with another, accounting that not a true victory which was gotten with others
arms. I will not doubt to allege Caesar Bargia, and his actions. This Duke
entered into Romania with auxiliarie arms s bringing with him all French
soldiers: but afterward not accounting those arms secure, bent hinselfe to
mercenaries, judging less danger to be in those, and took in pay the Orsini
and the Vitelli, which afterward in the proof of them, finding wavering,
unfaithful, and dangerous, he extinguishd, and betook himself to his own; and
it may easily be perceived what difference there is between the one and the
other of these arms, confidering the difference that was between the Dukes
reputation, when he had the French men alone, and when he had the Orsini and
Vitelli; but when he remaind with his own, and stood of himself, we shall find
it was much augmented: nor ever was it of grate esteem, but when every one
saw, that he wholly possessed his own a mes. I thought not to have parted from
the Italian examples of late memory; but that I must not let pass that of
Hiero the Siracusan, being one of those I formerly named. This man (as I said
before) being made general of the Siracusans forces, knew presently that
mercenary soldiery was nothing for their profit in that they were hirelings,
as our Italians are; and finding no way either to hold, or cashier them, made
them all be cut to pieces, and afterward waged war with his own men, and
none others. I will also call to memory a figure of the old Testament serving
just to this purpose. When David presented himself before Saul to go to fight
with Goliath the Philistims Champion, Saul to encourage him, clad him with his
own arms, which David when he had them upon his back, refused, saying, he was
not able to make any proof of himself therein, and therefore would go meet
the enemy with his own sling and sword. In sum, others arms either fall from
thy shoulders, or cumber or streighten thee. Charles the seventh, Father of
Lewis the eleventh, having by his good fortune and valor set France at liberty
from the English, knew well this necessity of being armed with his own arms,
and settled in his Kingdom the ordinances of men at arms, and infantry.
Afterward King Lewis his son abolisht those of the infantry, and began to
take the Swissers to pay; which error followed by the others, is (as now
indeed it appears) the cause of that Kingdoms dangers. For having given
reputation to the Swissers, they have renderd all their own arms contemptible;
for this has wholly ruind their foot, and obliged their men at arms to
foreign arms: for being accustomed to serve with the Swissers, they think they
are not able to overcome without them. From whence it comes that the French are
not of force against the Swissers, and without them also against others they
use not to adventure. Therefore are the French armies mixed, part more naries,
and part natives, which arms are far better than the simple mercenaries or
simple auxiliaries, and much inferior to the natives; and let the said example
suffice for that: for the Kingdom of France would have been unconquerable, if
Charles his order had been augmented and maintaind but men in their small
wisdom begin a thing, which then because it has some favor of good,
discovers not the poison that lurkes thereunder, as I before said of the
h^ctick fevers. Wherefore that Prince which perceives not mischiefs, but as
they grow up, is not truly wise; and this is given but to few: and if we
consider the first ruin of the Roman Empire, we shall find it was from taking
the Goths first into their pay; for from that beginning the forces of the
Roman Empire began to grow weak, and all the valor that was taken hence was
given to them. I conclude then that without having arms of their own, no
Principality can be secure, or rather is wholly obliged to fortune, not having
valor to shelter it in adversity. And it was always the opinion and saying of
wise men, that nothing is so weak and unsettled, as is the reputation of power
not founded upon ones own proper forces: which are those that are composed of
thy subjects, or Citizens, or servants; all the rest are mercenary or
auxiliary; and the manner how to order those well, is easy to find out, if
those orders above named by me, shall be but run over, and if it shall be but
considered, how Philip Alexander the Great his Father, and in what manner many
Republics and Princes have armd and appointed themselves, to which
appointments I refer my self wholly.

CHAP. XIV.
What belongs to the Prince touching military Discipline.

A Prince then ought to have no other aim, nor other thought, nor take any
thing else for his proper art, but war, and the orders and discipline thereof:
for that is the sole art which belongs to him that commands, and is of so
great excellency, that not only those that are borne Princes, it maintains so;
but many times raises men from a private fortune to that dignity. And it is
seen by the contrary, that when Princes have given themselves more to their
delights, than to the wars, they have lost their States; and the first cause
that makes thee lose it, is the neglect of that art; and the cause that makes
thee gain it, is that thou art experienced and approvd in that art. Francis
Sforza by being a man at, arms, of a private man became Duke of Milan; and his
sons by excusing themselves of the troubles and pains belonging to those
employments of Princes, became private-men. For among other mischiefs thy
neglect of arms brings upon thee, it causes thee to be contemnd, which is one
of those disgraces, from which a Prince ought to keep himself, as hereafter
shall be said: for from one that is disarmd to one that is armd there is no
proportion; and reason will not, that he who is in arms, should willingly
yield obedience to him that is unfurnishd of them, and that he that is disarmd
should be in security among his armed vassalls; for there being disdain in the
one, and suspicion in the other, it is impossible these should ever well
cooperate. And therefore a Prince who is quite unexperienced in matter of
war, besides the other infelicities belonging to him, as is said, cannot be
had in any esteem among his soldiers, nor yet trust in them. Wherefore he
ought never to neglect the practice of the art of war, and in time of peace
should he exercise it more than in the war; which he may be able to do two
ways; the one practically, and in his labors and recreations of his body, the
other theorically. And touching the practick part, he ought besides the keeping
of his own subjcts well traind up in the discipline and exercise of arms, give
himself much to the chase, whereby to accustom his body to pains, and partly
to understand the manner of situations, and to know how the mountains arise,
which way the vallyes open themselves, and how the plains ars distended flat
abroad, and to conceive well the nature of the rivers, and marrish ground, and
herein to bestow very much care, which knowledge is profitable in two kinds:
first he learnes thereby to know his own country, and is the better enabled to
understand the defense thereof, and afterward by means of this knowledge and
experience in, these situations, easily comprehend any other situation, which a
new he has need to view, for the little hillocks. valleys, plains, rivers,
and marrish places. For example, they in Tuscany are like unto those of other
countries: so that from the knowledge of the site of one country, it is easy
to attain to know that of others. And that Prince that wants this skill, fails
of the principal part a Commander should be furnished with; for this shows the
way how to discover the enemy, to pitch the camp, to lead their armies, to
order their battles, and also to besiege a town at thy best advantage.
Philopomenes Prince of the Achayans, among other praises Writers give him, they
say, that in time of peace, he thought not upon any thing so much as the
practice of war; and whenever he was abroad in the field to disport
himself with his friends, would often stand still, and discourse with them, in
case the enemies were upon the top of that hill, and we here with our army,
whether of us two should have the advantage, and how might we safely go to
find them, keeping still our orders; and if we would retire our selves, what
course should we take if they retired, how should we follow them? and thus on
the way, propounded them all such accidents could befall in any army; would
hear their opinions, and tell his own, and confirm it by argument; so that
by his continual thought hereupon, when ever he led any army no chance could
happen, for which he had not a remedy. But touching the exercise of the mind, a
Prince ought to read Histories, and in them consider the actions of the
worthiest men, mark how they have behaved themselves in the wars, examine the
occasions of their victories, and their losses; whereby they may be able to
avoid these, and obtain those; and above all, do as formerly some excellent
man has done, who has taken upon him to imitate, if any one that has gone
before him has left his memory glorious; the course he took, and kept always
near unto him the remembrances of his actions and worthy deeds: as it is said,
that Alexander the great imitated Achilles; Caesar Alexander, and Scipio Cyrus.
And whoever reads the life of Cyrus, written by Xenophon, may easily perceive
afterward in Scipio's life how much glory his imitation gaind him, and how
much Scipio did conform himself in his chastity, affability, humanity, and
liberality with those things, that are written by Xenophon of Cyrus. Such like
ways ought a wise Prince to take, nor ever be idle in quiet times, but by his
pains then, as it were provide himself of store, whereof he may make some use
in his adversity, the end that when the times change, he may be able to resist
the storms of his hard fortune.

CHAP. XV.
Of those things, in respect whereof, men, and especially Princes, are praised,
or dispraised.

IT now remains that we consider what the conditions of a Prince ought to be,
and his terms of government over his subjects, and toward his friends. And
because I know that many have written hereupon; I doubt, left I venturing also
to treat thereof, may be branded with presumption, especially seeing I am like
enough to deliver an opinion different from others. But my intent being to
write for the advantage of him that understands me, I thought it fitter to
follow the effectual truth of the matter, than the imagination thereof; And
many Principalities and Republiques, have been in imagination, which neither
have been seen nor known to be indeed: for there is such a distance between
how men do live, and how men ought to live; that he who leaves that which is
done, for that which ought to be done, learnes sooner his ruin than his
preservation; for that man who will profess honesty in all his actions, must
needs go to ruin among so many that are dishonest. Whereupon it is necessary
for a Prince, desiring to preserve himself, to be able to make use of that
honesty, and to lay it aside again, as need shall require. Passing by then
things that are only in imagination belonging to a Prince, to discourse upon
those that are really true; I lay that all men, whensover mention is made of
them, and especially Princes, because they are placed aloft in the view of all,
are taken notice of for some of these qualities, which procure them either
commendations or blame: and this is that some one is held liberal, some
miserable, (miserable I say, nor covetous; for the covetous desire to have,
though it were by rapine; but a miserable man is he, that too much for bears to
make use of his own) some free givers, others extortioners; some cruel,
others pitious; the one a Leaguebreaker, another faithful; the one effeminate
and of small courage, the other fierce and couragieus; the one courteous, the
other proud; the one lascivious, the other chaste; the one of fair dealing,
the other wily and crafty; the one hard, the other easy; the one grave, the
other light; the one religious, the other incredulous, and such like. I know
that every one will confess, it were exceedingly praise worthy for a Prince to
be adorned with all these above named qualities that are good: but because this
is not possible, nor do humane conditions admit such perfection in virtues, it
is necessary for him to be so discret, that he know how to avoid the infamy of
those vices which would thrust him out of his State; and if it be possible,
beware of those also which are not able to remove him thence; but where it
cannot be, let them pass with less regard. And yet, let him not stand much
upon it, though he incur the infamy of those vices, without which he can
very hardly save his State: for if all be thoroughly considered, some things we
shall find which will have the color and very face of Virtue, and following
them, they will lead the to thy destruction; whereas some others that shall ^s
much seem vice, if we take the course they lead us, shall discover unto us the
way to our safety and well-being.

The second blemish in this our Authors book, I find in his fifteenth Chapter:
where he instructs his Prince to use such an ambidexterity as that he may serve
himself either of virtue, or vice, according to his advnatage, which in true
policy is neither good in attaining the Principality nor in securing it when
it is attaind. For Politics, presuppose Ethiques, which will never allow this
rule: as that a man might make this small difference between virtue, and vice,
that he may indifferently lay aside, or take up the, one or the other, and put
it in prastise as best conduces to the end he propounds himself. I doubt our
Author would have blamd David's regard to Saul, when 1 Samuel 24. in the cave he
cut off the lap of Saul's garment, and spared his head; and afterward in the
26. when he forbad Abishai to strike him as he lay sleeping. Worthy of a
Princes consideration is that saying of Abigal to David 1 Samuel 25. 30. It shall
come to pass when the Lord shall have done to my Lord according to all that he
has spoken concerning thee, and shall have appointed thee Ruler over Israel,
that this shall be no grief to thee, nor offense of heart unto my Lord, that
thou have forborne to shed blood etc. For surely the conscience of this evil
ground whereupon they have either built, or underpropped their tyranny, causes
men, as well metus as spes in longum projicere, which sets them a work on
further mischief.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Liberality, and Miserableness.

BEginning then at the first of the above mentioned qualities, I say that it
would be very well to be accounted liberal: nevertheless, liberality used in
such a manner, as to make thee be accounted so, wrongs thee: for in case it be
used virtuously, and as it ought to he, it shall never come to be taken notice
of, so as to free thee from the infamy of its contrary. And therefore for one
to hold the name of liberal among men, it were needful not to omit any
sumptuous quality, insomuch that a Prince always so disposed, shall waste all
his revenues, and at the end shall be forced, if he will still maintain that
reputation of liberality, heavily to burden his subjects, and become a great
exactour; and put in practice all those things that can be done to get money:
which begins to make him hateful to his subjects, and fall into every ones
contempt, growing necessitous: so that having with this liberality wronged
many, and imparted of his bounty but to a few; he feels every first mischance,
and runs a hazard of every first danger. Which he knowing, and desiring to
withdraw himself from, incurs presently the disgrace of being termed miserable.
A Prince therefore not being able to use this virtue of liberality, without his
own damage, in such a sort, that it may be taken notice of, ought, if he be
wise, not to regard the name of Miserable; for in time he shall always be
esteemed the more liberal, seeing that by his parsimony his own revenues are
sufficient for him; as also he can defend himself against whoever makes war
against him, and can do some exploits without grieving his subjects: so that he
comes to use his liberality to all those, from whom he takes nothing, who are
infinite in number; and his miserableness toward those to whom he gives
nothing, who are but a few. In our days we have not seen any, but those who
have been held miserable, do any great matters; but the others all quite ruind.
Pope Julius the second, however he served himself of the name of Liberal, to
get the Papacy, yet never intended he to continue it, to the end he might be
able to make war against the King of France: and he made so many wars without
imposing any extraordinary tax, because his long thrift supplied his large
expenses. This present King of Spain could never have undertaken, nor gone
through with so many exploits, had he been accounted liberal. Wherefore a
Prince ought little to regard (that he may not be driven to pillage his
subjects, that he may be able to defend himself, that he may not fall into
poverty and contempt, that he be not forced to become an extortioner) though he
incur the name of miserable; for this is one of those vices, which does not
pluck him from his throne. And if any one should say, Caesar by his liberality
obtained the Empire, and many others (because they both were, and were esteemd
liberal) attaind to exceeding great dignities. I answer, either thou art
already come to be a Prince, or thou art in the way to it; in the first case,
this liberality is hurtful; in the second, it is necessary to be accounted so;
and Caesar was one of those that aspired to the Principality of Rome. But if
after he had gotten it, he had survived, and not forborne those expenses, he
would quite have ruined that Empire. And if any one should reply; many have
been Princes, and with their armies have done great exploits, who have been
held very liberal. I answer, either the Prince spends of his own and his
subjects, or that which belongs to others: in the first, he ought to be
sparing; in the second, he should not omitany part of liberality. And that
Prince that goes abroad with his army, and feeds upon prey, and spoil, and
tributes, and has the disposing of that which belongs to others, necessarily
should use this liberality; otherwise would his soldiers never follow him; and
of that which is neither thine, nor thy subjects, thou may well be a free
giver, as were Cyrus, Caesar and Alexander; for the spending of that which is
another, takes not away thy reputation, but rather adds to it, only the
wasting of that which is thine own hurts thee; nor is there any thing consumes
it self so much as liberality, which whilst thou usest, thou losest the means
to make use of it, and becomest poor and abject; or to avoid this poverty, an
extortioner and hateful person. And among all those things which a Prince
ought to beware of, is, to be despised, and odious; to one and the other of
which, liberality brings thee. Wherefore there is more discretion to hold the
style of Miserable, which begets an infamy without hatred, than to desire that
of Liberal, whereby to incur the necessity of being thought an extortioner,
which procures an infamy with hatred.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Cruelty, and Clemency, and whether it is better to be beloved, or feared.

DEscending afterward unto the other fore-alledged qualities, I say, that
every Prince should desire to be held pitiful, and not cruel. Nevertheless
ought he beware that he ill uses not this pity. Caesar Borgia was accounted
cruel, yet had his cruelty redrest the disorders in Romania, settled it in
union, and restored it to peace, and fidelity: which, if it be well weighed, we
shall see was an act of more pity, than that of the people of Florence, who to
avoid the term of cruelty, suffered Pistoya to fall to destruction. Wherefore
a Prince ought not to regard the infamy of cruelty, for to hold his subjects
united and fai^hfull: for by giving a very few proofs of himself the other
way, he shall be hold more pitiful than they, who through their too much
pity, suffer disorders to follow, from whence arise murders and rapines: for
these are wont to hurt an entire universality, whereas the executions practiced
by a Prince, hurt only some particular. And among all sorts of Princes, it is
impossible for a new Prince to avoid the name of cruel, because all new States
are full of dangers: Whereupon Virgil by the mouth of Dido excuses the
inhumanity of her Kingdom, saying,

Res dura and Regni novitas me talia cogunt
Moliri and late fines custode tenere.
My hard plight and new State force me to guard.
My confines all about with watch and ward.
Nevertheless ought he to be judicious in his giving belief to any thing, or
moving himself thereat, nor make his people extremely afraid of him; but
proceed in a moderate way with wisdom, and humanity, that his too much
confidence make him not unwary, and his too much distrust intolerable; from
hence arises a dispute, whether it is better to be beloved or feared: I answer,
a man would wish he might be the one and the other: but because hardly can they
subsist both together, it is much safer to be feared, than be loved; being that
one of the two must needs fail; for touching men, we may say this in general,
they are unthankful, unconstant, dissemblers, they avoid dangers, and are
covetous of gain; and whilst thou do them good, they are wholly thine;
their blood, their fortunes, lives and children are at thy service, as is said
before, when the danger is remote; but when it approaches, they revolt. And
that Prince who wholly relies upon their words, unfurnished of all other
preparations, goes to wrack: for the friendships that are gotten with rewards,
and not by the magnificence and worth of the mind, are dearly bought indeed;
but they will neither keep long, nor serve well in time of need: and men do
less regard to offend one that is supported by love, than by fear. For love is
held by a certainty of obligation, which because men are mischievous, is broken
upon any occasion of their own profit. But fear restrains with a dread of
punishment which never forsakes a man. Yet ought a Prince cause himself to be
beloved in such a manner, that if he gains not love, he may avoid hatred: for
it may well stand together, that a man may be feared and not hated; which shall
never fail, if he abstain from his subjects goods, and their wives; and
whenever he should be forced to proceed against any of their lives, do it
when it is to be done upon a just cause, and apparent conviction; but above all
things forbear to lay his hands on other men's goods; for men forget sooner the
death of their father, than the loss of their patrimony. Moreover the occasions
of taking from men their goods, do never fail: and always he that begins to
live by rapine, finds occasion to lay hold upon other men's goods: but against
men's lives, they are seldom found, and sooner fail. But where a Prince is
abroad in the field with his army, and has a multitude of soldiers under his
government, then is it necessary that he stands not much upon it, though he be
termed cruel: for unless he be so, he shall never have his soldiers live in
accord one with another, nor ever well disposed to any brave piece of service.
Among Hannibals actions of mervail, this is reckoned for one, that having a
very huge army, gathered out of several nations, and all led to serve in a
strange country, there was never any dissension neither amongst themselves,
nor against their General, as well in their bad fortune as their good. Which
could not proceed from any thing else than from that barbarous cruelty of his,
which together with his exceeding many virtues, rendered him to his soldiers
both venerable and terrible; without which, to that ^ff^ct his other virtues
had served him to little purpose: and some writers though not of the best
advised, on one side admire these his worthy actions, and on the otherside,
condemn the principal causes thereof. And that it is true, that his other
virtues would not have sufficed him, we may consider in Scipio, the rarest man
not only in the days he liv^d, but even in the memory of man; from whom his
army rebel'd in Spain: which grew only upon his too much clemency, which had
given way to his soldiers to become more licentious, than was well tolerable
by military discipline: for which he was reproved by Fabius Maximus in the
Senate, who termed him the corrupter of the Roman soldiery. The Locrensians
having been destroyed by a Lieutenant of Scipio's, were never revenged by him,
nor the insolence of that Lieutenant punished; all this arising from his easy
nature: so that one desiring to excuse him in the Senate, said, that there were
many men knew better how to keep themselves from faults, than to correct the
faults of other men: which disposition of his in time would have wronged
Scipio's reputation and gloory, had he therewith continued in his commands: but
living under the government of the Senate, this quality of his that would have
disgraced him not only was concealed, but proved to the advancement of his
glory. I conclude then, returning to the purpose of being feared, and beloved;
insomuch as men love at their own pleasure, and to serve their own turn, and
their fear depends upon the Princes pleasure, every wise Prince ought to ground
upon that which is of himself, and not upon that which is of another: only
this, he ought to use his best wits to avoid hatred, as was said.

CHAP. XVIII.
In what manner Princes ought to keep their words.

HOw commendable in a Prince it is to keep his word, and live with integrity,
not making use of cunning and subtlety, every one knows well: yet we see by
experience in these our days, that those Princes have effected great matters,
who have made small reckoning of keeping their words, and have known by their
craft to turn and wind men about, and in the end, have overcome those who have
grounded upon the truth. You must then know, there are two kinds of combating
or fighting; the one by right of the laws, the other merely by force. That
first way is proper to men, the other is also common to beasts: but because the
first many times suffices not, there is a necessity to make recourse to the
second; wherefore it behooves a Prince to know how to make good use of that
part which belongs to a beast, as well as that which is proper to a man. This
part has been covertly showed to Princes by ancient writers; who say that
Achilles and many others of those ancient Princes were entrusted to Chiron the
Senator, to be brought up under his discipline: the moral of this, having for
their teacher one that was half a beast and half a man, was nothing else, but
that it was needful for a Prince to understand how to make his advantage of the
one and the other nature, because neither could subsist without the other. A
Prince then being necessitated to know how to make use of that part belonging
to a beast, ought to serve himself of the conditions of the Fox and the Lion;
for the Lion cannot keep himself from snares, nor the Fox defend himself
against the Wolves. He had need then be a Fox, that he may beware of the
snares, and a Lion that he may scare the wolves. Those that stand wholly upon
the Lion, understand not well themselves. And therefore a wise Prince cannot,
nor ought not keep his faith given, when the observance thereof turns to
disadvantage, and the occasions that made him promise, are past. For if men
were all good, this rule would not be allowable; but being they are full of
mischief, and would not make it good to thee, neither art thou tied to keep it
with them: nor shall a Prince ever want lawful occasions to give color to
this breach. Very many modern examples hereof might be alleged, wherein might
be showed how many peaces concluded, and how many promises made, have been
violated and broken by the infidelity of Princes; and ordinarily things have
best succeeded with him that has been nearest the Fox in condition. But it is
necessary to understand how to set a good color upon this disposition, and to
be able to fain and dissemble thoroughly; and men are so simple, and yield so
much to the present necessities, that he who has a mind to deceive, shall
always find another that will be deceivd. I will not conceal any one of the
examples that have been of late. Alexander the sixth, never did any thing else
than deceive men, and never meant otherwise, and always found whom to work
upon; yet never was there man would protest more effectually, nor aver any
thing with more solemn oaths, and observe them less than he; nevertheless, his
cousenages all thrived well with him; for he knew how to play this part
cunningly. Therefore is there no necessity for a Prince to be endued with all
above written qualities, but it behooveth well that he seem to be so; or rather
I will boldly say this, that having these qualities, and always regulating
himself by them, they are hurtful; but seeming to have them, they are
advantageous; as to seem pitiful, faithful, mild, religious, and of integrity,
and indeed to be so; provided withal thou be of such a composition, that if
need require to use the contrary, thou can, and know how to apply thy self
thereto. And it suffices to conceive this, that a Prince, and especially a new
Prince, cannot observe all those things, for which men are held good; he being
often forced, for the maintenance of his State, to do contrary to his faith,
charity, humanity, and religion: and therefore it behooves him to have a mind
so disposd, as to turn and take the advantage of all winds and fortunes; and
as formerly I said, not forsake the good, while he can; but to know how to make
use of (...) evil upon necessity. A Prince then ought to have a special care,
that he never let fall any words, but what are all seasoned with the five above
written qualities, and let him seem to him that sees and hears him, all pity,
all faith, all integrity, all humanity, all religion; nor is there any thing
more necessary for him to seem to have, than this last quality: for all men in
general judge thereof, rather by the sight, than by the touch; for every man
may come to the sight of him, few come to the touch and feeling of him; yvery
man may come to see what thou seem, few come to perceive and understand what
thou art; and those few dare not oppose the opinion of many, who have the
majesty of State to protect them: And in all men's actions, especially those of
Princes wherein there is no judgment to appeal unto men, forbear to give
their censures, till the events and ends of things. Let a Prince therefore take
the surest courses he can to maintain his life and State: the means shall
always be thought honorable, and commended by every one; for the vulgar is
over-taken with the appearance and event of a thing: and for the most part of
people, they are but the vulgar: the others that are but few, take place where
the vulgar have no subsisteance. A Prince there is in these days, whom I shall
not do well to name, that preaches nothing else but peace and faith; but had he
kept the one and the other, several times had they taken from him his state and
reputation.

In the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth Chap. our Author descends to
particulars, persuading his Prince in his sixteenth to such a suppleness of
disposition, as that upon occasion he can make use either of liberality or
miserabley ness, as need shall require. But that of liberality is to last no
longer than while he is in the way to some design: which if he well weigh, is
not really a reward of virtue, how ere it seems; but a bait and lure to bring
birds to the net. In the seventeenth Chap. he treats of clemency and cruelty,
neither of which are to be exercised by him as acts of mercy or justice; but as
they may serve to advantage his further purposes. And lest the Prince should
incline too much to clemnecy, our Author allows rather the restraint by fear,
than by love. The contrary to which all stories show us. I will say this only,
cruelty may cut of the power of some, but causes the hatred of all, and gives a
will to most to take the first occasion offered for revenge. In the eighteenth
Chap. our Author discourses how Princes ought to govern themselves in keeping
their promises made: whereof he says they ought to make such small reckoning,
as that rather they should know by their craft how to turn and wind men about,
whereby to take advantage of all winds and fortunes. To this I would oppose
that in the fifteenth Psalm. v. 5. He that swears to his neighbor, and
disappointeth him not, though it were to his own hindrance. It was a King that
writ it, and me thinks the rule he gave, should well befit both King and
Subject: and surely this persuades against all taking of advantages. A man may
reduce all the causes of faith-breaking to three heads. One may be, because he
that promised, had no intention to keep his word; and this is a wicked and
malicious way of dealing. A second may be, because he that promisd, repents
of his promise made; and that is grounded on unconstancy, and lightness in that
he would not be well resolved before he entered into covenant. The third may be,
when it so falls out, that it lies not in his power that made the promise to
perform it. In which case a man ought to imitate the good debtor, who having
not wherewithal to pay, hides not himself, but presents his person to his
creditor, willingly suffering imprisonment. The first and second are very
vicious and unworthy of a Prince: in the third, men might well be directed by
the examples of those two famous Romans, Regulus and Posthumous. I shall close
this with the answer of Charles the fifth, when he was pressed to break his
word with Luther for his safe return from Worms; Fides rerum (...) Xenocarus
i^ vit. Car. Quinti.
promissarum etsi toto mundo exulet, tamen apud imperatorem eam consistere
oportet. Though truth be banished out of the whole world, yet should it always
find harbor in an Emperors beast.

CHAP. XIX.
That Princes should take a care, not to incur contempt or batred.

BUt because among the qualities, whereof formerly mention is made, I have
spoken of those of most importance, I will treat of the others more briefly
under these qualityes that a Prince is to beware, as in part is abovesaid, and
that he fly those things which cause him to be odious or vile: and when ever he
shall avoid this, he shall fully have played his part, and in the other
disgrace, he shall find no danger at all. There is nothing makes him so odious,
as I said, as his extortion of his subjects goods, and abuse of their women,
from which he ought to forbear: and so long as he wrongs not his whole people,
neither in their goods, nor honors, they live content, and he has only to
strive with the Ambition of some sew: which many ways and easily too, is
restrained. To be held various, light, effeminate, faint-hearted, unresolved,
these make him be contemnd and thought base, which a Prince should shun like
rocks, and take a care that in all his actions there appear magnanimity,
courage, gravity, and valor; and that in all the private affairs of his
subjects, he orders it so, that his word stand irrevocable: and maintain
himself in such repute, that no man may think either to deceive or wind and
turn him about: that Prince that gives such an opinion of himself, is much
esteemed, and against him who is so well esteemed, hardly are any conspiracies
made by his subjects, or by forreiners any invasion, when once notice is taken
of his worth, and how much he is reverenced by his subjects: For a Prince ought
to have two fears, the one from within, in regard of his subjects; the other
from abroad, in regard of his mighty neighbors; from these he defends himself
by good arms and good friends; and always he shall have good friends, if he
have good arms; and all things shall always stand sure at home, when those
abroad are firm, in case some conspiracy have not disturbed them; and however
the foreign masters stand but ticklishly; yet if he have taken such courses at
home, and lived as we have prescribed, he shall never be able (in case he
forsake not himself) to resist all possibility, force and violence, as I said
Nabis the Spartan did: but touching his subjects, even when his affairs abroad
are settled, it is to be feared they may conspire privily; from which a Prince
sufficiently secure himself by shunning to be hated or contemned, and keeping
himself in his peoples good opinion, which it is necessary for him to compass,
as formerly we treated at large. And one of the powerfullest remedies a Prince
can have against conspiracies, is, net to be hated nor despised by the
universality; for always he that conspires, believes the Princes death is
acceptable to the subject: but when he thinks it displeases them, he has not
the heart to venture on such a matter; for the difficulties that are on the
conspirators side, are infinite. By experience it is plain, that many times
plots have been laid, but few of them have succeeded luckily; for he that
conspires, cannot be alone, nor can he take the company of any, but of those,
who he believes are malcontents; and so soon as thou have discovered thy self
to a malecontent, thou give him means to work his own content: for by
revealing thy treason, he may well hope for all manner of favor: so that
seeing his gain certain of one side; and on the other, finding only doubt and
danger, either he had need be a rare friend, or that he be an exceeding
obstinate enemy to the Prince, if he keeps his word with thee. And to reduce
this matter into short terms: I say, there is nothing but jealousy, fear, and
suspect of punishment on the conspirators part to affright him; but on the
Princes part, there is the majesty of the principality, he laws, the defenses
of his friends and the State, which do so guard him; that to all these things
the peoples good wills being added, it is unpossible any one should be so
headstrong as to conspire; for ordinarily where a traitor is to fear before
the execution of his mischief, in this case he is also to fear afterward,
having the people for his enemy when the fact is committed, and therefore for
this cause, not being able to hope for any refuge. Touching this matter, many
examples might be brought; but I will content my self to name one which fell
out in the memory of our Fathers. Annibal Bentivolii, grand Father of this
Annibal who now lives, that was Prince in Bolonia, being slain by the
Canneschi that conspired against him, none of his race being lest, but this
John, who was then in swaddling clouts; presently the people rose upon this
murder, and slew all the Canneschi which proceeded from the popular affection,
which the family of the Bentivolii held then in Bolonia: which was so great,
that being there remained not any, now Anniball was dead, that was able to
manage the State; and having notice that in Florence there was one borne of the
Bentivolii, who till then was taken for a Smiths son: the citizens of Bolonia
went to Florence for him, and gave the government of their City to him, which
was ruled by him, until John was of fit years to govern. I conclude then,
that a Prince ought to make small account of treasons, whiles he has the
people to friend: but if they be his enemies and hate him, he may well fear
every thing, and every one. And well ordered States, and discreet Princes have
taken care withal diligence, not to cause their great men to fall into
desperation, and to content the people, and so to maintain them: for this is
one of the most important businesses belonging to a Prince. Among the Kingdoms
that are well orderd and governd in our days, is that of France, and therein
are found exceeding many good orders, whereupon the Kings liberty and security
depends: of which the chief is the Parliament, and the authority thereof: for
he that founded that Kingdom, knowing the great men's ambition and insolence;
and judgeing it necessary there should be a bridle to curb them; and on the
other side knowing the hatred of the Commonalty against the great ones,
grounded upon fear, intending to secure them, would not lay this care wholly
upon the King, but take this trouble from him, which he might have with the
great men, in case he favored the Commonalty; or with the Commonalty, in case
he favored the great men: and thereupon set up a third judge, which was that,
to the end it should keep under the great ones, and favor the meaner sort,
without any imputation to the King. It was not possible to take a better, nor
wiser course then this; nor a surer way to secure the King, and the Kingdom.
From whence we may draw another conclusion worthy of note, that Princes ought
to cause others to take upon them the matters of blame and imputation; and upon
themselves to take only those of grace and favor. Here again I conclude, that
a Prince ought to make good esteem of his Nobility, but not thereby to incur
the Commons hatred: It would seem perhaps to many, considering the life and
death of many Roman Emperors, that they were examples contrary to my opinion,
finding that some have lived worthily, and showed many rare virtues of the
mind, and yet have lost the Empire, and been put to death by their own
subjects, conspiring against them. Intending then to answer these objections, I
shall discourse upon the qualities of some Emperors, declaring the occasions
of their ruin, not disagreeing from that which I have alledgd; and part
thereof I will bestow on the consideration of these things, which are worthy to
be noted by him that reads the actions of those times: and it shall suffice me
to take all those Emperors that succeeded in the Empire from Marcus the
Philosopher to Maximinus, who were Mercus and Commodus his son, Pertinax,
Julian, Severus, Antonius, Caracalla his son, Macrinus, Heliogabalus,
Alexander, and Maximin. And first it is to be noted, that where in the other
Principalities, they are to contend only with the ambition of the Nobles, and
the insolence of the people; the Roman Emperors had a third difficulty,
having to support the cruelty and covetousness of the soldiers, which was so
hard a thing, that it caused the ruin of many, being hard to satisfy the
soldiers, and the people; for the people love their quiet, and therefore
affect modest Princes; and the soldiers love a Prince of a warlike courage,
that is insolent, cruel, and plucking from every one: which things they would
have them exercise upon the people, whereby they might be able to double their
stipends, and satisfy their avarice and cruelty: whence it proceeds, that
those Emperous who either by Nature or by Art, had not such a reputation, as
therewith they could curb the one and the other, were always ruind: and the
most of them, specially those who as new men came to the principality, finding
the difficulty of those two different humors, applied themselves to content
the sholdiers, making small account of wronging the people, which was a course
then necessary; for the Princes not being able to escape the hatred of every
one, ought first endeavor that they incurse not the hatred of any whole
universality; and when they cannot attain thereunto, they are to provide with
all industry, to avoid the hatred of those universalities that are the most
mighty. And therefore those Emperors, who because they were but newly called to
the Empire, had need of extraordinary favors, more willingly stuck to the
soldiers, than to the people; which nevertheless turned to their advantage, or
otherwise, according as that Prince knew how to maintain his repute with them.
From these causes aforesaid proceeded it, that Marcus Pertinax, and Alexander,
though all living modestly, being lovers of justice, and enemies of cruelty,
courteous and bountiful, had all from Marcus on ward, miserable ends; Marcus
only lived and died exceedingly honored: for he came to the Empire by
inheritance, and was not to acknowledge it either from the soldiers, nor from
the people: afterward being accompanied with many virtues, which made him
venerable, he held always whilst he lived the one and the other order within
their limits, and was never either hated, or contemnd. But Pertinax was created
Emperor against the soldiers wills, who being accustomed to live licentiously
under Commodus, could not endure that honest course that Pertinax sought to
reduce them to: whereupon having gotten himself hatred, and to this hatred
added contempt, in that he was old, was ruind in the very beginning of his
government. Whence it ought to be observed, that hatred is gaind as well by
good deeds as bad; and therefore as I formerly said, when a Prince would
maintain the State; he is often forced not to be good: for when that
generality, whether it be the people, or soldiers, or Nobility, whereof thou
think thou standst in need to maintain thee, is corrupted, it behooves thee to
follow their humor, and content them, and then all good deeds are thy
adversaries. But let us come to Alexander who was of that goodness, that among
the praises given him, had this for one, that in fourteen years wherein he held
the Empire, he never put any man to death, but by course of justice;
nevertheless being held effeminate, and a man that suffered himself to be
ruled by his mother, and thereupon fallen into contempt, the army conspird
against him. Now on the contrary discoursing upon the qualities of Commodus,
Severus, Antonius, Caracalla, and Maximinus, you shall find them exceeding
cruel, and ravinous, who to satisfy their soldiers, forbear no kind of
injury that could be done upon the people; and all of them, except Severus,
came to evil en^s: for in Severus, there was such extraordinary valor, that
while he held the soldiers his friends, however the people were much burthend
by him, he might always reign happily: for his valor rendered him so
admirable in the soldiers and peoples sights; that these in a manner stood
amazd and astonishd, and those others reverencing and honoring him. And because
the actions of this man were exceeding great, being in a new Prince, I will
briefly show how well he knew to act the Foxes and the Lions parts; the
conditions of which two, I say, as before, are very necessary for a Prince to
imitate. Severus having had experience of Julian the Emperors sloth, persuaded
his army (whereof he was commander in Solavonia) that they should do well to
go to Rome to revenge Portinax his death, who was put to death by the
Imperial guard; and under this pretense, not making any show that he aspird
unto the Empire, set his army in march directly toward Rome, and was sooner
come into Italy, than it was known he had moved from his station. Being ariv'd
at Rome, he was by the Senate chosen Emperor for fear, and Julian slain.
After this beginning, two difficulties yet remaind to Severus, before he could
make himself Lord of the whole State; the one in Asia, where Niger the
General of those armies had gotten the title of Emperor, the other in the
West with Albinus, who also aspird to the Empire: and because he thought there
might be some danger to discover himself enemy to them both, he purposed to
set upon Niger, and cozen Albinas, to whom he writ, that being elected Emperor
by the Senate, he would willingly communicate it with him; and thereupon sent
him the title of Caesar, and by resolution of the Senate, took him to him for
his Colleague; which things were taken by Albinks in true meaning. But
afterward when Severus had overcome and slain Niger, and pacified the
affairs and in the East, being returned to Rome, he complaind in the Senate of
Albinus, how little weighing the benefits received from him, he had sought to
slay him by treason, and therefore was he forced to go punish his ingratitude:
afterward he went into France, where he bereft him both of his State and life,
whoever then shall in particular examine his actions, shall find he was a very
cruel Lion, and as crafty a Fox: and shall see that he was always feared and
reverenced by every one, and by the armies not hated; and shall nothing marvel
that he being a new man, was able to hold together such a great Empire: for his
extraordinary reputation defended him always from that hatred, which the
people for his extortions might have conceived against him. But Antonius his
son, was also an exceeding brave man, and endued with most excellent
qualities, which causd him to be admird by the people, and acceptable to the
soldiers, because he was a warlike man, enduring all kind of travel and
pains, despising all delicate food, and all kind of effeminacy, which gaind
him the love of all the armies: nevertheless his fierceness and cruelty were
such, and so hideous, having upon many particular occasions put to death a
great part of the people of Rome, and all those of Alexandria, that he grew
odious to the world, and began to be feared by those also that were near about
him; so that he was slain by a Centurion in the very midst of his army. Where
it is to be noted, that these kind of deaths, which follow upon the
deliberation of a resolved and obstinate mind, cannot by a Prince be avoided:
for every one that fears not to dye, is able to do it; but a Prince ought to
be less afraid of it, because it very seldom falls our. Only should he beware
not to do any extreamd injury to any of those of whom he serves himself, or
that he has near about him in any employment of his Principality, as Antonius
did: who had reproachfully slain a brother of that Centurion; also threatened
him every day, and nevertheless entertaind him still as one of the guards of
his body, which was a rash course taken, and the way to destruction, as befell
him. But let us come to Commodus for whom it was very easy to hold the Empire,
by reason it descended upon him by inheritance, being Marcus his son, and it
had been enough for him to follow his fathers footsteps, and then had he
contented both the people and the soldiers: but being of a cruel and savage
desposition, whereby to exercise his actions upon the people, he gave himself
to entertain armies, and those in all licentionsnesse. On the other part not
maintaining his dignity, but often descending upon the stages to combat with
fencers, and doing such other like base things, little worthy of the Imperial
majesty, he became contemptible in the soldiers sight; and being hated of one
part, and despisd of the other, he was conspird against, and slain. It
remains now, that we declare Maximinus his conditions, who was a very warlike
man; and the armies loathing Alexanders effeminacy, whereof I spoke before,
when they had slain him, chose this man Emperor, who not long continued so,
because two things there were that brought him into hatred and contempt; the
one because he was very base, having kept cattle in Thrace, which was well
known to every one, and made them to scorn him; the other, because in the
beginning of his Principality having delayed to go to Rome, and enter into
possession of the Imperial throne, he had gaind the insamy of being thought
exceeding cruel, having by his Prefects in Rome, and in every place of the
Empire, exercisd many cruelties, insomuch that the whole world being provoked
against him to contempt for the baseness of his blood; on the other side upon
the hatred conceived against him for fear of his crulty; first Africa,
afterward the Senate, with all the people of Rome and all Italy, conspired
against him, with whom his own army took part; which incamping before Aquileya,
and finding some difficulty to take the town, being weary of his cruelties, and
because they saw he had so many enemies, fearing him the less, slew him. I
purpose not to say any thing either of Heliogabalus, Macrinus, or Itlian, who
because they were thoroughly base, were sudenly extinguish; but I will come to
the conclusion of this discourse; and I say, that the Princes of our times have
less of this difficulty to satisfy the Soldiers extraordinarily in their
government; for notwithstanding that there be some considerations to be had of
them, yet presently are those armies dissolved, because none of these Princes
do use to maintain any armies together, which are annexed and inveterated with
the governments of the provinces, as were the armies of the Roman Empire. And
therefore if then it was necessary rather to content the soldiers than the
people, it was because the soldiers were more powerful than the people: now is
it more necessary for all Princes, (except the Turk and the Souldan) to
satisfy their people than their soldiers, because the people are more mighty
than they; wherein I except the Turk, he always maintaining about his person
12000 foot, and 15000 horse, upon which depends the safety and strength of his
Kingdom; and it is necessary that laying afide all other regard of his people,
he maintain these his friends. The Souldans Kingdom is like hereunto, which
being wholly in the soldiers power, he must also without respect of his people
keep them his friends. And you are to consider, that this State of the Souldans
differs much from all the other Principalities: For it is very like the Papacy,
which cannot be termd an hereditary Principality: nor a new Principality: for
the sons of the deceasd Prince are not heirs and Lords thereof, but he that is
chosen receives that dignity from those who have the authority in them. And
this order being of antiquity, cannot be termd a new Principality, because
therein are none of those difficulties that are in the new ones: for though the
Prince be new, yet are the orders of that state ancient, and ordaind to receive
him, as if he were their hereditary Prince. But let us return to our matter;
whosoever shall consider our discourse before, shall perceive that either
hatred, or contempt hay caused the ruin of the aforementioned Emperors; and
shall know also, from it came that part of them proceeding one way, and part a
contrary; yet in any of them the one had a happy success, and the others
unhappy: for it was of no avail, but rather hurtful for Pertinax and
Alexander, because they were new Princes, to desire to imitate Marcus, who by
inheritance came to the Principality: and in like manner it was a wrong to
Caracalla, Commodus, and Maximus, to imitate Severus, because none of them were
endued with so great valor as to follow his steps therein. Wherefore a new
Prince in his Principality cannot well imitate Marcus his actions; nor yet is
it necessary to follow those of Severus: but he ought make choice of those
parts in Severus which are necessary for the founding of a State; and to take
from Marcus those that are fit and glorious to preserve a State which is
already established and settled.

CHAP. XX.
Whether the Citadels and many other things which Princes often make use of,
are profitable or dammageable.

SOme Princes, whereby they might safely keep their State, have disarmed their
subjects; some others have held the towns under their dominion, divided into
factions; others have maintained enmities against themselves; others have
applied themselves to gain them, where they have suspected at their entrance
into the government; others have built Fortresses; and others again have ruined
and demolished them: and however that upon all these things, a man cannot well
pass a determinate sentence, unless one comes to the particulars of these
States, where some such like determinations were to be taken; yet I shall speak
of them in so large a manner, as the master of it self will bear. It was never
then that a new Prince would disarme his own subjects; but rather when he has
found them disarmed, he has always armed them. For being beloved, those arms
become thine; those become faithful, which thou had in suspicion; and those
which were faithful, are maintaind so; and thy subjects are made thy parrisans;
and because all thy subjects cannot be put in arms, when thou bestowest favors
on those thou armest, with the others thou can deal more for thy safety; and
that difference of proceeding which they know among them, obliges them to thee;
those others excuse thee, judgeing it necessary that they have deservd more,
who have undergone more danger, and so have greater obligation: but when thou
disarmst them, thou beginst to offend them, that thou distrustest them, either
for cowardice, or small faith; and the one or the other of those two opinions
provokes their hatred against thee; and because thou can not stand disarmed,
thou must thenturn thy self to mercenary Soldiery, whereof we have formerly
spoken what it is, and when it is good; it can never be so much as to defend
thee from powerful enemies, and suspected subjects; therefore as I have said, a
new Prince in a new Principality has always ordaind them arms. Of examples
to this purpose, Histories are full. But when Prince gains a new State, which
as a member he adds to his ancient dominions, then it is necessary to disarme
that State, unless it be those whom thou have discoverd to have assisted thee
in the conquest thereof; and these also in time and upon occasions, it is
necessary to render delicate and effeminate, and so order them, that all the
arms of thy State be in the hands of thy own Soldiers, who live in thy ancient
State near unto thee. Our ancestors and they that were accounted Sages, were
wont to say that it was necessary to hold Pistoya in factions, and Pisa with
Fortresses; and for this cause maintaind some town ssubject to them in
differences, whereby to hold it more easily. This, at what time Italy was
balanced in a certain manner, might be well done; but me thinks it cannot now
a days be well given for a precept; for I do not believe, that divisions made
can do any good; rather it must needs be, that when the enemy approaches them,
Cities divided are presently lost; for always the weaker part will cleave to
the foreign power, and the other not be able to subsist. The Venetians (as I
think) moved by the aforesaid reasons, maintaind the factions of the Guelfes
and Gibellins, in their towns; and however they never suffered them to spill
one another blood, yet they nourished these differences among them, to the end
that the citizens imployd in these quarrels, should not plot any thing against
them: which as it proved, never served them to any great purpose: for being
defeated at Vayla, presently one of those two factions took courage and seizd
upon their whole State. Therefore such like ways argue the Princes weakness;
for in a strong principality they never will suffer such divisions; for they
show them some kind of profit in time of peace, being they are able by means
thereof more easily to manage their subjects: but war coming, such like
orders discover their fallacy. Without doubt, Princes become great, when they
overcome the difficulties and oppositions that are made against them; and
therefore Fortune especially when she has to make any new Prince great, who
has more need to gain reputation than an hereditary Prince, causes enemies to
rise against him, and him to undertake against them: to the end he may have
occasion to master them, and know that ladder, which his enemies have set him
upon, whereby to rise yet higher. And therefore many think, that a wise Prince
when he has the occasion, ought cunningly to nourish some enmity, that by the
suppressing thereof, his greatness may grow thereupon. Princes, especially
those that are new, have found more faith and profit in those men, who in the
beginning of their State, have been held suspected, than in those who at their
entrance have been their confidents. Pandulphus Petrucci, Prince of Siena,
governd his State, more with them that had been suspected by him, than with the
others. But of this matter we cannot speak at large, because it varies
according to the subject; I will only say this, that those men, who in the
beginning of a Principality were once enemies, if they be of quality so that to
maintain themselves they have need of support, the Prince might always with
the greatest facility gain for his; and they are the rather forced to serve him
faithfully, insomuch as they know it is more necessary for them by their deeds
to cancel that sinister opinion, which was once held of them; and so the Prince
ever draws from these more advantage, than from those, who serving him too
supinely, neglect his affairs. And seeing the matter requires it, I will not
omit to put a Prince in mind, who has a new made himself master of a State; by
means of the inward helps he had from thence that he consider well the cause
that moved them that favored him to favor him, if it be not a natural affection
toward him; for if it be only because they were not content with their former
government, with much pains and difficulties shall he be able to keep them long
his friends, because it will be impossible for him to content them. By these
examples then which are drawn out of ancient and modern affairs, searching
into the cause hereof, we shall find it much more easy to gain those men for
friends, who formerly were contented with the State, and therefore were his
enemies: than those, who because they were not contented therewith, became his
friends, and favored him in getting the mastery of it. It has been the custom
of Princes, whereby to hold their States more securely, to build Citadels,
which might be bridles and curbs to those that should purpose any thing against
them, and so to have a secure retreat from the first violences. I commend this
course, because it has been used of old; notwithstanding Nicholas Vitelli in
our days has been known to demolish two Citadel in the town of Castello, the
better to keep the State; Guidubaldo Duke of Vrbin being to return into his
State, out of which he was driven by Caesar Borgia, razed all the Fortresses,
of that Country, and thought he should hardlyer lose that State again without
them. The Bentivodi returning into Bolonia, used the like courses. Citadels
then are profitable, or not, according to the times; and if they advantage thee
in one part, they do thee harm in another, and this part may be argued thus.
That Prince who stands more in fear of his own people than of strangers, ought
to build Fortresses: but he that is more afraid of strangers than of his
people, should let them alone. Against the house of Sforza, the Castle of
Milan, which Francis Sforza built, has and will make more war, than any other
disorder in that State: and therefore the best Citadel that may be, is not to
incur the peoples hatred; for however thou hold a Fortress, and the people
hate thee, thou can hardly escape them; for people, when once they have taken
arms, never want the help of strangers at their need to take there parts. In
our days we never saw that they ever profited any Prince, unless it were the
Countess of Furli, when Count Hieronymo of Furli her husband was slain; for by
means thereof she escaped the peoples rage, and attended aid from Milan, and so
recovered her State: and then such were the times that the stranger could not
assist the people: but afterward they served her to little purposes when
Caesar Borgia assaild her, and that the people which was her enemy, sided with
the stranger. Therefore both then, and at first, it would have been more for
her safety, not to have been odious to the people, than to have held the
Fortresses. These things being well weighed then, I will commend those that
shall build up Fortresses, and him also that shall not; and I will blame him,
howsoever he be, that relying upon those, shall make small account of being
hated by his people.

CHAP. XXI,
How a Prince ought to behave himself to gain reputation.

THere is nothing gains a Prince such repute as great exploi^s, and rare trials
of himself in Heroic actions. We have now in our days Ferdinand King of
Arragon the present King of Spain: he in a manner may be termed a new Prince;
for from a very weak King, he is now become for fame and glory, the first King
of Christendom, and if you shall well consider his actions, you shall find them
all illustrious, and every one of them extraordinary. He in the beginning of
his reign assaild Granada, and that exploit was the ground of his State. At
first he made that war in security, and without suspicion he should be any
ways hindered, and therein held the Barons of Castiglias minds busied, who
thinking upon that war, rever minded any innovation; in this while he gaind
credit and authority with them, they not being aware of it; was able to
maintain with the Church and the peoples money all his soldiers, and to lay a
foundation for his military ordinances with that long war, which afterward
gaind him exceeding much honor. Besides this, to the end he might be able
hereamong to undertake greater matters, serving himself always of the color
of religion, he gave himself to a kind of religious cruelty, chasing and
dispoyling those Jews out of the Kindome; nor can this example be more
admirable and rare: under the same cloak he invaded Afric and went through
with his exploit in Italy: and last of all has he assaild France, and so
always proceeded on forwards contriving of great matters, which always have
held his subjects minds in peace and admiration, and busied in attending the
event, what it should be: and these his actions have thus grown, one upon
another, that they have never given leisure to men so to rest, as they might
ever plot any thing against them. Moreover it much avails a Prince to give
extraordinary proofs of himself touching the government within, such as those
we have heard of Bernard of Milan, whenever occasion is given by any one,
that may off ctuate some great thing either of good or evil, in the civil
government; and to find out some way either to reward or punish it, whereof in
the wolud much notice may be taken. And above all things a Prince ought to
endeavor in all his actions to spread abroad a fame of his magnificence and
worthiness. A Prince also is well esteemed, when he is a true friend, or a true
enemy; when without any regard he discovers himself in favor of one against
another; which course shall be always more profit, than to stand neuter: for
if two mighty ones that are thy neighbors, come to fall out, or are of such
quality, that one of them vanquishing, thou art like to be in fear of the
vanquisher, or not; in either of these two cases, it will ever prove more for
thy profit, to discover thy self, and make a good war of it: for in the first
case, if thou discoverest not thy self, thou shall always be a prey to him
that overcomes, to the contentment and satisfaction of the vanquished; neither
shall thou have reason on thy side, nor any thing else to defend or receive
thee. For he that overcomes, will not have any suspected friends that give him
no assistance in his necessity: and he that loses, receives thee not, because
thou would not with thy arms in hand run the hazard of his fortune.
Antiochus passed into Greece, thereunto induced by the Etolians, to chase the
Romans thence: and sent his Ambassadors to the Achayans, who were the Romans
friends, to persuade them to stand neuters; on the other side the Romans moved
them to join arms with theirs: this matter came to be deliberated on in the
council of the Achayans, where Antiochus his Ambassador encouraged them to
stand neuters, whereunto the Romans Ambassador answered; Touching the course,
that is commended to you, as best and profitablest for your State, to wit, not
to intermeddle in the war between us, nothing can be more against you: because,
not taking either part, you shall remain without thanks, and without reputation
a prey to the conqueror. And it will always come to pass that he who is not
thy friend, will requite thy neutrality; and he that is thy friend, will urge
thee to discover thy self by taking arms for him: and evil advised Princes, to
avoid the present dangers, follow often times that way of neutrality, and most
commonly go to ruin: but when a Prince discovers himself strongly in favor of
a party, if he to whom thou cleavest, overcomes, however that he be puissant,
and thou remainest at his disposing, he is obliged to thee, and there is a
contract of friendship made; and men are never so openly dishonest, as with
such a notorious example of dishonesty to oppress thee. Besides victories are
never so prosperous, that the conqueror is like neglect all respects, and
especially of justice. But if he to whom thou stickst, loses, thou art received
by him; and, while he is able, he aids thee, and so thou becomest partner of a
fortune that may arise again; the second case, when they that enter into the
lists together, are of such quality, that thou need not fear him that
vanquisheth, so much the more is it discretion in thee to stick to him; for
thou go to ruin one with his assistance, who ought to do the best he could
to save him, if he were well advised; and he overcomming, is left at thy
discretion, and it is unpossible but with thy aid he must overcome. And here it
is to be noted, that a Prince should be well aware never to join with any one
more powerful than himself, to offend another, unless upon necessity, as
formerly is said. For when he overcomes, thou art left at his discretion, and
Princes ought avoid as much as they are able, to stand at another discretion.
The Venetians took part with France against the Duke of Milan, and yet could
have avoided that partaking, from which proceeded their ruin. But when it
cannot be avoided, as in befell the Florentines when the Pope and the King of
Spain went both with their armies to Lombardy, there the Prince ought to side
with them for the reasons aforesaid. Nor let any State think they are able to
make such sure parties, but rather that they are all doubtful; for in the
order of things we find it always, that whenever a man seeks to avoid one
inconvenient, he incurs another. But the principal point of judgment, is in
discerning between the qualities of inconvenients, and not taking the bad for
the good. Moreover a Prince ought to show himself a lover of virtue, and that
he honors those that excel in every Art. Afterward ought he encourage his
Citizens, whereby they may be enabled quickly to exercise their faculties as
well in merchandise, and husbandry, as in any other kind of traffic, to the
end that no man forbear to adorn and cultivate his possessions for fear that
he be despoyled of them; or any other to open the commerce upon the danger of
heavy impositions: but rather to provide rewards for those that shall set these
matters afoot, or for any one else that shall any way amplify his City or
State. Besides he ought in the fit times of the year entertain the people with
Feasts and Maskes; and because every City is divided into Companies, and arts,
and Tribes, he ought to take special notice of those bodies, and some times
afford them a meeting, and give them some proof of his humanity, and
magnificence; yet withal holding firm the majesty of his State; for this
must never fail in any case.

CHAP. XXII.
Touching Princes Secretaries.

IT is no small importance to a Prince, the choice he makes, of servants being
ordinarily good or bad, as his wisdom is, And first conjecture one gives of a
great man, and of his understanding, is, upon the sight of his followers and
servants he has about him, when they prove able and faithful, and then may he
always be reputed wise because he has known how to discern those that are
able, and to keep them true to him. But when they are otherwise, there can be
no good conjecture made of him; for the first error he commits, is in this
choice. There was no man that had any knowledge of Antony of Vanafro, the
servant of Pandulfus Petrucci Prince of Siena, who did not esteem Pandulfus for
a very discreet man, having him for his servant. And because there are three
kinds of understandings; the one that is advised by it self; the other that
understands when it is informed by another; the third that neither is advised
by it self nor by the demonstration of another; the first is best, the second
is good, and the last quite unprofitable. Therefore it was of necessity, that
if Pandulfus attaind not the first degree, yet he got to the second; for
whenever any one has the judgment to discern between the good and the evil,
that any one does and says, however that he has not his invention from
himself, yet still comes he to take notice of the good or evil actions of that
servant; and those he cherishes, and these he suppresses; insomuch that the
servant finding no means to deceive his master, keeps himself upright and
honest. But how a Prince may thoroughly understand his servant, here is the way
that never fails. When thou see the servant study more for his own advantage
than thine, and that in all his actions, he searches most after his own profit;
this man thus qualified, shall never prove good servant, nor can thou ever
rely upon him: for he that holds the Stern of the State in hand, ought never
call home his cares to his own particular, but give himself wholly over to his
Princes service, nor ever put him in mind of any thing not appertaining to
him. And on the other side the Prince to keep him good to him, ought to take a
care for his servant, honoring him, enriching, and obliging him to him, giving
him part both of dignities and offices, to the end that the many honors and
much wealth bestowed on him, may restrain his desires from other honors, and
other wealth, and that those many charges cause him to fear changes that may
fall, knowing he is not able to stand without his master. And when both the
Princes and the servants are thus disposed, they may rely the one upon the
other: when otherwise, the end will ever prove hurtful for the one as well as
for the other.

CHAP. XXIII.
That Flatterers are to be avoided.

I Will not omit one principle of great inportance, being an error from which
Princes with much difficulty defend themselves, unless they be very discreet,
and make a very good choice; and this is concerning flatterors; whereof all
writings are full: and that because men please themselves so much in their own
things, and therein cozen themselves, that very hardly can they escape this
pestilence; and desiring to escape it, there is danger of falling into
contempt; for there is no other way to be secure from flattery, but to let men
know, that they displease thee not in telling thee truth: but when every one
has this leave, thou losest thy reverence. Therefore ought a wise Prince take
a third course, making choice of some understanding men in his State, and give
only to them a free liberty of speaking to him the truth; and touching those
things only which he inquires of, and nothing else; but he ought to be
inquisitive of every thing, and hear their opinions, and then afterward advise
himself after his own manner; and in these deliberations, and with every one of
them so carry himself, that they all know, that the more freely they shall
speak, the better they shall be liked of: and besides those, not give ear to
any one; and thus pursue the thing resolved on, and thence continue obstinate
in the resolution taken. He who does otherwise, either falls upon flatterers,
or often changes upon the varying of opinions, from whence proceeds it that men
conceive but slightly of him. To this purpose I will allege you a modern
example. Peter Lucas a servant of Maximilians the present Emperor, speaking of
his Majesty, said that he never advised with any body, nor never did any thing
after his own way: which was because he took a contrary course to what we have
now said: for the Emperor is a close man, who communicates his secrets to none,
nor takes counsel of any one; but as they come to be put in practice, they
begin to be discovered and known, and so contradicted by those that are near
about him; and he as being an easy man, is quickly wrought from them. Whence it
comes that what he does to day, he undoes on the morrow; and that he never
understands himself what he would, nor what he purposes, and that there is no
grounding upon any of his resolutions. A Prince therefore ought always to take
counsel, but at his own pleasure, and not at other men's; or rather should
take away any man's courage to advise him of any thing, but what he asks: but
he ought well to ask at larger and then touching the things inquird of, be a
patient hear, of the truth; and perceiving that for some respect the truth
were conceald from him, be displeased thereat. And because some men have
thought that a Prince that gains the opinion to be wise, may be held so, not
by his own natural indowments, but by the good counsels he has about him;
without question they are deceivd; for this is a general rule and never
fails, that a Prince who of himself is not wise, can never be well advised,
unless he should light upon one alone, wholly to direct and govern him, who
himself were a very wise man. In this case it is possible he may be well
governd: but this would last but little: for that governor in a short time
would deprive him of his State; but a Prince not having any parts of nature,
being advised of more then one, shall never be able to unite these counsels: of
himself shall he never know how to unite them; and each one of the Counselors,
probably will follow that which is most properly his own; and he shall never
find the means to amend or discern these things; nor can they fall out
otherwise, because men always prove mischievous, unless upon some necessity
they be force'd to become good: we conclude therefore, that counsels from
whencesoever they proceed, must needs take their beginning from the Princes
wisdom, and not the wisdom of the Prince from good counsels.

In this Chapter our Author prescribes some rules how to avoid flattery, and
not to fall into contempt. The extent of these two extremes is so large on
both sides, that there is left hut a very narrow path for the right temper to
walk between them both: and happy were that Prince, who could light on so good
a Pilote as to bring him to Port between those rocks and these quicksands.
Where Majesty becomes familiar, unless endued with a supereminent virtue, it
loses all awful regards: as the light of the Sun, because so ordinary,
because so common, we should little value, were it not that all Creatures feel
themselves quickened by the rays thereof. On the other side, Omnis insipien
arrogantia and plausibus capitur, Every fool is taken with his own pride and
others flatteryes: and this fool keeps company so much with all great wise
men, that hardly with a candle and lantern can they be discernd betwixt. The
greatest men are more subject to gross and palpable flatteries; and especially
the greatest of men, who are Kings and Princes: for many seek the Rulers
favor. Prove. 28. 26. For there are diverse means whereby private men are
instructed; Princes have not that good hap: but they whose instruction is of
most importance, so soon as they have taken the government upon them, no
longer suffer any reproovers: for but few have access unto them, and they who
familiary converse with them, do and say all for favor. Isocrat. to Nicocles,
All are afraid to give him occasion of displeasure, though by telling him
truth. Plutarch. de adulatore and amico ciscernendo.
To this purpose therefore says one; a Prince excells in learning to ride the
great horse, rather than in any other exercise, because his horse being no
flatterer, will show him he makes no difference between him and another man,
and unless he keep his seat well, will lay him on the ground. This is plain
dealing. Men are more subtle, more double-heatred, they have a heart and a
heart, netiher is their tongue their hearts true interpreter. Counsel in the
heart of man is like deep waters; but a man of understanding will draw is out.
Prove. 20. 5. This understanding is most requisite in a Prince, in as much as
the whole Globe is in his hand, and the inferior Orbs are swayed by the
motion of the highest. And therefore surely it is the honor of a King to
search out such a secret: Prove. 25. 2. His counselors are his eyes and ears;
as they ought to be dear to him, so they ought to be true to him, and make him
the true report of things without disguise. If they prove false eyes, let him
pluck them out; he may as they use glass eyes, take them forth without pain,
and see never a whit the worse for it. The wisdom of a Princes Counselors is
a great argument of the Princes wisdom. And being the choice of them imports
the Princes credit and safety, our Author will make him amends for his other
errors by his good advice in his 22. Chap. whether I refer him.

CHAP. XXIV.
Wherefore the Princes of Italy have lost their States.

WHen these things above said are well observed, they make a new Prince seem
as if he had been of old, and presently render him more secure and firm in the
State, than if he had already grown ancient therein: for a new Prince is much
more observd in his action, than a Prince by inheritance; and when they are
known to be virtuous, men are much more gaind and obliged to them thereby,
than by the antiquity of their blood: for men are much more taken by things
present, than by things past, and when in the present they find good, they
content themselves therein, and seek no further; or rather they undertake the
defense of him to their utmost, when the Prince is not wanting in other matters
to himself; and so shall he gain double glory to have given a beginning to a
new Principality, adornd, and strengthnd it with good laws, good arms, good
friends, and good examples; as he shall have double shame, that is born a
Prince, and by reason of his small discretion has lost it. And if we shall
consider those Lords, that in Italy have lost their States in our days, as the
King of Naples, the Duke of Milan, and others; first we shall find in them a
common defect, touching their arms, for the reasons which have been above
discoursd at length. Afterward we shall see some of them, that either shall
have had the people for their enemies; or be it they had the people to friend,
could never know how to assure themselves of the great ones: for without such
defects as these, States are not lost, which have so many nerves, that they are
able to maintain an army in the feld. Philip of Macedon, not the father of
Alexander the Great, but he that was vanquished by Titus Quintius, had not much
State in regard of the greatness of the Romans and of Greece that assailed
him; nevertheless in that he was a warlike man and knew how to entertain the
people, and assure himself of the Nobles, for many years he made the war
good against them: and though at last some town perhaps were taken from him,
yet the Kingdom remaind in his hands still. Wherefore these our Princes who
for many years had continued in their Principalities, for having afterward
lost them, let them not blame Fortune, but their own sloth; because they never
having thought during the time of quiet, that they could suffer a change (which
is the common fault of men, while fair weather losts, not to provide for the
tempest) when afterward mischiefs came upon them, thought rather upon flying
from them, than upon their defense, and hoped that the people, weary of the
vanquishers insolence, would recall them: which course when the others fail,
is good: but very ill is it to leave the other remedies for that: for a man
would never go to fall, believing another would come to take him up: which may
either not come to pass, or if it does, it is not for thy security, because
that defense of his is vile, and depends nor upon thee; but those defenses only
are good, certain, and durable, which depend upon thy own self, and thy own
virtues.

CHAP. XXV.
How great power Fortune has in humane, affairs, and what means there is to
resist it.

IT is not unknown unto me, how that many have held opinion, and still hold it,
that the affairs of the world are so governd by fortune, and by God, that men
by their wisdom cannot amend or alter them; or rather that there is no remedy
for them: and hereupon they would think that it were of no avail to take much
pains in any thing, but leave all to be governd by chance. This opinion has
gained the more credit in our days, by reason of the great alteration of
things, which we have of late seen, and do every day see, beyond all humane
conjecture: upon which, I sometimes thinking, am in some paret inclind to their
opinion: nevertheless not to extingush quite our own free will, I think it
may be true, that Fortune is the mistrisse of one half of our actions; but yet
that she lets us have rule of the other half, or little less. And I liken her
to a precipitous torrent, which when it rages, over-flows the plains,
overthrowes the trees, and buildings, removes the earth from one side, and
lays it on another, every one flies before it, every one yields to the fury
thereof, as unable to withstand it; and yet however it be thus, when the times
are calmer, men are able to make provision against these excesses, with banks
and fences so, that afterward when it swells again, it shall all pass smoothly
along, within its channel, or else the violence thereof shall not prove so
licentious and hurtful. In like manner befalls it us with fortune, which there
shows her power where virtue is not ordeind to resist her, and thither turns
she all her forces, where she perceives that no provisions nor resistances are
made to uphold her. And if you shall consider Italy, which is the seat of these
changes, and that which has given them their motions, you shall see it to be a
plain field, without any trench or bank; which had it been fenced with
convenienent virtue as was Germany, Spain or France; this inundation would
never heave causd these great alterations it has, or else would it not have
reached to us: and this shall suffice to have said, touching the opposing of
fortune in general. But restraining my self more to particulars, I say that
to day we see a Prince prosper and flourish and to morrow utterly go to ruin;
not seeing that he has alterd any condition or quality; which I believe arises
first from the causes which we have long fince run over, that is because that
Prince that relies wholly upon fortune, runs as her wheel turns. I believe
also, that he proves the fortunate man, whose manner of proceeding meets with
the quality of the time; and so likewise he unfortunate from whose course of
proceeding the times differ: for we see that men, in the things that induce
them to the end, (which every one propounds to himself, as glory and riches)
proceed therein diversely; some with respects, others more bold, and rashly; one
with violence, and the other with cunning; the one with patience, the other with
its contrary; and every one by several ways may attain thereto; we see also
two veby respective and wary men, the one come to his purpose, and the other
not; and in like manner two equally prosper, taking diverse course; the one being
wary the other headstrong; which proceeds from nothing else, but from the
quality of the times, which agree, or not, with their proceedings. From hence
arises that which I said, that two working diversely, produce the same effects
and two equaly working, the one attains his end, the other not. Hereupon also
depends the alteration of the good; for if to one that behaves himself with
wariness and patience, times and affairs turn so favorably, that the
carriage of his business prove well, he prospers; but if the times and
affairs chance, he is ruind, because he changes not his manner of proceeding:
not is there any man so wise, that can frame himself hereunto; as well because
he cannot go out of the way, from that whereunto Nature inclines him: as also,
for that one having always prosperd, walking such a way, cannot be persuaded
to leave it; and therefore the respective and wary man, when it is fit time for
him to use violence and force, knows not how to put it in practice, whereupon
he is ruind: but if he could change hi disposition with the times and the
affairs, he should not change his fortune. Pope Julius the second proceeded in
all his actions with very great violence, and found the times and things so
conformable to that his manner of proceeding that in all of them he had happy
success. Consider the first exploit he did at Bolonia, even while John
Bentivolio lived: the Venetians were not well contented therewith; the King of
Spain likewise with the French, had treated of that enterprises; and
nowithstanding all this, he stirrd up by his own rage and fierceness,
personally undertook that expedition: which action of his put in suspense and
stopped Spain and the Venetians; those for fear, and the others for desire to
recover the Kingdom of Naples; and on the other part drew after him the King
of France; for that King seeing him already in motion, and desiring to hold him
his friend, whereby to humble the Venetians, thought he could no way deny him
his soldiers, without doing him an open injury. Julius then effected that with
his violent and heady motion, which no other Pope with all humane wisdom could
ever have done; for it he had expected to part from Rome with his conclusions
settled, and all his affairs ordered before hand, as any other Pope would have
done, he had never brought it to pass: For the King of France would have
devised a thousand excuses, and others would have put him in as many fears. I
will let pass his other actions, for all of them were alike, and all of them
proved lucky to him; and the brevity of his life never sufferd him to feel the
contrary: for had he litt upon such times afterward, that it had been
necessary for him to proceed with respects, there had been his utter ruin; for
he would never have left those ways, to which he had been naturally inclind. I
conclude then, fortune varying, and men continuing still obstinate to their own
ways, prove happy, while these accord together: and as they disagree, prove
unhappy: and I think it true, that it is better to be heady than wary; because
Fortune is a mistress; and it is necessary, to keep her in obedience to ruffle
and force her: and we see, that she suffers her self rather to be masterd by
those, than by others that proceed coldly. And therefore, as a mistress, she
is a friend to young men, because they are less respective, more rough, and
command her with more boldness.

I have considered the 25 Chapter, as representing me a full view of humane
policy and cunning: yet me thinks it cannot satisfy a Christian in the causes
of the good and bad success of things. The life of man is like a game at
Tables; skill availes much I grant, but that is not all: play thy game well, but
that will not win: the chance thou throwest must accord with thy play.
Examine this; play never so surely, play never so probably, unless the chance
thoucastest, lead thee forward to advantage, all hazards are losses, and thy
sure play leaves thee in the lurch. The sum of this is set down in Ecclesiastes
chap, 9. v. 11. The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong;
neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet
favor to men of skill; but time and chance hapeneth to them all. Our cunning
Author for all his exact rules he delivere in his books, could not fence
against the despite of Fortune, as he complains in his Epistle to this book.
Nor that great example of policy, Duke Valentine, whom cur Author commends to
Princes for his crafts-master, could so ruffle or force his mistress Fortune,
that he could keep her in obedience. Man can contribute no more to his actions
that virtue and wisdom: but the success depends upon a power above. Surely
there is the finger of god; or as Prove. 16. v. 33. The lot is cast into the
lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. It was nor Joseph's wisdom
made all things thrive under his hand; but because the Lord was with him, and
that which he did, the Lord made it to prosper, Gen 39. Surely this is a
blessing proceeding from the divine providence, which beyond humane capacity so
cooperateth with the causes, as that their effects prove answerable, and
sometimes (that we may know there is something above the ordinary causes) the
success returns with such a supereminency of worth, that it far exceeds the
virtue of the ordinary causes.

CHAP. XXVI.
An Exhortation to free Italy from the Barbarians.

HAving then weighed all things above discoursed, and devising with my self,
whether at this present in Italy the time might serve to honor a new Prince,
and whether there were matter that might minister occasion to a wise and
valorous Prince, to introduce such a form, that might do honor to him, and
good to the whole generality of the people in the country: me thinks so many
things concur in favor of a new Prince, that I know not whether there were
ever any time more proper for this purpose. And if as I said, it was necessary,
desiring to see Moses his virtue, that the children of Israel should be
inthrald in Egypt; and to have experience of the magnanimity of Cyrus his
mind, that the Persians should be oppressed by the Medes; and to set forth the
excellency of Theseus, that the Athenians should be dispersed; so at this
present now we are desirous to know the valor of an Italian spirit, it were
necessary Italy should be reduced to the same terms it is now in, and were in
more slavery than the Hebrews were; more subject than the Persians; more
scatterd than the Athenians; without head, without order, battered, pillaged,
rent asunder, overrun, and had undergone all kind of destruction. And however
even in these later days, we have had some kind of show of hope in some one,
whereby we might have conjectured, that he had been ordained for the
deliverance hereof, yet it proved afterward, that in the very height of all
his actions he was curbed by fortune, insomuch that this poor country
remaining as it were without life, attends still for him that shall heal her
wounds, give an end to all those pillagings and sackings of Lombardy, to those
robberies and taxations of the Kingdom, and of Tuscany, and heal them of their
soars, now this long time gangrened. We see how she makes her prayers to God,
that he send some one to redeem her from these Barbarous cruelties and
insolences. We see her also wholly ready and disposed to follow any colors,
provided there be any one take them up. Nor do we see at this present, that she
can look for other, than your Illustrious Family, to become Cheiftain of this
deliverance, which has now by its own virtue and Fortune been so much exalted,
and favored by God and the Church, whereof it now holds the Principality: and
this shall not be very hard for you to do, if you shall call to mind the former
actions, and lives of those that are above named. And though those men were
very rare and admirable, yet were they men, and every one of them began upon
less occasion than this; for neither was their enterprise more just than this,
nor more easy; nor was God more their friend, than yours. Here is very great
justice: for that war is just, that is necessary; and those arms are
religious, when there is no hope left otherwhere, but in them. Here is an
exceeding good disposition thereto: nor can there be, where there is a good
disposition, a great difficulty, provided that use be made of those orders,
which I propounded for aim and direction to you. Besides this, here we see
extraordinary things without example effected by God; the sea was opened, a
cloud guided the way, devotion poured forth the waters, and it rained down
Manna; all these things have concurred in your greatness, the rest is left for
you to do. God will not do every thing himself, that he may not take from us
our free will, and part of that glory that belongs to us. Neither is it a
marvel, if any of the aforenamed Italians have not been able to compass that,
which we may hope your illustrious family shall: though in so many revolutions
of Italy, and so many feats of war, it may seem that the whole military virtue
therein be quite extinguished; for this arises from that the ancient orders
thereof were not good; and there has since been none that has known how to
invent new ones. Nothing can so much honor a man rising a new, as new laws and
new ordinances devised by him: these things when they have a good foundation
given them, and contain in them their due greatness, gain him reverence and
admiration; and in Italy their wants not the matter wherein to introduce any
form. Here is great virtue in the members, were it not wanting in the heads.
Consider in the single fights that have been, and duels, how much the Italians
have excelled in their strength, activity and address; but when they come to
armies, they appear not, and all proceeds from the weakness of the Chieftaines;
for they that understand the managing of these matters, are not obeyed; and
every one presumes to understand; hitherto there having not been any one so
highly raised either by fortune or virtue, as that others would submit unto
him. From hence proceeds it, that in so long time, and in so many battles fough
for these last past 20 years, when there has been an army wholly Italian, it
always has had evil success; whereof the river Tarus first was witness,
afterward Alexandria, Capua, Genua, Vayla, Bolonia, Mestri. Your Illustrious
family then being desirous to tread the footsteps of these worthyes who
redeemed their countries, must above all things as the very foundation of the
whole sabrick, be furnished with soldiers of your own natives: because you
cannot have more faithful, true, nor better soldiers; and though every one of
them be good, all together they will become better when they shall find
themselves entertained, commanded, and honored by their own Prince. Wherefore
it is necessary to provide for those arms, whereby to be able with the Italian
valor to make a defense against forreiners. And however the Swisse infantry and
Spanish be accounted terrible; yet is there defect in both of them, by which a
third order might not only oppose them, but may be confident to vanquish them:
for the Spaniards are not able to endure the Horse, and the Swisse are to fear
the foot, when they encounter with them, as resolute in the fight as they;
whereupon it has been seen, and upon experience shall be certain, that the
Spaniards are not able to bear up against the French Cavalery, and the Swisses
have been routed by the Spanish Foot. And though touching this last, there has
not been any entire experience had, yet was there some proof thereof given in
the battle of Ravenna, when the Spanish Foot affronted the Dutch battalions,
which keep the same rank the Swisses do, where the Spaniards with their
nimbleness of body, and the help of their targets entered in under their Pikes,
and there stood safe to offend them, the Dutch men having no remedy: and had it
not been for the Cavalery that rusht in upon them, they had quite defeated
them. There may then (the defect of the one and other of these two infantries
being discoverd) another kind of them be a new ordained, which may be able to
make resistance against the Horse, and not fear the Foot, which shall not be a
new sort of arms, but change of orders. And these are some of those things
which ordained a new, gain reputation and greatness to a new Prince. Therefore
this occasion should not be let pass, to the end that Italy after so long a
time may see some one redeemed of hers appear. Nor can I express with what
dearness of affection he would be received in all those countries which have
suffered by those foreign scums, with what thirst of revenge, with what
resolution of fidelity, with what piety, with what tears. Would any gates be
shut again him? Any people deny him obedience? Any envy oppose him? Would not
every Italian fully consent with him? This government of the Barbarians stinks
in every ones nostrils. Let your Illustrious Family then undertake this worthy
exployt with that courage and those hopes wherewith such just actions are to be
attempted; to the end that under your colors, this country may be enabled,
and under the protection of your fortune that saying of Petrarch be verifyed.

Virtue contr'ul fuore
Prendera l'arme, and fia il combatter corto:
Che l'antico valor
Ne gli Italici cor none anchor morto. Virtue 'against fury shall advance the
fight,
And it in the combat soon shall put to slight:
For the old Roman valor is not dead,
Nor in the Italians breasts extinguished.


The life of Castruccio Castracani of Lucca, composed by Nicholas Machiavelli,
and presented to Zanobiglioudilmonti and Lingi Alomanni his very good friends.
ZANOBI and LINGI, my very good friends, it seems a matter of great mervail to
those that take it into consideration, how that all they, or the greater part
of them, who have effected great things n^ this world, and borne up their heads
above others contemporaries, have taken their rises and births from obscure and
base beginnings, or such as have been by fortune extraordinarily afflicted. For
all of them have been either exposed to the mercy of savage creatures, or had
such base Sires, that as ashamed of them, they have feigned themselves sons to
Jupiter, or some other Diety; who these have been, every one having knowledge
of many of them, we shall omit to relate, as superfluous, yielding rather
distaste than delight to the Reader. I am indeed of opinion that it proceeds
from hence, viz in that fortune willing to demonstrate unto the world, that
she, and not wisdom, gives men their greatness, therefore begins to show her
strength at such a time, when wisdom can challenge no interest, but all rather
is to be attributed as due to her alone. Castruccio Castracani of Lucca was
then one of those, who in regard of the times he lived in, and the City where
he was borne, effected very great matters, and had, as others in this kind,
neither a very fortunate nor known birth, as in my further discourse of his
life it shall appear: which I thought fit to bring to memory, as having found
therein a subject of very great example, as well in regard of valor, as
fortune. And I thought I might the better direct this discourse unto you two,
who of all that I know most delight in such glorious achievements. I say then,
that the Family of the Castracani is reckoned among the noble Families of the
City of Lucca, however that in these days it be much decayed, according to the
course of all other worldly things. Of this there was one Antony borne, who
took upon him religious orders, and was a Canon of S. Michaels at Lucca, and in
honor thereof was entitled Master Antony. He had but one sister, who was
married to Buonaccorso Cennami; but Bnonaccorso being dead, and she remaining a
widow, betook her self to live with her brother, with intention not to marry
any more. Mr. Antony had behind his house where he dwelt, a vinyard, whereinto
by reason of diverse gardens bordering thereupon on several sides, the passage
was very ordinary. It happened that one morning a little after the Sun rise,
Dame Dionora, for so was Master Antonies sister called, walking out into the
vineyard, as she was gathering some herbs, after the manner of women, to make a
sallet withal; she heard somekind of russeling under a vine amongst the
leaves, and casting her eye that way, she perceived some little cry there,
whereupon drawing near to the noise, she discoverd the hands and face of an
infant wrapped in the vine leaves, which seemed as if it asked her assistance: so
that she partly marvailing, partly frighted, full of pity and amazement, took
it up in her arms, and having carried it home, and washed it, and swadled it
in clean clouts, as they use children, at her return presented it to Master
Antony: who considering the accident, and seeing the child, was as much amazed
and compassionate as was his sister: and advising together what they should do
in this case, resolved to bring it up, he being a Priest, and she not having
any children. Having then taken a nurse into the house, they nourished it with
as much tenderness as if it had been their own child; and causing it to be
baptized, named it Castruccio after the name of their own father. Castruccio as
he increased in years, so he grew in person and feature, and in every thing he
showed wit and discretion: and quickly, according to his age, he learned
whatsoever his Master Antony taught him: who purposing to make him a Priest,
and to turn over unto him his Canonicate, and his other benifices, instructed
him in that way: but he found him not a subject fit for that regular life: For
so soon as Castruccio came to 14 years of age, he began to grow a little
masterfull toward Master Antony and Dame Dionora, so that he stood no longer
in fear of them, laying aside all Church books, he began to handle arms, and
took not delight in any thing more than to manage them, or with others his
equals to run, leap, or wrestle, and such other like exercises: wherein he
showed such courage and strength, that he far surpassed all others of his age;
and if any time he gave himself to reading, he took pleasure in nothing else
than discourses of wars, and the actions of most famous men: for which cause
Master Antony was much greived at heart. In the City of Lucca there happened
to dwell a Gentleman of the Family of the Guinigi, called Master Francis, who
for fortunes, esteem, and valor, out-went all others the Citizens of Lucca:
who was always traind up in bearing of arms, and who had a long time served
under the Vlscounts of Milan; and because he was a Gibelline, he was accounted
of aabove all that followed that faction in Lucca. This man being then in
Lucca, and assembling morning and evening with the rest of the citizens under
the Governors Palace, which is in the head of the Palace of S. Michael, being
the prime place of Lucca, oftentimes saw Castruccio using of those exercises
with other lads of the town, wherein I formerly said he took delight; and
perceiving that besides the mastring of them, he held over them a kind of
Princely authority, and that they again loved and reverenced him, he became
very desirous to know what he was, whereof being informed by some there
present, he became the more desirous to take him home to him; and calling him
one day to him, asked him, where he had rather live, either in a Cavaliers
house, where he might learn to ride and use his arms, or abide in a Priests
house, where nothing else were to be heard but their Offices and Masses? Master
Francis perceived how much Castruccio was cheared upon the mention of horses
and arms; yet he standing a little out of countenance, Master Francis again
encouraging him to speak, he answered, that if his Patron would therewith be
content, he could not have a greater pleasure than to quit this calling of
Priest, and betake himself to that of a soldier. Master Francis was much
satisfied with this reply: and in a short time so negotiated in this matter,
that Master Antony gave him up to his charge, whereunto he was the rather moved
by the lads inclination, judging thereby that he could not hold him much longer
in his former course. Castruccio then being preferred from Mr. Antony Castracani
the Priests house to the Palace of Mr. Francis Guinigi the Commander, it was a
marvail to think in how short a time he attaind to those virtues and good
qualities, which are required in a complete Cavaliere. First he became an
excellent horseman: for he was able to manage the roughest horse at ease; and,
though but a youth, in jousts and tournaments he was of prime remarque; so that
in any action of strength or activity, none could exceed him. These perfections
besides were seasoned with such manners, and good qualities, as that touching
modesty, it was incredible how that either in word or deed he gave no distaste
to any; to his superiors he yielded reverence; he was modest with his equals,
and pleasant with his inferiors; which gained him favor, not only in the whole
Family of Guinigi, but also in the whole City of Lucca. It chanced in those
times, Castru^cio being now arrived to eighteen years of age, that the
Gibellins were chased by the Gulfes from Pavia, in favor of whom Master Francis
Guinigi was sent for by the Viscounty of Milan, with whom went Castruccio, as
he on whose shoulders lay the charge of the whole troops: in which employment,
Castruccio gave such proofs of his judgment and courage, that not one in this
expedition gaind so much esteem as he, and his name became honorable, not only
in Pavia, but throughout all Lombardy. Castruccio being then returned to Lucca
of far greater esteem than before his departure he was; failed not (to his
power) to gain himself friends, practicing means to win them. But Master
Francis Guinigi now chancing to dye, and having left behind him a son named
Paul of 13 years of age, appointed Castruccio his Tutor, and the Governor of
his estate; having first caused him to be called to him before his death, and
entreated him, that he would take upon him the ear to bring up his son with
that faithfulness he had found himself; and that what kindnesses he could not
return to the father, he would requite to the son. And now at length Master
Francis Guinigi being dead, Castruccio left Tutor and Governor to Paul, grew in
such credit and power, that the favor he was wont to find in Lucca, in some
part was turned into envy, and he was calumniated by many, as who they doubted
had some projects upon a tyranny. Among whom the Principal was M. George Opizi,
head of the Guelfes faction. This man hoping by the death of Mr Francis to
remain without competitor in Lucca, thought that Castruccio, being left with
that trust, by the grace and favor of his discreet carriage gaind him, had
bereaved him of all means to attain thereto; and hereupon sowed many seeds of
scandal against him, whereby to choke his well grown credit. Which at first
Castruccio disdained, but afterward grew jealous of it: for he thought that
Master George would never rest, till he had so far disgraced him with King
Robert of Naples his Lieuftenant, as to cause him to chase him out of Lucca. At
that time there was one Vguccion of Fagginolo of Arezo, then Lord of Pisa, who
by the Pisans was first chosen for their commander, and afterward made himself
their Lord. Diverse outlawed Luccheses of the Gibellin faction abode with
Vguccion, whom Castruccio practiced to restore again with Vguccions aid; and
this design he communicated also with his friends at home, who could no way
endure the Opizies authority. Having therefore given order, as was requisite,
to this purpose, Castruccio fortified the tower of the Honesti, and furnished
it with munition and store of victuals whereby upon occasion he might be able
to defend himself therein for some time: and the night being come, which was
agreed of with Vguccion, he gave the sign to him, who was gone down into the
plain with much people between the mountains and Lucca; and having seen the
signal, he came close to Saint Peter's gate, and fired the antiport: Castruccio
on the other side raised a great cry, calling the people to arms, and forced
the gate on the other side within: so that Vguccion entering with his men,
forced the town, and slew Master George with all those of his family, and many
others his friends and partisans, and chased out the governor, and changed the
State of the City, as Vguccion liked best, to the great damage thereof; for it
appeard then, that there were above a hundred families chased out of Lucca.
Those that fled, part went to Florence, and part to Pistoya, which Cities were
then governed by the Guelfes faction; and hereupon they became enemies to
Vguccion and the Lucheses. And upon this the Florentines and the rest of the
Guelfes thinking the Gibellines faction grown too mighty in Tuscany, accorded
together to restore again these exiled Luccheses, and having Levied a huge
army, they came to the vale of Nievole, and seizing upon Mount Catino, from
hence they went to incampe at Mount Carlo, whereby to have the passage open to
Lucca. Whereupon Vguccion having gathered a good army of Pisans and Luccheses
besides many Dutch horse which he drew out of Lombardy, went to find the
Florentines camp, which perceiving the enemies approach was removed from Mount
Carlo, and settled between Mount Catino and Pescia; and Vguccion sat down under
Mount Carlo about some two miles of the enemy, where for some days between the
horse of the two armies there passed some slight skirmishes: for Vguccion being
fallen sick, the Pisans and Luccheses refused to come to battle with the enemy.
But Vguccions malady augmenting, he retired to mount Carlo for his recovery,
and committed the charge of the army to Castruccio, which was the Guelfes
destruction: for hereupon they took courage, esteeming the enemies armies as
left without a head: which Castruccio understood, and lay still some few days,
the more to confirm this their opinion, making show of fear, and not suffering
any one to go out of the trenches: and on the other side the Guelfes the more
they saw this fear, the more insolent they became, and every day being orderd
for fight, they presented themselves before Castruccios army, who thinking he
had now enough, emboldned them, and having had full notice of what order they
kept, resolved to come to the trial of a day: and first with his speeches he
confirmd his soldiers courage, and showed them the victory certain, if they
would follow his directious. Castruccio had seen how the enemy had placed all
his strength in the body of the army, and the weak^r sort in the wings thereof:
whereupon he did the clean contrary; for he put his best soldiers in his
wings, and his slightest people in the body: and issuing out of his trenches
with this order, so soon as ever he came within view of the enemy, which
solently, as before they had wont, came to find them out, he commanded that
those squadrons in the middle should go on leisurely, but that the rest should
move with speed, insomuch that when they came to join battle with the enemy,
only the wings of each army fought, and the troops in the middle stood
unimployd, because the middle part of Castruccio's army had lagguerd so much
behind, that the enemies body had not yet reached to them: and thus the ablest
of Castruccio's army came to fight with the weakest of the enemies, and the
enemies strength lay idle, not able to endammage those they were to encounter
with, nor could they aid any of their own party: so that without much
difficulty, the enemies two wings were both put to flight, and they in the
middle seeing themselves left naked on each flank, without having whereupon to
show their valor, fled likewise. The rout and the slaughter were great: for
there were slain above ten thousand men, with many Officers, and great
Cavaliers of the Guelfes faction throughout all Tuscany, and many Princes who
came thither in favor of them: to wit, Peter, King Roberts Brother, and
Charles his nephew, and Philip Lord of Taranto: but of Castruccio's side they
came not to above three hundred: among which Francis Vguccions son was
slain: who being young and over-venturous, was killd at the first onset. This
overthrow much augmented Castruccio's credit, so that Vguccion grew so jealous
and suspicious of his own State, that he continually busied his brains how to
bring him to destruction; thinking with himself that that victory had rather
taken his power from him, than settled it: and being in this thought, while he
awaited some fair color to effect his designs, it happned that Pieragnolo
Michaeli was slain in Lucca, a man of good worth and esteem, and the
Assassine fled into Castruccio's house: where the Captains and Sergeants going
to apprehend him, were affronted, and hindered by Castruccio, so that the
murderer by his aid escaped, which thing Vguccion, who was then at Pisa,
hearing, and deeming then he had just occasion to punish him, called unto his
own son Neri, to whom he had now given the command of Lucca, and chargd him,
that under color of inviting Castruccio, he should lay hold on him, and put
him to death. Whereupon Castruccio going familiarly into the commanders
palaces, not fearing any injury, was first by Neri entertaind at supper, and
afterward seized on. And Neri doubting, lest by putting him to death, without
any public justification the people might be enraged, kept him alive, till he
were better informd by Vguccion what was farther to be done in that case: who
blaming his sons slownesse and cowardice, for the dispatching hereof went out
of Pisa with four hundred Horse toward Lucca: and hardly yet was he arrived at
the Baths, but the Pisans took arms, and slew Vguccions Lieutenant, and the
rest of his family, that remaind at Pisa, and made Count Gaddo of Gerardesca
their Lord: Vguccion before he came to Lucca, had notice of this accident
befalne in Pisa; yet thought he it not fit to turn back, left the Luccheses,
like as the Pisans, should also shot their gates against him. But the Luccheses
understanding the chance at Pisa notwithstanding that Vguccion was enterd
Lucca, taking this occasion to free Castruccio, first began at their meetings
in the Piazze to speak slightly of him, afterward to make some hub-bub, and
from thence came to arms, demanding Castruccio to be set free; insomuch that
Vguccion for fear of worse, drew him out of prison: Whereupon Castruccio
suddenly rallying his friends, with the peoples favor made an assault upon
Vguccion who finding no other remedy, fled thence with his friends, and so went
into Lombardy to the Lords of Scala, where afterward he died poorly. But
Castruccio being of a prisoner become as Prince of Lucca, prevaild so by his
friends, and with this fresh gale of the peoples, favor that he was made
General of their Forces for a year; which being compassed, to gain himself
further credit in arms, he purposd to recover for the Luccheses several
town; which rebelld after Vguccions departue, and went also by the Pisans
favor, with whom he had enterd into league at the camp, to Serezana; and to
win that he had built over it a fort, which, being afterward changed by the
Florentines, is now called Serezanello, and in two months space took the
town, and afterward in strength of this credit, he won Massa, Carrara, and
Lavenza, and in short time all Lunigiana: and to stop the passage that comes
from Lombarby into Luginiana, he took Pontremoli and drew out thence Mr.
Anastasia Palivicini, who was Lord thereof. Returning then to Lucca with this
victory, he was met by the whole people: whereupon Castruccio resolving not to
defer longer to make himself Prince, by means of Pazzino of Poggio
Puccinello of Porcico, Francisco Boccansecehi, and Cecco Guinigi at that time
of great repute in Lucca, but corrupted by him, made himself Lord thereof, and
so solemnly and by resolution of the people was elected their Prince. At this
time Frederck of Baviere King of the Romans came into Italy to take the
Imperial crown, whom Castruccio made his friend, and went to him with five
hundred Horse, having left for his Lieutenant at Lucca Paulo Guinigi, whom in
remembrance of his father, he made account of as his own child. Castruccio was
entertaind very honorably by Frederick, who gave him many privileges, and
made him his Deputy in Tuseany, and because the Pisans had expelld Gaddo of
Gerardesca, and for fear of him askd succors of Frederick, he made Castruccio
their Lord, whom the Pisans accepted for fear of the Guelfes faction, and in
particular because of the Florentines. Frederick then being returned into
Germany, and having left at Rome a governor for his affairs in Italy, all the
Gibellins as well Tuscans as Lomdarbs that followd the Imperial faction, had
their recourse to Castruccio, and each promisd him the Principality of their
native country; provided that by his means they might be restord: among whom
was Mattheo Guidi, Nardo Scolare, Lapo Vberti, Gerozzi Nardi and Piero
Buonacorsi, all Gibellins, and outlawd Florentines: and Castruccio plotting by
help of these, and with his own forces to become Lord of all Tuscany, to
gain himself credit the more, entered into amity with Mr. Metthem Viscoti
Prince of Milan: and traind up all the men ofhis own city and country to
arms: and because Lucca had five gates, he divided the country into five
parts, armd them, and distributed them under Captains and colors, so that on
a sudden he was able to bring together above twenty thousand men into the
field, besides the help he might have from Pisa. He then being environd with
these forces and friends, it fortuned that Mr. Mattheo Visconti was assailed by
the Guelfes of Piacuza; who had driven out the Gibellins, in whose behalf the
Florentines and King Robert had sent their troops. Whereupon Mr. Mattheo
entreated Castruccio to affaile the Florentines, that they being constraind to
defend their own homes, should call back their men out of Londarby. So
Castruccio with a good army entered the Vale Arno, took Fucachio, and St.
Miniato with great damage of the country; and upon this occasion the
Florentines were forced to call back their troops: who were hardly returned
into Tuscany, but Castruccio was compeld upon another necessity to haste back
to Lucca. And in that City the Family of Poggio being of such power and
authority as that it had made Castruccio not only great, but Prince also, and
not taking themselves to have been requited as they had deservd, agreed with
other Families of Lucca to move the city to rebellion, and to chase Castruccio
thence; whereupon taking occasion one morning they came armd upon the Deputy,
whom Castruccio had there ordaind over Justice, and slew him, and further
purposing to raise the people to commotion; Steven of Poggio an arcient and
peaceable man, who had no hand at all in this conspiracy, came before them,
constrained his friends by his authority amongst them, to lay aside their arms
offering himself to mediate with Castruccio for them, that he should satisfy
their desires. Thus they laid down their arms, but not with greater discretion
than they had taken them up; for Castruccio having had notice of these
novelties befalne in Lucca, without making any delay, with part of his troops,
leaving Paul Guinigi Commander of the residue, came thence to Lucca, where
having found the tumult appeasd beyond his expectation, deeming he might with
the more ease secure himself, disposed those of his party in several places,
as best was for his turn. Steven of Poggio thinking with himself, that
Castruccio was beholding to him, went to him, and entreated, not for himself,
because he thought it no way needful for him, but for the others of his
Family, praying that many things he would pardon, in respect of their youth,
and many things in regard of the ancient amity, and obligation he had to the
whole kindred. Whereunto Castruccio answered courteously, and bid him be of good
cheer, and told him that he received more content the tumult was appeased,
than he had had trouble that it was raised, and persuaded Steven to cause them
all to come to him, saying, that he thanked God he had given him opportunity to
make a show of his clemency, and bounty. They all then presenting themselves
upon Stevens word and Castruccios, were together with Steven imprisond, and put
to death. In this mean while the Florentines had recoverd S. Miniato;
whereupon Castruccio thought fit to stay that war: considering that as yet he
was not secure of Lucca, being that he could not safely part from home; and
having causd the Florentines to be felt whether they would admit of a truce,
he found them easily yielding thereto; for they also were weary of the charge,
and desirous to stop the expense. Whereupon they made a truce, of two years,
and that every one should keep what they had gotten. In the mean while
Castruccio being freed from the war, that he might not again incur those
dangers and hazards which formerly he had run, under diverse colors and
pretenses, cut off all those in Lucca, who could have any ambition to to aspire
to the Principality, and pardoned not one of them, depriving them of their
Country and Fortunes, and those he could get in his clutches, of their lives:
affirming that he had found it by experience, that none of them would abide
true; and for his better safeguard, built a Fortress in Lucca, and made use of
the materials of their Towers, whom he had banished and murdered. While
Castruccio was thus quiet with the Florentines, and that he strengthened
himself in Lucca, he failed not to do all that he could, without entering into
open hostility to increase his greatness: and having a great desire to take
Pistoya, thinking with himself that by the possessiou of that City, he had
gotten one foot into Florence, gained himself by diverse ways the whole
mountain to friend, and by the factions he made in Pistoya, so behaved
himself, that every one relied much on him. At that time the City was divided
(as always it was) into the Bianchi and Neri; head of the Bianchi was Bastiano
of Possente; and of the Neri, James of Gia: each of which held straight
correspondence with Castrucio, and one desired to expel the other, so that the
one and the other after many suspicions came to blows; James made himself
strong at the gate toward Florence. Bastiano at that toward Lucca, and the
one and the other of them relying more upon Castruccio, than upon the
Florentines, judging him more ready and quick of dispatch in any thing touching
the war, each of them sent to him secretly for aid: which Castruccio promised
to them both, letting James know that he would come in person, and telling
Bastiano, he would send Paul Guinigi his Foster son: and appointing a set time,
sent Paul by way of Pescia, and himself went straight on to Pistoya; so that
about midnight, for thus was it agreed between Castruccio and Paul, they both
arrived at Pistoya and there received as friends: being both entered, when
Castruccio found his time, he gave the watchword to Paul, whereupon he slew
James of Gia, and the other Bastiano of Possente; and all their partakers were
partly taken, partly slain, whereupon they forced Pistoya without resistance;
and for the government of the town, Castruccio constrained the people to yield
him obedience, remitting to them many old debts and duties, and thus did he to
the whole Country there abouts, who all flock't together: partly to see the new
Prince, so that every one fraught with hopes, or admiring his valor, set his
heart at rest. It happened about this time, that the people of Rome mutinyed
upon the extreme dearth of provision there, which was caused by the Popes
absence, who was then at Avignon, and they blamed the Germane government,
insomuch that every day murders and other disorders were committed, which Henry
the Emperors Deputy could no way remedy; whereupon he had a great suspicion
that the Romans would call in King Robert of Naples, and chase him from Rome,
and so restore it to the Pope: And having no nearer Allie, whom he could make
recourse unto, than Castruccio, he sent to entreat him, that he would be
pleased, not only to send him aid, but to come himself also in person.
Castruccio thought this voyage was no way to be put off, as well to render some
service of merit to the Emperor, as because now the Emperor was absent from
Rome, there was some necessity of it: leaving Paul Guinigi at Lucca, he went
thence with two hundred horse to Rome, where he was entertained by Henry, with
very much honor; and his presence in a short time gave so much credit to the
Imperials, that without blood or other violence, all things were well quieted:
for Castruccio having caused a good quantity of corn to be brought by sea out
of the Countey about Pisa, took away all occasion of offense. Afterward,
partly by admonishing, partly by chastsing the chief Officers of Rome, he
reduced them freely under Henry's government; and Castruccio was created a
Roman Senator, besides many other honors he received of the people, and that
Order he took with very great pomp, putting on a gown of cloth of tissue with
great letters before to this purpose, This man is what it pleases God; and
again behind, And shall be what God will. In this mean while the Florentines,
who were displeased that Castruccio during the truce, had made himself Lord of
Pistoya, devised which way they might make it rebel, which by reason of his
absence, they thought might easily be effected. Amongst the banished
Pistoyeses, who were then at Florence, there was Baldo Cocchi, and James
Baldini, both men of authority, and ready for any hazard. These men held
correspondence with some friends they had within; so that with the Florentines
help they entered by night into Pistoya, and chaced thence Castruccios friends
and officers, and some of them they slew, and restored the City her liberty,
which news much displeased Castruccio; so that having taken leave of Henry, he
came with his men by great days journeys to Lucca. The Florentines when they
had word of Castruccios return, thinking he would not take much rest, resolved
to prevent him, and with their forces to enter first into the Vale of Nievola,
before him: supposing, that if they first made themselves masters of that
valley, they should cut off from him all means of possibility to recover
Pistoya; and so having put in order a great army of all the friends of the
Guelfes faction, they came into the territory of Pistoya. On the other side,
Castruccio came with his troops to Mount Carlo, and having learned where the
Florentines army was, determined not to meet them in the plain of Pistoya, nor
to attend them in the plain of Psecia, but if it might be, to encounter them in
the straight of Saravalla; deeming that by bringing his design to pass, he
should surely gain the victory; for he understood the Florentines had got
together some forty thousand men, and he had made choice of some twelve
thousand out of all his; and however he was confident of his own industry, and
their valor, yet doubted he, lest if he set on them in a large place, he might
be environed by the multitude of the enemies. Saravalla is a Castle between
Pescia and Pistoya, placed upon a hill that shuts in the Vale of Nievole, not
upon the very passage, but above to that some two bow-shots of the place, by
which a man passes, is more straight than on the sudden; for of every side it
rises gently but in a straight manner, especially upon the hill, where the
waters are divided; so that twenty men on the one side and the other would
wholly possess it. In this place Castruccio had a design to encounter with the
enemy, as well because his small troops should have the advantage, as not to
discover the enemy but just upon the skirmish, fearing lest his men seeing the
number of the enemies, should be startled. Mr. Manfredi of the German nation,
was then Lord of the Castle of Saravalla, who before that Castruccio was Lord
of Pistoya, had been lest in that Castle, as in a place that was neuter between
the Luccheses and Pistoyeses: nor afterward befell it either of them to offend
him, he promising to abide neuter, and not to apply himself to the one or the
other: So that for this cause, and for that the situation was strong, he had
kept himself thus: but upon this accident Castruccio became desirous to possess
this place. And having very near acquaintance with one of the inhabitants of
the place, he so appointed his business with him, that the night before the
skirmish was to begin, he should take into the town 400 m^n of his, and slay
the commander; and abiding thus prepared, he stirred not his army from Mount
Carlo, the more to encourage the Florentines to pass, who, because they desired
to carry the war far of from Pistoya, and to bring it into the Vale of Nievole,
encamped under Saravalla, with intintion the day following to pass the hill,
but Castruccio having without any noise taken the Castle in the might, p^rted
from Mount Carlo about midnight, and quietly arrived in the morning at the
foot of Saravalla, so that at the same instant both the Florentines and he
began to ascend the side of the hill. Castruccio had sent his infantry by the
rode way, and a troop of 400 Horse he had sent upon the left hand toward the
Castle: on the other side the Florentines had sent 400 horse before them, and
after those their foot moved, not any way thinking they should find Castruccio
upon the top of the hill; for they knew nothing of that he had made himself
master of the Castle. Thus at unawares the Florentine Horse having got to the
top of the hill discovered Castruccios Foot, and were so near approached them,
that they had hardly time to lace on their helmets. These men then that were
unprovided, being assaild by the others that were prepared, and in order, were
fiercely set upon, and with much ado made resistance and indeed some few of
them made head a while: but so soon as the noise hereof desended into the
Florentines camp, all was full of confusion. The Horse were oppressed by the
Foot; the Foot by the Horse, and their carriages; the Commanders because of the
straifness of the place could neither advance nor retire: so that no man in
this confusion knew what could or should be done: insomuch, that the Horse
which were at blows with the enemies Foot, were cut to pieces, and they not
able to defend themselves because the malignity of the site did not suffer
them, yet made they resistance more of necessity than of valor; for being
hemmed in by the mountains on both sides behind by their friends, and before by
their enemies, they had to way open for flight. Hereupon Castruccio having
perceived that his troops were not able to break the enemy, sent a thousand
Foot by way of the Castle, causing them to desend with the 400 Horse which he
had sent before, who struck them so rudely upon the flank that the Florentines
unable longer to resist that violence, vanquished rather by the place than by
the enemy, all took them to flight; and the flight began from those who were
behind toward Pistoya, who dispersing themselves all along the plain, every
one where he best could, provided for his safeguard. This defeat was very great
and bloody; many Commanders were taken, among which was Bandino of Rossi,
Francesco Brunnelleschi, and John of Tosa, all noble Florentines, and many
other Tuscans, besides diverse of the Kingdom of Naples, who being sent by King
Robert in favor of the Guelfes, served under the Florentines. The Pistoyeses
hearing of this rout, without delay chasing out the faction of the Guelfes,
yielded themselves to Castruccio. Who not contented herewith, took Piato, and
all the Castles of the plain, as well on this as on the other side of Arno, and
set himself down with his army in the plain of Perettola some two miles off
from Florence, where he abode many days to divide the spoil, and to feast for
joy of the victory gotten, causing moneys to be stamped in scorn of the
Florentines, and races to be run by horsemen and queans: neither faild he to
endeavor to corrupt some noble Citizens, to open to him in the night the gates
of Florence; but the conspiracy being discovered, they were taken and beheaded,
among whom was Thomas Lupacco, and Lambertuccio Frescobaldi. Hereupon the
Florentines being affrighted upon his defeat, hardly knew any remedy to
preserve their liberty; and to the end they might be sure of aid, sent
Ambassadors to Robert King of Naples, to give him the City, and the Dominion
thereof, Which that King accepied of, not so much for the honor the Florentines
had done him, as for that he knew well how much it imported his State that the
Guelfes faction should maintain the State of Tuscany: and having agreed with
the Florentines to have of them two hundred thousand Florentines by the year,
he sent Charles his son with four thousand Horse to Florence: so that the
Florentines were somewhat eased of Castruccios troops: for they were constraind
to leave their territories and to go to Pisa, there to repress a conspiracy
made against him by Benedicto Lanfranschi, one of the chief of Pisa, who not
being able to endure that his native country should be enthralled to a
Lucchese, conspired against him, plotting to seize upon the Citadel, and to
chase out the garrison, and to slay those of Castruccio's party. But because in
such matters, if the small number be fit to keep the secret, yet suffices it
not to put it in execution: while he went about to gain more men to this
purpose, some there were that be wrayed his plot to Castruccio: neithet passed
this discovery without the infamy of Bonifacio Cerchi and John Guidi
Florentines, who were near neighbors to Pisa; whereupon Benedicto being laid
hand on, was put to death, and all the rest of that family banished, and many
other Noble Citizens beheaded: and thinking with himself that Pistoya and Pisa
were not very faithful unto him, he took care both by his industry and forces
to secure himself thereof: which gave leisure to the Florentines to recover
their strength, and to be able to attend the return of Charles: who being
arrived, they determined to lose no longer time, and gatherd ae great number of
men; for they called together to their aid in a manner all the Guelfes in
Italy, and made an exceeding great army: of more than 30000 Foot, and 10000
Horse, and having advised, which were first to be assaild, either Pistoya or
Pisa, they resolved it were better to set first upon Pisa, being a thing more
likely to succeed, by reason of the late conspiracy there, as also of more
profit, deeming that if Pisa were once gotten, Pistoya would soon render it
self. The Florentines then going forth with this army in the beginning of May
1328, suddenly took Lastra Signia, Mount Lupo, and Empoli, and came with their
army to St. Miniato; Castruccio on the other part perceiving this great army,
which the Florentines had brought again him, was nothing startled, but rather
thought that this was the time, when Fortune was to give him in his hand the
whole dominion of Tuscany, believing they should have no better success in this
of Pisa, than formerly they had in that of Serravalle; and that now they could
not hope to repair themselves again, as then; whereupon assembling twenty
thousand Foot and 4000 Horse, he brought his army to Fucchio, and sent Paul
Guinigi with 5000 Foot to Pisa. Fucchio is seated in a stronger place than any
other Castle, upon the territory of Pisa, because it is in the midst between
the Goseiana and the Arno, and a little raised from the plain; where he
abiding, the enemies were not able, unless they divided their army into two
parts; to hinder his provision either from Lucca, or Pisa; neither could they
but upon disadvantage either come upon him, or go toward Pisa: for in one
case, they might be enclosed in the midst between Castruccios troops, and those
of Pisa; in the other case, having the Arno to pass, they could not do it with
the enemy on their backs, without very great danger. And Castruccio for their
encouragement to undertake the passage, had not placed himself with his troops
along the bank of Arno, but a little aside near unto the walls of Fucchio, and
had left distance enough between the River and him. The Florentines having
gotten St. Miniato, advised whether were to be done, either to go to Pisa, or
to find out Castruccio; and having measured the difficulties of both courses,
they resolved to go and invest him; the river Arno was so low that a man might
wade over it; but yet not so, but that the infantry was wet to the shoulders,
and the Horse even to the saddle. Upon the tenth day then of June in the
morning, the Florentines in battle array, caused part of their Cavalery to
begin to pass, and a body of ten thousand Foot. Castruccio who stood ready, and
intent to what he had in his mind to do, with a battalion of five thousand
Foot, and three thousand Horse fell upon them: neither gave he them any time to
get out of the water but that he was at blows with them; he sent a thousand
light armed Foot up by the bank on that part, under the Arno, and a thousand
above it, the Florentines Foot were much distressed with the water and weight
of their arms, nor had they all yet got over the channel of the river. When
some of the Horse had passed, by reason that they had moord the bottom of the
Arno, they made the passage the uneasier for them that came after them; for the
bottom proving rotten and miry, some of the Horse came over and over on their
riders, and many stuck so fast in the mud that they were there stabled:
whereupon the Florentine Commanders seeing the difficulty to pass on that part,
caused them to retire and make proof of a higher part of the river, whereby to
find a sounder bottom, and the channel more favorable for their passage:
against whom those whom Castruccio had sent under the bank, made resistance,
who slightly armed with targets and darts, in their hands, with huge outcries,
wounded them both in the face and breast, insomuch that the horses affrighted
both with the cries and strokes, would in no wise pass forwards, but fell foul
one upon another; the fight between Castrucio's men and those that were already
past, was sharp and terrible, andd of each side there fell many, and every one
used all his skill and strength to overcome his adversary. Castruccio's men
would force them back into the river; the Florentines strived to put forwards
to make place for others, that being come forth of the water, they might be
able to stand to the fight, to which obstinacy there was added the Captains
encouragements. Castrucio put his men in mind, that these were the same
enemies, which but a little while ago they had beaten at Seravalle. The
Florentines reproached theirs, that they being many, should suffer a few to
overcome them. But Castruccio perceiving that the fight lasted, and that his
own and his adversaries were well wearied, and that on each side many were hurt
and slain, he sent out another band of five thousond Foot, and when he brought
them up to the very back of his own that fought, he gave order that they before
should open, and wheel about, one on the right hand, the other on the left,
and so retire; which thing done gave room to the Florentines to advance and
gain some ground. But when once they came to handy blows, the fresh men with
those that were tired, they staid not long ere they forced them back into the
river, between the Horse of the one side, and the other, yet there was not much
advantage: whereupon Castruccio knowing his own inferior, had given order to
the leaders, that they should only maintain fight, as he that hoped to overcome
the Foot; which done, he might be able with more ease to overcome the Horse;
which out as he purposed: for having seen the Foot forced back into the river,
he sent the rest of his infantry against the enemies Horse, who with lances and
darts wounding them, and the Cavalery also pressing them with greater fury, put
them to flight. The Florentine Commanders seeing the difficulty that their
Horse had to pass, strove to make their Foot pass on that part beneath the
river, to fight with the flank of Castruccio's troops. But the channel being
deep, and all above already possessed by his men, all this proved vain. Whereupon
the whole army was put to rout, to Castruccio's great glory and honor, and of
so great a multitude there escaped not a third. Many Chieftains were taken, and
Charles son of King Robert, together with Michaelangelo Falconi; and Taddeo of
the Albizi Florentine Commissaries, fled thence to Empoli. The spoil taken was
great, the slaughter exceeding great, as a man may imagine in such and so great
a conflict: for of the Florentine army 20231, and of Castruccio's part 1570
were left dead upon the place. But Fortune being enemy to his glory, when as
she should have given him life, took it from him, and interrupted those
designs which he a long time before had purposed to put in effect: neither
could any thing but death hinder him. Castruccio had toyld himself all that day
in the battle, when at the end thereof all weary and sweaty, he stayed about the
port of Fucchio, to attend the soldiers, as they should return from the
victory, and in person receive and thank them, and partly if peradventure any
thing should arise from the enemies, that they had made head in any place, he
might be ready to give order thereto: judgeing it the office of a good
Commander, to be the first to get a horseback, and the last to light off.
Whereupon he standing exposed to a wind, which ordinarily about midday rise;
upon the Arno, and uses to be pestiferous, he was all over chil'd. Which thing
not being made account of by him, was the occasion of his death: for the night
following he was taken with a dangerous fever, which continually augmenting,
and the sickness being judged mortal by all the Physicians, and Castruccio
perceiving of it, called Paul Guinigi, and spoke to him these words; Had I
believed, my son, that Fortune would have cut of my course in the midst of the
way, to arrive unto that glory which I by my so many good suce cesses had
promised my self, I should have less wearied my self; and to thee as I should
have left a smaller estate, so also fewer enemies, and less envy: for I would
have been content with the dominion of Lucca and Pisa, and never subdued the
Pistoyeses, nor with so many injuries provoked the Florentines; but by making
the one and the other of these people my friends, I should have led a life,
though not longer, yet surely more quiet; and to thee should I have left an
estate, though less, without doubt more secure and firm; but Fortune, who will
dispose of all human affairs, gave me not so much judgment, that I was able
first to know it, or so much time, that I was able to overcome it. Thou have
heard, for many have told thee, and I never denied it to thee, how I came into
thy fathers house, being yet a young lad, and void of all those hopes which
every generous spirit ought to conceive, and how I was by him brought up, and
beloved by him as much as if I had been of his own blood; whereupon under his
government I became valorous and grew capable of that fortune in which thou
have and do see me: and because at his death, he committed thee and all this
fortunes to my fidelity, I have brought thee up with that affection, and
increased them with that fidelity, that I was and am bound to. And because not
only whether that alone which was left thee by thy father, but that also which
my fortune and valor got, were thine, I never would marry, to the end that the
love of children should never take me off, from showing in any part that
thankfulness toward thy fathers blood, which I thought I was obliged to show.
I leave thee therefore a very fair State, whereat I am much pleased: but for
that I leave it thee weak and unsettled, I am exceedingly grieved there remains
to thee the City of Lucca, which will never be content to live under thy
government: Pisa is also thine: wherein there ere men naturally inconstant, and
full of treachery: which, however it be diverse times accustomed to serve, yet
will it always disdain to have a Lucchese for its Lord. Pistoya likewise is
left to thee, very little faithful to thee, because it is divided, and by
fresh injuries provoked against our Family. Thou have the Florentines for thy
neighbors, and those offended, and diverse ways injuryed by us, and not
extinguished, to whom the news of my death would be more welcome than the
Conquest of all Tuscany. Thou can not rely upon the Princes of Milan, nor
upon the Emperor, because they are far hence, lazy, and very slow with their
succors: wherefore thou oughtst not to hope in any thing, but in thy own
industry, and the remembrance of my valor, and in the reputation which this
present victory gains thee: which if thou shall know with discretion how to
make use of, will aid thee to make an accord with the Florentines, who being
affrighted at this present defeat, ought with desire to condescend thereto:
whom though I sought to make them mine enemies, and thought it would procure me
both power and glory, yet thou art by all means to seek to gain for thy
friends; for their friendship will prove thy security and advantage. It is a
thing of very much importance in this world for a man to understand his own
self, and to know how to measure the forces of his own courage and State; and
he that finds himself unfit for war, should endeavor to settle his government
by the rules of peace, whereunto thou shall do well if by my advice thou
address thy self, and strive by this way to enjoy my pains and dangers, which
shall easily prove successful to thee, when thou shall account these my
advertisements true: and herewithall thou shall be doubly obliged to me, first
that I have left thee this State, and secondly that I have taught thee how to
keep it. Afterward having caused those Citizens to come to him, who of Lucca,
Pisa, and Pistoya, served in the wars under him; and having recommended Paul
Guinigi to them, and made them swear obedience to him, he died; leaving to all
those, that ever knew him, a happy remembrance of him; and to those that had
been his friends, so great a desire of him, that never any Prince, that died at
any time, left more. His funerals were most honorably solemnized, and he was
buried at St. Francesco in Lucca. But neither valor, norfortune were so
favorable to Paul Gninigi, as to Castruccio; for not long after, he lost
Pistoya, and after Pisa; and with much ado held he the government of Lucca:
which continued in his family till Paul the grandchild. Castruccio then was,
by what is here showed, a man of rare note, not only for those times he lived
in, but for many ages that had past long before. He was of a stature higher
than ordinary, and his limb were well answerable each to other; and of such a
grace he was in his aspect, and entertained all men with that humanity, that he
never spoke with any that he sent from him discontent; his hair inclined to a
reddish color, and he wore it always cut above his ears; and always in all
seasons, whether it raind or snew, he went with his head uncovered; he was very
pleasing to his friends; and terrible to his enemies, just among his subjects,
treacherous with forreiners: nor where he could vanquish by fraud, did he
everstrive to do it by force: for he said the victory, and not the manner how
it was got, gaind a man glory; no man entered more boldly into dangers, nor was
more wary to get out of them: and he was wont to say, that men ought to prove
every thing, but to be astonished at nothing, and that God favors valiant men,
who always chastises the feeble with the mighty. He was also very admirable in
replying or biting sharply or gentily; and as in this kind he spared not any,
so likewise, he was nothing moved, when himself was not spared: so that we have
many things he said wittily, and heard patiently, as these: Having caused a
Duckat to be given for a Starling, and a friend of his reproving him for it,
said Castruccio Thou would not have given above a penny for it, and his friend
saying it was true, he replied, a Duckat is les^ to me. Having a flatterer
about him, and in scorn having spat upon him, the flatterer said, that Fisher
men to take a little Fish suffer themselves to be all moyl'd in the Sea; I will
let my self be daubed by a little spittle, to catch a Whale: which Castruccio
not only heard patiently, but rewarded. When one told him, that he lived too
sumptuonsly; said Castruccio, if this were a vice, there would not be so
splendid entertainments at the Saints Feasts. Passing through a street, and
seeing a young man coming out of a whore-house all blushing because he had
been seen by him, he said to him, Be not ashamed when thou go out, but when
thou entrest in. A friend of his giving him a knot to loose, that was curiously
tied, said, O fool, dest thou think I will loosen such a thing, which being
tied gives me so much trouble? Castruccio saying to one that professed himself a
Philosopher, You are of the condition of dogs, that always go about those who
can best give them meat; No says the party, we are like Phyfitians, who visit
the houses that have most need of them. Going from Pisa to Ligorne by water,
and a dangerous storm there arising, and thereupon being much preplex'd, was
reprehended by one of his company as pusillanimons, saying himself was not
afraid of any thing; to whom Castruccio replied, that he nothing marvayl'd
thereat; for every one valued his life, according to its worth. Being asked by
onu, what he should do to gain a good esteem? answered him; See when thou
go to a Feast, that a block sit not upon a block. When one blasted that he
had read many things, said Castruccio, It were better thou could brag thou
had remembered much. Another bragging though he had tipled much, he was not
drunk; he replied, and Ox does the same. Castruccio kept a young loss, which
he lay with ordinarily, and thereupon being reproved by a friend, telling him
that it was a great wrong to him that he had suffered himself to be so taken
by a Wench; Thou art mistaken, quoth Cactruccio, I took her, not she me. Also
when one blamed him that he was too delicious in his dy^^, he said to him, I
warrant thou would si^ not spend herein so much as I do; That is true, quoth
the other; then replied he Toou (...) more covetous than I am gluttonou. Being
invited to supper by Tadeo Cernardi a ^uc^hese, a rich and magnificent citizen;
and in the hou^. Tadeo showing him a chamber all furnished with cloth of gold,
and that it was all ^a^'d with curious stones, which were diversty wrought with
sundry colors, and represented flowers, leaves, and such like green things:
Castruccio having got together a great deal of spettle in his mouth, spat it
full in Tadeos face; at which he showing himself much troubled, says
Castruccio; I knew not where to spet that I might offend thee less. Being
asked how Caesar dyed? says he, Would to God I might dye like him. Being one
night in a house of one of his Gentlemen, where there were diverse Ladies
invited to a Feast, and he dancing, and sporting with them, more than befitted
his condition, was reprovd by a friend, answered, He that is held a wise man in
the day time, will never be thought a fool in the night. One coming to ask a
favor at his hands, and Castruccio seeming as if he heard not, sell down upon
his knees before him, whereat Castruccio chiding him, he answered, Thou art the
cause thereof, who carryest thine cares in thy feet: and thereby he gaind
double the favor he asked. He used to say, that the way to Hell was easy,
because men went thither downwards, and blindfold. When one askd him a favor
with many and supperfluous worrds, Castruccio said to him, Hereafter when thou
would any thing with me, send another. Such another man having wearied him
with a tedious speech, and telling him in the latter end, Perhaps I may have
tired you with my long speaking; No, thou have not, said he, for I heard not
one word of all that thou have spoken. He was wont to say of one who had been a
handsome boy, and afterward became a comely man, that he was too injurious,
having first distracted the husbands from their wives, and afterward the
wives from their husbands. To an envious man that laughd, he said, Laughst thou
because thou art well, or because another suffers evil? When he was also under
the rule of Master Francis Guinigi, one of his playfellows saying to him, What
will thou that I shall give thee, for a blow on the mouth? Castruccio answered
him, a Helmet. Having causd a citizen of Lucca to dye, who had helpd him in his
rising to his greatness, when it was said to him, He had ill done to put to
death one of his old friends; he replied; You are deceivd, I have put to death
a new enemy. Castruccio commended much those that betrothd wives, but never
married them, like men that say they will go to Sea, but never do. He said he
wondered much at men, that when they bought any vessel of earth or glass, they
found it first whether it be good; but in taking a wife they are content only
to see her. When he was near death, one asking him, how he would be buried? he
answered, with my face downwards: for I know, that as soon as I am dead, this
Country shall go upside down. Being asked, whether he never thought to become a
Friar to save his Soul? he said No, for it was strange to him, that Lazarus
should go to Paradise, and Vguccion of Faggivola to Hell. Being asked, when it
was best to eat, to preserve the health? he answered, if a man be rich when he
is hungry; if he be poor, when he may. Seeing a Gentleman a friend of his,
that made his servant trusse his points, he said, I hope one day too thou
wiltmake his feed thee. Seeing that one had written upon his house in Latin,
God keep the wicked hence; said, The master then must not enter here. Passing
by a way where there was a little house with a great gate, he said, This house
will run out of doors. Treating with an Ambassador of the King of Naples
touching some good of the borderers, whereat he was some What angry, when the
Ambassador said, Fear you not the King then? Castruccio said, Is this your
King good or bad? and he answering that he was good, Castruccio replied,
Wherefore then should I be afraid of those that are good? We might relate many
others of his sayings, wherein he showed both acurosse of wit, and gravity; but
these shall suffice in testimony of his worthy qualities. He lived forty four
years, and behavd himself like a Prince in all his fortunes: and as of his
good for^^nes there are enough monunments left, so likewise would he there
should be seen some of his evil fortunes; for the manacles wherewith he was
chained in prison, are yet to be seen fastened in the tower of his dwelling
house, where they were put by him, that they might bear witness of his
adversity. And because he was no way inseriour to Philip of Macedon, Alexanders
father, nor to Scipio of Rome, he died in the same age they two did; and
doubtless he would have exceeded the one and the other, if in exchange of
Lucca he had had Macedon, or Rome for his Country.

A Relation of the course taken by Duke Valentine in the murdering of
Vitellozzo Vitelli Oliverotio of Fermo, Paul, and the Duke of Gravina, all of
them of the Family of the Orisini; composd by Nicholas Machiavelli.
DUke Valentine was returned from Lombardy, whither he had gone to excuse
himself to King Lewis of France, touching those many calumnies which the
Florentines charged him with, for the rebellion of Arezo and the other Towns
of the Vale of Clicana, and was thence come to Imola; where he plotted his
enterprise against John Bentivogh tyrant of Bolonia: for he had a mind to
reduce that City into his subjection, and make it head of his Duchy of Romania:
which thing being known to the Vitelli and Orsini, and their other accomplices,
they thought the Duke would grow too powerful and that it was to be feared,
lest that taking Balonia, he should seek their utter ruin, that he might
remain the only Champion of Italy: and hereupon they made a diet at the
Magione, in the trritories of Perusia: where there met Cardinal Paulo, and the
Duke of Gravina of the Family of the Orsini; Vitellozzo Vitelli, Oliverotti of
Fermo, John Paulo Baglioni tyrant of Perusia, and Master Antonio of Venofro,
sent by Pandulfo Petrucci head of Siena: where it was argued amongst them
touching the Dukes greatness, and touching what his further intentions were:
and that it was necessary to bridle his appetite: otherwise they ran hazard
together with others, all to go to ruin: and they determined not to abandon
the Bentivoli, and to seek to gain the Florentines; to one and the other of
which places they dispatched men, promising aid to the one, and encouraging the
other to unite with them, against the common enemy. This Diet was suddenly
known throughout all Italy, and those people that under the Dukes government
were discontented, among whom were the Vrbinates, began to hope they might be
able to inovate some things from whence it proceeded, that their minds being
thus held in suspense by some of Vrbino, it was plotted to take the Rock of
Lea, which held for the Duke, and these took occasion from hence. The governor
fortified the Castle, and causing timber to be carried thither, they of the
conspiracy contrived that some great pieces of timber, which they were drawing
into the Castle, should be brought upon the bridge, to the end that being thus
clogged, it could not be lift up by them within: which occasion being taken,
they leapd upon the bridge, and thence into the Rock, by which surprisal, so
soon as it was understood, all that State rebelled, and called home again their
old Duke. Hope now being laid hold on, not so much by the taking of the Rock,
as for the Diet held at the Magione, by means whereof they thought to be
assisted: who having heard the rebellion of Vrbin, imagined it not fit to lose
the occasion: and getting their men together, they put forward, intending if
there were any town of all that State remaining in the Dukes hands, to assail
it: and they sent afresh again to Florence to solicit that Commonwealth to
join with them in extinguishing this common calamity: showing the party
already gained, and such an occasion offered as the like was not to be
expected. But the Florentines for the hate they bare to the Vitelli and the
Orsini upon diverse occasions, not only clave not to them, but sent Nicholas
Machiavelli their Secretary, to offer receipt to the Duke, and aid against
these his new enemies, who was then in Imola full of fear, because of a sudden
and beyond his opinion, his soldiers being become his enemies, he unarmd met
with a war at hand: but having taken heart upon the Florentines profers, he
purposed to temporise, and hold off the war with those few people which he had,
and with treaties of agreement, and partly to prepare aides, which he provided
two ways, by sending to the King of France for men, and partly by taking into
his pay all men at arms, and what others else made profession to serve a
Horseback, and to all he gave money. Notwithstanding all this, the enemies
advanced, and thence came toward Fossombrone; where some of the Dukes troops
had made head: which by the Vitelli and Orsini were broken: which thing caused
the Duke to turn himself wholly to see if he with treaties of accord could stop
this humor: and being an exceeding great dissembler, he faild not of any means
to give them to understand who had taken arms against him, that what he had
gotten he was willing should be theirs: and that it sufficed him to enjoy the
title of Prince, but he was content the Principality should be theirs, and so
effectually persuaded he them, that they sent Paul to the Duke to treat of
peace, and so stayed their arms: but now the Duke staid not his preparations,
and with a great deal of case increased both his Horse and Foot, and to the end
these provisions should not appear, he went and scattered all his soldiers in
several places throughout Romans. In this while also came there to him five
hundred French lances: and however he was now so strong, that with open force
he was able to right himself upon his enemies; yet thought he it the more safe
and profitable way to beguile them, and for all this not to stop the treaty for
peace: and this matter was so far labored in, that he made a peace with them,
and assured to them their old pays, gave them four thousand Ducats in hand,
promised not to molest the Bentivolii, and made alliance with John, and
moreover that he could not constrain any of them to come in person to him, more
than he thought good himself. On the other side they promised to restore unto
him the Duchy of Vrbiu, and all the other places taken by them, and to serve
him in any expedition he should undertake; nor without his permission to war
with any one, or take pay of any one. This accord being made, Guidubaldo Duke
of Vrbin sled again to Venice, having first caused all the fortresses of that
State to be demolished: for relying upon the people he would not that those
sorts, which he thought he could not defend, should fall into the enemies
hands, whereby to bridle his friends. But Duke Valentine having made this
agreement, and divided all his troops throughout all Romania, with the
Frenchmen at arms, at the end of November departed from Imola, and from thence
went to Cesena, where he abode many days to contriye with those that were sent
by the Vitelli and the Orsini, who were ready then with their forces in the
Duchy of Vrbin, what action they should then anew enter in, but not concluding
any thing, Oliverotto of Fermo was sent to offer him that if he would adventure
an ^expedition against Tuscany they were at his service; in case he would not,
they would be ready to serve him against Sinigallia; to whom the Duke answered,
that in Tuscany he would not make any war, because the Florentines were his
friends: but he was well content they should go to Sinigallia: whence it came
to pass that not long after, advice was brought, that the town was yielded to
them, but the Fort would not: for the Governor would render it to the Duke in
person, and to none else; and thereupon they perswad'd him to comebefore it,
the Duke thought this occasion very good, and that it would not any way skare
them, being he was called by them, and not going of himself: and the more to
secure them, he dismis'd all his French forces, which returned thence into
Lombardy, save only a hundred lances of Mounsieur Candi^les his kinsman, and
parting about the middle of December from Cesena, he went thence to Fano; where
withal his wiles and craft he could, he persuaded the Vitelli and the Orsini,
to expect him at Sinigallia; showing them that such strangeness would make
their accord to be neither faithful nor durable; and that he was a man that
desird he might avail himself both of the forces and advice of his friends:
and however Vitellozzo was very unwilling, and that his brothers death had
taught him, that he should not offend a Prince and afterward trust him;
nevertheless, being wrought to it by Paulo Orfino who had been corrupted by
the Duke with gifts and fair promises, he agreed to attend him: whereupon the
Duke before the 30 day of December, 1502, that he was to go from Fano,
communicated his purpose to eight of his chief confidents, among whom were Don
Michael, and the Lord of Enna who was afterward Cardinal: and gave them
charge, that presently as soon as Vitellozzo, Paulo Orsino, the Duke of
Gravina, and Oliverotto had met them, each two of them should get one of them
between them: consigning each one by name to certain two, who should train
them along even into Sinigallia, nor suffer them to part, till they had brought
them to the Dukes lodging, and that they were there taken. He afterward took
order that all his Horse and Foot, which were better than two thousand Horse
and ten thousand Foot, should be in the morning at break of day upon the
Metaure, a River some five miles from Fano, where they should attend him; being
then the last day of Deucmber, pon the Metaure with those troops, he causd some
two hundred Horse to go before him, afterward the Foot moved, and after them
himself in person, with the rest of his men at arms. Fano and Sinigallia are
two Cities of the Matches, seituate upon the bank of the Adriatic Sea fifteen
miles distant the one from the other: So that he who goes toward Sinigallia
has the Mountains on his right hand, the feet whereof sometimes are so
bounded by the Sea, that between them and the water there remains but a very
small distance, and where they are most extended, there is not above two miles
distance. The City of Sinigallia from the foot of these Mountains is not much
further than a bow-shot, and from the Sea not above a mile distant: along the
side hereof runs alittle river, which washes that part of the walls which is
toward Fano, looking toward the high way, so that till it come near unto
Sinigallia, it runs for a good part of the way along the Mountains: and being
come near up to the river that passes along by Sinigallia, it turns upon
the left hand along the bank thereof: So that running on for the space of a
bow-shot, it reaches to a bridge, which passes that river, and stands in front
with the gate that enters into Sinigallia; not by a right line, but athwart:
before the gate there is a bourg of houses, with a broad place before them,
which the bank of the river shoulders upon one side. So that the Vitelli and
Orsini having given order to attend the Duke, and personally to honor him, the
better to give way to his men, they retired their own into certain Castles,
some six miles from Sinigallia, and had left only Oliverotto in Sinigallia with
his band, which was some thousand Foot, and a hundred and fifty Horse, which
were lodged in the bourg before named. Things being thus ordered, Duke
Valentine came thence toward Sinigallia, and when the first head of the Horse
troops came up to the bridge, they passed it not, but making stand, they turned
their horse, the one part toward the river, the other to the open field, and
so left a way in the midst, whereby the infantry passd, which without stop
entered the Town. Vitellozzo, Paulo, and the Duke of Gravina upon their mules,
accompanied with a few horse, went to meet the Duke: and Vitellozzo disarmed
having a cloak all lined with green, being exceeding melancholy, as presaging
his own death near at hand, caused a certain admiration of himself in all, the
valor of the man being well known, and the fortune he had passd; and it is
said, that when he left his soldiers to come into Sinigallia, there to meet the
Duke, that he did in a manner take his last leave of them; to his Captains he
recommended his house, and the welfare thereof, and admonishd his Nephews, that
they should not so much mind the great fortunes of their Family, as the valor
of their Ancestors. These three then being come up to the Duke, and done their
obeisance, were receivd by him with a cheerful countenance, and presently by
those, who had charge to look to them, taken between them. But when the Duke
saw that Oliverotto was wanting, who had staid with his men at Sinigallia, and
attended before at the broad place by his lodging, above the river, to keep
them in order, and exercise them: he winked upon Don Michael, to whom the care
of Oliverotto was committed, that he should take such order that Oliverotto
should not escape him. Whereupon Don Michael rode before, and being come to
Oliverotto, to told him, that now it was not a time to hold his men together
out of their lodgings; because then they would be taken from them by the Dukes
soldiers, and therefore persuaded him to send them to their lodgings, and go
with him to meet the Duke: which when Oliverotto had done, the Duke came, and
having seen seen him, called him; to whom Oliverotto having made reverence, he
joined in troop with the rest, and entered into Sinigallia, where all
dismounting at the Dukes Lodging, enterd with him into a private chamber, they
were held prisoners to the Duke, who presently got a horseback, and commanded
that Oliverotto and the Orsinies Soldiers should be all rifled. Oliveroto's
were all pillaged, by reason they were near at hand; those that belonged to the
Orsini and the Vitelli, being more remote having before heard of the ruin of
their Masters, had time to get together, where calling to mind the valor and
discipline of the Families of the Orsini and Vitelli, jointly all in one body,
in despite of the country, and their enemies power, they saved themselves.
But the Dukes soldiers not satisfied with the pillage of of Oliverotto's
soldiers, began to sack Sinigallia. And had not the Duke by the death of many
stopped their insolence, they would utterly have sacked it. But night being
come, and all stirs quiet, the Duke thought fit to put Vitellozzo and
Oliverotto to death, and having brought them together, caused them to be
strangled. Where neither of them spoke any thing worthy of their life past; for
Vitelozzo prayed, that supplication should be made to the Pope, to grant him a
plenary Indulgence of all his fins; Oliverotto much lamenting himself, cast all
the fault of the injuries against the Duke on Vitelozzo's back. Paul, and the
Duke of Gravina were kept alive, til the Duke had word, that at Rome, the Pope
had laid hold on the Cardinal Orsino, the Archbishop of Florence, and Master
James of the Holy Cross. After which news upon the 18 of January, at the Castle
of Pieve, they also were strangled in the like manner.

The Table of the Chapters in the Prince.
Chap. 1. HOw many sorts of Principalities there are, and how many ways they
are attained to. Page 1 Chap. 2. Of hereditary Principalities. p. 2 Chap. 3. Of
mixed Principalities. p 3 Chap. 4. Wherefore Darius his Kingdom, taken by
Alexander, rebelled not against his successors after Alexanders death. p. 13
Chap. 5. In what manner Cities and Principalities are to be governed, which
before they were conquered, lived under their own laws. p. 17 Chap. 6. Of new
Principalities that are conquered by ones own arms and valor. p. 19 Chap. 7. Of
new Principalities gotten by fortune and other men's forces. p. 23 Chap. 8.
Concerning those who by wicked means have attaind to a Principality. p. 34
Chap. 9. Of the Civil Principality. p. 40 Chap. 10. In what manner the forces
of all Principalities ought to be measured. p. 45 Chap. 11. Concerning
Ecclesiastical Principalities. p. 47 Chap. 12. How many sorts of Military
discipline there be; and touching mercenary soldiers. p. 51 Chap. 13. Of
Auxiliary Soldiers, mixed and natives. p. 57 Chap. 14. What belongs to the
Prince touching military discipline. p. 62 Chap. 15. Of those things in respect
whereof men, and especially Princes are praised or disprais'd. p. 65 Chap. 16.
Of Liherality and Miserableness. p. 68 Chap. 17. Of Cruelty and Clemency, and
whether it is better to be beloved or feared. p. 70 Chap. 18. In what manner
Princes ought to keep their word. p. 75 Chap. 19. That Princes should take a
care not to incur contempt or hatred. p. 80 Chap. 20. Whether the Citadels and
many other things, which Princes make use of, are profitable or dammageable. p.
93 Chap. 21. How a Prince ought to behave himself to gain reputation. p. 99
Chap. 22. Touching Princes Secretaries. p. 103 Chap. 23. That Flatterers are to
be avoided. p. 105 Chap. 24. Wherefore the Princes of Italy have lost their
States. p. 110 Chap. 25. How great power Fortune has in humane affairs, and
what means there is to resist it. p. 112 Chap. 26. An exhortation to free Italy
from the Barbarions. p. 117 The life of Castruccio Castracani of Lucca. p. 123
A Relation of the course taken by the Duke Valentine, in the murdering of
Vitelozzo Vitelli, Olverotto of Fermo, Paul, and the Duke of Gravita, all of
the Family of the Orsini. p. 159
FNIS.

