THE Conquests and Triumphs OF GRACE: BEING A Brief Narrative of the Success
which the Gospel has had among the INDIANS of Martha's Vineyard (and the
Places adjacent) in New England. WITH Some Remarkable Curiosities, concerning
the Numbers, the Customs, and the present Circumstances of the INDIANS on that
Island. Further Explaining and Confirming the Account given of those Matters,
by Mr. Cotton Mather, in the Life of the Renowned Mr. John Eliot.

By MATTHEW MAYHEW.

Attested by the Reverend Mr. Nath. Mather, and others.

Whereto is Added, An Account concerning the Present State of Christianity
among the Indians, in other Parts of New England: Expressed in the Letters of
several Worthy Persons. best acquainted therewithal.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Hiller, at the Princes Arms in Leaden-hall-street,
over against St. Mary Axe, 1695.

WE whose Names are underwritten, are well Assured and Satisfied of the Truth
of these Narratives, concerning the State and Success of the Gospel amongst the
Indians in New England.

George Griffith. Matthew Mead. John How. Vincent Alsop. Isaac Chauncy. Nath.
Mather.


TO HIS EXCELLENCY Sir. William Phipps Knight. Captain General and Governor in
Chief of the Province of the Massachusett-Bay, in New England. TO THE
HONORABLE William Stoughton Esquire Lieutenant Governor. TO Major GENERAL, Wait
Winthrop Esquire To the Reverend, Increase Mather, Praesident of Harvard College.
AND To the Reverend, Charles Morton, Pastor of the Church in Charlstown.
SHOULD I not make Honorable mention of Your Names, for Your continual Care
of, and Inspection into, the Great Work of Civilizing the Indians, and
Promoting the Work for their Conversion* and the hope of future encouraging the
Preaching of the Gospel, to such who as yet are Strangers to the God of Israel;
I should be justly condemnable. I have in the ensuing Scrole, presented to the
World a True Narrative, though Short, of the Beginning, Progress and Present
State of the Indians on Martha's Vineyard and Islands Adjacent, and Places on
the Mainland to them relating, respecting their Conversion. That I have not
spoken of other parts of New England, may be justly Excused; since I have
Written little more than what is of my own knowledge: of other places I must
have presumed from report. Of the Calumnies cast on the Indian Professors, I
have in the discourse presented to Your view, (as in other things) spoken
briefly, which I hope will be some Satisfaction to You. I shall only desire of
You, that encouragement might be given to some English, or Indian, Spirited for
such Service (humbly conceiving an Indian most probably like to effect the
same) to visit the Indians, bordering on New England; who might carry to them
the glad Tidings of the Gospel; but since I may not doubt Your Prudence, in
this as in other your weighty Affairs; I shall not add to this, but Subscribe

Your EXCELLENCIES, And Your HONORS, Most Humble Servant, MATTHEW MAYHEW.
Martha's Vineyard, June 18. 1694.
THE PREFACE.
THAT Blessed Work, which is the Principal Subject of these following
Narratives, was begun about Forty or Fifty Years ago: And there were then
Published, for Three or Four Years successively, several Prints giving account
of its Progress, under the Titles of, The Day dawning, etc. Strength out of
Weakness, etc. Tears of Repentance, etc. to the great rejoicing of the Hearts
of many Precious Saints of that Day. Since that Time, there has been but
little (that I know of) Communicated to the Public, concerning that Affair;
save only that Letter from my Dear Brother, Mr. Increase Mather, to Doctor John
Leusden of Utrecht, which is here Inserted, and which was (soon after it was
Received) Printed in Latin, as it was Written; and also Translated into
French, and into English; and the French Translation Printed in the
Netherlands, the Latin and the English here in London; first by it self, and
the English again afterward in the Story of the Life of Mr. John Eliot, by my
Dear Nephew Mr. Cotton Mather: Which ^ife of Mr. Eliot was first Printed in New
England, and has been Printed thrice here in London, (though not without being
greatly maimed, according to the Direction and Pleasure of our English Index
Exp^g^torius. This Letter when first ^rinted here, was Presented to the King by
the Right Honorable the Lord Wharton. These other Papers, here joined
therewith, were lately Printed at Boston in New England, and sent over from
thence to my Hand by my Dearest Brother there. I give this so Particular an
Account concerning these Relations, that the Reader may rest assured and
satisfied concerning the Truth and Certainty of Matter of Fact, as here
reported.

The Jesuits about 130 Years ago, endeavored to amuse the World by their
Epistolae Indicae, and other Prints, with Stories of the Conversions wrought by
them, and their Companions, in the East Indies and Adjacent Isles. But, as many
of the Stories which they tell are palpable and impudent Impostures, so if all
that they vaunt of their Conversions were true, no milder Censure of them can
be given than that which Christ passes on the Conversions made by the
Pharisees, who (he tells us) compassed Sea and Land to make one Proselyte; and
when he was made, he became twofold more a Child of Hell than they who
proselyted him Of the Justness of this Judgment there needs no other Evidence
than that Book Entitled, Manuale ad Sacramenta Ecclesiae ministranda, D.
Ludovici Ce^queira Japonensis Episcopi opera ad usum sui Cleri ordinatum. Cum
approbatione and facultate. Nangsaquij, in Collegio Japonico Societatis Jesu.
Anno Domini, MDCV. It is a Directory for the Ministering of their Sacraments, as
also for Reconciling or Purifying Churches and Burying-Places, for making
Holy Water, for blessing Priests Garments, New Crosses, a Paschal Lamb, Bread,
New Fruits, Candles, New Houses, New Ships, Nets, New sown or planted Ground,
Sick Cattle; as also for exorcising or driving out Devils from Bodies, from
Storms of Hail and Lightning, from Haunted Houses; with more such Trumpery. It
appears by it all along, what woeful Christians they there make; the most Solemn
Services wherein they are instructed, and to which they are engaged, being full
of abominable Idolatries, foul and gross and sottish Superstitions, execrable
Blasphemies, horrid Conjurations, and damned Magical Practices: In all which
their miserable Converts follow, and have going before them those Agents for
Hell and Factors for the Devil, their wretched Priests and Perverters.

But in these New England Preachers, and Converts among the Indians there, the
Reader will find nothing but the Plainness and Simplicity of the Gospel, and
the Power of the Grace of Christ accompanying it.

It must be confessed, they have not in use among them either Lordlike Bishops,
or Pompous Ceremonies, or Set Forms of Human Composure and Prescribing for
Public Prayer and Praise. But surely there may be Real Converts to Christ,
True and Pure Churches, and Acceptable Worship tendered up to God, without those
Things which the Scripture knows nothing of. The truth is, those Persons whom
the Lord has used and honored in this Blessed Work, have no more fondness for
such Things, than the Zealots for them have for the Preaching and Propogating
of the Gospel. But be Men of what Persuasion soever, if they be good, and be of
Holy Paul's Spirit, they will nevertheless rejoice, That however Christ is
Preached and Received among those who, they and their Forefathers for many
Generations, even beyond all Memory or Record, sat in Darkness, and in the
Region and Shadow of Death, if ever any did. These Assaults upon the so long
quietly continued Possession of the Devil, and the rescuing so many of his
miserable Thralls from his Power, it is likely has much enraged him against
New England, and caused him to bear a singular Spite to that Plantation: And
certain it is, he has by his Instruments raised more Trouble to those
Colonies, than to any other of the English Nation in America.

That this Work of Gospellizing the Barbarous Indians has been set on foot so
soon; kept alive so long, and carried on to such a Progress, by a Generation of
Dissenters, should be looked upon as a Real upbraiding of the other Colonies of
the English Nation in those Goings-down of the Sun, for their great
Neglectfulness of it. Never let it be said, nor let there be occasion given for
it to be thought, that the English Prelacy, Liturgy, and Ceremonies, will not
admit of the Gospel's being Preached to blind perishing Heathens, that they
might be saved; nor that the Users and Approvers thereof can have no Heart or
Zeal for such a Good Work. O that what of that kind has been done in New
England, might provoke others to an earnest Imitation of this Example, and an
holy Emulation of them in this Work so manifestly tending to the Glory of
Christ! So prays

Nath. Mather.
This 29th. of the 11th. Month, 1694/5.
Of the Indians Inhabiting in New England, and Adjacent Provinces.
Language.
TO speak more of the Original of this People, than that they are descended from
the Loins of their great Grandfather Adam, however diverse worthy men, have
their diverse Sentiments; I shall not pretend; but that they are Originally of
one Language is most evident: nor is the admired knowledge of those Ancients so
admirable, for their ready speaking more than Twenty Languages which may
rationally be supposed to have been but one Originally; though suffering some
Change, by occasional accidents: We know, the diverse pronouncing of the same
words, without difference in Dialect, may render the speaker hardly
intelligible, to him that writes alike with him; nor do I think the speech of
these Americans so diverse, but that an Indian who is well acquainted with his
own, may by conversing with those, supposed of a different and other speech,
promptly Express himself in very few years, so as to be well understood by
Forty of these Nations; who by reason of Wars, the want of Trassick and
Commerce, and the advantage, other Nations have had by Literature; have
severally suffered much alteration of that Language, at first indifferently
spoken by all, which yet is not more differing, than the present Language of
the English, from their speech not many hundred years since; which although it
would not readily be understood, by a present Londoner, if he should speak with
his great Grandfather, who than lived, yet has not so altered, but no long
Converse, might render them mutually intelligible. Of words not unlike in the
Indian Tongue hardly intelligible without customary discourse of Nation with
Nation, I might instance in above an hundred; such as Nuppaw, Duppaw, Ruppaw,
the Sun; Attik, Ahtooque etc. a Deer; Winnit, Wirrit, Good; and the like, Pum,
Pum me, Pim, Oil or Fat; these and the like, were doubtless the same words,
little altered; beside which, the alone difference in Pronouncing the same
word, might seem a great difference in the Speech or Language: for Example,
Wirrit pronounced short, sounds Writ, and might be not less readily understood,
by differently accenting the same word; to which I might add words, as such,
Expressing the mind of the speaker, being Compounded of other words, suitable
for such Composition, yet as such might be called new, or distinct from a
speech in former use; of which words, near the one half of this Peoples
Language is. I have been the larger concerning their Language, that such
English whose hearts may incline to so good and great a work, may be
encouraged, to go among those who yet have hardly heard the Name of the LORD
named among them.

Government.
Their Government was purely Monarchical; and as for such whose dominions
extended further than would well admit the Princes personal guidance, it was
committed into the hands of Lieutenants, who Governed with no less
absoluteness, than the Prince himself: notwithstanding in matters of
difficulty, the Prince Consulted with his Nobles, and such whom he esteemed for
Wisdom; in which it was admirable to see the Majestic deportment of the
Prince, his Speech to his Council, with the most deliberate discussion of any
matter proposed for their advice; after which what was by him resolved, without
the least hesitation was applauded, and with at lest a seeming Alacrity
attended.

The Crown (if I may so term it) always descended to the Eldest Son (though
Subject to Succession.
usurpation) not to the Female, unless in defect of a Male of the Blood; the
Blood Royal, being in such Veneration among this People, that if a Prince had
issue by diverse Wives, such Succeeded as Heir who was Royally descended, by the
Mother, although the Youngest; esteeming his issue by a Venture of loss quality
than a Princess, not otherwise than Sachims or Noblemen.

Nobles.
Their Nobles were either such who descended from the Blood Royal, or such on
whom the Prince bestowed part of his Dominions with the Royalties; or such
whose descent was from Ancestors, who had time out of mind been Esteemed such.

Yeomen.
Their Yeomen were such who having no stamp of Gentility, were yet esteemed as
having a natural right of living within their Princes Dominion, and a Common
use of the Land; and were distinguished by two Names or Titles, the one
signifying Subjection, the other, Tiller of the Land.

Villians.
Although this People retained nothing of Record, nor use of Letters, yet there
lived among them many Families, who although the time of their Forefathers
first inhabiting among them, was beyond the Memory of man, yet were known to be
Strangers or Foreigners, who were not Privileged with Common Right, but in
some measure Subject to the Yeomanry, nor were not dignified, in attending the
Prince, in Hunting or like Exercise; unless called by particular favor.

Revenue.
The Princes, as they had not other Revenue, than the Presents of their Subjects
(which yet was counted, Due debt) Wrecks of the Sea, with the Skins of Beasts
killed in their dominion, and many like things, as First Fruits, etc. so they
wanted none; for in case of War, both People and Estate was wholly at their
dispose; therefore ^one demanded nor Expected Pay. If we respect their Court,
it was doubtless maintained in great Magnificence, in distinction from the
Subject, which is the utmost can be obtained by the Greatest Monarch; their
Families, and attendants, being well Clothed, with Skins of Moos, Bear, Deer,
Beaver, and the like: The Provisions for their Table, as Flesh, Fish, Roots,
Fruits, Berries, Corn, Beans, in great abundance and variety, was always
brought by their Neighboring Subjects; of all which they were as void of Care,
as the most Potent Princes in the Universe.

Dominion on Seas.
As the Prince was acknowledged, Absolute Lord on the Land, so he had no less
Sovereignty at Sea: for as all belonged to him, which was stranded on the Shore
of his Seacoast, so whatever Whales or other Wreck of Value, floating on the
Sea, taken up, on the Seas washing his Shores, or brought and Landed, from any
part of the Sea, was no less his own.

I shall conclude this brief account of the Indians in general with what long
since passed between the late much Honored, Mr. Thomas Mayhew, and an Indian
Prince, who ruled a large part of the Main-land.

Grandeur.
This Prince coming to Martha's Vineyard, with his usual attendants, being about
Eighty Persons, well Armed, came to Mr. Mayhew's House, and being admitted, sat
down; Mr. Mayhew entered the Room, but being acquainted with their Customs,
took no notice of the Prince's being there (it being with them in point of
Honor incumbent on the Inferior to Salute the Superior:) a considerable time
being past the Prince broke Silence, and said, Sachem (a word importing in
their Language not more than Noble, or Worshipful) Mr. Mayhew, are you well? to
which having a Friendly reply; and treating of several things, and of the
Island Martha's Vineyard, being Peopled with English; the Prince desiring
something wherein the English were concerned, Mr. Mayhew promising to effect
what he desired; immediately Subjoyned, that he must First speak with the
Inhabitants; the Prince demanded why he recalled his Promise; for said he, What
I Promise or Speak is always true; but you English Governors cannot be true;
for you cannot make your words nor intentions true; but mine are always true,
for I make them true; greatly disdaining the Popular Government of the English
in this Country.

Having Promised an account of the Conversion of many Indians. Inhabiting these
parts of America, it may well be Expected I should say something of their
Religion, while Heathen.

Religion.
They generally acknowledged and worshipped Many gods; therefore greatly
esteemed and reverenced their Priests, Powaws or Wizards, who were esteemed as
having immediate converse with the gods: to them therefore they addressed
themselves in all difficult cases: yet could not all that desire that dignity
(as they esteemed it) obtain Familiarity with the Infernal Spirits; nor were
all Powaw's alike Successful in their addresses: but they become such either
by immediate Revelation, or in the use of certain Rites and Ceremonies,
Tradition had left as means conducing to that end: insomuch that Parents often
out of certain Zeal dedicated their Children to the gods, and Educated them
accordingly, observing certain Diet, debarring Sleep, etc. yet of the many thus
designed, but few obained their desire.

Supposing that where the Practice of Witchcraft has been highly esteemed,
there may be given the plainest demonstration, of Mortals having Familiarity
with Infernal Spirits; I am willing to let my Reader know that not many years
since, dyed here one of the Powaw's, who never pretended to Astrological
knowledge, yet could precisely inform such who desire his Assistance, from
whence Goods Stolen from them were taken, and whither carried; with many things
of the like nature: Nor was he ever known to endeavor the concealing his
knowledge, to be immediately from a god Subservient to him, that the English
worshipped. This Powaw being by an Englishman, worthy of Credit (who lately
informed me of the same) desired to advise him, who had Stolen certain Goods
which he had lost, having formerly been an eye witness of his ability; the
Powaw after a little pausing, demanded why he requested that from him, since
himself served another God, that therefore he could not help him; but added, If
you can believe that my god will help you, I will try what I can do; which
diverted the man from further inquiry. I must a little digress, and tell my
Reader that this Powaws Wife was accounted a Godly Woman, and lived in the
practice and profession of the Christian Religion, not only by the approbation,
but encouragement of her Husband; She constantly Prayed in the Family, and
attended the Public Worship on the Lords Days: He declared that he could not
blame her, for that she Served a God that was above his; but that as to
himself, his gods continued kindness, obliged him not to forsake his Service.

That the Powaw's by the Infernal Spirits often killed Persons, caused Lameness
and Impotency, as well as showed their Art in performing things, beyond Humane,
by Diabolick Skill, such who have conversed much among them have had no reason
to question.

Their practice was, either by desiring the Spirit to them appearing to
perform, what mischief they intended; or to form a piece of Leather like an
Arrow-head, tying a hair thereto: or using some Bone, as of Fish (that it might
be known Witchcraft, to the bewitched) over which they performed certain
Ceremonies; and dismissed them to Effect their desire. Such Enchanted things,
have most certainly, either entered the Bodies of the intended to be by them
wounded; or the Devil has formed the like, within their Flesh, without any
outward breach of the Skin; which we have good reason to believe, the Powaw's
acknowledging that practice, and such things having been taken out of the Flesh
or the supposed to be bewitched. Or by their Seizing something of the Spirit
(as the Devil made them think) of such they intended to Torment or kill, while
it wandered, in their Sleep: This they kept being in Form of a Fly, closely
imprisoned; and according as they dealt with this, so it Fared with the Body it
belonged to.

Of the Cures performed by them, on the Bewitched, I could give many instances;
I shall briefly hint at two.

The one, of an Indian on Martha's Vineyard, called afterward George; who
having been sometime greatly Tormented, and now wholly impotent, his Friends
advise him to the Powaw's, concluding him to be Bewitched; they being met, and
dancing round a great Fire, the Sick lying by, some of the Neighbors entered
the House, being persuaded that a great Powaw, now called to cure, had
bewitched the Sick: They threaten him that as he had Bewitched, unless he would
Cure the Sick man, they would burn him in that fire; after many Excuses, too
long here to relate, they took him up, resolving at least to Singe him a
little; who no sooner felt the heat of the fire near him, but the Sick
immediately recovered. This was a thing Publicly known to the English, as well
as Indians, in the Neighborhood: there can be no doubt of it.

The other I shall instance in, was a Relation from Capt. Thomas Dagget Esquire now
deceased, and Richard Sarson Esquire Justices of the Peace; who being on an Island,
where a Bewitched Woman lay in great Extremity and wholly impotent: The Powaw's
there having without Success endeavored the Cure; the related sent to
Martha's-Vineyard, for more famoused Powaw's: The said Gentlemen, were admitted
to be present, on certain conditions; the Powaw's, go to dancing; who with the
Spectators, used certain Ceremonies usual in such cases; one of the Powaw's
Praying to his god, with such ardent desires and servency, that Capt. Dagget
told me, had it been to the true God, it had been a Prayer Exceeding most that
he had heard: The issue was, they in a Deers Skin caught the Spirit (as they
said) which entered the Woman; this they said was the Spirit of an Englishman
drowned in the Adjacent Sound: Yet it was then supposed, the Powaw was by,
which bewitched her: The issue was, she immediately recovered: The Powaw told
her, unless she removed to Martha's Vineyard, she would again be Sick, for
being an English Spirit he could not long confine it.

Of the Conversion of the Indians, inhabiting certain Islands near adjoining to
the Continent of New England; and the Propagation of the Gospel by some sent to
the Maineland from thence.
THE Worshipful Thomas Mayhew in the Year 1641. having obtained a grant of
Martha's Vineyard, Nantuket and Elizabeth Isles, to make a Settlement; his Son
Mr. Thomas Mayhew in the Year 1642. Settled at Martha's Vineyard, with a few
other inhabitants, where his Reputation for Piety, his natural gifts, beside
the acquired by his Education (having attained no small knowledge in the Latin
and Greek Tongues, and being not wholly a Stranger to the Hebrew) soon
Occasioned his call to the Ministry among that handful. Not long after, Viz. in
the year 1644. God who had Ordained him an Evangelist, for the Conversion of
these Gentiles, stirred him up with an Holy Zeal and Resolution, to Assay what
Success he might find in that work; he takes opportunity to insinuate, the Love
and good will he bore to that People, and soon finds Occasion to let them no
their Deplorable Condition, under Satan; who as he had kept them in Ignorance
of those Bodily and Earthly things, which might render their Lives in this
World more happy; so of those that related to their Future happiness in that to
come. And whereas he could not be in hopes of being heard in a more Public, he
Treats them in a more Private way; sometimes going to some particular Houses,
of Persons whom he esteemed most Rational and Well qualified; other while
discoursing with parcular men. The first Indian embracing the motion of
forsaking their gods, and Praying to the true God, called I a coomes; Esteemed
by the Indians as a contemptible Person among themselves; unto this man, God
who orders all things for His own Glory, gave so great a measure of Faith and
Confidence in His Power, that he is soon beyond the fear of Concealing his
Contempt of their gods: The Sachems and Powaw's being much enraged, threaten
his Life; the Powaw's or Wizzards told him (a thing Publicly known) that he
could not be ignorant, that they could kill such as displeased them, Viz. by
Witchcraft: he answers for himself before the Sachems, Witches, and a great
Assembly; acknowledges the god they Worshipped had great Power, but Limited,
and was Subservient to the God he now had chosen; therefore although by their
means many had suffered much, and some were killed, he despised their power, as
being himself a Servant of Him, whose Power overruled all Powers, and ordered
all things: The Expecting multitude wait the event, which while they Concluded,
to be Sickness or Death, the good man remains wholly Sound to their
astonishment. Mr. Mayhew makes use of this advantage, is uncessant in his
labor, and Promises, Now while they Stumbled in doubt of their own, to set
them in the Right Path; he spares not his Body by Night nor Day, lodges in
their Houses, proposes such things to their Consideration he thinks firstly
requisite, solves all their Scruples and Objections; and tells them, they might
plainly see, it was in good will, for their good, from whom he Expected no
reward, that he sustained so much loss of time, and endured wet and cold. It
pleased God to give such Success to these endeavors, that it was not long
before he obtained Public Audience among them; when generally, he spent more
time after Sermon in reasoning with them, than in Sermon; whereby I must tell
my Reader, it came to pass, that their Religion was as well in Head as Heart.
This worthy Servant of the Lord continued his painful Labors among them until
the year, 1657. in which time, God pleased to give such Success to his faithful
and unwearied Labor, that many hundred men and women, were added to the
Church; such who might truly be said to be Holy in Conversation, and for
knowledge, such who needed not to be taught the first Principles of Religion;
beside the many hundred of looser Professors of which, that such worthy
Christians, whose godly Zeal, for Propagating the Gospel, to such who sat in
Darkness and saw no Light, provoked an holy Emulation, to compass Sea and Land,
by their liberal Contributions for Proselyting the Heathen, to the Service and
Worship of the Lord Jesus (who yet Survive) might rejoice, since that, God gave
a Blessing to, and caused a Plentiful harvest to Succeed their Sowing in these
Waters: and that the Successors and Children of those ever to be Honored
deceased Christians might rejoice, that their Predecessors Religious intent, in
giving freely of their Worldly Goods, to advance the Work for Salvation of
Souls, was so far from deminishing their Estates; that they thereby left an
Inheritance to their Childrens Children. I shall give a true Relation of the
Progress, and present State, of the undertaking, and Gods blessing following
the endeavors of those he called, for Converting the Indians, on Martha's
Vineyard and Adjacent Isles; by letting the World know, who, and how qualified
these were, who were Esteemed Christians.

When such a Number professed the Christian Religion, as gave Occasion to the
Indians in general to Esteem them a Sect differing from themselves, and by the
denomination of, Praying men, to Signalize that difference; and that their
Number was such as to Meet Publicly to Worship God: such who forsook their
Heathenish Worship and Idolatry, professing to become Christians, in the
Public Assembly declared the grounds and reasons moving them to embrace the
one, and forsake the other way, with their Resolution to Pray, to Serve, and
endeavor to Obey the true God in Jesus Christ; how this Resolution was wrought
in them, what Temptations had obstructed, what Reason, Scripture and Strength
from God had encouraged them, and enabled them to retain such Resolution: how,
they had often Prayed to God, and yet been overcome by discouragements, and
Temptations etc. Closing all with professing a Resolution, by Gods Assistance,
to Pray to, and Serve Him and Him only; begging the Prayers of the
Congregation to God in their behalf: which said, many of the Congregation took
them by the hand, in token of love and good will. If after such Public
Profession, any was observed not to perform the usual Worshipping of God, in
Praying with their Families, desiring a Blessing on their Food, or the like
(who yet in their Public meeting constantly attended) they were Publicly
Examined of the same: Of which let me give a remarkable instance: One who after
his Admission (if I may so term it) into the Number and Society of the Praying
Indians, being present at a great Assembly, after the Exercise, was by him that
Preached, informed that it was reported, he had ceased to Pray, desired him, to
let the Congregation know, what grounds and motives occasioned such neglect;
the man answered, It was true, he had not lately used Publicly to Pray; yet
did sometimes Pray Privately; that he did not in his judgment disapprove the
Service of God, but acknowledged it to be good; but found himself weak; not
able to live up to Rules of that Religion: but when God should give him more
strength, he hoped he should be again a Praying man.

Thus Mr. Mayhew continued his almost inexpressible labor and vigilant care
for the good of the Indians, whom he justly esteemed, his Joy and Crown: and
having seen so great a Blessing on his faithful endeavors in the making known
the Name of his Lord among these Gentiles, with indefatigable pains, expecting
no reward, but alone from Him, who said; Go teach all Nations, Lo I am with
you: God moved the hearts of some Godly Christians in England, to advance a
Considerable Sum for encouraging the propagating, and preaching the Gospel to
the Indians in New England: And seeing the Spirit given to sundry of the
Indians, with the gift of Prophesying; according to the promise, given by Him
who Ascended, and gave gifts unto men; an able Godly Englishman, named Peter
Foulger, who was employed in teaching the Youth in Reading, Writing, and the
Principles of Religion, by Catechizing; and being well Learned in the
Scripture, able to assist them in what might be needful: his Honored Father,
the Governor, well skilled in their Language, and highly honoring the Work
for their Conversion; whereby, if in his absence, any difficult matter might
happen, they might find suitable Assistance: In the Year 1647. he intended a
short Voyage for England; but alas! the Ship wherein he took Passage was never
heard of; Thus came to an Immature Death, Mr. Mayhew, who was so affectionately
esteemed of by the Indians, that many years after, he was seldom named without
Tears.

Mr. Thomas Mayhew, after the loss of his Son, as aforesaid: Seeing no such
Salary, probably to be obtained, that might invite a Minister to embrace the
work among the Indians; and little hopes of finding any of the Spirit of his
Son, or Mr. ELIOT, to bear the burden, attending, and in that day of necessity
to be undergone; without a prospect of more than could well be expected, for
encouraging to so in-it-self troublesome employ; and that his only Son had
spent his Strength, and yet rejoiced in the midst of those many Aches, Pains
and Distempers, contracted by his often lodging in their cold Houses, and
enduring Wet and Cold, in faith of Gods accepting of, and prospering him in
that, whereunto he could see nothing could rationally move him; concludes, that
it was Of God, and not of man; he therefore resolves to Visit and encourage
them often; he goes once every Week to some of their Plantations; and with the
Assistance of Godly Indians, who taught and instructed their Neighbors on the
Lords Days, persuaded the Indians of the Gayhead, who many Years, were
obstinately resolved not to admit the Glad-Tydings of the Gospel among them
(being animated by the Sachims of the Continent) not to embrace it; so that now
the Indians on the Islands of Martha's-Vineyard and Nantuket, might justly bear
the denomination of Christian: the number of Adult Persons on both Islands,
being about three thousand; of which I have taken the more particular care to
make an exact Computation, that I might Vindicate Mr. Cotton Mather, from the
Imputation of over-reckoning, when in the Life of Mr. Eliot, he reckons the
number supposed on Martha's Vineyard professing the Christian Religion to be
Sixteen hundred.

The Indians being thus brought over to the acknowledgment and profession of
the Christian Religion; and many of them desiring to join in such Communion,
whereby they might enjoy the presence of God in all His Ordinances; Mr. Mayhew
and Mr. John Cotton (now Pastor of the Church of New-Plymouth) who having been
sometime Preacher to the English, had attained some knowledge in the Indian
Tongue, and Preached unto them two Years; being well Satisfied with their
suitable qualifications, after mature Consideration and Advice, concluded to
give their Help and Assistance thereto; which was happily accomplished, to the
good Satisfaction of the English Church, and Godly Professors of the Island;
who by advantage of many years acquaintance with them, had great Experience of
their qualifications. An Indian Church Confederated, at Martha's Vineyard. Aug.
22. 1670.

Mr. Mayhew by Mr. Cotton's removing from the Island, was left alone as to any
English Assistance: But Mr. John Mayhew his grandson, being called to Preach to
a small People; by the urgent and ardent desires of the Indians; and being well
skilled in their Language, complied with them; and once every Week Preached at
some of their Plantations. His diligence was now to be doubled, especially
after Mr. Mayhew his Grandfathers Death, in the Year 1681. by reason of
certain Heterodox Opinions, likely to take root among them; and being a man of
great natural parts, he used to desire such who had imbibed any of those
Principles, to produce their Reasons; as likewise any that desired to be
resolved in any matter, to give him advantage to resolve them in Public; that
others might receive Satisfaction and Instruction; whereby I believe and know,
that they received more Conviction, Instruction and Satisfaction, than in the
ordinary way of Preaching; which always notwithstanding preceeded that:
insomuch that none of those Erroneous Opinions spread to the disturbance, or
unsettlement of the Church, nor generallity of professors among them: but
having finished what God in His All-wise Providence, saw good to improve him
in; he deceased in the Year 1688. leaving the Indians (if I might now so term
them) in an orderly way of Religiously Congregating, in their several
Assemblies on the Lords Day, and hearing their several Teachers, who usually
began with Prayer, Sang part of a Psalm, then from some portion of the
Scripture spoke for the Conversion and Edification of his Hearers: As also a
Church which then or soon after consisted of at least One Hundred Communicants,
being according to the most strict Order of the Congregational Way: Which leads
me to say something of the Discipline used among them.

The Church then are a Selected Company of Professing Believers, in Covenant
according to the Congregational practice, having Officers accordingly; and
keeping up the Exercise of a severe Discipline, by public Admonition in case
of the disorderly walking of any member of their Society; and if after the
Reproof and Admonition of the Church, any proceed in their evil Courses, such
are proceeded with by Excommunication.

I would then willingly know of those Detractors, who either publicly or more
privately, have endeavored to Scandalize so great a work; What kind of people
they expect to see a Church consist of? Or when it will come to pass, that some
shall not be retained in Churches (who yet may be deemed an Holy People) whose
Conversation may be grievous to the Church, though the Church can find no
Expedient for their Excomunication? I know that many who are in no measure
qualified for Church Fellowship, think it no small disparagement to themselves,
that Indians should be accounted worthy of what themselves cannot be admitted
to: how it is in other places I know not, but here some, whose religious
pretenses have gained Credit abroad, and have not Scrupled to Stigmatize the
Indians with greatest opprobry, in particular cases of their complaint, the
Indians have been found wholly innocent, and themselves sordidly Vilanous: but
when shall it be that the Seed of the Serpent shall cease to hiss at, and open
their Mouths against the Seed of the Woman? which yet I could demonstrate,
has in several cases which have occurred here, against the Indians, broken the
Serpents head, in his Children, and if it were possible filled them with Shame
and Confusion: -- however, the Sober Religious People here, have done, and do,
esteem them as Christians indeed; and although the Building be not all of
Living Stones, yet as it is an House, is so far esteemed an House of God;
Insomuch that I have heard some Godly English, their Neighbors, Members of
Churches; profess they were troubled, that their unacquaintedness in their
Language was such, that they could not well (but otherwise would gladly)
partake with them, in the Ordinances of the Lords Supper.

I must acknowledge, that as the Number of the Indians are greatly decreased,
so especially of the Godly and Religious; it being a thing so obvious, that in
the year 1690. of the Indians of Martha's Vineyard alone; of the number of more
than one hundred Adult Persons that dyed, not less than three fourths, were of
the Sober Religious Professors; that it was by the English Inhabitants vulgarly
taken notice of: the which notwithstanding, in the year 1692, of the before
mentioned Church, were remaining more than one hundred; without mentioning
those many Confessors, before mentioned, whose Public Declarations of their
several Convictions, Temptations, and Resolutions to endeavor to Serve the
true God, would have drawn Tears from the eyes of any who had but in the
Serious retirements of Consideration acknowledged a Deity.

I must not conclude before I tell the Reader, that as in the Apostolic times,
the Church sent forth from among themselves, for the Conversion of the Nations,
so these Indians on Martha's Vineyard did not only to the Island of Nantuket,
being about 1500 Adult Persons; but likewise to the Maine-land. Of those of
Nantuket I shall subjoyn a Letter, from the Worshipful John Gardner, who is
well acquainted with them, having diverse years Assisted them in their
Government, by instructing them in the Laws of England, and deciding difficult
cases among them.

Worshipful SIR.
I Haved Received Yours of April the 8 th. 94. with your desire to be informed
of the present State of our Indians, as to their Number, Worship and
Government; an Answer to your desires, take briefly: Their Decay is Great,
Chiefly in Number, there being now but about Five hundred Grown Persons: As to
their Worship, there is Three Societies or Churches: Two Congregational, One,
of the Baptists, but their Number is small; but their is Five Constant
Assemblies or Meetings; Two amongst them that went by the Name of the
Antepeatames or Powatoms,; and that I may now say, there is not known a Powaw
amongst them: and although it is true, there is a great decay in Religion among
the first Societies, many of their best men, and I may say Good men are Dead:
Yet amongst the now Praying Indians, there is an Increase; God Raising up some,
yea even of Themselves, Preachers and Serious men too, some of them; which is
cause of Thankfulness: but that there is a decay with many is to be Lamented;
the cause I take to be their not preserving the Truth in the Love of it; their
Love to Drink: their being more mindful of Form than Substance; which puts me
upon endeavor to make them sensible, That it is neither Circumcision nor
Uncircumcision is any thing, but the Keeping the Commandments of God; Faith
that works by Love, the New Creature, and things of that Nature. As to their
Government, They are wholly under Their Majesty's, or the English Government;
the method is, they have Three distinct or Town-Courts, with Power to hear and
determine to Forty Shillings: the Magistrates they choose themselves yearly; and
when Chosen and Approved of, they have Commissions with liberty of Appeal to
the English, which they make much use of: Greater matters come to the English.
This in short is the Truth of their Present State.

I am Your Real Friend and Servant, John Gardner.
Nantuket, MAY, 17 th. 1694.

Here we must take notice of Gods giving Success to the Ministry of the
Indians; and acknowledge, that although there have been some decay, yet on that
Island, there is not only a Form, but in some measure the Power of Godliness.

So likewise on the Maine-land; by the alone Ministry of the Martha's
Vineyard-Indians, was the Civilizing and Conversion of the Indians on the
Maine-land, at a place called Succonet, and parts Adjacent: who as they were
Converted by the Ministry, sent from the Church of Martha's Vineyard, so the
Officers were by them (as likewise were those of Nantuket) Ordained by laying
on the hands of their Presbytery; of these although I have been no eyewitness;
yet I have received account, from even such who bare no great respect to
Religion, that they are as beyond Comparison, Exceeding the other Indians in
moral Virtue; so likewise from other Judicious Persons, their Neighbors of
whom I shall name. Mr. William Vobes, a Person now representing the
Freeholders of those parts, in the Great and General Assembly, of the Province
of the Massachuset-Bay in New England: nor have these People as yet dependence
on, nor Expectation from any other than their Mother, the Church of
Martha's-Vineyard.

Of the Indians Government when Christian.
I have already told my Reader, that the Government of this People was the best
of all Governments, Monarchy; and it has been judged not without reason, that a
main obstruction in the progress of the Gospel in the American Plantations,
was, if not yet is, the jealousy the Princes conceived of the Invasion of their
Government through the pretenses of Religion, and the Eclipsing their
Monarchical Dignity.

The ever Honored Thomas Mayhew therefore finding that the Princes on these
Islands, who although they maintained their absolute Power and Jurisdiction as
Kings; were yet bound to do certain Homage to a Potent Prince on the
Continent: and although they were no great People, yet had been wasted by
Intestine Wars, wherein the great Princes on the Continent (not unlike European
Princes for like Reasons of State) were not unassisting, whereby they were
necessitated to make these Princes the balance to decide their Controversies,
and several Jurisdictions, by presents annually sent, whereby obliging the
Princes to give their several Assistance as occasion required: and seeing his
Son as aforesaid in a zealous endeavor for their Conversion, he judged it meet
that Moses and Aaron join hands; he therefore prudently lets them know, that by
order from his Master the King of England, he was to Govern the English which
should inhabit these Islands; that his Master was in Power far above any of the
Indian Monarchs; but that as he was powerful, so was he a great lover of
Justice; that therefore he would in no measure invade there Jurisdictions; but
on the contrary Assist them as need required; that Religion and Government were
distinct things. Thus in no long time they conceived no ill Opinion of the
Christian Religion.

When afterward the number of the Christian Indians were increased among them,
he persuaded them to admit of the Counsels of the Judicious Christians among
themselves, and in cases of more than ordinary consequence of a Jury for Trial;
when likewise he promised his Assistance and Direction with the Prince; when
notwithstanding the Princes assent was to be obtained, though he were no
Christian. Thus within a few years there was a happy Government settled among
them, and Records kept of all Actions and Acts passed in their several Courts,
by such who having learned to Write fairly were appointed thereto. The Princes
with their Sachims (or Nobles) made Public acknowledgment of their Subjection
to the King of England, being nothwithstanding mindful to be understood as
Subordinate Princes, to Govern according to the Laws of God and the King. Here
I shall take leave to insert two Remarkables.

During the late unhappy War between the English and Indians in New England,
about Nineteen years since; an Evil Spirit possessed too many of our English,
whereby they suffered themselves to be unreasonably exasperated against all
Indians; of such there were some on these Islands, who could hardly be so
moderated by Mr. Mayhew, and others in Government with him, as to be restrained
from rising to assay the disarming of the Indians; for whose satisfaction Capt.
Richard Sarson Esquire was ordered with a small party (the Indians being on these
Islands Twenty to one, having Arms) to Treat the Indians on the West end of
Martha's Vineyard, who were mostly to be doubted: he returns with the ensuing
Answer: That the delivering their Arms would expose them to the will of the
Indians engaged in the present War, who were not less theirs than the Enemies
of the English; that they had never given occasion of the distrust intimated;
if in any thing not hazarding their safety, they could give any Satisfaction
for proof of their Fidelity, they would willingly attend what should reasonably
be demanded of them; but they were unwilling to deliver their Arms, unless the
English would propose some means for their safety and livelihoood: With this
Return they drew a Writing in their own Language, which I have often read, and
would have Verbatim inserted, but cannot at present find it; the Substance was,
that as they had Submitted to the Crown of England, so they resolved to Assist
the English on these Islands against their Enemies, which they esteemed in the
same respect equally their own, as Subjects to the same King; which was
Subcribed by the Persons of greatest note among them.

Having this answer, the Government resolved, and accordingly improved them as
a guard, furnishing them with suitable Ammunition, and found them so faithful
that even some nearly related, in observance of general instructions given
them, so soon as they landed from the Continent, were immediately brought
before the Governor, to attend his pleasure; insomuch that the English
(although the War, with respect to the multitude of Indians inhabiting the
Continent, and their advantage by the nearness to the French had no good
aspect) took no care, but left the whole to the Indians; nothing doubting to be
advertised by them of any danger from the Enemy. This was the effect of the
bringing the Gospel of Peace among them, Viz. a Peace-bringing Gospel.

The other observable I shall add to show as their Loyalty, so their observance
of the Laws of England.

In the time of the late Revolution, when manny in hopes there was no King in
Israel, expected to have done what they saw good in their own eyes: Several of
our English threatening to fetch certain Sheep in possession of the Indians
inhabiting a small Island Adjacent to Martha's Vineyard, which Sheep they
asserted were Stolen from them, who met with repulse; the Sachim least there
should happen any misunderstanding of that matter, immediately makes his report
to me in these words, Viz. Several of your English have been on my Island, and
would have forceably taken Sheep from thence; and we are much threatened
therewith; I am doubtful if they persist in that Resolution, it may Occasion
Bloodshed: you know that while your Grandfather and my Father lived, there
never happened any difference in such things, nor hope will be Occasion given
by me. I desire the same Amity may be continued, nor can the English say, that
we have not manifested our Allegiance to the King by a continued Subjection.
And although it is true, we have desired your Order should come to us, rather
than your Officer, which has generally been observed; yet we are willing in
Case the English pretend any thing ours have injured them in; let an Officer by
writ from Authority do his duty, then we shall know how in an orderly way, to
be relieved; yet shall the least Boy bringing your Order, as in your
Grandfathers time, Command any thing: And if you see cause on any complaint
about our Sheep, your may command all of them; hoping to find as hitherto a
decision by the Rules of Justice: We hope we shall not see (as is too much
practiced in other places) an Englishman, pretending an Indian to be in his
debt, to come to our Houses and pay himself; or in other cases beat our People;
but as hitherto we may have equal Justice, being the King Subjects; and
Violence and Riot committed on our People by the English may be esteemed of the
same nature and quality as ours against them; of which, with the Justices, we
pray you would Consider, and take speedy care.

I shall as to their Government only add; that in their several Plantations or
Town-ships, they Elect three or more to join with the Sachims (or Lords of the
place) who hold Courts, for issuing such Controversies as happen among them,
the Sachim presiding in such Courts, or in case he decline that Office, another
is Elected in his place: if either party dislike the Judgment given, he Appeals
to a Superior Court, which consists of some of the most esteemed of each
place, being some of their Magistrates, where some Principal Sachims is Elected
to preside for one Year: and from this Court an Appeal lies to the English
Court. In giving Judgment, they observe such rules and orders made and recorded
among themselves, and the English Law, the knowledge whereof they much aspire
unto. They have likewise some among them, whom the less able to declare, or
defend their own Cases, employ as Attorneys; some of which are to admiration
Critical in their pleadings.

I shall close the whole when I have told the Reader, that their Children are
generally taught to Read, and many to Write; in one of their Towns the last
Winter, Viz. 1693. Thirty Children were at School, Twenty more of the same
place, at the same time, accidentally, being not supplied with Books, could not
attend it. Such who are too far distant from any School are often taught by
some of their Neighbors. In diverse places are lesser Schools.

CONCLUSION.
May, if not a double, yet a single Portion of the Spirit of an ELIOT of New
England, the Mayhews of Martha's Vineyard, a Bourn of Sandwich, in the late
Colony of New-Plymouth, fall on some Persons, who may, induced with an Holy
Zeal for God, and the Conversion of Souls, according to their Example, Be
instant in Season and out of Season, endure all things, become all, unto those
miserable Creatures, that if possible they may Win some, not doing the Work of
the Lord negligently, by only Preaching a Sermon to such who desire to hear;
but by frequent visiting them, and from House to House, disputing with and
convincing them, show that it is God, and not themselves they Serve; believing
there is a great and Eternal Weight of Glory attending those whom the Lord
shall find So Doing: Then may we hope to see a Blessing on this Land, and Peace
on our borders; and the Indians bordering on us, shall obey not out of Fear,
but for Conscience sake. May the Indian Church send forth some from among
themselves, to the more Remote Indians, with as good Success as when to the
next bordering Indians. May the Royal Heart of our Gracious KING still favor
so Great and Glorious an Undertaking: To which may the LORD our GOD, give His
Blessing. AMEN.

Postscript.
HAving among many things, worthy of notice in the Precedent Discourse, omitted
some Remarkables, of the Indian Converse with Infernal Spirits; I thought meet
to briefly touch some things therein Remarkable: and to insert a Narrative of
the Decease of a Prince, memorable for his forsaking his People for the sake of
Christ; and his return with happy Success in Proselyting his Subjects, to the
Worship of God in Christ. This I find Written on the outside of a Book, in the
Library of Mr. John Mayhew deceased: which please to take as follows.

Mittark, Sachim (rather Prince) of the Gay-head, on Martha's-Vineyard,
Deceased January. 1683.

This Princes Subjects being resolved to continue in their Heathenism,
notwithstanding his embracing the Gospel; grew so disaffected to him, that he
for a time, removed to the East end of Martha's Vineyard; whither after three
years abode at the said place, he again returned, having persuaded his People
into a willingness, that such who would, might attend the glad Tidings he
pretended to bring; whereupon He himself opened to them the Mysteries of the
Gospel, dispencing the word to such as came to hear him; insomuch that at this
day that People are All Christians by Profession.

The day before his Death I being with him, inquired of him concerning his
hope; who after he had treated some time of the Mutability of an earthly Life;
Said, I have hope in God, that when my Soul departs out of this Body; God
will send his Messengers, who shall Conduct it to Himself, to be with Jesus
Christ; and then with great earnestness, pronounced these words; where that
Everlasting Glory is! As for my reasons; (said he) I my self have had many
wrongs of Enemies, of whom I have sought no Revenge, nor retained evil in
thought, word, nor deed; and I also expect the same from God; but (said he) I
proceed no further, for God is very Merciful: then I asked him of his
willingness to Dye; he replied: It is now Seven Nights since I was taken Sick,
and I have not yet asked of God, to live longer in the World. In this World are
some benefits to be enjoyed; also many troubles to be endured; but with respect
to the hope I have in God, I am willing to dye; here I am in pain, there I
shall be freed from all pain, and enjoy that Rest that never ends. Then
pointing to his Daughters, said, There be three of my Daughters; (relating how
they were disposed of) and you my Daughters, if you loose your Father, Mourn
not for me, but Mourn for your selves, and for your Sins: Mourn not for me, for
though you are unwilling to spare me, and I might be helpful to you if I should
Live longer in this World, yet to dye is better for me.

Of Powaws or Persons improving the Infernal Spirits to Effect their intended
Malicious Harms: I can inform of a Converted Sachim; who in his Public
Protestation, said as follows. Viz. That he having often employed his god,
which appeared to him in form of a Snake, to Kill, Wound, and Lame such whom he
intended mischief to, he employed the said Snake to Kill, and that failing to
Wound or Lame Hiacooms, the first Convert on Martha's Vineyard; all which
proved ineffectual, and having seriously considered, the said Hi acombs
Assertion, that none of the Powaw's could hurt him, since his God, whom he now
Served was the Great God, to whom theirs was subservient; he resolved to
worship the true God, from which time during Seven years, the said Snake gave
him great disturbance, but that he never after his Praying to God in Christ,
ever employed that said Snake in any thing, which about that time ceased to
appear to him.

I can also inform, of an Indian Powaw, who although he was not accounted
Religious, yet said, he was a Christian, who being questioned by some English
of such matters reported of him, acknowledged, that designing to Kill by
Witchcraft a certain Indian who accidentally lodged in the House with him and
his Brother, while he went out to inchant an Hair, his Brother who before lay
from, now contrary to his knowledge lay next to the fire, it being then their
custom to lie bare-back't to the fire; he when he came in, nothing doubting but
that it was his Enemy, directed the enchanted Hair to the back of his supposed
Enemy, which immediately entering his body, killed him; but in the Morning it
proved to be his Brother. The thing was well known; and this Powaw seemed with
great remorse and sorrow to acknowledge the same to such of our English who
inquired of him, concerning that matter.

A Further Account, concerning the present State of Christianity among the
INDIANS in other parts of New England.
COncerning the further progress of the Gospel among the Indians in America;
the Reader may take this following Account, which is Extracted out of several
Letters sent to the Reverend Increase Mather, Praesident of the College at
Cambridge in New England.

Mr. Samuel Treat Pastor of the Church in Eastham, in a Letter bearing date
August 23. 1693. Writes as follows:

Reverend and Worthy Sir.
I Being Advertised that it would not be unseasonable or unservicable at this
Juncture, to give your self a true and impartial account, both of the number as
also of the present State of our Indians, and Acceptance and Entertainment of
the Gospel among them, and their professed Subjection thereunto: Wherefore Sir,
you may be assured as follows.

That there are Five Hundred and Five Adult Persons of Indians, within the
Limits of our Township, unto whom these many years past, I have from time to
time imparted the Gospel of our LORD JESUS, in their own Language, (and I truly
hope not without Success); and yet I continue in the same Service, earnestly
imploring, and not without hopes expecting, and waiting for a more plentiful
down-powring of the Spirit from on high among them: and I verily do not know
of, nor can I learn that there is so much as one of these Five Hundred Indians,
that does obstinately absent from, but do jointly frequent and attend on the
Preaching of the Word, and countenance the same, not only frequenting and
attending seasons of Worship of a divine Sanction, but also all other
occasional Opportunies, when the Gospel is dispensed to them; and when our
Congregations Solemnize Public Days of Prayer with Fasting or of Praises (I
usually giving them Advertisement thereof) they readily comply therewith, in
their respective Assemblies. They have four distinct Assemblies in four
Villages belonging to our Township, in which four Assemblies, they have four
Teachers of their own choice, of the more Sober, well Affected and
Understanding Persons among them, who do duly Preach to them, when I am not
with them; these Indian Teachers repair to my House once a Week, to be further
instructed (Pro modulo meo) in the concernments proper for their Service and
Station.

There are in the four abovesaid Villages, four Schoolmasters (of the best
accomplished for that Service) who teach their Youth to Read and Write their own
Language.

There are also Six Justices of the Peace (or Magistrates) in the four
abovesaid Villages, who regulate their Civil Affairs, and Punish Criminals and
Transgressors of the Civil Law; they have their stated Courts and other
Inferior Officers in a Subserviency to their Civil EUPOLITUESTHAL.

There are among them, many of a Serious, sober, civilized Conversation and
Deportment, who are making Essays toward a further Progressive step of
Obedience and Conformity to the Rules of the Gospel, viz. an Ecclesiastical
Combination, having a great desire to be Baptized.

They are very Serviceable by their Labor to the English Vicinity, and have
all along since our Wars with their Nation, been very Friendly to the English,
and forward to serve them in that quarrel. Their Deportment and Converse, and
Garb, being more Manly and Laudable than any other Indians, that I have
observed in the Province.

But Sir, I would not be tedious, only Craving your Interest at the Throne of
Grace for us, that we may be Serviceable to the Name and Kingdom of our LORD
JESUS. So I Subscribe.

SIR, Yours willingly, Samuel Treat.
Eastham, August, 23. 1693.

Mr. James Noyce Pastor of the Church in Stonington, in a Letter dated the
Fifteenth of March last, Writes thus.

Reverend Sir.
YOVRS I Received, and Rejoice that God has Stirred up any that does take care
and Contribute toward the advancing Christ's Kingdom amongst the Poor Heathen;
and do and did formerly believe, that where God sends Light, He intends Love;
and where God gives little, He expects less: and therefore the Labors of the
Reverend Mr. Eliot, Mr. Mayhew, etc. have not been lost, they have not Run in
vain, but that many are gone to Heaven of their deceased hearers. And I should
count it my Joy and Crown to win one Soul of them to Christ. And am in hope
that some one or two of the Pequots, that were my Friends and lived on my Land,
upon my endeavor have obtained Mercy, now dead, who dyed Praying, Renounced
wholly the way of the Heathen Worship, etc. Also some of our Captive Servants
professing the Faith with many Tears are Baptized, and give good Testimony in
their Knowledge, Converse and Conversation of a real Gracious work upon them. I
have in my House a Witty hopeful Sachems Son, one of the chiefest quality in
these parts, bound fast to me to be instructed to Read and Write, and in the
way of Life, which hitherto gives great hopes, and no discouragement; he is
about Thirteen Years of Age. And once I had the advantage to Astonish many of
the Heathen, and of the chief of them, by Gods answering Prayers in the
presence of many Heathen, by raising a very Sick Indian Lad (English also
present) after the Lad was given over by Indians and English, and was
speechless; and several Powaws had Powawed, and given that Sentence, that the
Lad would Dye; but he is alive to this Day: The Story is too large to write,
but I believe God did Glorify Himself in the sight of the Heathen, according
to Humble and Earnest Petitions, made in the presence of about Thirty Heathen:
all seemed to be much Confounded and awakened. One very Witty and Wise Sachem
there present told me, he would be a Christian, but he was afraid his heart
would not be right, without which Profession would be in vain, and he was
afraid Wine and Women would be his Ruin, he should not forbear, but he owned
and almost all present, when I Prayed, Our God was the Great and True God, but
they were Poor Indians, and they did not know Him. Of these things and much
more many English witnesses are alive, but some are dead. I have heard also the
Reverend Mr. Fitch did at the Request of the Mohegs, keep a Fast for Rain, in
the Time of Great Drought, at the Request of the Heathen, when their Powaw's
had long Cried for Rain, and God answered by sending Rain the same day, to the
great Astonishment of the Heathen.

Yours to Serve, James Noyce.
Stonington March, 15. 1693,4.

Mr. Rowland Cotton, Minister at Sandwich, in a Letter of June 27. 1693.
Writes thus.

Reverend Sir,
I Have Endeavored to take an Exact Account of those Indians, Adult Persons,
who do constantly attend upon the Dispensation of the Gospel, in the place that
at present I am concerned for. And we do find that in Manshipau, Sanctuit, and
Cotuit, Villages bordering on each other, and all belonging to the same
Assembly; there are no less than Two hundred and Fourteen, besides several
Straglers, that have no settled place, do repair thither. To carry on the work
of the Lords Day there is appointed on Simon Papmonit: and at other times I
shall diligently intend their good according to my Capacity.

Reverend Sir, I desire your Blessing on Your Servant, Rowland Cotton.
Sandwich June, 27. 1693.

Mr. Thomas Tupper also has given an Account of One hundred and Eighty Indians,
unto whom he does dispense the Word, concerning whom he has Charitable hopes
that they do (and that with Zeal and Sincerity) Embrace the Gospel. There are
moreover, in Plymouth Colony about Five Hundred Indians, amongst whom Mr. John
Cotton (Pastor of the Church in Plymouth, and Son to the Famous Cotton of
Boston) has and does preach the Gospel. Likewise Mr. Peter Thatcher, Pastor of
the Church in Milton, is a Faithful Labourer amongst the Indians at Punkepaog.
So is Mr. Grindal Rawson, Pastor of the Church in Mendam, among the Indians in
those parts; and Mr. Bondet, who is Minister to the French Congregation at
Oxford, in the Nipmug Country. The Indian Church at Natick (which was the first
Indian Church in America) is since Blessed ELIOI's Death, much diminished and
dwindled away. But Mr. Daniel Gookin has bestowed his pious Cares upon it.

Besides the Labors of the English in New England, Mr. Dellius (a worthy Dutch
Minister) at Albany has Learned the Language of the Indians in those parts; God
has Graciously Smiled on his Endeavors, so as that Considerable Numbers of
them are Converted to the Faith of Christ, and there is reason to hope that
what is done, is but the First Fruits of a Great Harvest to follow. Take the
Account which himself gives, in a Letter bearing date the 16th. of January
last. His words are these.

Reverend Sir,
I Have this to add to my former, that a Jesuit, called Milet, whom the
Oneydes took prisoner about four years ago, and who is now in that Castle a
great man among them, uses all his Sultilty to frustrate my Labors, by by
making false Impressions upon the Indians concerning our Religion; yet God
Almighty is pleased to strengthen my Proselytes in that way I teach them more
and more; sometimes there happens difference and disputes between my Proselytes
and his, concerning the points of Religion, but ours allege they Confute the
others. This I must say for them, that they take a great deal of pains and are
very Zealous to learn, and very Devout in their practice; I am under savor of
opinion, that the Jesuit Catechism, with the Cases of Conscience added thereto,
writ by their own Hands, which they learn the Indians, which is either in your
or your Reverend Son, Mr. Cotton Mathers possession, may be Serviceable, to
convince our Proselytes and others French, that come here of their penicious
Principles, and wish the same might be sent me. I had put Six or Seven Psalms
in their Native Language upon our Notes, but were not perfected, now they are
finished and the Ten Commandments also. The new Infant Church among the Heathen
Increases, there being Seventeen last Communion day, the Thirty first of
December last, who took the Sacrament with us, and four others Baptized the
same day. Thus God is sought of them that asked not for Him, and is found of
them that sought Him not. I think that God has a great People of them yet; the
Lord send a Blessing to those means that are used for the Enlargement of His
Kingdom among them; and Bless you, and all that Labor in His Vineyard, which
shall ever be the Prayers of him, who is,

Reverend SIR, Your most Faithful and Obedient Servant, in our Lord Jesus,
Godefridus Dellius.
Albany, January, 16. 1693,4.

A LETTER CONCERNING The Success of the Gospel amongst the INDIANS in
New England.
Written by Mr. Increase Mather, Minister of the Word of God at Boston, and
Rector of the College at Cambridge in New England, to Dr. John Leusden, Hebrew
Professor in the University of Vtrecht.
Translated out of Latin into English.
Worthy and much Honored Sir,
YOUR Letters were very grateful to me, by which I understand that you and
others in your famous University of Vtrecht, desire to be informed concerning
the Converted Indians in America: Take therefore a True Account of them in a
few words.

It is above forty Years since that truly godly Man, Mr, John Elliot, Pastor
of the Church at Rocksborough, (not above a Mile from Boston in New England)
being warmed with a holy Zeal of Coverting the Americans, set himself to learn
the Indian Tongue, that he might more easily and successfully open to them the
Mysteries of the Gospel; upon account of which he has been (and not
undeservedly) called, The Apostle of the American Indians. This Reverend
Person, not without very great labor, Translated the whole Bible into the
Indian Tongue; he Translated also several English Treatises of Practical
Divinity, and Catechisms into their Language: Above 26 Years ago he gathered a
Church of Converted Indians in a Town called Natick; these Indians confessed
their sins with Tears, and professed their Faith in Christ, and afterward they
and their Children were Baptized, and they were solemnly joined together in a
Church Covenant; the said Mr. Eliot was the first that Administered the Lords
Supper to them. The Pastor of that Church now is an Indian, his Name is Daniel.
Besides this Church at Natick, among our Inhabitants in the Massachusetts
Colony there are four Indian Assemblies, where the Name of the True God and
Jesus Christ is solemnly called upon; these Assemblies have American Preachers.
Mr. Elliot formerly used to preach to them once every Fortnight, but now he is
weakened with Labors and Old Age, being in the Eighty Fourth Year of his Age,
and preaches not to the Indians oftener than once in two Months.

There is another Church, consisting only of Converted Indians, about fifty
Miles from hence, in an Indian Town called Marshippang, the first Pastor in
that Church was an English Man, who being skilful in the American Language,
Preached the Gospel to them in their own Tongue. This English Pastor is dead,
nevertheless that Church has an Indian Preacher.

There are besides that, five Assemblies of Indians professing the Name of
Christ, not far distant from Marshippang, which have Indian Preachers: John
Cotton Pastor of the Church at Plymouth (Son of my venerable Father-in-law John
Cotton, formerly the famous Teacher of the Church at Boston) has made very
great progress in learning the Indian Tongue, and is very skilful in it; he
Preaches in their own Language to the last five mentioned Congregations every
Week. Moreover of the Inhabitants of Saconet in Plymouth Colony, there is a
great Congregation of those who for distinction sake are called Praying
Indians, because they pray to God in Christ.

Not far from a Promontory called Cape Cod, there are six Assemblies of
Heathens who are to be reckoned as Catechumeni, amongst whom there are Six
Indian Preachers: Samuel Treat, Pastor of a Church at Eastham, Preaches to
those Congregations in their own Language. There are likewise amongst the
Islanders of Nantuchett a Church, with a Pastor who was lately a Heathen, and
several Meetings of Catechumeni's, who are Instructed by the Converted Indians.
There is also another Island, about Seven Leagues long, (called Martha's
Vineyard) where are Two American Churches planted, which are more Famous than
the rest; over one of which there presides an Ancient Indian as Pastor, called
Hiacooms: John Hiacooms, Son of the said Indian Pastor, also preaches the
Gospel to his Contrymen. Another Church in that place John Techinosh a
Converted Indian teaches. In these Churches Ruling Elders of the Indians are
Joined to the Pastors; the Pastors were chosen by the people, and when they had
fasted and prayed, Mr. Eliot and Mr. Cotton laid their Hands on them, so that
they were solemnly Ordained. All the Congregations of the Converted Indians
(both the Catechumeni and those that are in Church Order) every Lords Day meet
together, the Pastor or Preacher always begins with Prayer, and without a
Form, because from the Heart; when the Ruler of the Assembly has ended his
Prayer, the whole Congregation of Indians praise God with singing; some of them
are excellent Singers: After the Psalm, he that preaches reads a place of
Scripture (one or more Verses as he will) and expounds it, gathers Doctrines
from it, proves them by Scripture and Reasons, and inferrs Uses from them after
the manner of the English, of whom they have been taught; then another Prayer
to God in the Name of Christ concludes the whole Service. Thus do they meet
together twice every Lord's Day: They observe no Holy Days but the Lord's Day,
except upon some extraordinary occasion, and then they solemnly set apart whole
days, either in giving Thanks or fasting and praying with great servour of Mind.

Before the English came into these Coasts, these barbarous Nations were
altogether ignorant of the True God; hence it is that in their Prayers and
Sermons they use English Words and Terms; he that calls upon the most Holy Name
of God, says, Jehovah, or God, or Lord, and also they have learned and borrowed
many other Theological Phrases from us. In short, there are six Churches of
Baptized Indians in New England, and Eighteen Assemblies of Catechumeni's,
professing the Name of Christ. Of the Indians there are Four and Twenty who are
Preachers of the Word of God; and besides these, there are Four English
Ministers who Preach the Gospel in the Indian Tongue. I am now my self weary
with Writing, and I fear least if I should add more I should also be tedious to
you; yet one thing I must add, (which I had almost forgot) That there are many
of the Indian Children who have learned by heart the Catechism, either of that
Famous Divine Mr. Perkins, or that put forth by the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, and in their own Mother Tongue can Answer to all the Questions in
it. But I must end. I Salute the Professors in your University; to whom I
desire you to Communicate this Letter, as Written to them also. Farewell,
Worthy Sir; the Lord preserve your Health for the Benefit of your Country, his
Church, and of Learning.

Yours ever, Increase Mathers.
Boston in New England, July 12. 1687.
An Advertisement.
SOME further Account of that Jesuit Catechism, and Cases of Conscience,
mentioned in the above-written Letter, may be seen in the Life of Mr. John
Eliot: Written by Mr. Cotton Mather, page 135, 136, 137. Edit. Third, Printed
at London for John Dunton.

THE Righteousness of God through Faith, upon all without difference who do
Believe: In Two Sermons; On Romans 3.22. Preached at the Merchants-Lecture in
Broadstreet, by Nathaniel Mather, Minister of the Gospel. Printed for Nathaniel
Hiller, at the Princes Arms in Leaden Hall street.


