Truth held Forth AND MAINTAINED According to the Testimony of the holy
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles recorded in the holy Scriptures.

With some Account of the Judgments of the Lord lately inflicted upon
New England by Witch craft.

To which is added, Something concerning the Fall of Adam his state in the
Fall, and way of Restoration to God again, with many other weighty things,
necessary (...) People to weigh and consider.

Written in true Love to the Souls of my Neighbors, all Men, which includes
that Love to them, (...) by Thomas Maule.

Printed in the Year 16^^

(...) PREFACE
Friendly Reader:
AMong the many Writers in this Age, who profess themselves Gospel Ministers,
great i^ the number of false Prophets, and word^ teachers, whose Doctrines,
Principles and Practices are inconsistant with the Doctrines Principles, and
Practices of the holy Prophets and Apostles in days past, who brought, glad
tidings of Peace to ^he souls of many People, who were turned from Darkness to
Light, and from the Power of Satan to the Pow-God, Acts 26.18. even so,
ingmeasure, is it with true Gospel Ministers in this day, who turn Peoples
minds to the inward manifastation of the gift of Gods Spirit, which ministers
Life to them that hear and obey, unto them its life indeed; for the gift of God
is Life eternal; and as every true faithful Minister of Christ, has received
the gift of God freely, they minister freely from he same, as good St^wards of
the manifold Grace of God, d^ing unto all men, at they would have all m^n do
unto them, not striving for Mastership, but are gentle unto all men, and apt in
teach, patient in (...), instructing those that oppose themselves. 2 Timothy (...)
24, 25. that (...) by the Church may be edefied; for the true Ministers of
Christ are Servents to Christ, and not Masters own, (...), as many
Antichristian Teachers are, (...) H^^itage, (...) Persons in admiration for
advantage; but the true Ministers of Christ are men of sorrow, desol^ed, and
rejected o^ mend as he was, they are not made ministe^s by the mill of (...),
but by the will of God, and blameless, as the Stewards of God, not self willed,
nor soon angry, nor given to Wine, nor strikers, ^or are they greedy of filthy
Lu^re, but lovers of Hospitality, and sober, Just, holy, temperate, holding
fast the faithful Word, as they have been taught, that they may be able by
sound Doctrine, both to exhort, and convince the gainsayers; for there are
many unruly and vain Talkers and Deceivers, even as those in days past, whose
mouths must be stopped, for they subvert whole Houses, teaching things which
they ought not, for filthy Lucre sake; and as in that day, they had a Prophet
of their own, said, the Cretians are always Liars, evil Beasts, flow bellies
Tit. 1.7.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. even so as by Luther, and others, who have left
their Testimonies agreeable with what is found incorded in the Scriptures of
Truth, which give a true account of the Doctrine, Principles and Prectices of
the many Teachers in this age, who will not preach (...) Money. This witness is
true, wherefore rebake th^^ sharply, that they may be found in the Truth, for
they profess they know God, but in Works they deny him, Tit. (...). By which,
is it not manifest that the love of Money (which is the root of all evil) is in
them that will not prench without Money? what better are they, the^ the (...)
and false Prophets we read of, Jer. 14.14. Do they (...) bare rule by their
means in all Nations, where (...) see^ for their gain each from his Quarter?
Isa. ^. (...). Do they (...) preach for hire, and divine for Money M^^. 3.11.
And do they not preach peace so long as men keep paying, but when any come to
see their deceit, and cannot put into their mouths, then they preach open war
(...) And have not the false Prophets, Antichristian (...) and hired Priests,
destroyed ^he lives of many thousands of People for their obedience to the
faith, which work, by consent of the Magistr^^^, has had its day in
New England, when they put to ^ath four of the People called Quakers at Boston,
(concerning the which an Account will hereafter follow) which was by the
Priests accomplished, by the consent of the then Rulers; for without the
consent of Power, the Priests could not Persecute, which they wait to do as
Troops of Robbers wait for a man, so have the company of Priests murdered in
the may by consent, Hos. 6.9. So that by their fruits men may know them, Luke
6.13. Mat. 7.13, 16. for they are tried which say they are Apostles, and are
not, and they are found to be Liars, Rev. 2.2. Come from among them* and do not
partake of their sins, that ye may be free from their Plagues, which the Lord
is bringing upon the Whore and the false Prophets and Teachers, which (...)
wrought Iniquity against the Lord and his chosen People.

From my dwelling House at Salem in New England, 1st. 3d. Mon. 1690. Thomas
Maule.
Humane Learning I have not,
God does to me afford,
His Teaching by his Spirit good,
To understand his Word.
T. M.



The Heads or Contents of the ensuing TREATISE.
Chap. 1. COncerning the (...) of Gods quickening Spirit by Jesus Christ, page
1. Chap. 2. Concerning Christ, the true Seed and Everlasting Covenant of God to
his People, p. 10. Chap. 3. Concerning the Man Christ Jesus, which was
conceived of the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, and suffered Death for
the Redemption of all men, p. 16. Chap. 4. Concerning the holy Scriptures, p.
2^. Chap. 5. Concerning Faith, Hope and Obedience, which by the Power of God,
through Jesus Christ, works Salvation to them that truly believe. Also,
something concerning Silence. p. 30. Chap. 6. Concerning Perfection, and that
Warfair which the faithful are to pass through, before they come to witness
f^ll and free Redemption from sin, p. 47. Chap. 7. Concerning the Worship of
God in Spirit, p. 5^. Chap. 8. Concerning true Prayer, by which the faithful
find acceptance with God, by faith in the Son of his Love. p. 6^. Chap. 9.
Concerning the Lords Supper, which People call the Sacrament, p. 65. Chap. 10.
Concerning Baptism, and sprinkling Infants, which many hold most necessary to
Salvation, p. 70. Chap. 11. Concerning the true Sabbath, p. 76. Chap. 12.
Concerning Election and Reprobation, p. 79. Chap. 13. Concerning the (...)tion,
through Faith in Chr^ (...) p. 87. Chap. 14. Concerning the (...) p. 93. Chap.
15. Concerning the Ministers of Christ, and the Ministers of Antichrist Also,
of humane Learning, and the use of it, and how it came in practice among the
Reformed Churches in this latter Age. And concerning Gospel Maintenance, and in
what manner, and to whom it belongs, p. 99. Chap. 16. Concerning divine
Inspiration and Revelation, p. 109. Chap. 17. Concerning the Spirit of Christ,
and the Spirit of Antichrist, p. 114. Chap. 18. Concerning the true Language,
and proper Nature of Speech, and the true Names of the Days and Months, etc.
p. 118. Chap. 19. Concerning Prophesying, and Women's speaking in ^e Church, p.
124. Chap. 20. Concerning Powers, p. 127. Chap. 21. Concerning O^thes and
S^earing, p. 1^^. Chap. 22. Concerning Wars and Fightings, p. 136. Chap. 23.
Concerning Conscience, p. 144. Chap. 24. Concerning the free Love of God, p.
146. Chap. 25. Concerning the Church of Christ, etc. p. 154. Chap. 26.
Concerning the state of all men, and of Gods Judgments, and also of his calling
the Jews, etc. p. 164. Chap. 27. Concerning being born and brought forth of the
Immortal Seed of Gods Kingdom, p. 169. Chap. 28. A Letter to the Committee in
Salem, p. 175. Chap. 28. Concerning covering and uncovering the head, p. 178.
Chap. 29. Concerning the great Judgments of God upon the Inhabitan^s of
New England by W^^h-craft, p. 179. Chap. 30. Concerning the Lords Harvest, p.
210. Chap. 31. (...) Gods Judgments upon diver^ of the (...) Priests and Rulers
in New England, (...). p. 212.
The Contents of the second Part.
Chap. 1. COncerning the two wonderful Trees in the Gard^n of Eden ^viz. the
Tree Knowledge of good and evil, and the Tree of L^^e unknown ever since man
was drove out of Paradise, until admitted to return again, p. 220. Chap. 2.
Concerning the Tree of Life, what it is, and why Adam was shut out forbidden
and withheld from it, and not suffered to eat thereof. p. 227. Chap. 3.
Concerning the T^ee of Knowledge of good and evil planted in the heart of Adam,
p. 228. Chap. 5. Concerning the Sin of Covetousness. p. ^35. Chap. 6.
Concerning that Life, and nature of it, which God requires of all men, p. 2^^.
Chap. 7. Concerning Judgment begun at the House of God, and in his House to
judge down every appearance of evil, p. 258.
Friendly Reader;
ALthough the following Treatise has been very long detained in the Press, yet
hope thou shall find the impression pretty clear of Errors, as to the main,
except the mis-numbring of (...) or three Chapters, and one material error in
(...) 23. after Rule of Life, read for Christ is the Way, the Truth and (...),
which pray amend.

CHAPTER I. Concerning the Light of Gods quickening Spirit by Jesus Christ.
THe Light of Christ is the Power of God, by which the Righteous have been
preserved in all Ages, from Abel to Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and
Moses, in whose day the Lord wrought wonderful great D^liverances, by the Power
of his Light, figured in the (...) by Day, and in the Pillar of Fire by Night,
by which was Israel's Deliverances from their Enemies, which perished in the
midst of Darkness, Exodus 13.21. Now Israel in that day were commanded To remain
still in their Minds, and not to walk after their own Lust and Evil ways; in
which state of ^^^dience to the Li^h^ they came to witness great Deliverances;
but when Israel, through their Disobedience, fe^^ back in their Minds, from the
Light and Power of Gods Spirit, having their Minds turned by the Power of the
Enemy, to look back after the Flesh Pots of Egypt, them remained Death, by
which they slighted the Lords Mercy, despising his Gift inwardly, as they
despised the (...) outwardly, and saving, That their Souls (...) ^read, Numb.
21.6. for which cause of Disobedience, the Lord sent firey Serpents, whereof
the People became wounded and many dyed in that state; then the Lord in reader
Mercy toward the penitent preserved a number, that had not sinned unto Death,
whose Redemption was wrought through the Power of God, by lifting up the bra^en
^^^pent in the bewildered state, that whosoever, in (...) to the Light of Gods
Power, come to be^^^^ the (...) ^erpent, received (...); which was a true (...)
Gods (...) full^led in this Gospel Day (...) Christ, (...) divine Light is to
be listed up above all other things in the heart of man, even as they were to
look to him by Faith, a^ he was to be outwardly lifted up on the (...) their
sins, dye and rise again; for as Moses ^^^ted up the (...) Serpeat in the
Wilderness, even so mast the S^^ of (...) be lifted up, that whosoever
believes in him should not pe^^^, but have ^terna^ Life, John 3.14, 15. And
this is that L^g^t which has been the Path of the Just in all Ag^^, by which
the holy men of God were enlighte^ed to see the Glory of God to come, in
sending his Son Jesus Christ to be a Light to the whole world, that as many as
believed in him might be saved; for they that believe in Christ believe in the
Light, as he is Light, which redeems the Soul and keeps it alive unto God; by
which the Soul comes to be redeemed from the Stings of the old ^erpent, the
Power of the Devil, whose Power the Light makes manisest, and by Obedience to
the Light the Soul receives p^^er from God, which sets up the Light above all
other Lope in the heart of man which must be overcome by the Power of Gods
Spirit, which is Light and Lise, before the Soul (...) receive any assurance of
God in Christ; for he that loves any thing more than Christ is not found
worthy to receive him, Mat. to. 27, 38, 39. for where the heart is set in the
love of a^^ thing, more than to love the Light, the Soul of that man remains in
the broad way, where the venomous Ser^ents ^e which draw the heart and mind
from the Love of God in^o a state of sinning against the Gi^^ of his div^^e
Light, which is the Gift of his Spirit, purchased by the death and Resurre^^^^
of his Son, the Lord Jesus Christ which some know no mo^^ of than to call the
gift of Gods divine Light in the hearts o^ (...), A Stinking Vapor from Hell,
and The Relics of (...) which they have said, are the Checks of a Natura^^
(...), which words have proceeded from the Mouths of (...) Priest, in New
England, which are no less than (...) Words, by them, in whom no go^d seed can
take (...) for their Dischedience is against the Light, for which the light is
their Condemnation, John 3.19, 20. for the (...) Christ is the Power of God, by
which the Righte^ is have been preserved in all ^ges, which the faithful (...),
to the saving of their Souls, in this day; for the light of Christ is the Gift
of God, and the Gift of God by (...), Christ is ^ernal Life to them that
believe; for it is the Seed of the Kingdom sown in the hearts of the faithful,
who witness their Life in Christ the hope of Glory in whom is the su^^^hing of
things past, wherein the faithful Servants of God ^^ed and dyed in the holy
Faith of Gods Promises, (...) Christ should (...) me in the fullness of time,
for a Light (...) the whole World^ according to the Prophecy of Is^^^^, (...)
58 8. Then shall thy Light break forth as the M^r^ing, and thine Health shall
spring forth speedly, and thy Righteousness shall go before; the Glory of the
Lord shall be thy Reward. Which ^^th manife^^, that the Prophet foresaw Christ
to come, the Covenant or Light, and Promise of God to the G^^^ike, of which
Steek we are, who have received a measure of Gods Spirit, which is of the
divine Light and Nature of Christ, the true S^ed of his Kingdom, which by
measure has been sown in the Hearts of all the Sons and Daughters of Ad^^, To
open their blind Eyes, to bring out the Prisoner out of the Prison House, I^a.
42.6, 7. which is that which the Prophet declared of Christ, the Foundation of
Life, in whose Light the faithful see Light. Psalm. 36, 9. Here David saw God in
Christ, who was to (...), and in that day was a Rule to light D^vid in his
(...) goings and Incomings, by which he received the heavenly ^^ehes or Gods
Love, to the saving ^f his Soul, which is the Portion of all the faithful, who
receive Christ in the love of his Light, which is no less than Life Eternal to
all them that believe in his Name; for his Name is Light, and this Light has
been preached to every Creature under the Heavens, Col. 1.23. which is that
Light which John was sent to preach, Christ the true Light, that lights every
Man that comes into the World, John 1.9. and this Light opened their
Understandings to know the Scriptures, Luke 24 15, to 29. for Obe^^ence to the
Light of Christ brings into the Knowledge of (...) by which there comes to be a
right understanding of what i^ contained in the holy Scriptures; for by the
Spirit of God in Christ were the holy men of God enlightened, and gave forth the
holy Scriptures, as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

Now mind, That of this Light has every man received a ^^^sure in his heart,
it being the Seed of the Kingdom, and ^^^^geth forth Fruit in good Ground, Mat.
13.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. (...) not in all other Grounds, which signify dark unclean
stoney and hard Hearts, in which the Seed has been sown, but only thrives and
brings forth Fruit acceptable to God in the good Ground, that is, the honest
faithful Heart, which yields Obedience unto that which the gist of Gods divine
Light requires, it being the Lords Talent, Mat. 25. wherein we find Christ did
declare, concerning the Work of his Kingdont, by the Parable of the ten
Virgins, and sloathful Servant, both having received the Seed of the Kingdom,
the Lords Talent, which is a Gift of his divine Light and Spirit of Truth,
which had they been faithful thereunto, Salvation had not been wanting; for
when men receive of the Lords heavenly Gift of divine Light, be it more or
less, yet through faithful Obedience it is sufficient for their Salvation; for
whether more or less, yet the Lord requires his own with profit, and where much
is given, much also is required; but he that is not faith^ul in that which is
little, shall never be made Ruler of that which is greater, but that which he
ha^h po^^mpr^^ved shall be taken away, and given to him that has improved the
Gift of God for the Hon^nur of his holy Name^^ and comfort of man's own Soul,
Mat. 25 28, 29. which is ma^^er of great concern, for all to be w^le, an
diligent in the Work of the Lord; for the diligent gain Heaven^. Riches when
the sloathful are sent emp^y away, which will be the Portion of all the (...)
that are found living in a careless state, spending their time in that which
brings dishonor to the Name of the Lord, and sorrow to the Soul o^h^m that so
lives; for the Light of the Wicked shall b^ put out and the Sparks of his Fire
shall not sh^ne, and the Light shall be Darbness in his Tabernacle, and h^^
Candle shall be put out with him Job 18.5, 6. but in the faithful shall the
Light shine, which begets the heart and mind into good Works, that glorify God
their Father which is in Heaven.

Now the Light of Gods Spirit in the Son of his Love, the Lord Jesus Christ, is
that Light which the Lords People, called Quakers, profess to be the Rule of
their Life whose Life is the light of men, John 1.4. and this light has been a
Rule to the faithful in all Ages, Psalm. 27 1. The Lord is my Light and
Salvation, and he shall bring forth thy Right^oushes^^^ the light, and thy
Judgments as the noon day. In this the Righteous rejoice, and give Thanks at
the remembrance of his Holiness. Here Light is sown for the Righteous, and
Gladness for the Upright in Heart, Psalm. 97.11, 12. And again, he speaks of
Christ to be the Light, For with thee is the Fountain of Life, in the ^ight
shall we see Light, Psalm. 36.9. O send out thy Light and (...) Truth; let them
bring me unto thy holy Hill, and thy Tabernacle, Psalm 43.3. And the Spirit in
the Bropher says, Arise, shine, for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the
Lord is risen upon thee, Isa. 60.1. And the Gentile shall come to thy Light,
and the Kings to the Brightness of thy R^sing, verse 3. And many more instances
from the holy Prophets Writings may be produced to that effect; but these are
sufficient to prove Christ the Everlasting Foundation of L^fe and Light, in
whom the faithful of God in all Ages have built their Faith, in the Light of
God in Christ, which gave them ^ull assurance in the same Faith, That God in
his due time would enlarge his Covenant of Light to all Nat^ons, by sending h^^
Son Jesus Christ, who has appeared in the liken^ss of sinful flesh to take
away sin in the flesh by p^^forming the Will of God the Father, to full^r Death
in a Body of F^^sh, for the Redemption of all men; and this is Jesus which
shall save his People from their sins, Mat. 1.21. By which it is evident, That
the Work o^ God by Jesus Christ, is to save People from their sins. Then what
is the state of such man who profess themselves to be the Ministers of Christ,
and teach People of an imperfect state, never to be free from sin in this Life?
(concerning which at presen^^ shall omit, leaving it in order for another Head,
in which God willing) I shall clear by sufficient Testimony of holy Sempture
Proof, and at present proceed in Vind^cation of the Light against the Lies, by
which evil minded men reproa^^ the People of God, and dishonor his holy Truth,
in which the saithful live (each according to his measu^e of Light and (...)
Spirit of Grace, Light and Life by Je^ds Christ, which leads them to
acknowledge God the Father, Word and Spirit, Christ the Word, Life and Light,
and the holy Ghost, which (...) the Soirit of God the Father (...) Jesus Christ
the Son, and Lord of Life and Light, which was conceived by the holy Ghost and
brought forth by the Virgin Mary, betrayed by Judis, suffered under Pontius
Pilate, rose again the third day, aseen led into Heaven, where now he sits in
all Righteousness and Holiness with God the Father, in full Power, Majesty and
Dominion, being God over all, and in all for evermore, whom the World has in
great dispute, and many Controversies have risen, to the destroying of many
Thousands of Peoples lives, when that it is plain, That Christ came not to
d^stroy men^ lives, but to save and make alive, leaving this Example. That
Wheat and Tares should grow together until the Harvest lest in gathering the
Tares, they root up also the Wheat with them. Mat. 13 28 29 30. from which
saving Christ proceeds to another Parable, comparing the Kingdom of Heaven to a
grain of Mustard-s^ed, being account^d the least of all Grain Seeds, which
being grown up, it becom^th the greatest among H^rbs, and b^cometh a Tree that
the B^rds of the Air come to lodge in the Branches thereof, Mat. 13.31, 32. and
in the 33 ver^. Christ likens the Kingdom unto leven hid in three measures of
Mea^ until the whole was leavened. These things were spoke in Parables, that
the Saying of the Prophet might be fullfilled, in the ^ttering things which
have been kept secret from the Foundation of the World, which now is manifest
by the Light, through the Death and Resurrection of Christ Jesus, and also left
upon Record in the holy Scriptures of Truth, that in the light of the Lord God,
People may learn, and come to u^derstand, that Peoples perishing is not
altogether for want of Knowledge, but for want of Obedience to that measure of
Light which they have received; for he that is faithful in that which is
little, is made Ruler over more; for as the Grain of Mustard Seed has the
Light been ^own in the hearts of many, which have received as one Talent, and
in others who have received more; so that where much is given, much is
required; and where more or less, if it light on good ground, it becomes the
greatest among Herbs in the Lords Garden, and brings forth Fruit abundantly,
to the Praise and Honor of Gods holy Name; also, the little Leaven had in
three measures of Meal, implies the whole man, till the whole becomes leavened
into a new lump of the heavenly Nature of Gods Kingdom in Christ Jesus, which
as men come into a true Christian state of Obedience to the Gift of Gods divine
Light, and quickening Word or his Spirit, which has been handed ^orth through
the Death and Resurrection of the Lord of Life and Light, they (through
Obedience) may come to witness Eternal Life by Jesus Christ. Which things, one
would think, are sufficient to encourage all to yield their Obedience to the
g^^t of Gods divine Light; for there is not a Thought of the Heart, nor an
In^ent of the Mind, but the Light makes it manifest, which to obey is (...),
and to disobey is Death; for to be carnally minded is Death, but to be
spiritually minded is life and peace; Romans ^.6. For while men ^emain in
obedience to the Light, they are spiritually minded, in which state they are
^ervants to Righ^^ousness, but while men are in Disobedience to the Light, it
is accounted before the lord as Rebellion, which is as the (...) Witchcraft;
for it is the Willing and Obed^ent that shall (...) the good Land; which (...)
only extends to the Christ of (...) to the L^ght, who walk in the right as
(...) ^^dallght and ^n Christ the (...) and Light, have they Feth^^sh p^one
with anoth^^, and the Blood of Jesus Christ cleans^^ (...) from their sins, 1
John 1 7 for Christ is the Light (...) the ^oeld and he that follows Christ
shall not walk in Dark^^ (...) have the Light of Life, Joh. 8.12. Now (...)
this (...), it (...) the D^^obed^ent, whose Eyes are bl^nde^ (...) of (...)
(...) Gor. 4.4. Awake, thou that sleep in sin, and Christ will give thee
Light; for all things that are reproveable in the he^^t of man, are reproved by
the Light, for whatsoever does make manifest is Light, Ephe. 5.13, 1^. by which
it is manifest that man's condemnation is of himself, in that he will not be
faithful to the Gift of Gods divine Light, because his deeds are evil; for
every man that does evil hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest
his Deeds should be reprovea, Joh. 3.19, 20. but he that does Truth comes to
the Light, that his ^e^ds may be manifest that they are wrought in God, cap.
3.21. for God in Christ is the Fountain and Well spring of all Life and Light,
in whom the ^aithful of God shall for evermore remain, in the holy City of
heavenly Jerusalem, where there is no need of Sun, Moon nor Stars to shine in
it, for the Glory of God righteth it, and Christ the Lamb of God, is the Light
thereof, and the Nation of them that have been Obedient to the Light of Gods
Gift, by Jesus Christ shall be saved, and shall walk in the Light of it, Rev.
21.23, 24. So the God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is God of all
Life and Light, and the Way, the Truth, and the Life of Light, which all men in
measure have received, that they may yield their Obedience to the Requirings of
it, that by it their Understandings may come to be more and more enlarged
toward the Lord of Life and Light that by him, through the Power of his Spirit
of Grace, they may come thoroughly to see and perceive, to hear and understand
the things of God, treasured up in christ for all them that love the appearance
of his ^ight in their own hearts, which is the gift of his Spirit of ^race,
which in measure all men have received, and it preaches Life and Salvation to
all that are found in faithful obedience to it, but it preaches Condemnation,
Woe and Misery to all that live in a known Life of Disobedience to it; which
state of so living, is no less than to ^rucifie the Lord of Life afresh, and to
trample under foot all that ever Christ has done and suffered for the
Redemption of the Soul of that Man or Woman which is found in a known state of
Disobedience to the Gift of Gods Spirit of Truth, which is that Gift of his
divine Light, which will not loose it, honor, either by the Salvation or
Condemnation of all Mankind, even as their Obedience or Disobedience has been
in this Life, accordingly will be their Reward in the Life to come, which is
matter for all to consider, before the Spirit of God has lest striving, and
the Day of Gods Grace be over with them that perish through a Life of known
Disobedience to the Gift of Gods divine Light, which came by Jesus Christ, who
is the Author and Finisher of his own Work, in them that believe.

Concerning Christ, the true Seed and everlasting Covenant of God to his People.
THis is the Christ which the holy men of God in their Day and eneration
prophesied to come, and to finish Sin, and to put an end to Transgression in
all tha^ truly believe in his Name, which according to Gods appointed time, the
Word was made Fesh and d^elt among the Son and Daughters of Men, and they
beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of
Grace and Truth, Joh. 1.14. and this is Christ unto whom all things, of the
Father, are delivered, both in ^eaven and Earth, and no man knows him but the
Father, neither knows an^ man the Father, save the Son, and he to whom the
Son will reveal him, Mat. 11.27. By which it is evident that all Revelation is
not ceased. Come unto me, all ye that are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest, verse 28. Here Christ has promised Rest unto all that will come unto him;
But how shall they come unto him? by Faith in Obedience to that measure of his
divine Light of his Spirit of Grace, which he has placed in their Hearts, it
being the Lords Talent given to Man, for this end, that he should improve it to
the Honor and Glory of God, and Salvation of his own Immortal Soul, by Jesus
Christ, the Evidence of whose Spirit gives Life to the Soul of that Man, whose
cleart, Mind and Spirit is faithful to his Gift; for the Scriptures rest^le,
That Christ affords unto all them that by true Faith come unto him; Search
the Scriptures, for in them ^e think to have Eternal Life, and they are they
that testify of me, and ye will not come to me, that you may have Life, Job.
5.39, 40. Here it is evident from Christ's own words, That to search the holy
Scriptures without the true saving knowledge of God in Christ, and of his
Spirit, which moved in the holy Men of God and gave them Utterance to declare
his Will and Mind, according as contained in the holy Scripture, without which,
in some measure, Men cannot profit or benefit (toward Salvation by Jesus
Christ) by their reading the holy Scriptures; for they that will not come to
the inward Evidence of Gods Gift of his Spirit and Grace, they have not the
Love of God in them, Joh. 5.42. For Jesus Christ, the Promise of God, and Seed
of the Kingdom, him has God given to be an Everlasting Covenant of Grace,
Light and Life, to them that fear and tremble at the Power of his Word, and
steadfastly remain in the belief of his holy Name, which is no less than to give
up in their whole desire of Heart and Mind to serve him, the Lord of Life, in
Truth and Righteousness, with uprightness of Heart, Mind, Soul and Spirit; for
unto him it does belong, and unto such belongs the Promise of God, by the
suffering of his Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, which does extend Salvation to
their Souls; for God in tender Love and Mercy toward all men, falling short of
his Glory by the fall of the first Adam, does tender the Son of his Love, the
Lord Jesus, by the call of his good Spirit of Grace, Life and Light, which
remains not in the oldness of the Letter, but in the newness of the Spirit;
which has no relation to the saving of that Soul which remains in sin term of
Life; and having received the inward Evidence of the Spirit, which condemns for
every thought, word and action which is not agreeable with the Spirit of Truth,
of which every man has received a measure in his own heart, to justify or
condemn, even as his Works appear before the Lord, so shall be his Reward, if
of Faith and Obedience, then Life and Peace will follow; but if it be of Sin
and Unbelief, then Death, Hell and Destruction will be the Portion of him or
her which dies in such a state; for the Wages of Sin is Death, but the Gift of
God is Eternal Life; so they that dye in sin are free from Righteousness,
having no part, lot nor share in the Promise of God and Hope of Jesus Christ;
for their Hope shall be cut as the Spiders Web, which shall perish for
evermore; for Christ came not to save People in their sin, but to save and
redeem from sin and Transgression; His Name shall be called Jesus, for he shall
save his People from their Sins, Mat. 1.21. for they that dye in their sins
cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven, as Christ said, If ye believe not that I am
he, ye shall dye in your sins, and where I go ye cannot come, which relates to
a state of Perfection in this Life, upon which Head I shall (God willing) treat
more at large in a distinct Chapter, by which the Understandings of them that
desire after Truth, may receive the benefit of my small measure relating to the
same; for man living in sin becomes destitute of any benefit by Christ for the
Salvation of his Soul; for he that commits sin, it is of the Devil, and he
knows not God the Father; but he that is faithful to the Gift of God in his
heart, learns to fear the Lord, and to work his Righteousness which is the
fullfilling of what God requires, in obedience to the Son of his Love, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who spiritually moves in the hearts of all whose day of
Visitation is not over; for Christ rules over all, and will in no way fall
short of his Honor, either by the Salvation of the one, or Condemnation of the
other; for Christ by the measure of his Spirit, is in all, except Reprobates
(...) and therefore it is matter of great concern for People to examine their
own hearts, whether, by true Faith, Christ abides in them; for the Body of Man
(where Christ, by the gift of his divine Light and Spirit, lives) is the
Temple of the holy Ghost, and if any Man defile the Temple of God, him will God
destroy; Then he that is not in obedience to the gift of God which he has
received, is a Pollutor of the Temple, and is without true Faith in Christ;
Prove your own selves, know you not, that if Christ be not in you, you are
Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.5. Now they whose Minds are wrought toward the Lord,
their Affections are set on heavenly things above, to seek God in Christ; and
in them, Christ by the measure of his divine Light, Grace and Spirit, lives,
Gal. 2.20. Now Christ being in his People, the Body is dead, because of Sin,
but the Spirit is Life, because of Righteousness, Rom 8.10. for there is
neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision, Barbarian, Sithian, Bond nor Free, but
Christ is all; and in all, and many more Scripture Prooffs might be produced to
the same effect, That Christ lives and moves by the Gift of his divine Light,
and Spirit of Grace and Truth, in the hearts of his People, and that their
Bodies are the Temple of God, for Christ, by the gift of his Spirit, Life and
Light to dwell in, which if People, both Young and Old, would forsake their
Vanity, and apply their Minds to seek the Lord, in his own way of Truth and
Righteousness, according to the Gift of his divine Light, and quickening Word
of his Spirit, as by Record, for their help in learning the holy Scriptures, in
which they have the Doctrine, Principles and Practice of the holy Men of God
for their Example, to follow them, even as they have been Followers of Christ;
then they would come into that state in which they would witness the Power of
God by Jesus Christ, to crucify every unruly Affection, which does lust after
sin and evil, and leads the Mind from serving God, into the excess of spending
the Creation, to perform their hearts Lusts, by which they dishonor the Name
of the Lord, and increase Trouble and Sorrow, to the destroying of their Souls,
which is the end of them that remain in an unrighteous Life; for whatsoever
People may say, in respect that their Tongues are their own, an^ that their
Thoughts are free to think what they please, and that there is a time to be
Merry, and to Sing and Dance, and Recreate themselves, with much more of the
like Expressions, yet for all these things there is a time wherein all men must
appear before the Lord of Life, to render a just Account of every Thought,
Intent and Action, of all the Deeds done in the Body, in which Day it shall go
well with the Righteous, but the Ungodly and Profane shall be turned into
Hell, with him unto whom their Obedience has been; for all that have forgot to
retain God in all their Thoughts, so living and dying, God will also forget
Mercy toward them; for his Regard is only to his own Seed, (and to Men as they
are joined to it) which has been sown in all sorts of Ground, which is, in the
heart of every Man and Woman, for them to yield their whole Obedience
thereunto; for whatsoever ye do, whether ye eat, or whether ye drink, let all
be done to the Praise and Honor of God, who gives Life, Health and Strength
for that end; for whatsoever is in Peoples talk more than of Yea and Nay, it is
for Condemnation, which is great matter of weight for People well to consider,
what will become of their Souls, who live in the daily Practice of Words and
Actions, wherein the Lord never savingly appears, but as he does permit their
Souls Enemy to rule their Thoughts, Intents, Words and Actions, so of his free
Love, in Mercy to their Souls, the Lord does manifest to them the evil of their
way, which is by the gift of his divine Light in their own hearts, and by his
Spirit in the Instruments of his Truth, which have been sent, and are yet
sending to warn the Wicked to turn from their unrighteous Ways, which if they
would but give up their minds to come under the Cross of Christ, which is that
Cross for them to bear, which remains in Opposition to their corrupted Desires,
then they would become able, by the Power of God in Christ, to witness his Yoke
to be easy, and his Burden to be light; for what he has said unto one, be
has a so said unto all, that is, Watch and Pray, lest ye eater into
Temptation; for he that remains faithful in his Watch, by the Light of the Lord
perceives the Devil's Temptation in his first Allurement, which by true
Prayer, in faithfulness to his Watch, the Power of God in him does appear, to
the resisting of his Souls Enemy, and causes him to slay, so that in them, in
whom the Mind is stable in seeking after the Lord, for the Knowledge of his
Truth, in Jesus Christ, their Understanding will open more and more toward
him, by which the reading of the holy Scriptures will also be of great benefit
to the Understanding, which will also refresh the inward Man; so that as all
are diligently to mind the Gift of Gods Grace which they have received, as a
Seed of the Kingdom, through which by Obedience, it will grow and bring forth
Fruit acceptable to God, who requites his own with increase for the Honor of
his Same, and profit of Peoples Souls, that by Obedience to his holy Seed, they
may remain in Covenant with God, and be made Partakers of his Kingdom, in and
through the Son of his Love, the Lord Jesus Christ.

Further, concerning the Man Christ, which was conceived by the holy Ghost born
and brought forth of the Virgin Mary, and suffered Death for the Redemption of
all men, and as many shall be saved as believe in his Name.
GOd so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life, John 3.16. Which
does manifest, that God sent his only Son, born of a Woman, to suffer Death in
a Body of Flesh, for the Redemption of Peoples Souls, in which Body of Flesh
did remain the Fullness of the Spirit, toward the Salvation of all men's Souls,
yet they only shall be saved which believe in his Name; for his Name is called
Jesus, because he was sent of God to save his People from their sins, Mat.
1.21. Luke 1.31. which is according to the Prophet Isaiah, cap. 7.14, 15. A
bruised Reed shall he not brea^, nor smoking Flax shall he ^ot quench, till he
send forth Judgment unto Victory; and in his Name shall the Gentiles trust,
Mat. 12.15. to v. 21. He came to his own and (...) received him not, but as
many as received him, to them he ga^e Power to become the Sons of God, which
were born not of Blood, nor of the will of Flesh, nor of the will of Man, but
of God, Joh. 1 11, 12, 13. Which does manifest, that where men only believe in
the outward Righteousness of the Man Christ, who as he was in the Body of
Flesh, was God and Man, without the believing in the Gift of his Spirit, which
i^ the inward Word of Life, and leads the heart and mind of every sincere
Christian into a sanctified state of true Obedience to the Gift of his divine
Light and quickening Word of his Spirit of Grace, without which they cannot
come to live in that true Faith which justifies the Souls of the Righteous in
the sight of God the Father, in which state of true Obedience the evidence of
his Spirit does bear witness with their Spirit, That the Declaration of his
Truth recorded in the holy Scriptures, has proceeded from the Spirit of Life
in Christ Jesus, who in that Body of Flesh was both God and Man according as it
is written for Peoples learning That the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt on
Earth among the Sons and Daughters of Men, and many that believed his Name,
believed his Glory, as the Glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of
Grace and Truth, Joh. 1.14. They outwardly believed as Man with a visible Eye,
but as to his invisible Glory of Holiness, they believed him the Lord of Life,
as he was God and Man, with an invisible Eve, which by the Gist of his Spirit
enlightened them to know him to be the Lord of Life, whom to know by true
Faith, is Life Eternal, which was made known unto them by the gift of Gods
^race, through the effectual Working of the holy Ghost, by which they came to
understand the Will and Mind of God the Father, in the Death and Resurrection
of his Son, the Lord Jesus, which was expedient that he should depart, that
(...) forter might come, Joh 15.26. which Promise was fulfilled by the voilding
up that Body of Flesh, which was born of a Woman, and betrayed by Judas,
condemned by Pilate, delive (...) unto (...) set him at naught, and crucified
the Lord of Life upon their Cross without the Gates of Jerusalem, which Body
was buried, and rose again the third Day, being the first Day of the Week,
which Christians attend for the Worship of God, having the holy Apostles for an
Example, to follow them, as they were Followers of Christ, who met together on
the first day of the Week to worship the Lord in Spirit and in Truth, which is
in the Power of his Spirit, by the effectual working of his Gift, through his
Death and Resurrection, which appeared unto the Saints, who received of his
Fullness, Grace for Grace, which made them able Ministers of the New Covenant
of Life and Light in Christ Jesus, which then ascended into Heaven with God the
Father, and with him is in a glorified Body, which Flesh and Blood cannot
reveal, being glorified with that Glory which he had with the Father before the
World began, which is the Christ that the holy men prophesied should come for a
Light to the Gentiles, and for Salvation to the ends of the Earth, Isa 49.6.
Acts 13.47. who accordingly is come, and has done the will of God the Father,
in that Body, as aforesaid, and by him, through his Death; Resurrection and
Ascension, have all the Sons and Daughters of Men received a Gift of his
heavenly divine Light, as a Talent and Tale^ts for them to work out their
Salvation with fear and trembling at his Work which is able to make^ through
separation betwixt the precious and the vile, that is, between the begettings
of his own divine Life, and that Seed which brings forth the Life of the
Stranger, which is the Devil and Enemy of man's Soul, whom the faithful will not
follow, but are willing to submit under the Cross of Christ, whose Yoke is
easy and his burden light, not desiring the Death of any one Sinner, but that
all might turn at his Reproofs, and live the Life of the Son of God, who has
suffered Death, been buried, and is risen again, and ascended into the Heavens,
where he makes Intercession with God the Father for the Redemption and
Salvation of all them that are willing, by true Faith, to receive the tenders
of his free Grace, which by the Gift of the divine Light of his Spirit of Truth
is largely manifested unto the Sons and Daughters of men; for his divine Light
and quickening Word of his Spirit in his People, that is Christ in them the
Hope of Glory, by which not any will be left without excuse in the great Day of
his Coming to take Vengeance on all the Ungodly of them which have not improved
their T^lents to the Honor of his Name, and profit of their Immortal Souls, in
which Day with the Righteous it shall gowell, but with the Wicked, who have
slighted the Day of the Lords Visitation, through their idle, careless, loose
and vain living in Disobedience to that which the Lord by the gift of his
divine Light and Word of his Spirit requires of them, for which cause sorrow
and anguish shall overtake them in that Day, in which they shall forever be
shut out from having any lot, part or share among the faithful in the Kingdom
of Heaven, through the Death and Resurrection of the Son of God, who laid down
his Life for the Sins of the whole World, but as many shall be saved as truly
believe in his Name; for as by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners, so
by the Obedience of the Man Christ Jesus, many shall be made Righteous. Romans
5.19 for Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness, to every one that
believes so that not any (...) to say, wh^ shall descend to bring up Christ
again from the (...) who shall ascend to bring down Christ from Heaven, for the
(...) nigh, even in the Mouth, and in the Heart, that is the Word of Faith.
Romans 10 (...) by which Word of Faith we (...), that Christ wh^^^ outwardly
desc^^d, (...) ascended, and by (...) Power of, divine Light and quickening
word of his Spir^^ he is the Author and Finisher of every good Work of Faith in
the hearts of his People; for he is the Word of Life unto the (...) by true
Faith believe in him as he outwardly suffered, and in the gist of his Spirit,
which is the inward Word of (...) them t^ whom Christ gives the Shield of
Faith, and Hope, the H^^ not of their Salvation, by which Word Sim^n Peter came
to know the Lord of Life to be the Christ, the Son of the living God, which
Flesh and Blood did not reveal, Mat. 16 14, 15 16. but was revealed by God, the
Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, whose mere B^d^y Presence did not give Peter
the knowledge of the Church buils on that that Rock whose Foundation was so
sure, that ^he Gates of Hell could never prevail against ^^s Members, which by
the most sare Word of Prophecy are ingrafted in the Man Christ, in whom the
fullness of the Godhead dwells for evermore; for he is the well-beloved of
the Fathers own begetting, and has done the Work of God in that Body of Flesh
which suffered on the Cross without the City Gates of Jerusalem, and was
buried, and rose again the third Day, and appeared to the Saints, and gave
Gifts unto them, and ascended into Heaven, of which things the Father, Word and
Spirit bears witness, and these three are one God, and that no man speaking
by the spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed, and that no man can say, That
Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Ghost; and as there is but One God, One Lord
Jesus Christ, One Father, One Son, and One holy Ghost, One Word, and One
Spirit, all which are One God, who has given Diversittes of Gifts, but the
same Spirit, and Differences of Advanistrations, but the same Lord, and
Diversities of Operations, but it is the same God which works all in all, for
a manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal, 1 Cor.
12.3, 4 5, 6, 7. for as the Body is one, and has many Members, and all the
Members of that one Body, being many, are one Body, so also is Christ; for by
one Spirit are all the faithful baptized into one Body whether they be Jew^ or
Gentiles, Bond or Free, they have been made to drink into one Spirit; for the
Body is not one Member but many, and are ingrafted by the Power of Gods Spirit,
the most sure Word of Prophecy, into the stock, which is Christ, the true Vine,
with which every true Branch that is a Member of his Body, does of his divine
Nature partake, by which it does bud, spring and bring forth Fruit abundantly,
to the Praise and Honor of Gods holy Name, but every Branch that brings not
forth Fruit unto God, by true Faith in Christ, the Father takes away; for its
by Disobedience the Lord cuts it off, and appoints it its Portion in Hell,
which is the Portion of all them that let the Day of Gods Grace and Visitation
of his Spirit to pass over; but every Branch that bears Fruit in Christ the
true Vine, the Father purges it of its first nature, the old heaven of
Degeneration, and by the Power of his Word, Grace and Spirit, leavens the
heart, mind and spirit into the new lump and nature of his heavenly Kingdom in
Christ Jesus, the Author and Finisher of his own Work in them that truly
believe, which by Faith in Christ, bring forth Fruits of Righteousness and
Holiness, which are the Works of true Faith, without which, Faith is even dead
as the Body is without the Spirit, for by the Gift of Gods good Spirit of
Grace, is the Faith of every true Believer wrought into a lively hope, in which
stands an assurance of that Crown of Righteousness which (...) store for all
true Believers that fear the Lord and keep his Commandments, such are they that
live in the true fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of Wisdom, and leads
the Mind out of visible delights, and to follow Christ with an easy Yoke and
light burden to do his Will, which is that strait and even narrow Way which
leads unto the Kingdom, in which no unclean thing can enter, neither is there
any cleansing but what is here on Earth; for as Death leaves, so Ju^gment
finds, and there is no Repentance in the Grave.

Which things, in the true Love of God to Peoples Souls, I do exhort them to
weigh and consider, that they may turn in their minds from all vain Delights,
and obey the Voice of the Son of God in their own hearts, that by the Gift of
his Spirit they may come to be turned from Darkness to Light, and from the
Power of their Souls Enemy, to serve the Lord in true Holiness of heart, mind
and spirit; for there is no other Name given under Heaven for men to be saved,
but as they come to believe in Christ as he did outwardly suffer, and also
believe in the Gift o^ his Spirit and inward Word of Life unto all them that
are in true Obedience to the gift of his divine Light, which has been the Path
of the Just in all Ages, and yet appears in the heart of every man and Woman,
with whom the Day of Gods Grace is not over; for his Love remains steadfast to
all that which is of his own Nature, which is of a contrary Nature to that
permitted Power unto which too many yield their obedience, by which the desire
of their Minds is drawn from obedience to the gift of Gods divine Light and
quickening Word of his Spirit; in which state they serve the the Lust of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, and as men void of all
spiritual sense and reason, as to the things of God, their Thoughts, Words and
Actions are here and there in the love of those things, which Work the Lords
Soul abhors, and such appear as Trees without Fruit, as to God; for their Fruit
is of a strange Plant and unregenerate Vine, for which cause the Spirit of the
Lord in his Servants is the same as it was in his Servants of Old, who are
called of God to bear their faithful Testimony against all Unrighteousness of
men, who as evil corrupt Trees bring forth evil corrupt Fruit, for which cause
evil minded men are at Enmity with the Lord and his People, whose Fruit is of
his own Spirit, which is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gen^leness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, against such there is no Law, for they
live in the Spirit and walk in the Spirit with Christ, whom now, as in days
past, the wise builders set at naught, wherefore he has said, The things of
the Kingdom are hid from the wise and prudent of this World, and revealed unto
Babes, even so has it pleased God; for the wise and prudent of this World
pretend to build upon him at whom they stumble, and is become the Head of the
Corner, and will so remain, to the breaking down all that which is contrary to
his holy and blessed Truth; so that no building shall stand but that which is
built by the Power of his own Spirit in them, whom the Wisdom of this World
does despise, even as the Wise did despise in that Day, when they set their
Learning in H^brew, Greek and Latin over the Head of Jesus, Joh. 19 20 even so
is it with the Wise of this World in this Day, whose Learning is set above the
gift of God, which came by Jesus Christ, whose People, begot by him in the true
Faith and Oneness of Spirit, do well know that there is No other Name under
Heaven given among men, whereby to be saved, but by that Name Jesus of
Nazareth, that Christ by which is the Righteousness of his People; for he unto
them is made of God Wisdom. Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, and
that in this World, as well as in the World to come, and not simply so
accounted, as some judge, and then made unto us of God Wisdom Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption hereafter in the World to come, but realty made
to us here, and that perfectly too, so far as he is perfectly hoped in, (1 Pet.
1.13.) for Salvation, that is, Salvation from God by Christ, through the Faith
of his outward Sufferings and by obedience to the gift of his Spirit in the
heart, which is the inward Word o^ Life to them that hear and obey, by which
they may be turned from Darkness to Light, and from the Four of Satan to the
Power of God, by which they may witnes^ ^he Evidence of Gods spirit, That they
have the Pardon of sin, and forgiveness of that which is past, being washed
with the Blood of Sprinkling, which cleanses the Heart, and purg^th the
Conscience from dead Works, to serve the living God in uprightness of Soul,
Body and Mind; and without witnessing of this Work perfected, through Faith in
Jesus Christ, the Soul can never be clean to enter his Rest with him in the
Kingdom of Heaven which was prepared before the Foundation of the Earth was
laid, for a People that should serve the Lord in uprightness of Soul. Mind and
Spirit, being thoroughly cleansed by the Blood of Jesus Christ whose Death,
Resurrection and Ascension will not avail any Man or Woman whose Mind remains
in the love of any one thing more than to love him and serve him with
uprightness of Heart and Mind; for to be carnally minded is death, but to be
spiritually minded is Life and Peace, and whereby every Man and Woman may know
how it stands between God and their own Souls, which is good for all to mind,
and make their Peace with the Lord while he has given them space and time
for that end, that their Souls may not faint in the great Day of his Coming to
call every Man and Woman to an account for their Deeds done in the Body.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Scriptures, which are the Writings of the holy Men of
God wherein is contained, that Jesus Christ is the Everlasting Word of God, by
whom is the Salvation of all Men that are saved by his Power, which leads them
to believe in his Name.
THe Holy Scriptures, (contained in the Old and New Testament) signify
Writings in which VVritings are contained the Words of God, as they were
received by the living Word of God, as may be read in the Prophets VVritings,
The Word of the Lord came unto them, this was not the Letter of the Scripture
that came unto them, but it was the living Word of God, which in Scripture
is most properly and frequently called The Word of God; In the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was God; the same was in the beginning with God, all
things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made, that was made,
Joh 1.1, 2 3 And the Word was made Flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld his
Glory as the Glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth.
Now consider what grounds People have to call the Scripture the only Word of
God, without any Distinction, but by way of Information to the understanding of
a^^unbyassed Minds, that my design in the following Li^^ a is not to deprive
the holy Scriptures of that honor due unto them, but that Truth and
Righteousness may take place; for the holy Scriptures, in their place, are
highly to be esteemed, with that Honor due unto them; for which end (...)
labor is, that by others they may not be dissplaced, by (...) to understand a
true distinction between the written and declarative Word of God, and the Word
of his Spirit of Grace, Life and Light by Jesus Christ, whom to know is Life
indeed; for they that come unto him, it must be through Faith, in obedience to
the gift of his divine Light and quickening Word of his Spirit, which opens the
dark Understanding, and quickens the Mind, and works Grace in the Heart, and
sanctifies the inward Man of him that yields Obedience to the Word of his
Spirit, without which there can be no true understanding of Gods saving Truth
by Jesus Christ, whom to know is Life Everlasting; concerning which things the
written Word is large in its Declaration, concerning what God requires of the
Sons and Daughters of Men, who, for Power to perform what they find to be their
Duty, as by holy Record, they are to come unto Christ, the Author and Finisher
of his own Work in them that believe; for the holy Scriptures of Truth were
given forth by the Spirit of Truth, and living Word of Truth, which was the
Word of God in His Servants of old; which Word, according to measure, remains
the same to this Day in every sincere true Believer, whose whole desire is to
give up in obedience to the manifestation of Gods good Spirit of Grace, by
which they come to a thorovv understanding of what they find of his Will and
Mind, recorded in the holy Scriptures of Truth, without which Obedience the
Letter kills, but by Obedience the Spirit makes alive; for the holy Scriptures
are full in relating of what has been past, and of what is to come; but as to
the time when and manner how, the Lord in his own due time, by the Word of his
Spirit does reveal it to his Servants and Messengers of his Truth in this Day,
even as it has pleased him in days past; for as then in that day, the same is
it with many in this day, who the Scriptures, yet it is said of them, That they
had not the Wor^ abiding in them, for whom God had ^ent, which was Christ the
Word, him they believed not, Joh. 5.3, ^ which by the written Word is evident,
that the gift of Gods Spirit of Grace, Life and Light by Jesus Christ, is the
saving Word of God to every Soul that by him is saved; for what says it? the
Word is nigh thee, in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart, that is the Word of Faith,
James 1.21. Romans 10 7, 8 and this Word is the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God, Ephesians. 6.17. it sanctifies the heart of the faithful by the Word
of God and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5. for the faithful are them that are poor, and of
a contrite Spirit, which tremble at the Word of the Lord Isa. 56.2, 5. Hear ye
the Word of the Lord, ye that that Tremble at his Word. And again I have
written unto you, Fathers, because ye have known him that is from the
beginning; I have written unto you, Young Men, because ye are strong, and the
Word of God abides in you, and you have overcome the wicked One, John 1.14.
Now let all People mind by which they may come to a right understanding of the
Scriptures, which were not from the beginning, neither do they of themselves,
and without the inward Word, give Power to overcome the wicked One; for the
Word of God was before Scripture, and promises Life eternal to all that are
willing to receive the Word, which is the Promise of God in Christ before the
World began, Ti. 2.3. And this Word has been a Rule of Life to the faithful of
God in all Ages, showing unto Man the Thoughts of his Heart, and intents of his
Mind and Obedience to the Word is an acceptable Sacrifice to the Lord and God
has promised o^ overcome sin in the faithful by the Power of his Word, which
is as a two edged Sword to cut up and beat down all that is contrary to his
heavenly divine Life in the heart of every faithful Man and Woman, that is come
to yield their Obedience according (...) that knowledge which they have
received of God in Christ, whom to know is Life Eternal, in which Life they
have the true saving knowledge of God, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
which is One God, and One Lord Lord Jesus Christ, and One holy Spirit, God in
all, and through all, and over all, the Alpha and O^aega, the beginning and the
end, the first and the last, blessed are they that do his Commandments, that
they may have right to the Tree of Life, Rev. 22.13, 14. which (as aforesaid)
is that which the Lord by the assisting Power of his Spirit has made known to
me concerning his Word of Life and Light, by which the holy men of God were
assisted in giving forth a Declaration of his holy Truth, which they received
by his holy Spirit, which is the living Word of all Truth, and will remain the
same when the Letter of the Scripture shall end and be no more; for the Word of
the Lord shall endure forever. And what is left recorded in the written Word of
God, is for this end, that People may learn in the Light of the Lord, to
perform that which by the Gift of his Spirit of divine Light and Grace he
requires of them to do, the Declaration of which is recorded in the holy
Scriptures of Truth, which are profitable for Doctrine, etc. 2 Timothy 3.16 which
no man can learn but as he remains faithful to the gift of God, which he has
received for that end, that by so doing he may come to grow more and more in
Grace, to the Honor of God, and everlasting Welfare of his immortal Soul,
which will never witness Salvation, but by true Faith in Christ Jesus, the most
sure Word of Prophecy whereunto they will do well to take heed, as unto a
Light that shines in a dark place until the day dawn, and the Day star arise
in their hearts, without which there is no Salvation.

CHAP. VI. Concerning Faith, Hope and Obedience, which by the Power of God,
through jesus Christ, works Salvation to the Souls of them that truly believe
in the gift of his Grace. Also something concerning Silence.
JEsus Christ in all things became obedient to the Will of God the Father, for
the Redemption of all Mankind, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but should receive Life Everlasting, which is the Promise of God by
Jesus Christ, unto all the faithful, willing and obedient, that is, in all
things for the Salvation of their Souls, by Faith in Jesus Christ; for Man, by
Obedience to the Gift of God, which is a measure of divine Light by Jesus
Christ, by whom the Soul comes to be reconciled unto God; for the Lord in (...)
^ay requires no less than perfect Obedience of all Men; (...) all men have
received of his Gift of his Spirit of divine Light by Jesus Christ, so he will
not have any left without Excuse in the Day of his Coming to take Vengeance on
all the Ungodly, which call not upon the Name of the Lord. for Christ is made
manifest according to the Commandment of the Everlasting God, made known to all
Nations for the Obedience of their Faith, Rom 16.6. and for that end did the
Apostle write, that he might know the proof of them whether they were obedient
in all things; 2 Cor. 2 9. for this is the Day of Gods Visitation, wherein if
ye will hear his Voice, harden not your hearts against the Light of his Spirit
of Grace; for unto whom ye yield your Minds Servants to obey, his Servants you
are, to whom you obey, whether of Sin unto Death, or Obedience unto
Righteousness, Romans 6.16. Now the Gift of Gods divine Light by Jesus Christ,
makes manifest to all men, all the thoughts of his Heart and intents of his
Mind; for the Righteousness of Faith speaks on this wise, Say not in thy
heart who shall ascend into Heaven, that is, to bring Christ down from above?
or who shall descend into the deep, that is, to bring up Christ again from the
Dead? but what says it? the Word is nigh thee, even in thy Mouth and in thy
Heart, that is the Word of Faith, Romans 10.6.7, 8 By which it is evident, that
where men perish, it is not altogether for want of Knowledge, but for want of
Obedience to the Gift of God, which he has placed in the hearts of all the
Sons and Daughters of Men, which by obedience would give them Power over their
lustful Desires, which by Nature lodges in the hearts of sinful Men and Women,
whose Minds, for want of Obedience are drawn by the Enemy's Power, to join with
the Temptations of the Devil, but if they yielded Obedience to the gift of Gods
Spirit, they would witness strength to with-stand the Enemy, and cause him to
flee; for the ^eapon of every true Believers VVar-fare, are not carnal, but
spiritual, and mighty, through God, to the pul^ing down strong Holds, casting
down every high thing that exalts its self against the Knowledge of God, and
brings into Captivity every Thought, to the Obedience of Christ having in
readiness to revenge all Disobedience, when their Obedience is fullfilled, 2
Cor. 10.1, 5, 6. and in this do the faithful come to witness the inward
Affections of Christ more and more abundant toward them, whilst he remembereth
their Obedience, how with fear and trembling they receive him, 2 Cor. 7.15
Which things are plain and by Obedience easy to be understood, that they who
come to receive the benefit of Christ by the Power of Gods Spirit, in and
through him, it is by true Faith in Obedience to his Word, at which they fear
and tremble, it being sharper than any two-edged Sword, dividing between the
Precious and the Vile; which is an Engagement between the Power of God and the
Power of the Souls Enemy, who has seated himself in the Temple of God, as if
he were God; which Enemy is the strong Man that has taken Possession in the
hearts of the Sons and Daughters of Men, (whose Minds are alienated from God,
by reason of Sin and Transgression) who keeps the House, until a stronger
than the Devil does dispossess him of his Power, unto which Power through the
Lust of Peoples unregenerated Hearts, they are most inclined to serve, which
has been and yet is the state of many Thousands of Men and Women, who are
deceived by the Devil, which is for want of Obedience to the gift of God,
Power, which by true Faith and Obedience, would dispossess the Devil of his
Power, and bring the inward Man into the true saving Knowledge of his
sanctified Work of Grace in their own Hearts, which things they are ignorant
of, who remain in a blind zeal for God, but not according to the true saving
Knowledge of him in Jesus Christ, Rom 10.2. by which their Faith remains in a
dead Hope that shall perish; for true Faith works the whole inward Man of
Heart, Mind, Soul and Spirit into the true Love of God, and Hope of Salvation
by the Lord Jesus Christ, whose Spirit gives Evidence of an assurance in those
things that by true Faith are hoped for; so that Faith is the substance of
things hoped for, and the Evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1, 2. for by
Faith the holy Men of God obtained a good Report; for we see and understand,
through Faith in God, that the Worlds were framed by Christ, the Word of God;
so that things that were seen were not made of things which do appear, Heb.
1.3. By when it is manifest, that Christ is the Word by whom all things were
made long before the Scriptures were given for (...): for the Law came by
Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, in whom remains the ^ope of
h^s People for the ^arvation of their Souls; and from this Word (Christ) the
Se^vant of God received Grace and Apostlesh^^, for their Obedience to the
Faith, among all the Nations for his Name, Romans 1.5. and as many as received
this Word, in o^e ^rence to the Faith, being grafted in him, in whom there is
not my thing avails the Soul of Man, but by that Faith which works by the
Love of God, Gal. 5 6. Now seeing that t^^e Faith works by the Love of God,
in and through Christ, what Faith is that in them which leads to destroy the
Lives and Estates of People, for their Obedience to God, who works by Love in
the hearts of his People, for this end, that they might believe in the Word of
Faith, which sanctifies the Soul of every true Believer, that by Faith in Jesus
Christ, through Grace, they are saved; for true Faith works by Love, through
Obedience to the Word of Faith, which is Christ in his People, the Hope of
their Glory by whom his People are begot into a lively Hope, that makes not
ashamed? but that Faith which leads People to believe that they do good service
for God, by destroying the Lives and Estate of their peaceable Neighbors, for
their different Judgment concerning spiritual things, is it not the Faith of
Devils, and Hope of ^pocrites whose Obedience is to the Prince of Darkness, the
Enemy of Man's Happiness, and all such are in a dangerous st^^? for God works
by love, and Christ came not to d^stroy men's Lives, but to save them; and such
men being many, that pretend to work ^o God, whose Truth is contrary to their
Doctrine, Principle and Practice, as does at large appear by their preaching
and writing such things (as in Deuteronomy. 13. Numb. 25. also in Ezra, and diverse
other places in the Law) which were only to continue the Lords time of
fullfilling the Righteousness thereof, whose R^gateousness in this Gospel ^ay
will not be received by the many Teachers in this Age, who preach and teach to
advance their own profit in way of their Trade; for in the time of the Law the
false Worshipper, with all h^^ Substance, was held accursed before the Lord,
and for that end both were to be destroyed; and therefore in this Age, the
Antichristian Teachers do account, that such who are not of their Faith, and
as one with them in Doctrine, Principle and Practice, that ^he^, as false
Worshippers, are to be destroyed. But Christ is come, by whose Coming the
Righteousness of the Law is fullfilled, in that he came not to destroy m^ns
Lives, but to save and make alive, by calling Stanners to Repentance, and to
return, by Faith in O^edience, to serve him the living God with uprightness of
Heart, Mind and Spirit, doing unto all Men, even as they themselves would be
done unto, which is the Law and Prophets; out of which state men are not in the
true Faith, but are ignorant of Gods Righteousness, which is in the New
Covenant of Life, Light and Grace, which came by Jesus Christ, contrary to
whose Righteousness they establish their own Righteousness, and not submit
themselves to the Righteousness which is of God, Romans 10.13. wherefore their
Faith remains dead, and their Hope vain; for Faith is the gift of Gods Word,
which is Christ the true and living Priest, who by the gift of his Spirit of
divine Life and Ligh^, preaches Light, Life and Grace, by which the Souls of
^he faithful are saved; and of this nature comes Faith, ^y hearing the Word of
God, Romans 10.17. which does manifest, that Faith comes not by that Word, which
is not from the Spirit of God; in such faith^ess men, who for ^^cre of Gain,
make use of other men's lines made ready to their hands, that is, of such who
bargain with People to preach unto them for their Money, who if they perceive a
greater benefit to present in another place, they account it sufficient
Encouragement to leave the lesser, and to hold the greater; but such their
Doctrine Principle and Practice is inconsistent with Gods holy Truth, which
does live in the hearts of them that are faithful unto what of God by Jesus
Christ, is made manifest unto them; for unto them does the Promises of God
belong, by whose Spirit of Grace is his Righteousness revealed from Faith to
Faith, as it is written, The J^st shall live by Faith, Romans 1.17 Then what does
it profit any man to say, that he has Faith, when that by works of
Righteousness he does not ma^^est the ^^me; for Faith without Works is dead,
even as the Body is dead without the Spirit; such may believe that there is one
God, they do well, the Devils also believe the same, and fear and tremble; but
they fear and tremble because of Gods Wrath in Judgment, even so it is with the
Rebellious, who by their vain Life of Disobedience fall short of true Faith
they also fear and tremble, but not in love to God, but for fear of Terment to
com^; such are they whose Faith is without Works, whose Faith is as dead as the
Body is dead without the Spirit. (...) 2 17, 18, 19 20. Then seeing, that
without that Faith wh^^ is by the gift of Gods Grace, that sanct^fies every
true Believers Work of Obedience, by which it is imputed to him for
Righteousness, without which ^t is impossible to p^ease God, who will hold all
men guilty of Did bed^ence ^ha^ remain in sin; for sin makes a continual
^eperation (...) God and ^he Soul, whereby they that continue in a state of
sin^^ng against the gift of Gods Grace, they by so doing, fall short in the
true Hope of Salvation; for by true Faith in Obedience to the gift of Gods
Spirit, the Mind is wrought into a still frame of Spirit, being made able,
through the Power of Gods Gift to wait for the Hope of Righteousness by Faith,
Gal. 5 5. By which it is manifest, that waiting in Silence of M^^^, the inward
Affections come to be drawn from having any desire in that part, which through
the Temptation of the Souls ^nemy is natural to lust after evil; for the Body
is the Temple of the holy Ghost, and all thoughts and intents of the heart and
mind, that appear contrary to the moving of his own Spirit, they are Thieves
and Robbers, that proceed from the Souls Enemy, which strive to prevent and
hinder the prosperity of Gods Gift of divine Light, which is of the Seed of the
Kingdom of God, which Seed in measure has been sown in all sorts of ground,
which is the heart in all men, Mat. 13.3, 4, 5 6, 7, 8 for the Temple of God is
the Body of Man, in which Christ is to rule, for the Salvation of all them that
by Faith in obedience to the gift of his Grace, Life and Light, receive him.
Know ye not that ye are the Temples of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells
in you? If any man defile the Temple of God, him will God destroy, for the
Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are, 1 Cor. 3.16, 1^. ^t is a worthy
subject for every Man and Woman to consider well with themselves, by making a
diligent search with the ^ight of the Lord in their own hearts, how it stands
between God and their Souls, which must either live forever, or eternally
perish with the Devil; and all they that by obedience to him in this Life, have
sinned out the Day of Gods Grace, and of his ^ich M^cies by Christ Jesus, which
has been tendered unto them, for the Salvation of their Immortal Souls. So to
all with whom the Spirit of God does strive, that they may bend in the strength
of their Minds to ^ir upon him in a retired state out of all their owRn^^nnings
from Hill to Mountain, in which state they are out of that Silence which the
Lord has commanded, That the whole Earth, which is all flesh, should keep
silence before him, Hab. 2 20. And again, the Spirit of the Lord, by the Mouth
of his holy Prephet, says The Lord who is raised out of his holy Habitation
commands all flesh to keep Silence before him, Zech. 2.13. By which it
appears to all that hear, see and understand, That Silence is that which God
has commanded to all Men and Mankind, who are to wait upon him in the Silence
of Mind, that they may see and perceive, hear and understand the Lords Will and
Mind in hole things which belong to the Peace and Welfare of their Immorcal
Souls, in which state of true faithful Obedience, the inward Man of Heart Mind
and Spirit, will be made capable of receiving that benefit which the Lord will
improve by his faithful Instruments, and that not only for the benefit of his
own good, but for the benefit and good of others, that so the Name of the holy
One may b^ honored thereby. The Lord in his rich Mercy is good unto all them
that wait for him in S^^ence, Lam. 3.25 28. And in this state did David wait on
God, from whom comes the Salvation of the faithful, who truly wait i^ Silence
on the Lord, Psalm. 37.7 69.1. Now (...) the ^alvation of Peoples Souls cannot
be without Obedience to the Faith of God in Christ, of whose Spirit^^^ men, in
measure, have received, which is the Call of God by the Son of his Love, the
Lord Jesus Christ, who was obedient to the Fathers Will in ^ll things, for the
Redemption of men's Souls, which without true Faith and Obedience, according to
the Requirings of his good Spirit of Grace, there is no Salvation by him; then,
if no Salvation by him, to them that remain in Disobedience to the gift of
Grace, they are to perish for evermore; for as in the outward, among the
Disobedient and Rebellious, which pretend themselves Subjects to some Earthly
King he knowing them so to be, will not protect them with that care and safety
from the danger of an outward Enemy, as he will protect them whom he well
knows, that the^ are faithful Subjects, which in true obedience serve him; such
Subjects will remain in silence to hear what their King does relate, as tending
to the preservation of their outward Man; then how much more, suppose ye, will
the great King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, keep and preserve them that observe
his Commands, to remain in silence before him, the Lord of Life, to hear what
he will speak by the Voice of his Spirit, for the preservation of their Souls,
which keep silen^e before him; Unto me Men gave ear, and waited, and kept
Silence at my Counsel, Job 29.30. Now they that are not in the Faith of these
things, they are in a Faith of their own Righteousness, seeking the Lord where
he is not to be found, crying, Lo here, and Lo there, in this and the other
Form, wandering in their Minds from place to place, from one high Hill to the
other barren Mountain, which brings forth barren Fruit by Hebrem Greek and
Latin, of which are few that are not in Paul's first state, in which all his
unsanctified Learning would not give him the true saving Knowledge of God by
Jesus Christ; for in that unregenerated state, Man's Will and Time is not
accepted with God, but Gods Will is to be Man's Time, in that which Man offers
unto the Lord, otherwise, Who required these things at your hands? depart from
me, ye that work Iniquity, against me and my People, for I know you not; and
forasmuch as you have not received them, you have also denied me; therefore the
Lord will utterly destroy the Wicked, by bringing their Works to naught; but he
will preserve the Righteous, which shall shine as Stars in the Firmament of
H^^ven, as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that bring glad
Tidings of good Things, Romans 10.14, 15. Now where are the good things that the
Hireling Teachers bring? as to spiritual, I could never find any thing by or
from them, that did proceed from the divine Nature of God, by his Son, the Lord
Jesus Christ, but as to other Men's Lines made ready to their hands, that for
Money men may buy once or twice a week, of which things I shall only touch in
this Chapter, leaving the substance for another place, where, through the
assisting strength of Gods Power, I shall prove, to the satisfaction of them
whose Minds are in faithfulness before the Lord, who cannot b^^ see, hea^ and
understand, that forced Maintenance for Preaching, is not according to the Rule
of God, nor practiced by any of his holy Prophets in days past, neither is the
manner and method in Preaching, nor their Order in that they call their Church
Government or Gospel Order in their Church, with diverse others of their
Principles and Practices, which they account belongs to their Calling, are so
inconsistent with Gods holy Truth, as is sufficiently mani^ested by his own
Spirit, and by his holy Prophets and Apostles lest on holy Record, as does
appear by the Declaration of the holy Scriptures, and the Spirit of God by
which they were given fo^th; and my Charity is to write and speak of them that
which I am fully persuaded is the Truth of God i^ my heart, That they either
hold the Truth of God i^ Unrighteousness, or that they are ignorant of his
saving Knowledge by the Son of his Love, the Lord Jesus Christ, that is, they
know little or nothing as they ought to do, of Gods ^^ving Power, and spiritual
appearance of Christ in their own he^^ts, but are blind Leaders of the blind,
till (without true Repentance and Reformation) they shall fall together, which
according to Christ's own words, all they that continue in a state of
unfaithfulness, in D^obedience to the gi^t of his Word, of his good Spirit of
^race, which is given by measure to heal and make alive, they shall ^ade and
wither away as fruitless Branches, which when their day is over, they shall be
cut off and cast into the Fire, where the Worm dies not, nor the Fire of Go^s
Wrath goes out; for Christ came not in any measure of that nature which has
appeared in the false Teachers of this Age; for he came not to dest oy men's
Lives and Estates, but his coming was for this end, To save that which he had
made alive, by calling Sinners to Repentance, which by Obedience, through
Faith, found Mercy, and entered into that Hope, by which the Righteous have
been preserved in all Ages, Heb. 11.2. to 40. for it is the Just that live by
Faith, ^ab. 2.4. and therein is the Righteousness of ^od revealed from Faith to
Faith, as it is written, The Just shall live by Faith, Romans 1.17. which proves,
That the Righteous, by Faith in Christ, are the Just that live by Faith, having
yielded their Obedience to the gift of Gods Grace, which gave them the Hope of
Christ, through his Death, and rising again to Life, by whose Spirit of Grace,
Life and Light, they come to receive an assurance b^ Faith, of that blessed
Hope in Christ, for the Salvation of their Immortal Souls; for through Faith,
by Grace are the Righteous saved, for it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2 8. and
the gift of God is Life Eternal unto them that are not found clothed with any
thing of their own Righteousness, but altogether clothed with that
Righteousness which is by Faith in Christ, which is the Righteousness of God,
Ephesians 3.9. which (...) works b^ love, and is that Faith which ^or^s into the
V^ity of the one Spirit, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. in which state
the Righteous (...) ^^^tified b^ Faith, and have peace with God through the
Lord Jesus christ, Rom 5 1. and by him have the ^aith (...) access by Faith,
into the Grace wherein they stand, and rejoice in the Hope of the Glory of God
and not only so, but they glory in Tribulation also, knowing that Tribulation
works Patience, and Patience works Experience, and Experience works Hope, and
Hope makes not ashamed, because the Love of God is sh^d abroad in their hearts
by the holy Ghost, which is given unto them, Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Which things
are by the Spirit of God in his faithful Servants and Messengers of Truth, left
upon holy Record, that People may learn to keep low in their Minds, from the
love of all Vanity, and things of a perishing nature, that so they may come to
give wholly up in their Minds to retain God in their Thoughts, by which,
through Faith and Obedience, they may not fall short in the Hope of Gods
heavenly Riches, which are treasured up in Jesus Christ, for all them that by
Faith and Obedience live up to his Spirit of Grace, Life and Light, whereby the
faithful have been made partakers of Gods durable Riches which is that Crown of
Righteousness laid up in store for all them that by true Faith live in
Obedience to the appearance of Christ in their Hearts; such, so living and so
dying, shall in no way fall short in the true Hope of Jesus Christ.

Concerning Perfection, and that Warfare which the faithful are to pass
through, before they come to witness free and full Redemption from Sin in this
Life, according as will appear by what follows.
GOD is perfect, just and holy in all his Works and gifts toward all the Sons
and Daughters of Men; for every good and perfect gift comes from the Father of
all Grace, Life and Light, with whom there is no variableness nor shadow of
Turning, Jam. 1.17. but in Man, the heart above all things is deceitful and
desperately Wicked; who can know it, save the Lord, that made Man in his own
Image, after his own Likeness made he him, and gave him Dominion over the
things of the Earth, Jer. 17.^. Genesis 1 26. commanding him, that he should not
eat of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, for in that day wherein he did
eat thereof, he should surely dye, genesis 2.17. Which Command, through
Disobedience, Man broke, by which he brought the Sons and Daughters of Men into
a state of Lust which through the Temptations of the Enemy to his own feed in
the Heart, draws the natural Mind to lust after that evil which brings sin,
and sin brings Death ove^ the Soul; for the Wages of sin is Death, but the
gift o^ God ^s eternal L^^e, unto them who do not remain in that first sta^e of
D^generation, sinning against the gift of God; for as the Children of men sel^
short of the glory of God, through the I all of the first Man Earthly, so the
Children from Adam, (...) Faith and Obedience to the gift of ^od, shall be
saved, through the Death and Resurrection of the Lord of Life, the second Adam
^om Heaven, spiritual, who requires perfect Obedience of all men, to his holy.
Commands, that their Souls, through Faith in him may be saved; for only they
are saved which perfectly believe in him, that he is able and willing to give
them Power that are willing to keep his Commands; ^or which end of Man's
Salvation, he has commanded People to be ^^^^ect, even as God is Perfect, Mat.
5.48 which Command by Jesus Christ, seems too straight for many to receive into
their Belief of ever attaining such a state in this Life, that they either
distrust in the Power of God ^y Jesus Christ, or otherwise they are not willing
to part with all their sins to gain Christ; for Sin makes a partition Wall
between God and man's Soul, that it cannot come to receive the incomes of Gods
divine Love by Jesus Christ; for all Sin is of Unrighteousness, and all
Unrighteousness is of the Devil, which is the Father of all Sin, whose work of
Darkness has no relation to the Kingdom of Heaven, neither can any enter Gods
holy place before they are free from Sin; but he that serves the Lord, and
keeps all the Commandments of God, does witness a perfect state in this Life,
Mat. 19.20, 21. and 5.48 and the holy Scripture is full and clear, that such as
feared God and wrought Righteousness, were perfect Men; for Noah, which walked
with God was a perfect Man; and God commanded Abraham to be perfect, Genesis 17.1.
Also, Job was a perfect M^n, being upright, and one that fea^ed God and
eschewed evil, Job 1.1. and cap. ^.2, 3. in which Trial of Job's Faith, he
said^ That God would not cast away a perfect Man, J^b 8.20. which manifests,
that such have been perfect men in this Life, otherways the Spirit of the Lord
would not have suffered an account of the same to have been recorded in the
(...) Scriptures of Truth. Also, David was a man after Gods own heart (except
in the matter of Vriah, of which he repented) which could not have been, had
not David been a perfect Man; for he that is not perfect in the Work of the
Lord, to keep his Commands, he is not a Man after the Nature of Christ, who
perfectly performed the Work of God, for the Redemption of Men, in whom the
work of God is to be perfected by Jesus Christ, who came to redeem from sin,
and will redeem the Souls of them that faithfully believe in his redeeming
Power, by which they shall be freed from sin in this Life, till sin can find no
place to lodge in the hearts of them that are saved; and this has been the
state of Noah, Abraham Job and David, with many others of the Lords Servants,
who did not distrust in the Power of the Almighty, but believed in God by which
they became Men after Gods own heart; and for any to believe, that David, or
any other of the Lords Servants, could be Men after Gods own heart, and yet
could not be free from all sin, which is the work of the Devil, to me it seems
the Antichristian Faith, which is of the Devils begetting, to persuade People,
that G^d is not willing to give Power to them that truly believe in him, to
perform what he requires of his People that is, to keep all his Commandments,
according as he has commanded; that thereby they may fulfill his Command. To
be perfect as ^od is perfect and holy as he is holy, that is, to be free from
sin, which is to be free from consenting to join with the Devils Temptations;
for Gods Holiness i^ Perfection extends beyond what M^n in this Life can
^^^prehend; but they that dye from sin, to live in (...), a^^ made free from
sin in this Life, otherwise according to Christ's own words, where he is gone,
they can never come. Then it is sufficient in the Wildom of God, to be perfect,
just and holy, according as the Lord requires, in this Life, and in the Life to
come to see him, and to be with him in Glory, and to be, in measure, of his
Glory, even like unto him; and as it pleased the holy God, in his own Wisdom,
to let the Enemy, by Temptation, to prevail against David, and Peter, with
others of his Servants in days past, by which their Testimonies for Gods holy
Truth came to bear the more force, by the Power of God, through which, by true
Repentance, they came to be renewed to a heavenly Life again; by which Fall
they t^roughly came to see and behold, that there was not any (...) ^ower, save
the Power of God, that was able to preserve and save from the Power of the
Devil; for though the Wildom of God, many times does suffer the righteous to all,
yet the cause is imputed unto themselves, through the neglect of their Watch
against the Temptations of their Souls Enemy; but by Repentance, through Faitly
in God, they by his Grace come to be restored again, which is sufficient
warning, that their Watch should never be neglected more; so that though the
Righteous fall yet by their faithing it does not in the least measure weaken
the Truth of God's Cause in the work of Perfection; for they which fall rise
again, and by Repentance, through Faith in Christ, by him they are resto^ed, as
his faithful Servants and Children, to God again, which state of Falling once
or twice in the whole time of a Man or Woman's Life, some make an c^^sion or
matter for the Devil to work against the Trum of God, as does evidently appear
by them that sin daily in Thought, Word and Deed against God, ^hos
Commaniton^nts, they say, no Man in this Life, can keep, according^ to what God
requires of them to do; By which they unjustly charge the Lord, as did that
unfaithful Servant, which hid his Lords Talent in the Earth, and charged his
Lord of being a hard Master, ^at. 25 2^. etc. even so is it with them in this
day, who do not improve the Gift of God, but live in the daily breach of Gods
Commandments, in which state they plead for sin all the days of their Life, in
which they remain in the Fall, which is as much differing from the Life of the
Righteous, as Heaven diff^rs from Hell; for the Righteous live not in the Fall;
for God is their strength and Power, he makes their ways perfect, Psalm.
18.32. By which it is manifest, that if People would but give up in their Minds
with this godly Resolution, to follow the Dictates and Motions of Gods Gift,
which is the Light of his own Spirit by Jesus Christ, and by measure is
bestowed on the Sons and Daughters of men to profit withal, that they would
come to witness Gods Power by Jesus Christ, to be sufficient for their
preservation against all the Temptations of their Souls Enemy; but while People
remain in their Lo here and Lo there, running in their Minds from one high Hill
to ^he other Barren Mountain, where the chiefest of their Food is by a
Confession from their Shepherds Mouth, That their best Performances are Sin,
and that they draw in Sin as an Ox draws in Water; which in so doing, they do
well to acknowledge the Truth of their state, which by their continuance
therein, it does further enlarge Gods just Judgments against a People which
live in sin against the Lord of Life, whose gift of Grace they ought to improve
to the profit of their Lords Talent, which h^ has bestowed upon them, for the
honor of his own Name, and everlasting welfare of their Immortal Souls, which
must either live by true Faith and Obedience to God, or eternally perish,
through their Disobedience to his heavenly Gift of the divine Light of his
Spirit; for as they live in sin; they continue Servants unto him whom they
obey, and his Children they are whose Works they do; and they that plead for a
Body of sin all their days, they uphold the Devils Kingdom, in which state
they oppress the Seed of God, and quench the gift of the Spirit of God, by
which they hinder themselves of the heavenly divine incomes of Gods Love, which
refreshes the Heart and quickens the Spirit of the faithful, by which their
Souls, through Faith in Christ, are made alive to God, whose people preach,
pray and sing in his Time, to the honor of his holy Name, and edification of
one another; but the Prayers of the Wicked are an Abomination to the Lord; for
the Lord does abhor the Prayers of him that prays in his own Time and in his
own Will; for the Spirit of Prayer leads the faithful to pray in the Lords own
due time, by which the Sour^ comes to be refreshed, by the effectual working of
Gods spiritual Appearance, which does assist the in ward Man in the holy Work
of Prayer unto God, without which assisting Power of Gods spiritual Appearance,
which does assist the inward Man in the holy Work of Prayer unto God, without
which assisting Power of Gods spiritual Appearance Prayer is of no effect to
the Soul of Man, who in their own Time go round in their own Wills, in their
preaching, praying and singing, even like to a Horse in the Mill, and a Door on
the Hinges, and still remaining where they were; yet such men in the like
Confession will in the same place of their Worship, presume to call the ^uakers
Light a stinking Vapor from, Hell

Now, we know, that with God there dwells no imperfect thing but with the
Devil dwells all Unrighteousness, and with him remains all they that live
and dye in their sins; for all them that remain in sin in this Life, they are
never free from the Devils Power, which if it were not for the restraing Power
of God, the Devil by them that serve him) would soon destroy the whole Heritage
of God, which as yet remain the Body on this side the Grave; for the Devil
finneth from the beginning, and his Work is to lay waste Gods Heritage, and to
destroy all that which is good. Now so this purpose was the Son of God made
manifest, that he ^^ght destroy the Works of the Devil, 1 John 3.^. For
whosoever committ^th sin, transgresses the Law; for sin is the Transgression
of Gods holy Law, and ye know he was made manifest to take away our si^, and in
him is no sin, 1 John 3.5. Whosoever abides in him, sins not, whosoever
sins, has not seen him, neither knows him, 1 John 3.6. Let no man deceive
you, he that does Righteousness is righteous, 1 John 3.7. Whosoever is born of
God does not commit sin, for his S^^d remains in him and he cannot sin
because he is born of God, 1 John 3.9* Now in this the Children of God are
manifest, and the Children of the Devil; whosoever does not Righteousness is
not of God, neither he that hates his Brother, verse 10. Now, we know, that
whosoever is born of God, sins not, but he that is begotten of God, keeps
himself, and that Wicked One touches him not, 1 John 5.18. And this
Declaration of Gods Truth, has proceeded from the Spirit of God, and is
agreeable with Chri^s own words, John 8.21 Thy that dye in their sins, where
Christ is gone, they can never come; for as Death leav^s, so Judgment finds,
and there is no Repentance in the Grave. And in John 1^.23. from Christ's own
words, Ian them, and there in me, that they man be made perfect in one, and that
the World may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them, ^s thou have
loved me.

By which we may see, that which God has commanded, he is in no way short in
his Power toward the willing and obedient, but unto them, who through
Disobedience to the Gift of Gods Spirit, which came by Jesus Christ, they
remain in sin, whose Reward will be with that unprofitable Servant which hid
his Lords Talent, by which he lost his portion of Gods heavenly Riches, which
the faithful are made partakers of in this Life, and in the Life to come; so
that where there is any thing of faithfulness wanting to the gift of Gods
Spirit of divine Grace, Life and Light, it hinders from a perfect state, even
as with him whom Christ brought to the Touchstone, If thou will be perfect go
and sell that which thou have, and give it to the poor, and thou shall have
Treasure in Heaven, Mat. 19.20, 21. By which it is manifest, that men through
Obedience to what the Lord requires of them to do, may by him be made perfect,
according to his own Command, in this Life, Mat. 5.48. for Christ's words are to
be believed before the words of all men that have ever taught the Doctrine of
Imperfection; for Christ's words are very plain, and by the Spirit of God easy
to be understood, in his saying, Be ye therefore Perfect, as your heavenly
Father ^s Perfect; also, That the Disciple is not above his Master, b^t every
one that is perfect shall be as his Master, Luke 6.40. Which also implies, that
some there were that were perfect, otherwise it would not have been said,
Every one that is perfect; and for this end Christ gave Gifts, for the
perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.12. For the gift of God is for the
perfecting of his Saints, for which the Lords Servants prayed, That they might
present every man Pefect in Christ jesus, preaching and ^arning every man, and
teaching e^^^^ man in all Wisdom, that they might present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus, 1 Col 1.28.

But unto such who Reply, That he that says he has no sin, deceives himself,
and the Truth is not in him, 1 John 1.8. and verse 10. If we say, we have not
sinned, we make him a L^ar, and the Truth is not in us. By which it is evident,
That all men in their first state have sinned, and that there is something of
that Nature, so long as the Warfare against sin remains; but at the end of
the Warfare against sin, sin in the Warfare is overcome, and no longer remains
in the Man of God, which is according to the Spirit of God, as by the Apostles
writing concerning that state in which men were in the Warfare, I write unto
you, little Children, because your sins are forgiven you for his Name sake; I
write unto you Fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning; I
write unto you, Young Men, because ye have overcome the Wicked One; I write
unto you, little Children, because ye have known the Father; I have written
unto you Fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning: I have
written unto you, Young Men, because ye are strong, and the Word of God abides
in you, and you have Overcome the Wicked One, 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. So that in
the Warfare, the Churches growth, was in their several states of pressing
forward to Perfection; in which state of their Warfare, they came to grow from
a Child's state, to the state of a strong man in Christ Jesus. So that in their
Spiritual Travail against Sin, they still come more and more to the increase of
Gods holy Truth by their knowledge of his will and mind, through Jesus Christ,
by whose Power they received daily Strength for their Preservation in his holy
Truth, by which they come to grow from one degree of Grace unto another, till
at length in the Lords due time they become perfect Men in Christ Jesus, who is
the Author and Finisher of his good Work in the hearts of his People; for when
they have overcome the wicked One, they have also overcome sin, and the same is
a perfect Man, 1 John 2.13, 14. And this is agreeable with the Apostle Paul's
writing concerning the same state, which he did experience in his Warfare,
including all under sin in the first state; for as Men are found to partake of
Adams Disobedience, so also are they found Transgressors of Gods holy Command,
in which they have sinned, and all that remain in that state, remain in sin,
being Servants to sin, which frees them from the Righteousness of Christ, whose
faithful Servants war not with carnal Weapons, but with spiritual Weapons,
which through him are mighty, to the pulling down of strong Holds and
Wickedness in high Places. Now least the Apostle should be exalted above
measure, through the abundance of Revelations, there was given unto him a Thorn
in the Flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet, least he should be exalted
above measure. And whereas he said, O wretehed Man that I am! who shall deliver
me from this Body of Sin and Death, Romans 7.24. All which does not incinde him
to be a Transgressor of Gods holy Law, as every man that remains in sin is,
which cannot in truth and righteousness say, as the holy Apostle did, I thank
God throvgh Jesus Christ our Lord; so then with the Mind I my self serve the
Law of God, but with the Flesh the Law of sin, verse. 25. Now by the Law of Sin,
the ignorant do conclude, the holy Apostle was not free from sin in this Life,
which he clears in Rom 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. There a therefore no Condemnation to
them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit; for the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus has made me free
from the L^^ of Sin and Death; for what the Law could not do, in that it was
weak, through the Flesh, God sending his own Son in the Likeness of sinful
Flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the Righten^sness of the
Law might be full^illed in them who walk not after Flesh, but after the Spirit.
For they that be after the Flesh, do mind the things of the flesh, but they
that be after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit; for to be carnally minded
is Death, but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace, because the carnal
mind is at Enmity against God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither
indeed can it be; so then they that are in the Flesh cannot please God, Romans
8.1, 2 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. By which it is manifest, that the holy Apostle did not
all his days continue in a Body of sin, but in his War^are was pressing forward
toward the Mark of the Calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.14. forgetting
those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are
before, Phil. 3.13. That the Man of God might be perfect, thoroughly furnished
unto all good Works, 2 Timothy 4.17. in which state of pressing forward to
Perfection, Patience has her per^ect work, that they might be per^ect, wanting
nothing, James 1 17. Which state the holy Scriptures bear Record, Paul in the
end of his Warfare did attain, which is a state free from sin in this Life
according as by the Spirit of God he himself testified, That he had ought a
good fight, wherein he had finished his Course, and ^ept the Faith, or whom
there was laid up a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge
would give him at the last Day, and not to him only, but to all them that love
his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. And these things were done before his Departure
from the Body, as appears by his Epistle to Titus, and to Philemon, and also to
the Hebrews; so that the Lords People well know, by the Spirit of God agreeing
with the holy Scriptures, as also by their daily prog^ess in the Way of the
Lord, all agreeing with the gift of his divine Light and quickening Word of his
Spirit, that by true Faith and Obedience thereunto, they shall receive a daily
supply of his Power, which will give sufficient strength against the Devil, and
all his Temptations; by which he that has set his hand to the Plow, and does
not look back, shall come to witness a through cleansing from sin in this Life,
which they that witness not in this Life, shall not witness a cleansing in the
Kigndom of Heaven; for no imperfect thing can enter the Kingdom of Heaven,
neither is there any Repenting in the Grave, for as Death leaves, so Judgment
finds.

Concerning the true Worship of God in Spirit.
EVen at this day, as in days past, among the Peop^^ of the World there are
many Ways of Worship* but with the People of the Lord, his way of Worship is
but one, in which they worship God in the Spirit and in the Truth; for God is a
Spirit, and they which are true Worshippers of him, they worship in the Spirit
and in the Truth. Then how can any be true Worshippers of God which abide not
in his Truth; for Christ is the Way, the Truth and the Life, and they that are
not in christ, are out of his Truth, and so not in the true Worship of God; so
as they are not in Christ the^ are not in the (...), but out of that spiritual
Life in which the true Worship of God remains. Now this we know, that all men
are in the worship of some one thing or another, all pretending that their
Worship is the right and true way of Worship. Then seeing that all are
Worshippers, How is the true Worshipper known from the false? Even as the Tree
is known by its Fruit, so are Worshippers known one from the other; for the
good Tree brings forth good Fruit, but the evil Tree brings forth corrupt
Fruit; for men do not expect to gather Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of Thistles,
neither can any man be a true Worshipper of God in Spirit, that does not bring
forth Fruits of the Spirit, which are Love, Joy, Peace, Long-Suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, against such there is no
Law, Gal. 5.22, 23. for they live in the Spirit and walk in the Spirit with
Christ, such are the true Worshippers of God in Spirit and Truth; but such
Worshippers that draw in sin as an Ox draws in Water, their best Performances
in Worship, are sin, unto which the Lord has no regard; for we know that God
hears not sinners, but if any man be a true Worshipper of God, and he does
his will, him he hears, John ^.31. Now to think that God will accept any man's
Work wherein sin remains, that man deceives himself; for all Works wherein
sin remains, it is not of the Spirit of God, but of the Devil; for he is a
sinner from the beginning, and the Truth abides not in him; for in the time of
the Law, the Peoples Offerings before the lord were to be perfect, without
blemish Lev. 22.21. and their weight and measure were to be perfect before the
God or their Salvation, Deuteronomy. 25.15. Which did signify spiritual Obedience to
christ, the Lamb of God, without blemish, spot or wrinkle, who requires in this
Gospel Day, under the Light of his ^ovenant of Grace, Light and Life, unto
which not any thing of man's imperfect Gift, and Offerings can find place, to
enter into Covenant with the Lord of Life for the Salvation of their immortal
Souls; for as God has perfected his work of Grace in Jesus Christ, for the
Salvation of Peoples Souls, so most their work be also perfect, by the Power of
God, in and through Christ, for the Salvation of them that are saved, in and
through him the Lord of Life, of whose Spirit there is a gift given to the Sons
and Daughters of men, which is for this end, that through perfect Obedience
thereunto, they may work out their Salvation by true Faith in Jesus Christ, who
is Author and Finisher of his own Work in the hearts of them that in him
believe; for he is given a Light to the Gentiles, and a Rule of Life for all to
walk by. So here is no occasion of stumbling, as the heart and mind attends its
Rule, which Rule directs the heart and mind in to the true and living Way,
which leads to the Kingdom of Heaven, where they that worship out of the Spirit
and Truth can never come; for though they may not profess to worship a false
God, as many do, yet they profess a worship of the true God in a false way, by
which their worship is a false Worship, which the lord will destroy; for
contrary to the mind and will of God they have set ^p a false Worship, teaching
for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, Mat. 15.9. For the hour comes, and now
is, ^hen the true Worshipper shall worship the Father in Spirit ^^d in ruth,
for the Father seeks such to worship him, ^ob. 4.23. By which its man^est,
That all words in De^arations, Preaching and Praying, with all whatsoever ^se
that men pretend to the Worship of God, being not ^ad thereunto by the Power of
God, it is no more before (...) Lord, than he that cuts off a Dogs Neck or
^fforeth S^ines blood. Isa. 66.^. For the lord is o^ (...) pure Eyes ^an to
behold Iniquity, or to regard Iniquity; for be will not have regard to that
Worship in which Obedience is not yielded to the gift of his own Spirit of
Truth, which calls for Silence in the heart and mind of all such People whose
Worship is not in the Spirit and in Truth; for the fleshly part must be
subdued, and the natural Thoughts of the heart, and the intents of the natural
Mind must be subdued by the Power of God, unto which Obedience is to be
yielded, that every wandering Thought may be brought into subjection by the
Power of God, then the Lord will have regard unto the Soul of him that so
worshippeth; for such Worshippers are they of the Circumcision, which worship
in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, having no Confidence in the Flesh,
Phil 3 3. Now this is the main Reason why People do not pront, but in their
Worship, as themselves confess, go round in their Duties, even like a Horse in
the Mill, and a Door on the Hinges, still remaining where they were, because
they offer to God with a false weight and measure, which is of their own
Imperfection, in a belief that they shall never be free from Sin in this Life,
whereby their Debt is in larged, and causes them to fall short of a true Hope
by Jesus Christ, who will not accept that imperfect Offering, which would not
profit in the Time of the Law; for this is the Day of Gods Grace by Jesus
Christ, in which if any man will hear, let him not harden his heart, through a
false Belief, begotten by the denial, that in this day of so large a
Dispensation of Light by Jesus Christ, that God will receive the imperfectness
of Man's own Work, which indeed is that which the ^ords Soul abhors; for the
Devil, and Enemy of Man's Peace, has seated himself in the heart and mind of
Man, and exalted himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped,
so that he as God fitteth in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God,
These. 2.4. and unto him the natural Mind inclines to serve, by which the Soul
remains in Sin and Transgression against God, whose Gift of divine Light is
veiled from the Understanding, which also becomes Dark, in which state they
walk in the light of their own ways, which leads in the Paths of Death; which
fulfills Christ's saying, If the Eye be evil, the whole Body shall be full of
Darkness, then how great is that Darkness, Mat. 6.23. which Darkness drowns the
Understanding of the inward Man, that it cannot come to perceive the Light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ Jesus, which is the Power of God to Salvation, in
them that believe in the Light of it, which if it be hid, it is only to the
Disobedient, who yield their Obedience to their hearts Lusts, which lusts
after Sin and Evil, being also desirous to know God, without Obedience to the
gift of his Spirit of Grace, in which state the Devil has the ruling part in
the heart, which lusts after some outward Work, in pretense of worshipping
God, only for the outward Name of Christian amongst Men, such Worshippers the
Lords Soul does abhor; for Man's natural Will is Enmity with God, and in that
state man's Time in Worship is not that Time which the Lord does accept; but the
Lords Time, in which he does accept Man's Offering, is, when by the Power of his
own Spirit, the heart is moved to worship him, the only true God, in the only
true way of his Worship, which is, in the Spirit and Truth. So all are
commanded to keep silence before the Lord, and to hear him for the profit of
their own Souls, before they can speak or declare any one thing for the
spiritual Edification of another; for he that names the Name of the Lord, is
first to depart from Iniquity, and to wait for the Teachings of Gods holy
Spirit, which has commanded Silence to all Flesh before him, Hab. 2.20. Ezekiel.
2.13. also Psalm. 3.25, 28 Let all the Earth keep Silence before the Lord: I
patiently waited on the Lord: Truly my Soul waits on God, from him comes my
Salvation. So that God requires a free and willing Mind, to be free from all
Incumberments, and love of visible things, which are below the true Wisdom of
God, which unto the wise-learned in the things of this World, is counted
foolishness, to see the Lords Children sit together in Silence, waiting on God,
to hear the Voice of his inward Call, by the gift of his Spirit of divine
Grace, Life and Light, in which is the true Worship of God in Spirit and Truth.
So here is to be no giving way to any straggling Thought of the Heart, nor
Intent of the Mind; for all that is of Self, is (by the Power of God) to be
brought into Subjection to his holy Will, which is the true worshipping of God
in Spirit and Truth; for all Thoughts and Intents which proceed not from the
Power of Gods Spirit, they are Thieves and Robbers, which keep lurking, through
the Devils Power, to deceive the Soul of that benefit, which if they were
obedient to the command of the Lord, they might receive; for as the true
Worshippers in all Ages have been sound in the silent waiting, their strength
has been renewed; for they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength,
they shall mount up with Wings, as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and
they shall walk, and not be faint, Isa ^0.31. for they come to witness the
Renewings of Gods Grace from day to day, and from time to time, which increases
their Faith in the hope of Gods heavenly Riches in Jesus Christ, whose Spirit
of Grace gives Utterance to preach, pray add sing in the Spirit of Holiness, to
the praise and honor of God, and to the edification and comfort of one
another, which is the true worshipping of God in the Spirit and Truth. And in
this Worship have all been in, whose Minds have been turned from Darkness to
Light, and from the Power of Satan to the Power of God, through which their
Souls were made alive in Jesus Christ, without whose Spirit of Grace, all
preaching, praying and singing avails not the Soul in the sight of God; for
whatever men practice, as to the worshipping of God, if it do not proceed from
the drawings of Life by his own Spirit, in and through the Lord Jesus Christ,
it is no more but what is by and from their own Works of Righteousness, which
will not justify in the sight of God, to save from his Wrath to come, in which
Day it will be said, Who required these things of you? Therefore it is
expedient for People which are in their several ways of Worship, to be deeply
concerned about these things, and to make a diligent search with the Light of
the Lord in their own hearts, which through Obedience they may soon find how it
stands between God and their Immortal Souls, which must come to witness the
Lords spiritual ^ppearance in their Worship, which if other ways it is not the
true worshipping of God in the Spirit and Truth, but is a false Worship, which
differs not from the Worship of them that worship a false God; all which are
built without the Spirit of God, stand upon sandy Foundation, which the Lord in
his own due time will overthrow; for no Worship shall remain, but that which is
in the Spirit and Truth; for that is the true worship of God, and the Father
seeks such to worship him; for they are the true Worshippers, and their
building remains upon the Rock of Ages and Foundation of many Generations, on
which the holy men of God in days past built their Faith in him, who gave them
an assurance in the Hope of their Salvation, who in their day were perfect
Obedient Children to the gift of Gods divine Light, and quickening Word of his
Spirit, which made them able Ministers, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit,
by which they were lead and guided in a holy fear to perform the Work of God,
according as they were moved thereunto by the Power of his own Spirit, in and
through the Lord Jesus Christ, the gift of whose Light, and movings of whose
Spirit in his People, is that which is as much derided and evil spoken of among
Professors in this Day, as his holy Servants of Truth were by that professing
People, the Rebellious Jews, in days past, who had a zeal for God, but not
according to true Knowledge, even as it is with many who profess to worship
the true God, but worship in a false way in this Day; but blessed are they
whose Works are governed by the Spirit of God, in and through Jesus Christ,
such are they that worship God in the Spirit and Truth; for, as I have said,
and that by experience, that God is Worshipped by his own, and not by or from
any thing of man's own natural Will, but all are to wait the Lords Time, that
his Will in all things may be done to the honor and praise of his own holy
Name, and the overlasting comfort of them that continue in the well doing,
unto them belongs a Revvard, which is that heavenly Portion of Gods Riches in
Christ Jesus, who is the Author and Finisher of his own Work, in them that
love him, and keep his Commandments. Concerning which things it is good for
People to consider, while Time is, before Time be no more; for every Man and
Woman have a Soul, which must either live with the Lord of Life, or eternally
perish, which will be the state of all them who at the Lords coming shall by
him be found to have been Worshippers of false Gods, or that have been false
Worshippers of him who is the true and living God, whom all men are commanded
to worship in the true and living way, which is in the Spirit and Truth, which
is the desire of my Soul, that all may do, that so they may come to witness
true Peace with God, through the Lord Jesus Christ, who is God of all, and over
all, blessed be his holy Name for evermore, for in him is the Riches of God,
which belongs to them that worship him in the Spirit and Truth.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning true Prayer, by which the faithful find Acceptance with
God, by Faith in the Son of his Love, the Lord Jesus Christ.
TRue Prayer is an Ordinance of God, and a Duty which God requires of Man, to
be performed by the Power of his own gift, which came by Jesus Christ, who has
commanded all men to watch and pray, in a believing frame of Spirit, which is
that that God requires of all men, and all men that are in perfect Obedience to
God, they watch and pray by the assisting Power of Gods Spirit, by which they
are made able to resist the Devil in the hour of Temptation, but they who are
in Unbelief of Gods Power by Jesus Christ, That they shall never be made free
from sin in this Life, they cannot pray by the Spirit of God, because of their
Unbelief; for all sin is of Unrighteousness, and all Unrighteousness is of the
Devil, and the P^^^^s of them that continue in sin, are an Abomination in the
sight of God, for the Eyes of the Lord are more purer than to behold Sin, or
regard Iniquity; for the Thoughts of the Wicked are an Abomination to the Lord,
but the words of the Poor are pleasant words, Pro. 15.26. By which it is plain,
that by Peoples living in Sin, is the cause of their Prayers not being accepted
with the Lord, because the Ways of the Wicked are an Abomination before him,
but he loves him that follows after Righteousness, Prove. 15.9. for sin being
loved and entertained, makes a separation between God and man's Soul, in which
state man is incapable of receiving the incomes of Gods divine Love by Jesus
Christ, by whose Spirit of Life, the hearts of them which hunger and thirst
after Righteousness, come to be enlightened, through which they come to receive
his Will in what they should pray for unto him; for Man in his own Will cannot
know when or what to pray for, ^s he ought to do, for thou, O Lord! have
revealed unto thy Servant, therefore has thy Servant found in his heart to
pray this Prayer unto thee, 2 Samuel 7.27. By which it is evident, that true
spiritual Prayer proceeds from the Power of Gods Spirit, by which the
Righteous come to enjoy the benefit of that which they pray for; but the
Unrighteous pray for the deliverance from sin, which living in a state of
Unbelief, that God will never in this Life wholly free them from Sin, which
Unbelief stops the current of Life, and hinders the Work of God by Christ,
whose Work by. Faith in him is to destroy Sin, and put an end to Transgression,
that is in them which believe in the gift of his Grace, by which men are saved;
for its the Gift of God, which comes by Jesus Christ, and through Faith in him,
is Life Everlasting, that is to them, who through Faith have their whole
dependence on him, but where men remain in a state of daily sining against the
manifestation of his spirit, which all have received, to profit with all, it
keeps them short of Gods Grace by Jesus Christ; for the Prayers of the Wicked
are sin, because they remain in sin, which causes their Prayars to be sin in
the sight of God, for the Prayers of the wicked are an Abomination before the
Lord, and the Sacrifice of the wicked are an Abomination to him, but the
Prayers of the Upright is his delight, Psalm. 119.7. Prove. 15.2. so it is the
Prayers of the Upright in heart, which the Lord accepts and delights in, for
unto them is the promise of God by Christ, who renews the Faith of his People,
by the power of his spirit, which begets the inward man into a lively hope of
that assurance, which by true Faith the soul receives, by true Prayer unto the
Lord, through which Prayer by Grace, every Dispensation of Gods gifts come to
be sanctified, through the Power of his own spirit; for every Dispensation is
from God, and only sanctified to the Righteous, which receive of the Lords free
benefits, and rich Mercies of his Love, in the outward Dispensation, which
through Prayer and Thanks-giveing, are sanctified to them which live in
Uprightness of heart and mind toward God, which the Unrighteous also pretend,
but it is with unclean Hearts, for which cause the Lord will not accept their
Prayers, for the Lord only dwells with the pure in heart, whose minds are
wrought into a true and living sense of Gods heavenly riches in Jesus Christ,
which is the inheritance of his faithful People, which pray unto him, by the
power of his own spirit which does condemn the Prayers of all unrighteous men,
who pray in their own time, and in their own wills.

But some may then query, Whether the Unrighteous are not commanded to pray?
Ans. The hearts of the righteous desire the return of the Wicked, that they may
forsake the evil of their way, and serve the Lord in Truth and Righteousness,
and that the Wicked are to pray, which will not discharge any part of their
Disobedience to God, until they come to forsake their Unrighteous way of
sinning against the gift of his Grace, and divine Light of his Spirit, which
remains their Condemnation for sin, Joh. 3.19, 20, 21. By which it is evident,
that the Prayer of a wicked man avails not before the Lord, that is, while he
remains in the known Life of Sin, which he prays against, but let the wicked
forsake their way, and the Unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and let him return
unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and unto our God, for he will
abundantly pardon, Isa. 55 7. So that where men live in known sins against God,
and in a belief of its being impossible to be free from sin in this Life, the
Prayer of such does not proceed from the Spirit of God, who has Commanded his
People, not to touch, taste nor handle with any unclean thing, but to follow
the leadings of Gods holy Spirit, as the Apostles have done for Example, and to
mark them which walk otherwise. So every man and every woman is to seek God
for themselves; for he has promised to be found of them that seek, him in
uprightness of heart; and I do not read that any of the Lords servants in days
past, were ever lead by the spirit of God, to pray either privately among People
in unbelief of ever attaining that which ths Apostles prayed for, which is,
that they might present every man perfect in Christ Jesus; then where in
remains the profit of any true Beleivers Prayer in public, though in his own
family, (which through their unbelief in the power of God, that they shall
never be free from sin in this Life, by which they are not as yet of the true
Household of Faith) at times and seasons as the spirit of God moves in the heart
of every such master of family, he does pray, for the return of them, and all
other People, which remain in the same state of Unbelief, which until they
repent and forsake, their prayers will not be accepted of God.

CHAP. IX. Concerning the Lords Supper, which People call the Sacrament.
AS to the word Sacrament, I find it not contained in the holy Scriptures of
Truth; but as to the Lords Supper, according to Christ's OWN words, Luke
22.1.20. when he took Bread, and gave Thanks, and broke it, and gave it to his
Disciples, saying, This is my Body, which is given you; This do in Remembrance
of me; likewise also, the up after Supper, saying, This is the New Testament in
my Blood, which is shed for you. The foregoing words some have Wrested, by
which they have gathered in their Comprehension somewhat of a Meritorious
Work, which they hold most necessary to Salvation; from which grounds, they
have set up a Form, each for themselves, according to the Apprehension of the
natural Mind, being altogether destitute of experience of the Power of the
Blood of Christ, the end of whose Death was not to destroy men's Lives and
Esta^es about his Body and Blood; for his Coming was to heal the Sick, to bind
up the Broken, and to make alive; but where the Nature of Christ is wanting,
they are not come to the true saving Knowledge of God, by the Body and Blood of
Christ, through whose Death and Resurrection, there is no hope of Salvation to
them that by his Blood are not cleansed from all sin in this Life; for where
sin remains, it Rules the Heart, and darkens the Understanding, by which the
Power of God is not received, which gives the true knowledge of the Nature of
the body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which proves their Form dead, and they to
remain in a dead Form, having a zeal for God, without his saving Knowledge by
Jesus Christ, about whose Body and Blood, many thousands of Peoples Lives have
been destroyed, which makes manifest, that such are not in the true form of
Godliness, for neither Christ nor his Apostles have enjoined any to particular
time or place, but in remembrance of his Death, as is further manifested by the
Apostles saying, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26, 27. That Christ took the Cup when he had
supped, saying, This is the New Testament in my Blood, this do ye, as often as
you drink it, in remembrance of me. So that here is no command, either to
Particular time or Place, but as often as ye eat of this Bread, and drink of
this Cup, ye do show forth the Lord Death, till he come; which according to
that spiritual Light of Understanding, which God has given me, my Faith in
Christ, is to believe, that the daily ^ood which every true Believer does
receive, by Prayer and Thanksgiving, that it is to be received in the
remembrance of his Death, till he come, as well as when Believers eat together
more solemnly, remembering his Death with Prayer and Thanksgiving, whose coming
will be, to reward the Wicked and Ungodly, among whom are they that have a form
of Godliness, without the true saving Knowledge of God, by the Body and Blood
of Christ, whose coming also will be to receive the Souls of them whom, he has
promised to drink of the Vine, new in the Kingdom of God; and as to any
command by Christ, or example by his holy Apostles, I find not, for any hired
Teachers, to set up a form, for People to eat Bre^d, and drink Wine once a
month, or more or less, even as they and their followers can agree about the
same; for the Apostles were never hired to set up any ^orm without the Power of
God, neither without the Power of God, did they ever maintain any Form; for
they did continue with one accord breaking Bread from House to House, and did
eat their bread with gladness and singleness o^ heart. Acts 2.46. Which does
and will continue among sincere Christians and true Believers until the last
coming of Christ; which does manifest the blind Zeal, which People have of
their own Righteousness, who have not the true form of Godliness according to
the practice of the holy Apostles, for which end I may improve the Prophets
saying, Wherefore do ye spend your Money for that which is not Bread, and your
Labor for that which satisfies not? Isa. 55.2. Which indeed is so as does
appear by Peoples Lo here, and Lo there, in their differing Forms, which are
destitute of the Power of God, who is the Bread of Life, which is tendered by
his free Grace, in and through the Son of his Love the Lord Jesus Christ, who
stands at the Door and knocks, if any man will hear his Voice and open the
Door, he will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he shall sup with the
Lord of life, R^v 8.10. which if any refuse this the Lords Supper, he refuses
his own Salvation by Jesus Christ, the Bread of Life, which if any man eat, and
drink of this cup he shall neither hunger, nor thirst, but shall live forever.

And as to the outward Dispensations, which the Lord bestows upon the
Children of men, among whom they that do not render a due acknowledgment by the
spirit of Prayer and Thanksgiving for the Lords Mercies in his gifts bestowed
upon them, for the Comfort of the Body, it does but further add to their
Condemnation; for whether ye eat, or whether ye drink, let all be done to the
Honor of God, who has not called man to live by Bread alone, but by the Power
of his Word, Mat. 4.4. Luke. 4.4. for the Power of his Word is in Jesus Christ,
the Bread of Life, that a man may eat thereof, and not dye; for all outward
Bread and Wine is of a perishing Nature, but the Bread of Life and Wine of the
Kingdom endures forever; for Christ has said, that he is the Bread of Life,
or Living Bread that comes down from Heaven, which if any man eat of this
Bread, he shall live forever; that Bread that he gives is his Flesh, which he
has given for the Life of the World, John. 9.50, 51. for in this is the Power
of God made manifest unto the soul of every true Believer, which have their
whole Dependence on God by true Faith in the Son of his Love, the Lord Jesus
Christ, who is become the Mediator of the New Covenant, which speaks better
things then that of Abel, Heb. 12.2^, for Christ is come, and spiritually he
lives in his People, whose hearts and minds he has redeemed out of all dead
Forms, by which they witness him to be the Lord of Life, unto whom they yield
the strength of their minds to serve him the living God, with uprightness of
Soul, Mind and Spirit, by which their inward Life does not remain in ea^ing
Bread and drinking Wine, which is not of it self material for the Salvation of
any man, Soul that so do; for it comes short of Gods Promise by Jesus Christ,
and supping with him at his Table, which affords Bread without, Money, and Wine
without Price, which if People had true Faith to believe these things, their
dead Form would soon end, for Christ is the Bread of Life, and he that comes
to him shall never hunger, and he that believes in him shall never thirst,
which is large in a general way to all men, which they that refuse, are left
out, from having any lot, part or share with the Guests of the Bride Chamber,
where the Lamb of God has his abode, and remains with them, where they by true
Faith feed on his spiritual Food, which is that spiritual Bread and spiritual
Wine, which is without Money and Price, and gives Life unto the World of them
which by true Faith receive him, Joh. 6.32, 33. in which state of true Faith,
every sincere Believer receives of his Dispensation, which by Prayer and
Thanksgiving is sanctified unto them, so as every true Christian does worthily
in all his eating and drinking, eat and drink in the holy Faith and Fear,
remembering the Lords Death, with Prayer and Thanksgiving* So is it to be
acknowledged, that the primitive Christians did eat and drink together,
solemnly assembled, and were to wait one for another, that they might eat and
drink together, when solemnly assembled, remembering the Lords death, with
prayer and Thanksgiving, in token of their being Members together of one Body,
whereof Christ is the Head, to signify their Love, Unity and Fellowship one
with another, and the which is worthily practiced by sincere and faithful
Christians at this day, and is to continue to the last coming of Christ, when
he shall come without us, to Judge the quick and the dead, as well as his more
abundant inward coming in spirit, to them, who have not yet witnessed it, and
many as yet are not come into the true Faith of these things, which according
to my measure of Faith in God by Jesus Christ, do I faithfully believe, by
which thorough Faith I do receive of Gods outward Dispensation for the
preservation of outward Life, and in measure of his heavenly divine Riches, by
Faith in Christ, which unto me is the Bread and Water of Life, for the
preservation of my soul, and not to me only, but unto all them that by true
Faith witness their feeding with the Lord of Life at his his heavenly Table,
where all the faithful of God witness the eating of the Lords Supper.

CHAP. X. Concerning Baptism, and Sprinkling Infants, which People hold most
necessary to Salvation.
SPrinkling of Infants, it being set up without any prescribed command, or
Example commanded by Christ, or his holy Apostles, although many Teachers in
this Age have wrested the holy Scriptures, thinking thereby to make their own
invention to be accounted the Ordinances of God. Now the main Reasons that many
teachers have rendered, they have grounded from Christ's word, Mat. 22.19. which
does not prove baptizing of ^nfants to be commanded by Christ, Go ye therefore
and teach all Nations beptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son
and of the holy Ghost. Now the command of Christ was to his Disciples, that
they should go and teach, which proves that teaching was commanded before
baptizing or dipping, as the word may be rendered; by which all may understand
that they could not be discipled which were untaugh^; for this we know, that
Infants are incapable of being taught which proves, that they are not capable
of being Disciples. And in Mark 10.14, 15, 16. where they bring Christ's saying,
Suffer little Children to come unto me, forbid them not, for of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven; which saying is explained in the following Verse, that
whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little Child he shall not
enter therein, can never reach by Visible Water, which cleanses not the inside
of these wise Hebrew, Greek and Latin learned Builders, who ground their
unsound Foundation of Sprinkling Infants, in the room of Circumcision, which
according to the holy Scriptures of Truth, one Tipe did never tipe out another,
but every Tipe typified the substance, for Circumcision was a Tipe or Figure,
and cutting off the foreskin was a Figure of the Circumcision and cutting off
the Foreskin of the heart, Now baptism with water was a Tipe or Figure, as in
Peter 3.21. which tiped out the spiritual Washing or regeneration, which is,
baptizing of Infants come in the room of Circumcision; then how do they agree
in a parrellel, seeing that the Males were only circumcised, then why are the
Famales now baptized, if Baptism come in the room of Circumcision, which as to
their form in batpizing, they differ one from the other even as in other
things, which they account to be the Ordinances of Christ, but are found to be
the Ordinances of men, set up and maintained by the Power of men, who in their
several Forms differ each from the other; for some sprinkle, others dip, and
some dip over again; others plunge, others sprinkle with mixed Water, and to my
knowledge some have had their Children sprinkled with warm water in cold
weather, for which form, some of their Priests have said to me, that they have
allowance for their differing Forms under this Dispensation, that is, to dip or
sprinkle, according to the nature of the Climate where they live; but to prove
their assertion by Scripture they cannot do, which without scripture Proof,
they are willing to say something for what they hold, but in what form soever
any by their Priests are baptized, there is no effect of their work does
appear, but like Priest like People, all pleading for A Body of Sin, while they
remain in this Life; which does manifest, that visible Water is of no effect,
notwithstanding these hired Builders, bring Christ's words to Nicodemus, John
3.5. that except a man be born again of Water and Spirit, he cannot enter the
Kingdom of God. From which words some do infer, that Infant Baptism is of
absolute Necessity to Salvation. Now Christ did then speak of that heavenly
Water which did regenerate and make new; for through the Power of that Water
the Heart came to be made clean, according to the Prophets Saying, Then will I
sprinkle clean Water upon you, and you shall be clean from all your Filthiness,
Ezekiel. 36.25 By which it is manifest, that visible Water cleanses not the
inside, which is to be cleansed through the washing of Regeneration; for it is
not the washing away of the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good
Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3 21. Now
John's Baptism was to decrease, and the Baptism of Christ to increase; for
Christ was before John, whose Baptism made way for the Baptism of Christ to
take place; for this Testimony John did bear of himself, That he should
decrease, and that Christ should increase; for John's baptizing was to
Repentance, but he that comes after me shall baptize you with the holy Ghost,
Mat. 3.11. Then if John's Water Baptism was to decrease, which was to
Repentance, where is the benefit of Water Baptism in this day, to any who have
repented? And to them which have not repented, their Life of remaining in a
Body of Sin all their days does manifest no benefit in Water Baptism, toward
the Salvation of any man that is baptized with visible Water, in what Form
soever* for as Water Baptism was a ^ipe or Figure, P^t. 3.21. so all Types and
Figures made way for the Spirit of H^iness, in which they are all fulfilled,
through the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, whose Baptism is that of
the holy Ghost, which except People receive they can never witness the heart
cleansed from dead Works; for John baptized with Water, but ye shall be
baptized with the holy Ghost, having the p^omise to receive Power, Acts 1 52
which does manifest that People cannot receive full power against sin before
they have received the Baptism of Christ, which is that of the holy Ghost and
Fire, which burns up and purifies the heart of the inward man, by which the
thoughts of his own corrupted desire, are brought into subjection to the Power
of God, by Jesus Christ, which clean^eth the inward man of Heart, Mind and
Spirit, through which he comes to serve the Lord with Uprightness of his whole
Desire, in which state he becomes (...) thorough Witness for Gods holy Truth,
that there is but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4 5. into which
Baptism all the Righteous o^ God are baptized; for so many as were baptized
into Christ, were baptized into his Death, therefore they are b^r^ed with him
by Baptism, into he Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in Newness
of Life, Rom 3.4. Now wh^t People have g^thered in their Comprehension
concerning the Apostles words, (...) Cor. 14. it avails no for their pro^^^, in
the least measure of strength, to prove Water Baptism an Ordinance of God in
this day; for if so, then is Circumcision because the same Apostle in that day
both circumcised and baptized, which was for this end, that he might gain some
to Christ, and not that it should continue in practice among Believers for time
to come, Then how are they true Beleivers with whom the practice of Water
Baptism does yet remain? for the very same Apostle laid that practice aside in
his day, saying, that least any should say that he baptized in his own Name, he
then thanked God, that he had not baptized (as he knew of) any more, save
Crispus and Gaius, and the Household of Stephanus; plainly concluding that
Christ sent him not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.16.17. Now
the Apostles saying, that he thanked God, that had not baptized any other, is
sufficient proof, that Water Baptism is not that which God does expect in this
day, if other ways the holy Apostle would never have said, he than ed God,
that he had baptized no other as he knew of; which is sufficient, that the
Almighty God does neither except nor accept sprinkling or dipping with visible
Water in this day; for Jesus Christ has fulfilled all Tipes and Figures, which
were but shadows of better things to come, and are come to them which by true
Faith in him, and he in them; by which there is no need to lay the Foundation
of things past, for Christ crucified and risen again, as the Mystery o^ his
Death and Resurrection outwardly is inwardly revealed, is the Substance and
Foundation of his Peoples Faith, which gives them an assurance in the hope of
his heavenly Riches, which they that are not dead with Christ from the
Rudiments, cannot partake of, for they are yet living with their affections
uncrucifid, as to the Rudiments of the World, being yet subject to Ordinances,
of diverse forms, in their will Worship, which the righteous have overcome, so
that they cannot again be brought into bondage, to touch, taste nor handle
those things, wherein their uncrucified Affections once did remain, well
knowing they are all to perish with the using after the Commandment of men;
which things indeed, have a show of will Worship and Humility, and neglecting
of the Body, not in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh, Col. 2.20, 21,
22, 23. Now the faithful of God are risen with Christ, in which state they are
^^^king those things which are above, where Christ si^^eth on the right hand of
God; so that their Affections are set on things above, and not on things on the
Earth, Col. 3.1.2. and they are a blessed People, which are come to witness
that state, in which they seek the Lord, and his righteousness, which is the
right use of means that God has appointed, for the honor of his holy Name,
and the salvation of them, who in the true use of means lay hold on God,
thorough faith in the son of his love, the Lord Jesus Christ, by whose Power
the Faithful are baptized into the one spirit by the holy Ghost, which is the
true Baptism of Christ, by whom they that are not baptized thorough the Water
of Regeneration, they yet remain with their Affections uncrucified, in which
state the Lord has no regard to their daily Offerings. And yet, if any, for a
furtherance of the Gospel should find freedom in the Will of the Lord to
condescend to the weakness of some, to baptize into Water, we should not forbid
it; but the bare form and Im^^ation taken up in the mere Will of men without
any inward motion, or call of God, or inward approbation we utterly disown.

CHAP. XI. Concerning the true Sabbath, which signifies Rest, to them who abide
in Christ, who is the everlasting Sabbath.
MAny are the Talkers of the Sabbath, and of the first days Rest, but few are
they that come so far in the Work of God, by Faith in Jesus Christ, as to
witness their first days Work in him, who is the true and everlasting Sabbath,
in whom the faithful have their resting place, they are them which are come to
witness the end of their Labor, which have their rest in Christ, the true
Sabbath. Now where People in their differing forms of Will Worship rest from
their outward Labor one day in seven, calling that the Sabbath Day, thinking
thereby that the Lord of Sabbath will accept their will Worship, with their
rest from outward Labor, for his ^abbath, they deceive themselves, and the
Lord of S^b^ath will reward them according to their own Works, by which they
pre^end to serve him; for the Lord only looks at them who in in uprightness of
heart labor against sin, that by so doing they witness the effect of their
Labor, through the Power of God, by Faith in Christ against sin; for they that
labor not six days against sin, shall never witness the seventh Day Holy to
the Lord of Sabbath, which proves such Talkers of the Sabbath to be no keepers
of any Time Holy to the Lord of Sabbath; and as to many such Talkers about the
Sabbath Day, on which they are more unholy in their Minds, as to the Lord of
Sabbath, than on any other of the six days, in which Peoples Minds are
exercised on things of Bodily concern, which being freed from outward Bodily
Labor on the first day, which they call the Sabbath, their minds are more in
the exercise of those things, which are of no profit to the Soul, neither of so
much profit to the Body, as their outward Labor is on the other six days of
the Week; which things are manifested by their Fruits, as appears both in words
and actions upon the first day, which they pretend a Sabbath to the Lord, in
which state they are Sabbath Breakers, and not Sabbath keepers; for all Time is
to be kept holy unto the Lord of Sabbath; which if any observe a Day, let him
keep it holy unto the Lord, and not to judge another man's Liberty in matters of
Faith concerning the keeping or not keeping of a Day; for one man may be
prepared, as from the Lord, to keep a Fast unto him, when another man may not
be called of God to d^ the same; for every man is to seek God for himself; for
the Lord has promised, To be found of them that seek unto him with a pe^fect
Heart, and with a willing Mind; for the Lord searches all Hearts, and
understande^h all the Imaginations of the Thoughts, which if they seek him, he
will be found of them; but if they forsake him he will cast them off forever, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. 1 Samuel 16.7. Psalm. 7.8, 9. and 139.2, 3, 4. Jer. 17.10. Now in
what men pretend to God, if in uprightness of heart they do not retain him in
all their Thoughts, their Work is of no effect for the profit of their Soul,
but further adds toward their Condemnation, which is matter of weight for
People to consider, how they spend their precious Time, which God has given
them in this Life, to make their Peace with him, through Faith in obedience to
the gift of his Grace, which came by Jesus Christ, the Lord of Life, and
Everlasting Sabbath of his Peoples Rest, which for People to talk of, without a
true believing in his outward Sufferings and in the inward Word of his Life,
their Souls shall never find rest in the Lord of Sabbath, who was buried, and
rose again the third day, which is the first Day of the Week, which in honor
to that great ^ork of Redemption by the Son of God and Lord of Sabbath, is
worthily regarded and attended for the Worship of God in the Spirit and in the
Truth, having the holy Apostles for Example, to follow them, as they were
Followers of Christ and to mark them which walk otherwise; then sure we are to
mark them whose Dress appears more like for Stage Play than for the true
Worship of God on the first Day of the Week; for where the heart is, there is
the Treasures also; and out of the heart proceeds all evil Communications,
which abundantly appears among People, who rather exceed upon the Day of their
Worship, than at other times, when their Minds are exercised in things of
Bodily Labor, which by their Fruits they are to be judged, that they live void
of the true fear of God, or regard to their Immortal Souls, and so are as a
People without God in the World, who have no true saving Knowledge of God by
Jesus Christ; they will talk of God and Christ, and of the Sabbath, without any
spiritual sense of his saving Grace by Jesus Christ, the Lord of Sabbath, who
is the everlasting ^abbath of his Peoples Rest, where the Righteous cease from
their own Works, as God did from his, Heb. 4.9, 10.

CHAP. XII. Concerning Election and Reprobation, agreeing with the Holy
Scriptures.
THis is that which many hold, That God from all Eternity has unchangeably
ordained whatsoever comes to pass; and That God has decreed one part of the
Angels, with Men, Women and their Infants, for everlasting Damnation. Which
Doctrine is mostly held by the Presbyterians, as by their Confession of Faith,
cap. 3. which Doctrine I have often considered in the spirit of Meekness, and
according to my measure of Gods holy Truth by Jesus Christ, do I declare as
follows, That to know God by Jesus Christ, is Life eternal, and for that end
was the Son of God made manifest, that all might come unto God through Faith in
Jesus Christ, and through Grace, by him be saved; for God made Man in his own
Image, and gave him a being in the Garden of Paradise, from which state he soon
fell, which Fall was through Disobedience by eating of the forbidden ^ruit,
which has brought Darkness over the Children of Men, which are in a state of
Bondage to that Seed of the Enemies sowing in their first Parents, which more
or less comes by Nature in the Children of Men, in whom that Seed lusts,
which is a doing of that in Obedience to the Temptations of the Souls Enemy,
which God has strictly commanded should not be done. And for that end, that
the Children after Adam should know the Will and Mind of their Maker, God in
all Ages gave unto the Sons and Daughters of Men a gift of his own Spirit of
divine Light, by which they might see the right way of the Lord, and walk
therein which is according to his holy Promise, as in Genesis 3.15. And I will put
Enmity between thy Seed and her Seed, it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall
bruise his H^el; in which two Seeds i^ chiefly contained Election and
Reprobation; former Seed should bruise the Head of the Serpent, and break his
Power, that is, through perfect bedience to Christ, the Seed of the Woman, and
to his Grace, which is that gift of divine ^ight that makes manifest all the
hidden things of Darkness; so that let the Devil appear in what likeness so^ver
he will, yet as Men and Women stand faithful to the manifestation of Gods gift,
the Enemy's Power comes to be^broken. So that the Promise of God in the Seed
remains only to the faithful; for the Promise of God was not to Seeds, as of
many, but as of One and to thy Seed, which is Christ, Gal. 3.16. for the
Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was four
hundred and thirty Years after, cannot disannul, that it should make the
Promise of none effect; for the Law was added because of Transgression, till
the Seed should come, to whom the Promise was made; but the Scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the Promise by Faith in Jesus Christ, might be
given to them that believe, Gal 3.17, 18, 19, 20. Now all not believing in
Christ the true Seed, does not include, that God ordained them to perish,
because the Promise of God in the Seed is tendered in Gods own time and way to
all the Children of Men, otherwise all that perish would not be left without
excuse, concerning which the Spirit of God has left it plain to be understood,
that the Seed of the Kingdom has been sown in all sorts of Ground; and the
Reason is rendered by the Spirit of God, why it did not bring forth fruit in
all sorts of Ground, which is, because Obedience has not been yielded to the
Command of God; for if God had absolutely decreed men's Damnation, his Decree
being unrevokable, there would be no need for men to strive for Salvation, for
who could resist such an absolute Decree? But blessed be the Name of God, and
Father of Jesus Christ, whose faithful People well know, that he is a just God
which has not ordained the Souls of any to perish before they were born, but
for their Sins and final Impenitence, through Disobedience to the ^ift of his
Grace, which is of the Seed of the Kingdom, and has been sown throughout all
Ages, in all sorts of ground of what Nature soever, and has been the same in
this day among all the Children of Men, and if any perish, it is of themselves,
for Light is come into the World, and man's Condemnation is of himself, because
he loves Darkness rather than Light, Joh. 3.1. the Reason is, because he hates
the Light, which repreves his evil Deeds; in which stare the Seed is appressed,
and kept as in Bondage, by which it can take no ro^t in the hard rebellious
heart and barren sandy ground, where Rocks, Thorns and Thistles grow, and
Serpents have their abiding place, which destroy and cause the Life of the Seed
to depart, which i^ the state of disobedient and rebellious men, whose
Damnation neither slumbereth nor sleeps, but is of themselves; by which they
cannot charge the just and holy One of ordaining them to perish. By which it is
manifest that man's Dimnation is of himself, and tha^ is by yiedling his mind to
serve in Unrighteousness, when occasions sin that destroys the soul. ^y which
at appears, that they unjustly charge ^od of decreeing men ^o perish which for
the begetting of a further belief of unfound Doctrine, they have wrested the
Apostles words, Romans 9.11, 12, 13 where is is said, The Children being not yet
born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God, according
to Election might stand, not of Works, but of him that calls, it was said
unto her, the elder shall serve the younger, as it is written, Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I hated. Also, in another place, where it is said, That
Esau sought the blessing with Tears, but could not obtain it; All which makes
not the least proof that the soul of Esau did perish; for they themselves
allow, that if the Parents are Believers, their Children are holy: Then finding
that the Parents of Esau were holy Believers, why should any judge of God to be
such a severe Master, as to decree the soul of a Child born of holy Parents, to
perish, without having done any evil in its own Body* And as to Esau^s being
hated, the Lord never hated the soul of any man, as to decree its Damnation
before he was born, but for its sins and final Impenitency; for hatred is taken
in a twofold sense; for Jacob loved Rachel, and hated Leah: And Christ said,
He that hates not Father and Mother, Wife and Children, he cannot be my
Disciple, Luke 14.26. Now if God had hated Esau with such Hatred as to decree
his soul for Damnation, before he was born, or had done either good or evil,
then Isaac by Faith would not have blessed Esau; for Isaac did by Faith bless
Jacob and Esau concerning things to come. And as to Repentance, which Esau
could not find, it was relating to the first blessing, which he could not
recover, being before given to Jacob the younger, of whom it is said, Esau the
elder should serve. Which no more implies that Esau did perish, than David the
younger Brother, whom God chose before all the rest of his elder Brethren, who
were to serve David their younger Brother, whom God saw good to place on the
outward Throne, in the outward Kingdom of Israel, that the outward Government
might (...) in the Line of David, in which line of David's stock, the elder did
serve the ^ounger; for so did the Wisdom of God order the outward Government of
Israel in Church and State, in which the elder did serve the younger. And in
Jacob's Line, the stock of Esau served the younger, until the ^^ling of the
Gentiles, which then did reach the stock of Esau, and all Nadons that should be
found to call on his Name, that they may poss^^s the Remnant of Edom, and all
the Hea^hen which are called by any Name, says the Lord, ^mos 9.12 by which it
is manifest, that the Church of God remains seattered a^n^ng all Nations, among
whom they that (...). God and work his Righteousn^^s, the same shall be saved,
through Faith in Christ Jesus; for the gift of Gods Grace b^ Jesus Christ is
large in his love to all Nations, which b^ his promise in calling the Gentiles,
it frees the yoke of servitude from the stock of Esau's Posterity, which is no
less privilege than to be made partakers of Gods Promise in the Government of
his Grace by Jesus Christ, which the stock of Jacob have refused, for which
cause they have lost their Interest, through their Self-Righteousness in the
first Covenant of Works; for which cause of refusing the rich Mercy of Gods
Grace by Jesus Christ, they are given up in Unbelief concerning the great Work
of Redemption by the Son of God whom they wickedly slew without the City Gates,
for which cause the Lord has given them the Spirit of Slumber, Eyes that they
should not see, and Ears that they should not hear unto this day. And David
said Let their Table be a Snare, and a Trap, and a stumbling Block, and a
Recompense unto them; let their Eyes be dirkened that they may not see, and bow
down their back always; Then have they stumbled that they should fall? God
forbid, but rather through their Fall Salvation is come unto the Gentiles, for
to provoke them to jealousy; for if the fall of them be the Riches of the
World, and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, how much more
their fuliness? For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the
World, what shall the receiving of them be, but Life from the Dead? for if the
first Fruit be holy, the Lump is also Holy; and if the Root be Holy, so are the
Branches; for if through Unbelief they were broken off, then it is by true
Faith that there is an entrance into the Covenant of Grace, which extends to
the stock of Esau, Ishmael, and all the Nations of the World; for the Lord has
said, That he will call them his People which were not his People, and her his
beloved which was not his beloved, Romans 9.25 Hos. 2.23. 1 Pet. 2 10. Hos. 1.10.

Therefore let not any be ignorant, to establish their own Righteousness, but
submit to that Righteousness which is of God, by Faith in Jesus Christ, who
does not delight himself in the death of any sinner, but had rather all might
turn and live. By which it is evident that God has not decreed the Destruction
of any man's soul, before he has sinned out the day of Gods Visitation, whose
spirit shall not always strive with man whose Condemnation is of himself,
through the unbelief of his own hard heart, and the decree of God respects
him only as such, which was the state of Pharaoh, of whom it is said, The Lord
hardened the heart of Pharaoh, that be might be honored upon Pharaoh, and upon
all his host; So not only Pharaoh, but his People also had rebelled against the
Word of the Lord by his Servants and Messengers of his Truth, for which cause
the Lord gave them up (thorough unbelief) to haron^^ of heart, by which it is
said, The Lord hardened Pharaohs heart, for this end, to give honor to his own
holy name, thorough the overthrow of so great a King as Pharaoh in the Earth
then was, who hardened his own heart, through the unbelief which he had to the
Word of the Lord, who permitted the Devil to draw Tharaoh from Obedience to the
Command of the Lord, thorough which his heart came to be hardened, to the Glory
of God and honor of his name; for all the Devils work is by permission, and is
to the honor of God in the Condemnation of them, which thorough Disobedience
yield their minds in obedience to the Devils Power, by which their hearts come
to be hardened against Gods holy Truth; so that God hardens not any man's
heart, whose Condemnation is of himself, in that he will not yield his
Obedience to the gift of God, who desires not, that any should perish, but that
all might do his Commandments and live; for which end all men have ever had the
way of good and evil set before them; which proves, that man do not perish
thorough a decree of Gods making, before they have done either good or evil,
hat they shall perish; for tho the Decree or Purpose of God begins not in time,
yet it respects Man, having had a time and day of Visitation, and living in
Sin, until it be expired; for the holy Scriptures are very full, that God is
clear of all men's Blood which perish; for he has tendered Life to all the
Children of men; by which, thorough Faith in Obedince to the Gift of his Grace,
they may not fall short of the true Hope which is by Jesus Christ, who will not
withold from any man of his Grace, whom he finds in the well doing; for he
that does well shall be accepted, but he that does not well, sin ^veth at the
door, and unto him shall be his desire, and he shall rule over him; which
proves sin is the cause of man's perishing; for the spirit of (...) and
whosoever will let him come, and taken the Water of Life freely, Rev. 22 7. So
that for my part, ac(...) that small measure of Light which God has (...),
Concerning the knowledge of his Truth as it (...) he Son of his Love, the Lord
Jesus, thorough Faith (...), do I believe, with many thousands o^ the Lords
^^^thfull People, that God who in his ind^ite Wisdom knows all things long
before the ^o^ld began, and whatever comes to pass, that it is by his Power of
commission or permission; but tha^ he has unchangeably ordained whatsoever
cames to pass, seems to me, a charging of God with all the unrighteous Actions,
and wicked W^^ks, that ever unrighteous and wicked men have done, or ever shall
do for time to come, and to hold that God from all etern^^ty has ordained men,
women, and their infants for everlasting perdition, without respect to their
final impeaitency, is that which they can never prove, by or from any things
that is left on holy Record by the Spirit of God in the holy Scriptures of
Truth; for he that fears God, and works his righteousness through Faith in
Christ, the same shall be accepted, as a faithful Child of God, and true
Servant of Jesus Christ, whom the Father has made manifest by the gift of his
divine Light, which through Obedience thereunto, no man need walk in Darkness,
but have the Light of Life, which gives the knowledge of God in Jesus Christ,
whom to know is Life Everlasting.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning the Grace of God which brings Salvation, through
Faith in Christ, to the Souls of them that by him are saved.
THe Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, John 1.
verse. 17. Now the Love of God is largely manifested through the gift of his
Grace, which came by Jesus Christ, before whom no man's works shall stand, which
are not sanctified by Grace, neither can any man's works be sanctified by Grace,
further then he comes into Obedience to the gift of Gods Spirit of Grace, which
is that gift of divine Light which God has bestowed to the Children of men,
thorough the Death and Resurrection of his Son, the Lord of Life, in whom the
fullness of Grace, remains, and it is by the Grace of Gods Power, in and
thorough him, which sanctifies the soul of every true Believer in him, by whom
th^i says is imputed to them for Righteousness, by which they are justified
before God in the sight of Jesus Christ, whose Kingdom has been prepared
before the Foundation of the World, for the righteous to enter, for their works
have been in obedience to the gift of Gods Grace; for as there is but one God
and one Lord Jesus Christ, and one Spirit, so there i^ but one saving Grace in
the Ground, Seed and Root or Being and Nature, for the race of God is one, and
manifold, according as we read in the holy Scriptures, of the manifold Grace of
God, and manifold Wisdom of God, even as the Spirit of God is one, but
diversity of Gifts, and there are Diversities of Operations, but one God, and
diversity of Administrations, but one Lord; and the Scriptures do declare of
the Spirit of Fear, and Bondage, and of Adoption; also the S^^^^ture
distinguishes between the Servants and Sons in the H^^se of God; ^or every son
is a servant of God, but every Servant is not a son, born of the Free Woman.
And of this mystery Ishmael and Isaac were Figures; men may be Servants and
Sons by the Bond Woman, by obedience ^o the first Ministration of the Spirit,
or Light within, as it teaches common Duties, Piety, Temperance and Justice
without revealing the Mystery of Christ crucified and raised again, or working
the Faith of it but none are the Sons of God, by the Free Woman, or Children of
the New Covenant, but they who have the Mystery of Christ crucified and raised
again Outwardly, revealed in them, and have a living Faith in it, by which they
witness a conformity to Christ, in his Life, Death and Resurection, and by that
Power that raised him from the dead. The sufficiency of Gods Grace within, is
not to be understood in opposition, either to the Faith of Christ, as he was
outwardly Crucified for us, and rose again, and is a scended into Heaven, there
making Intercession for us, nor in opposition to the great benefit and help of
the holy Scriptures, or sincere preaching of faithful men* or any other help,
but in unity with all these; and it ought to be acknowledged, that though God
has not left the Heathens, where Christ, is not outwardly Preached, altogether
destiture but has given them a dispensation of Light, that is real and divine,
and is of great service to them, who improve it, to prepare and call them to
receive the Faith of Christ, when Preached to them, yet faithful Christians are
under another Dispensation of Light and Grace, as far exceeding that of the
mere Heathens, however honest or conscientious, as Gold excels Brass, or the
Light of the Sun excels that of the Moon, but both proceeding from one God,
one Christ, and one spirit, and the sufficiency of Grace that any man does
receive, or that any man has, is only with respect to the present time and
state, but not for all times to come; for the best of Saints are to depend, and
Pray to God, to receive more and more Grace from him, who is the God of all
Grace, and Father of Mercies, and Father of Lights, which lights his Sons and
Daughters, by the gift of his Grace, and good Spirit of Life, which gives unto
them the Light of Life, to walk in the straight and even way, which he has
laid out by the Son of his Love, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is one with God the
Father in all his holy Works of Grace, Life and Light, by which he is Working
among the Sons and Daughters of men, among whom is also the spirit of Iniquity
working, in and thorough the many Teachers which would make the Grace of God to
be (...) and differing in kind of being and nature, when it is evident, that
though the (...) diversities of gifts, yet they all proceed from the one Spirit
of the one God and one Lord Jesus Christ, whose Grace is but one, which
restrains and saves from sin; for he is the only begotten of the F^^^h^ full of
Grace and Truth, and of his fullness every true Believer in him receives (...)
for Grace, John 1.14, 16. and by his Grace they received Apostleship, for
Obedience to the Faith among all Nations for his Name, Romans 1.5. that in Ages
to come they might show forth the exceeding Riches of his Grace in his kindness
toward them, through Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.7. and this is the Grace which is
of God, and is sufficient for the Salvation of them that truly believe, 2 Cor.
12.9. So that it is not an outward are Profession of what God has wrought by
Jesus Christ for the Salvation of others, but that every man and woman live
their Life, in true Obedience to the gift of Gods Grace, that by Faith in
Christ they may witness the same Life, through faith, by which men are saved;
for the Grace of God brings Salvation only to them tha^ believe in the the
gift of his ^race (without which no man can be sa^ed) for it is by Grace that
men are saved and no^ o^ an (...) by (...) of themselves, but by Grace through
Faith in Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2 8. Then seeing it is by Grace that men are
^aved, and not of themselves, let every man and woman turn in the strength of
the Mind to the teaching of Gods gift of Grace, which teaches to deny all
Ungodliness, and to live a righteous, sober and godly Life in this present
Wo^^, that nothing may appear but what is good, to the use of edifying, that it
may minister Grace to the Hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. for where there is Obedience to
the g^^ of Gods Grace, ^^e more of Christ dwells richly in all Wisdom,
teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual S^ngs,
singing with Grace in their Hearts, Col. 3.16, 17. which ^s contrary to the
practice of m^^y thousands, who profess much in the outward of God and Christ
in this day, whereby they gain of one another the outward Name of Christians
but inwardly in the Antichristian Practice, as their outward fruits manifest;
for where Faith is without Works, it is (...) dead Faith, and in such Grace
works no effect toward (...) peace with God in Christ, by whom the Righteous
are (...) conciled to God through Faith, by Grace in him* (...) requires
perfect Obedience to the gift of his Grace, which teaches his people to pray
preach and sing with Grace (...) their hearts, to the praise and honor of his
holy Name and edification of one another, which they that yield (...) their
Obedience to the Spirit of Grace, cannot do, for which cause of their unclean
Fruits, their Condemnation does follow, in which state they witness no true
peace through Faith, by Grace, in Jesus Christ, whose Sons and Daughters,
begotten through Grace in him, they continue in the Way of the Lords own ^aying
out, having their words seasoned as with S^^^, and Grace abounding in their
hearts, through which, by grace, they become able Witnesses for the Lord of
Life, that by him, through grace, they are made able to perform his Will, in
what of them he requires by his good spirit of Grace, Col. 3 17 in which state
the Love of God by Jesus Christ, is his Peoples everlasting Consolation and
good Hope, through Grace, 2 These. 2.1^ Not by Works of Righteousness which they
have done, but according to his Grace, by the washing of Regeneration, and the
re^ew^n^ of the holy Ghost, Tit. 3 5 Which is sufficient encourage ne^ to come
with holdness unto the Throne of his Grace by which they obtain Mercy, and find
Grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16. For the Grace of God has appeared
unto all men, teaching them that they should d^ny Ungodliness and Wouldly L^st,
and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World, T^^. 2.11,
12. By which we see and know, that all men have received of his Grace,
sufficient for the present time and state; for as the Grace of God, which
brings Salvation, has in measure appeared unto all men, so all men that have
neglected the day of Gods Visitation, they shall be left without any excuse in
that Day of the Lords calling all to an account for the Deeds done in the Body,
when it shall go well with the Righteous, but sorrow and trouble will reach the
Wicked on every side for the Lord will not hold them guiltless which take his
Name in vain. Then will the Wicked, which have derided at the movings of Gods
good Spirit of Grace in his People, come to know a Day of Trouble, when the
Lord shall laugh at their Distress, for unto them Damnation slumbereth nor
sleeps not, but will overtake all the Ungodly as a Thie^ in the Night of
their Darkness, but it shall go well with the Righteous, which ask in Faith,
without doubting, unto them is Salvation through Grace by Jesus Christ, who
came to save his People from their sins, for which end he was made a little
lower than the ^ngels for the suffering of Death, and crowned with Glory and
Honor, that he might by the Grace of God taste Death for every man H^^. 2 9.
that whosoever believes in him (...), but have Life eternal; for the Promise
(...) ^ent to then (...) at believe in the gift of (...) of his Will and Mind,
by Faith, thr^^ Grace, in Jesus Christ, by whom the Souls of them tha^ believe
in him, are justified in the sight of God; for he that sanctifies, and they who
are sanctified are all of one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them
Brethren, Heb. 2 11. for b^ the Grace of God are they of him, who unto them of
God is made Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, 1 (...).
1.30. by which People may see, that the main cause why People perish, is
through Disobedience to the gift of Gods Grace, which by Jesus Christ they have
received, and it brings the Tenders of Salvation to every man in some measure
or degree which as improved, leads unto perfect Salvation, through Faith in
Christ Jesus, which they that refuse do unjustly charge God, that is is for
want of Grace, by which they perish, when that it is not for want of Grace
tendered unto them, but for want of their Obedience to the gift of Gods Grace,
which is sufficient for the Salvation of them that are faithful thereunto, so
as the Righteous, through Faith and Obedience grow from grace to grace, until
they become perfect in Christ Jesus; so the Unrighteous, through
unfaithfulness, by Disobedience, sin away the Grace of God more and more, until
the Day of Gods Grace with them be over, and his Spirit with them has left
striving; which all ought to consider, while they have time to Repent, for
there is no repenting in the grave.

CHAP. XIV. Concerning the Resurrection.
MAny are the People that are concerned to know how the dead are raised, and
with what Bodies they appear ^or (...) what Bodies they do come forth? Then
seeing their minds are to concerned, to know with what Bodies they shall
appear, does manifest that they are not come to the knowledge of Gods saving
Power, through the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, which to know gives
an assurance of Salvation, in which state m^n may know h^w the dead are raised,
and with what Bodies they shall appear; for it is certain that there shall be a
Resurrection of the dead, b^th of the Just and Unjust; for all shall appear
before the Lord, the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, before whom the
heavenly spirited, and the earthly spirited shall appear, to give an account of
all their Deeds done in the Body of this Life, which then will be time
sufficient for the unrighteous to know with what Bodies they shall appear, in
the mean time the Apostles words are very suitable unto all such whose state of
Disobedience is far from the saving knowledge of God, by the Death and
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, and though not simply fools, yet through (...)
Disobedience and Unbelief, (...) as the (...) be (...) the husband man, ^o
(...) of the R^^rrection, Thou soul, that which thou so rest, is not q^^e (...)
it dye; and (...) which thou so rest thou so well no^ that (...), that shall be
bath re^^rain, it ^ay chance of Wh^at (...) other Grain and withal co^^ledes,
that God (...) as it pleases him, and to every Seed his own Body, 1 Cor.
15.35, 36, 37, 38. by which the unrighteous may know with what Bodies they
shall come forth; for he that so with to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap
Corruption, but he that so^eth to the Spirit, shall of the spirit reap Lif^
Everlasting, Gal, 6.5 for the time is at hand, that he that is Unjust, let him
be Unjust still, and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still, and he that is
Righteous, let him be Righteous ^^ll, and he that is Holy let him be Holy
sti^^, f^r behold the Lord will quickly come, and his Reward will (...) with
him, to give every man according as his works shall be Rev 22.11, 12. which
does manifest that according as men have sown so shall they reap, for every
seed shall have his own Body, whether of Works of Faith and Obedience to
Salvation, or Works of Unbelief and Disobedience to Damnation. Then seeing
these things are plain, as by holy Record, which agrees with the inward Word of
Gods Spirit, and the gift of his divine Light, which came by Jesus Christ, and
through Faith, in Obedience to him, through whom Salvation comes, which work is
most necessary for People to be concerned in; for as the Soul is the most Noble
part of Man, so ought every man principally to be concerned about his Soul, and
the well air thereof, yet because the Body is a part of the Man and that Christ
is the Savior does of Soul and Body of every sincere Believer in him,
therefore every Man may and ought to be concerned about the whole Man, both
^oul and Body, and the Faith and Hope of the Resurrection of the Body; and as
the spirit of God works that Faith and ^ope in us, it is of great use to
sanctify us, and prepare us for the Resurrection to come; for Paul does not
call them Fools simply for enquiring concerning the manner of the Resurrection,
but for their Ignorance and Unbelief, that some did not believe the
Resurrection, which they that do not believe it, they remain in gross Ignorance
and Unbelief, and such are directed to the Husbandman, to learn the manner of
the Resurrection, by using the Example of the ^orn. And it is a great Error for
any to hold, That the Saints now living in the mortal Body, have attained the
Resurrection of the Body, or that they attain it immediately after Death; for
it is most evident from the holy Scriptures, that the Resurrection of the Dead
is reserved to the last coming of Christ to judge the quick and the dead, and
the d^^d in Christ shall rise first; so where there is the true knowledge to
God in Christ, of the Souls well-being, it m^^t necessarily follow, that the
spiritual Understanding w^ be the more capable to know in what state the Body
w^^app^a^, which shall never enter Gods Kingdom with natural Flesh, blood and
Bones; for though it be sown a natural Body it is raised a spiritual Body as it
is written The first ^^a^ a living Soul, the last ^^dam was mad a quick^ning
Spirit; so that which was first was not spiritual but natural, and afterward
that which is spiritual. S^ then it must be (...) minded only that have the
true knowledge of these things; for the natural minded man is a fool, a^ to the
true Knowledge of God, because he remains in D^^obedience to the gift of his
Grace, but is bewitched that he should not obey the Truth made manifest by
Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.1. through which unfaithfulness the mind of his
Understanding is Darkness, as to the things of God, which chiefly concern his
Soul; and such live without God in the World, not knowing that there is a God
by his saving Grace, according as by their Works is manifest, which includes
them to be one with the fool, which says in his heart, there is no God,
neither indeed is there any Salvation of God to the rebellious Children of
Disobedience, who pretend they know God, but in Works deny him. Therefore it is
most necessary for all such to bend in their Minds, and by true Repentance seek
the Lord while he is to be found, for he is only found of them that truly seek
him in true Humility of Spirit, and not o^ them that remain in a state of
serving the Lust of their corrupted Desires, and yet remain talking about the
fashion of the Body, and in what likeness they shall appear, before they
witness any thing for the Souls wellfair, as they ^^ght to do; for Christ is
risen, otherwise all preaching is in vain, and Faith also is in vain; or if the
dea^ rise not, th^n is not Christ raised, and if Christ (...) raised, Faith is
in vain, and all men are yet in their sins: Bu^ the Lord has given a true
knowledge of himself to the Righteous, who witness Christ to be raised from the
dead, and is become the first Fruits of them that slept, and by true Faith they
witness his Resurrection, by what they feel of his heavenly divine Nature, that
he is raised from the dead; for since by Man came Death, by Man came also the
Resurrection of the Dead; for as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all
be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. So, as People come to witness a dying state
from sin, they shall also witness a living ^ate to God, through whose Spirit of
Grace they shall partake of his heavenly Riches, through Faith in Jesus Christ;
but as to these spiritual things there is no profit by them to any, who come
not into Obedience to the gift of Gods Grace, which comes by Jesus Christ, whom
no man knows but the Father, neither knows any man the Father, save the
Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him, Mat. 11.2^. Joh. 6.44. Then
as the Scriptures are left for men's learning, no man can learn to know God
aright, without the gift of his Grace, and divine Light of his Spirit by Jesus
Christ; for the Letter k^^eth, but the Spirit gives Life, 2 Cor. 3.6. for as
the Spirit of God is the Ministration of Condemnation to the Disobedient, so
also do they read their Condemnation in the Scriptures of Truth; but to the
faithful, who live in Obedience to the Spirit of Truth, to them the Spirit of
God by Jesus Christ, is the Ministration of Life and Salvation, and through
Faith in Christ Jesus, the Scriptures do minister the knowledge of Life; for
through Faith in Christ they are able to make wise to Salvation. Then, whatever
men may gather in the outward Comprehension from the holy Scriptures,
concerning the great Work of God, by the Death and Resurrection of his Son, the
Lord of Life, which will not profit them that remain in a state of daily
sinning against the gift of his divine Light, which is their Condemnation for
evil Deeds, Joh 3.19, 20, 21. in which state they remain dead as to God, having
no benefit by the Resurrection in the Life to come; ^or God is not a God of
that which is d^ad, but a God of the Living, Mat. 22 23 So that God is a ^od of
the living, who have been buried with the first Man in sin, but through the
Resurrection of the second Man, the Lord from Heaven, have they received the
earnest of Life Everlasting, 1 Cor. 15.48, 49, 50. having obtained the Promise
of God, through the Resurrection o^ Jesus Christ, which the (...) the benefit
(...) Christ conc^ied and (...), ^he is that which People ought to witness,
through the in ^ard Word of his traching which teaches the true knowledge of
God, according as is recorded in the holy (...), That ^^s s^hcient to Salv^tion
to know God and Jesus Christ (...) Lord, which was made of the S^ed of David,
accord^n^ to the (...), and (...) to be the S^^ of God with (...), according to
the Spirit of Ho^^ness, by the Res^rrection of the death Rom 1 4. which the
Righteous witness, through (...) the Law of sin, by the Body of Christ, that
they should b^ (...) to another, even to him who is rasea^ from the dead that
they should bring forth fruit unto God R^m. ^.4 for they (...) have been
planted together in the likeness of his Death, (...) also in the likeness of
his Resurrection Romans 6.5 So that the ch^efest desire of true Believe^^, is to
know the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Power of his Resurrection, and the
fellowship of his Sufferings, being made conformable unto his Death, Phil. 3
10. for they that shall be accounted worthy to obtain the Kingdom of God, and
the Resurrection from the Dead, neither marry nor give in Marriage, neither can
they dye any more, for they are equal unto Angels, and are the Children of the
Resurrection, Luke 20.34, 35, 36. but they whose hearts and minds are joined to
the perishing things of this ^ife, they are not married to Christ, and so have
no hope to be the Children of the Resurrection, but only Children of the World,
which love gain, delights and pleasures, in which there is no profit for a man
to gain, and lose his soul; for he that loves any thing more than Christ, is
not worthy of the rich benefits which the faithful receive through his Death
and Resurrection. Therefore it concerns all that they may so live as to dye
from sin, and be m^me, alive with Christ, that they may be partakers of his
heavenly Riches in the Kingdom of God, where Flesh and Blood cannot inherit, 1
Cor. 15.50.

CHAP. XV. Concerning the Ministers of Christ, and the Ministers of Antichrist.
Also, of Humane Learning, and the Vs^^f it, and how it came in practice among
them called the Reformed Churches of this latter Age. And concerning
Gospel-Maintenance, and in what manner, and to whom it belongs.
JEsus Christ, the Son of God, and Everlasting Covenant of Grace, Life and
Light, he is Minister of all Truth and Righteousness, which has appeared for
Salvation of men, for which end in days past, he chose unto himself Twelve
Disciples, which were men that believed in him, and not being brought up in
that manner as the many Teachers are in this day, who serve a time in Schools
of Learning, by which they gather outward knowledge in H^brew, Greek and Latin
Phrases, also Arts in other things, which the holy men of God did never
practice; for the twelve Disciples of Christ's choosing, were not fitted after
any such manner to preach the Gospel; for they were illiterate, and Tradesmen,
etc. and lived not by hire for preaching, but labored with their hands for
their outward subsistence, such were they whom the Lord did call to preach the
Gospel, which did minister the glad Tidings of Peace and Salvation unto the
Nations, among whom the Word of God was divided (...), and every one their
portion, according to their (...); for they had not their Wisdom from below, is
the many Teachers now have, notwithstanding, the Lands Servants wanted not
Wisdom from above, when gave them utterance of words, whereby they were enab^^d
^o divide the Word aright, in declaring and dem^ustra^ing the Will and Mind of
God, at which time some of the learned Jews and wife Rabbis opposed them
setting them at naught, others resisted them, notwithstanding they did not
(...) to be approved in that Wisdom that Man touches, which is never able to
prepare and sit for (...) work and service of the Gospel, as is further
manifested by the saying of him who was brought up in great outward Learning at
the feet of Gamaltel, Acts 22. in which state he was not capable, by all his
outward Learning to know Christ, whom he persecuted in his Servants and
Messengers of his Truth, thinking that he did good service for God, when he was
destroying his People, even as has been in many places, many of the learned
Hebrew, Greek and Latin Men have destroyed the Lives and Estates of many
People, because they could not conform to their Antichristian Faith, which the
Devil would have had set up in the Disciples of Christ, who came not to destroy
men's lives, but to save and make alive; which work is of a contrary Nature to
that Wisdom which is from below; for the true Wisdom of God opens the
Understanding in the things of God, which the learned, by all their outward
wisdom can never do; for they remain in the Wisdom of Darkness, as to the
things of Gods Kingdom, which Paul in all his outward Learning was a stranger
unto, but by that Wisd^m which is from above he came to receive that spiritual
sight which gave him the true saving knowledge of God by Jesus Christ, whose
Minister he became, being then a Witners unto all men of both what he had seen
and heard, Act. 22.13, 14, 15. Which does manifest, that his (...) to the work
of the ^o^pel, was of God; which Work he attended, according to the
Dispensation which he had received, for the opening of blind Eyes in others, by
which they were turned from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Stran to
the Power of God, and received Forgiveness of sins, and an Inheritance among
them (...) are fa^ctified, Acts 26.18. in which state he did not (...) to speak
any thing which Christ had not wrought in him; yea, he so strove to preach the
Gospel, not where h^st was named, lest that he should build upon another man's
Foundation, Rom 1^ 18.20. which is as much differing from the call and practice
of many called Gospel Ministers in this day, as the East differs from the West,
being contrary one against the other, and at that distance by which they can
never join one to the other, even so contrary are they in their own Wisdom, to
the Doctrine, Principle and Pract^ce of the holy Apostles, who were called of
God by the Power of his own Spirit, in and through the Lord Jesus Christ, which
made them able Ministers not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, which gave forth
the Letter that kills them that are not in Obedience to the gift of the Spirit,
for the Letter kills, but the Spirit makes alive, 2 Cor. 3.6. for the Ap^stles
were not made Ministers by the Will of Man, neither were they upheld by the
Power of Man, but were made Ministers according the gift of Gods Grace, given
unto them by the effectual working of his Power, Ephesians. 3.7. neither did they
build again the things which they had once destroyed; for in so doing they
become Transgressors, Gal. 2.18. Now the hited Teachers of this Age preach
against Sin, which on the other hand they build up, by laying a rotten
Foundation, That People can never be free from sin in this Life which is
inconsistent with Gods holy Truth by Jesus Christ, who came to destroy sin, and
put an end to Transgression, that is, in them which believe, as the Apostles
have done for example; for they were so far from hire, that they had, as it
were, nothing, and yet, through contentment with the Lords providing, were made
possessors of all things, approving themselves as the Ministers of Christ, in
much ^atience in Distress, by Pureness, by Knowledge, by Long-suffering by
Kindness, by the holy Ghost, by the Word of Truth, by the Power of God, by the
Armor of Righteousness on the right hand and on the left; by Honor and
Dishonor, by evil Report and good Report; as Deceivers, yet true, as
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, as poor, yet making many rich, as having
nothing, yet possessing all things, 2 Cor. 6.4, to 11. which was the state of
the true Ministers of Christ in that day, and is, in measure, the same with
many in this day. Which does manifest the wide difference between the Ministers
of Christ, and the Ministers of Antichrist, the one being in a state of
Dark^e^s, through that wisdom which will neither enter, nor suffer others to
enter; and the other in a state of Light, through the gift of that Wisdom which
is of God by Jesus Christ, which is willing to give entrance, through Faith in
him, to his Rest, which the wise of this World, by all their outward Learning
can never find; for as the true Ministers of Christ give no offense, so the
Ministers of Anti christ offend in all things toward God and his People; and
he that offends Christ's little ones, better were it for him that a Mill stone
were hanged about his Neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea,
Mat. 18.6, 7. for the People of the Lord are even to him as the Apple of his
Eye, and blessed are they that are not offended in him, for they shall receive
a double Reward of Gods heavenly R^ches in Jesus Christ; but Woe is unto them
that have taken upon them the name of his Ministers, and are not found in ^he
(...) of his Life, by whose Spirit of Grace his Servants were made able
M^nisters of his Truth, according to the Disp^niation given th^^, for others to
fulfill the Word of God, Col. 1.25. which is evident they did not preach (...),
but J^us Christ the Lord, and themselves the Peoples Servan^s (...) Jesus sake,
2 Cor. 4.5. neither had any man's Person in a^miration for advantage sake of
outward gain, neither was their preaching with (...) words of man's wisdom, but
in the demonstration o^ the Spir^^, and of Power, that Peoples Faith might not
stand in the Wisdom o^ Man, but in the Power of God, 1 Cor 2.4, (...) that so
they might continue in the Faith, grounded and sted^ast, and not be moved away
from the Hope o^ the Gospel, which they ^ave heard, and which was preached to
every Creature that is under the Heavens, whereof the Apostles were made the
Ministers of Christ, Col 1.23.

Now it is evident, that they who pretend to be Gospel Ministers, and are not
in Doctrine, Principle and Pratice, as aforesaid related of Christ's Ministers,
they are ^^e Worlds Teachers, set up and upheld by the World, and so no true
Gospel maintenance belongs unto them; ^r their mouths are to be stopped,
because they subvert ^hole Houses, teaching things they ought not, for filthy
^ucre take; therefore their mouths are to be (...), whom God has not sent to
tred out his Corn; for (...) God takes care for Oxen, so he takes the greater
care (...) the Ministers of his Truth, that as they plow in hove, they also
thresh in hope, and are made partakers of their hope, 1 Cor. 9, 9, 10. in which
state the Household of Faith do good unto all men, and more in a special manner
to them of whom they partake of their spiritual things; So in the one Faith, do
the People of God minister to each other, without any Compulsion by or from the
Power of man, Romans 15.27. 1 Cor. 9 11. So they that want a^ the Altar are made
to partake with the Altar, 1. Cor. 9 13. Even so has the Lord ordained, that
they which prea^^h the Gospel should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. So the
true Ministers of Christ do not use any outward Power, least that they should
hinder the Gospel of Christ, 1 Cor 9.2. which Example is left for all to
follow, even as the true Gospel Ministers have followed Christ, and also to
mark them that walk otherways, 1 Cor. 11 1. Phil. 3.17. Then whom should we
mark, but them who have taken upon them the Name of Gospel Ministers, and by
their Doctrine Principle and Practice, are not found of the Nature of Christ,
and his true Gospel Ministers, which teach People the way to Gods Kingdom,
without Money by the year for preaching; for the Love of God in Christ, by whom
his Servants and Messengers of Truth are constrained to preach the Gospel, for
whose sake they preach the Gospel without Charge; even so was it with the
Apostles in their Day, who used no Compulsion, neither did he write that any
such thing should be done unto them, for it were better for him to dye, than
that any man should make his glorving void; for though he did preach the
Gospel, he had nothing to glory of for a Necess^^y was laid upon him, yea Woe
was unto him i^ he did not preach the Gospel. What the^ was his Reward, that
when he did preach the Gospel, that he might make the Gospel of Christ without
charge, that he might not abuse his Power in the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.15, 16, 18.
for though he was free from all men, yet he made himself a Servant unto all
men, that he might gain the more, 1 Cor. 9.19. which does condemn the Doctrine,
Principle and Practice of them which have the name of Gospel Ministers, but not
the nature of Gospel Ministers in this our day, in which some have said, That
would to God they could but practice all what their Ministers preach and teach
to them; the reason is, because the great God of Heaven and Earth, by whose
Power they are restrained, other ways they would do even as their Forefathers
have done, who have persecuted many of the Lords People to Death, and not only
among Papists, but among them called Protestants also; but the Lord has in all
Ages permitted the Power of that Spirit for a trial of us Peoples Faith, who
did never esteem of human Learning as needful for Man's Salvation, but of late
(among other things) it has crept in among the Churches, as by the following
Account from Christian Authors.

Gaudeutius da mor. sec. Justinian says, We do not read that ever the Ancients
did openly in Schools, read or teach Philosophy, since they did rather abhor
it. And faith another good Author, I would fain see a man that could show, that
Christians either before or in the time of Justinian, did openly teach
Philosophy. And Hadrian Saricrial informs us, That the primitive Christians had
no Accademical Schools, like those now a days. And we do not read of any
University of the Albigenses, Waldenses or Bohemians; for most of their
Teachers were Tradesmen and Handy-crafts-men, and did not spend their Time in
reading Tongues or studying Authors. Herald. Aaimad. in Arnob. The Christians
living excluded from all Honors and Magistrates, did neglect the Studies,
which were for the discharge of civil Employments, because Sophesters and
Philosophers were the principal Enemies of Christianity; therefore upon this
account they condemned all Tragadies and Commodies and all other Poetical
Writings being the main part of humane Learning, as Judging they did not
conduce to sollid Knowledge. Tertullian lib. de Idolat page 138, 139. Judged,
that Schoolmasters professing Lea^ning, were guilty of great Idolatry, because
they did only expound Names, G^neologies, and fabulous Arts o^ Heathen g^dds,
and generally in ho^e days Believers harbored a very bad esteem of Natural
Learning, and generally the Christians were provoked thereunto, because the
Gentiles did upb^a^d them, that their Teachers were sal^^erate Persons, as
Wool-Combers, Weavers, or the like. These things being objected against the
Christians, the Christians on the other side rejected all humane Learning, as a
(...) thing, and no ways advantageous to Salvation, though their Adversaries
boasted of it. Origin lib. 3. says The Christians did declare that Men of any
Condition might be saved, Servants, Idiots, Rusticks, and such as the World
valued as Fools; and that God did confound the wise in their own Wisdom. And
Coelsus, as Orig^ne (...) his Book (...), That Christians did proclaim it in
their Assemblies, Let none that is Wise enter, none that is learned, none that
is ^oudent; for thus it is appointed us in the Gospel; but if there be any that
is unwise, unlearned, any foolish, let him approach with Confidence, for these
are fit to be the Servants of God.

Gazentius in his Annimadversions, page ^5. says, That the G^ntiles did object
against the Christians their rude Style, their harsh Language, and how they
were destitute of all Addresses, calling them Rusticks, Clowns etc. So the
Christians did again term the Gentiles the Eloquent and the Learned.

Clemens Romanus says in his Writings, lib. 2. cap. 6. Abstain from all the
Books of the Gentiles, for what have you to do with strange Discourses, or
Laws, or false Prophets, which seduce weak men from the Truth?

Petrus Belonius says, That in Greece among the Christians, which were very
many, there were few learned men* because they esteemed not of it, as of
necessity to Christianity, though they could speak Greek, and some Larine, few
could write or read. In their Libraries were found several Manuscripts of
Divinity, but no H^story, no Philosophy, for these were (...), and (...)
Christians not to study Poetry and Philosophy. Yet we find that the Greek
Church is highly owned for a true Christian Church by the Protestants, though
neither the Greek Church, the Pikards, Albigenses nor Waldenses in Bohemia did
value Learning, so far were they from esteeming of it, as the proper true
Religion.

Luther de Inst, puer inter. oper Wittingburg, tom. 7 fol. 444. Paul exhorts
to beware of Philosophy and vain deceit, 2 Col. 2. He had been as A^h^ns, and
had acquainted himself with that vain glorious humane Wisdom, and knew the
multiplicity of Contradictions which it had procured; what then had Athens to
do with Jerusalem? what has the Epicures and Stoics to do with the Church of
Christ?

Jerome lib. 1. contra. Peleg. What had Aristotle to do (...) with Paul, or
Plato with Peter? And a multitude of Testimonies may be brought to the same
effect, how that Christians did in former days reject Philosophy and Heathen
Authors, and all such frivolous stories, as of no way lawful (...) Christians
to meddle in, nor good to propagate Christi^nity. And Bishop Usher in
Vindication of the Waldenses, by way of Apology, says, God did choose
Fishermen, that he might not give his Glory to another; forasmuch as the
little Ones had asked Bread, they came to receive it, and the learned being
busied about vain Contentions and Disputations, were sent empty away. Bishop
Usher, des. Eccles. cap 6.28. The Waldenses said, We are not ashamed of our
Teachers, because they labor with their hands, procuring thereby a livelihood
to themselves, because both the Doctrine and Example of the Apostles does lead
us to such Apprehensions.

But I would not have any to mis-understand me, or to think that I am against
all outward Learning, for that is not my drift, but that Truth and
Righteousness may take place, by which outward Learning may remain for the use
of that end for which it was intended, the knowledge of Tongues and Languages
having their proper Uses, which are not evil in themselves; and Schools of
Learning I acknowledge there ought to be, for Natural Languages are serviceable
for Translating the Scriptures, and ^the^ pious Books into the vulgar Tongues,
and for natural use^ in natural Transactions, in civil Affairs betwixt Man and
Man, and Nation and Nation; for its good to maintain Learning, and to keep it
in its right place, otherways i^ can never be of that service for which it was
intended that is, for the honor of God and service of men's outward Employments
between Man and Man, and Nation an^ Nation, and not to be upheld for this end
that non without humane Learning are capable of preaching the Gospel; for Paul
without that Learning which was (...) the Wisdom of God, was not capable of
preaching Christ to the People, no more are they Gospel Ministers, n^ Ministers
of the Gospel which remain in Paul's first sta^ of outward Learning; but
Learning sanctified, through Grace, by Faith in Jesus Christ, is of benefit to
his People, which without Grace, outward or (...) Learning cannot be any Honor
to God for (...) profit of his People; which does prove, that men without Grace
cannot be the true Ministers of Christ, but all without Grace are of the
Ministers of Antichrist, unto whom no Gospel Mainteuance belongs; for they
remain in the outward knowledge of the Letter, and by their Fruits they are
manifest not to be the Ministers of Christ, but the Ministers of Antichrist.

CHAP. XVI. Concerning divine Inspiration and Revelation.
MAny are the Teachers which hold, all divine Inspiration and Revelation to be
ceased ever since the Apostles days, and from that time that God has wholly
committed his Will and Mind to be known by the written Word.

To which I Answer: That God in Christ, before the World began, did determine
all things necessary for man's Salvation, whom God did make in his own Image,
and gave him Dominion over the Works of his own Hand, which Image of Holiness
Man lost in the Fall. Now Adam is called the Son of God, and he that is a Son
of God is also a Child of God, Luke 3.38. in whom the Spirit of God by measure
dwells, which is for this end, to direct the mind of Man unto the true and
living Knowledge of God; for which end there was a sufficient gift of God
Spirit to save Adam's Soul, which gift in measure is given to all the Children
of Men, that they may know the Mind of God, and do it; for Salvation is not by
the Works of the Law, but by Grace, through Faith in jesus Christ; for the Law
was given by ^loses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, who is the
Author and Finisher of his own work of in his people, John 1.1^. and for that
end they have received a divine gift of his Spirit of Grace, which does reveal
the Mind and Will of God, in and through the Son of his love, the Lord Jesus,
which is Christ (by the divine Life and Light of his Spirit in his People the
Hope of Glory, in which state they serve the Lord of Life, according to the
Revelation of his Spirit, of which all, in measure have received, or shall
receive, for their Obedience to the Faith, through which Obedience of Faith, is
the Justification of Life and Salvation, and Condemnation unto them whose
Disobedience is to the true Faith, which has been delivered unto the Saints,
unto whom the Lord, in measure, does reveal himself in this day, as to his
faithful Children in days past, it being granted, that God gave extraordinary
Revelations, etc. to the holy Prophets and Apostles, beside what he gave them
in common with all Saints; for he changes not, but is the same God yesterday,
to day and for evermore, who makes known the Mystery of Salvation by the
Revelation of his good Spirit of Grace, through their Faith in Jesus Christ.

So now, as the Almighty God has in all Ages made known of his Will and Mind
to the Children of men, by the revealings of his Spirit in their hearts, even
so is it among his Children in this Day, who behold with their spiritual Eyes
the mighty Works of God to their Souls, by the Revelations of his Spirit, in
and through Jesus Christ; for he that was to come, is come, in whom the
fullness is, and has brought in the hope of Salvation to all them that believe
in the gift of his Spirit, which does reveal the Mind of God in his People, who
witness him to be come, which has fulfilled all Righteousness, and brought in
the Hope of Assurance, which is revealed by the Inspiration of his holy spirit
in them, through which they are brought into a further acquaintance with the
Lord of Life, whom to know, through the drawings of the Father, is Life
Eternal, through the Son; for no man comes to receive Life by the Son, but as
the Father draws him, neither comes any to the Father, but by the Son, John
6.44. These. 65

So here is a drawing by the Spirit, which reveals the Will of God in the
Children of his own begetting, thorough which, by Faith, they come into
fellowship with the Son more and more, whom no man knows but the Father,
neither knows any the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him, Mat. 11.2^. Therefore the true saving knowledge of God, is by the
divine Revelation of his own Spirit, in and through Jesus Christ, whom to know
is Life Eternal, of which the Scriptures do declare, that the Power of God
remains in the gift of his Grace, which come by Jesus Christ, through which is
the assurance of Salvation, to them that by Faith in Christ, through whom by
his Grace, they are saved. Now the holy scriptures were given forth by the holy
Spirit of God; therefore is his Spirit before and above the Scriptures, as the
workman is above the instrument he works with; for the spirit works with the
Scriptures instrumentally upon the souls of men, both to inform their
Understandings, and to move and incline their Wills and Affections; and no man
can understand the things o^ the Spirit but by the Revelation of the Spirit;
for they in days past did search the Scriptures, thinking therein to find
eternal Life, when though they restifie of him, yet there is no Life to them the
by true Faith, in Obedience to the gift of his Spirit, will no^ come unto him,
Joh. 5.39, 40, Here is Life tendered, but not barely and only by the
Scriptures, but by coming to Christ; for they in that day had the outward
knowledge of the Letter, which kills without the saving knowledge of God in
Christ, which by Faith is revealed thorough the Gift of his own Spirit in his
People; for all that either tends to Salvation or Condemnation, it is by the
Revelation of Gods Spirit in man, for the Spirit of God keeps striving against
the Enemies Power in them whom God has armed with his spiritual Armor against
the Devils Temptations, and in them that disobey God, thorough their Life of
Disobedience to the gift of his divine Light, in them it is their condemnation
for sin and evil, Joh. 3.19. Romans 1.18, 19. 2 Cor. 3.6. for it is by the
Revelation of Gods Spirit, that men come to the knowledge of which thought and
intent is for him or against his Truth; for the thoughts and Intents of men,
whether good or evil, the Lord shows it unto them in their own heart and
conscience, by the Revelation of his spirit, which Justifies the thoughts and
intents of the Righteous, but condemns the thoughts and intents of the Wicked.
Now the holy Scripture is short in giving men the knowledge of their thoughts
and intents, without the searchings of the Spirit of God; for the Lord
searches the Heart and tries the Reigns and decleares unto Man what is his
Thoughts, Amos 4.13. Also, the Prophet has said by the Spirit of Truth, That
they shall all be taught of God, which is according to Christ's saying, John. 6
45. Every man that has heard and has learned of the Father, comes to me^
neither has Eye seen nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of
man the things which God has Prepared for them that love him, but God has
revealed them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, even
the deep things of God; for what man knows the things of a man, save the
spirit of a man which is in him, even so the things of God, knows no man, but
the spirit o^ God, and to whom the Spirit reveals them; for true believers in
this day, as well as in days past have not received the Spirit of the World,
but the spirit which is of God, that they might know the things that are freely
given to them of God, 1 Cor. 2 9, 10, 11, 12 By which it is manifest, that
divine Revelation, by the inspiration of Gods holy Spirit, is of absolute
necessity for Salvation, in and thorough Faith by Jesus Christ, whom no man can
know, but by the revealed gift of his Spirit, which through Faith begets the
inward man into the saving knowledge of God, and of his Son, the Lord Jesus
Christ, through which every true Believer in him, comes to receive of the like
benefit with the Saints in their day, to see with their spiritual Eyes, and to
hear with their spiritual Ears, and with their spiritual hands, they come to
handle the Word o^ Life, 1 John 1.1. Then if all divine Revelation and
Inspiration of Gods Spirit to his Children be ceased, must not all spiritual
seeing and spiritual hearing be ceased also? which by their Doctrines does seem
to me, as if they conclude Christ also to be ceased; for if the Inspiration of
Gods holy Spirit of Revelation be ceased, then how shall God and Christ be
heard and seen spiritually, as believers in days past did spiritually hear and
see him? Also if God has committed his whole Will and Mind to Writing, then by
what means are these saved, which have not received the knowledge of the Letter
of the holy scripture? Will they conclude, they all perish, for want of the
Letter, when the Mind and Will of God is, that a Remnant of all Nations, of
them that fear him and work Righteousness shall be saved. And though the holy
Scriptures do give Infallible Marks of such an estate yet there is no scripture
can infallibly assure any man that he has these marks, but it must be the
spirit of God, that gives every true believer such an assurance; for the spirit
it self bears witness with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God, Romans
8.6. So it is the Spirit of God by which that assurance is revealed to
beleivers, or more properly in believers, by which they come to witness, that
they have the Son, and he that has the Son of God, has Life, 1 John, 5.12. Now
the holy Scriptures hold forth, that he that has the Son of God, has Life,
but give no assurnce of Life, but the Spirit of God does reveal an assurance;
which proves, that all divine Revelation is not ceased.

CHAP. XVII. Concerning the Spirit of Christ, and the Spirit of Antichrist.
THe whole state of man's Life is governed in Thoughts, Words and Actions, by
the Power of the Spirit, which has the Commanding part in man, who is either
governed by the Spirit of Christ, or the Spirit of Antichrist, which is the
Devil; for there are but two Spirits which rule, the Spirit of God, through
Jesus Christ, which rules in the Righteous, whose Thoughts Words and Actions
are governed by the Power of Gods Spirit, which brings the Thoughts of the
Faithful to be subject, in Obedience to the Power of his own Spirit, in and
through Faith by Jesus Christ. Now the Spirit of the Devil, is that
Antichrist, which Gods Power permits to rule in the Children of Disobedience,
whose Thoughts, Words and Actions are governed by the Spirit of the Devil, so
that men are Servants unto that Power which they obey; for the Thoughts of man's
Mind are in a continual motion, and where God is not retained in the Thoughts,
they cannot be of any service to him for the Souls benefit, but are in
servitude to him unto whom they yield their Obedience, which Work altogether
tends for Destruction of the soul; therefore People ought to be diligent with
that gift of divine Light which God has given, to find out the hidden things
of Darkness, in the heart of man, who by Obedience to the gift of Gods Grace,
may come to understand the Lords Will to be done in their Thoughts, Words, and
Actions, which work will bring honor to the Name of the Lord, and Peace to
their own Souls; for he that brings his Deeds to the Light, they are made
manifest by the Light, whether they are wrought in God, through faith and
Obedience to the gift of his Grace; for the promise of God by Christ, is to the
obedient part) for his Children are made a free and Willing People, to serve
him with uprightness of Heart, Mind, Thoughts, Word and Actions) for the carnal
Thoughts of man brings Death over the soul, but the spiritual Thoughts of man
bring Life; for to be carnally minded, is Death, but to be spiritually minded,
is Life and Peace with God in Christ. S^ as there is but two Spirits which bare
rule, the one or the other has the Commanding part, in the heart and mind of
man; for the Mind cannot serve two Masters, that is, no man can serve God and
Mammon; for while the Mind is in obedience to the Spirit of Life, it overcomes
the Spirit of Death, but while it remains in obedience to the Spirit of
Antichrist, it becomes dead, and remains with Death, which state has no
relation to the things of Christ's Kingdom; for God is not a God o^ that which
is dead in sin and Tre^pass against the heavenly divine gift of his Spirit of
Grace, Life and Light, which come by Jesus Christ, whole Spirit is not of this
World, neither are they of this World, whose Minds are begotten of God,
thorough him, to live in Obedience to his holy Truth, but the Spirit of
Antichrist is of this World, and rules the Thoughts Words and Actions of them
who are the Children of this World, which by subjecting to his Power, they
believe that in the best of men, sin remains all the days of this Life,
which Faith is begotten by the spirit of Antichrist, which rules in the
Children of Disobedience, whose minds are drawn into works of Darkness, which
are begotten by their Father, the Devil, the Prince and Power of the Air, whose
^iry Kingdom remains in the Heart and Mind of all Unrighteous men, who are
bewitched by the spirit of Antichrist, that they should not obey the Truth of
God, made manifest by Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.1. by whose Spirit the heart and
mind in the righteous are governed from vain and evil Thoughts; for every
Thought, Word and Action that tends not to the honor of God, it proceeds from
the lust of the corrupted Desire, which yields its Obedience to the Spirit and
Power of Antichrist, who is that Devil and Enemy to God and all Mankind, and
his they are if they obey; for his Servants ye are, to whom ye obey, whether of
Sin unto Death or of Obedience unto Righteousness, Romans 6.16. So that Death,
Hell and Destruction remains in all Thoughts Words and Actions, which proceed
not from the Power of God, in Obedience to the gift of his Spirit by Jesus
Christ; for all that is not of Gods Righteousness by the Spirit and Power of
Christ, is of Unrighteousness, by the Spirit and Power of Antichrist. So that
all sin is of Unrighteousness, and all unrighteousness, is of the Devil, who
sins from the beginning; and he that commits sin, it is of the Devil; but
whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, for his seed remnineth in him,
and he cannot Sin, because he is born of God, 1 John 3.8.9. Then let no man be
deceived by the Spirit of Antichrist, or by any of his Disciples, for he that
does Righteousness, is righteous, even as he is Righteous, 1 John 3.7. for
whosoever commits Sin, is a Servant to sin, Joh. 8.34. Then he that is a
Servant to sin, is free from Righteousness; for the wages of sin is Death, and
God is not a God of the Dead, but a God of them that are made alive, by the
Power of his Spirit, in and thorough the Lord Jesus Christ, whose gift of
Righteousness is Life eternal, that is, to them that keep close in their minds
with the Lord, by which they may not be drawn into the Antichristian Faith of
any one thing, with which the Devil seeks to destroy the Soul; for God is not
mocked, whatsoever men some, that they shall also reap; for he that sows to
his flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption, but he that soveth to the
Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life everlasting, Gal 6.7.8. Now every-Spirit
that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God, and every
Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of
God. 1 John 4 2.3. Then that which appears from a spirit in men, which does not
lead from sinning against the gift of Gods holy Spirit, their so living does
manifestu^ a unrighteous Life is toward God, and that unrighteous Life is in
obedience to the Spirit of Antichrist, which denies that Christ is come in
the flesh; of which Spirit there are many, which have entered the false
Prophets, which are gone out into the World, by which many are deceived; for
they are of the World, and speak of the World, and the World hears them, 1
^oh. 4.5. but the Children of God are begotten by the Power of his own Spirit,
in and thorough the Lord Jesus Christ, and by Grace, through Faith in him,
their works are of Righteousness before him, who is the Author and the Finisher
of his own Work, in all them whose Works of Righteousness manifest Jesus Christ
to be come in the flesh, which the works of the Unrighteous do not do.

CHAP. XVIII. Concerning the true Language, and proper Nature of Speech, and
the true Names of the Days and Months. And also the Unrighteousness of Peoples
vain living.
Through the Unrighteousness of Peoples careless living unto God, they are got
into a habitual custom of vain living before the Lord, not regarding to live up
in Obedience to the the Spirit of Truth, which lead, Gods faithful People into
the true Nature of Speech, and to call the Days of the Week, and the Months of
the Year by their proper Names, according as by that Spirit of God they are
recorded for People to learn, in the holy Scriptures of Truth, which givs a
holy Testimony, of the Righteous in days past, who lived in all manner of good
Life, and holy Conversation before the Lord, speaking their words in the true
Language, which is the proper Nature of Speech, and calling the Days of the
Week, and and Months of the Year by their proper Names, which holy Practice,
does witness against this Generation of evil Doers, who accostom themselves to
a vain way of living, both in Words and Actions, by which it does manifest,
that they are Lovers of their own vain Ways, and not the Lovers of Gods holy
Truth, which leads every upright hearted man and woman, to keep in the true
Language and proper Nature of Speech unto all men, without respect of Person to
any; for that which the World terms Re^pect, with Hand, Hat, and Knee, and You
to the Rich, and Thee and Thou to the Poor is a respecting of M^ns Persons,
which is a transgressing of Gods holy Law, for they that respect men's persons,
commit sin, and are convinced of the Law, as Transgressors, Jam 2.9. for thee
and thou is proper to all men, and you to more then one for God said thee and
thou to Adam, and Adam, said thee and thou to God again, Genesis 3.12, 13. and the
same was maintained between ^acob and his Sons, Genesis 43.49. which proves, that
thee and thou was the true Nature of Speech between God and Man, and Men and
their Children, as Jeptha, a Judge in Israel did thee and thou his Daughter,
and his Daughter, did thee and thou her Father again, Judge. 11.3, 5, 6. And the
three Children did thee and thou to the King, and also Paul to Agrippa. And the
same form of thee and thou to a single person, and you or ye to more then one,
was prectised by Christ to his Disciples, and the same by the Disciples (as
thee and thou) to Christ again, which is the true Nature of speech, as
contained in holy Record, thoroughout the Scriptures of Truth, though some have
wrested diverse Scriptures, thinking thereby to prove a lawfullness of saying
thee and thou to more then one, which does not prove that you on ye is proper
to a single person; for those scriptures which they have wrested, do manifest,
that when the spirit of God in his Servants and Messengers of his Truth, did
speak by the Spirit of Truth, to a Nation, Church or People, it was proper to
say either you or ye, or thou, which did include a Nation, Church, or People,
as one body in the cause, which was from the Lord, either for or against them,
which is not the same between man and man, or between man or men, further then
the cause does concern a body of People, which in the cause are included, as
one Man; for as the Body has many Members, them many Members make but one
Body, even so is it with a Body of People, whether in Church, or state; the
many Members of that Church or state, make but one complete Body of People,
which is very proper to say, thee or thou to that Body of People, but not
proper to say thee or thou to a part of them, as they are divided; for though
it was proper, according to Truth, to say, thee and thou to Jerusalem, yet we
never find that the Spirit, of God did direct any to say you or ye to a single
Jew, nor thee and thou to more then one, except as aforesaid, to a Body of
People, whom the Spirit of God did as many Members includes one Body.) But then
why not you to a single Person, which includes all the Members of that Body?
because when the spirit of God did you or ye to a Body of People, it was that
all might understand the Lords Cause, which was either for or against them. Now
though the body of a single Person has many Members, yet the Understanding of
that body is but one, which Understanding comprehends the matter or cause,
which the other does relate; for when the Spirit of God speaks by the
Messengers of his Truth to a Body of People; they do not speak to all the
Members of the Body of each Man and Woman, but to the Body, which includes each
man and woman a Member of that Body; so that it is very improper, and
inconsistent with Truth, for People to plead, that when they say you or ye to a
single Person, they speak as including all the Members of that single Persons
Body; for which they have no warrant from the Spirit of God, nor Example from
any that we read of in the holy Scriptures of Truth, Mat. 23.37 Luke 13.34. Isa
43 5. but to keep to the proper true Nature of Speech, which God did set forth
in the beginning, and the same by his People has been in practice throughout
all Ages, the hight of Pride is such in many People of this Age, that they
abhor to receive thee and thou to themselves, in which words they themselves
render their Prayers to the Lord, which does manifest their Disobedience to
Gods holy truth, which leads to pr^^tise every good Work, which does not appear
in them which will not in love receive thee and thou to themselves, without
esteeming of it as ill breeding; then what breeding are such of, who render
their Prayers to God, ^n or by the same words of thee and thou, which they
^ccount Ill Breeding in the People of God, whose Communication is Yea, Yea, and
Nay, Nay, and Thee and Thou ^o a single Person, and You and Ye to more then
one, but ^vil Communication corrupts good Manners, and it is ^il for People to
live in that which is inconfident with ^^e Truth of God, who brings forth his
Children with the same Breeding, which in days past his People did manifest,
by their upright living in all manner of good Life and holy Conversation which
in this day among them account the Scriptures the Rule of Life, how contrary
are they to the Scriptures, in the words and actions of of their Life? for
among many, if not the greatest part of them called Christians in this day, who
will not in love receive thee and thou from their Parents, neither will Parents
in love receive thee and thou from their Children, nor the Rich from the Poor;
for according to men's outward Wealth, or their place in Authority and outward
Power, do Peopler spect them in their words and actions, as with Hat, Hand and
Knee, you Sir, and your Servant Sir, and of the like, too tedious to mention,
which are so many and ridiculous, that by such Fruits, with many of the like
nature, they may with the spirit of God b^ Judged, that they are far from a
L^^^e or the holy Scriptures and the Spirit of God, which is their Condemation;
(...) there is matter sufficient con^ained in the Scriptures for People to
learn the proper Nature of speech, and to call the Days and Months as there
recorded ^or every man's learn (...) and not to practice you and ye to a single
Person, and the or thou to more then one, neither to call the Days (...)
Months by that Name which the Heathens, and the (...) Saxon Pagns have put upon
them, according as will (...) low, in their Idolatry, when they worship the
Sun, fr^ which they called the first day of the week Sunday, a^ the second day
of the week they worshipped the M^ from whence came Monday; and the third day
of (...) week, they worshipped the Planet called Tuisko, (...) which came
Tuesday; and so following, from their I Woden came Wednesday; and from their
Idol Thor (...) Thursday; and from their Idol Friga came Friday; (...) from
their Idol Seater came Saturday. And the Heathens called Mars the godd of
Battle, and from thence they called the first Month March; and Venus they
called the godd of Love and Beauty, and from thence they called the second
Month A^ril; and Maja, a H^athen Gods, called Flora and Flowris, were called
the Gods of Flowers; and unto Maja, the Heathen Idolators used to sacrifice,
from thence was the Third Month, called May, and upon the first day of the same
Month, they used to keep Floralia i. e. Feasts to the two Goddesses of Flowers,
viz. Flora and Flowris; and Flora was a Strumpet in Rome, ^^at used on the
first day of the month to set up a May Pole before her Door, to entice her
Lovers, from whence came May Poles to be first observed; and from the Heathen
Gods, Juno, is the fourth Month called June; and in honor to Jalius Caeser,
a Roman Emperor, is the (...) Month called July; and the sixth Month took its
Name August, in honor of Agustus Caesar, the Emperor; and September, October
November and December are called from the Latins; and Janus, a King in Italy
was for his Wisdom pictured with two faces, whom they honored as a Godd, from
this name Janus was the eleventh Month called January; and Saturnus, Plato,
Februs, were called the Godds of Hell, whom the Heathens said had the rule of
the evil Spirits there, and from Pluto Februs was the Twelfth Month called
February. Now as to them who have been, and yet are accounted Gospel Ministers
of Christ, how have they neglected the work of God, to let People stray from
the outward Letter of the holy Scriptures, to follow the p^actice of Pagans and
Heathens, as before related, whose Fruits are not agreeable with the Truth of
God, as by holy Record appears; and for a Tree to be good, that brings forth
evil Fruit all its days, is a thing impossible; for men do not use to gather
Grapes of Thorns, nor Figgs of Thistles; and for T^^chers with their People to
live in a Life of these things, which are so contrary to the holy Scriptures,
and the Spirit of God, by which they have been given forth, does manifest that
such People are only Christians in the outward Name, but not in the inward Li^e
and Nature of what God requires, that every true Christian should be.

CHAP. XIX. Concerning Prophesying, and Women's speaking in the Church.
Prophesying signifies Preaching, which is declaring the Word of God, as they
receive his Will and Mind, by his Spirit of Grace, in and through the gift of
his own Spirit by Jesus Christ, whose gift of good spirit of Grace, is by
measure in the Male and in the ^emale alike, who are made partakers of his
blessed Truth, and in this day called of God by Jesus Christ, to declare his
Truth, as the holy Men and Women were in days past; for he has promised, To
pour out of his Spirit upon all flesh, and among the faithful, their old Men
dream Dreams, and their Young Men see Visi^ns, and their Sons and Daughters
Prophecy. But many have wrested the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 14 35 Let our Wom^^
keep silence in the Church, for it is not permitted them to speak but are
commanded to be under Obedience; and if they will lea^^ any thing, let them ask
their Husbands at home, for it is a sham^ for a Woman to speak in the Church.
Now the Apostle words do not include all speaking by Women in the Church which
if they did, it would then follow, that every true believing Woman is debarred
from improving the gift of Gods holy Spirit among his People, which are the
Church of Christ; for by measure is the gift of God, by Jesus Christ, to the
Man and Woman alike, wherefore they may pray and prophecy in the Church of
Christ; for all may prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be
comforted, 1 Cor. 14.31. So that here is no tie nor bar from believing Women's
speaking in the Church of Christ, but deparred by them which are not the true
Church; for every Woman that praveth and prophecyeth with her Head uncovered,
dishonors her Head, 1 Cor. 11.15. By which it is evident, that their Women
did in that day speak in the Church; for its of no Edification for any Woman to
prophecy alone by her self, but where two or three are gathered together in the
Name of the Lord, there will his Spirit be in the midst o^ them; which proves,
that where two or three (Male or Female) are met together in the Lords Name,
that there is his Church; and whether Male or Female, if called of him, they
are to speak, which is not that speaking which Women in the Church are not
permitted to do. For whereas they are not permitted to speak in the Church, it
is to be understood relating to the Government of the Church, in which they are
to keep silence, and be under Obedience, as also in the Law; for the outward
Government of the Church God has committed unto men, of which if the Women
will learn, they are to ask their Husbands at home; for it is a shame for a
Woman to speak in the Church, relating to the Government thereof; for in so
(...) she comes to usurp in Government over the man, 1 T^o. 2.12. for Christ is
the Head of his Church, and the Head of every Man is Christ, and the Head of
the Woman is the Man, and the Head of Christ is God, 1 Cor. 11.3. And as to
such Women whose Husbands are Unbelievers, or that have no husband, a believing
Brother has liberty to inform them in things relating to the Government of the
Church; in which the Women Prophets in days past, did not rule in the
Government of the Church, as may be read of Miriam and Deborah, who were
Prophetesses in their day, Exodus 15 20. Judge. 4.4 and Haldah the Prophetess,
which prophesied of the evil to come upon Jerusalem 2 Chronicles. 34.22.23. And we
read of Anah that prophesied concerning Redemption; for it is said, she coming
in that instant, gave Thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spoke of him to all
them that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem; which all that looked for
Redemption, did include the whole Church of Christ in Jerusalem; and at that
instant of her coming in, and giving Thanks likewise, was, when the Church was
gathered together, and Christ himself at that time in the midst of his Church
in which, at that time, Anah the Woman Prophetess did speak, Luke 2.27. to v.
0. And Phillip had four Daughters which did prophecy, Acts 21.8, 9. And the
Lord has promised, That he will pour out his Spirit upon all Flesh, and their
Sons and Daughters shall prophecy; and their old Men shall dream Dreams, and
their Young Men shall s^e Visions, and upon the Servants and Handmaids will
the Lord pour out his Spirit, Act. 2 17, 18. Joel 2.28, 29. By which it
appears, that prophesying is not altogether ceased among the People of God,
whose promise does continue among the faithful, whom he has called, both Male
and Female, to preach the everlasting Gospel of Jesus Christ, and by his good
spirit of Life, Light and Grace are they lead to preach, in order as becomes
the Gospel so to do, that the Prophets may speak two or three, and the others
to judge; and if any thing be ravealed to another that sits by, let the
first hold his p^ace, that all may prophecy one by one, that all may learn and
be comforted; for the Spirit of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; for
God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the
Saints; but if any he ignorant, let him be ignorant, 1 Cor. 14, to v. 38. But
all covet to prophecy and forbid not to speak with Tongues, verse. 39. Now
among such Professors, where these things are not in practice, according to the
Record of the holy Scriptures, which are for Peoples learning, that by the
Spirit of God they may follow Christ, as the Apostles have done for Example,
and to mark them which walk other ways; then whom is it that true Believers
should mark, but them who pretend to be Gospel Ministers, and with their
Hearers are not in the holy Practice of the faithful in days past, whom they
are commanded to follow, as they have followed Christ, which until such time as
they reform, in obedience to Gods holy Truth, and are found to worship him in
the Spirit and in the Truth, they are to be marked by all true Believers in
Christ Jesus, To have a form of Godliness, but deny the Power, who are ever
learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth.

CHAP. XX. Concerning Powers.
ALL Power is of God, either by commission or permission; Let every Soul be
subject to the higher Power, for there is no Power but of God the Powers that
be are ordained of God, Romans 13.1. The Apostles words are very weighty, for all
to Consider, and not to do as many say, that if they live where Governors and
Rulers are, they must be subject to their Laws, which (they say) are ordained
of God, for the benefit of Church and State, otherwise (say they) we cannot be
subject to all Powers which are ordained of God. Now this I do believe, that
all Powers which are to keep down sin and evil, that they are ordained of God,
but for any to think that the holy Apostle did include the Powers of Darkness,
to be ordained of God, is gross Ignorance in them that so believe; for all the
Powers of Darkness are of the Devil, who is the Father of all Unrighteousness;
and God never ordained the Devil, nor any of his Dark Towers, which rule in the
Children of Disobedience, of whom some have asserted to me, That God made the
Devil, as he now is a Devil; but its through Disobedience to God, and Obedience
to the Power of the Devil, men come to grow into such gross Ignorance, that
they will venture to the hazard of their souls, to say that which they neither
know nor understand; for the Powers of Darkness, which God permits to rule in
the Children of Disobedience, are for a trial of his Peoples Faith, who are not
to submit in active obedience to the dark Powers of the Earth, among
unrighteous men, which cause the righteous to suffer for the Truth of God, and
Testimony of Jesus, which if any refuse Obedience to suffer for the Truth of
God, and Name of his Son Jesus Christ, they cannot be his Disciples; for he
that is not willing to part with his Life for the sake of Christ, can never be
made partaker of his heavenly Riches in the Life to come; for he that denies
Crhist before men, he will be denied of Gods Kingdom by Jesus Christ in the
World to come; so that the Righteous are not to be subject, in active Obedience
they are to submitt, and that for Conscience sake, well knowing that their
reward will follow in heavenly Riches of Gods Kingdom, where the Wicked shall
never come. So all Powers that be, are of God, who permits the Devils Power, in
unrighteous men, for a trial of his Peoples Faith, and that he may gain honor
to his own Name, through their damnation, which fullfils the Apostles saying,
Let every soul be subject to the higher Power, for there is no Power but what
is of God, either by commission or permission; for the Power of the Devil, God
does permit in unrighteous men, whose Power the rightous are not actually to
obey; for if they should actually they any unrighteous Power, in so doing they
resist the Ordinance of God, and to themselves receive Damnation, Romans 13.1^.
which according to the Apostles words, no man is actually to obey any Power,
save the Power of God, which is saving to them, that through Faith live in
Obedience to his Truth, according as the holy Apostle did or example, who
hinself was accounted one of the grea^est Transgressors of men's Laws, in that
he was not in ^ctual Obedience to any of their dark Powers, which ^ere then in
his time, for which cause he himself suffered (...) the Name of Jesus, through
whose Power his People ^ome to be redeemed from all actual Obedience to the
^eviles Power, which rules in Unrighteous men, which ^ould force People from
their Obedience to God, which ^ermits the Disobedient to wrest the holy
Scriptures to ^eir own Destruction, in which state they would bind (...) others
to believe in their Antichristian Faith, that (...) is of God, and that if any
man resist their Power, that (...) resists the Ordinance of God, and to
himself receives ^amnation, which is the very way of promoting the Kingdom of
Antichrist, through whose Power many weak People are seduced from the true
Faith, and have distrusted in the Power of God, by their actual Obedience, of
conforming to the dark Powers of the Devils setting up in wicked men; but the
day will come, which haltens toward the wicked, whom the Lord by his mighty
Power will overthrow; for all power is committed unto him, whose power is over
the power of the Devil, which the power of God suffers to rule, that he may see
who will serve him, the God of all Truth, which permits the Devil to set up and
pull down, even to the making waste o^ one another, but they that truly serve
the Lord, shall stand forever; for he is God and Lord over all, whose almighty
Power suffers one dark Power to pull down one, and to set up another, until his
time comes, whose right it is to rule in Truth and Righteousness in the heart
of every man and woman, and in the mean time, they that rule for God, are not a
Terror to good works, but to the evil; for they are the Ministers of God for
the Peoples good, that they that do evil might be afra^d; for he bareth not the
Sword in vain, but is the Minister of God, and a Revenger to execute wrath upon
them that do evil, Romans 13.3.4. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only
for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake, Verse. 5. and for this cause pay you
Tribute also; for they are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this very
thing, Verse. 6. Render therefore their due, Tribute to whom Tribute is due,
Custom to whom Custom is due, Fear to whom Fear is due, Honor t^ whom Honor
is due; owe no man any thing, but love on another, Romans 13.7, 8. Now them that
are faithfully in Obedience to the Power of Gods gift of Grace by Jesus Christ,
they fear the Lord, and work his Righteousness through which they live in the
love of God toward all men, which is the fullfilling of the Law, Verse. 8. in
which sta^e o^ true love they render to all men (rich and poor) whatever the
Lord requires of them to do; for their obedience is to the power of his own
spirit, which leads every Just and upright man in Power, to rule for Gods
Honor, through which they have Dominion over the evil Doers, and praise unto
them that do well, such Rulers bare not the Sword in ^aine; but he that
respects the Person of any man, in Justice and Judgment, is a Transgressor of
Gods holy Law, and is convinced of the Law, as a Transgressor, Jam. 2.^. for
they that rule for God, do no unrighteousness in Judgment, neither do they
respect the Persons of the Poor, nor honor the Persons of the Mighty, but in
Righteousness judge they their Neighbor, Lev 19.15. for they hear the small,
as well as the great, without respecting the persons of either, thereby they do
not fear the face of any man, for the Judgment is the Lords, which if there be
any thing too hard for them they are to wait on the Lord, who in his own due
time will manifest the truth of the Cause, by which they may come to render
true Judgment, according to the mind of God, Deuteronomy. 1.17. but if they respect
men's Persons, and wrest Judgment, and receive Gifts, then they are out of Gods
way, and rule not for his Honor, but for their own Honor, and self ends among
men; for a Gift blinds the Eyes of the Wise, and causes them to pervert the
words of the Righteous Dan. 6.19. Now that Honor which is of Hand, Hat and
Knee, to each other, it is not of God, for the Honor of God dwells in the
heart of every faithful man; which is faithful to what the Lord has ^^mmitted
to his charge; for it is the Lord that searches the heart, and tries the
reigns of the heart, and declares unto man what is his thoughts; which no man
can know by the Hat, Hand, and Knee of another, for which Honor they have no
express command from God, nor example from his Servants in days past, who in
their day did render Tribute, Custom, Fear and Honor in its right place, which
at all times does not belong to one and the same Person, but as he appears for
Gods cause, is there Honor due to him, as in the case of Paul before Festus
and Agrippa, the one appearing in the truth of Paul's cause, and the other by
Paul almost persuaded to be a Christian, which Noble Principle in them, was
worthy of Honor from Paul, Act. 26.2.28, 31. 32 and diverse other instances do
the holy Scriptures afford, of that noble Spirit appearing in man of outward
Power, whom they of this Generation esteem as Heathens, but be what they will,
or whatsoever they were, the Lord and his People well know, that them so
esteemed, their works toward the Lords People in their day, do condemn the
works of many men toward the People of God in this day, which do give Honor
unto them, unto whom it does belong, and not to honor them which honor not
the Lord; for they whose works bring no honor to the Name of the Lord, they
are not to be honored by his People; for Old Age to many is lengthened out by
many days, that the condemnation, of him that fears not God, and works not his
righteousness, may be the greater; for though the Wicked may live to a hundred
years, so living and so dying, they are accursed (...) but the Hoary Head is a
Crown of Glory, if it be found in the way of Righteousness, Prove. 16.31. By
which we see and know, that God has no respect for them that live not in the
way of his Truth, for Old Age is as a Judgment to some, which desire to dye,
because of outward Troubles in Body, and Horror of Conscience for their evil
Deeds, but Death as an addition to Gods Judgments from such flies away, others
again, for their unrighte ous living in sin and Rebellion against God, are (by
his Just Judgments) cut off in the midst of their days.

And as to such Rulers that trouble the People of God from day to day, and from
time to time, they may read their Portion Luke 16.19, to 24. but the People of
the Lord cannot be brought into bondage by the Power of unrighteous Laws, made
by wicked men, to ensnare and hinder the faithful of their Obedience to God,
who does abhor the dark Works of unrighteous Rulers, whose wicked Works against
the Lords People, are done in pretense of some service for God, when that they
are altogether for the service of Antichrist, and the promoting of the Devils
Kingdom, which the Lords People, by the Power of God, are kept and preserved
from touching, tasting or handling with any unclean thing, well knowing, that
the Wages of Sin is Death, but the gift of God is Life Everlasting; so then
Death remains in the unrighteous Powers of Wicked and Ungodly Men, who, Balaam
like, love the Wages of Unrighteousness, which the dumb Ass declared against,
when he forbid the madness of the wicked Prophet, who had forsaken the right
Way of the Lord, to obey the dark Power of an Earthly Ruler; So the portion of
Balaam will be the Inheritance of them that do not obey the Power of God by
Jesus Christ, whose Power is the higher Power, unto which every soul is to be
subject; for his Power is ordained of God, and there is no other Power, but the
Power of God, which is by Jesus Christ, whom all men are commanded to obey; for
by and through his Power are the faithful supported in all their Sufferrings
for his Truth, which is the Condemnation of all unrighteous Judges.

CHAP. XXI. Concerning Oaths, which includes all Swearing.
IN the first ^ovenant the Lords People were commanded to Swear by the Name of
God, in which time of the Law Oaths were observed, in that Covenant which was
faulty for if that Covenant had been faultless then should no place been sought
for the second, Heb. 8.7. Now that Ordinance did not ma^e perfect, as
pertaining to the Conscience, by which there came to be an end to that
Covenant, and a better H^pe was brought in, which stood upon better Promises;
for that Covenant, and the Ordinances thereof were only to continue till the
time of Reformation, which stood only in Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings,
and carnal Ordinances imposed on them, until the time of Reformation, Heb.
9.10. Now Christ, the everlasting Covenant of God to his People, fullfilled all
Righteousness under the Law, by which the Covenant of Grace took place, in
which the Oath ended, for Christ is the Oath of God, and the end of all Oaths,
Strife and Contention. Mat. 5.33. to 37. It was said of old Time. Thou shall
not Forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths, but I say
unto you, Svvear not at all. Plain Doctrine, easy to be understood, commanded
by Christ. Not at all to swear, or not to Swear at all; there is not a plainer
and more strict Command contained in the holy Scriptures of Truth, than for
people Not to Swear at all, which does exclude from all manner of Oaths,
otherwise Christ would not have mentioned Oaths, which were observed in the
first Covenant of Works under the Law, in which time they were not to forswear
themselves, but to perform their Oaths unto the Lord, which were to be
conscientiously performed, according to Truth, in what they were engaged, or
had engaged themselves in Gods Name to do. Now Christ, the Oath of God is come,
and in him is fullfilled the Righteousness of the Law; for he is the end of all
Oaths, Strife and Contention; and the holy Apostles followed Christ's Doctrine,
and exhorted People to follow them, as for Ensample they were Followers of
Christ, whose Command they obeyed, and directed People to perform the same, and
that was, Above all things not to Swear at all, but to let their Yea be Yea and
their Nay, Nay, lest they fall into Condemnation, Mat. 5.33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
James 5.12. Now the Apostles exhorting the Brethren to observe and keep close
to the Truth of God, according to the Doctrine of Christ, which was, Not to
Swear at all; which does manifest, by his calling them Brethren, that they whom
he exhorted not to Swear at all, were Brethren in Covenant with the Apostle in
the Church of Christ else why called he them Brethren? then if Brethren with
the holy Men of God in the Church of Christ, then why should any presume to
say, his Exhortation from Swearing did only include common Swearing, which it
so, it must then follow, that there were common Svvearers in Covenant with
the holy Apostle in the Church of Christ, which thing I do not believe, that
any common Svvearers were in Covenant with the Apostle James in the Church;
but that as they were Observers of the Oath in the Law, he exhorted them to
believe in Christ, who had fulfilled all Righteousness contained in the Law,
in which the Oath was contained also. So that by fullfilling the Righteousness
of the Law, or that righteousness of Works which was required in the Law, he
also fulfilled the Righteousness of the Oath^ and being the end of all Oaths,
Strife and Contention, be exhorted the People to believe in him, who is the
Way, the Truth and the Life of Light, which lights every true Child of God,
begotten through faith in him, to speak the Truth each to the other in all
cases whatever without Swearing, which is according so what the Apostle James
does also direct, viz. Above all things, my Brethren, Swear not at all, but let
your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than these, is evil;
and we know that all evil is for condemnation, neither do the People of God
cause any to Swear, but desire that all may speak Truth, and that they which
speak the Truth, and they that swear the Truth, may be received under one
Penalty, without transgressing the Kings Law, by which men might live in
outward peace, as to these things of Swearing, or not Swearing.

CHAP. XXII. Concerning Wars and Fightings, being contrary to the Command of
God by Jesus Christ, and Example of his holy Apostles.
IF People would but follow Truth and Righteousness, they would do to one
another as they would be done unto, which is the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 12.
Luke 6.31. then would there be an end of all Wars and Fightings, which until
men come to the first Ministration of the Law and the Prophets, to do even as
they would be done unto, they are far from the Covenant of Life, Light and
Grace by Jesus Christ, whose doctrine to his Discip^es, by many is not minded,
as they ought to do, or else they would put up the Sword; for Christ has said,
All they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword, Mat. 26.52. whose
Doctrine is in general for all men to observe and do, that thereby they may
perform the command of God, and live the Life of Obedience unto him, who has
said, all they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword; by which
People may see and know, (besides what daily experience teaches) that they
which take the Sword, perish with the sword; by which they may see the woeful
effect of their use of means, as they call it, which is, according to the
spirit of God by his Prophet, ^ursed b^ the man, that trust th^in man, and
makes Flesh his Arm Jer. 17.5. Then is not man departed from the command of
the Lord, when he takes the Sword, with which Christ has said, they that take
it; shall perish with it? Can there be a more plainer saying in the holy
Scriptures for People to understand, then the saying of Christ to Peter, Put up
the Sword, for all they that take the sword, shall Perish with the Sword; which
does manifest ^he use of the Sword, to destroy the lives of each other, not to
be the ^rdinance of God; for Christ came not to destroy men's ^ves, but to save
and make alive. And his holy Apostle ^ueries, Do not Wars and fightings come
even of men's Lusts, that war in their members? Jam. 4.1. which notwithstanding
Christ, and his holy Apostles their sayings, People ^un back in their minds, as
Israel, when in distress, turned their minds to Egypt for help; even so do
People distrust (...) this day, as if there was no God in Israel to save, but
(...) run back in their minds to what Abraham and David, and diverse others of
Gods faithful Servants did against the Enemies of God in the time of the Law,
which is no way lawful for Christians to do in the time of the Gospel; for the
holy men of God, in the time of the Law, did destroy People by Cursing them in
the Lords Name, and destroyed m^n, others by fire from Heaven, which if such
things were lawful in the time of the Gospel, as was lawful in the time of
the Law, then every false Preacher is to be destroyed now in this Gospel day,
even as they were destroyed in the time of the Law; for though they do not
preach up a false God, yet they preach the true God in a false way, which no
whit differs in sin against God in this Gospel day, no more then the sin of
Baals priests did in the time of the Law; but as the Lords People are to pray,
and do pray, that the Lord may turn the hearts of all such to preach the true
God in the true way of living unto him in Truth and Righteousness, with
uprightness of heart and mind, according as of God, by Jesus Christ, they are
commanded to do, then would they preach against the use of the Sword, and pray
for the return of their Enemies, which is according to the command of Christ,
who directs not any of his true begotten Children, to follow Abraham, David nor
any other of the Lords Servants, with the use of the Sword in the time of the
Law, which was to cut down, and lay waste their Enemies Country, that it might
be an outward holy Land for the Lords People to remain in, and serve him in
Truth and sincerity of heart and mind, according to the Commandments of God
which they had received so that all what was done in the time of the Law, in
respect of wars and fightings, they were all to end in the time of the Gospel;
for Christ is the end of all war, strife and contention, for Christ's day was
before Abraham, who trained up his Servants to fight the Lord Battle against
the outward Ennemies of Gods Truth, which is fulfilled by Jesus Christ, who
has commanded us to pray for Enemies; for he suffered Death for all, and does
not desire that any should perish, but that all might turn and live, and for
that end, he does not withold the Sword of his Spirit from his Servants and
Children, but trains them up to fight the Lords Battle against the spiritual
Enemies, which oppose his Truth, and strive to hinder the prosperity of his
Peoples peace, toward the holy Land or spiritual abode in heavenly Rest, which
Enemies are the World, the Fresh and D^vil, and all whatever else does tend to
hinder the soul of true enjoyment (with ^he Lord) of Rest; so that now in this
Gospel day, it is by the Sword of the Spirit, by which the Kindom of God is
advanced in the hearts of his People, who pray to the Lord o^ Life to teach
their spiritual hands to right the Lords Battle against the Enemies of their
Peace with him, so as Israel of old were to destroy all Gods outward Enemies
with the outward Sword, for the outward advancing the outward Kingdom of
Israel, in the outward La^d of Canaan, so are the People of God in this day,
with the inward Sword of his spirit, to maintain now in their inward Travail to
the heavenly Canaan, against all the inward Enemies which would hinder the
advancing of Gods Kingdom by Jesus Christ in his People, by whom they receive
strength to fight the Lords spiritual Battle against the Enemies of their soul;
and as Israel of old, did not perform the command of the Lord by the mouth of
his Prophets, to destroy all them outward Enemies out of their Land, for which
cause they remained as Thorns in their sides, so will it be with them, that
reserve alive any one inward Enemy to Gods Truth; for every Enemy to his Truth,
seeks to draw the heart and mind from serving God in the true and living way,
even as in the outward with Israel, in that day of the Lords command, to
destroy all them that were outward Enemies to his Truth, which Israel, not
fulfilling the word of the Lord, them Enemies were as snares and gins to draw
their minds from serving the true and living God, by which they not obeying the
word of the Lord, they by their enemies were drawn into Idolatry to worship the
gods of the Nation, which were no godds to save Israel from the just hand of
God, through whose just Judgments they received their reward from ^he Lord,
which suffered them, for their disobedience, to be destroyed by the hand of
their outward Enemies, so as Israel was to fulfill Gods command to destroy
their outward Enemies, by, or with the outward Sword of the Lords outward
Battle, against them that were outward Enemies to the true Worship of God in
that day, even so are the inward Enemies of man's soul to be destroyed by or
with the spiritual Sword, which is to fight the Lords spiritual Battle, against
the spiritual Enemies, which would hinder the inward man of the true inward
Worship of God in the Spirit and in the Truth, so as the Rebellion in days
past, did not regard the Sword of the Lord, who of long time after did strive
with his People in that day of their outward War, against their outward
Enemies, and they would not hearken to obey the Word of the lord by the mouth
of his Prophets, but beat one and destroyed another, till at length, through
unbelief and hardness of heart, they crucified the Lord of Life, whom they put
to open shame without their City gates, for which cause, their day was over,
and their House became desolate, even so will it be with the Rebellious in this
day, who reserve Gods spiritual Enemies, by keeping them alive whom God has
appointed to be destroyed, which for not obeying the command of God by his Son,
the Lord of Li^e, but refuse the tenders of his Grace, by his gifts of divine
Light and Word of his Spirit, which keeps striving from day to day, and from
time to time, until their day be over, and House be left desolate; for the
Spirit of God will not always strive with man; which is matter of great
weight for all to consider, that they may so live in obedience to the
manifestation of Gods Spirit, that they may come to vvitness every evil Lust of
the heart, and corrupt desire of the mind, which are the inward Enemies to
God and man's Soul, that they may not reserve or keep any one alive, but keep
all down with the spiritual Svvord of Gods Power, in and through the Lord
Jesus Christ, who vvith-holds not from any that are vvilling to take up the
Cross to their natural will, and follovv him, to gain the Crown, which is far
from them that lust after War and Fighting with the outvvard Svvord, which
has no relation toward the promoting of Gods Kingdom by Jesus Christ, who
has said, all they that take the Sword shall perish with the Sword; which is
according to the Apostles Query, From whence come Wars and Fightings among you?
come they not hence, even of your Lusts, that war in your Members? ye lust, and
have not, ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain; ye fight and war, yet
ye have not, because ye ask amiss, that you may consume it upon your Lust, Jam.
4.1, 2, 3. Then they which ask cannot receive, because they ask that which
God has forbidden; they lust to kill, and ask. Victory, that they may spend it
on their lust, but their reward is to be according to Christ's words, all that
take the svvord, shall perish with the Svvord.

But some will say, If the Spirit move the Quaker, he will sell his coat and
buy a Sword to fight for his Religion.

To which I Answer,

That Christ sent his Disciples without Purse, and Scrip, and Shoos, yet they
lacked nothing, notvvithstanding he said unto them, He that has a Purse, let
him take it, and likewise his Scrip and he that has no Sword, let him sell his
Garment and buy one, for I say unto you, that this that is written, must yet be
accomplished in me. So he that had no Svvord, was to sell his Garment and buy
one, that the use of the Sword, according to the Righteousness of the Law,
might befulfilled by the Righteousness of Christ, who said unto them that two
Swords were enough, Luke 22.35, 36 37, 38. Then seeing that two Svvords were
enough, for the Disciples of Christ, by whom the use of the Svvord was
fulfilled by the Righteousness of Christ, as to the Law, then whose
Unrighteousness is that, which the many Svvords are fulfilling in this day?
for the use of the Sword, as to the Righteousness of the Law, is fulfilled by
the Righteousness of Christ, which suffered his Body to be pierced for the sins
of the People, that all might witness him to be the end of all War, Strife and
Contention; for if his Kingdom had been of this World, he could have prayed to
the Father, and the Father would have sent him more then twelve Legions of
Angels, and this was in full satisfaction to Peter, which was after Peter had
put up the Sword, when Christ said to him, all they that take the Sword, shall
Perish with the Sword, which doctrine is true, as by the Spirit of God, and
holy scripture, with daily experience, which teaches the same; but Faith and
Patience of the Lords People, witness the Kingdom of Christ, not to be of this
World, for which cause, they cannot fight for him with the carnal Sword; for
the Spirit of God does not change in his People, to command them from a thing
that is evil one time, and another time move them to do it; for the Spirit of
God, by Jesus Christ, moves his People in the way of holiness, in which holy
Way of Righteousness, they have born their faithful Testimonies for Gods holy
Truth, against Fighting, to defend their Faith by or with the carnal Sword, or
to take up any such like evil Practice again; for Gods way of bringing his
People nearer to him, is by Jesus Christ, whose Kingdom he will more and more
exalt in the hearts of the saithful, and not with the using of any carnal
Weapon, but by the Power of his own Spirit, Ezekiel. 4.6. in which state they
desire the welfare of all men, both Soul and Body, and not as many do, to kill
the Body and say, they desire the welfare of their Souls, whose Bodies they
have destroyed; for the Spirit of God means not any such thing, as to destroy
men's Bodies with the carnal Sword, and say they desire the welfare of their
souls; for according to Christ's Dostrine, he that destroys the Body of his
Enemy cannot love the Soul of his Enemy, for Christ came to save both Soul and
Body, and through the Power of God in him, are many redeemed, which by nature
were Enemies unto him; then what more can be said, are not men by rature
Enemies to one another? then come to the Law and the ^rophets, and do even as
ye would be done unto, for if you will be beloved of God in Christ, you must
love both Soul and Body of your Enemies, even as Christ has done unto them
which have been Enemies unto him, for Love covers a multitude of faults, and
Love leads them that are faithful to God, to keep the sayings of Christ, who
has commanded to pray for Enemies, and to do good unto all men, by which they
may be the Children of their Father which is in heaven, in which state the
Kingdom of this World may become the Kingdoms of Jesus Christ, that the
Prophets saying may be fulfilled, that Nation shall not lift up Sword against
Nation, neither shall they learn War any more, Isa. 2.4. Mich 4.3. until which
time, the saying of Christ is fulfilled, upon them that take the Sword, which
must perish with the Sword; then happy are they that are yet living in the
Body, and have known the end of all War, Strife and Contention, for unto their
Number Will be the gathering of them that shall not lift up the Sword one
against the other, neither learn war any more, of which Number are the despised
of this day, who strive to maintain Peace, by denying all Wars and Fightings
with the carnal Sword, or of the like Nature.

CHAP. XXIII. Concerning Conscience, which justifies the Ways of the Righteous,
and condemns the unrighteous Works of the Wicked.
MAny People talk of Conscience, among whom some there are whose Hearts are
so hardened, that their Consciences are seared, as with a hot Iron, such are in
the depth of Iniquity against God and his Christ, and many are they that have
so little regarded Conscience, that they have sinned out the Day of Gods Grace,
and many more are travailing in the broad Way of Destruction, and fevv there be
that know what Conscience is, or the Nature of a good Conscience toward God
and all men; for the Righteousness of God is held in a pure Conscience, by
which the fruits of their righteous Works are manifest in the sight of God,
and in the sight of men; but the Righteousness of the World is Unrighteousness
with God; for their Righteousness is held in a corrupt Conscience of their own
Unrighteousness, which is to themselves for Destruction; but where there is
any thing of Life in heart, mind and spirit, as to the things of God, which
concern the Wellfair of the Soul, there is Conscience at work, either excusing
or accusing, according as their words, thoughts and actions are before the
Lord, which searches the heart, and gives to every man according to the
Fruits of his own Works, whether of Faith and Obedience, or of Unbelief and
^isobedience, which the Witness of God with every and ^isobedience, which
either justify or condemn; for all men shall be tried by their Deeds done in
the Body, and accordingly they shall receive from the Lord, the righteous Judge
of Heaven and Earth, who will call all to an Account in the great Day of his
Coming to judge the Quick and the Dead, then happy will it be with them who
have made good Conscience in all things of this Life, toward God and all men;
for the Day is coming, in which Fear and Dread shall come upon all the Ungodly,
who have not made Conscience of Obedience to the Name of the Lord Jesus, who
is largely manifested, and many have and do believe and confess, and show
their Deeds, as many have already ^one, who have brought out their Books of
curious Arts, and burnt them in the presence of men, the loss of which to them
was gain, though the price thereof amounted to fifty thousand pieces of
Silver, Acts 19.17, 18, 19. and such were they, that by believing made good
Conscience before God in the sight of men, which if all would live up in
obedience to the Witness of God, they would come to the improvement of the
like Conscience before God.

CHAP. XXIV. Concerning the free Love of God, in and by the Lord Jesus Christ.
THe Love of God, by the gift of his Spirit of Light, Life and Grace, is free
for all men by Jesus Christ; for God so loved the World that he sent his only
beloved Son, the Lord Jesus, to suffer Death for all men, that abosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life, John 3.15, 16.
Then they that believe in Christ, are them that abide in the love of God, which
leads to keep all his Commandments, which he has, by the Son of his Love, the
Lord of Life, commanded all men to keep; for the great Love of God was
manifest, that Jesus, who was made a little lower then the Angels, for the
suffering of Death, crowned with Glory and Honor, that by the Grace of God
should taste Death for every man, Heb. 2.9. by which every man that hears his
Word, and believes on God, has Life, and shall not come into Condemnation,
but is passed from Death unto Life, John. 5.24. For the hour is coming, and now
is, when the dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear
shall live, Verse 25. which is according to the Apostles saying, that when he
was dead in T^espasses and Sins against God, the Voice of the Son of God
appeared unto him, who became willing to give up in true love to serve the Lord
with uprightness in heart and mind, by which thorough the Love o^ God in
Christ, he came, through Faith and Obedience, to receive that Crown of
Righteousness, which was not only in store for him, but for all them, that love
the appearance of the Lord Jesus in their own hearts, 2 Timothy 4.8. which is that
true be^eving on Christ, by which the faithful receive Life everlasting, John
6.7 for he that loves any thing more th^n the appearance of Gods Gift of
divine Light of Life by J^ins Christ, he is not in the true Love of God to
receive Christ; for he that will not come into obedience to the gift of Gods
Spirit in his own heart, he is free (through Disobedience from the Love of God
by Jesus Christ; for it is the Willing and Obedient, that are made partakers of
Gods heavenly Riches, by the Son of his Love, and Lord of Life, whose Life
remains hid to them that are not willing, in true love, to forsake the love of
all Visibles, and visible Delights for his sake, but they who in obedience to
him, are willing to forsake the love of Houses or Brethren, or Sisters, or
Fathers, or Mothers, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for the Name of Christ,
they shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inher^^ everlasting Life, Mat.
19.29. Luke. 8.29, 30. So that Life and Salvation is of no other way, then by
that love which is free for God, to serve him in what he has commanded by the
Lord Jesus Christ, who requires no less love from his People, then to serve him
in true love of Uprightness in heart, and mind; for he that was to come, is
come to redeem his People from spiritual Bondage, and they are to serve no
other lovers, but the Truth of God made manifest, by the Son of Gods love, the
Lord Jesus Christ, whose Commands they are to keep all the days of their
appointed time, and not to love any thing more then to serve the Lord with a
perfect heart and willing mind, out of which state the Soul is free from that
benefit which the faithful receive through the love of God by Jesus Christ;
for no man can remain in love to serve two Masters, he will either hate the
one, and love the other, or despise the one, and hold with the other; for no
man can serve God and mammon, Mat. 6.2. Luke 16.13. but many are they that
profess love to God in words, but their love is far from him in works, for he
that says his love is to God, and does not keep the Commandments of God, the
same is a Liar; and the love of God abides not in him for whosoever keeps
his word, in him is the Love of God perfected, and he is known by his walking,
even as he walked, Joh. 2.1, ^, 3, 4, 5, 6. for Christ is the Righteousness of
Gods Love to his People, and every one that does Righteousness, is born of him,
1 Ioh. 2.2^. then People who are in a profession of Gods Truth, and of loving
one another, and their Neighbors as themselves, which except such Professors
are come to witness the saving Love of God, and of his redeeming Power, through
Faith and Obedience, to the gift of his divine Light, and quickening Word of
his Spirit, their Profession is for Condemnation, because it remains dead, as
to the Love of God by Jesus Christ, in which state it is not he that says
Lord, Lord, that shall enter, but he that does the will of God, in love of
obedience to what he has required, which is to serve him and keep his
Commandments; for in that day many shall say, they have done wonderful Works
in his Name, but having not done the will of God, in perfect Love of Obedience,
to keep his Commandments, they shall not be found worthy to enter the Lords
Rest, Mat. 7. to 23. Luke 13.27. So that Gods Love is not for the rest of man's
Soul which remains only in the outward Profession of his Truth, unto such the
Lord will say, Depart from me, ye that work Iniquity, I know you not; so that
the Love of God, by Jesus Christ, does not reach to save the soul of any man,
only and barely by an outward Profession of his Truth, but if any man love him,
and keep his Word, the same is accepted of God, John 14. for the Promise of
Gods Love is only to them that fear him, and work Righteousness, they shall
receive Life everlasting; for where the heart is, there the Treasure is also,
if in the Love of Visibles, then free from the love of God; for all that is of
the World, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of
Life, all which is not of God, but altogether of the World and the World
passes away, and the Lust thereof, but he that does the will of God abides
forever, 1 John 16.17. then as the World and Vanities thereof shall perish, the
Souls of them whose minds remain in the things of this World, they shall perish
also; therefore let none be deceived, for God is not mocked, for whatsoever a
man sows, that also shall he reap; for he that sows to the flesh shall of
the flesh reap Corruption, but be that sows to the Spirit, shall of the
Spirit reap Life everlasting, Gal. 6.7.8. which is sufficient encouragement for
all to be faithful in love to God, by which they will come more and more, to
witness of his divine Love to the spiritual strength of their inward man,
through which every true Believer in him, comes to witness their holy Life in
all manner of good Conversation, in which state the love of God, in and through
the Lord of Life, leads in true love, to do good unto all men, especially to
them of the Household of Faith, Gal. 6.^. 10. who are bound in true love to God,
that they do not dare to love that which God ha^t^, neither to hate that which
God loves, neither indeed can they, because the Love of God is to his own
begetting, and they that are begot of him, through Faith and Obedience in
Christ, they can neither love nor hate, but as ^^od loves or hates, that
which is for him, or against him, so that the Life of every true believer in
Christ, is of the nature of Christ, and is led by his spirit to love that which
Christ loves, and to hate that which he hates, in which Life of true love to
God, by his good Spirit of Grace, are the faithful led to perform his will, in
all things of Love and Charity, to the honor of his Name, and the everlasting
well-beeing of their own Immortal Souls; so that good Works are in a band of
true Love and Charity, which man in his own Will and Time cannot perform,
according to what the Lord requires; for the Lords Thoughts, are not as man's
Thoughts, neither is the Lords Time, as man's time, whose Love is as unstable as
the Mind, which m^ves here and there, having no constant abiding place, even so
is the Love and charity of unstable men, which for want of true Love to God,
and obedience to his command, they have no a biding in his Truth, but love and
hate, even as the natural will stands affected one toward the other, in which
state they run on in many words about Love and Charity, even as they do in all
other things of the like nature, not knowing a bridle to the Tongue in true
love to God and knowledge of his Ways, which lead the faithful in love to
render unto every Man his due, in which work they do justly, love mercy, and
hate all iniquity; in which life of true Obedience, there is no room to love
that which the Lord hates, nor to hate that which the Lord loves, but to
render, in true, love to every man, according to the mind of God in Christ, who
does not allow his Children, to give their holy things to Dogs, nor to cast
their Pearls before Swine, but to live in the true love of God, which is above
the Wisdom of the Serpent, whose Wisdom in unregenerated man, is far from the
innocent Dove-like nature, in which li^e the faithful continue, and remain in
the Power of an endless Life, in which they are redeemed from the pollutions of
the World, which the unfaithful remain in; for as they are of the World, the
world loves its own, but the Righteous, whom God has chosen out of the World,
such the world hates, John 15.9. Then they which remain in the love of the
world, they cannot receive the love of God, because they continue in
Disobedience against the known will and mind of their maker, therefore they
have no true love to God, nor his People, John 15.18. but this the righteous
know, that all things of this world shall perish, even so shall the love of
them which are of this world perish also, but unto them which are of the world
to come, the love of, God is there received, which shall endure forever; but
the love of this World remains in the works of Darkness, in which the minds of
them that are the Children of this World, are roving out of one perishing thing
into another of the like nature, being unstable in all their ways, as to the
Lord; but the love of God which passes knowledge, is stable in the hearts of
all that are faithful, whose Works are without Dissimulation, a^horing all that
is evil, cleaving only to that which is good, and leads to be kindly
affectionated in Brotherly Love, and in the holy fear of God, honoring, and
prefering one another in the work of his own calling, who has called his
People out of all sloathfulness, into f^rventness of Spirit, seeking the Lord,
and rejo^cing in Hope, patient in Tribulation, and instant in prayer, in which
state love works no ill to his Nighbour, but is the fulfilling of the
righteous Law, Romans 12 9 to v. 13. and 13.10. So the works of the Righteous,
manifest them to be Christ's Disciples, Joh. 13.35 for they have not received
the Spirit of Fear, but of Power and Love, and good Works 2 Timothy 1.7. Heb 10.2,
4. which they that witness not these things, they remain in Darkness, as to the
things of God, from which the Righteous cannot be separated, neither by trial
in Affliction, Tribulation, Distress, nor Persecution, neither Famine,
Nakedness, Peril, nor. Sword, for as it is written, the Righteous are all the
day long killed for his sake, and accounted as sheep for the Slaughter, Romans
8.35, 36. which is the state of Gods Heritage, who are justified by Faith, and
have peace with God in Jesus Christ, by whom also, they have access by Faith,
into his Grace, wherein they stand, and rejoice in the hope of the Glory of
God; and not only so, but they glory in Tribulation, also knowing that
Tribulation works Patience, and Patience, Experience, and Experience, Hope,
and hope makes not ashamed because the love of God, is shed abroad in their
Hearts, by the holy Ghost, which is given unto them, Romans 5.2, 3, 4, 5. so that
hight nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate from the love
of God which is in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. for their Souls are redeemed, and
become the first fruits of his Spirit, in Truth and Righteousness, and
Holiness, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,
Meekness, Temperance, against such there is no Law, Gal. ^.22, 23. And this is
the Love of God in Christ, which passes knowledge, that they may be filled
with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. in which state the Work of the Lord
is done in them that are brought home to him, through perfect Obedience to his
holy Will, in all things which of them he has required, by the gift of his
Spirit of Grace, in and through the Lord Jesus Christ ^y whom the Righteous are
saved, for they are grounded in the Love of God, which is without blame,
forbearing in love, speaking in love, walking in love, dwelling in love, having
no fear in love, being knit together in Faith and love, which is in Jesus
Christ, 1 John 4.12. Ephesians. 1.4. These. 3.17. and 4.2.15. and 5.2.16. Col. 2.2.2
Tim. 1.13. and many more Instances which the holy ^criptures afford to the same
effect that the free love of God by Jesus Christ, has appeared unto all men,
but all men have not received the free tenders of his love, through faith and
obedience to his holy Will, so that by Disobedience to the free gift of Gods
Grace, hardness of heart and unbelief has got the Victory in all that perish,
and God is clear of the Blood of all men that perish, because his free love
has been tendered, through the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, who
delights not in the death of them that perish, but had rather all might turn
and live.

CHAP. XXV. Concerning the Church of Christ, and Gospel Order in the Government
of the Church of Christ.
IN the World among men of diverse Persuasions, each Society pretends to be the
Church of Christ, and each have their differing Forms to govern in their
Church. Now Christ is but one in God the ^ather, and so are his Children but
one in him, who are begotten by the quickening Word of his Spirit, which
governs the Righ^^ous in Thought, Word and Deed, by which they know his
government in his Church, which are the true People of God, in whom Christ is
glorified, John 17.9, 10, 11. for as God is but one in Christ, and Christ is
but one in God, so are the People of God but one in Christ, and Christ is but
one in them; for as their Body is the Temple of the living God, he has said,
That he will dwell in them, and walk in them, and will be their God, and they
shall be his People, 2 Cor 6.16. Then Gods People, begotten by him, through
their Fa^^h and Obedience to the gift of his Grace, in and through Christ
Jesus, by whom, through Grace, his People are of an upright heart and willing
mind, to part with all that is not agreeable to his holy Will, who will not
take up his abode in men of corrupt hearts, whose minds are not free to part
with every delight to gain Christ, and only to delight in the performing of his
holy Will, who knocks at the door of man's heart, for obedience to his holy
Truth, which if any man will obey the Word of his Grace, he spiritually will
come in and sup with them, and they with him, Rev. 3.20. Then the Table of the
Lord is in a clean heart, and with them of a willing mind; for Christ will not
enter the Door to remain (for his abode) with them of corrupt hearts and
unwilling minds, whose state is always to confess, but never to forsake all sin
against God and his Christ, neither does the most High dwell in Temples made
with hands, Acts 7.4.8. and 17.24. For thus says the high and lofty One, that
inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is holy, I dwell in the High and Holy Place,
with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, and revive the heart of
the contrite Ones, Isa. 57.15. But to this Man will I look, even to him that is
poor, and of a contrite Spirit, and Trembles at my Word. Isa. 66.2. By which it
is manifest, that God in Christ, by the Grace of his Spirit of Life and Light,
dwells not in outward Covenants, made by men in their own time and will,
whose hope of Salvation (as they say depends on the Promises of God by Christ,
who is not to be found in all their humane Precepts and Ordinances, which from
time to time, for many years, People have observed, which to the D^obedient,
the Lords coming to them will be, even as his coming was to a Generation in
days past, whom savingly he did not know, because their works and way was not
in obedience to his holy Commands, for which cause, though many Works by them
were done in the outward Profession of his Name, yet they were commanded to
depart from him, as workers of Iniquity, because they had not kept the
Commandment of God, Mat. 7.23. Luke 13.22, 27. for the Works of their own
establishing were found unclean before the Lord, even as all men's works will
be, which are not established by the Power of Gods Spirit, in and through the
Lord of Life, whose Life is only witnessed in men of clean hearts and willing
minds, who are made willling that Christ should rule every Thought of the Heart
and Intent of the Mind, that all their Works may be done to the Honor and
Praise of his own Name, and they to receive the Comfort of it to their own
Souls; in which state of Obedience they witness the Cords of Gods Love to draw
the heart and mind in to a more and more fellowship of his divine Nature, in
and through the Lord Jesus Christ, by which they remain in the true Worship of
the Spirit, and in the Truth, and such Worshippers are they whom the Lord seeks
to worship him, Joh. 4 22, 23, 24. and 6.44 Then the true Church and People of
God witness a drawing by his Spirit, or the Power of his Spirit, in and through
the Lord of Life, otherways they cannot rece^ve Life; for no man comes to the
Son, except the Father draw him, for all things of the Father are delivered
unto the Son, and no man knows the Son, but the Father, neither knows any
man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son reveals him.
Therefore all that will come to the knowledge of God by Jesus Christ, it must
be through Faith and Obedience to the gift of Gods Spirit of Grace, which comes
by Jesus Christ, under whose eafie Yoke and light Burden all may learn of him,
who is meek and lowly, whereby they that are heavy laden may come to find rest
in him to their Souls, Mat. 11.27, 28, 29, 30. for by and through the Power of
God in Christ, every obedient Child learns of the will and mind of God in
Christ, Joh. 6.45. by which Life and Salvation comes to them that believe,
neither is there any true Believers, but as they are come to witness, in
measure, of the like state; for he that has not received the Son, has not
received the knowledge of God by the Son, through whom every true Believer in
him receives Life; for he that has the Son, has Life, and he that has not
the Son of God, has not Life, 1 John 5.12.

Now they that have received this Life, they manifest it by fruits of a holy
Life, in all manner of holy Conversation, doing no other to another, then as
themselves are willing to be done unto; for as the outward Tree is manifested
by its fruits, so is every man's works manifested by the outward manner of Life;
for Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of Thistles can no man expect to gather, neither
is any man's Faith accepted of God without Works of Obedience to his holy Will;
for as the Body is dead, without the Spirit, in the sight of men, so is Faith,
without Works of Obedience, also dead in the sight of God, Mat. 7.16, 17, 18,
19. James 2. Then where Faith is, without Works of Obedience, they cannot
perform the Commands of God by the Power of his own Spirit, in and through the
Lord Jesus Christ, that Church and People remain in a dead Faith to God, who is
not a God to that which is dead, but a God to that which is living, in true
Obedience to the mani^estation of his Spirit, which they have received to
profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. for as in the time of the Law, there was means for
the Peoples outward cleansing, who were to remain without the Camp, as not fit
for the service of Gods Worship, before they were cleansed of their Filth, Lev.
13.46. and 23 42, 43. Neh. 8.14. even so in this Gospel Day, is no man fit for
the service of Gods Worship in Spirit and Truth, before he comes to witness
something of an inward cleansing, through the little Leaven, whereby (through
Faith and Obedience to his Talent received) he will come to witness more and
more of Gods Power by Jesus Christ, until the whole Lump be leavened into the
new Nature of Gods Kingdom in Jesus Christ, which only belongs to them of his
Church, who are not in a state of always confessing, and never so faking; but
as the true Church acknowledges her Weaknesses and Inabil^t^es, as of
themselves not able to do any one work acceptable to God, so through Faith and
Obedience to the Word and ^ower of God, by Jesus Christ (through his Grace) are
they made able to do all things, according to what the Lord of his Church and
people requires; so that they remain not in a state of always confessing what
great Sinners they are, but withal forsake their sins, in Obedience to God,
whose Power gives Victory over their sins, in which state they grow from one
degree of Grace to another, till they become perfect Men and Women in Christ
Jesus, which is according to the Apostles Doctrine, who were sent of God by
Jesus Christ, to turn People f^^m Darkness to Light, and from the Power of
Satan to the Power of God, and praying, that they may present every man perfect
in Christ Jesus, whose Church and People are not to remain in sin all the days
of their appointed time here in this Life; and therefore many Teachers of this
Age with their Hearers, are out of Gods holy Truth, in the Doctrine of
Imperfection, and even so is the Life and Practice of many who call themselves
by the Name of Christ, to say, that their Church is the Church of Christ, when
in neither Doctrine, Principle nor Practice are they according to the Command
of Christ, nor Example of his holy Apostles, but in a faith of their own Works,
teaching for Doctrine the Commandments of men, Mat. 5.19. But the Church of
Christ are they of the Circumcision, which worship God in Spirit, and rejoice
in Christ esus, having no Confidence in the flesh, Phil 3.3. and in all things
relating to the Worship of God and Government in his Church, are they led and
guided by the Power of Gods Spirit, in and through the Lord Jesus Christ, who
ever was, and will rem^in to be the Head of his Church, whom God has bu^lt
upon that Rock of Ages, and Foundation of many Generations, against which the
Gates of Hell can never prevail, for he is the first born of God whom the
Father has put all things under his feet and gave him to be Head in all things
over his Church; so that in him is the fullness, that fills all in all,
Ephesians. 1 22, 23. for he is the Head of the Body, the Church, who is the
beginning, the first and the last, the first born from the Dead, that in all
things he may have the Pre-eminence; for it pleas^d the Father, that in him
should all fullness dwell, Col 1.18 19. for he is the Head of his Church, from
which all the Body, by joints and bands, have nourishment ministered increases
with the increase of God, Col. 2.19. which increases the knowledge of God in
Christ, that not any one Member of the Body may be ignorant in spiritual
things; and as every one has received the true Knowledge and Faith of Christ,
the Spirit of Christ will enable and move them to confess with the Mouth, God
and Christ, in whom they have believed, and openly to confess and profess,
without fear or shame, the Doctrine of Christ; and such have their Minds wholly
given upto wait the movings of Christ, the Head, through whose Power the
spiritual Understanding in each Member, comes to receive the true knowledge, in
things relating to the well-fair of the Body; for no man can truly say that
Jesus i^ the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12 3.

Which does manifest, that there cannot be the performing of any one Work, by
any one Member, which will be ^^^ted of God, but as they receive Power from the
gift of his Spirit by Jesus Christ, who is the Head, by which the whole Body of
true Believers witness his Government, in which Body, as every Member keeps
faithful to the Head, it comes to know a true Government in its right place
belonging to the Body, of which Christ remains the Head; for as every Member of
the Body keeps faithful to the gift of Gods Spirit, he is serviceable,
according to the measure of his gift, which is of service to the whole Body, in
which Body each Member has his gift, according to that measure which God ^ath
given him to p^o^t with^^; for there are dive^s^ies of Gifts but the same
Spirit; and there are differences of Administrations, but the same Lord; and
there are diversities of Operations, but ^he same God, which works all in
all; for the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal; for to one is given by the Spirit, the Word of Wisdom, to another the
Word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit; to another the working of Miracles, to
another Prophecy, to another the Discerning of Spirits, to another diverse
kinds of Tongues, to another the Interpretation of Tongues; but all these
works, that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as
he will; for as the Body is one, and has many Members, and all the Members of
that one Body being many, are one Body, so also is Christ; for by one Spirit
are all the faithful baptized into one Body, whether Jews or Gentiles, Bond or
Free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit; for the Body is not one
Member, but many; for if the Foot shall say, because I am not the Hand, I am
not of the Body, is it not therefore of the Body? And if the Ear shall say,
because I am not the Eye, I am not of the Body, is it therefore not of the
Body? for if the whole Body were an Eye, where were the hearing? or (...) whole
Body were hearing, where were the smelling? But now has God set the Members
every one of them in the B^^y, as it has pleased him; for if they were all one
M^^ber, where were the Body? But now are they many M^mbers, yet one Body, and
the Eye cannot say to the H^^^, I have no need of thee; nor again, the Head to
the (...), I have no need of thee; nay, much more, those Members of the Body
which seem to be more feeble, are necessary; and those Members of the Body
which we think to be less honorable, upon these we bestow more abundant
honor, and our uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness, for our comely
parts have no need, but ^od has tempered the Body together, having given more
abundant honor to that part which lacke^, that there should be no schism in
the Body, but that the Members should have the same care one of another, and
then where one Member suffers all the Members suffer with it, and when one
Member is honored, all the Members rejoice with it.

Now the Church of Christ, which are the chosen People of God, they are the
Body of Christ, and Members in particular, and God has set some in the Church,
first, Apostles, secondly, Prophets, th^rdly Teachers; after that Miracles,
then gifts of H^aling, H^lps, Government, Diversity of Tongues; a^^ all
A^ostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? are all Workers of M^racles,
having all the gifts of Healing? Do all speak with T^n^^es? do all Interpret?
but covet earnestly the best Gifts: And yet show I unto you a more excellent
way; though I speak with the Tongues of Men and A^gel, and have not Charity; I
am become as sounding Brass, or a tinckling ^^mbal, and though I have the gift
of Prophecy, and understa^d all Mysteries, and all Knowledge; and though I have
all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and have no Charity, I am nothing:
And though I beslow all my goods to feed the Po^r, and though I give my Body to
be burnt, and have Charity, it profits me nothing. So that these thing left
recorded by the Spirit of God, with which every faithful Believer, which is a
Member of the Body, re^ his Duty, to follow Christ the Head, even as the Men of
God in days past have done for Example, 1 cap. 12, 13. in which holy Work the
hol^ Scriptures^ great help; for through Faith in Christ Jesus they are to make
the Man of God wise to Salvation; for of the N^ of God and Christ is every true
Believer, begotten by and by his Spirit, gifted in measure, and are to mark
that live not up in good Works of Faith, to the w^ Gods holy Truth, according
as it is manifested by (...) Christ, and left recorded by his Spirit of Truth,
w^ has commanded each Member of the Body, to w^ over one another, not for
evil, but for good, and i^ Member be out of place, the next Members are to see^
the way of the Lord, for to restore it into its place ag^ but when all diligent
care and means has been use^ its restoration, and with long waiting cannot be
recov^ but remains in a state of dishonor to the Body, the (...) is to cut off
that Member, in obedience to God, by w^ means all the other Members of the Body
may receiv^nefit in the Work of the Lord, by by casting that (...) from the
Body, which has offended the whole Body, by all the other Members of the Body
cannot be res^ to the Body again; for its better that one Member ^^perish, than
that the whole Body should be cast into Hell, 5.29. and 18.8. Mark 9.47. So
that of what use for that Member has been, as to the benefit of the E^ whether
as the right ^ye or the right Hand, yet if o^ ^orrupted, and cannot be recoved
by all the other M^^ers of the Body, it is not to remain whereby to destroy ^he
who^e Body, and to cause it to perish. So that all is ^o be done by and through
the gift of Wisdom, which is from him who is the great Physician of Value; so
that all ^^e to stand faithful upon their Watch, and to watch over one another
for good, and not for evil, that all may be done to the praise and honor of
Gods Name, and for the Prosperity of his Truth, in and among his chosen People,
which are the Church of Christ, among whom there can ^e no real forgiving of
each other, further than thy Brother turns to thee, and says, he does Repent;
for the Lord forgiveth no man, but as he does turn by Obedience, and Repent. So
that al^ may live so as to keep out that Canker Worm of Prejudice, which has
caten up some, till they are become nothing, as to the Life and Power of Gods
saving. Truth by Jesus Christ, but are turned with the Dog to the Vomit, and
with the Sow to the wallowing in the Mire; such went out from the People of
God, because they never were of the Church of Christ, but remain as Landmarks,
and not as Way-marks for any of the Lords People to follow; so there is no
unbinding that on Earth which is (...) unbound in Heaven, neither binding that
on Earth which is not bound in Heaven, but that all may be done to the Honor
of God, and Prosperity of his Truth, whose People are to pray, that in all
their Undertakings for his Truth, the Will of God by them may be done on Earth,
as it is done in Heaven, through which he will have the Honor of his own Work,
and they the Comfort of it to their own Souls, which I desire may be fulfilled.

When all the scattered Sheep shall come
Into that Fold, in which are some,
Then will the faithful come to see
Christ's Church in glorious State to be.
CHAP. XXVI. Concerneng the State of all men, and of Gods Judgments, and also
of Gods calling the Jews, and manner of their Return to the Light of the Gospel.
THe Light of the Gospel is of God by Jesus, who is the Power of God to
Salvation, in all them that believe, and the Power of God for Condemnation in
them that be^ieve not, John 1.11, 12 for the Lord searches the heart and
trye^h the R^ms, even to give every man according to the fruit of his doings;
for the Light of Gods gift of divine Life, by Jesus Christ, makes manitest what
fruit God requires of the Sons and Daughters of men, who through Faith and
Obedience, do not answer his holy Will, for which cause the Wrath of God is
revealed from Heaven, against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of men,
because their Life of Disobedience is knowingly against the gift of Gods divine
Light, which is their Condemnation for their evil Deeds, John 3.19, 20. for
that which may be known of God is manifested in them, for God has showed it
unto them, Romans 1.18, 19 For the Lord shows unto Man what is his Thoughts,
Amos 4.13. Which if through Faith and Obedience to what the Lord makes
manifest, then the Thoughts of the Heart and Intents of the Mind are justified
before him; but if their Works are of Unbelief, through Disobedience, then the
Thoughts of their Heart and Intents of the Mind are for Condemnation; for every
Obedient Child of God brings his Deeds to the Light, by which they are
manifest to be wrought in God; but they who are Lovers of their own unrighteous
Ways, more than they are Lovers of Gods holy Truth, they hate the Gift of Gods
divine Light, because by it their evil Deeds are reproved So that the state of
all men is either of Obedience or Disobedience to the known Will and Mind of
God, made manifest by the Light of his Spirit, in and through the Lord Jesus
christ, whose Light is not hid to them that are faithful, but through
Disobedience, the Wicked, that sin away the Day of Grace, their Candle has
been often lighted, and through their Disobedience goes out again, Job 21.17.
and 8.5, 6. Prove. 2.20. So that if the Light of the Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that are lost, in whom the godd of this World has blinded the Minds of
them which believe not, lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is
the Image of God, should sh^ne unto them, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. So that it is through
continued Disobedience by which men perish; for the Light of the Lord is not
hid under a Bed, nor under a Bushel; for there is nothing hid that shall not be
made manifest, neither was any thing kept secret, but that it shall come
abroad, Mat. 5.15. Mark 4.21, 22, 23. Luke 11.33. By which it is clearly
manifested, that Gods Wrath and Indignation in his just Judgments upon the
Unrighteous, is because of their Unbelief and Rebellious living, which is as
the sin of Witch craft before him, and in his sight. Now as the state of the
faithful witness Salvation by Grace, through Faith and Obedience, so also do
the unfaithful witness Condemnation and Destruction, through Disobedience and
Unbelief, begotten by the Father of all Unrighteousness. So that the state of
all men are either in Servitude to the Power of Gods gift by Jesus Christ, or
in Servitude to the Power of the Devil, who is the Father of all
Unrighteousness, which the Disobedient live in, and in that state of
Disobedience the Wicked perish for evermore; more; but unto the Righteous has
God regard, whose Portion is of his heavenly Riches, which shall for evermore
endure with his People in the World to come. But the Day shall come, and now
is, that the Lord shall suffer his Judgments to make way for the Righteous to
inhabit the Earth, in which the Wicked have, of long time been suffered
(through the permission of God) by the Enemy of Maus Peace, to lay waste the
Lives and Estates of the Righteous, who shall inhabit the Earth with Peace and
Quietness, when the Lords Judgments have destroyed all the Thorns and
Thistles, with all other the Combustible high and lofty Trees, which have long
incumbered the Lords Earth* without bringing forth Fruit unto him, through
whose Judgments of Famine, Sword and Pestilence, with other Judgments of the
like Nature, by which the Potsherds shall dash one against another, till the
Earth shall become plain and smothe, from the crooked Nature of unrighteous
men; For every Valley shall be exalted, and every Mountain and Hill shall be
made low, and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain,
and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all Flesh shall see it
together, for the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Isa. 40.4, 5. Luke 3.5. And
all Flesh shall see the Salvation of God in that Day, in which all Israel shall
be saved; for there shall come out of Zion a Deliverer, and shall turn away
Ungodliness from Jacob which is his Covenant to them, when he shall take away
their sins, Romans 11.26, 27. for the Lord will finish the Work, and cut it short
in Righteousness, because a short work will the Lord make upon the Earth; and
for that end has the Lord begun in his Judgments among the Wicked, that he may
make way for his Seed in the Remnants of the Nations which shall be saved, of
which there is a Number already gathered, unto which small Number of despised
People, the Lord ^s daily adding unto his chosen Heritage and elect Seed, unto
whom the Promise does belong which is to all them that fear the Lord and work
Righteousness, unto them is the gathering of the Nations which shall be saved,
and for their sakes has the Lord begun his righteous Work against the
Adversaries of his Truth, whom he will overthrow and bring to naught, for out
of Heaven will the Lord thunder of his Judgments upon them; and will judge the
ends of the Earth; for God has given strength to the Righteous, and will exalt
the Horn of his anointed, and he shall only and alone rule, unto whom the
Government does belong; for when his Judgments are in the Earth, the
Inhabitants thereof will learn Righteousness; for God shall arise in Judgment
to save the weak of the Earch, and the Wrath of man shall praise him, and the
remainder of W^ath shall the Lord restrain, Psalm. 7.6, 9, 10. And the Lord will
return to Jacob, and have Mercy upon the House of Israel, after they have born
the Shame of their Trespasses, whereby they have trespassed against the Lord,
Ezekiel. 39. Then will the Lord gather them from among the Heathen, and they shall
know him whom their Fathers slew, to be the Lord of Life, then shall they sing
Praises acceptable to God, giving Glory due unto his holy Name, and their
Offerings unto him shall be in the Beauty of Holiness; for they shall know the
Lord, and him the only true God shall they worship in the Spirit and in the
Truth; the^ shall the Earth fear before the Lord, and the World also shall be
stable, that it be not moved; then the Heavens will be glad, and the Nations
will sing Praises to the holy One of Israel, whom they shall know to rule and
reign in the hearts of the Out casts of Israel; for if the casting away of them
have been the reconciling of the World, what shall the receiving of them be,
but Life from the Dead? Romans 11.15. Then let the S^a roar, and the fullness
thereof, let the Fields rejoice, and all that is therein; then shall the Trees
of the Wood sing out at the presence of the Lord, for he comes to judge the
Earth, Chron. 16. And unto them that fear his Name shall the Sun of
Righteousness arise with healing in his Wings; and they shall grow up in Truth
and Righteousness before the Lord, and the Wicked shall be as Ashes under the
sol^s of their feet, in the Day that I shall do this, says the Lord of Hosts;
for the Lord will pour out of his Spirit upon the Fathers and the Children, and
the hearts of the one shall be turned toward the other; for Truth and
Righteousn^ss shall reign in all the Earth, and there shall be no more Norse of
the Horses rushing into the Battle; for all carnal Weapons of War shall be done
a way, and all the Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdoms of God and
his Christ, and the Lord of Life shall rule and reign in his People for
evermore; and happy is it with that small Number of despised Ones among men in
this day, who witness the beginning of these things in themselves; for having
set their hand to the Plow, and not looking back, they shall be made fit for
the Kingdom of Heaven, into which no unclean thing shall ever enter; for it is
prepared of God by Jesus Christ, for them that have kept his Commandments in
this Life, and not for them that plead for a Body of sin all their days, in
which sinning state they know no end of Disobedience against Gods holy Truth;
for sin brings Death, and Death brings Judgment, which is for Wrath to come
upon all the Ungodly, which fear not God, to keep his Commands; for which cause
the Wicked live in a ^ell upon Earth, which by the Wrath of Gods just Judgment,
will be enlarged to all the Wicked after this Life; for for when the Righteous
dye, they dye to live in the Lords Rest, where they enjoy Pleasure at the right
hand of God for evermore; but the Wicked (who have disregarded the Commands of
the Lord in this Life) they dye to live in Everlasting Torment of the fiery
Flames of Gods Wrath and Indignation, which is the Reward of all the Wicked and
Ungodly of this Life whose Life is far worse than the Life of a Dog or a Toad,
for when they dye, all their Misery is ended, but when the Wicked dye their
great Misery then begins and will increase forever and ever. Which things
are too little regarded by many in this Life; but the Day will come, in which
they shall wish, that others might have warning, but if they will not hear
Moses and the Prophets, neither have they regarded the Lord from Heaven; for
which cause is their Misery, which will come upon all the Ungodly that call not
(as they ought to do) upon the Name of the Lord.

CHAP. XXVII. Concerning the begetting, being born and brought forth of the
Immortal and Incorruptible Seed of Gods Kingdom by Jesus Christ.
THe Immortal and Incorruptible Seed of Gods Kingdom in Jesus Christ, is of
that Birth which the World by all their Wisdom in outward Learning, are never
able to find, neither can any ever know, to witness the new Birth, further than
by Faith and Obedience to the gift of Gods Spirit by Jesus Christ, whose Spirit
of Life makes fr^^ from the Law of Sin and Death; for the Seed of the Kingdom,
is of a heavenly divine Nature, which has no fellowship with the Works of
Darkness, in which all that disobey the Lord of Life remain, by which their
Birth is of the Enemies Seed, which alienates the Heart of Man and Woman from
true O^edience to God; ^n which state they are Strangers to the nature of the
New Birth, which is not born of Blood nor of the will of the Fle^, nor of the
Will of Man, but of God John. 1.13 for it is born of the Spirit of God, and
brought forth by Grace, through Faith in Christ Jesus, by whom the Children of
men have received a measure, which though, but as a grain of the smallest of
all grain, it is of the little leavens Nature, to purge out, and leaven the
whole Lump into the nature of Gods Kingdom in Christ Jesus, whom the World by
all their Wisdom can never know; for the things of Gods Kingdom are hi^ from
the Wise and Prudent of this World, and revealed to the Children of God, whose
Life remains in the Babe-like Nature of God in Christ, whose Babes they are,
begotten of God by the word of his Spirit, through Faith and Obedience to the
Lord of Life, in whose Life and Nature, every true Child of God, in their
measure, live, move and have their being, in the nature of him; for as his
nature is the New Birth, and all that are born of him hey bring Fruits
acceptible to him; for they are the Children of the Day, which live in the
Light, and walk in the Light, which the Children of the Night cannot do; for
the Day of Gods Visitation, by the gift of his divine Light, is unto them a
dark thing, at which the wise stumble, and the prudent cannot receive; for by
their own Wisd (...) in their own prudent way, is their Understanding
darkdarkened, as to the things of God, and Nature of his Kingdom neither can
any grow to understand the things of (...), Jesus Christ, bu^ as they grow in
Grace, through the affectual working of his divine Life and Light, by the
quickening Word (...) his Spirit, which opens the understanding, and enlarges,
the gift of his divine Nature, through which (...) the holy Seed incre^seth
more and more, and in the increase brings forth fruit, more and more
abundant, to the praise of God, and honor of his Name, and well-being of the
Soul in Christ Jesus, who is the Author and Finisher of his own Work of
Righteousness in his true begotten People, who are begot by the gift of Gods
good Spirit of Grace, Life and Light, in which the faithful see Light, Psalm
36.9. for by Light is all and every Deed of Darkness manifested, so that Faith
in Christ Jesus, and Faithfulness* Obedience to the gift of Gods divine Light,
is the first beginning of an acquintance with the divine Nature of Christ, who
draws the heart of every faithful man and woman, into the assurance of Faith,
having their hearts sprinkled from ^n evil Conscience, and their Bodies washed
with pure Water, Heb. 10.22. and of this Nature is the Seed of Gods Kingdom in
the hearts of them that belong unto him, the nature of whose Kingdom, the wise
prudent part in man cannot comprehend; for the wise unregenerated part, is that
which ramains in the Fall, and is alienated from the true Seed of the Kingdom,
which will not take root in any other ground, but in that honest heart, which
is made willing to bear the Cross, in all things to the self will, in which
state of subjection to the will of God the Seed takes root down-ward, and
brings forth Fruit upward, to the honor of Gods holy Truth; so than all
reasoning with Flesh and Blood is shut out by the Power of Gods Spirit in every
upright honest heart to wards God, in which life of Obedience, there is no
giving way to the Earthly part, which ramains in the Disobedient, through which
they oppress the Seed of God, and cause his Life, in the measure of the Seed,
to depart, which if they were but faithful to the measure of Seed received, the
Life of Gods Spirit of Grace would increase, to the withstanding of all the
Enemies Power, which through the willingness of the obedient part being yielded
to him, the true Seed of God will take no root of abidance in any sort of
ground whatever, where People live in a state of sinning against God and his
Christ, Mat. 13. So they that are new born of the incorruptible Seed, they
first come to dye, through the Cross of Christ, which crucifies the self will
prudent part; for Knowledge, without Obedience brings Death over the Soul, in
which state the Kingdom o^ God is hid; For that which is born of the Flesh is
Flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, John 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. So
they that are truly begotten of God in Christ, the^ witness the New Birth,
which is not born of Flesh and Blood nor of the Will of Man, but of the
incorruptible Seed, the Word of God, which lives and abides forever, 1 Pet.
1.23. Now the Word of God which abides forever, is of his Spirit (...) Life,
Light and Grace, which flows into the hearts (...) true Believers, through
Faith in Christ Jesus, who draw^ the willing mind to partake of Gods heavenly
Riches, i^ and through him who is the Lord of all Grace, Life an^ Light, which
by measure lives, moves and abides in the heart of every sincere Believer in
him, through who^ Power they witness a daily decaying of the first Nature and a
daily increase of Newness in a holy Life unto Go^ who gives power to the weak
and feeble, through which there is no distrust in the Power of God, which they
daily experience to give them Victory over every Thought which would exalt it
self above the Witness of God, and hinder the growth of the Seed of the Kingdom
of Heaven, in which no man can enter, without being born again, the benefit of
which no man is denied of God by Jesus Christ, who has said by his Spirit of
Truth, Whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely, Rev. 22.17. Isa.
55.1, 2, 3. By which it is clear, that the Spirit of God hinders no man of any
benefit by Jesus Christ, for the Salvation of his Soul, that is, as Man keeps
faithful to God, according to what he has commanded by the Son of his Love,
the Lord of Life.

Postscript.
MUch more might be related for the convincing of People concerning the Truth
of God by Jesus Christ; but all that has been, with all whatsoever of holy
care and means that may be used, is but for the further Condemnation of them
that refuse Obedience to the gift of Gods divine Light, which men have received
as a Talent or Talents for them to improve for their Lords use, and the benefit
of their Souls; for the Lord of Life waits with the Tenders of Life and
Salvation for every Soul, where the heart and mind is willing to forgo all the
ways of Unrighteousness, and to give up in true Obedience to serve the Lord
with an upright heart and willing mind, as becomes his People so to do; for
there is no Salvation of God by Jesus Christ to any man's soul, but by true
Faith and Obedience to God in Christ, who siving^ is no^ a God to them (...)
love and delight in any one thing which is not (...) his holy Commands; for as
the Lord of (...) of God in all things, for the Servation (...) so them that
witness S^^vation in and through him, must through Faith and Obedience, come
through the Cross, even as he has done; for as he was outwardly crucified on
the outward Cross for the sins of the People, somust the Power of God, through
Christ, come to crucifi^ every lustful affection, which would exalt it sel^
above the Witness of Gods holy Truth, which no man can savingly partake of, but
as he comes through faith and obedience to partake of Gods heavenly Riches,
which are in store for all them that love the appearing of the Lord Jesus
Christ, whom it any man will hear, let him not harden his heart by Disobedience
in ^nbelief; for the Devils Power is of no other strength than to tempt the
mind of man to serve him, which if men obey his Temptations to serve him in
sin, it begets the heart into a hard stare of Unbelief, to believe no other but
a sinning life all the days of their appointed time in this life, the cause of
which is altogether through their Obedience to the Devils Temptations, whose
Power never did, neither can force any man to sin, but as they yield their
Obedience to his alluring Temptations, which if through faithfulness men would
watch and pray to God, the strength of his Power by Jesus Christ would give
them Victory against and over every lustful Desite of the corrupted heart,
which is by nature inclineable to serve no other save the Devil, which seeks
all unrighteous ways to destroy the soul of Man, which through Faith and
Obedience to what God has of his divine Grace and Light of his Spirit, made
manifest by Christ Jesus, through which they may be saved. And though some may
despise at my small measure in the aforesaid Work, yet this I have an a^^urance
of, and that from the Lord of Life, tha^ as (...) keep faithful to that measure
of his good Spirit of Grace, Light and Life which through Faith and Obedience
he will increase my Faith and enlarge my Understanding, to understand his Will
and Mind more and more in the things which concern the wellfair of the Souls
well-being with God in Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Substance of my Letter to the Committee of the Militia in
Salem, in answer to what they did desire of me.
I Received yours, by one of the Committee, relating to my joining with your
laying out Disbursments for a Town stock of Ammunition and Provision, against a
time of Invasion. Now you your selves well know, that I never did withold the
promotion of any Work among you, or any other of Power in this place, so far as
it has not been inconsistent with the Truth of God, according to my Faith,
which leads me to assist and help, according to my measure, when and where
God shall direct, until which time, if I should conform to your desire, where
then will follow my Reward? And as to your War, both Temporal and Spiritual,
where does the benefit of it appear to a People whose unrighteous cruel Bloody
Laws yet remain, only wanting Power against the Lives and Estates of their
honest Neighbors, whom your Priests esteemed, as those of your Church Members,
whom your selves do now put to Death as Witches, which possibly some of them
may be so; and if that God should further permit the Devils Power against the
Rulers, Priests and Hearers, it would follow to be the greatest of all other of
Gods just Judgments that ever have befallen New England, since they began to
stock, whip, cut off Ears, banish, order for Bonds men and women, long and
cruel Imprisonment, and taking away to the value of twenty hundred Pounds,
besides the Lives of them four Righteous ^e sons put to Death at Boston; all
which has been the afflicted state of the Lords People, which in Derision have
been known by the Name of Quakers. And if the Children of them that destroyed
the Lives and Estates of the Lords People in that day, will say, That they had
no hand in the same I say that their assertion is utterly false (so long as
they condemn not their Predecessors actions) and I prove it by the rebellious
Jews, many thousands of whom had no actual hand in destroying the Righteous in
those days, and they could say even as these in this day, That they had no hand
in the same; but forasmuch as they did not bear a faithful Testimony for Gods
holy Truth, against the Unrighteousness of their Priests and Rulers, the just
Judgments of God has reached their Posterity to following Generations; even so
is it with New England, while the Land remains defiled with the Blood of the
Lords Servants slain at Bo^on, which New England former Priests and Rulers have
done, in the Name of God, and the Kings Name, without any warrant or example
from either; but in their blind persecuting Spirit have maintained their
persecuting way, from a command in the Law, which relates to false Worshippers
in that day, which in this Gospel Day they have charged upon the Lords People,
which worship the only true God in the Spirit and in the Truth; which if God
should permit the Power of the Devil, by the spirit of Persecution, then might
more than three parts of the People of the World lose their Lives, among whom
it is evident the Lord has a Number belonging unto him, though at present
st^angers to the outward Sufferings of Christ; for he is the Light of the
Gentiles, and Salvation to the ends of the Earth, and by him the Remnant of the
Nations which fear God and work Righteousness are saved; and he has commanded,
That Wheat and Tears should grow together until the Harvest, of which things I
only hint to you, for your understanding my Mind concerning the Proceedings in
New England, whose former Priests and Rulers have not manifested the like
Repentance as that of Judas, who repenting himself o^ betraying innocent Blood,
and withal returned the Money which he had unrighteously taken, which Doctrine
ought not to find itching Ears among any the Children of them who have
persecuted the Lords Servants to Death at Boston; but as the Lords Se^vants and
Messengers of his Truth have born the merciless Rod of that persecuting
Generation, so ought every man concerned, either actually, or by consent, to
bear the Charity of the Lords People, which is great Charity indeed to inform
them of their unrighteous ways against the Lord and his People.

The foregoing Letter some of them called Railing, but the Day will come, in
which they shall know, and that from the just God of Heaven and Earth, that it
is no railing to info^m People of the Truth, which in the time of my Letter was
both lawful and expedient for me so to do, neither are they to have forgiveness
of God, further than they turn and repent, neither are the Lords People to
forgive that on Earth which is not forgiven in Heaven, but to pray that his
Will may be done on Earth, as it is done in Heaven.

CHAP. XXVIII. Concerning the Covering and Uncovering of the Head, in Honor to
Man or Men.
WHere there is liberty by the Law of God for one man to remain with his Head
covered before another, it can be no transgression of any Righteous Law among
men; and as to Customs of that nature, it is better to obey God than Man^ for
all things which a man is persuaded of God in his own heart, to be comely,
decent and of good report, that men ought, in obedience to God, to follow; but
that which has no Scripture Example from any command of Christ, nor Practice
of any of his Apostles, for one man to stand bear-headed in honor to another,
is that which cannot proceed from the Life and Power of God, because it is not
found in the holy Scriptures to be commanded of God, neither in practice by any
of Christ's Disciples, nor his holy Apostles b^t only a bea^ Cu^tom got up among
some of the Nations, which inde^d by many of them are so accustomed to the Hat,
Hand and Knee, by or with which they bestow so much Honor one toward the
other, that by that practice, with other of their Works among men, they have
not due regard to the Works of Righteousness and Holiness, for the honor o^
God, before whom, in the time of praying and prophesying, the Head is to be
uncovered, for the Head of every man is, Christ, and the Head of Christ is God;
which proves a dishonor to the Name of the Lord, to honor men whose hearts
they know, not as to God, but honor them in the sa^^e form as they do the
Lord, when their Prayers are made to him, who is the searcher of all hearts,
and giver to every man according to the fruits of his doings, which to the
faithful will be a Crown of Righteousness to the hoary Head, but to the Sinner,
though a hundred yea^s old he is accursed, which also does of Hat-Honour, by
which men honor that which is accursed of God.

CHAP. XXIX. Concerning the great Judgments of God upon the Inhabitants of
New England by Witchcraft.
Witchcraft is altogether wrought, through the Spirit and Power of the Devil,
which rules in the Children of Disobedience, who ramain in the Works of the
flesh, with which Witchcraft is included, Gal. 3. and 5 20 for which cause the
just Judgments of God, are the Reward of all Wicked and ^^godly men, but to all
that repent, their Sins and Blasphemies, wherewithsoever they shall blaspheme,
shall be forgiven, but he that blasphemeth against the holy Ghost, shall not be
forgiven in this World, nor the world to come, Joh. 5.6, 17. Mat. 21.10. Now as
to diverse Authors, their apprehensions are various, in differing one from the
other about Witches and Witchcraft, which to prevent error, that Truth and
Righteousness may take place I have taken in hand, to set forth, in order, a
Declaration, which is according to the holy scriptures, which do hold forth the
nature and cause of People having familarity with the Devil, who is the Father
of all Unrighteou^ness, through which Unrighteousness he begets the heart and
mind to serve him, in which state more or less are most men, through which Life
of Disobedience, the Understanding of man is darkened, that it cannot see what
is for God, according to his will, neither do they comprehend diverse works
which are against him, which is also as a Judgment from God for Disobedience,
which indeed is of the nature of Rebellion, which is as the sin of Witch craft;
then where men are in the like state, they are blind, as to the knowledge or
God, concerning such whom he commanded to be destroyed in the time of the Law,
Deuteronomy. (...) 11.12. Exodus 22 18. for they that are not come to (...) Law and the
Prophets, do not know the will and Mind of God, relating to the new Law of
Light, Life and Grace by Jesus Christ; for they that serve sin, are servants to
sin, and of him they are, whose works they do, Romans 6.16. John 8.44. Mat. ^.24.
Luke. 6.13. Then in what state are they that are always confessing, but never
forsaking? for if through Obedience they did forsake sin, then there would be
no such need of confessing that which they have forsaken, because where men
forsake their sins, and live in all good order of Gods holy Truth, as they are
command^d to do then the Lord will remember their Transgressions no more, Isa.
45 7. and 44.25. for where men keep Judgment, and do Righteousness at all
times, they are not in a state of always confessing, and of not forsaking,
Psalm. 106.3 for where men confess and not forsake, their works manifest a dead
Faith, James 2.26. in which state of ^^obedience they draw near with their Lip
and Mo^th, to honor the Lord, when it is manifest by Works, that the heart is
far from him, and their fear is taught by the precepts of men; therefore does
the Lord do amarvelous work, and a wonder; for the Wisdom of then Wise Men
shall perish, and the Understanding of their Prudent men shall be h^d, Isa.
29.13. Mat. 15.8. Mark, 7.6. which scriptures are fulfilled, as a Judgment of
God for innocent Blood shed in New England, whose Priests and Rulers, with the
consenting Inhabitants have been bewitched, that that should not obey the Truth
of God, made manifest by Jesus Christ, whose Servants they have put to Death at
Boston, for which cause (as a Judgment) they are deliverd up through Unbelief)
to hardness of heart, to commit other sins, which with the sin of Blood, has
further stored up the Lords Wrath, to add to their Troubles, through the
increase of his Judgments against them, for rebelling against his holy Truth,
for which cause, as Judgment increases against sin, so sin in New England
increases against Judgment, until the Light of sin at this time is of that
hight and nature, that there is no less of the Priests and their Church
Members, with others of their hearers, then five hundred accused of Witch
craft; but some of them called Witches, with some of the afflicted Evidences as
the say) do give an account ^f seven hundred, all being by them accused for
Witch^s, of which Number there is now this present year 1692. ^ne hundred and
twenty, which are apprehended for Witchcraft, of which there are 20 put to
Death, and about twenty more condemned to dye; but by reason that the Spertre
or apparition has accused some Priest, and others accounted eminent, the
Rulers have aba^ed in their speedy work; and as at first they with speed, did
condemn and put to death, so now with as much speed they have cleared many from
their Prison, though as giulty of Witchcraft, by the accusation of the
Spe^^er, as they already put to Death, all which left this life in denial of
what was laid to their charge though they had before confessed, yet when they
come to dye, before the multitude, they said, that their confession was by
reason of diverse fair pretenses, That if they did confess, they should find
marcy with God and Man, and one the other side, if not confess, as they said
diverse did threaten what would b^ done unto them; So what with the Prie^ts on
the one fi^e, and Relations on the other side, any indefferent man may judge of
the work* But as to the Work of the Devil to the afflicted Evidences, it is
sufficient, in short, to say, that I never heard nor read of the like work from
any Author; and not to omit Lynn Priest, who was one of the forwardest to have
all that by the Specter were accused, to be put to Death, which in some shor^
time, was also by the Specter (or Devil) accused him self; by which People may
see and know, their eminent Teachers, (they so term) are no more freed from the
Power of the Devil, then others so accused; to Geo. Buroughs, in denial of all
laid to his charge ^thoug^ a learned Preacher of the Gospel (as People called
him and a Teacher for them called the Church of Christ was one whom now is put
to Death) the other priest^ do now render him as odious as may or can be; b^
let him be what he is, for my part, I know not to the contrary, but that in his
Doctrine they do not him exeee^ and as to their Principles and Practice, let
the faithful judge how far they fall shor^ of bewitching People, that they
should not obey the Truth of God, made manifest by Jesus Christ, who came to
destroy all the Devils Power, which (to me) many Teachers in this Age seem to
uphold, through their imperfect Preaching, That a Body of sin remains with all
men to the end of this Life; then where the Body of Sin remains, it must needs
follow, that there remains the Devils Power, which does bewitch People to
commit sin, because all Unrighteousness is of the Devil, and all sin is of
Unrighteousness; then they that commit sin are Servants to sin, even as we
daily see, to the grief and trouble of the upright in heart, to see such a
known Life of Disobedience among the Inhabitants of New England, among whom the
Devils Power rules in their body of sin, and bewitches the Mind to obey him, in
which state People are instrumental, through the Devils Power, in bewitching
one another, either to believe pernicious false Doctrines, or to swear, lie and
be drunk, which is common with all other sins, which attend them, that by false
Persuasions men are seduced from the true Faith; so that in whomsever the
Devils Power bears rule, they are Instruments for his Service to bewitch others
into the same manner of Life, even as we daily see one Drunkard; Swearer and
Liar begets another into the same sin, and of the like nature does one evil
minded Person beget another; for as the Righteous are Instruments in the hand
of the Lord, to beget others into the Works of Righteousness, so are the Wicked
Instruments in the hand of the Devil to bewitch others into the Works of
Unrighteousness; and of this Nature is the bewitching of one another to serve
the Devil in the Works of the Flesh, with which Witchcraft is included, Gal.
5.20. Then if they that despised Moses's Law were to be cut off without mercy
under two or three Witnesses, how much greater Punishment, suppose ye, are they
found worthy of, who live in Rebellion against the Lord of Life in this Gospel
day? are they not to be cut off without Mercy, by the just hand of Gods
Judgments, under three Witnesses, viz. the Father, Son and Spirit, Heb 10 28,
29. which if otherways, that the command in the Law remain, of not suffering a
Witch to live in this Gospel Day, then the false Worshipper, the Adulterer and
the Adultress, with the rebellious Son, are also, according to that Command, to
be cut off from the Land of the Living, in which more than two thirds of the
People are guilty of the one or the other; but Christ has said, Love your
Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them which despightfully use you, and persecute you, that you may be the
Children of your Father which is in Heaven; for he m^keth the S^n to rise on
the evil and on the good, and on the just and on the unjust; for if ye love
them which love y^u, what Reward have you, do not even the Publicans the same?
And if ye salute your Brethren only, what do you more than others, do not the
Publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven
is perfect, Mat 5.44, 45, 46, which if People, through Obedience to the Command
o^ God would fulfill his Will, according to his Command, it would soon put an
end to all men's various Apprehensions, and these busling Noises about the Devil
and Witches, and indeed the very Name of a Devil and a Witch is to be abhorred
among men; also shall the Name of the Wicked perish, which are no such manner
of Witches as these are accused for, though through Gods goodness I have no^
Relation among them, neither am I any Advocate for the Devil, Witches, nor
Wicked Men, but desire that Truth and Righteousness may take place in the
Earth; for it were better that one hundred Witches should live, than that one
person be put to death for a Witch, which is not a ^itch; but God Almighty best
knows what the Priests and Rulers have done toward these People, who have not
lived unto God as they ought to have done, for which cause these things are,
(as a Judgment for ^in and Transgre^sion) fallen upon them. But with the
Righteous it is not so, because they abide in Obedience to the holy Commands of
God, through whose Power they witness a sure d^e^ing place, having their
settlement upon that sure R^ck of an everlasting Foundation, against which
there is ^o Enchantment nor Divination for the Gates of Hell against it shall
never prevail; for the Love of God in Christ Jesus ^s to the faithful, and
through him are they kept in perfect peace, out of which state the World
remains unstable, having the mind tossed to and fro in the bus^^gs and
clamourous Noises about the Devil and Witch craft, which ^^man need to fear, as
he keeps faithful upon his watch, (...) Obedrence to Gods holy Truth made
manifest by Jesus Christ; for while Israel kept faithful, the Devil could not
get entrance; for it is said, Surely there is no Enchantment against Jacob, nor
Divination against Israel, N^mb. 23.23. Which does certainly prove, that if
there were not first a falling from Obedience to the Command of the Lord, that
^e would not depart from them; for God has commanded all men to watch and
pray, that they may witness deliverance in the hour of Temptation; and if this
Command had been kept by the afflicted Evidences, they could not have been
possessed or bewitched by the Devil, nor any of his Instruments; for the cause
of their being possessed or bewitched, has been through a Life of Disobedience
to God, who (as a Judgment for not obeying his Truth) has suffered further
affliction to come upon them, which is also as a warning to all others, that
they may live (as they ought) to Gods Truth, which the Devils Power cannot
touch; for though the Devils Power was permitted to touch the outward Man of
Job, for a trial of his inward Faith, but not to touch the inward Man; for
whatsoever the Lord may suffer the Devil, for the outward trial (...) his
Peoples inward Faith, yet he never suffers the Devils Power to lauch in such a
manner, as in these bewitched or possessed Evidences, which is almost beyond
the credi^ of man to receive, what manner of strange actions they had, which I
do believe the true Prophets of God were never acted by any such Spirit, which
gives them (as they say) the true knowledge who are Witches, and who are not,
the diverse of the Persons they never knew, nor never heard of the^ Names,
before the Spectre (or Devil turned informer) man their Names known to them,
and where they live; and the^ have presumed to affirm, That P. F. a Merchant of
Salem murdered J. R's Son of Salem, by drowning him at the Island of
Barbados, with many more things of the like nature, which are too tedious to
relate of the afflicted Evidences; and I desire of God to be preserve from such
a Spirit of Sights. And yet some (who Names I shall not here mention) have
said, That the afflicted, bewitched or possessed Evidences, are the true Marty
of Jesus Christ, and that they are killed all the Day long, a^ as his Sheep
accounted for the Slaughter. From which Bel^ the Lord deliver me; for the
chosen of God, which w^ read of ( Psalm. 4^.22. Romans 8.35, 36, 37, 38, 39.) we
not sighted by any such Spirit as these are sighted with (...) they were
Christ's Sheep, and knew his Voice, who (...) he true Shepherd of Israel, which
neither slumbereth (...) sleeps, but watches over his Flock by day and by
^^ght, and his Voice they know, but the Voice of a ^^ranger they will not
follow, John 10.5. For they follow (...) Lamb of God which takes away the Sins
of the World, Joh. ^.29. for by his Blood are the Righteous made clean from
(...) corrupt part, which is the cause in them who are affected and tormented,
even as we see these Evidences be, those whooping and hollowing, with all their
other ^^tick Actions, is far from singing the new Song, as they ^^d who were
redeemed, not by the power of Man, but ^y the Power of God, Rev. 5 9, 10, 11,
12. for by the ^ower of God, without the help of Man, were they made ^^re than
Conquerors, through him that loved them, Romans (...) 37.

So that the Love of God savingly, is to them that ^ar and obey, and not to the
disobedient state, through which Unbelief and hardness of heart, brings People
^^o trouble of Spirit; and it may be, that some of ^^ese People called Witches
have been in trouble, which ^ith other Circumstances, may have occasioned them
to ^^clare that against themselves, which (it may be they ^e not giulty of; for
to them that are in trouble of and, by reason of unfaithful living to God, the
Devil ^ay be permitted to work the frame of their Spirits into ^^th Delusions,
that thereby the whole natural senses the understanding, may be drawn to
believe a thing, which is but only in show, and not in substance, as for ^an to
believe that the Devil has avisible Book of natu(...) Paper, and with the
natural Blood of men's natural Bo^^, they subscribe to this natural Book, and
that the Devil takes their natural Bodies of natural men and women, and
baptizeth them with natural Water, and that he sets them upon a natural
pole, and carries them for above the highest Trees, to a natural House, where
the Priests and the Devil give them natural Bread, and natural Wine, which they
say they eat and drink, and he promises them to pull down the Kingdom of
Christ, and himself to sit upon the Throne of Christ; with much more of the
like nature, which some of there called Witches have confessed but most of them
that have so confessed I think are at liberty, and those that have not
confessed put to Death, for what they have confessed of the like nature most of
them ((...) not all have denied again, which as to their deny at, I do believe
would not have been of much benefit, had not the Devil been so hasty to inform
against such whom some may think impossible to be Witches, but as to that, God
and their own Consciences know best; but the faithful may Judge, according to
men's fruit, even as the Apostle did, when he said, O foolish Galations! who
has bewitched you, that you should not obey the Truth, before whose Eyes Jesus
Christ has been evidently set forth, crucifi^^ among you, Gal. 3.1. So that
Witchcraft is maintained through the Devils Power in diverse manners, which to
be sure, one part of Witchcraft properly belongs to them that bewitch
People, that they should not obey the Truth of Gods holy commands by Jesus
Christ; for which cause of Disobedience (as before related) is it tha^ some (as
a Judgment upon them) are given up through unbelief, to hardness of heart, in
which state some liv^ in such horror of Conscience, that their Lives are of
suc^ burden, that they wilfully murder themselves, other in the same state,
are as willing to dye as the other but desiring to dye, and not being permitted
to destroy themselves, because Death (as an addition to Judgment) slee^h away,
Rev. ^.6. then in that state of horror, may they not accuse themselves of such
sins which they have not committed, for this very end, to be destroyed by
others? for a wounded Spirit, who can bare? Prove. 14.1^. and how common is it
in Barbados for black People to destroy themselves, merely upon a false
belief, of their being at more ease when out of this body, than in the body;
then what changes the nature between black People, and white People? the
color of the skin does not change the Nature. But some may say, The Negroes in
Barbados do not go to Church. Indeed is it so, and what better are many for
going to Church in New England, where they that have been nearest related to
the Church, have manifested themselves to be the furden from God, as witness
their putting four of the Lords Servants to death at Boston, which Church they
then accounted the purest Church in the World; and if the sheding of innocent
Blood be the mark of a pure Church, the Church of Rome is more pure then the
church of Boston, of which I may hereafter more relate; so that it is not the
going to Church in New England, that causes white People to differ in nature,
from black people, which go not to Church in Barbados. And therefore Judges
had need to consider all things aright, because they are expressly commanded, To
do no Unrighteousness in Judgment, Lev. 19.15. Now some of these People have
said to me, that they were in trouble of mind, and then hearing of themselves
accused by the Specter, (or Devil turned Informer) that it made them even as it
were besides themselves, or out of their natural Understanding; and then
hearing that all, without confession were suddenly put to Death, and large
promises of mercy from God and Man, and with the Priest and his Fallowers on
the one side, and their nearest and dearest Relations on the other side, all
urging to a Confession, which is so (as I believe it was) let all rational men
judge what state and condition these confessors were in; for we read, That over
much Oppression will make a wise Man mad; and its easy to conceive that lesser
Oppression will make them mad who are not in their right Understandings, by
reason of some trouble in mind.

But the thing then is, how or which way, or by what means shall men come to
know one that is a Witch, from one that is not a Witch?

To which I say, it must be by that Wisdom by which the Damsel, E^^mus and
Simon came to be known, Acts 10.16. and 13.8, 9, 10. and 8.23. and
notwithstanding they were known to be Witches, the Apostle did not direct to
the command in the Law, of not suffering a Witch to live, but directed or
exhorted him to repent, and pray; which ought to be noted, that first to
repent, then pray, which may afford this use, that Prayer before Repentance is
not accepted of the Lord, neither is Repentance, without the Fruits of
Repentance, and without Fruits the Faith of Man is dead, even as the Body is
dead without the Spirit, James 2.26.

But then say the Professors of this Age, Is there no other way and means to
know Witches, but as the Apostle did in his day? Then there is no knowing a
Witch in this day, because (say they) all such means by the Spirit of God is
ceased; for one working of Miracles is past.

Answ. Past indeed to them that know no other state, but to bear a Body of Sin
all their days; but to them who are redeemed from sin, they know, in measure,
as the Apostle did in his day; for if one Spirit cannot discern another, then
Christ is not in his People; but the faithful witness Christ is spiritually in
them, and in whom he is not, are they not Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.5. and to them
is no Prophecy, no Revelation, no Miracle, for they are spiritually dead,
deaf, dumb and blind, as to all the spiritual things of God by Jesus Christ,
and to such the Truth of God (by any of his Servants) is as Pearl before Swine;
and if a faithful man should say, That he has an infallible assurance that
some of these twenty People put to Death in N. E. for Witches, were not such
Witches, as accused, condemned and put to Death for; then what follows, but the
prosecution of Law, because he has but one Evidence, and that is in himself by
the Spirit of God; so though all are lawful, yet all things are not expedient,
without the call of God thereunto. But Witches there be of diverse sorts, as
before related, and if any be convicted of Murder, they ought to dye; but if
men once maintain it lawful to put all to Death for Witches, in whose likeness
the ^evil may appear, and work the like Wickedness, as is laid to the charge of
these put to Death, they may, (I believe) put to Death for Witches, the
greatest part of People now in the World, because its but a few in comparison
that shall be saved; which greatest Number that perish, when the Spirit of God
leaves striving, and the day of Grace is over, then their House becomes
desolate, and they become the Children of him whose Work they have done, and he
takes more full possession of his own House and Goods, which is the heart, mind
and Spirit of them that are wholly departed from the Lord, and the Lord from
them, ( Genesis 6.3. Mat. 12.43, 44, 45. Luke 11.24.25) And thou has not the
Devil full Power over his own, that is, without their consent, to act and do,
so far as he is permitted, any manner of Wickedness in their likeness, or in
the form and shape of their Bodies? But to act and do such Wickedness in the
form, shape and likeness of Gods faithful Children, is that which I cannot
believe, therefore I leave it, waiting the Lords time for the further
manifesting of that, with other Mysteries unto me, and doubt no^, but as I
remain faithful, the Lord will manifest unto me, in his own due time, what he
sees convenient for me. And his I am well satisfied in, that if men maintain
that command of not suffering a Witch to live, as in the time of the Law, that
they are not Ministers in all things according to the Law, except they put to
Death as the Law in that day did require, that is, the Witch and the Wizard,
the false Worshipper, the rebellious Child, the Adulterer and Adultress, all
which were under one sentence of Death in the time of the Law; then why only a
Witch, not guilty of Murder, to be put to Death in this Gospel Day, when Christ
has said Let the Tares and Wheat grow till the Harvest, and to let the blind
alone, for if one lead the other, both shall fall into the Ditch. And though
the holy man of God destroyed twice fifty, with their Captains, by fire from
Heaven, and forty more by cursing them in the Name of the Lord, these things,
according to Christ's own words, are not lawful to be done in this Gospel Day, 1
King. 1.10. These 2.24. Luke 9.5. Mat 15.14. Luke 6.39. Mat. 13.30. Mat. 5. Then
as to the Command in the Law relating to false Worshippers, as they were
accursed, so was their whole Substance accursed also; therefore if these put to
Death be Witches, it must needs follow, that they are false Worshippers, then
why they put to Death, according to that Command in the Law, and their
Substance taken away to defray public Charge, contrary to the express Command
of God in the time of the Law, Exodus 22 18. Deuteronomy. 28.16 and 13.1^, 1^. But when
men come ^o burn their Books of curious Arts, then the oldness of the Law will
dye, and newness in Spirit will appear, through the growth of Gods Word, which
in that day shall prevail, Acts 19.17, 18, 19, 20. until which time, let
Christ's saying to the Rebellious Jews be sufficient, that is, when they brought
the Woman taken in the act o^ Adultry, saying, Moses in the Law commanded that
such should b^ stoned to Death, Christ bids, Let him that is without sin cast
the first stone; but no man among them being without sin, the woman escaped,
even so may Witches, not guilty of Murder, escape in this day; for he that ^s
wholly clear of every degree of Witchcraft, may cast a stone at Witches, that
is, when as evidently proved as the Woman's act was in Adultry, John 8.4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10. for where the nature of Witchtraft remains, it evidently appears
by Peoples Threats one to the other, and their living in Malice, Hatred and
Envy one against the other, watching and waiting for the opportunity of
advantage one against the other, and if no advantage present of damnifying one
the other, yet the sin of Witchcraft in one degree, is as deeply rooted in
them, as the sin of Adultry is rooted in him that looks on a Woman, to lust
after her, has committed Adultry with her already in his heart, Mat. 5 28. for
the intent of Wickedness is of greater abomination in the sight of God, than
the act of sin is in the sight of sinful men.

Of which number I am now concerned to give an account of New England's first
Inhabitants, and of them which yet remain without Power, but in the very nature
of their fore Fathers, justifying the Laws by which the Lords Servants were
persecuted to Death at Boston, for which Judgment after Judgment has fallen
upon this place even since, and the Lords just Judgments were to bring them to
a sight of that sin of Blood, but instead of re^enting, their hearts have waxed
harder and harder against the Truth of God, delivered by his Servants, in that
day, in which Day of Gods Truth to them, their requital was by destroying the
Lives of the Lords People, with whole innocent Blood, New England remains
defiled; for the very first stepped of the first Inhabitants toward this land,
in may be questioned whether or not they fled beyond the command of the Lord;
for finding the Bishops Yoke uneasy, under which if they had remained
faithful, the Yoke of the Lord would have been easy, and his Burden light, but
instead of manifesting the Lords cause in the other City, they fled this Land,
which fleeing was it not beyond what the Lord has commanded when persecuted in
one City, to flee to the other, that each place or each People may hear the
Truth, which all that are called of God, are to deliver, according to their
measure, which if any say that it was sufficient warrant from God, for them to
flee the Land, and as Paul did, preach the Gospel where Christ was not named,
then why followed they not Paul, as for example he followed Christ, who came
not to destroy men's lives, but to save, and (...), by turning People from
Darkness to Light, and (...) Power of Satan to the Power of God; but how (...)
they turned the Native Indians, where Christ (...) named, did they not in their
first settlement, (...) them in to the Grave, where there is no Repentance? a
strange turning in feed, by a People that pretended so much to Gods Truth, as
they did, and not come so far as the Law and the Prophets, but to do unto the
poor Natives, otherwise then they themselves would be done unto, well might
such a work not be expected, to promote a People for the Service of God, and
Honor of his Name, who has well rewarded the Inhabitants of New England, for
their unrighteous dealings toward the Native Indians, whom now the Lord has
suffered to reward the Inhabitants with a double measure of Blood, by Fire and
Sword, which had they followed the command of the Lord, to have prayed for
their Enemies, and done to others, even as themselves would have been done
unto, the ^nhabitants might have been free from these great and terrible
Judgments of God, which for sin and evil, is their Reward in this Day. So its
evident that through their unfaithfulness to God, in their first settlement of
this Land, and since has been the leading cause of their being further left to
do these unrighteous things, which have increased the Lords Wrath against them,
and their following Generation, who remain guilty, for not repenting of sin and
evil against God, for whose Truth they ought to have born a faithful Testimony
in their public ^ssemblies, against all the unrighteous Ways of their
fore-Fatcers, which have been against the Lord and his People, of which I may
relate something, that others thereby may receive warning, not to follow
Unrighteousness, but to remain faithful to their measure, lest the Lord deliver
them up, through Unbelief, to hardness of heart, and they do as New-England's
Priests and Rulers have done, which has caused the hand of the Lord to be
against them, and all that actually, or by silence, have consented to their
unrighteous ways, which have been maintained by the Sword of the Magistrate,
which the Priests, in the day of their Power, whitted sharp through their false
pernicious Doctrines, which did encourage the Rulers of that day to deshoy all
the Lords Servants that were found within their Government, under the Name
Quaker, to whom they allotted the Valley of Achor for a door of Hope, Josh. 7
24.25. perverting the Truth of God, through their preaching up things in the
Law, which Christians are not to do in the time of the Gospel, Deuteronomy. 13. 1
King. 1.10. and 2.24. Luke 9.54. which notwithstanding they would preach and
pray, That all were accursed that did their Work negligently against the
Quakers, whose living among the People the Priests did impute to be the cause
of Gods Judgments, which they said, was the Peoples just Reward, for suffering
any one Quaker to live among them; whereupon the Rulers, with the silent
consent of the greatest part of the Inhabitants, did make sharp and bloody Laws
against the Quakers, whereby they were long imprisoned, under many Hardships,
as in respect of the hard cold Clymate, without fire, and for days together
without food having their Friends denied of visiting them in any kind, but as
the Lord was daily with them, their strength in love did increase toward him,
who did uphold and support them in their great Sufferings, which were of that
Nature, that one would even wonder that a People of so much preaching and
praying, should be so blind, and of so unbelieving hard hearts, to work in such
a hight of Wickedness against the Lord and his People whom they have
imprisoned, whipped, stockt, out the^ Ears, undering them to be sold for Bonds
Men and Bond Women, banishing them upon pain of Death, if ever they return, to
be offered up at their bloody Altar; and to the value of twenty hundred Pounds
taken from them for Fines; and made a Law, that every Master of a Vessel that
landed any one Quaker within their Power of Government, should pay one hundred
Pounds, and five pounds for any one that gave entertainment to any one of their
Books, with much more of the like nature, acted and done by them to the
aforesaid honest harmeless People, whom in their Law they have styled with the
Name of Rogues and Vagabonds, Blasphemous Heretics, and Seducers of the People
from the Faith; but if they have called the Master a Devil, they of the same
Spirit have called his People after the like manner, and after the same nature
have they perseented his Servants to Death at Boston, which Wickedness they
would cover with a Lie, even as their fore Fathers did, by giving large Money
to the ignorant, to say his Disciples stole him away by Night; which large
Money will not hide their Lying, no more will the twenty hundred Pounds taken
from the Quakers, hide the Lies of them in this day, who say, The Quakers
hanged themselves; for the Law by which they were put to Death, was made after
that they had been a time in the Country, which after their Return, according
to that Law of Banishment, were they in a most barbarous inhumane way put to
Death, being drove to their bloody Altar with Drums, Guns and Swords, and out
down, even to the breaking of their skulls, and in a barbarous manner dragged
their naked Bodies in a Roap, with the gnashing of Teeth; in which inhumane
manner they threw their naked Bodies into a stinking Pit near to their Bloody
Altar, not suffering their Friends to secure the place with Fence, by which
their Bodies might be preserved from Swine, and other ravenous Creatures. By
which it is evident they hanged not themselves, but as they were persecuted in
one place, they kept the Command of the Lord by fleeing to the other, until
they delivered up their Lives, as for ^xample the Lords Servants in days past
have done, for the Truth of God and Testimony of Jesus, whom they have
followed, even as the Disciples and Apostles of Christ have done. Then seeing
that it is high Rebellion against God and the King, to put his People to Death
without any warrant, precept, command or example from either, of how much lower
nature is the Work of Witchcraft if really it so be) in and about the Town of
Sal^m? for the Lords People are to him as the apple of his Eye, and he that
touches them, toacheth the Apple of his Eye, Z^ch 2.8. Deuteronomy 32 10. Psalm. 17.8.
for whosoever offends one of them, b^tter were it for him that he were
drowned in the depth of the Sea, Mat 18 6. Mark 9.42. Luke 17.1, 2. Therefore
People ought well to consider whom they establish to rule for their outward
Peace among themselves; for where men of Persecuting Principles are appointed
by the People to rule, where they once gain Power by the consent of the People,
to persecute, their unrighteous Work draws the judgments of God upon the
Inhabitants of the whole place where they rule; for had the Body of the Jews
withstood their unrighteous Prie^^s and Rulers, by bearing a faithful Testimony
for Gods holy Truth, they had been freed from that Judgment which now remains
upon their Generation; even so is it with the Inhabitants of New England,
though many of them had no actual hand in shedding of innocent Blood, which
has defiled the Land, because they did not bear a faithful Testimony against
the unrighteousness of their Priests and Rulers of that Day, for which cause
every Judgment upon this place, reaches the whole Body of People in the general
Cal^^^ty; for Christ charges the Spirit of Persecution with all the righteous
Blood that has ever been shed, Mat. 23.35.

Then seeing that this Spirit of Persecution is charged with more
Unrighteousness toward God and his People, then all them of that nature which
they call witches who have not that influence upon People to bewitch them, that
they should not obey the Truth, even as the persecuting Priests and Rulers have
done, which proves Persecutors to be the greatest Witches in the World, because
the one, as the Devil was only permitted to touch the outward Body, for the
inward trial of Faith, but the other are permittnd to bewitch People to
persecute one the other to Death, and through the Power of the Devil, cause
People to believe, that they are deing good Service for God, when they are
persecuting his People to Death, Acts. 26.10, 11. and 8.5. and 9.1, 2. which
time has been, and yet remains, where the Priests bear rule, Joh. 16.2.3. for
as Troops of Robbers have waited for a man, so have the company of Priests
murdered in the way, by consent, Hos. 6.9. So that these things are in all
places, where the persecuting Priests are rule among the People, who are like
their Priests, Hos. 4.6, 7, 8,.10. and it is by the consent of the People, that
persecuting Magistrates rule, and by consent of their ^urighteous Laws, do the
persecuting Priests destroy he outward Lives and Liberties of the Lords People,
(...) which cause the Lords Wrath and Indignation is against the whole People,
so far as they are either accally (or by silence) consenting to these things,
through which the righteous suffer for the cause of Gods holy Truth, who are
not to give their Bread to Dogs, nor to cast their Pearls before Swine, neither
are they to forgive further then men turn, and say, they repent, Mat. 6.10.
Luke. 17.4 for nofurther then men repent of their Evil Deeds, will the Lord
forgive; so that his will may be done on Earth, as it is done in Heaven, men
are not to seek to unbind that on Earth which as not unbound in Heaven, neither
to ^^ek to bind that on Earth which is not bound in Hrave^, but to pray that
the sin of Murder may not be laid (...) charge of them that know not what they
do, Mat. 5.44. Acts 7.00. for in this Day of great Trouble upon them that have
not done even as they would be done unto, the Lord is daily adding unto their
Afflictions because they Kopent not of their evil Deeds toward him and his
People, whom Pharaoh-like they have oppressed, but the Lord has in a great
measure withheld the roaring of the Lion, and the fierce Lion, and the Teeth
of the young Lion the Lord has broken, and the strength of their power against
Gods Heritage, is become of no force; for their striving against the holy One
of Israel is brought to naught; for he is a consuming fire, to burn up and lay
waste the Works of the Wicked, whose unrighteous ways have been in Disobedience
against hi^ holy Truth, in which the Righteous are preserved; for the Lord is
the Hope of his People, against whom there is no Enchantment, neither against
them can any Divination take place; for the Lord exalts Judgment for the
Oppressed, and gives food to the hungry, the Lord is his Name, by whose Power
Miracles are wrought, and Aonders done; for the Lord opens the Eyes of the
blind, and unstoppeth the Ears of the deaf, and causes the Lame to walk in
pleasant places, the Lord raises them that are bowed down, and preserves the
strangers, he is God, and Lord over all, he relieveth the Fatherless, and
pleads the Widows Cause, but he turns the way of Wicked upside down, which
they that are not deaf, dumb and blind, may hear, see and understand, ^o the
praise of God and honor of his Name, who preserves the Righteous from falling
into the many Snares of the Worlds Ways and Customs, who are accustomed to
serve in those things which the Lords soul abhors, in which state the blind
lead the blind to Death, Hell and Destruction; wherefore the Day of Gods Wrath
increases against the Wickedness of men, who, without Repentance, shall
certainly perish; for the ^ay of Gods Vengeance has overtaken many, and is
hastening toward all that preach for hire, and all that divine for Money, and
to all them that pervert the Truth, and turn the cause of the Fatherless and
Widow, and he that purteth the Cup to his Neighbors mouth for outward gain,
by which excess is made in the use of the Creature; and to him that oppresses
in time of Sickness, and wrongeth the weak and feeble in time of Trouble; and
the Thief, with the Swearer, Liar and Drunkard, and the Adulterer, with the
Adultress, and he that oppresses the Poor, and he that is oppressed in buying,
which seeks his loss by Oppression in selling, which causes Oppression among
the poor, even like a sweeping rain; and he that spends of the Creation beyond
what is meet for his present state, and of all others, of what nature soever,
as the Charmer, or Observer of Times, or Inchanter, or Witch, or Consulter with
familiar Spirits, or a Wizard, or a Nicromancer, for all these are an
Abomination unto the Lord, which with these sins, and the destroying of the
Lords Servants, let the Priests, Rulers, and rest of the Inhabitants consider
what Work there is for them to do, before the Lord will withdraw his Wrath,
which burns against New England, for their rebellious stiff-neckedness in
Unbelief and hardness of Heart against the Lord of Life, who has given a
measure of the same Light, Life and Grace to the faithful in this day, as to
the Righteous in days past, through which they receive Wisdom from above, which
leads them not to spend their whole time to study out of other men's Lines, made
ready to their hands, but receive the mind of God in Christ, through the gift
of that Wisdom which gave the Lords Servants to know the sta^e of Annanias and
Saphira, and the Damsel, Simon and Elymus, Acts 8.23, 2^. cap. 5.9. and 14.9,
10, 11. and 16, 17, 18. But to them that live in known Disobedience against the
known Commands of the Lord, they deny all infallible means by the Spirit of
God, for which cause of Disobedience, the Light of the Lord is their
Condemnation for evil Deeds, John 3.19, 20, 21. for the Lord does call to
remembrance the Disobedience of them that are bewitched that they should not
obey his Truth, and against them will the Lord draw up Judgment after Judgment,
until he has destroyed the Disobedient, even as he has done to the Rebellious
in days past; for he will out off the Wicked, even as we see, in the midst of
their days, in which day the sinner escapes not, though a hundred years old,
Isa. 56, 20. Deuteronomy. 18.6. Heb. 10.28. Psalm. 37.16, and 21.37, 38 Genesis 6.3.

Therefore let not People be any longer deceived by such idle Shepherds as we
read of in days past, which live upon the Peoples Labor, and not profit their
Souls, Isa. 56.10.11. Ezekiel. 34. Mic. 21.2.3.4. Isa. 5.2.9.10. Jer.
14.9.10.11.12.13.14.15.16. Joh. 10.12.13. but instead of Peoples searching the
holy Scriptures, which through faith in Christ Jesus, are able to make wise to
Salvation, they are roving in their minds after this and the other Teacher, as
learned and brave Orthodox men, whom they esteem to be Preachers of the Gospel,
not at all considering, that the Gospel is the Power of God to Salvation, to
them that believe, and Condemnation to them that do not believe, which must
needs follow, that such savingly believe not in the Power of God, which gives
Power to them that savingly believe in his Power, which redeems the mind of
every true believer out of every dead form, and from all dead formal Teachers,
whose Teachings is altogether from the Letter without the assisting Power of
divine Grace and Spirit, which in words they will seem to own, but in works
they deny; for their preaching is where outward profit gives the greatest
encouragment, and if there be one place of more outward benefit then another,
that is for the accutest Work^man, and the lesser benefit for the weaker
capacity in their way; but as Unrighteousness is of man's Enemies, and they are
they of his own House, and unto them is their Obedience yeiled through which
they are Servants unto him whom they obey, and Children unto him whose Work
they do, Romans 6.16. Ioh. 8.44. Mat. 6.24. Luke 16.13, 1 John 3.8. so that if
they say, they have no sin, they are Liars, and deceive themselves, for they
remain in the Degeneration, having their minds alienated from God, and from
serving him in the true and living way, Romans 3.11.12 13. Psalm. 59. and 140.7.
Prove. 1.16. Isa 59.7.8. But that nature which makes atrue believer is by Faith
in God, through Jesus Christ, and they that are true Believers believe in him,
of whose nature they be, which sins not, 1 John 3.2. to 11. Isa. 5.3.6. but
they whose minds are exercised in the love of that which is below the love of
God in Christ, are not worthy to receive him, Mat. 19.20. to 25. and
10.37.38.39. But through Disobedience the wise are blind from receiving the
Truth of these things, Mat. 11.25. Luke 10.21. but the faithful press forward,
having the assurnace, through Grace, by faith in Christ, that the Lord will
perfect his Work of Grace, according to his faithful Promise, even as he has
done to his faithful Children in days past, Genesis 17.1. Job 1.1. and 8.3. Psalm.
18, ^2. Mat. 19.20.21. Ephesians. 4.12. Luke 6.40 Col. 1.28. for nothing less, then
of what Obedience God required of man in the time of the Law, will be of God
accepted in this Gospel Day, Levit 22.21. Deuteronomy. 25.5 Therefore not any one man
nor woman, but shall be left without excuse in the Day of Account, because all
have in measure, received to profit withal, Joh. 3.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Mat
25. 1 Cor. 12.3. to 9. Ephesians. 5.13.14. So that if People would but give up in
their minds to spend that time in reading the holy Scriptures, which they spend
in that which only satisfies the Lust of the natural Will, which begets from a
further and further obedience of retaining God in their thoughts by which the
mind is fitly framed, through Disobedience, to veild it self a servant to the
Devils Power, through which they become Witches, and in one degree or another,
are Instruments of bewitching others* in which state of Disobedience the World
remains in Wickedness, bewitching one the other that they should not obey the
Truth of God made manifest by Jesus Christ so that the greatest sort of
Witchcraft by the Devil, is to make men Instruments for his service, and to
bewitch into that which is of the most service to promote his Kingdom of
Unrighteousness, which cannot be higher promoted, by any that serve him, then
when they are by him bewitched, to bewitch others into the like state, that when
they are destroying the lives of the Lords Children, think it is of the
greatest Service for God, and benefit to their Souls, which is the greatest
sort of Witchcraft that ever was, for People, of the Devil, so to believe.

Now for all other sort of Witches, they only touch the outward, but cannot
touch the Spirit of one true Believer in Christ Jesus, which, according to that
command of God, for the destroying of Witches and false Worshippers in the time
of the Law, if it remain the same in this Gospel Day, it reaches the Life of
every Persecutor, which does bewitch that they should not obey the Truth; in
which state, though they worship not a false God, as in the time of the Law,
yet they worship the true God in a false way, which comes under the same
Condemnation of not suffering a Witch and the false Worshipper to live, in the
time of the Law. So that Persecutors are no more the true Worshippers of God in
this Gospel Day, than Witches, and other false Worshippers were in the time of
the Law; for Publicans and Harlots shall enter the Kingdom of Heaven before
them that are of that Persecuting Spirit, by which so many Thousands of People
are bewitched, that they should not obey the Truth, but remain in the works of
the flesh, with which Witchcraft is included, Gal. 5.20. for which cause the
Devil is permitted to imitate the very form of the way and manner of their
former proceedings against the People of God, at their general Court in Boston;
for some of the afflicted, bewitched or possessed Evidences say, That the black
Man, ( i. e. the Devil) in a high crowned Hat, with his Priests, have diverse
times called together about four or five hanared of their Number, at Sa^^m they
use to assembl^ themselves together, breaking R^^ad and drinking Wine, which
they call the Devils Sa^^ament, which practice (as the Evidences, with some of
the confessed, say) is before they set upon the hight of their intended Work,
to a (...) and torment others, thereby to force them to conform to the same
practice of the Devils way; and some have confessed, they have been freed from
the Torment of their afflicted state, upon conforming to the Devils Will, who
then baptizeth them into Covenant, to do what he and the Priests with him
command to be done. Which work of the Devils general Court, is as like in
imitation to the work of the former Priests and Rulers against the People
called Quakers, as the moving shadow of a wicked man, is like to the moving of
(...) corrupted Body; for all that would not conform to the Faith of the
Priests and Rulers, to do as they did in that day, were by them and their
followers esteemed no better than Dogs; for I never heard of any D^g but
received more Mercy than that Servant of the Lord William Breand, received at
the hands of the Priests, Rulers and their Followers in that day, who tied the
said W. B. neck and heels sixteen hours, and laid upon his naked back thirty
stripes with a three cord knotted whip, and then from ^^e of their Church
Members (with a pitched Roap) received one hundred and seventeen stripes, only
his Shirt to defend the same; having his body thus beaten into a Jelly of flesh
and blood, he fainted away; some thinking that he would not have recovered life
again, and the Doctor said, if he did recover it would be a Miracle; which
through the goodness of God he did recover to (...) and strength again, whose
Testimony was of great courage, through the Power of God, for the service of
his Truth among them that did believe, and for the further Condemnation of them
that did not believe; in which day the work of Unbelievers was of that nature
against the said People called Quakers, that to read the History of all their
Sufferings in that day, in and about Bo^on, may in Ages to come, make men to
wonder, that such a professing People in New England should manifest themselves
so mad against an innocent people; nay, in that day did they not appoint their
Women Church Members to search the Bodies of the Lords Hand maids for Witches,
whose Testimony will remain to the end on Record, That one of them so searched,
in the bearing and bringing forth fire Children, did not undergo the like
trouble, as the inhumane cruelty of these Church Women put her to in the
searching of her Body for a Witch, which she was clear of, but now among their
own Church Members, they have, as is supposed, Witchcraft upon Wi^ch-craft,
the which whether true or not, is a Judgment of God upon them, for their not
repenting of their evil Deeds against the Lord and his People, who daily desire
of God that they may manifest Repentance by the fruits thereof, until which
time of Reformation, that men may come to do, even as they would that all men
should do unto them, the Lords Anger against the Inhabitants of New England
will not be removed; for they may expect, that as they increase in
Unrighteousness against God, that as he draws off the lesser Judgment, a
greater, for sin and evil against him, will upon the Unrighteous be poured
forth; for God is not mocked, such as men sow, such they shall also reap; and
if the Inhabitants of New England do not amend and repent, the Lord has yet a
Work to do by Pestilence and Famine, which will be more terrible than all the
Lords former Judgments have been, ever since they began to persecute the honest
People called Quakers.

Of which work, under Boston Government, in that day, I have before mentioned,
proving it to be the moving cause that the Lord has, as with Israel of old,
left the Inhabitants of New England to further evils, which with the shedding
of the Blood of the innocent, and their other sins, these horrid Accusations of
Witchcraft have increased among the Inhabitants and Churches, so called, in
New England (but whether true or not, I do not affirm.) And to conclude, I
shall give an account of the Quakers sufterings in one small Town in
New England, by which the whole may the better be comprehended, which is as
follows.

An Account of Goods taken from the People called Quakers in the Town of
Sandwich in New England.
l. s. d. Taken from Robert Harper, 44 00 00 Taken from Ralph Allen, 68 00 00
Taken from Joseph Allen, 05 12 00 Taken from Thomas Greenfield, 28 00 00 Taken
from Edword Perry, 89 00 00 Taken from Richard Kirby, and his son Richard, 54
12 00 Taken from George Allen, 25 15 00 Taken from William Allen, 86 17 00
Taken from Matthew Allen, 48 16 00 Taken from William Gifford, 57 19 00 Taken
from Thomas Ewer, 25 08 00 Taken from William New-land, 36 00 00 Taken from
Daniel Wing, 12 00 00 Taken from Ralph Allin, 18 00 00 Taken from Peter Gaunt,
43 14 06 Taken from Thomas Jenkins, 19 10 00 Taken from Michael Turner, 13 10
00 Taken from John Newland, 02 06 00 In all 678 19 06

The other part of their Sufferings, in this small Town of Sandwich, was with
whipping, and long Imprisonment, and though the sufferings of the Inhabitant
Quakers of Sandwich were great, yet under Boston Government the sufferings of
this People, did abound in Cruelty above the other Collonies adjoining to
Boston Government, from which the other united colonies adjoining took their
example, to persecute the Quakers, as i^ short I have before related; but the
Lord open the dark Understanding of their Mind, and give them a heart Suitable
to Repent, that they may live to God, as they ought to do, which Repentance,
must appear by the fruits of Repentance, otherwise there can be no Salvation to
them that leave this Life without Repentance, because that there is no
repenting in the Grave, which if men did without Repentance, then they dye in
their sins, and cannot share with the faithful, in the things of Gods heavenly
Riches, which are in store for all them, that love the appearance of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XXX. Concerning the Lords Harvest, and of the Labor in his Vineyard.
EVen now, as in days past, the Lords Harvest is Great, but the Laborers are
few, because many have received of the Lord to work in the Vineyard, but are
not faithful to that of him which they have received; for which cause their
part of labor in the Vineyard remains not done, and they remain clothed with
the works of their own Labor, which is not of the Spirit of God, therefore do
they labor in Vain; for it is the diligent hand (through the gift of God)
which enriches the Soul of him, that is a faithful Labourer in the Lords
Vineyard, when the negligent and floathful ones are sent empty away; for all
have in measure received the seed of the Harvest; but through unfaithfulness
the harvest of Truth and Righteousness is not perse^^ed in them, because
through their unfaithfulness to the gift of God, the Seed takes not root, for
the ground proves barren, which is the cause of the seeds not taking root, to
bring forth fruit acceptable to God; for as the feed, in measure, has been
sown in all forts of ground, it only takes root to bring forth good fruit in
the honest heart, which is faithful to God in the work of the Vineyard; for
many are called to labor in the Vineyard, that through unfaithfulness to their
call, are never chosen among the faithful Laborers in the work of the Lords
Vineyard, therefore pray to the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send forth
more faithful Laborers, or the Harvest is great, and many unfaithful
Laborers there be, which hinder others from receiving the Truth, for they have
sown diverse strange seeds in the Lords Vineyard, where the many Pastors have
trodden the Lords portion under foot, and have made his pleasant Portion a
desolate Wilderness, which being desolate, it mourns unto the Lord, for which
cause the Lord has sent his Servants, as in days past, to warn the learned
wise rebellious Ones from the evil or their way, that People may find ease from
under these heavy burdens, with which their Teachers have yoked them, and
encouraged them to beat one, destroy the other, persuading them it was good
service for God in so doing, in which state many have itching ears, that will
not endure to hear found Doctrine, but heap up Teachers, which turn them from
the Truth into Fables, through which the Vinyard is encumbered with a multitude
of fruitless Trees, Briars, Thorns and Thistles, among which the Lion waits
for his prey, and the Subtle Foxes have their hiding places, where the Wolf
also seeks to devour, which things are left for Preachers to consider, and
not to teach People, to dash one against the other, but to love one another,
and to pray for their Enemies, and do no other thing to another, then they
themselves are willing to be done unto, until which time the Just Judgment of
God is their Reward, for all their evil ways toward him and his People, for
whom the Lord is making way, through his righteous Judgments, which take pleace
upon all them that obey not his Word, to keep his commands, they like
potsherds, shall even dash one against the other, until all be consumed, which
is not fitly framed and tempered according to the Lords own mind, but the Lord
is making way for the growth of his own Seed, which shall bring forth abundant
of increase, to the praise of God, and honor of his Name; for the harvest is
Great, and the Laborers are few, but the Lord will daily add more and more,
that by the strength of his own Power, he will make his Vineyard fit, according
to his own defire, where every one shall remain in peace under his own Vine,
unto which many are gathered, and unto them will be the gathering.

CHAP. XXXI. Something of an Account concerning Gods Judgments upon diverse of
the chief persecuting Priests and Rulers in New England, as also relating to
some of their Laws, Acts and Orders, for the further Reformation of them called
their Churches, with some what relating to their form and manner of Habit in
that day.
IT has been found lawful and expedient in all Ages, (as appears by the holy
Scriptures) to record the Works of the Righteous, that as Land Marks they might
remain for all to follow them in the way of Righteousness, and also to record
the Works of the Unrighteous, that as Way-Marks all might take warning to hate
evil and do good; for had the first Inhabitants of New England remained
faithful under the Bishops Yoke, in fleeing from one City and Town to the
other, the Yoke and Burden of Christ would have become easy and light, but not
bearing the Cross of Christ, in opposition to their natural Wills, they fled
beyond the Command of God, in fleeing the Land, though seemingly under a fair
pretense of gathering Churches, and planting them where Christ had not been
once named. But their preaching their Gospel and planting their Churches,
seems to me of the nature of the Spaniards among the Indians in New Spain,
who destroyed the Natives by Fire and Sword, even so was it with them that at
first came to preach the Gospel and plant Churches in New England, the effect
of which Work is recorded in their Book of Gods Providence toward them, in
suffering them to destroy the Natives, not considering how to love their
Enemies, and to pray for them, unto whom the King of Heaven and Earth had given
this Land to possess; but as in that day, by reason of the Native not
understanding the nature of Guns and Powder, one English Man with his Gun,
would put ten Indians to flight, so in fifty or sixty years time of being
acquainted with the Unrighteousness of the English, they are now become so
unrighteous in the same way, that as a Judgment upon the English, their Fire
and Sword is so terrible, that at the sight of ten Indians do one hundred well
armed English men take their flight; for the Natives now understanding Trade,
do say, the English cheated them of their Land, and also of the many ten
Thousand Pounds worth of Furs, with which they have traded with the English,
who were bounded by a Law, that only a few of them, which were mostly in the
Priests and Rulers favor, could trade, without paying five pounds in Money for
every pint of strong Drink they sold to any Indian, without lisence from the
Rulers, who did lisence such as aforesaid, to sell what they thought good,
insomuch that some of the Traders have boasted, that their profit was one
thousand pound in Furs, for one hundred pounds in Rum, Gun powder, and other
Goods with which they traded; but of all their trading goods, they said Rum was
the chief; for the Indians nature did so require and desire after strong Drink,
that all would be drunk in some short time, for which cause the English Traders
might then buy at any rate, and also to lengthen out out their stock by mixing
Rum and Brandy with two thirds Water; but ill gotten goods do not long remain
with the Wicked; for the Indian Traders, with their great Estates, have the
Indians destroyed most of them and their Estates with Fire and Sword; and if
New England has been purchased of the Natives, as they say, after the like
nature it has been, how can the English have peace with the Indians, until
they have repented of their sin, and made full restitution to them for their
wrong received from the English, especially about their Land, which all know
God gave unto them; and before the English came here, its generally
acknowledged, the Indians were a moral People in way of Trade with each other;
but since the English undertook the work of reducing them into the knowledge of
their Doctrine, Principles and Practices, they are become the worst of men in
stupidity, to work ^^ickedness; so that it is concluded, that those Indians
which have complied with the former Government, by which they have gained the
Name of Praying Indians, have been the greatest Enemies to the English in the
late Wars; and this I know, that some of them called praying Indians, have far
exceeded them called cursing Indians, in Mischief against the English, and in
general, the praying Indians are no more to be credited than they that never
prayed in their life; so that the great sums of Money or Goods sent from
England, to promote the Prie^^s and Rulers Work of converting the Indians in
New England, has no more answered the end, than all the Money and Goods, which
in the time the Priests have received of their people for preaching; for in
that day, the nearer people were drawn, by their Priests, to join with their
Church, the further they were drawn from serving God in the true and living
way, as is sufficiently manifest by their persecuting of People to death; so
that the more the Indians complied, in joining with the Church, the more
subtiler they grew, and now in subtilty exceed the Foxes, Bears, Lions and
Wolves, which if a true man were b^^ by the one, he could have no true
recompeace by complaint to the other; in which day they accounted their
Devotion so holy, that if one that was a Member was was reading in his Psalm
Book, and another that was no Member did but cast his eye, to behold what he
was reading, the prerson that was reading would close his Book, as a thing
unfit for them, accounted as Dogs, to partake with with them in their holy
things; and at that day, in the Church of Salem, the Women in time of service
had their faces covered with a Vail, which practice did not many years
continue, and when this practice was laid aside, they had (for the more order
in their Church) to keep people from sleeping, a man that wholly tended with a
short clubbed stick, having at the one end a knop, and at the other end a Fox
Tail, with which he would stroke the Wemens faces that were drousie to sleep,
and with the other end would knock unruly Dogs, and Men that were a (...); in
which time the Persecutors were not only known by their persecuting, but also
by their habit of high crowned Hats, and two inch broad Bands, with short hair
above or even with their Ears, and peaked Beards, for their manner was to cut
their hair by the brims of a dish upon their heads. They had also a Law about
Men and Women's Apparel, by which in wearing of black silk Hoods and Scarfs, the
Priests and Rulers Wives might be known from others, and them accounted rich
might be known by their fine Cloth, and Gold and Silver Buttons, and thereupon
came they to receive Honor of the poorer sort, which were yearly rated to
maintain their Priests, etc. And in that day a man or woman, though never so base
and wicked, yet should they find acceptance of favor with the Priests and
Rulers, by informing against the Quakers, who were recorded as Liars,
Blasphemers, Seducers, Heretics, Rogues and Vagabonds, with much more of the
like nature.

Now having related in several places of this Book some, what of the
unrighteous Laws, Acts, Orders and Practices of New England, I shall now relate
a little concering their last insnaring Law against the same people called
Quakers, through their pretended zeal for Conformity, by choosing Tyding Men in
each Town under their Government, which were year after year sworn to give true
Information where they found the Quakers to meet, or any other professing
people which were not lisenced to meet by the Priests and Rulers, who for so
meeting, according to that Law, did forfeit House and Land to the Country, and
then the Priests and Rulerrs were called the Country; and the persons, of
what quality soever, that were taken at any of the the aforesaid Meetings,
were forth-vvith to be well whipped in the house of Correction, the penalty of
which Law several honest rich Merchants in Boston received, which Law well
pleased the Priests, not knovving how little time they had to ride the Rulers
at their pleasure; but soon after this King Charles the second, with his
Council o^ Parliament, called them to an account, and found tha^ they had
forfeited their Charter, and which was condemned, and for their misdemeanour
toward him and his Subjects justly taken away. And in that Day their pretended
Holiness was such, that none but them of their own Profession were admitted to
bear Office, or fight against their Enemies; but now they will accept the
Mahoque Indians, or Pirates, or them highly accused of Witchcraft, to be their
chief Commanders; and instead of differing Apparel, all that can get it may
wear what they please, most striving who shall come nearest the newest French
fashion; and instead of Women's Vails in their Worship, strive who can spy out
the newest fashioned Apparel, and the richest and highest Top-kno^s, etc. and
too much let their minds out to discourse of these things, till their next
Worship day I write not these things to reflect upon the People of New England,
but that they may repent of their evils, which provoke the Lords Judgments
against a People that profess him in words, but deny him in Works; for which
cause it was, that diverse of the former Priests and Rulers were suddenly
removed by the just hand of the Lord, which reached them by sudden Death.
according as I have read in a printed Paper given to King Charles the second,
and to his Council, that upon the day of putting to Death them four Persons
called Quakers, many people to see them put to death, run over the Drawbridge
in Boston, which broke down, and several people hurt but only one Woman big
with Child killed, and that was her who had said, That rather than those four
Quakers should not be put to Death: for want of some one to hang them, that her
Husband should perform the Work.

The next in order was their Major General, whose Horse threw him in all his
Pomp, at the head of the Trainbands, and he dyed immediately in the same place.

The third was the Captain of their Castle, who was suddenly killed with
Thunder, at which time the blades of his Soldiers Swords melted in their
sheathes by their sides, yet all preserved alive.

The fourth and fifth were their two Captains which drove those innocent
persons to their bloody Altar; the one was deprived of his natural Reason, and
for filthiness degraded of his Church Brethren, and became eaten of Lice, and a
reproach to them that met him. The other was given up to strong Drink, and
suddenly dyed.

The sixth of their Rulers, was one Webb, who was accused of Uncleanness with
his near Kins-woman, he was strangely drowned, when all others in the same
Boat, were out of danger.

The seventh was their Jailer, a devout Member of their Church, who departed
this Life in great horror of Conscience, confessing, it was for his great
Cruelty to the poor Quakers.

The eight is said to have rotted alive, and was he that condemned the innocent
to dye

The nineth bled to Death, not known to have any Wound.

The tenth was one Underwood, a rich Baker, which wasted his Estate, and became
a Servant in Virginia And another, which I well knew, did the like.

The twelfth (a great ^ersecutor) was a rich Collonol, he ended miserably,
being killed by the Indians in his own House, in a taunting way of reproach.
And at the same time his Riches consumed by fire, and his Daughter taken
Captive.

The thirteenth was John Norton, their high Priest in Boston, who preached in
the forepart of the day, and in the latter part of the day, its said, he
confessed, the hand of God was upon him, and ^o dyed.

And as the Word of the Lord was by the Mouth of his Servants to John Indicot
Governor, even so is it, for his fair Dwellings in Boston are become a Barn,
and Stable for Cows and Horses; and one can hardly find where his fair D^ in
Salem stood. And of all his other great Estate in Lands and Livings, its well
known, that on four pence a day for labor, many honest men in Old England have
and do live far more better than any of his Posterity upon the aforesaid great
Estate, and yet I know not any of them extravagant, but things do not prosper
with them.

Some Deep and Mysterious Matters for all to Consider. BRIEFLY RELATING How Man
came to fall, his state in the Fall, and Way of Restoration to God again.
CHAP. I. Concerning the wonderful and mysterious Trees in the Garden of Eden,
unknown ever since Man was driven out of Paradise, until admitted to return
again, viz. the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, and the Tree of Life in the
midst of the Paradise of God.
NOw some will have the Tree of Kowledge of good and evil, to be a natural
Tree, planted by God in Paradise; with whom I will not much contend, but of
such a nature it was, that whosoever did eat thereof should have their Eyes
opened against themselves, and so to be as Gods, to know both good and evil;
then might it be, that God would admonish Adam both inwardly and outwardly, of
what he did inwardly and in his heart, either forbid or teach him, that he
would (...) for the greater Evidence set before his Eyes, but ^^^al this may be
granted, that what was outwardly done, the same happened inwardly in the heart
of Adam, that he was there temped by the Seed of the Serpent, viz. to make some
account and reckoning of his own Wisdom, Will and Nature, and not submit
himself unto God, as void of all name, knowledge or work, but to be something
of himself; and there are two causes for it, first, because the promise is,
that the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the head of the Serpent. Now I do not
read of any natu^a^ o^ living Serpent, whose head was so bruised by the Seed of
the Woman; therefore it may besaid, as the spiritual Seed of the Woman (or
Christ) was in the heart of Adam, so likewise was the serpents Seed; for man
was made good, and not of the substance of God, therefore is it that man turns
himself always from God, and inclines to his own vanity; for what is the Devil
Sin, Death and Hell, but nothing, even as many of the ancient Fathers have
writ, especially Thaulerus that God never created them, for they are a
Nonentity, a not being, which is contrary and perfectly opposite to Entity and
being; and this might be the Devil that dwelt in Adam which seduced him, as
also in Lucifer; The other cause is this, that the Scriptures likewise witness,
that the City of God, and the heavenly Jerusalam, and the Kingdom of God, is a
Paradise within his People; and further, that God and his Almighty Word is their
Paradise, the Tree of Life the Temple where they dwell, walk, sacrifice and
pray, as likewise are his People and Paradise; and that the Beast spoken of in
the Revelations, which the whole World, both great and small do at this day
worship in their hearts, as likewise the Tree of knowledge of good and Evil, is
within men, for the whole exterior World, or whatsoever either is or is done
outwardly, are but only an accident and figure, signifying the Truth of the
thing, and the internal nature; and therefore, there is nothing true, of
whatsoever is seen with the Eyes of man, for the figure and fashion of this
World must pass away and perish, as being nothing else but a certain imaginary
World, and the figure that is true, right, eternal and subsisting of it self,
consequently, all things which in the Bible we^e done externally and
signifyingly, must again be done, and again be brought to t^ pass, after their
manner, and all the History of the Bible, and all Moses and the Prophets; for
the whole Scriptures to this day stand in force, and are continually
accomplished and fulfilled internally and spiritually; for all things are by
Christ translated into the Truth, therefore it must needs be, that all the
Prophesies which God s^ake, from the beginning of the World by the mouth of his
holy Ones, must still be called back, reiterated, or done over again, therefore
that shadow or that Tree, was and is nothing else in the Truth but the nature,
will, knowledge and life of Adam, of this he should not have eaten, this he
should not have ascribed or arroga^ed to himself, but should a been-free, and
freely subject to God, and not to have known any thing, but what God knew in
him, nor to have done any thing, but what God did in him, nor to have spoken
any thing, but what God spoke in him, etc. And upon this account every man is
as much forbidden this Tree as Adam was, to the end that God, without any
impediment, might have exercised his Almighty Kingdom, Will, Nature and Power
in him, but himself should have been utterly void of all knowledge, will or
nature, and not to have arrogated any of these, as proper to himself; this
pleases God, this was that which he commanded, and what he would have had
done, to this interpretation agrees true Divinity, that this Tree in the
substance thereof is nothing else but man's own Will and Knowledge, of which
alone in all the earthly Paradise of this wide World of men's hearts, they ought
not to ea^, but to account it forbidden, except they will eat of Death and
Destruction; for as soon as Adam fell, by eating of this Tree, the Tree was
immediately planted in his mind, and afterward derived into all the branches
and fruit thereof, so that as the same Word, precept and forbidding was
commanded to all, so is the same Fall, all men which are in Adam have now
eaten of Death, and received from the Serpent this undigested P^yson; so that
it is easily perceived how man is his own greatest Enemy, and what he ought
to think of himself, of his own Will Understanding, Wisdom and Knowledge,
seeing it is the Counsel, Seed, Wisdom Knowledge and Head of the Serpent,
which must by Christ, be bruised in the Children of men; for it must needs be,
that as in the old Testament was signified by Circumcision, that in the new one
by Baptism, which is that of the Spirit, through Regeneration, and being new
born of the incorruptible Seed of the Kingdom of God; therefore, he that will
be made fit for the Kingdom of Heaven, must part with, and put off all things
by nature and Inheritance by Adam, even as he would do the Devil, and Death it
self, viz. his own Will, Prudence, Wisdom, and Righteousness, wherewith (as
fig leaves) their Adam does vainly seek to (...) himself, for that is Sin, and
the (...) of Death, namely, to eat of this True, to (...) as (...), his own
Wisdom, Prudence, (...) but, alas! who know^ this, (...) who is it that is
displeased with his own (...) Understanding, occ^^isdom? when will men forsake
them? where are the men, that do not delight themselves in their own will, and
recreate their minds sweetly and contentedly therein, reposing upon their own
knowledge, understanding, and the ^ike? The Tree is fair to be looked upon, and
sweet to be tasted, and therefore do the Sons of Men so greedily swallow and
devour Death, as Adam did; land this is the misery, that men know it not,
neither think they of it, but judge it to be good, and think assuredly that
this is the Tree of Life, even to follow their own Wills and their own Conceits
and Opinion of good, which indeed is false, to know much, to discern many
sciences, and so to grow great in their own Thoughts, assume to become Gods,
and in the mean time they are not aware, that this is Adams fall, his biting of
the Apple, yea, his bitter Death it self, yet are continually speaking ^f the
miserable^ state of Man by Adams fall, but not take notice the same is done in
themselves; and many are they that talk of his eating, and pretend to detest
it, and him for it, yet themselves eat of it, even as he has done, which does
manifest the miserable state of men, who prepare a Rod for themselves, by
giving sentence against their own life, by condemning their first Father Adam,
and perceive not themselves fast in the same Trap. Here then, consider
diligently, what man's Will, Knowledge and Understanding is; where with they
think they may come into the presence of God; whereas indeed it is nothing but
the bitterness of Death, and the fruit of the forbidden Tree; how few is there
among men that perceive this, or will learn to put off, deny, fear, mortify or
kill his own Will and Wisdom? nay, rather do they not hold it fast, extol and
value it as pure Gold? whenas indeed it is eternal Death; and truly in this
Misery the whole World, lies sick, and few is the number of them blessed Ones,
who are delivered from themselves, and their own wills, power and wisdom, but
are a small remnant, and few in number, as one of a City, and two of a Tribe,
that find this strait gate, and enter in at it.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Tree of Life, what it is, and why Adam was shut out,
forbiaden and withheld from it, and not suffered to eat thereof.
I Can also allow that there is the Tree of Life likewise in Paradise, as we
find recorded in the holy Scripture, whose fruit might have been so seasoned,
and endued by God, and how it had that nature that he who should eat of it;
should live forever, and never dye; and when Adam had eaten of the forbidden
Tree, and had fallen, as God foretold, into Death, it might not now be that he
should be permitted to eat of the Tree of Life, otherwise he might have lived
forever, and the Word of God, if thou eat thereof thou shall dye the Death, had
been false. Moreover, God who is mere Love, and cannot forever be angry, did
will provide, that Man in his misery, and in enmity to God, might not forever
lead a wretched and calamitous Life, for which cause he drove him out of
Paradise, from the Tree of Life, into his House of Penance, as if it were, the
World, and showed him a way, whereby he might ag^in come out of Death into
Paradise, to the Tree of ^ternal Life; but in the mean time he fenced the Tree
of Life, with a flying Cherub and glittering Sword, lest Adam in his banishment
would eat Life; for it seemed better to God, that Man should dye, and so by
Death put off this miserable Life, and change it to be translated to a better;
for he knew, that Life, after this Death, cold calam^y and banishment, would be
so much the more welcome, and he the more dear unto God, after Victory;
therefore God, who cannot hate the Sons of men, ever deals mercifully with
them, howsoever he handles them, if they would take it in good part, and not
suspect him to be their Enemy; for such indeed is the nature and suspicion of
man's heart.

Now may it not thus be, that for a greater Evidence or Testimony, that the
same thing did likewise happen in the Tree Paradise, i. e. Adams heart, as
there is the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, which is the Seed, Speech,
Council, Knowledge, Wisdom and Will of the Serpent; so there is also the Tree
of Life, the Seed, Speech and Counsel of God, or of the Woman; and as God and
the Devil are, even so are these two Seeds, or two Trees, so contrary the one
to the other, that one brings Life, the other Death; and therefore it is
impossible that whosoever eats of the one, should at the same time eat of the
other, or come unto it, as being separated by a flying Chrub and a^ glittering
Sword. Thus do I, and also other faithful Writers, interpret whinged Sin and
obstinate Disobedience which is elsewhere called in Scripture, a separation or
wa^ of partition; for whosoever eats of the Tree of Knowledge o^ good and evil,
that is he that greedily swallows down and devoureth humane and diabolical
Wisdom, he is already separated from the Tree of Life, that is, from the
Wisdom, Speech and Knowledge of God; and neither of these Wisdoms Speeches,
Wills or Knowledges can endure the other, neither can the one come from the
other, so great is the Gulf between them, being as far divided asunder as
Heaven and Hell. He that eats of the Tree of Life, that is, of the Word of God,
he is born of God, and cannot dye nor sin, for his Fruit does eat the Eater,
and translate him into his own Nature, that is, into Life, as elsewhere the
Scripture speaks of eating Christ's flesh; for indeed it is the same thing to
eat Christ, and to drink his Blood, to live in his Word, to believe, to know
God and the like; as likewise it is all one to believe in Adam, to live in
Adam, to dye to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, to obey the Seed
and Word of the Serpent, and to become Gods; therefore he that eats of the
deadly Tree, and cleaves to the Word and Wisdom of the Serpent, being born of
Satan, and afflicted, he lives in flesh and blood, and therefore cannot do
well, or please God; as contrary wise, the other cannot sin, do evil, or
displease God; Therefore he that will have the one, must needs part with the
other, they must of necessity go out of the Wisdom of Adam and the Serpent, and
from the forbidden Tree, that so the Wisdom of the Tree of Life may enter, to
abide in them; Adam, and the Wisdom of the flesh must dye in them, that Christ
may live in them, and the Spirit may have the government; the Life of the one
is the Death of the other, and the weakness of one is the strength of the
other; for no man can serve two Masters, and in vain shall men strive to
reconcile God and Adam, or Christ and the Serpent, Light and Darkness, the Old
Man and the New God and Beliel, or the Temple of God, and the Temple of Idols.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil planted in the
heart of Adam, that is, the Seed Speech and Spirit of the Serpent, and that
great Idol Anti christ, Sin, Death and the Devil, and the Beast spoken of in
Daniel and the Revelations, which is the greatest and most ordinary worshipping
of Angels.
WHat is it that men think, is the Beast, of which Daniel writes, that
resists and blasphemeth the the most High, and kills the Saints? is it not
that old Serpent that overthrew Adam and Eve? And what is the Tree of knowledge
of good and evil? what is the shameless King and Antichrist, of which Daniel
writ, and Paul to the Thessalonians? And what is that many headed Beast which
the whole World adoreth, which is spoken of in the Revelations? And what is
Sin? what is Death? what is the Devil himself, but every man's own Will, Wisdom,
Reason, Religion, Righteousness, Skill, Delight, for which cause, Paul calls
it, Death itself, Enmity against God, and Folly before him; and the Apostle
James, calls it Earthly, humane, Devilish Wisdom, because these three are one
and the same, and that is devilish which is merely humane, and contrary wise,
Man, the Devil, Adam, and the Serpent, are the same, and do agree; for the
Serpent did so instill this Wisdom and feinged goodness into the nature of
Adam, that the Serpents seed and word was in Adam, made a corporal man; so that
now the same thing may be said of them both, and as they are, that are born of
God, and in whom the Word of God is made man, or flesh, are called Gods, and
one Spirit with God, so all men being sprung of flesh and blood before they be
planted into Christ, and are born of the Spirit, they are justly called Devils,
and the Devils Children and Offspring of the Devil, whose work they do,
therefore that which is only humane, is evil, and that which is devilish, is
humane. And again, what is the fall of Adam but the wisdom of the Flesh, and
the fruit of the forbidden Tree? What is that old Dragon that came out of Hell,
and drew down from Heaven with his Tail, a great part of the Stars of Heaven,
but only the Wisdom of this Tree, which extolls it self against God, and places
his seat with the higest? And what else are the Thoughts of the Flesh? What is
sin? what is Arrogance, but the Fruits and Wisdom of this Tree? And what are
the Decrees of Men, and the bent of their Reason against God, their devices and
light Books, but the cunning of the Devil, from this Tree eaten? What is all
the Worship of Idols, the false Religion of all the wicked Jews, Turks,
Gentiles, Mamalucks, and all false Christians? And what are all the Leagues,
Conventicles, Ceremonies and Covenants, but the Apples of this Tree eaten,
which counterfeiting the Tree of Life, seems to the Sons and Children of men,
to be pleasant fruit, which indeed are but such as are Death it self? for I do
believe, that no man can sufficiently express the general worshipping of Idols,
where withal the corners of the World and hearts of men are stuffed. How common
is it for men to worship Idols? and what is an Idol, but to worship the true
God in a false way? and who is it that says not to his own reason, knowledge,
honesty, art and wisdom, thou art my God? They do not thus say with their
Mouths, but their whole life, and their idolatrizing Mind says as much, by
their deeds, for they continually sacrifice to their own Drag? and here it is
that mortal men deny God, and testify it by their works, which are without
faith, being dead, even as a body is without the spirit; for if by true faith
they were alive to God, they would leave vengeance to him, and not so much seek
to revenge themselves, which does manifest they dare not trust God with their
cause to avenge for them; if otherwise, why are they anctiously careful? why do
they so exercise mischief and fraud, and so deceive one another? why do they
make war and strife, right or wrong, for mine and thine? why do they so lie,
deceive and flatter one another? why do they forget God and his saying, making
no account of his Commandments? wherefore are they so covetously minded, to
labor night and day, and to take every opportunity to improve every
unrighteous advantage against their Neighbor, to get and heap up the perishing
things of this Worlds Riches; truly all this is, because they retain not God in
their Thoughts, to believe that he has any care of them, or that he can
provide or will revenge for them, therefore is it as their works do manifest,
for them to believe, they must not be wanting in this and the other thing, but
that it is most necessary to help and revenge for themselves, otherwise, say
they, we might by our Enemies be all hilled, or become Slaves and Bondmen, and
beg our Bread. And thus it is with them who will not have ought to do with
good, and Truth in good earnest; no, they must not be wanting to themselves,
but make their own Markets by lying, deceiving, cozening, usury, and the like;
these things they think will enrich them good; and thus by them are the
Commandments of God and his Word slighted, until, with many, they cause his
Spirit to leave striving; for they oppress the seed, and crucify the just
Principle of God in themselves, and account the Word of God an insufficient
help in time of adversity, therefore it well pleases them to adore themselves,
and to kiss their own Works, and to sacrifice to their own Net, to speak big
words, and to admire themselves; for who else is our God, says the whole
World, by their works.

CHAP. IV. Concerning that great Idol of Man's Wisdom and Knowledge, how men
kiss their own hands, and the whole World does diligently worship only self,
and the Works of their own hands, that is, the Inventions, Arts, and Counsels
of their own Reason and Wisdom.
WHAT other thing is it, that is the Worship of Idols, Superstution, Witch
caft, evil Doctrine and the Ordinance of Men, which is no other, but the
Wisdom, Reason, Inventions, Crafts, Actions, Instincts and Prudence of men,
therefore the worshipping of Idols, is but to fashion such or such a form, like
unto God, but not according to his Word, as he teaches, figureth and forms
himself in man, but according to their own Opinion and Judgment of him?
Moreover, what is sin? any other then man's own Will, Wisdom and Counsel, sown
in the mind of Adam, and in his Posterity by the serpent? Then consider the
purpose, cause and life of Man, where and how thou will, and it is nothing but
humane Wisdom; here will man be his own God, to lead, teach, govern, revenge,
defend, excuse, enrich him self, and the like; and so man's own Head, Will and
Reason is instead of God to him, though the sin and fall of Adam, be nothing,
but the cunning Reason and Wisdom of the flesh, which in Scripture is called
Fo^y and Devilish Wisdom, yet how do men generally prize and magnify it, as if
they were endowed from above; all men therefore ought with Christ, to bring man
to nothing, and that by daily lessening and depressing him, to make him become
as a Child and a Fool, but instead of performing what God has commanded, it is
with man clear contrary thereunto, for men build up the man, that so he may
come to prove wise, glorious and famous, and for that end they have many Arts
that wreched and unprofitable man may become great, eminent, praised and
excellent, and may obtain Places, Titles and Names; so that thereby young men
are purposely inflamed with a desire of Glory, for which cause many are they,
that are not content to abide with the teachings of Gods gift of divine Light,
by the Word of his Spirit, but by their humane Wisdom and cunning reason of the
flesh, they come to domineer in Pulpits and teaching places, where they are
upheld to lord it over Gods Heritage, and to this very end, there are
artificers employed to make their Scholars accute, witty and knowing in all
kinds of Crafts, and in all exercises, arts and litteral deceits, whereby it
appears more clearer then the light, that the World is contrary, and an enemy
to God. Now here the wise and prudent of this World perish in their own way,
because they live without the true knowledge of God, and kiss their own hands,
and adore the wisdom of their own wit, which is to the World and its Teachers
insted of God, his way and word, and indeed of all things, it is the greatest
and only sin, and the very fall of Adam, and the very fountain whence all other
sins do flow, as Job confesses, for this only to be obedient, addicted to
serve himself, to admire and adore himself, to follow his own will, briefly, to
be his own, and to serve only self, being of a free will, and glad to be
somewhat in and of himself, and to do, to omit, and to know some what in
himself, and not to be utterly void of all name will, work, and subject only to
God, this is the only and most deadly sin, yea, rather the sinck and mother of
all sins; for the delight, will and wisdom of the flesh, is Death it self, and
a man is thereby no more profitable, better nor religious, then a dog, toad or
swine in his Death; for when they dye all their misery ends with them, but in
this state, with man, as death leaves, so Judgment finds, and he cannot repent
in the grave, but his torment does increase, and with him will abide forever,
without end; which to remove all horror, which to the wicked is disquietness of
Mind, trouble of Conscience, in this life, and increases torment in the life
to come, is while time is, and the spirit of God keeps striving, to live to his
Word, to do his will, that is to yield their obedience to the Word of his
Spirit, that the Will of God may be done in their earthly Tabernacle, agreeble
to the desire of his Will which is in Heaven; this is the way of them, that to
God abide faithful, to keep the path of him that is Just, in which their is
neither variation nor shadow of turning, bu^ keeping the way of Life, which
leads to enter the strait Gate, that is to that man that does nothing,
know-nothing, and wills nothing of himself, but bears and suffers and sees
God making holy day in him, this man keeps the Sabbath holy, being void of all
skill and will, is subject only to God in him, to do out, will know, both how,
what, when, and why he pleases God. Now the whole World lies in this Death
and Sin, for that it does nothing else but kiss its own hand, and Sacrifice to
its own Net, that is, adore the purpose, counsel, invention, and wisdom of it
self, and to this purpose are all things drawn and bent, even the holy
Scriptures and words of God, namely, to be consonant to the Reason of men, and
not to cross their own wisdom, course and way, but all these things must be
overthrown and unlearned again, if they will see God; therefore does the Spirit
of God, and the holy Scriptures so vehemently urge the Children of Men, to
become Children and Fools, and to vomit up again all the art and knowledge of
this forbidden Tree, to be purged by the strength of the Tree of Life,
consequently let men in this state, look and observe in themselves narrowly
what they do, either in their worship to God, or serving their Neighbor, and
they shall find, that all this is true in their own breast, that themselves is
the mark they aim at in all they do.

J. E. T. M.

CHAP. V. Concernining the Sin of Covetousness.
THe nature of which Lust or Devil, lusts to covet after that Which God has
expressly forbidden, namely, the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, which
causes men to become as Gods, whose Eyes are opened against themselves, to
perceive the Tree good for Food, and pleasent to the eyes, and a Tree to make
one wise, therefore do they covet after the fruit of the Tree, and greedily eat
of it, not considering how they eat Death, and dye to God, as Adam did, even so
is it with every man that is not planted into the Tree of Life, and new born of
Christ, regenerated, and brought forth by the immortal Seed, the Word of God,
the Spirit of Truth, and Seed of his Kingdom, but on the contrary, covet after
the perishing things of this World, thereby to enrich themselves therewith,
contrary to what God has commanded, first to seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and
the Righteousness thereof, unto which is the promise, of adding all other
things; for as the Promise was on condition to Adam, To do and live, so has it
been the same, to all men in every age, and is the same in this day, therefore
let none deceive themselves, for the doers of the Law were only them that kept
the Word of the Lord, who accounted them worthy of receiving Life, to live with
God forever; for to the Disobedient, who are only hearers of the Word, and not
doers of the Word, there is no true peace, neither in this Life, nor in the
Life to come; for there is no peace to the Wicked, says my God; so that the
doers of the Law were they, and only them that kept the Commandments of God,
and by faith in him were the works of the Law imputed to them for
Righteousness. So, not in this Gospel Day, Christ is given for a Light to
ligh^^n the Gentiles and for Salvation to the ends of the Earth, that whosoever
will believe in him, might not perish, but have the Light of Life; Therefore as
Christ has dyed for the sins of the whole World, that every man in the World
may be left without excuse, God has given unto them a gift of divine Light,
which is to them a Talent and Seed of the Tree of Life, as is elsewhere called
the lord of Faith, being a manifestation of the Spirit given to every man to
profit withal, which as they hear, to obey and do it, they also profit by it,
to perform the Commandments of God, and of this nature is their strength in the
Tree of Life renewed, which causes the Seed to grow, and makes rich the berren
land, through purging out the old Leaven, that the new Lump may take place,
which brings forth holy Fruit abundantly to God; so that the Children of her
that was barren, now brings forth, and become many; and thus do the faithful
grow, who covet after the better part, namely, to fear God and work
Righteousness, to (...) Justly, love Mercy, and walk humbly, doing no other
thing to any, then as themselves would be done unto; This is the Law and the
Prophets, and also what God has commanded for all men to do in this day, that
they may come to partake of his Promise, to grow in the Tree of Life, from
Grace to Grace, until by Grace the work of God in them is wholly perfected: but
these things, are to a Coveteous man, even as the wise Charmeer, is to the deaf
Adder; for having ears to hear they hear not, to receive the Truth, in the love
of it, because the love of Money is their pride, in which they delight to
become wise, rich, and what not, in the perishing things of this life. Here
covetous men grow from one covetous desire to another, until, through pride and
covetousness, they come to ^all as Angels have done, and yet may remain, as
many covetous Usurers do, who have clothed themselves with the Prophets and
Apostles words, that thereby they may appear in the sight of m^n to be knowing,
prudent and wise, and accounted men of good Reason, yea, and withal religious
and righteous, whenas indeed, it is but their own work, and the Righteousness
thereof, which is as filththy Rags and fig-leave Garments of Unrightecusness,
wherewith they vainly seek to hide themselves, from the presence of God, whose
all seeing eye beholds the ways of every covetous man's setting up for
himself to walk in; for which cause, God that searches the heart and knows
the intents of the mind, and checks, reproves, and condemns for every vain
thought, evil intent and idle word, and Unrighteous work, for which cause often
times covetous and proud unrighteous men and woman fall into such condemnation
by the Power of God, that they even despair of Mercy, yea, the horror of their
condemnation is such, that Priest nor Levit, nor the dark Watchmen of the
night, can afford no help to the wound of a troubled Conscience, in which state
of a wounded Spirit who can bear, which for remedy, the physician of no value
is set to work, who in his own will, wisdom, knowledge and reason of
Disobedience in its own time, and with his own words, does apply such means, of
which himself did never experience, imputing the cause to proceed from
Witchcraft or a Melancholy humor, and withal gives direction, not to give
way to comply with the Light within, which (he says) are the checks of a
natural Conscience, and relics of old Adam. Thus, and of he like nature, are
the directions, counsels and advice of such proud covetous men, who follow the
ways of Balaam, that forsook the right way of the Lord, to gain the Wages of
Unrighteousness; for Light is sown for the Righteous, and gladness for the
Upright in heart, and to them that will not obey, it is their Condemnation,
Joh. 3.19. for it is the gift of God which came by Jesus Christ, by whom all
that are saved come through the Cross, which mortifies and kills every Lust,
which is man's deadly Enemy, by which every covetous and unrighteous man is
deceived, and of his own lust drawn into this and the other form of Religion,
which is their cloak, to cover, hide and shelter all their pride and
unrighteous Works of Covetousness. And here it is that poor mortal men are
become Servants and Slaves to their own Lusts, which are Devils, Thieves and
Robbers, the deadly Enemies of man's own House, that have drawn a way his mind
into the love of carnal things that perish; and of this like Nature are they
bewitched that they should not obey the Truth; for in their own wisdom, will
and time they can neither see, hear nor obey, to do those things which are of
faith in Christ, to make their peace with God, because their own wisdom,
knowledge, will and reason is the Righteousness of their works, which make a
Wall of Partition between Man and his Creator, who has created him to wait
upon his Maker, to hear and obey God in all things, according to his will and
time, that he may have the honor and praise of his own work done by and of
himself, on man; the omitting of which Duty keeps the Children of men from the
true saving Knowledge of God; for Man, in his own wisdom, will and time, has
always the eye of Knowledge and Reason open against himself, in which state he
cannot receive the will and mind of God from above, because he gives way to
serve his own Lusts, which are his Enemies, that ensnare his Soul and keep his
Mind in Bondage, to serve this and the other thing of his own invention, in
which abides Death and Destruction; and indeed, of this nature is every man's
God, that lives not to the true God, in thought, word and work, according to
his Word, which he teaches and forms in all them that abide faithful, which
without faithfulness to what God has commanded, no man can come unto him;
therefore it is that every covetous, proud and unrighteous man is shut out from
having any entrance into the true saving knowledge of God, because to him is
not the true God retained in any of his Thoughts, which of his own lust are
moved here and there, and indeed every where into this and the other thing,
which abides but for a time, and then leaves the Mind, or the Mind leaves
it, and so in its motion; which is swift indeed for another thing of the like
nature, in which abides Death. So that every proud vain covetous man in the
world, to him there are Gods many, all being of one nature, which in his own
wisdom, will, knowledge, reason and righteousness, to him make but one God,
which is their own lusts, the Prince and Power of Darkness, which rules in the
Children of Disobedience, and is called, The God of this World, because he is a
God to them that are of the World, who have yielded their minds to serve their
own lusts, therefore is this lust to them, the God of this World, the Prince
and Power of Darkness, that rules the mind of every covetous, proud and
unrighteous man and woman, that retain not the true and living (...) thoughts,
the moving cause of which (...), their own Enemies, the Devil (...) away the
mind in the swiftness of motion, the world over into the many things thereof,
in (...) and with which the mind is besettered, and entangled with the love and
delight therein, that there is not the least measure of freedom in the will,
for the mind to abide in re^iredness to wait upon God, to see his Salvation
wrought in his own time, according to the will and mind of himself. Now to them
that abide faithful unto God, they keep in a true state of watchfulness,
waiting upon God, and watching against the appearance of every lust, which is
such an Enemy against God, and man's true peace, with his maker, that lust is
ever ready to draw away the mind from God, that it may not retain him in its
thoughts, but to be thinking of this and the other thing, in which remains
death, that draws the soul into perdition, which as they abide in
faithfullness, upon their watch, their strength, by the power of God will be
renewed, that they shall not only perceive their Enemies motion, but also
receive power to vvith-stand their lusts, and cause Gods enemies to scatter.

And of this nature, in the hour of temptation, he receives strength, in and
through the Power of God, which resists such Devils, and causes them to
flee; and of this nature it is with them that are not carnally minded, to live
after the flesh, but spiritually minded, to live after the spirit, through
which, by the spirit, they mortify the deeds of the flesh, which work of God
is only known to them who retain him in all their thoughts, that with a holy
Resolution and godly zeal for his Cause, they are made willing to give up and
forsake all for the love of God which is in Christ Jesus, him to hear, and in
all things to obey, as becomes his Truth; this is it which God would have all
men to do, that he only may rule in them, and the spirit have the government,
that thereby Man may come to live and abide in peace with his Maker, who is
willing to be at peace with them, that are willing he shall rule, whose right
it is to have the government; for he that will be Christ's Disciple, must first
take up the Cross, and follow him in all things, according to his wisdom, will
and time, who best knows when, where and how to cleanse the house of Thieves
and Robbers, which rob God of his honor, by living to their own lust, their
own thoughts, words and works, according to the reason of their own will and
wisdom of the flesh, which desires the Temple of God and makes it become an
unfit habitation for the Lord of Life to abide in; therefore if any covetous
man, any unjust man, or he that is unrighteous and unholy, will know himself
to be purged from his unjustness, his covetousness and unholiness, he must
forsake the love of all things which are his own, and wholy cleave to the
Tree of Life, to live to Gods Word, that the Life of it may grow in him,
otherwise he will remain in that state which fulfils what is written, That
he which is unjust, unrighteous, unholy and filthy, let him be so still; for
the Lord will quickly come as a swift Witness, and his Reward will be with him,
to give to every man according as his Works shall appear to be, and a day of
terror, horror and misery will be to every vain, proud, covetous and
unrighteous man and woman, who have defiled the Temple of God, through a life
of obedience to the love of any one thing whatever, more than to love the
appearance of Gods holy Truth, his divine Light and Word of his Spirit, which
is the appearance of Christ, the Tree of Life, and seed of the Kingdom of
Heaven, which all unrighteous and covetous men have, and do in this day burden,
oppress and keep under, as a Cart laden with Sheaves, until, with many, the
Spirit of God leaves striving, and their house becomes desolate, being left in
hardness of heart with a seared Conscience, having eyes and ears with which
they can never more see the tenders of Gods free Love, and the riches of his
free Grace and large Mercy toward them that hunger and thirst after his
Righteousness, which only them that abide faithful are made to partake of; for
although the seed of the Tree of Life has been lown in all sorts of ground,
yet for as much as through pride, covetousness, usury, oppression, and the like
of other sins, which fruit it has brought forth to unrighteousness, the seed
or their own lust, which has refused to cleave to the Tree of Life, and lived
on the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, which has caused their ground to be
accursed, and their (...) with the fruit thereof to wither, waste and perish
away; for every branch which brings not forth fruit in the Tree of Life, the
sa^^e is taken off, and cast into the fire of Gods Wrath, which is burning
against all the unrighteousness of men; but as any repent, they find mercy with
God, with whom all power in Heaven and Hell does remain; for as Love is a
Heaven to them that live to him, so likewise is his Wrath a flame of holy zeal
and fire from Heaven, which is Hell both in this World, and also Hell in the
World to come, which will burn forever against every wicked Spirit of every
wicked Man and Woman, who have yielded themselves Servants, to serve their own
lusts, which has brought forth all manner of evil fruit, which is accursed in
the sight of God, who has commanded all men against Pride and Covetousness,
which are the two great inlets or doors of Unrighteousness, which man's Enemies,
the Devils, his own lusts keep open, through which, the greatest of all sins
enter, namely, Pride, Blasphemy Covetousness, Usury, Oppression, Murders, all
manner of Profaneness, Lying, Swearing, Drunkenness, Theft, Whoredoms, both
spiritual and temporal, Back-bitings, Whisperings, Witch-crafts, Hatreds,
Strifs, Emulations, and what not of other sins, is it, that Pride and
Covetousness make not way for them to take place; for Pride and Covetousness
are not willing to live and abide alone, without the whole company of Enemies,
which find room enough to abide and live together, as Brethren of one House or
Family, in the heart and mind of every covetous man and woman, whose lust is
natural to give way to any appearance of outward profit or gain in the things
of this (...) Lust is such a subtle Devil, that it teaches and lead (...) a
covetous man and woman to cloth the outside with a form of Religion, which is
but a Child of their own lusts begetting, whose Servants they are to whom they
obey, and a Child of their own Lusts, whose work they do. And thus is the
Scripture fulfilled by men in a form of godliness, without the power of God
therein, being outwardly clothed with Scripture words, which to them is such
clothing, that causes such men and women outwardly to appear as Sheep of the
true Fold, when indeed, (as the Scripture speaks) they are inwardly ravening
Wolves; for when they speak most fair, there is seven abominations in their
heart. So that all men and women, under what Name soever, few are they that
cleave to the Tree of Life, to live to God in thought, word and work, as they
ought to do, because the love of some one thing or another blocks up the way of
Truth, that no part of the Cross can be taken up, by them that love any thing
more than the appearance of Gods holy Truth, for which cause many are them that
cannot enter the strait Gate, which will not open to any but to them that keep
in the path of the just, which leads to the Tree of Life, from which the
faithful receive their daily nourishment, who are made fit to enter the Kingdom
of Heaven; but of such their Number is small, and in this life the trial of
their Faith is great; but this is their strength, through faith in the Promise
of God, that nothing shall befall them, more than what he will enable them to
bear; for they have an assurance of his Grace, that it is able to save from the
nethermost pit of Hell, and will keep and preserve all them that abide faithful
to him, who, in the stillness of mind and retiredness of thoughts, witness his
saving power, whose Salvation is to the ends of the Earth.

So that nothing more shall befall his chosen ones, then what has happened to
the Household of Faith in days past; There is no new thing under the sun, for
as in all ages, even so now, he that was a Jew in the outvvard, was only a
hearer of the Law, and not a doer of what was contained in the Law, and so
no true Heir of the Promise, which was to faithful Abraham and to his seed,
not after the flesh, but after the spirit, for that which is born after the
flesh, lives to the things of the flesh, which to the wisdom of the flesh are
sweet and delightful, but the end thereof is the bitterness of Death, for
Death and Destruction is the portion and inheritance of every covetous man born
after the flesh, whose love to covet, is that Enemy, the Lust and Devil of his
own hour that persecutes the Just Principle of Truth, both in themselves and
others, which fulfilleth the scripture, he that that is born after the flesh
persecutes him that is born of the spirit; which consequently follows, that
every man which is in disobedience to the spirit of God, is a persecutor of the
just and holy One; but who is it that considers this, or thinks of it? nay,
rather do not men hide and cover themselves with this and the other form of
Religion, which if they do but barely come up to the outward form, and in
common honesty, answer the extreme Righteousness of the Law of men, they pass
among men for Christians not at all considering, that no man can be a true
Christian, but as he is born of the Spirit, and through the Spirit to mortify
the deeds of the flesh, such are not only Christians in name, but in nature
also they witness the work of God, by Jesus Christ, whose Leaven is the seed of
the Kingdom, the Tree of Life, unto which every true Christian cleaves, to
know himself purged, cleansed and purified, regenerated, new born and planted
into Christ, being of one spirit with him, to know, do, omit, go forth and work
for God, when, and at what time soever his spirit moves; here the Anointing
teaches them in all things, and the Evidence of the spirit gives an infallible
assurance, of their having the mind of God in Christ, and to them that have not
made some good beginnings in this work, however their outside Cup may seem
clean, as to men, yet their minds are in the world, and the world in all its
ways, is at enmity with God, who will shut out every covetous man and woman,
from having any lot or inheritance in the Tree of Life, except they turn to God
by true Repentance, which will manifest it self by holy fruit of the Spirit,
which brings forth no unclean thing in thought, word nor work, but is
altogether obedient and submitting to its own nature, to work Righteousness, do
justly love mercy, and in lovvliness of mind, and meekness of heart, keeps the
even path, and enters the strair Gate, which will not open to any, that do not
in all things follow the teachings of Gods Word, and leadings of his Spirit,
which begette^h true faith, of which is good works viz. to fear God, to work
Righteousness, to do justly, love mercy, walk humbly, and doing no other thing
to any, whatever, than as themselves would be done unto; this is the Law and
Prophets, and what God requires of all men to do, otherwise they are not
accepted of God by Jesus Christ, to enter into his rest. So that, if any man
say, he has faith, and trusts in God, to believe in his promise, and does
not manifest his faith, by holy works, which according to the Light of the
Gospel, so shine, that others may gloryfie God by the same, that man whomsoever
he be, is a Liar, and the saving knowledge of Gods holy Truth abides not in
him; for faith without works is dead, and such a faith and hope will fade away
and perish.

And again, in whom Faith is not, Grace works no effect, which is altogether
through man's own neglect of Obedience to the spirit of Truth, which leads
into all Truth; for the Truth is no other than the Tree of Life, which is
Christ, in whom no man's faith can abide, without works of Holiness; for where
men have a Faith, without works of Righteousness, their building is founded
upon a rotten foundation, against which the Gates of Hell do ever prevail, that
is, of their own Lusts they are led, and kept in bondage, not having any right
to the promise, which only belongs to the free born, who are redeemed by the
power of an endless Life, and made heirs of the promised Land, and heavenly
Jerusalem, which is from above, and is the Mother of all them that abide in
faithfulness to the end. Now here every unrighteous and covetous minded man is
shut out from entering the Kingdom of Heaven; nay, though he may be outwardly
righteous, as was one in Christ's day, when he said, It was easier for a Camel
to go through the eye of a Needle, than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom
Heaven, which is for this cause of a coveting desire, to which their love is
joined, that their love abounds more to delight therein, than to part with all,
to take up the Cross, in true love, to follow Christ, who has said, He that
loves any thing more than me, is not worthy of me. Now for what end, do people
think, were these things written? do they think that God is such another as
themselves, or that he will be mocked? No verily, God will not be mocked, such
as every man sows, of the same he shall reap, whether to the flesh or to the
spirit, the one being life, the other death; for, to be carnally minded is
Death, but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace; which things ought by
all men to be duly considered, before Time be no more, for as Death leaves, so
Judgment finds, and in the Grave they cannot repent; but these things are not
regarded nor minded among many, therefore is it written, The fool has said in
his heart there is no God; which though in words he acknowledge God, yet the
bent of his covetous mind draws the heart from retaining God in its thoughts,
that such men live without God in the World, for by their deeds they manifest
the same; therefore is it that there is no true saving knowledge of God to
them; and in this state are all covetous men, among whom many are they that
have taken upon them the Name of God and Christ, whose words they have stolen,
who through covetousness make it their Trade to gain Money by; this is also
contrary to the Word of God, and not at all according to the example of his
holy Ones, who coveted no man's Silver nor Gold, but freely received the gift of
God, and as good Stewards of his manifold Grace, they freely broke their Bread
from House to House, with singleness and gladness of heart, rejoicing in the
Work of the Lord, whose Word they divided to every one his portion, without
Money or Price, laboring with their hands for their maintenance, that they
might not make the Gospel chargeable to any, and woe was to him that did not
preach the Gospel without reward from men, because the promise of him that
takes care for birds of the air, and beasts of the field, is large, in that he
takes the greater for his Servants and Messengers of his Truth, who have said,
That Godliness, with content, is great gain; but alas! who is it among men,
that regard or mind these things? is not the love of Money, which is the root
of all evil, that which is most beloved among men? And again, Covetousness is
of Lust, such a Devil, that contrives and joins so close and fast to the mind
of men, that some have lost their lives by sorrow for worldly goods; for a
covetous m^n can meet with no greater sorrow than to part with that in which
his love does most abide; for above all other things, that which a man does
most love to delight his mind in, that is to him his Godd; therefore is it that
bear outside Christians are so entangled with the things of this Life; for
where the Treasure is, there is the heart also, and yet extreme righteous, as
toward the Law of men, which often is extreme wrong in the sight of God,
because a covetous man takes the opportunity to enrich himself by another man's
necessity, whereby the borrower rather becomes a slave than a servant to the
lender, who, through covetousness, can in no wise simpathize nor participate
with his friend or neighbor in loss or cross whatever, because the
affectionate part is only to self, so as covetousness can do no good work to it
self, neither can it do that which is properly good to another, therefore is it
not safe to be too far concerned with the god of any covetous Usurer, for as it
wholly tends to the destruction of the soul of him that binds, so it also tends
to impoverish him that is bound; for the lust of a covetous man, namely, the
Devil, his idol and god, will never suffer the rust and canker to feed upon his
Money, nor the mote to devour his goods, more than to supply the necessity of
any man without interest; so that the mercy and pity of a covetous man is plain
Cruelty, not only to his own soul, but also to the body of others, who are
concerned with the idol or god of a covetous man, whose mind is always bent
toward the enlarging of his idol; therefore he takes the opportunity of every
advantage, by bill, bond, mortgage, and the like, to enrich himself with those
things which will perish with him, except he repent; and of this nature, by
opportunity, through advantage of another man's necessity, do men enrich and
impoverish one another; so that Oppression among men is like to a sweeping
rain, which drives all from one man into the bounds and possession of another,
through which many men are enlarged with Mountains, Hills and Valleys, when
many have not whereon to set their foot; and of this nature is it that
Covetousness leads to Usury, Oppression, and the like which has divided the
things of this World, and is the only portion of every covetous, proud and vain
man, which does not forsake and repent of all his evil deeds, and covet after
the better part, unto which is the promise, of adding all things needful;
therefore is it written, The Righteous are never forsaken, nor their seed
begging Bread. Say unto the righteous, it shall go well with them, but with the
wicked it shall go ill. Therefore study after Righteousness, and covet after
the better part, against which, lust to covetousness, cannot prevail; for lust
to covet after the Riches of this World, is as natural to the Children of men,
as the ground is natural to bring forth Weeds; therefore is it, that men by
nature, of their own wills, wisdoms, knowledges, reasons righteousnesses, and
the like, will not come under the cross, to hear and obey Moses and the
Prophets, to fulfill what the Law required of him to do; so also are they
accursed which refuse to hear and obey the Voice of the Son of God, whose gift
of divine light is the condemnation of every covetous man's thoughts, words and
works; so that Covetousness is of no profit to any man that gains the riches of
this world, with the loss of his soul; but godl^ness, with content, is great
gain, to them that fear God, work righteousness, do justly, love mercy, walk
humbly, and do no other thing to others, than as themselves would be done unto.
Yet notwithstanding this, and whatever else is written in the holy Scriptures
against Covetousness, how do men daily nourish and cherish it, as if it were a
godd of such a nature and life, as to abide with them forever; therefore are
they so choice of this lust of unrighteousness, that for its sin they provide
the largest cloak; for of all other sins, Covetousness is most in credit among
the Sons of men, therefore they will not let this Devil go naked, but cloth it
with credible Names, not as sin or vile, but as thrift, provident good care of
a man's own, and care of the main chance, and not only so, but will protect and
defend it with Scripture words, viz. He that provideth not for his own house is
worse than an Idfidel, and has denied the Faith. Therefore as God directs,
is my labor to uncloak and lay open this Lust, Devil and Sin of Covetousness,
which abides in the wise and prudent of this World, who, through coveting
after Money, the love of which is the root of all evil, in them that will
neither enter the Kingdom of Heaven, nor suffer others which are entering, to
go therein; which does manifest their Covetousness to exclude all love and fear
to God, and all love and pity to their Neighbors good. Nay, what sin is it,
that Covetousness leads men not to commit? it leads them that are covetous to
oppress, cozen, deceive, lie, and sell their Conscience for every trifle; also,
it leads men to turn from the Faith, betray the Truth, sell it for Money, and
to hold the Truth in Unrighteousness; it leads men to forsake all good
Religion, to turn Persecutors, which is the greatest Oppression that can be,
for it sweeps away the Life and Estate of many men; it leads men to wait as
Troops of Robbers, to kill and destroy by the consent of unrighteous Laws,
which have been made by covetous Usurers. And I may say, Covetousness not only
leads men to kill and steal by the highway, but to rob God of his honor, by
stealing his words which he spoke by the mouth of his holy Ones, whose words
they sell for Money, each looking for his gain from his Quarter, which if any
man refuse to pay, open war is prepared against him; and of this, and the like
nature does Covetousness lead men to sin against God, even to the destroying of
their peace with him; for to the Wicked there is no true peace in this life,
nor in the Life to come. Covetousness is one of the chief gates and Inlets to
the broad way of Death, Hell and Destruction, and is so delightful and
well-pleasing, that many are led thereby into all manner of Abominations, even
to rebel against God and King, and to change the form of Worship at every
change in Government. In short, it leads Parents to destroy their Children,
and Children to destroy their Parents; also, it leads men to lie and swear,
and to hold the the Truth in unrighteousness, and to pervert the truth, thereby
to turn the cause of the Fatherless and Widow. Therefore let all men beware of
coveting after that which God has forbidden; for while some have been coveting
after Riches, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows, because it is such a sin, that it draws the soul of him that
is over much righteous, into perdition; for over much righteous before men, is
over much wicked in the sight of God, because its only man's own works, which is
plain hypocrisy and deceit, and indeed so are all things which are not done by
man in truth and sincerity, with uprightness of heart and mind to God, whose
all-seeing eye beholds the evil and the good in all men whatever, among whom
the heart of some that labor to be rich, is pierced through with many sorrows;
for it is written, They that will be rich, fall into many Temptations, and a
Snare, and many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which draw men into perdition; for
lust to Covetousness, is such a subtle Enemy, and the Devils snare is so
cunningly contrived, and so full of fair pretenses, that let a man be once in
love with Money, he knows not which way to wind himself out; for it does so
bewilder, fetter and entangle his mind, even to the destruction of his soul,
and loss of body also, yet how vehemently with care and diligence, will men
vindicate Covetousness, because that care and diligence there may be, and ought
to be, but the truth is, every covetous man makes care and diligence a cloak
for Covetousness, whereby he is sheltered against all reproof; in which state
man's life among his Neighbors is not much desirable, neither by the Poor
lamented at his Death, but rather rejoice at the dividing of his Idol, to whom
God has not given the privilege of a beggar, who has a Child to inherit his
old Apparel. And again, an Inheritence hastily gotten by covetous men, soon
wastes among their Children, for all that is gained not agreeable to truth and
righteousness, it is under the curse; for the promise of blessing is only to
that which is gained according to Gods Word, which is, That men should first
seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof, unto which is the
promise, of adding all other things needful; for God that takes care to
provide for the birds of the air, and the beasts of the field, tak^th the
greater care for them that fear him and work righteousness. So that in
whomsoever God is not retained in their thoughts, words and works, cannot be
agreeable with his Truth; therefore are they of the World, the ways of which
are Covetousness, through which they oppress one another, even like to the
sweeping rain.

CHAP. VI. Concerning that Life, the Nature of it, which God requires of all
Men.
GOd in the counsel of his own Wisdom and Time, has set before all men, the
way of Life and the way of Death, which Death is the Tree of Knewledge of good
and evil, that is, man's own will, wisdom, knowledge, reason, righteousness, and
the like, of which he ought not to eat, because in it is death; for it opens
their eyes against themselves, and that in evrey thing, in which to them
abides death. Now the Tree of Life is Christ, which calls to all men to feed
upon him, to eat his Flesh, to drink his Blood, to do his Will, to follow his
gift of divine Light, to hear and obey his Word, to improve his Talant, and
measure of his Spirit of Truth, which leads into all truth, which is Bread and
Wine indeed, without Money, without Price, the Bread of the Kingdom, the Water
of Life, of which if a man eat and drink, he can neither hunger nor thirst, for
it gives life to all that hunger and thirst after Righteousness. These things
are not hid from man, unto whom the spirit says, Come, take of the Water of
Life freely; come, take the yo^e, it is easy, and the burden is light; come,
take up the Cross, and follow him, that in all things has done the Fathers
will, for the Redemption and Salvation of all them that hear him, and obey him,
to do his will, which is meat and drink indeed. Here the heavy are made light,
and the mourner is comforted, yea, he of a sad Countenance has his heart made
better; here the flying Cherub and the glittering Sword turns every way to
destroy, lay waste, and dispossess the strong man of all his goods, the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil, man's own wisdom, will, knowledge reason,
righteousness, and the like, that all lust may dye, and Devils be cast out, and
that through the work of the spirit, which has the Government, to mortify all
the deeds of the flesh, that man may be brought to nothing, to will nothing, do
know nothing, omit nothing, but as God wills in him, does in him, knows in
him, and omiteth in him; this man does rest from his Labor, and keeps the
Sabbath holy, he cleaves to the Tree of Life, he is regenerated, new born, and
brought forth of the immortal Seed, he is cleansed and purified, through the
Baptism of the Spirit, he is planted into Christ, and is in whole obedience to
the rule and government of his Spirit, both in though, word and work, his meat
and drink is to do the will of God on Earth, as it is done in Heaven, he
wills nothing, but what God wills in him, he does nothing, but what God
does do inhim; he omitteth nothing, but what God omitteth in him; he knows
nothing, but what God knows in him; his only food is of the Tree of Life,
which is Bread and Wine of Life indeed, which he that knows nothing of this
work wrought in him self, he yet is in a miserable, and undone estate, reposing
upon his own knowledge, wisdom and reason, in which abides death it self;
therefore says the Spirit, arise, take up the cross to that which is of self,
and Christ will give thee Life; his yoke is ease, his burden is light, that is,
to them whom he is of God, made Wisdom, Righteousness, Senctification and
Redemption, they also renew their strength in the Tree of Life, which is the
beginning of grace by the work of the Spipit, which mortifies the deeds of the
flesh, that the house may be cleansed of Gods Enemies, which destroy means
peace with his maker, and defile the Temple of God, whose Enemies is man's lust,
and every Devil which has sprung from the seed of the Serpent sown in man,
which lusts to be wise and knowing, having its eyes always open against it
self, which must be destroyed by the Spirit of Truth, the strength of the Tree
of Life, that the man of God may grow from one degree of Grace to another, till
they become perfect men and women in Christ Jesus, in whom there is no
condemnation, to them, to whom Christ of God is made wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemtion, they are born of the Spirit, and baptized of the
Spirit, and made free by the Law of the Spirit of Life, from the Law of Sin and
Death, in which work of the Spirit of Life, there is nothing of man's own
Wisdom, Knowledge, Will or Reason, for the work is wholly wrought of God,
through faith and obedience, to hear, believe and obey Gods gift of Grace, his
Spirit of Truth by Jesus Christ, who for his works lake imputes it to them for
Righteousness; for faithful Abraham believed God to trust in his promise, but
his faith was not without Works of Obedience, nor according to his own
knowledge, wisdom, will and reason, but in Gods time, according to his own
knowledge and wisdom, through which the work done by Abraham, was done in Faith
and Obedience to God, whose will was done on Earth, as it was done in Heaven;
therefore is it written, that as the body is dead without the spirit, so is also
Faith dead without Works, that by whomsoever works are not manifested,
agreeable to Gods holy Truth, and example of his holy People in days past, they
are only Christians in name, and not in nature of that life, which God
requires of all men to live and abide in; therefore it is, that people profit
not by what they hear or read, because they are spiritually dead having blinded
Eyes and deaf Ears, with which they can neither see, hear, nor receive to
understand the Spirit of Truth, of which a manifestation is given to every man
to profit withal, and is the gift of his Spirit, the Word of Faith to them that
will hear, to obey the Light of the Spirit of Truth, which is the condemnation
of the Disobedient, who are here and there, in this and the other Form of
Religion, serving God with mouth and lip, in their own wisdom, wills, and with
their own words, being only called by the Name of Christ, without the Nature of
his Life, which being destitute of, no man can be a true Christian, yet how
contentedly do men live and abide in this and the other form, but do not
witness the strength of the power of God to redeem from sin and transgression,
and to make alive to God, who is only a God them that through the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the flesh, and through the Spirit are brought in again,
by the flying Cherub and glittering Sword of Gods power, in and by Christ the
Tree of everlasting Life, on which as any eats he cannot dye to God, but has
an infallible assurance of life in the Son of God, without which assurance no
man can truly say, that he pleases God in thought, word and deed; for it is
the anointing, which is by the Tree of Life, that teaches all things, and
which leads into all Truth, the evidence of which Spirit does assure the Son,
in whom there is life, and the nature of his life dwells and abides in them,
that by true faith in him, and obedience to the word of his Spirit, they are
made alive unto God; and of this nature is Christ in his people, and in whom he
is not, they are Reprobates, and in whom he abides not, they are cursed
Children, abiding under the curse in their own wisdom, knowledge, will, reason,
righteousness, and the like, which causes them to lust more and more after the
Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, for which cause they rebel against the
Spirit of God in themselves, and deny his appearance in his People; for which
cause of Rebellion, which is as the sin of Witchcraft, the Truth of God
abides not in them; therefore are they without God in the world, living to
their own God, of which, in the world there are many that delight, and sweetly
recreate their minds in, by living a life of obedience to their own ways of
righteousness, which only proceeds from lust, that gives way for men to live
according as their own will and reason directs them, in all they do for God,
and to one another, all which is under the Curse, as it is written, Cursed is
he that puts his Trust in man, and makes flesh his Arm. So all men that
live in flesh and blood, and are obedient to their own wisdom, will and reason,
they are servants to their own lust, being in bondage, as slaves, and servants
to that and those things which they do, as it is written, Men are Servants to
him to whom they obey, and Children of him whose work they do; therefore he
that will be free from the curse of condemnation, must take up the cross, and
deny himself of all things which are not of God and his Spirit of Truth,
otherwise he cannot come to the Tree of Life, but will fall short of that Crown
of Righteousness which is in store for all them that abide faithful to God, as
by his divine Light he does lead, and teach by the spirit of Truth, which
leads into all Truth, by which men are made fit to enter in at the strait
gate of Christ^ Kingdom.

CHAP. VII. Concerning Judgment begun at the House of God, and in his House to
judge down every appearance of evil.
THe House of God in general, where Judgment first begins, is his people,
but Judgment comes to every Transgressor of his holy Truth, and that to judge
down every appearance of evil; therefore said one in his day, Who shall deliver
me from this Body of sin and death? Now the Body of this man was the House of
God, and Temple of the holy Ghost, in which God by his Judgment was at work, to
judge down, cast out and destroy every lust that would evalt it self above the
Witness of God, that the House of God might be thoroughly cleansed, and only
become a house of ^oly Habitation for the Spirit of Truth to abide in; for as
(...) is written, The high and holy one who inhabits Eternity, dwells not in
Temples made with hands, but takes up his abode with men of clean hearts and
contrite spirits, that fear him and work righteousness, do justly, love mercy,
and walk humbly, such bear the image of God and nature of Christ, with whom,
and in whom both Father and Son do take up their abode; therefore where men
give not up to come under the cross, and follow the light and word of Gods
Spirit, in obedience to his call, they resist the holy one, and crucify him
afresh to themselves, such defile the house and temple of God, and them will
God destroy; and indeed, how many such people (with a fair Israel (...) of
Religion) are crept into a profession of Gods Truth, (...) through deceit,
have, under the like profession, entered (...) selves as Christians among the
People of God; but he that caused the Net to be cast into the Sea, which
brought forth good and bad to the shore, the same does permit the net of
profession to gather all sorts of People into the outward name Christian,
therefore does Judgment also begin at the House of God, which are his people,
to make a separation between the precious and the vile, not only to purge and
cleanse from lusts, but also, to cut off the stubborn and stiff-necked ones,
which will not submit to the cross, whose Judgment will also reach to the old
Age of them that live in disobedience to the Spirit of Truth; for Judgment from
God has spread it self to the ends of the Earth, and has begun its work at
the house of God. If the righteous scarcely are saved, where shall the ungodly
and sinners appear? Judgment is not come to bring peace to any unrighteous
person, but is gone forth to do the work of God among the People, and will,
both inwardly and outwardly lay waste and destroy all that is not of himself;
for that which only is of himself shall stand, and that which is not of himself
shall come to naught, and therefore Judgment from God is gone forth to the ends
of Earth, that all that will be gathered may be preserved, and that which will
not hear the Spirit of Truth, to be obedient thereto, the same shall be
scattered abroad, till Judgment gather it, as Fuel for the fire of Gods Wrath,
which forever burns against the unrighteousness of wicked and ungodly men;
and for this very end is judgment at work for God, that he may gather a People
pure in heart, and of uprightness in mind, which in all things shall be of one
spirit and mind toward him, in thought, word and work, therefore let none in
this day, which make a profession of Gods holy Truth, deceive themselves, for
God will not be mocked, such as every man sows, of the same he shall (...)
reap, whether to the flesh, or to the Spirit; for all that is of the Spirit,
the spirit gives evidence in every faithful man and woman, that it is of God;
and though the Spirit abides not in every unrighteous man, yet the appearance
of it is often to their condemnation, and so does continue, (...) it has left
striving, and the day of Gods Grace be over, having sinned out the day of Gods
Visitation. Let all therefore consider in what state they abide, as to God,
whose promise to the Righteous is, That it shall go well with them, but it
shall go ill with the Wicked; Therefore let not these Truths which have been
received by the Spirit of Truth, find itching Ears among any, but as every man
turn in his mind to the Spirit of Truth, he will witness the truth of these
Things.

^th. 1st. Mon. 1694. THO. MAVLE.

THE END.

