A SERMON Preached before the Honorable Company of MERCHANTS Trading to the
Levant-Seas.

AT St. PETER-POOR, Dec. 15. 1695.

By HENRY MAUNDRELL, A. M. Fellow of Exeter-College in Oxford: And Chaplain to
the Factory at Aleppo.

LONDON: Printed for Daniel Brown, at the Swan and Bible without Temple Bar,
MDCXCVI.

To the Right Honorable George Earl of Berkeley, GOVERNOR, AND TO THE
Honorable Company of MERCHANTS Trading to the Levant-Seas.
Right Honorable, etc.,
THIS Discourse, at first Preached by your Appointment, is now Presented to you
in a more public manner, in Obedience to your Commands. The Defects of it, I
acknowledge to be such, as render it very unworthy of the Patronage to which it
is Dedicated; but how little soever it deserves your Protection, yet it has one
Argument to plead for it self, That it needs it: An Argument, which, as it
seldom fails to obtain your Favor, so I hope now it will the rather prevail,
because it is in Submission to your Order, that it is brought under that
necessity: For tho the blame of its faults be imputable only to its Author, yet
the Publication of it is wholly yours. I am too sensible, how ill I have, in
this mean Performance, answered the Character given of me, to your Honorable
Company, by some Worthy Members of it, my Incomparable Friends: Persons of such
Improved Knowledge and Exquisite Judgment, that it may perhaps be wondered how
they should come to be so mistaken; but you will be the less surprised, when
you consider, That it was a mistake arising from those Virtues in them, which
are so Illustrious in your whole Society, Friendship and Generosity. However,
this Advantage I shall make of their kind Error, to use it as an Admonition,
what sort of Person he ought to be, and how well qualified, who should pretend
to the honor of being your Chaplain. And thus far I hope I may assure you,
That, what I want in Learning or Abilities, I will endeavor, by the Grace of
God, to make up and supply, by Diligence, and Probity, and Zeal, for the
Service of God, and of your Honorable Society, in this Important Station, in
which your great Goodness has placed me. I am,

MY LORD, and GENTLEMEN, Your most Obedient, and most Faithful Humble Servant,
HENRY MAUNDRELL.

A SERMON Preached before the Levant-Company.
ECCLES. Chap. VII. Verse. 16, 17. Be not Righteous Overmuch, neither make thy
self Over-wise: Why should thou destroy thy self?

Be not Overmuch Wicked, neither be thou Foolish: Why should thou dye
before thy Time?

THESE words are the Counsel of the All-wise God; delivered also to us by the
Wisest of Men, King Solomon. And it is well they come so Recommended, since they
may be thought to stand in need of so great an Authority to defend them from
those Objections which every Man's Reason, at first hearing, is apt to suggest
against them.

Be not Righteous Overmuch, neither make thy self Over-wise: Is this like the
usual Style and Language of Inspiration? Can those Lively Oracles of God's
Word, whose whole aim it is to advance us to the highest Degrees of
Righteousness and Wisdom that our Nature is capable of, so far contradict their
own design, as to bid us not be Over-wise, or Over-righteous? Can those Sacred
Writings, which in other places command us to be holy, even as he that has
called us is holy; Perfect, as our father which is in heaven is perfect, Here
interpose a Caution against Overmuch Perfection? Or can there be any danger of
our ever being Over-righteous, the only Rule and Measure of whose Righteousness
is to be taken from the Infinite Purity of God himself? Where may a man be
bold, to exert his most Vigorous and Unconfined endeavor, without all danger
of running into any excess, if not in his attempts after these excellent
Endowments, Wisdom, and Righteousness?

Or admitting it were possible in the Nature of the thing, that men could ever
be Over-wise, or Over-righteous; yet where is the Necessity of their being
cautioned against these Extremes? Are they so Intemperate in their Applications
to Wisdom and Righteousness, that they need a Bridle to check their too Swift
and Aspiring Zeal? Do they bring in the Offerings of Righteousness in so vast a
store, as the Jews did, of old, their Contributions for the Service of the
Tabernacle, That it is requisite there should be a restraint laid upon their
too profuse Liberality? Exodus 36.
Happy certainly were those Golden days of Solomon, if Wisdom and Righteousness
so abounded! And have we not now reason to cry out, Oh! that men would but be
Wise, and Righteous enough, rather than to use this caution of Solomon, Be not
Righteous Overmuch, neither make thy self Over-wise.

Again, Be not Overmuch Wicked; Is this also a command becoming the Purity of
the Word of God? Does the Divine Law allow us to be Wicked in a lesser Degree,
provided we are not Over much so? Is Wickedness so harmless a thing in its own
nature, that, like Wine, it is forbid, not in the use, but only in the excess
of it? Or is there any measure of Sin that is but enough, seeing all that we
are here forbid, is no more but only this, -- Be not Wicked Overmuch?

These are Exceptions, that are apt naturally to arise in men's Minds, against
the words that now lie before us; for what Degree of Righteousness or Wisdom
can be so great, that it may be condemned as Overmuch; or what Degree of
Wickedness so little, that it may be acquitted as not so?

It will be necessary for me therefore, before I prosecute my Discourse any
further, to insist a little upon the Vindication of my Text; and to explain it
in such a sense, as may not be liable to these Objections, but more agreeable
to the Holiness and Dignity of the Word of God, whereof this is a part.

Tho, I do acknowledge, some Orthodox Commentators have interpreted these words
only in a Moral sense; and have so understood them, that hereby, the highest
true Degrees of Righteouss, and Wisdom, cannot be in the least condemned; but
only the unreasonable Affectations, and arrogant Ostentations of both, and a
censorious Pride, and rigid severity toward other men, arising from a
Presumption of our excelling others in them: Yet, because I find diverse other
sound Interpreters have explained my Text in a larger, and more Spiritual
sense, with reference to the principal Duties of our holy Religion, I think it
more proper for my present business, in this Religious Assembly, to consider it
chiefly according to this latter Interpretation.

In order to which, be pleased to observe, That these words Righteousness and
Wisdom, are very frequently used in Scripture, to denote, not only those
particular Virtues, but the entire body of Religion, with respect both to the
Knowledge and Practice of it. According to which sense, he is a Righteous man
who exercises a becoming Zeal in the whole practice of Religion; and he a Wise
man, who is well instructed in its Principles and Mysteries.

But now, if this be the meaning of these words here in my Text, how can the
Preacher's prohibition be justified? How is it possible for any one to be too
Zealous in the Practice of Religion; or too studious to make himself Wise and
Knowing in the Principles of it?

I answer, That it is true indeed, the Knowledge and Practice of Religion, are
things of Infinite and Eternal Importance to us; and do therefore both require
and deserve to be made the Subjects of our most vigorous Zeal and Application.
But it is no less true also, that there are certain Excesses and
Irregularities, which men are prone to fall into, even in these most weighty
concernments; upon account of which, they may be censured, as Over-wise, and
Over-righteous.

For it is a Maxim well known and approved amongst the Moralists, That Virtue
consists in a Mean, or Mediocrity, between two extremes; and the holy Scripture
suggests to us the same instruction, when it recommends to us, amongst its
other Precepts, the Duty of Moderation, as a kind of Regulation, and
Government, to be applied to all the other Offices of Virtue and Religion;
which rule of Moderation, holds good in reference even to these most precious
Qualifications of Wisdom and Righteousness; There is a certain Measure and
Government to be observed in our practice of them, without which, our very
Wisdom will become absurd, and our Righteousness impious. According to that
just censure of the Poet, Insani sapiens Nomen ferat, Hor. lib. 1. Ep. 6.
equus iniqui,
Ultra, quam satis est, Virtutem si petat ipsam.


For the illustration of which Principle in Morals, we may borrow a resemblance
from Natural things. Our food, we know, if moderately taken, is the nourisher
and sustainer of our Life; but if used unseasonably, excessively, irregularly,
it turns to our Disease instead of our Refreshment: Physic, when skilfully
applied, relieves the pains of the languishing Patient, and repairs the decays
of his ruinous Tabernacle; but when used, without due Measure, Art, and
Regimen, it takes part with the Disease, which it was designed to cure, and
under the pretenses of a Remedy, proves to be a Poison. The natural heat of the
Body, when it is temperate and even, and actuates the Blood with a regular
Circulation, is Health, and Vigor, and Life: But the same Heat when it becomes
feverish, and raging, destroys that Body which before it animated, and the
Patient dies with the Excess of his very Vital Flame.

Thus in like manner, Righteousness and Wisdom are the Food of the hungry Soul,
the Physic of the Sick, and the spiritual Heat and Life of the Mind. But then
also, if in relation to those so necessary Perfections, we exceed the bounds of
Sobriety and Moderation, that Food oppresses, that Physic poisons, that Heat
inflames and enrages our Souls. Without that necessary mixture of Moderation,
our Righteousness degenerates into a Furious Zeal, Superstition, and Bigotry;
and our Wisdom into Profaneness, Presumption, and undue Curiosity.

Now to restrain us from all these and the like excesses, is the principal part
of the Wise-man's Prohibition in the former Verse of my Text, Be not Righteous
overmuch, neither make thy self over-wise.

The other Branch of the Prohibition is, Be not overmuch wicked, neither be
thou foolish: Which Words are not to be so understood, as if they forbad only
the higher degrees of wickedness, and yielded an indulgence to sins of a lesser
size: For there can be no instance of Vice so inconsiderable either in its
Measure or its Quality, as to find any toleration allowed for it in the Law of
God. But the being overmuch wicked, relates to the duration of Sin, and not to
the degree of it; and forbids a long persistency and hardness in Wickedness,
and not only the more heinous and exorbitant acts of Impiety. This Exposition
is sufficiently warranted by the Septuagint Translation of this place; in which
the Word here rendered Foolish, is (...), and properly signifies Hard and
Obstinate; according to which Interpretation we may best understand the Words
of the Wiseman, when he bids not to be overmuch wicked, neither to be foolish.

From this account which has been given of the Text, we may now perceive that
it contains in it, no such strange and unwarrantable meaning, as we were apt in
our first thoughts to imagine; Since it appears, that the Prohibition here
brought against overmuch Righteousness and Wisdom, tends not to discourage us
from applying our selves vigorously and faithfully to those great and important
Endowments; but only to restrain us from those Excesses and Irregularities
which we are apt to run into in such applications: Nor is the Precept against
overmuch Wickedness intended to insinuate any such favorable opinion of Vice,
as if the lower degrees of it were harmless and allowable, but rather to deter
men from a long obdurateness and obstinacy in sin.

I shall observe therefore in the Text, a Caution given by the Wiseman against
Three dangerous Excesses; The two former incident to the Good and Religious
man; the Last to the Wicked and Irreligious.

The Good Man, Solomon cautions, 1st. Not to let his Zeal for Religion be
immoderate and furious; Be not righteous overmuch. 2dly. Not to let his
Enquiries into the Mysteries of Religion be too curious and presumptuous;
Neither make thy self over-wise.


Both which Cautions He backs with this Consideration, Why should thou
destroy thy self?

The- Wicked Man, He warns against a long and obdurate Persistency in Sin; Be
not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish: Which warning He enforces by
this Argument, Why should thou dye before thy time?

These Three Cautions I take to be the principal and most useful matters
contained in the Text; And to illustrate them very briefly, and enforce them by
the Arguments annexed to them will be as much as I shall be able to dispatch,
in the Time that is allowed for my following Discourse.

I begin with the first of these Cautions, viz. Let not thy Zeal for Religion
be Immoderate and Furious. Which is the Counsel implied in these Words, Be not
Righteous overmuch.

This is Advice very seasonable to all men, and at all times; it being an
universal Error, too often in some measure visible in every Society and Party
of men, to be transported into an Excessive Zeal, for the Patronage and
Promotion of their own Persuasions. Whatever Religion men have been trained up
in, it is natural for them to be fond of it afterward; That fondness will as
naturally incline them to wish well to it; That kind Wish, to a Zeal and
Endeavor for its Increase and Propagation. And it must be acknowledged, that
this Zeal, so long as it contains it self within the bounds of Sobriety and
Moderation, is so far from being culpable, that it is a Charitable and Generous
Disposition. And indeed, Religion is so near a Concern, and so engaging, that
it is impossible for a man, who really has any, to be indifferent toward it, or
not affected for its Honor and Advancement.

But from hence results the Excess which men are led into in this point: They
are not contented to be soberly and temperately zealous, and to promote their
Religion by such Rules and Measures as that Religion it self prescribes to
them; but they run mad with an Excess of Zeal and Bigotry for it. Their Cause,
they are confident, is the only righteous one; and then conclude, that they can
never be over-righteous, in the promotion of it. All other Persuasions are very
Dagons to them, and must fall down at the feet of their Ark. All the Engines of
Fury and Persecution must be set on foot, for the service of so meritorious a
Cause; And such Mischiefs and Barbarities must be executed for its sake, as are
a Reproach not only to Religion, but even to Humanity it self.

These are effects of an inordinate Zeal, which have been more or less
evidenced in all Parties of men, and in all Religions. For indeed the very
Christian Religion, that Mild and Peaceable Institution, has not escaped these
flames of a mad and outrageous Zeal. But on the contrary, that blessed
Instructor of Gentleness and Love, has been, by the abuse of its Professors,
perverted into an Incentive of the fiercest Cruelty and Persecution. The Prince
of Peace has been made a Herald of Contention; and too many, that pretend to be
of Christ's Flock, have turned themselves into ravening Wolves, worrying and
devouring one another. What Flames, what Confusions, what Massacres, what
Devastations! have been occasioned, by an over-righteous Zeal, for that
merciful Religion, which disclaims nothing more than such Unchristian
Barbarities? And we have too many Instances, even at our own doors, in the
several Sects and Divisions of the Reformation it self, which, if they do not
present us with any such Tragical Scenes as those beforementioned, yet cannot
they be thought on, without affording a sad and evident demonstration, how
possible it is in the Nature of the thing, and how pernicious in its Effects,
for men even in the best of Causes to be over-righteous. But

How unworthily do men treat the Christian Religion, when they make it the
occasion of such Rage and Animosity? Christianity was never intended, to kindle
such a fiery and passionate Zeal amongst its Votaries. The Spirit which that
inspires, is a Spirit of mutual Forbearance and Condescension to one another. A
Spirit, which for its visible Representation chose the Shape of a Dove to
appear in, that Emblem of Love, and Meekness, and Innocence; a Spirit which
allows us indeed to join the Serpent's Wisdom to its Dove-like Innocence, but
in all cases utterly abhors his Sting and his Poison.

It Is such an amicable Spirit, which, as it is the genuine Fruit, and the
distinguishing Badge of the Christian Religion, so it is the most effectual
Preserver of the Disciples and Church of Christ. But as for that contrary
Spirit, of over much Zeal and Bigotry, it can tend to nothing, but that fatal
end, which the Wise man here denounces as the just and natural Consequence of
it; namely, That by it we shall destroy our selves. For what else can be the
product of an Intemperate Zeal, and Rigor, and Contention amongst Christians?
It may pull down, but it can never edify; It can convert neither side, it may
destroy both.

It is the healing Spirit of Meekness and Forbearance, which best promotes the
Happiness and Safety, both of Single men, and of Societies. This has the
Blessing both of God and Man attending it; Men bless it, by rendering back a
Reciprocal Love and Favor toward it; and God blesses it by his gracious
Promises, declaring, That the Meek shall inherit the Earth, the Meek shall find
rest to their Souls. But on the other hand, a Spirit of fierce Zeal and
Bigotry, subverts the Peace and Safety both of private Persons, and of
Communities, and chiefly of those very men who are most possessed and acted by
it: For no man can exercise a furious Heat and Rigor in opposition to others,
without provoking them, to mete out the same Measure, back again into his own
Bosom. Thus he kindles a Fire, and perishes himself in the same Conflagration;
the Mischief which he set on foot, comes home to his own door; and he verifies
the Wiseman's Denunciation, which he would not take for his Admonition: By an
Over-righteous Zeal he destroys himself.

And thus much of the first Caution suggested in my Text: Be not Righteous
Overmuch; that is, Let not thy Zeal for Religion be Immoderate and Furious.

And that we may be the better enabled to observe this first Caution, Let us
proceed to the second, the consideration of which will most effectually conduce
to that end; for the chief ground and occasion of such inordinate Zeal for
Religion, arises most commonly, from an Over-wise and curious search into the
Mysteries of it; which is the excess forbid by Solomon in these words: Make not
thy self Over-wise, that is, Let not thy Enquiry into the Knowledge of
Religious Mysteries be too Curious and Presumptuous.

Wisdom is indeed the Natural desire and thirst of our Souls: The Waterbrooks
are not so fiercely longed after by the Panting Heart, as this is by the mind of
Man; nor when tasted, do they afford so great a Refreshment and Satisfaction.
This is that Endowment whereby our Nature exceeds that of the Beasts that
perish, and imitates, in some Measure, the Perfection, not only of Angels, but
even of God himself. Justly therefore may Men's minds Gasp and Pant after those
living Waters; and so long as their desires and endeavors to be wise, are
Moderate and Humble, they act according to the Prerogative and Propriety of
their reasonable Natures.

But the desire of Wisdom is oftentimes too strong, and imperious, to submit to
those confinements, which Modesty and Sobriety would prescribe to it; for where
men's thirst is so great, they are apt to be intemperate in the Gratification
of it. They content not themselves with such competent Portions of Knowledge,
as God allows them, and the Edification of their own Souls require; but they
Launch out into the boundless Ocean of Divine Mysteries, striving to make
themselves over-wise. They pretend to define the Incomprehensible Nature and
Properties of the Deity; they rifle all the secret Cabinets of his Counsels and
Providence; they invade the most private Recesses of his inscrutable Wisdom,
and would leave him no reserve of Knowledge to himself. They despise the most
useful parts of Religious Wisdom, as low and vulgar Contemplations; and that
Knowledge they account but a poor and contemptible Attainment, which is
sufficient to make 'em serviceable in their Generation, and to direct them safe
to Heaven hereafter. The Eyes of these Men's Understandings, delight not, as
the Eyes of the Body always do, in such Prospects as are Light, and Clear, and
beautifully terminated; but on the contrary, they love, either to be ever
looking into such dark Caverns and Abysses of Knowledge, where they can discern
nothing at all; or else to survey such Infinite Spaces, where they can never
arrive at any end of the Prospect. Nothing in Religion shall be to them a
Mystery. Has God enacted Eternal and Immutable Decrees? They Will unseal the
Mystical Book, and the Records of Heaven shall not escape their observation.
Has God in a most stupendous and unspeakable manner redeemed Mankind? They
must unfold the whole Mystery; and they will hardly be contented, to accept the
benefit of that Redemption, if they may not be allowed to scan, and unravel,
the whole Divine Art, by which that glorious Work was Accomplished.

With such rude and irreverent Curiosity do men dare to treat the most
Mysterious Articles of Religion: But this certainly is a most presumptuous
exorbitancy, and may justly be censured as the excess forbid by Solomon in my
Text, it being the making our selves over-wise. For the holy Scriptures seem to
have drawn a Curtain before these Sacred Articles, to admonish us not to search
too boldly into them; but to receive them, as the constant Trials of our Faith,
and Motives of our Humility. They give us the undoubted Testimony of God, to
assert and confirm their truth, and that should be sufficient to warrant and
command our belief of them, which is all that God in this particular, requires
at our hands. But if we will be over-wise, and search too curiously after the
nature and discovery of them, all that we shall gain by it, will be nothing
else but this mournful Recompense, we shall destroy our selves; for these
sublime Truths are placed above our Mortal heads, like the Sun in the
Firmament, to the intent that they might warm our Hearts, and influence our
Lives; but they will be sure like the Sun too, to dazzle our Eyes, if not to
strike us quite blind, if we look too closely and obstinately upon them. It was
an aspiring desire of being over-wise, that brought the Original Curse and
Destruction upon Mankind: And alike ill consequence will attend all those who
are guilty of the same Sinful Curiosity touching Divine Mysteries, which was
our first Parents, Transgression, in reference to the Tree of Knowledge. Such
presumptuous discoverers may lose themselves in their researches, as we may see
by the sad Ship-wrecks of those, who have been the boldest Adventurers that
way; but they shall never find the forbidden secrets which they so thirst and
languish after. They may disturb their Peace, impair their Health, subvert
their Faith, distract their Reason; and according to the Wiseman's denunciation
in my Text, totally destroy both their Bodies and Souls; but that is all the
fruit that they are likely to reap from their endeavor to make themselves thus
Over-wise.

And thus much of the two former Cautions contained in my Text, directed to the
Good and Religious man.

But if it be so necessary for the Good and Pious man, to observe such Limits
and Cautions in his Applications to Religion; How much more then does it behove
the Wicked and Irreligious, to lay the severest Restraints upon himself in
Relation to his Vices? Which leads me to the Third caution contained in my
Text: viz. Be not over much wicked, neither be thou foolish, That is, Be not
Persisting and Obdurate in thy Wickedness?

The holy Psalmist tells us, that God's mercies are over all his works;
Extending their Benefits not only to his good and obedient Creatures, but also
to the wicked and rebellious ones. He bears long with them, spares and
cherishes them; and when their Sins cry aloud for the Vials of Wrath, he
nevertheless pours upon them the showers of his Mercy. And what is the gracious
end and design of this long-forbearance and mercy of God toward them? No other
but that which the Apostle assigns, That he may thereby lead them to
Repentance: Romans 2.4.
But such is the Ingratitude of Sinners, that it too often works a contrary
effect upon them; and that Patience and Long-suffering of God, which both in
the nature and design of it should persuade them to repent, encourages them to
become more excessive and obdurate in their Wickedness. Thus every days
continuance in Sin, as it makes the Sinners condition more dangerous, so it
renders him more obdurate and insensible of his danger; and that wickedness
which puts him under the greatest necessity of Repentance, does most of all
disable and harden him against it.

In their first Essays and Practices of Wickedness, Men are naturally apt to be
diffident and fearful; full of inward distrusts, in the very commission of the
evil, and of bitter checks and remorses for it afterward. They proceed to their
first acts of Lewdness, as raw and unexperienced Soldiers are wont to go into
Battle, that is with Chill Fears, Paleness and Tremblings; but when they have
often tried the danger, and come off with safety, they then bid defiance to the
Almighty, Job 15.26.
They run upon the thick bosses of his buckler; and what they at first
attempted with so much fear and reluctance, they repeat afterward with Triumph
and Shouting. When they find that none of those Judgments, which are denounced
against Sin, and which they were at first so apprehensive of, fall upon their
heads; but that on the contrary they are crowned with Blessings; they then
begin to flatter themselves, that God's threatenings are but empty Menaces, of
much seeming terror indeed, but no real danger. That he is no such dreadful
Judge and Avenger as they at first mistook him for. And by these steps they
become overmuch wicked and foolish, that is, hardened and secure in their
Sins. Eccl. 8.11.
Because sentence is not speedily executed upon them; therefore are their
hearts fully set in them to do evil.

But hear the Wiseman's warning, ye secure and obdurate Sinners! Why will ye
dye before your time? Mistake not God's forbearance with you, for an allowance
of your actions; think not that you are Pardoned because you are Reprieved: Or
that God's Judgments against you are reversed, because they are respited;
flatter not your selves with such deceitful expectations. For if Solomon knew
any thing, this will be the sure, tho it may be the slow Recompense of your
overmuch Wickedness, it will bring you to a wretched and untimely end. For the
wrath of God is compared in Scripture to the raging of a Lion; which tho it may
be long before it can be provoked, yet it will be sure to break out upon you at
last, in so much the more violent fury and destruction. And admitting that the
Divine Wrath should for a time pass you over, yet the natural product of your
own over much wickedness, will it self do the work of that Vengeance, and you
will need no other Executioners but your own Vices; for all Sin is naturally of
a most deadly and pestilential Influence; it is the fruitful Parent of
surfeitings, debilities, and rottenness of Bones, of an Infirm Life, and an
Immature Death. And whilst both Nature and Providence thus combine against your
safety, how can you live out half your days? How can you escape Solomon's
Denunciation against your over much Wickedness, That it shall cause you to dye
before your time?

And thus I have given you a brief Illustration of the Three Cautions delivered
in my Text, and the Arguments annexed to them by the Wiseman. I shall now
crave leave, only to make Application of what has been said, in a short Address
to the Three several sorts of Persons who are guilty of the Excesses which we
are here warned against, and to persuade them to yield a more dutiful Regard
and Obedience to these Excellent Cautions of Wise Solomon.

1. And first I shall apply my self to the overmuch Righteous; that is, to
those who are excessive and intemperate in their Zeal for Religion.

It Is one of the saddest Considerations that can enter into a Christian's
heart, to observe the deplorable effects of such a furious and ungoverned Zeal
in our own Nation; and to reflect upon that Wrath and Bitterness, with which
men professing the same Fundamentals of Religion, do notwithstanding detest and
separate from one another. Even the most distant Parties of men, and most
disagreeing in other matters are yet all of the same mind in this Point, in
showing an immoderate Zeal, in favor to their own Persuasions, and in
opposition to those of other men. Nay, many times you shall have such men
warmest of all for the Cause of their Opinions in Religion, who were it not for
that Mad and Inordinate Zeal, would be hard put to it to produce from their
whole Life and Practice any other Proof that they are of any Religion at all.
Let the Members of the Party that is opposite to them be never so regular both
in Belief and Practice; never so careful to preserve Faith, and a good
Conscience; yet because they dare to contradict them in some small things, they
burn with Zeal against them; give no Quarter either to their Persons or
Opinions; but that single and inconsiderable difference shall efface all sense
of their Agreement in greater matters; and like a Gulf fixed between them,
shall separate them from all Christian Charity and Commerce with one another.
Unreasonable men! Thus to rip up the very Bowels of Christianity by an over
righteous Zeal for its Cause, and for the sake of such things which are but the
Mint, and Annise, and Cummin of Religion, to violate that Love and Meekness
which are the weightier things of our Savior's Law.

But all such fierce and extravagant Zealots, of whatever Tribe or Persuasion,
let me admonish, That the Gospel abhors such a Furious and Uncharitable
Bigotry, and enjoins us to let our moderation be known unto all men. It
commands us indeed to show a Zeal toward God: But what kind of Zeal is it? Is
it such a blind, angry, and exterminating Zeal, as that which these men are
possessed with? Nothing more contrary; It is a Zeal according to knowledge; a
Zeal that enlightens, warms and cherishes, but never consumes or destroys. A
Zeal that ought indeed to stir us up to convince gainsayers, and to put to
silence the ignorance of foolish mea: But how should that be done? Not with
fierce Oppositions, Fury, and Maliciousness; but by the gentler methods of
Love, and Patience, and Well-doing: These are the Weapons of our Warfare. A
Christian Zeal must imitate that friendly and propitious River upon which this
City stands, and to which you are so much indebted for your Traffic and
Grandeur: It must proceed in a still and gentle Course, and not in such an
eager and rapid Torrent, as can serve only to sweep all things before it, and
to betray the shallowness of its own Channel. From the example of this
Bountiful River, be pleased to learn the due Moderation of your Piety: And
derive this double Advantage from its Waters, to make it the Pattern of your
Zeal, as it is the great Fountain of your Riches. It Is such a Calm, and Even,
and Deep Current of Religion, which alone can quench the burning Discords that
are between us; and Import as great an Increase of true Piety amongst us, as
that other does of Wealth and Splendour.

And have we not now, in the present Posture of our Affairs, the greatest
reason to be of this mind, considering the Subtilty and Vigilance of our Common
Enemies, who will be sure to take all Advantages from our Domestic Feuds, and
to improve them to their Interest, and our Destruction. How will they rejoice
in Gath, and triumph in the streets of Askalon! to see our over-righteous Zeal
against each other; to look on whilst we most unnaturally do the work of their
Arms by our own Animosities; and give them the Pleasure of beholding our Ruin,
without putting them to the Trouble and Expense of procuring it? Let me beseech
you therefore, for the sake of our Common Interest and Safety, to entertain
Candid, Amicable, Christian Dispositions toward one another. And wherever we
meet with a man of a truly Pious and Teachable Spirit; Sound and Orthodox in
the Articles of the Christian Faith, and conscientiously observant of the Rules
of Christian Practice; let us treat such a one as a Brother, and a true
Disciple of Jesus Christ. We may wish indeed, That he were not only almost, but
altogether such as we are: We may, by the proper methods of Gentleness, Good
Example, and Meek persuasion, endeavor to make him so. But if that perfect
consent cannot be obtained, if those lesser marks of distinction cannot be
totally wiped out; yet let 'em not be allowed to break Friendship between us,
and to prejudice our Charity but when we are so far agreed Let us overlook in
our private Capacities and common Conversation, all differences in lesser
matters; and say of 'em all, as Ephron did to Abraham, concerning the price of
his Field, What is that betwixt me and thee? This is the true Genius and
Behavior of a Christian Spirit; and to this I exhort you all, in the name of
God, and in the meekness and gentleness of Jesus Christ, by whose name we are
called, and whose merciful temper, ought to be made the subject of our faithful
imitation. But if the Example of Christ be not sufficient to work us into such
a mild and condescending Spirit, yet at least let the sense and care of our own
Self-Preservation prevail with us; for why should we by an over-Righteous Zeal
and Bigotry destroy our selves?

But 2. In the next place let me address my self to those who transgress in the
second excess, cautioned against in my Text, By making themselves over-wise;
that is, by being too boldly Curious and Inquisitive in the Mysteries of
Religion.

This is an Excess, the practice and mischief of which is too widely and
fatally spread in the present Age. In which, the most Venerable Mysteries of
Religion, are prostituted to the most illiterate and vulgar Examination; and
those sacred Articles of the Trinity and Incarnation, to which the most
Improved Understandings of former Ages have bowed with a profound Veneration,
are presumptously attempted to be unfolded, by every confident Undertaker; and
if they cannot be unfolded, more presumptuously denied, as if it were out of
Malice and Revenge for their unsearchable obscurity.

But let every such curious and daring Enquirer hear the Advice of the Wiseman,
who is likely to be his best Instructor in the rules and measures of acquiring
Knowledge; Mike not thy self over-wise.

Vain Man! Would thou be wise beyond the Standard and Capacity of thy
Nature? Does this disoblige thee, that there should be Mysteries in Religion
above thy Understanding? Will nothing content thee but thou must comprehend the
Essence and Attributes of the Deity? Foolish and Ambitious Creature! Go first
and study those things which are more proportioned to thy capacity; the Idioms
and Elegancies of Languages, the Histories and Polities of Nations, the
Practical Maxims and Cases of Morality, and the ordinary appearances of Nature.
Search into the matter and motions of the heavenly Bodies, the Formation of
Animals, the Virtues of Plants, the seeds and mixtures of Earth, and the fluxes
and refluxes of the Waters. And when thou have gone through this School of Art
and Nature, and have mastered all the difficulties that occur there; then, and
not before, begin to unriddle the Mysterious Doctrines concerning Religion, and
the Author of Nature. But if there are many things even in this inferior scope
of Knowledge, which thou must confess to be too hard for all thy Study and
Learning to overcome, and which will baffle thy most diligent enquiry into
them; Why should thou pretend too boldly to the Knowledge of more remote and
sublime things? Why should thou think it a disparagement to thy
understanding, which is not able to give account of the meanest Plant or
Insect, to acknowledge something above its comprehension, in the Nature of God,
and the Mysteries of Religion?

Let me therefore as earnestly, as I may seasonably in this Generation, Exhort
you all, in consideration of the narrowness and insufficiency of our human
understandings, not to be too curious, or to expect to be over wise in
Religious Mysteries; but let us acquiesce in such a knowledge and discovery of
those high and inaccessible Articles, as may conduce to our Edification and
Salvation; and let us not by an endeavor to be over-wise in them, weary, and
distract, and perplex our minds; For why should we thus destroy our selves?

But 3. Let me now apply my self to those who are guilty of the last and
greatest excess forbidden in my Text, who are, the overmuch wicked and
obdurate Sinners.

And all such let me exhort, by the terror of the Wiseman's denunciation, to
rouse themselves up from their dangerous security. It Is a Lethargick and
treacherous sleep, that lulls them so fast, and will be sure to end in an
Immature, and which is worse, in an Eternal death; and what Motive can be
sufficient to persuade men to the forsaking of their most beloved Vices, if
they will not do it for this strong reason, for the prolongation of their
Lives, and for the escaping of Death?

What terrible pains and operations, will not men sometimes contentedly undergo
for these dear ends? they will part with Limb after Limb, cut off Right-hands,
pluck out Right-eyes, and think themselves sufficiently rewarded for all, if
they can but avoid dying thereby, and preserve a poor helpless trunk and
remnant of Life. And why will they not be equally prevailed with for the same
reason, to give up their Sins? Those Sins which are the Gangreens and
Mortifications of their Bodies and Souls, and must, if not cut off, bring them
to death before their time? Why will they not part with these Right-hands, and
these Right-eyes, their beloved Sins, as willingly as they do those of their
Bodies, since there would be less pain in doing it, and there is for it a
greater necessity. Strange and unaccountable infatuation! That whereas Skin for
Skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life; yet he will not, tho
for the sake of the same dear possession, be persuaded to part with his darling
Vices.

What account can thou give of such a proceeding, thou soolish and obdurate
Sinner? That whereas God has hedged in thy way with thorns, and placed death as
a stop in thy progress, thou will yet break through all those strong senses,
choosing to dye before thy time, and to offer thy self up, if I may so say, a
Martyr to the Devil? What Apology can thou make for such an extravagant
conduct? What reason can thou find wherewith to answer the Wisemans question,
why thou will dye before thy time? Is death so amiable a thing in thy eyes? Art
thou so enamored with the King of terrors, that thou hastenest thus to meet
him, and to anticipate the day of thy dissolution? No certainly, this cannot be
the true reason of thy proceeding; no man can be thus in love with death, but
especially not the wicked man, who must expect so sad a Catastrophe after
death. But the true cause of such an absurd Behavior is this; That men
consider not the last issue of their actions: they go on in their Vices, as the
Ox goes to the Slaughter, reflecting in the mean time no more than that Beast
does, that they are tending to the Chambers of death. Awake then, ye hardened
and secure Sinners, from this unthinking stupidity! Arise, and escape for your
Lives! Death and Hell are before you, and why will ye die before your time? If
you love life, and desire to see good days, flee from those Vices which lead
you into such fatal and murderous consequences; Let the time past of your lives
be accounted as overmuch wickedness; and walk from henceforth in the good and
wholesome Paths of Virtue and Religion. Thus will you escape that untimely end
which the Wiseman here warns you of; thus will you set out in a fair way to a
long life here, and in a sure way to an eternal One hereafter. To which God of
his Infinite Mercy bring us all through Jesus Christ, To whom, etc.

FINIS.

