A VINDICATION OF THE Primitive Church, AND DIOCESAN EPISCOPACY: In ANSWER to
Mr. Baxter's Church History OF BISHOPS, And their COUNCILS Abridged: As also to
some part of his Treatise of EPISCOPACY.

Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet, cui si non exors quaedam
and ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesiis efficerentur schismata,
quot Sacerdotes.

Hieron. adv. Lucif. Ab illo Deo Patre, ab hac Ecclesia Matre, nullius me
Hominis Crimina, nullius Calumnia separabunt.

Augustine. Coll. Carth. 3. Ego illam Ecclesiam defendo, hanc assero qualicunque
voce in qua quisquid fuero, illa Ecclesia est,

Aug. ibid. LONDON, Printed for Moses Pit, at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1682.

PREFACE.
IT is a very just Censure that Polybius passed upon Phylarchus, one that wrote
the History of the Achaian War, That he did not understand the principal
Business of an Historian, because he concealed all the virtuous and generous
Actions of one Side, Polyb. l. 2. (...).
and insisted only upon such as might render them odious to the Reader: the
Rigor and Seveverity of Execution which the Achaians were sometimes obliged to
use, are set out with all the miserable Circumstances that can be conceived on
such Occasions; but not a word of their Clemency and Humanity which they
commonly used toward their Enemies, when they fell into their Power: As if,
says that Noble Writer, It were the Office of an Historian to record only the
Worst of Humane Actions, to reckon up the Faults and Miscarriages of Men, and
not their great and commendable Actions; (...).
and as if the Examples of Sin might be of greater Benefit and Edification to
the Reader than those of Goodness and Virtue. Mr. Baxter's History of Bishops
and their Councils, being writ after the same Model, falls unavoidably under
the same Reproof, unless perhaps the Disingenuity that is condemned in a
Heathen, may become a Christian Writer; and what the one must not do to his
Enemy, the other may offer to his Brethren and Fathers, to the great Lights and
Ornaments of the Christian Church.

Now this History of Bishops is nothing else but an Account of all the Faults
that Bishops have committed in the several Ages of the Church, without any
mention of their good Actions, of the piety and severity of their lives, of
their Zeal for the Faith, of their Charity toward the Poor, of their Contempt
of the World, of their Labor and Diligence in their Office. These were things
he thought, perhaps, not to belong to a Church-Historian to relate: These were
improper, unedifying Examples, at least wise they were not very agreeable to
the Design of our Author, which was, to disgrace Diocesan Episcopacy. This
Weeding of Church History for the Faults of Bishops, is not to write, or
abridge History, but to draw up an Indictment; and because many things are
falsely charged, it is no better than a Libell.

But we need not look for a severer Censure of this Church History, than that
we have in Mr. Baxter's own Critical Preface to it: For as his Church History
is designed to disgrace Diocesan Bishops and their Councils, so the Preface
looks as it were intended to disgrace this History: For the Qualifications of a
Credible Historian, which he reckons up there, appear so little in our
Abridger, and the Character of Incredible Relators so nearly resemble him, that
one might suspect a Trick in it; and that some of Tom Coryat's Ensurers had
given their Testimony to the Work.

1. It is supposed (says Mr. B.) that a Man should believe his Senses: Surely
our Author was asleep when he wrote this, and thought he saw every thing he
relates. But how shall we believe our Senses, since we are told, in this
History, that they were not Presbyterians, but Episcopal Men that began the
late War against the King?

2. The History of the Gospel is certainly credible. This would mightily ensure
the Credit of this Abridgement, if all were Gospel that Mr. Baxter writes.

3. Prophets who had Divine Inspiration, and Vision, had that Evidence that
gave them a Certainty, tho not to others. It may be Mr. B. has heard a Been
scripsisti de me; but because he confesses this to be no Evidence to others, we
may suspend our Faith; and upon Examniation believe as much as we shall find
reason to do.

4. When History delivers a matter of Fact and Sense by the common Consent of
all those that knew it, though of contrary Minds, Disposition and Interest. The
Superiority of Bishops over Presbyters is acknowledged by Catholics, and
Schismatics and Heretics, Men of very contrary Minds, Disposition and
Interest; and yet this Church History would have us believe the contrary: Here
we are in a Straight: For whether shall we belive in this Case the Preface or
the Book?

5. When the History of any Person or Action is proved by continued and visible
Effects, as that William of Normandy Conquered England, while there are so many
Effects of that Conquest in our Laws and Customs: And what may be proved by
more visible and continued Effects than the Superiority of Bishops over
Presbyters? The Laws and Customs of all Churches are full of this; all the
Christian World being governed by Diocesan Episcopacy till the last Age; and
yet notwithstanding these visible effects, we must not believe this Government
to be Apostolical, when the Ancient History that delivers it as such is proved
by such Continued visible Effects. Here we are in a great Straight again, which
to trust, the Critic or the Historian.

6. That History is credible which speaks consentingly against the known
Interest of the Author. Well, but many of Mr. B's Characters of Ancient
Bishops, are taken from professed Enemies, or persons manifestly prejudiced, as
his Accounts of Athanasius, Theophilus, Cyril, and diverse others do manifestly
show: But here he does endeavor to clear himself, and says, What I say of the
Miscarriages of Bishops and Councils is most in their own Words: Oftentimes
they are not the Words of the Bishops or Councils, but Mr. Baxter's Own, when
he mistakes in Translating them.

What I say against Popes, is but the Recital of what is said by the Greatest
Defenders and Flatterers of Popes: And let those Flatterers and Defenders
answer him if they think it worth their while; but because upon this occasion
he is pleased to give Account of his Authors, let us consider his Authorities.
He tells us in the first place, who he has not made use of: I give you not a
word (says he) out of Luther, nor Illyricus, nor the Magdeburgenses, etc. It is
no great Matter: For they were something disaffected to Popery, and therefore
they may be liable to Exceptions: But it is something hard to reject those that
follow. No nor out of the Collections of Goldastus, Marquardus, Freherus,
Rubrus, Pistorius, etc. So familiar to him, that Marquardus Freherus makes two
Authors by the same Figure that Marcus Tullius Cicero makes three: Unless you
will lay this Mistake upon the Printer; but then you cannot easily give a
reason, why, in the midst of so many Surnames, Freherus should have his
Christian Name more than any of the rest: But whoever this mistake belongs to,
it is plain, Mr. B. had but little Acquaintance with those Collections. He
tells us, He gives us not a Word out of them. It must be surely great Modesty
to conceal his Authors, or his Ignorance not to know them: For he does really
gives us several things from these Collections, and cites his Authors too.
Egristhart and the Called by Aimon, l. 4. c. ult. Ademarus, and Adelmus by P.
Massonus.
Anonimous Author of the Life of Lewis the Emperor, are cited with several
others that are published in some of those Collections which Mr. B. denies to
have given his Reader one word out of: It would sound something harsh from a
Compiler of General History, to say, That for that of England, he had not given
one word out of the Collections of Cambden, Savil, or Seldom, but only out of
Alford or Cressey; and yet to cite Bid, or Newburgensis, or Huntington, etc.
It is a strange thing, that a Man who talks so much of leaving the World,
should not yet have left the Vanity of pretending, and of mustering up Books of
which he had never seen any more than the Titles.

Thus far Mr. Baxter gives Account of his Authors negatively; in the next place
he informs positively, whence this Worthy Rhapsody is taken.

The Substance of the Common History (the Rarities are not to be enquired after
whence they come) is taken out of the commonly received Church Historians, and
among them Mr. B. does reckon Nazianzen, the first time doubtless that ever he
appeared among the Commonly received Church Historians: Mr. B. names Eusebius,
Socrates, and some others; but I am afraid Mr. B. mistakes Dr. Hanmar's
Translation for Eusebius, etc. Whereas this English Translation which Mr. B.
makes use of, has seldom the Sense of the Authors, and oftentimes none at all.
The main part of the Councils he owns to be taken out of Binius, of an Old
incorrect Edition of the Year 1606. but it must be noted, that where Mr. B. did
not understand Binius, he is pleased to give something of his own.

7. The next Degree of Credibibility depends upon the Veracity, or Credible
Fitness of the Reporter, as, 1. One that lived upon the place, or near. 2. A
Wise Man. 3. One that made it his long and hard Study. 4. One that is
Impartial, a lover of Peace, and not engaged in Faction. 5. A Sober, Calm,
Considerate Man. 6. Of manifest Honesty, Conscience, etc. And after this, he
tells us of several sorts of Men that are not to be believed: among others, One
that is deeply engaged in a Party; One that shows a Malignant Spirit, that
extenuateth or denies (he might have added concealeth) all the Good that was
in his Adversaries, and fastens on them all the Odium that he can, without just
Proof, mutato nomine de te; One that is ignorant or proud; a silly, weak Man;
nor one that is passionately rash, with many more things to this purpose. And
how well the Circumstances of Credibility agree with his History, or how little
these discrediting Circumstances concern him, the Reader will best judge: How
Impartial, how Calm, how disengaged from Faction, how well versed in this
Study? As for his Temper, the Books he lately Published sufficiently discover
it; and let the Reader judge, whether ever any Man railed with greater
Intemperance, or less Provocation? Now to give some Instances of his Christian
Meekness, page 19. he calls the present Bishops of the Church of England, A few
Turbulent Prelates, p. 46. Silencing, destroying Prelates. p. 73. Proud,
Contentious, Ambitious, Hereticating part of the Bishops. p. 50. Hereticating
Prelates; and this is a Title he takes great delight in, and applies to all
Councils that condemn any Heretics. p. 77. He has much ado to forbear calling
Theophilus of Alexandria a downright Knave. p. 95. Speaking of Bishops, he
calls them the Firebrarnds of the World. p. 98. Self-conceited Bishops. p. 196.
Merciless, Furious Bishops. p. 183. The Confounders of Churches, etc. And this
is the Temper of the Catholic, of the mere Christian, as Mr. B. is pleased to
style himself. Bitterness, and Wrath, and Clamor, and Evil Speaking, are these
the Fruits of that mere Christian Spirit? To say no worse, This Spirit comes
not of him that calls us.

But because Mr. B's Character of a Credible Historian regards not only those
that write an Original History, it will be expedient to add something
concerning such Qualifications as are most necessarily required in an Abridger,
or Collector of General Church History at this time.

1. It is very requisite, that whosoever undertakes to write a General History
of Bishops and Councils, should be acquainted with the Languages in which those
Historians, out of whom he collects, have written: For it is neither safe, nor
very decent to depend altogether upon Translations. Who does not see, who has
read Valesius his Edition of the Ancient Church Historians, how necessary it
was to translate them a new? And how often former Translations had mistaken the
Meaning of those Authors, in Passages very Material? And who would not smile,
after all this, to see a man pretending to Learning, transcribing out of Dr.
Hanmar's Translation, and Copying out the grossest of his Mistakes? As for
Instance, p. 83. Mr. Baxter, out of that English Translation, says, That
Hypatia taught in the Schools which Plotinus continued. (...). Scholam a
Plotino deductam, Vales.
He should have said, That he taught in the Platonic School, descended or
continued down from Plotinus, i. e. where he had taught above a Hundred Years
before Hypatia was born: For Plotinus died about the Year of Christ, 270.
Hypatia flourished in the beginning of the Fifth Century: And p. 127. we have
this imperfect Sense, Also that he embraces the Venerable Images which the
Economy of our Lord Jesus Christ: (...) etc.
Where he observes that the Verb is left out, whereas the Sense is perfect in
the Greek, and there needs no Verb; The Venerable Images of the Economy of
Christ: But of this sort of Mistakes it would be endless to give Instances, the
Translations of the Greek Historians and Councils, which he has made use of
being very bad.

But it may be alleged here, in Mr. Baxter's Defense, that several other
Compilers of Councils, and Church History, had as little Greek as he: For
Surius and Crabbe had none at all, and Baronius discovers his Ignorance in this
part, by the miserable Versions he is forced to make use of. Binius, Mr. B's.
Author does not seem to have any, for all his Greek and Latin Edition of the
Councils. And Bail, a Frenchman, and a Late Abridger of the Councils, had
just so much Greek, as to be able to derive the Anomaei, Heretics that denied
Christ to be of like Substance with the Father, from (...), and (...), exleges,
or sine Lege, Men without Law. Well then, let Mr. B. be excused in this
particular, for undertaking to write Church History upon the Credit of Wretched
Translations. It will be surely indispensably necessary to understand these
Transactions: But because Mr. B. is so puzzled with these Latin Versions, I
wished for his sake, that Hanmar had translated Binius: I wonder in what
Dictionary Mr. B. found that ire ad Comitatum, was to go the Palace of Great
Prelates? p. 56. We have strange Confusion of Discourse. p. 88. About the
Scriptures, the Divine and Terrible Scriptures, for want of understanding the
Language of those times; for all that Scripture is nothing else than Sacra
Imperatoris, the Emperor's Letter. p. 107. Mr. B. represents Theodoret as a
Jesuit, not, I believe, out of any Evil Will, but for want of a little Latin.
Theodoret says (according to Mr. B's. Translation) I take not my self to say
true, (...).
but I know I please God. Vere non dico, nisi quomodo novi placere Deo, i. e.
In good Truth I do not speak, but as I am persuaded is acceptable to God: But
p. 112. Mr. B. translates the Translation of Nicephorus something pleasantly.
Stephanus (says he) was killed by the Boys, with sharp Quills. Surely these
were Porcupin's Quills to do this Execution: Yet it is to be acknowledged, that
he has the Authority of Qui mihi for the Quills; but because in the same place
these Calami acuti are said to be sharpened like Spears, (...).
it will make new Difficulties: The Critics would be at a loss about it, if
some Dictionaries did not render Calamus a Reed, or a Cane, which possibly may
better agree with the Description of these Fatal Weapons. I must confess I was
something surpised with Mr. B's singular way of rendering the Names of Places;
as p. 96. The Council at Regiense, at Arausican. p. 131. at Toletane. p. 217.
George Bishop, of Praenestine. p. 358. D. of Spoletane. p. 428. Council of
Palentine; with many more of this kind. It would sound something strange with
us, to say, the University of Oxonian, or of Cantabrigian: For my part, if he
stand upon it, I do not love to contend about Words, let him have Liberty of
Conscience in Grammar as well as Religion.

But Mr. B's Translation of Canon the 21st. of the Council of Tours is
something more considerable, because Mr. B. makes Remarks upon it, in behalf of
some Dissenters: The Passage is something long, but to make the Reader amends,
it shall be the last; not for want of Matter, but because I would not tire him
with too many Instances of one sort: the foresaid Canon is thus rendered by Mr.
B. p. 187. Those that the Law commands to be put to Death, if they desire to
hear the Preacher, we will have to be convicted unto life (i.e. not to die;)
for they are to be slain with the Sword of the Mouth, and deprived of
Communion, if they will not observe the decrees of the Seniors left them, and
do despise to hear the Pastor, and will not be separate. Some Sectaries among
us ( says Mr. B.) are of the same mind against putting penitent Malefactors to
Death. Whatever mind some Sectaries may be of, it is plain Mr. B. did not
apprehend the Mind of this Council. The matter in short is thus: This Canon
speaks of such as having vowed Virginity, do afterward marry; and that though
the Ecclesiastical Laws do punish such with perpetual Excommunication; yet this
Council thought fit so far to mitigate the punishment, as to offer Penance and
Reconciliation to such who shall separate from these Marriages; which the
Council expresses thus: Nos vero si quos lex perimi jubet, si cupiunt audire
praeconem volumus ut convertantur ad vitam: Nam perimendi sunt Oris Gladio, and
Communione privandi, si relicta sibi Seniorum decreta observare noluerint, and
pastorem suum audire despexerint, and esse separati noluerint, i. e. We order,
that those whom the Rigor of the ecclesiastical law commands to be cut off, if
they desire to hear the voice of the Preacher, (calling them to Repentance)
should be converted and live: For those that refuse to obey the Decrees of the
Bishops that have been before us, and also neglect their Pastor, and will not
separate themselves, ( i. e. from those unlawful Marriages) are to be cut off
by the Sword of the Mouth, and Excommunication. And this is explained by what
follows presently after, Qui vero in hac pertinacia perdurare voluerint, and
potius in volutabro malae Conversationis permanere quam se de vetito Conjugio
separare perenni Excommunicatione damnentur, i. e. Let those who will
obstinately persist, and choose rather to wallow in the Enjoyments of a
forbidden Marriage, than to separate from it, be condemned to perpetual
Excommunication. I have promised to spare the Reader's Stomach, or Spleen in
this kind; and to add no more Instances of Mr. B's Success in Translating
Binius, and therefore shall add no more of this kind.

3. It is very requisite for an Abridger of Church History, of Bishops and
Councils, to consult the best Editions of those Historians and Councils; least
instead of the Words of the Historians, or of the Councils, he obtrude upon his
Reader the Oversight of Copyists: If Mr. B. had been at this pains, and
consulted Sirmond's Edition of the French Councils, he must have wanted several
Allegations for the Congregational way, which are nothing else but corrupt
Readings of the Ancient Canons of the Gallicane Church, as is showed more at
large in this Book: Nor can we suspect Sirmond as too great a Favorer of
Diocesan Bishops, since it is well known how he is charged by the Abbot of St.
Cyran, under the Name of Petrus Aurelius, for having falsyfied a Canon of the
Council of Orange to the prejudice of the Episcopal Order, to comply perhaps
with a Design the Jesuits had then on Foot to Govern the Papists of England,
independent from any Diocesan Bishops: Jesuits care as little for Bishops, as
our Protestant Dissenters can do.

4. It is very requisite that an Abridger of Church History use some little
Diligence in Examining and Comparing of Authors; at least in considering that
Author out of which he takes his History: for want of this little Care it is,
that Mr. B. tells us, out of his own Head, That Theodahatus yielded up Rome and
the Crown to Belisarius, p. 130. Whereas Theodahatus was killed before
Belisarius came near Rome; and it was from Vitiges that Rome and the Crown were
forced by that Great General, as Procopius and Evagrius do particularly relate.
It is an odd Oversight of Mr. B. p. 201. where he tells us, that King Egica,
before the Council of Toledo writes a Sermon for them (the Bishops) wherein he
tells them, that every Parish that have twelve Families must have their proper
Governor; i. e. a Presbyter: Whereas that is not part of the King's Sermon, as
Mr. B. calls that Prince his Letter to the Council, but a Canon of the Council
it self: For the King's Letter ends long before with a Formal Date. Dat. die 70
faeliciter 60 Regni: Toleto. In the same Page Mr. B. to show his Skill, makes
Willibrood and Wilfrid to be the same; I wonder the more at this, because
Binius, in this very place, from whence Mr. B. takes his account of Willibrood
and Wilfrid does plainly make them to be two persons; but when Mr. B. goes to
play the Critic, this is constantly his Success: But Binius leads him into a
mistake, p. 253. where he transcribes, out of his Author, That Ludovicus
deprives him (Pepin) of his Kingdom of Italy, and divides it between his two
Sons by the Second Wife, Charles and Rodolphus: It is great news to Historians,
to hear, that Lewis had two Sons by his Second Wife, since no mention is made
of any other but Charles; the Writer of that Emperor's Life, speaks of no
other; nor Ammonius who transcribes him; nor the following Chronicles. Girard,
Vignier, Mezeraye, who reckon up Lewis his Children, have no such person; and
say expressly, that Judith had but one Son: She had a Brother indeed named
Rodolphus, but he had no share of the Empire: But this Division of Pepin's
Kingdom, was between Lotharius and Charles, as the Annal. Franc. before
mentioned do deliver: Nor was Italy the Kingdom of Pepin, the Son of Lewis, as
Binius and Mr. B. tells us; but Aquitain. Lotharius had been a good while
before made King of Italy, and Crowned by the Pope, in the place of Bernard.
Mr. B. by way of Remark, p. 342. says, That it was no wonder that Pope
Benedict, and his Company should condemn Berengarius; but Lanfrancus, in his
Book against Berengarius, writes, that Leo the Ninth was the first that
condemned him some Years after the Death of Benedict, Anno Dom. 1050. We have a
Conjecture of Mr. B's. p. 356. that is not unpleasant, and that shows his
profound Skill in History: He cites an Epistle of Gregory the Seventh to the
King of Denmark, where, among other things, he invites him to send his Son with
an Army to conquer a Maritine province not far from Rome, possessed by vile and
sluggish Heretics: What Province he means (says Mr. B.) I am not certain,
unless it be the Waldenses. It is pretty well guessed: For Gregory the Seventh
died in the Year 1085. and P. Waldo, from whom the Waldenses had their
Denomination, began to be taken notice of about the Year 1160. But Fourscore
Years break no Square; nor is our Author much more happy in his Geography, than
in his Chronology: For p. 421. He tells us, that there was a Council held at
Vienna near France: As if a Man should say, the City of Sarum near England: But
there would be no end of instancing all the Oversights of this Church History:
the Reader may dip at adventure, and if he do not light upon Mistakes as
Remarkable as any of these, he has but ill Fortune: He that takes any pleasure
to trace Beveus and Mistakes, may find here an endless Comedy of Errors.

5. But I had almost forgot one Qualification very requisite for a
Church-Historian, which must not be omitted, the Learned call it (...), the
want of which, betrays a Writer sometimes, when Fortune is not propitious, into
great Absurdities. I will not be so bold with Mr. B. as to say this was the
Occasion of a strange Misadventure of his, p. 122. For speaking of the Canon of
Scripture concluded upon in a Council at Rome, under Pope Gelasius, Mr. B.
makes a wonderful Discovery, that in the Canon they put a Book called, ORDO
HISTORIARVM: And now let the Church of Rome value it self if it dare, for
having preserved the Canon of Scripture entire and undiminish'd; since Mr. B.
plainly discovers a Book to have been once in their Canon, which is not now to
be found in any of the Pope's Bibles. A strange thing this! that no body should
ever discover this before: But I wonder that he did not find out another Book
in that Canon, every whit as strange as this, and that is Ordo Prophetarum: For
there it is as a General Title before the Prophets, as this Ordo Historiarum is
before some Historical Books. This mistake is as if a Man should find a Chapter
in the Bible called Contents, or a Book called Apocrypha.

I have given these few Instances, out of many of Mr. B's great Abilities in
Church History, that the Reader may perceive how much this Infamous Libel
against Bishops and Councils is to be depended upon; and let any Man that has
any acquaintance with these Mattters, judge impartially whether this History do
really disgrace Bishops or Councils, or any body else so effectually as it does
the Author? And if this be the Effect of having made History ones long and hard
Study, even let us burn Binius and Baronius, and go make Buttons: We may with
honest Application employ our time so to much better purpose.

I must detain the Reader a little longer with this Preface, while I endeavor
to clear some Passages of this Book, which may seem to be answered already, the
Effect of them being said in behalf of Episcopacy, and replied to on the part
of the Dissenters: For some part of this Book being Printed 8 or 9 Months ago,
and the Subject having been treated by several Hands, it could not be, but that
several things should be said to the same effect in Answer to Mr. B's
Allegations for the Congregational Way; and in Confirmation of Diocesan
Episcopacy, with what is written here; and being replied to there, seem already
to have received their Answer: Wherefore I conceived it necessary to take off
such Exceptions as prevented any Passages in this Book; and because it could
not be done conveniently, in the Book it self, to reserve them for the Preface:
But upon Examination, I found them to be fewer than I did at first imagine; For
Mr. Baxter, since his Church History, and Treatise of Episcopacy has made no
farther Impression into this Controversy; I have examined some Chapters of
that Book that pursued the Design of this History, by the Addition of several
Historical Passages to disgrace the Episcopal Government, as the occasion of
all Mischiefs in the Church: As for the first part, about the Order of Bishops,
it had too many particulars to be minutely considered; but the Substance of it
having been said in short in the first Chapter of his Church, and more at large
in his Disputation of Church Government, has been examined in the beginning of
this Book Dr. O. has followed Mr. B. in the Congregational way; and as for his
Allegations out of Antiquity, they are transcribed out of Mr. Baxter, with
little of Improvement or Addition. One would think a diligent Man might find
good Gleaning after Mr. B. but Dr. O's. Book, it seems, is answered already by
an unknown Hand: But there is a later Book published under the Title of No
Evidence for Diocesan Churches, etc. in the Primitive Times, in Answer to the
Dean of St. Paul 's Allegations out of Antiquity for such Churches, etc. But no
Reply being yet made, that I know of to those Exceptions, I shall endeavor to
take off such of them as may concern me.

1. I have endeavored to prove, that the Church of Carthage in Cyprian's Time,
was Diocesan; and among other things, urge for it the Multitude of Presbyters
that belonged to that Church, even in the time of Persecution, when the
greatest part of the Clergy was fallen off. The Author abovementioned excepts
against this, where it is alleged by the Dean of S. Paul's, and offers two
things in Answer; 1. A Passage out of Bishop Downham, That indeed, at the first
Conversions of Cities, the whole Number of the People converted (being
sometimes not much greater than the Number of Presbyters placed among them)
were able to make but a small Congregation: But this Allegation can be of
little Use, because, 1. This was not the Case of the Church of Carthage, it was
not a new converted Church, but settled long before, and in a flourishing
Condition. 2. Many more Presbyters may be ordained in a City than is necessary
for the first Beginnings of a Church, with respect to future Increase; and for
the Service of such as afterward should believe: So that though there might be
in a new gathered Church, almost as many Presbyters as there are People, yet
the Design of that number of Officers may be for several Congregations, when
the Believers of that place should become so numerous as not to be contained in
one. 3. The Multitude of Presbyters belonging to one Congregational Church,
might be occasioned by the uncertain Abode of most of the Apostles and their
Commissioners, who are the Principal, if not the only Ordainers of Presbyters,
mentioned in Scripture. Therefore they might ordain more than were just
necessary for the present Occasions of a Church, because they could not be
present to ordain, as often as the Increase of a Church, or Vacancies, or other
Necessities of it should require. But that any Church fixed and settled, having
its Bishop always present, should multiply Presbyters beyond Necessity, in the
Circumstances of the Primitive Christians before Constantine, is altogether
incredible: For the necessary Expenses of the Church were very great; the Poor
numerous; the generality of Christians not of the Richest; and the Estates they
had being at the Discretion of their Enemies, and ruined with perpetual
Persecution: Is it credible, that persons in this Condition would multiply
Officers without Necessity, who were to be maintained out of the Public Stock;
as Cyprian affirms the Presbyters of Carthage were? And lastly, if this Opinion
of Bishop Downham had any certain Ground in Antiquity, We should probably hear
of it with both Ears: and we should have it recommended upon Ancienter
Authority than His: But the first which this Author cites is Nazianzen, who
complains of the Multitude of Presbyters in his Time: This has been already
alleged by Mr. Baxter, and has received Answer; and he that cannot answer it
to himself from the great difference between the Condition of the Church in
Cyprian, and in Nazianzen's Time, has a fondness for the Argument beyond my
Skill to remove.

The next Instance of the number of Presbyters belonging to the great Church of
C. P. St. Sophia, the greatest perhaps in the World, will do as little Service,
as the complaint of Nazianzen: Justinian (says that Gentleman) Observing that
Officers in Churches were multiplied beyond reason and measure, takes order
that they should be reduced to the numbers of the first Establishment; but in
the great Church at C. P. he would have the Presbyters brought down to Sixty:
And what follows from this? That the Number of Presbyters was become
extravagant in Justinian's Time; but what is this to their Number in Cyprian's:
For this very Edict of Justinian shows, that this multiplying of
Church Officers, was an Innovation, and therefore would have them reduced to
the first Establishment; but that first Establishment it seems admitted great
Numbers; for one Church had Sixty: True; but it must also be noted first, that
these sixty were to serve more than one Church: For there were three more,
besides St. Sophia, to be supplied by those Presbyters, as may be seen in the
Constitution, Nov. 3. c. 1. viz. St. Mary's Church, and that of Theodorus the
Martyr, and that of Helena, as some, but of Irene as others read: Yet after
all, there is no Argument to be drawn from this Number; for these were Canons
of a particular Foundation, designed for the Service of a Collegiate Church,
and no measure to be taken from hence concerning the Numbers of Presbyters
belonging to the Diocese. This is evident from the Preface of the said Novel,
whither I refer the Reader.

But I must confess, that what this Gentleman adds concerning the Church of
Constantinople is something surprising. No doubt (says he) they (the
Presbyters) were more numerous in C. P. in Constantine's Time, who endeavored
to make that City in all things equal to Rome, and built two Churches in it;
Soz. l. 2. c. 2.
yet in the latter end of his Reign, after the Death of Arrius, the Christians
there could all meet together for Worship: It is said expressly, that Alexander,
Bishop of that Church, (...). That Constantine built two Churches in C. P.
Sozomen does not say but that he built many and very great Churches there. Soz.
l. 2. c. 3. Ed. Vales. Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 48.
(...): after the same manner Eusebius says, that he adorned the City that he
called after his own Name, with many Churches, and great Temples, (...). Some
within the City, and in the Suburbs of it: Nor can we imagine, that two
Churches (much less one) could suffice all the Christians in C.P. when the City
of Heliopolis being converted to Christianity required more, and Constantine
built several for them, (...), Soc. l. 1. c. 18.
i. e. Having built several Churches, he ordered a Bishop; but one for all
those Churches and Clergy to be ordained there. Socrates indeed says, that
Constantine built two Churches in C. P. and names them; but does not say,
either that there were no more there in his Time, or that he built no more; but
these being remarkable for the Magnificence of the Structure, are perhaps, upon
that account, only mentioned by this Author: But we have showed already from
other Writers, of as good, or better Credit, That this Emperor built there very
many, and very Great Churches. Nor were these only for State and Ornament, but
the Number of Believers in that City did require many Churches for their
Assemblies: And the Passage of Theodoret above cited does not import the
contrary: Therefore to clear this point, I will endeavor to show the State of
the Church of C. P. about the later end of Constantine's Reign; and how it was
impossible for them to meet All in one place. 2. I will show, that the words
before cited do not conclude, that all the Believers of C. P. were assembled in
one Congregation with Alexander their Bishop. 1. As to the State of this
Church, it could not but be very numerous, when we consider what care the
Emperor took to bring Inhabitants to it from all Parts, some from Rome, some
from other Provinces; and it is more than probable, that much the greatest part
of those that came to inhabit the first Christian Emperor's Favorite City, were
Christians. 2. His care for rendering this City great and suitable to the
Magnificence of so mighty a Prince, had that Success, that it did not only
equal Old Rome, but excelled it as well in Greatness of its Wealth, as the
Multitude of its Inhabitants, (...), says Sozom. L. 2. c. 3.
And the same Author adds, that the Piety of the Emperor, and of the Citizens,
and their Charity toward the Poor, was the reason of its mighty Increase, from
the whence may be judged, what Religion the Generality of the City did profess.
3. The Success of that Charity did not only add, to the Number of the Citizens,
but very considerably to the number of Christians: For the same Author writes,
that it had so good effect there. (...), i.e. That many of the Jews, and almost
all the Heathens were converted and became Christians. 4. The same Author, to
make it altogether a Christian City, writes farther, that it was never polluted
with any Heathen Temples or Sacrifices, unless it were in the Time of Julian
the Apostate. 5. The Provision which Constantine made for the Burial of the
Dead, shows the number of the Church of C. P. to be far too great for one
Congregation: For he alloted to that charitable Use no less than Nine Hundred
and Fifty Shops, or Workhouses, whose Profits were to be employed in burying
the Poor decently; which Shops were to be free from all Tax and Duty to the
Prince: As you may see by comparing these several places in the Body of the
Civil Law, N. 59. with N. 43. and with N. L. 12. And Honorius in the Year 409.
considering the Number of the Decani, the small Officers that attended
Funerals, to have grown inordinate, reduces them to Nine Hundred and Fifty,
probably the first Establishment of Constantine the Great. See Justinian's
Code, l. 1 T. 2, 4. And if after all this, all the Christians in C. P. could
meet together in one Church toward the latter end of Constantine's Reign, we
must conclude some wonderful Mortality to have happened, and that these Decani
had had extraordinary Employment, and buried, in a manner, the whole City: But
let them believe that can comprehend; For my part, I can as soon imagine, that
Homer, with all his Scholiasts, can be put into a Nut shell, or that a Witch
can turn her self in a Keyhole, as that all the Christians in C. P. made but
one Congregation.

But notwithstanding the Number of Christians in C. P. might be much too great
for one Congregation, yet the major part might be Heretics, or Schismatics,
such as came not to the Bishops Church, and therefore all that adhered to him,
might be no more than could meet in one Assembly. To which I answer, toward
the latter end of Constantine's Reign, it was so far from being the Case of the
Church, that the number of Heretics and Schismatics was inconsiderable; and
most of those were forced to come to Church; and that there may be no
Difficulty remaining in this point, I will give some farther account of the
number of the Catholic Christians in comparison with Heretics and
Schismatics.

Constantine the Great, having set his Heart upon Christian Religion, to settle
and adorn it, he thought nothing more effectual than the Unity and Concord of
Christians; to promote which, he resolved to proceed against all Heretics and
Dissenters by a severe Law, and to reduce them to the Unity of the Church. The
Doctrine of Arrius, tho it began to be favored in several places, had not yet
made a formal Separation, L. 2. c. 32.
says Sozomen,(...), i. e. All came to Church, and communicated together; but
the Novatians and some old Heretics. Against these the Emperor made an Edict,
whereby he took away their Churches, and ordered them to be joined to the
Churches of the Catholics. -- He told them, it was better for them to
communicate with the Catholic Church, and advised them to come over to it. The
Success of this Law we find in the very same place; That by this means, (...).
The memory of those Heresies was in a manner extinguished; for they came all to
Church for fear of that Law against their Conventicles. (...): Ibid.
And those that persisted in their Opinion, having no opportunity to
Conventicle, nor to corrupt the minds of men, died at last, and left none to
succeed them in their Opinions: Only the Novatians remained, who, says the
Author, did not suffer much by this Edict, being befriended by the Emperor, who
had an esteem for their Bishop of C. P. upon the account of his Holiness; and
therefore his Church there was not much endammag'd, though the Historian speaks
this very mincingly, and says only, that it was probable, that so it was; and
likely had no other reason for it, than the Opinion which the Novatians had of
that Bishop; and that their Church was not altogether extirpated then, like
those of other Heretics: But he confesses, that every where else they suffered
the same measure with others, unless it were in Phrygia, and some Bordering
Provinces: And now to allow the Novatians a Conventicle in Constantinople,
toward the later end of Constantine's Reign, which is more than Sozomen durst
affirm, yet I hope the Catholics will be still too numerous, to meet all of
them in one Congregation.

But Theodoret affirms, they were no more than could meet in one Church, and
that they did actually do so. I answer, That Theodoret does not say so, and
that the Passage cited does not conclude it; therefore to clear this
difficulty, let us examine it: After the Death of Arrius, says Theodoret, those
of Eusebius's Faction were much out of Countenance, and buried him; but on the
other side, L. 1. c. 14.
(...), which Valesius renders thus: B. autem Alexander cum gaudio totius
Ecclesiae collectas celebravit pie, and orthodoxe, simul cum Universis
fratribus Deum orans, and impense glorificans: Now he takes the Phrase (...),
in a general Sense, which I suppose was spoken with respect to that particular
Congregation in which Arrius was to have been reconciled, if he had lived but
one Night longer; and that the Author intends only to say, that that Service
was performed (...), with the Joy of that Church, which the Bishop apprehended
would be the occasion of great Trouble to it; and that with all the Brethren
there present, not all the Believers of Constantinople (for that he does not
say) he prayed to, and praised God for what had happened; unless you will say,
that the (...), does not signify their Personal Presence, but only their
Unanimity; * (...). Aquila.
as that of David Ps. 33.3. (...). To conclude this point then, Theodoret could
not think that all the Believers of C. P. could come together to the Bishop's
Church; for he cites a Letter of Constantine a little after this, where he
gives an Account of the great Increase of that Church. c. 16.
In the City that is called by my Name (says he) by the Providence of God, an
infinite Multitude of People have joined themselves to the Church; and all
things there wonderfully increasing, it seems very requisite that more Churches
should be built; understanding therefore hereby what I have resolved to do, I
thought fit to order you to provide Fifty Bibles fairly and legibly written,
etc. which he signifies in the same place to be designed for the Service of the
Churches there. Now where Christians were so multiplied, that it was necessary
to build more Churches, and to make such Provisions for the Multitude of their
Assemblies, it could not be, that they should all make but one Congregation,

It would swell this Preface to too great a Bulk; if I should answer the rest
so particularly: Therefore I shall be more brief, but as plain as I can; p. 10,
11, 12. This Author gives several Instances of several Bishops being in one
City at the same time, in Answer to the Dean of Paul's, who affirmed, That it
was an inviolable Rule of the Church, to have but one. I have endeavored to
show, that it was the Rule of the Church to have no more than one: So Cornelius
affirms, that in a Catholic Church there ought to be no more; and the Council
of Nice finds Expedients even against the show and appearance of two Bishops
being together in one place. Jerusalem is the first Instance, which is said to
have had several Bishops together in the time of Narcissus. I wonder to find a
man of Learning cite this Passage, than which nothing can be more
disadvantageous to his Cause: For 1. Narcissus having retired, and the People
not knowing what had become of him, the Neighboring Bishops ordained Dius in
his place; who dying in a short time, was succeeded by Germanicio. In his Time
Narcissus returns, and was desired by the Church to resume his Office. What
became of Germanicion is not said, probably he resigned, or died presently: For
the next thing we find is, that Narcissus, being very old, an Hundred and
Sixteen Years of age, took Alexander into a Participation of the Charge: He was
indeed the Bishop, and Narcissus retained but the Title and Name only, as we
may gather out of Alexander's Letter, (...), Eusebius. l. 6. c. 11.
i. e. Who was Bishop before me, and who now joins with me in Prayers. The
Administration was, it seems wholly in the Hands of Alexander: For the
Historian says of Narcissus before, (...). He was not able to officiate by
reason of his great Age: And Valesius confirms this in his Notes upon the
place. Hoc enim sibi-vult Alexander, Narcissum in Orationibus duntaxat, non in
reliquo Episcopali munere sibi collegam fuisse, and then, Ex quibus apparet,
Alexandrum non tam adjutorem quam Episcopum in locum Narcissi, utpote jam
decrepiti factum fuisse. Narcissum vero nudum nomen Episcopi, atque honorem
retinuisse. The next instance is of Theotecnus and Anatolius, who were for some
time Bishops of Caesarea together: Anatolius was a person of extraordinary
Learning and Abilities, and Theotecnus, designing to make him his Successor,
says the Historian, ordained him Bishop in his Life time, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 32.
and as it were his Coadjutor, or Episcopus designatus: Afterward Macarius and
Maximus were Bishops at once in that Church: He means that of Jerusalem, though
that of Caesarea was the last he mentioned; and this Instance is of the same
nature with the other: For Sozomen writes, that first of all he was secretly
designed by the People, to succeed Macarius after his Death: And to make sure
of his Succession, with the Consent and Concurrence of their Bishop, they
brought it about, that he should stay at Jerusalem, and assist Macarins in the
Episcopal Office, Soz. l. 2. c. 20.
and (...), i. e. After his Death to govern that Church, whereas before he did
only (...), i. e. assist in the Divine Service and Offices of the Church.

Epiphanius, continues this Gent. ( alleged by Grotius for this purpose)
signifies that other Cities had two Bishops, and excepts but one, Alexandaia
had never two Bishops,(...); His meaning cannot be (as a great Antiquary would
have it) that Alexandria was never so divided, as that several parties in it
should have their respective Bishops there; for so it was divided in the time
of Epiphanius, when the Catholics had Athanasius, the Arrians had Gregorius,
and then Georgius, and afterward the one had Peter, the other Lucius; and the
Novatians had their Bishops successively in that City, Soc. l. 7. c. 7.
till Cyril 's time. To which I answer as briefly as I can. 1. That Epiphanius
cannot mean that all other Cities had had two Bishops at a time: For the
contrary is too notorious, and the Cases above alleged are extraordinary,
when the Bishop, or People of a City had a mind to secure the next Succession
to some Extraordinary Person. He was made the Assistant and Coajutor of that
Bishop he was to succeed: If Alexandria had never done this (and it might be
the reason why Athanasius was not ordained then when he was designed by
Alexander) I do not see what advantage can be made of this Passage; the
practice of those other Churches has been already considered: However I do not
see why that Learned Antiquary's Opinion may not be maintained against this
Gent's. Objections: He says, that Alexandria was divided before Epiphanius his
Time, between several Bishops: It cannot be denied; but that is not the thing
Epiphanius speaks of, but that before the Election of Theonas against
Athanasius, who was before appointed by Alexander with the Approbation of the
Church, there were never two opposite Bishops, as in other Churches: the
Instances are all later than this Fact; and therefore are insignificant: Unless
it be that of the Novatians. That they had their Bishops successively to
Cyril's Time: Soc. l. 7. c. 7.
Socrates does not say in the place alleged; but only that Cyril had taken
from him all that he had; and Successively from what time had they their
Bishops there? That is not said: It may be they began there after this time:
For there is little account in Church History, that I know, of any Novatians in
Alexandria before Athanasius.

The next Instance is pregnant, and comprising many at once, as the Gentleman
tells us, it is that of Valerius and St. Augustine, who were Bishops of Hippo
together; and the Bishops of those Parts assured Austin, that this was usual,
and proved it by Examples, both in the Africane and Transmarine Churches, as
Possedonius tells us: But suppose all this true, that this might be maintained
by the Examples of several Churches: What is it? That two Bishops may be in one
Church? No, that is not the Matter; but that a Bishop, when he grows Old, may
appoint or ordain his Successor, to prevent the Mischiefs that are usually
produced by popular Elections, and to secure the Succession to some
Extraordinary Man; and this was not thought to violate that Rule that allowed
but one Bishop to a City: For this Provision for a Successor does not destroy
that Rule. For Instance, I believe no man will deny, but that this Government
is Monarchical in its Constitution; and that it, ought to be in the hands of a
Single Person; or if Royallists, word be not Authority enough, the Worthy
Gentlemen that would have convinced Cromwell's Conscience about is, I hope will
satisfy: And yet, after that this Succession had been a little interrupted by
the Usurpation of King Stephen, Henry the Second thought it convenient to make
his Eldest Son King in his Life Time, and to have him Crowned to secure the
Succession: Yet for all this, and tho some more Instances may be fetched of the
same Nature, from neighboring Kingdoms, yet I belive it will be true enough,
that it is the Rule of these several Kingdoms to have but one King* And this,
as far as I am able to perceive, is the utmost that can be made of all those
Instances of two Bishops in one Church. As for the last Reason of the Rule
about dividing the Revenue, I suppose it is added only out of Gayety, and might
have been left to Mr. Baxter, who is used to supply his Want of Learning with a
double Portion of Spite. But I have too much respect for this Person (who
shows more Learning than any of the Advocates for Dissenters) to make any
Reflection upon it.

This Rule is likewise page 15. oppugn'd by Exceptions from the Conference at
Carthage; but of this I have spoke so particlarly in the following Book, that I
think it unnccessary to add any more.

The next thing I find concerns any thing alleged by me is p. 23. where the
Bishopric of Hippo is considered. I have showed the Names of a good number of
Parishes in it, which were under the Care of their Presbyters, and among others
alleged the Town of Fussala; the Gentleman Translates it a Castle, I suppose
to diminish it; but these Castles were Garrison-Towns, with a good dependence
of Villages belonging to them; and this particularly is so represented. It was
Forty miles from Hippo, and was in St. Austin's Diocese, and never had a Bishop
of its own. This the Gentleman answers, by saying, That the reason why it had a
Bishop no sooner, is signified by St. Augustine, when he says there were no
Catholics at all in it: St Augustine says indeed, the Town or Castle it self
had none, but the County belonging to it had some: Paucos habebat illa Terra
Catholicos: And there were several Presbyters belonging to those Catholics,
Presbyteri qui eis Congregandis a nobis primitus sunt Constituti: But I believe
the reason alleged for their having a Bishop no sooner will hardly hold: For
first, St. Austin says, that this Town, when he set upon the Reduction of it,
to the Unity of the Church, had then no Catholics; but that it never had any
he does not say; nor is the thing probable: But as for a Bishop, he expressly
says, that it never had any; but that it formerly had Catholics, we may
conclude by Mr. Baxter's reasoning, because it belonged heretofore to the
Diocese of Hippo. Simul cum contigua sibi regione ad paroeciam Hipponensis
Ecclesiae pertinuit. Now Mr. B. would ask what did belong to the Bishop of
Hippo, the Stones or the Timber of the Town, since none of the People did ever
own him: Nor can it be imagined how a Town so distant should be judged to
belong to that Diocese, where yet there never was one Man that owned the
Jurisdiction: So that I conceive this reason will not hold for its having no
Bishop of its own, since the same reason destroys its dependence upon the
Diocese of Hippo, which is exprefly affirmed. As to St. Austin's Excuse, that
it was too far, and that he could not look after the inconsiderable Relics of
the Donatists there: It is to be ascribed to his Modesty, since he discharged
the Office of a Bishop toward it in much more difficult Times, while the
Presbyters he employed were barbarously used, and the generality of the People
were against him.

The Towns in St. Austin's Diocese, mentioned by the D. of St. Paul's, this
Gentleman finds to have had B shops of their own or some other Towns that had
Names like them, which yet may not be the same; but here I am unconcerned,
having, as I remember, mentioned none of these places, but diverse others: But I
cannot pass by what he offers p. 26. That St. Austin had only Episcopalem
Sarcinam Hipponensem, the Episcopal Charge of Hippo, as if he had been Bishop
of the Town only: Nay, but of part of that neither: For the Donatists had their
Bishop there too. This will strangely diminish the Bishopric of St. Austin,
which at first appeared so large. To which I answer, That for the Donatists
having a Bishop there it signifies little to our present purpose, since he was
but an Usurper, and the whole Diocese did of right belong to the Catholic
Bishop: As to the Insinuation, that St. Austin was only Bishop of the Town let
us believe himself: Hoc Ecclesiae Catholicae, aut ut modum dispensationis meae
non supergrediar, Ep. 159.
hoc Ecclesiae ad Hipponensium Regionem pertinenti prodesse contestor: Which
plainly signifies, that all the Church, belonging not only to the Town, but
also to the Region of Hippo, belonged to him. There is but one thing more which
I shall observe concerning the Diccess of Hippo; and that is a Passage cited
out of St. Austin, Ep. 68.
to show, that there were many Bishops in that Region. Ecce interim Episcopos
nostros qui sunt in Regione Hipponensi, ubi a vestris tanta mala patimur
convenire. To which I answer, that these Bishops, who are said to be in Regione
Hipponensi, were not the Bishops of that Region, but some Bishops of the
Province met together there; as had been done before upon the like Occasion, as
may be seen in the same Epistle, Facto Concilio placuit ut conveniremini. 2, It
appears from the Inscription and Style of this Epistle, Clerici Catholici
Regionis Hipponensium; and yet speaking of the Bishop of Hippo, they call him
their Bishop, not one of their Bishops, which they must have said if they had
had more; but Conventus ab Episcopo nostro Proculeianus, -- non est Conquestus
Episcopus noster, etc. So that notwithstanding these Bishops mentioned in the
Region of Hippo, the Body of that Clergy own but one who was properly their
Diocesan: And this is farther cleared by comparing this passage with that of
St. Austin, mentioned a little before, where he assumes to himself the Church
belonging to the Regio Hipponensium.

From the Diocese of Hippo, we pass to that of Alexandria, of which I have
spoke particularly enough before; but here the same Author offers a great many
things, p. 32. which I cannot answer at this time very particularly; yet
something I shall say as briefly as I can. The Instance of Maraeotis, he says
little to; he insinuates as if Maraeotis might not have Number enough of
Christians to have a Bishop. But this Athanasius does sufficiently show to be a
Groundless Conjecture; and even before Athanasius, the Generality of the People
there were Christians. He farther finds one Dracontius made a Bishop in the
Territory of Alexandria; possibly a Chorepiscopus, or at leastwise, it is
manifest from the Epistle to him, that it was the extraordinary Favor of the
People toward him, that compelled him to accept a Bishopric: And the Danger
of their falling to Arrianism was the reason which Athanasius makes use of to
press him to accept it. This was an extraordinary Case, and allowing this man a
Country Bishopric, that of Alexandria would be a great deal to big for the
Congregational Measure. After this we have Instances of several Cities that had
Bishops, and lay very near one the other; and what does this conclude? Might
not these Dioceses be yet much larger than one Congregation? Suppose the Chief
Cities of Holland had each a Bishop, yet I conceive they would be Diocesans,
though those Cities lie very close together. And now after all this, though we
have several Instances out of Egypt, how near Cities were together in some
parts; yet upon the whole account, (...). Ath. Ap. 2.
the Dioceses do appear to be large enough from the Number of them: For in
Athanasius his Time, there were not a Hundred Bishops in all Egypt, Libia, and
Pentapolis.

The next thing I shall take notice of, is the Defense of Mr. Baxter's
Allegation out of Athanasius, to show, that all the Christians of Alexandria
could meet in one Church. It is to be confessed, that the Expressions of that
Father do seem to favor him, (...), and that the Church did (...), hold all,
etc. Now suppose that all the Christians in Alexandria, the Catholics at
leastwise, could meet together in that Great Church, yet all the Diocese could
not; there were some parts of it at a good Distance, and they could not
conveniently come; so that the Diocese of Alexandria, will exceed the measure
of the Congregational Way. 2. Suppose this Great Church could receive all the
Multitude, yet if that Multitude was too great for Personal Communion, it is
insignificant: For if that be a Congregational Church that can possibly meet
between the same Walls, this Congregational Church will be as indefinite as a
Diocese. 3. Before this the Church of Alexandria met in distinct Congregations,
(...): But we are told, that these places were very small, short, and straight
places: So I suppose they were in respect of the Multitude of Christians which
they did scarcely receive. But that they were such Chapels or Churches as some
of our Parishes in England have as great a number as Alexandria, is hardly
credible; because,

1. The Church of Alexandria was very numerous from the beginning; and if they
met all in one place, it must consequently be very large: Nor is it likely they
should divide till they were grown too numerous for the biggest Meeting Place
they could conveniently have.

2. Though before the Empire was converted they might be confined to little
places, and forced to meet severally, yet after Constantine became Christian,
it is not likely that the Alexandrians would content themselves with small and
straight Chapels, when every ordinary City built very Great and Magnificent
Cathedrals; And,

3. Some of these Churches had been built with a Design of receiving as many as
well could have Personal Communion in Worship together; as Theonas is said by
Athanasius, to have built a Church bigger than any of those they had before:
And yet this and all the rest were but few, and straight, in comparison of the
great Multitude of Catholics that were in Alexandria.

But I conceive after all this, that the Expressions of Athanasius do not
conclude, that all the Christians in Alexandria were met in that Great Church:
All that came, it may be found Room; but that all did come is not easily
imagined: For the Tumultuous manner in which they come to their Bishop, to
demand a General Assembly, makes it probable, that not only Women and Children
would be glad to absent themselves, but many more, either apprehensive of the
Effect of this Tumultuous Proceeding, or of the danger of such a Crowd, would
willingly stay away. Mr. Baxter, though he thought the main Body of the
Catholics might meet here, yet he would not conclude that all did; and even
these that did assemble here, were too many for one Congregation; and was an
Assembly more for solemnity and ostentation, than for Personal Communion in
Worship, and the proper Ends of a Religious Assembly.

But that we may not wonder how the Catholics should be so few in Athanasius
his Time, we are told farther, that the Arrians, and other Dissenters might
make much the Major part: Nay, it may be the Arrians alone were more numerous.
How true this is, we may learn from Athanasius, who speaking of the Catholic
Party, makes them the Major part of the Alexandrians,(...): All these were
Catholics, and their business was to desire Sirianus and Maximus not to
disturb their Churches, till they might send to the Emperor. And that they were
the greatest part, might be yet farther cleared from several Circumstances of
that time, which I cannot insist upon in this place, without being too tedious
to the Reader. To conclude this, not only Alexandria, and the other Cities of
Egypt had several Congregations comprised in the same Diocese, but the
Meletians had some Bishops of several Titles who had more Cities than one in
their Diocesses, as may be seen in the Catalogue of Bishops, ordained by
Meletius, and given in to the Bishop of Alexandria.

The lastthing I shall take notice of, is the Diocese of Theodoret. This indeed
I just mentioned and remitted, the Reader to the D. of Paul's, who had spoke
very particularly of it: I shall therefore say very little to it here, being
unwilling to do any prejudice to so good a Cause, and so great a Person, by a
weak and unnecessary Defense: But this I cannot omit, that if those 800, not 80
Churches, as this Gentleman reckons them, belonged to him as Metropolitan, and
they were all Episcopal, this poor Region of Cyrus would have more Bishops than
all Africa, notwithstanding they were more numerous there, than in any part of
the World besides.

I have no more to add, but that there was designed a Chapter concerning the
Right of electing Bishops and Church Officers, with an Historical Deduction of
the Practice of the Church, through the several Ages of it; but because it
could not answer the Design first formed without swelling this Book to too
great a Bulk: It may hereafter in due time be published by it self: The Subject
affording Variety enough for a large Treatise, and requiring some Time and
Diligence to do it to any Effect.

CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. OF the Design of Mr. Baxter's Church History, and his Notion of
Primitive, Congregational Episcopacy, Page 1. CHAP. II. Of Heresies and the
first Councils p. 76. CHAP. III. Of the Council of Nice, and some that followed
it, p. 105. CHAP. IV. Of the Council of Constantinople, p. 130. CHAP. V. Of the
first Council of Ephesus, p. 177. CHAP. VI. Councils about the Eutychian
Hereresie, p. 228. CHAP. VIi. The Council of Calcedon, p. 239. CHAP. VIII. Of
the Authors of Heresies, Schisms and Corruptions, and whether they were all
Bishops, p. 276. CHAP. I. A short View of the other Governments, set up in
Opposition to Episcopacy, p. 364. CHAP. II. Of the Rise and Progress of
Diocesan Episcopacy, p. 433
ERRATA.
THe Faults that have escaped are almost infinite; I have noted some of the
most gross. Page 5. for the effect, read this. p. 10. for judicially, r.
judiciously p. 11. for concident, r. coincident. p. 5. for the right, r. their.
p. 18. for and so many, r. over p. 21. for or Elders, r. over. p 23. there is a
whole passage so mangled, that it requires some trouble to restore it. What
refers to the Council of Calchedon, cited in the Margin, That is left out, viz.
that at that time they reckoned 27 Bishops of Ephesus from Timothy, that
Polycrates reckoned himself the 8. (not the 6.) Bishop of that Church; for so
many understand the passage of his Epistle, though that does not necessarily
follow from the words cited by Eusebius. p. 27. for positure law, r. positive.
ibid. the residence, r. their. p. 29. as they, etc. d. as. p. 36. (...). ibid.
for our Presbyters, r. your, ibid. for alleging, r. alluding. 16. for Capital,
r. Capitol. p. 39. in the Margin, r. coimus in caetum. p. 41. for the
generality of Christians, r. many Christians. p. 57. for made, r. many
Congregational, etc. p. 61. for before our Savior was born, correct before his
Passion. p. 63. r. Pantenus Heraclas. p. 68. for shine, r. thin. p. 69. r.
that he should be. p. 81. for is dangerous, r. as. p. 113. for Constantin's
time, r. Constantius. p, 126. for a dozen times, r. lines. p. 136. for to
Meletius, r. to Pautinus. p. 143. for possum, r. portum. p. 319. for
Observations, r. Obsecrations. p. 332. for not an Heretic, r. Arch-Heretick.
16. Arch Heresy, d. Arch. There are very many false pointings, which the
Reader may correct; as Isidor, Pelus, Evagrius, Pontious, etc. where the
Comma's are to be blotted out; and several other wrong punctations, that render
the sense sometimes difficult; but with a little observation, the understanding
Reader may restore them.

CHAP. I.
Of the Design of Mr. Baxter's Church History, and his Notion of Primitive
congregational Episcopacy.

THERE is nothing so fatal to Christian Religion, as our unhappy Dissentions
about it, especially such as divide the Church into Parties, abhorring each
others Communion: for besides that, the very Disagreement between men of the
same Profession, brings the whole Doctrine under suspicion of Falsehood or
Uncertainty; the Method that the Parties contending, commonly make use of to
set up themselves, by the Disparagement and Reproach of the contrary side,
serves to bring them and their Religion into the lowest Contempt: and the
Result of all is, that the common Enemy is made Judge between them, who fairly
sums up the Evidence, and passes Sentence upon all sides, according to their
mutual Accusation.

This sad Truth is but too much confirmed, by the experience of our times,
wherein there are few so happily removed from the noise of profane
Conversation, as not frequently to hear the scurrilous Blasphemies of the
Atheist, under pretense of running down the several Factions in Religion; it is
this gives them Shelter and Protection, and while they pretend to expose this
or that Party, they have the Opportunity, with little change of Company, to
mock all Religion by parcels, and that with the great good likeing and
approbation of Christians themselves.

This is no such News, but that most men seem to be sensible of it, and bewail
the thriving of Profaneness, by the Countenance that it receives from our
Differences; yet for all this, how few abate any thing of their Fierceness? How
few will be so moderate as to sacrifice even the most disingenious Arts of
Contention, Calumny, and Railing, to the Safety and Honor of our common Faith.

I wish Mr. B. had had this Consideration before him when he set upon the
writing of his Church History of Bishops, and their Councils abridged, he has
indeed sufficiently abridg'd all the good Services that Bishops and Councils
have done to the Church, but their Miscarriages he has enlarged upon to
purpose, and sometimes, by a foul Juggle, conveyed the best of their Actions
into the Catalogue of their Crimes, and their greatest Services for Religion,
prove a considerable part of their Endictment. I must confess, I never saw any
thing that in my Judgment reflected with more dishonor upon Religion, than
this strange account that he has given of the progress of it, and the frightful
Representation that he has made of the Church in all Ages; Heathens have been
civil and modest in their Character of us, l. 27.
compared with this. Ammianus Marcellinus, though he be something sharp upon
Damasus, Bishop of Rome, yet speaks honorably of the generality of Christian
Bishops; Zosimus does not mention Chrysostom with any disrespct, l. 5. c. 23.
though he had a fair occasion; nay the scurril Wit of that Buffoon Lucian, nor
the Malice of Julian the Apostate, have left nothing half so scandalous in all
their Libels against Christians, as this Church Historian has raked up; for
here is nothing to be seen in his Book, but the Avarice, Ambition, Ignorance,
Mistakes, and furious Contentions of the Bishops, and the Governors of the
Church. And they being so bad, the People that were guided by their Order and
Example, could not be much better, they were but the Instruments of the
Episcopal Ambition, to fight their Quarrels, to kill all that opposed, and to
burn and destroy all that came before them; turbulent, seditious, Incendiaries
and Murderers; and what can be the effect of such an History, but that men
should believe there never was any sort of People so desperately wicked, and so
great disturbers of the World: the Enemy of our Religion will have reason to
rejoice, that his work is in great measure done to his hands, for this will
serve him as a common place book, for railing against Christianity, and the
Christian Reader will be in danger, either of loosing all his Patience, or a
great deal of that Reverence he had for his Religion, and those primitive
Worthies that professed and defended it.

But this perhaps will be thought not to concern the Church, but the Bishops
only, who are charged with these Misdemeanors, and dishonored by this
Representation. He must have a strange notion of the Church, that can think it
unconcerned in the dishonor of those by whom it is governed: for if one should
write a Book, and call it the History of the English Nation, which should only
represent the Vices of our Kings, the Contentions and Disagreements of our
Parliaments, the Weakness and Corruption of our Ministers of State and Justice,
and represent all persons that were eminent enough to hold any place in Story,
under mean and infamous Characters; he must needs have a very metaphysical
Moderation,, that could think the honor of the Nation unconcerned, and that it
was no Reflection upon the English name.

God forbid I should charge the Design of the Author with any disservice to
Religion; but well-meaning men do sometimes pursue their Resentments too far,
and so they can be revenged of their Enemies, pursue them into the Church, and
set upon them in the Sanctuary, not considering how much it is violated and
profaned by the Action. But Mr. B. is not insensible of the evil use that may
be made of this book, and therefore endeavors to prevent it by wholesome
Caution, and frequently in his History starting like a man affrighted to see
that which he though to have been a Rod turned into a Serpent, straight applies
what Remedies he can against the Poison: he does in the first place warm the
Reader, that he do not abuse this into Diabolisme. But alas it is a poor
Relief, to forbid an Enemy to make use of those Weapons you have put into his
hands, to leave the Honor of our Religion at his Mercy, and then to desire him
to be generous, not to make use of his Advantage. However, if the Scorner
should prove perverse and take no Warning, Mr. B. proceeds to confute his
reasoning, and his Inference, by saying that this scandalous account of the
Bishops and their Councils, concludes nothing to the discredit of Church or
Religion; for there were many good men that were not Bishops but Presbyters,
Monks, or Laymen; nay, p. 16. 17. etc.
many Heretics; obscure good men, whose Virtues do not shine in Story; nay,
there were some good men among the Bishops themselves, with more to the effect.
God forbid I should endeavor to invalidate the least shadow of reasoning, that
is urged in defense of the Church of Christ; I join heartily with him in this
part, and I must profess, it is the greatest end of this Treatise, to prevent
the Contempt of Religion, which this Church History might occasion. Nor can I
think the Author will be offended, that I take his part and Religions against
his own Book, and that I look upon it as a dangerous piece, p. 16. 19. 49.22.
etc.
when he himself has given such frequent and solemn Warnings against it.

But I must take leave to pursue this point upon another Supposition than he
does, for he takes all his History to be a true and just representation of
things, and upon that supposal, makes his Vindication of the Church; which I
hope is a mistake in him, and will endeavor to show, is very far from being
true; nay on the contrary, it is the most injurious Character and the most
unsuitable to the persons it is fastened upon, that can be imagined: this I take
the great Confidence to do, because I am persuaded, Mr. B. would be very glad
this dishonorable Character, even of Bishops, should be found a Mistake,
rather than it should be true, to the Disparagement of the Christian Name.

It is true, that in the Western Church, the generality of the Clergy, as well
as Laity, were so grievously corrupted; as well in Doctrine as Discipline, in
some of the Ages that were more removed from our Savior, that we must make use
of God's Vindication of the Church of Israel to Elijah, to excuse it from a
total Defection; but for the first four or five hundred years (thanks be to
God) there is no need of that refuge: for the generality of the Christians of
those times, and the Bishops more eminently, were men of that Holiness and
Integrity, as reconciled the most obstinate Prejudices against their Religion:
men of so exact and punctual a Justice, of so frank and unstinted a Charity, of
so severe a Temperance, of so grave and weighed Conversation, that their Memory
does still command an universal Veneration, and their Examples remain a
reproach to the degeneracy of after Ages. What sort of men did the World know,
that were greater Undervaluers of it? Upon whom did the Temptations of Wealth,
or Honor, or Pleasure, prevail less? What Society of men was ever united by so
powerful Bands of Friendship and Affection? No Religion had ever so constant
and faithful Adherers, whom no Danger, no Loss, no Death could fright from the
Acknowledgment of the Truth, which is after Godliness, in hope of eternal Life.
And all this owing next to the Grace of God, and the Precepts of so holy a
Religion, to the Guidance and Example of the Bishops. It was by their Ministry,
that Churches were multiplied, and the Kingdom of Christ enlarged: by their
Care, that they were preserved in Peace and Unanimity. These were the great
Champions for Religion, that maintainld the Purity of the Faith against Paul of
Samosata, Arrius, Eunomius, Photinus, Macedonius, Pelagius, Nestorius,
Eutyches, and innumerable other pestilent Heretics, and Overthrowers of the
Foundation of our Religion. But with all this, they were men, subject to the
same Passions and Mistakes with us, and if some among them were evil men, and
the best of them had his Failings, it is not to be wondered at, much less to be
aggravated, to the Disparagement of the Order. They were generally, men of
severe Lives, and that naturally sharpens the Temper, and renders it more rigid
and uncomplying; they had an extraordinary Zeal for Religion, and that
oftentimes made them take Alarm, when it was not in any extreme danger; and if
their Knowledge and Discretion were not always proportionable to their Zeal,
surely among Christians it might be allowed to the Frailty of Humane Nature,
and the Sincerity of a good meaning; If they differed sometimes among
themselves, and were warmer than is fit in their Disputes; consider that the
Apostles themselves had their Misunderstandings, and their Contentions;
sometimes Peter was to be blamed, and Barnabas was carried away. The Churches
founded by the Apostles, were immediately divided about Opinions, which were
presently determined in Council; and yet we do not find that the Controversy
was at an end. Should any one therefore so abridge the History of the Apostles,
as to represent nothing of them, but their unhappy Contention, and leave them
under the odious Characters of Disturbers of the World, and Dividers of the
Church? would it not justly pass for a Libel against Christianity? It were
disingenious and base, even in an Enemy, in a Christian I know not how to call
it.

Having paid this duty to the honor of Religion by a general Vindication of it
from such Consequences as might be drawn from this Church History against the
Intention of the Author, I come now to his design, which is laid down, page 27.
To show the Ignorant so much of the matter of Fact, as may tell them who have
been the Cause of all Church-Corruption, Heresies, Schisms, Seditions, etc. And
whether such Diocesan, Prelacies and Grandeur, be the Cure, or ever was.] But
surely, this is not the way of cureing Church-divisions thus to exasperate.
These Reproaches cannot serve to heal, but to fret and inflame the Wound; I
have some hopes that I shall be able to show the Reader so much of the matter
of Fact too, as may let him see how much he has been imposed on by this
History, and that all Corruptions and Schisms, are very injuriously, and
against all Truth of History, charged upon the Bishops. Yet suppose the Charge
be true, is it such a Wonder, that men of great Talents and great Authority do
sometimes abuse them, and by that means become the Cause of Church-Corruptions?
Private men though neither better nor wiser than the Bishops, have not the
Opportunity of doing so much either Good or Hurt, and their Mistakes or Vices
do not draw after them so great Consequences. This Accusation though it may
serve to render Bishops odious, is yet of use to prove their Authority, and
their ancient possession of the right of governing the Church; like his who
would prove, that they have troubled the World ever since the Apostles time. If
the abuse of this Power be sufficient reason to take it away, or to render it
odious, what will become of preaching, and writing Books? What will become of
Scripture and Conscience? Let him still exclaim, the Bishops have been the
Authors of all Corruption and Schism, were they not Christians and Men as well
as Bishops? and if a Heathen or a Jew should not lay such a Stress upon the
name of Bishop, but put that of a Christian in it is place, and then make a
great Outery, wicked Christians! turbulent Christians! would not this reasoning
hold as well as Mr. B's? or if some of the graver Beasts should recover the
Conversation they had in Aesop's days, and talk judicially, might not they bray
aloud, Horrible men! Abominable men! that will never agree or understand one
another, and then conclude with the Ass in the Satyr.

Ma foy non plus que nous l'home n'est qu'une beat. Be the Bishops, whose
History Mr. B. writes, as bad as he will have them, how will this concern the
rest of that order, unless they will follow their Examples, and own their
Corruptions: Machiavel was of Opinion, that the greatest part of men were
Rogues and Knaves, but what is that to You and I? let every man bear his own
Burden.

But Mr. B. is resolved to cut off this Retreat, and to level his Charge, not
so much against the Persons as the office of Bishops, and to this effect, he
explains himself, p. 22. There is an Episcopacy whose very Constitution is a
Crime; and there is another that seems to me, a thing convenient, lawful, and
indifferent, and there is a sort which I cannot deny to be of divine Right.]

Here we have three sorts of Bishops, and this is pretty reasonable and
compendious, but in another Book which he refers to in this, he gives no less
than twelve; Disput. of Chapter Government p. 14.
dividing was much in Fashion at that time, though commonly it was without a
difference: and as they could make a sort of Seekers, that neither sought nor
found, so he gives several sorts of Bishops that were no more so than he or I;
nay, in this Abridgment of the great Division, I believe the Members will be
concident, and that it is but a little artificial Illusion of Mr. B. that makes
them appear several; take away the little cornered glass, and that great
multitude of pieces we saw, are in a moment reduced to one poor Sixpence,
well, let us see then, what this criminal sort of Episcopacy is, and what Mr.
B. has to lay to it is Charge.

That Episcopacy which I take in it self to be a Crime, is such as is
aforementioned, p. 22.
which in it is very Constitution, overthrows the Office, Church and Discipline,
which Christ, by himself and his Spirit in his Apostles, instituted:] this is
criminal indeed and a thousand Pities it should stand one Moment.

But where shall we find this Abomination? it is not far of, if his Judgment
may be taken; for, Such says he, I take to be that Diocesan kind, ibid.
which has only one Bishop over many Score or Hundred fixed parochial
Assemblies. Is this then their Crime, that they have many fixed parochial
Assemblies under their Government? Had not the Apostles? Had not the
Evangelists so too? And was that Constitution criminal? Had not the Bishops of
St. Jerome's Notion several fixed Assemblies? That Father did indeed maintain
that the poor Bishop of Eugubium was as much a Bishop, as he of Rome; but he
little thought that he was more so, or that the Extent of the Roman Diocese had
changed the very Species of it is Church Government: Hieron. Ep. ad Evagr.
he thought they were both of the same sort, and that the single and small
Congregation of the one, and the numerous Assembly under the Inspection of the
other, had made no difference at all in the nature or constitution of their
Episcopacy; he communicated with, and submitted himself in Questions of the
highest moment to the Bishop of Rome: Vid Hier. Ep. ad Damas.
which, considering the Temper of the man, and his Contempt of the World, he
would hardly have done, if he had judged him an Usurper, but would rather have
joined himself to the poor Bishop of Eugubium, and done all possible
Countenance to that Primitive and Apostolic Constitution of Episcopacy.

But let St. Jerome think as he pleases, Mr. B. is of another Opinion, and now
let us consider his Reasons.

By this means (says he) parochial Assemblies are made by them (the Bishops) no
Churches, p. 22. 55.
as having no ruling Pastors, that have the Power of judging, who to baptize or
admit to Communion or Refuse, but only of Chapels, having Preaching Curates.]
But must every Parish be an independent Church, and exercise all Authority and
Jurisdiction within it is self? May not several Parishes associate under the
Discipline of the same Bishop, but that they must be unchurch'd? If it be no
Church that has no Bishop, what will become of all Presbyterian Churches, that
are subject to Classes? do not they unchurch Parishes as well as Bishops? But
they are made no Churches for want of governing Pastors; this is a great
Mistake, every Parish with us has a governing Pastor, but it is in
Subordination to the Bishop, and with Exception to some Acts that concern the
general Union of all the Parishes associated. Is he no Governor, because he is
not Independent? Is he no Officer that is subordinate? At this rate, every
Constable should be a King, and every Captain a General.

But our Pastors Mr. B. says, have not the Power of judging whom to Baptize,]
this is a Calumny that has not the least Shadow of Truth, and the contrary is
notorious: That they have no power to admit to Communion or Refuse, is not
true; they have Power to admit any one that is not excommunicated, or naturally
incapable; and they may likewise refuse the Communion to such as they judge
notoriously unfit, but must afterward approve their reasons to the Bishop.
Several have used their Liberty and Discretion in this point, without Offense;
however, it is but fit, that since the peace of the Church does greatly depend
upon the right Application of Church Censures, there should be a Restraint laid
upon ordinary Ministers in this particular; yet there is no Church-censure can
have any effect, without the Consent of the Minister of that Parish where he
lives, against whom it is directed: The Ministers Refusal indeed may expose him
to great Inconveniences, and it is but just, when his Refusal is only the
effect of Opposition, yet he has time and opportunity to produce his Reasons;
and why should he despair in a just Canse of convincing his Ordinary? However,
though the Power of Church Censures be not allowed Parish Presbyters under
Diocesan Episcopacy, it is no Diminution of the right; for neither under the
Apostles, nor the Primitive Bishops, did they ever exercise it as principals or
independent.

2. Mr. B's second Reason against Diocesan Episcopacy is, p. 22.
That all the first Order of Bishops in single Churches is deposed; as if the
Bishop of Antioch should have put down a thousand Bishops, about him, and made
himself the sole Bishop of the Churches.] This reason goes upon the same
Supposition with the other, that every single Congregation had a Bishop, the
proof of which we will examine in due place. The Bishops of great Cities had
several Parishes or Congregations under them in the first times, which never
had any other Bishops but themselves; and it was not this but the contrary,
that was the fault of great Bishops and Metropolitans of old: for instead of
deposing little Bishops, they multiplied them to strengthen their Party in
Councils, Vid. Collat. Carthag.
when they began to vye with one another in number of Suffrages, as if the
Archbishop of York should make every Town under his Jurisdiction, an Episcopal
Seat, that he might have as many Suffrages as the Archbishop of Canterbury.
This I hope to prove in due place, and to show the Reader how far Mr. B. is
mistaken in the Causes of Schism, and that nothing contributed more to some of
them than the multiplying the number of the lesser Bishops by their
Metropolitans.

3. His third Reason is, That the Office of Presbyters is changed to
Semi-presbyters,] What then is the Office of a Presbyter? Is it not to preach,
and to be the mouth of the Congregation in public Worship? to administer the
Sacraments? to exhort? to admonish, to absolve the penitent, to visit the sick?
This all Presbyters in the Church of England have full liberty to do; and I
wish all would take care to execute their Function, as fully as it is permitted
them.

4. Discipline is made impossible, p. 22.
as it is for one General without inferior Captains, to rule an Army.] But are
there not subordinate Officers in the Church, as well as in the Camp? How then
is Discipline impossible? If the General reserve to himself certain Acts of
Jurisdiction, does he by that means supersede the Commissions of all inferior
Commanders? Mr. B. is much upon the point of Discipline's being impossible
under Diocesan Episcopacy, because one man, he thinks, cannot govern so many
Parishes. Admit in all things he may not, nor is it necessary he should, but in
such Acts of Government that are reserved to him, it is possible enough, and
has been practiced from the days of the Apostles, to this present time. This
Point you may find excellently discussed by Mr. Dodwel, in his second Letter to
Mr. B. which Mr. B. confutes briefly, ( Cb. Hist. 2. part) by telling the
Reader, that if he will believe those reasons, he has no hopes of him; a short
way of confuting, and one would wonder, that he that makes use of it should
write so many and great Books of Controversy. Yet this I must add, that if it
be impossible now, it is fit to let the World know who has made it so; the
Dissenters themselves have first weakened the Authority, and obstructed the
Execution of Discipline; and when the subordinate Officers agitated, caballed
against their Superior Commanders, it is not wonder if Government be made
impracticable. However, the Accusation sounds ill from those men, by whose
Mutiny and seditious Practices, things have been brought to that evil Pass.

Mr. B. pursues his point further, 55.
and adds, Much more does it become then unlawful, when first deposing all
Presbyters from Government by the Keys of Discipline they put the same Keys,
even the Power of decretive Excommunication and Absolution into the hands of
Laymen called Chancellors, and set up Courts liker to the Civil than
Ecclesiastical.] It is a Question I cannot easily resolve, whether it be the
King or the Bishop that governs by the Chancellor, but whoever governs by them,
they neither have no naught to have the Power of Decisive Excommunication, or
the Power of the Keys, but act only as Assistants, and judges of matter of
Fact, and apply the Canons, which determine what Offenses are to be punished
with Excommunication; if they do any more, I neither undertake the Defense, nor
will I suppose those that employ them, own their Actions any farther. However,
the Presbyterians fall under the same Censure with our Diocesans, for their
Elders do directly excommunicate, and yet are laymen. It would be much to the
Advantage as well as the Reputation of our Dissenters, if they would first
agree, and correct those Abuses among themselves, which they so sharply exclaim
against in our Church.

2. When they oblige the Magistrate to execute their Decrees by the Sword, be
they just or unjust, 55.
and to lay men in Goals, and ruin them, because they are excommunicated by
Bishops, Chancellors, etc. This is the Law of the State, and not of the Church,
and therefore is not to be charged upon Diocesan Episcopacy; besides, now there
are few that have reason to complain of this, there are those Evasions found
that render that Law insignificant; but the Threatening Princes and Magistrates
with Excommunications, if not Depositions, p. 23.
if they do communicate with those whom the Bishops have excommunicated,
belongs not at all to our Diocesan Episcopacy: let the Papists, who hold this
Dostrine, or the rigid Scotch Presbyterians, who seem to have outdone the Popes
in their Claim of Authority over Sovereign Princes, answer it if they can.

3. Or when they arrogate the Power of the Sword to themselves, as Socrates
says Cyril did. 55.
How far Socrates is to be credited in his account of that Bishop, we shall
consider in due place; in the mean time, this does not concern Diocesan
Episcopacy, as it is with us, for our Bishops do not arrogate that Power: if
the King confer upon them any Authority extrinsecal to their Office, Mr. B. has
declared himself, p. 23. 59.
that shall make no difference, and that he will submit to them notwithstanding.

The next Paragraph I am loath to meddle with, it is little else but Biitterness
and Railing, and this I have neither Skill nor Inclination to answer; yet
because it is set down as the highest Aggravation of Diocesan Tyranny, I must
say something to it, lest I should be thought to be ashamed of the Cause, and
to desert it.

It becomes much worse, 56.
(continues Mr. B.) by tyrannical Abuse, when being unable and unwilling to
exercise true Discipline (and so many hundred Parishes) they have multitude of
Atheists, Infidels, gross Ignorants, and wicked Livers in Church Communion; yea
compel all in their Parishes to communicate, upon pain of Imprisonment and
Ruin, and turn their Censures cruelly against godly persons, that dare not
obey them in all their Formalities, Ceremonies, and Impositions, for fear of
sinning against God. I am afraid, there are too many wicked men in all
Communions, and the Communion, or as they call it, the Religion of the State,
will have the most, for Reasons I need not mention: but it is oftentimes a hard
thing to know them, and until they are discovered it can be no Reproach to the
Discipline of the Church that they are in outward Communion, but all sorts of
People, and these with the rest, are forced into our Communion.] They are
indeed obliged to come to Church, and to receive the Sacrament three times in
the year; but all this is upon the Supposition of their being Christians: if
they declare to the contrary, they are immediately exempted from all
Church-Jurisdiction; and for the Civil, let them deal with it as well as they
can. It is the duty of every Christian to come to Church and receive the
Sacrament, and because all that have been baptized and have not renounced the
Faith, are presumed to be Christians; it is doubtless, lawful to quicken them
to that which is their Duty by Penalties upon the neglect of it. As for the
Atheists and Infidels declared, if they are admitted to Communion, it is an
unexcusable fault of Discipline, yet such as is to be charged on the Minister
of the Parish that receives them, rather than the Bishop; and for the being of
any such men amongst us, that is not so much to be imputed to the defect of
present Discipline, as to the licentiousness of the late unhappy times, and the
Offense that was given to light and unsteady minds, by such pretended Saints as
made Religion their Warrant for all their barbarous Villainies they committed.

But wicked Livers (he adds) are forced into Church Communion by the Bishops.]
56.
This is a great Mistake, for the Bishop forces no such into the Church, but
obliges the Minister and Churchwardens of every Parish, to present such, if
any there be, that they might be separated from Communion, till they shall have
given some Satisfaction to the Church, by their Repentance, and good Hopes of
their future Amendment; and lastly, that gross Ignorants are admitted to the
Communion, can be charged upon no other than the Minister of that place, whose
Duty it is, to instruct them in the Principles of their Religion, and the
Bishops are so far from obstructing the Exercise of this Duty, that there is
hardly any thing which they press with greater Earnesiness.

As to those godly persons who dare not obey the Orders of Bishops, in point of
Church Communion, and cannot bring their Conscience to comply with Ceremonies
and Formalities.] Whether it be their Fault or Misfortune, I pity them
heartily; but I believe this ought not to be charged upon the Constitution of
our Episcopacy: for if the King and the great Senate of the Nation, after
Experience of former Troubles, should think fit to impose this as a Test upon
such as they thought the Government not secure of: what is all this to Diocesan
Episcopacy?

The next Paragraph concludes the Arraignment of Diocesan Bishops, 57.
not with any Argument, but a great many hard Words, which suppose the Proofs
that have gone before to have amounted to full Evidence. I am not willing to
repeat them here, let them stand or fall with those Arguments they depend upon.

Now least you should take Mr. B. for an Enemy to Bishops, for one sort he
rejects he receives two, the first, such as St. Jerome says Was brought into the
Church for a Remedy against Schism; the Bishop of this Constitution was it
preside over Presbyters, and without him nothing of Moment was to be done in
the Church. 58.
These Presbyters that were under the Bishop, had they several Parishes or
Congregations, or the same with their President? If several, then this is the
Diocesan Prelacy, that is a Crime in it is Constitution, if the same, then what
did they do there? For by old Canons it appears, (and Mr. B. makes use of them
to serve his own Turn) that a Presbyter was not to preach in the Presence of
the Bishop, what then? Shall they only read the Offices of the Church? This is
to fall into worse than Diocesan Episcopacy, and to make Presbyters, not
Preaching, but, what sounds much meaner, reading Curates only to the Bishops.

There is another sort of Bishops that he dares not deny to be of divine
Institution, 60.
And they are such as succeed the Apostles in the ordinary part of
Church Government, while some senior Pastors have the supervising Care of many
Churches, ( as the Visitors had in Scotland,) and are so far Episcopi
Episcoporum, and Archbishops, having no constraining Power of the Sword, but a
Power to admonish and instruct the Pastors, and to regulate Ordinations,
Synods, and all great and common Circumstances that belong to Churches; for if
one Form of Government in which some Pastors had such extensive Work and Power
( as Timothy, Titus, and Evangelists as well us Apostles had) we must not
change it without Proof, that Christ himself would have it changed.

Let us compare this with Diocesan Episcopacy, and see whether for all this
mincing of the matter, they will not amount to the same thing: this supervising
of many Churches, does it not sound like having many Parishes under them? And
if this be impossible for a Diocesan, how comes it to be otherwise in an
Evangelist, or an Apostle? Nay, how comes it to be allowed in a Scotch Visitor
or Super-intendent? The regulating Ordinations is no other in Scripture Phrase,
than to appoint and ordain Elders in every Church, and in every City; the
Diocesan Bishops desire no more in that point, than to have such a Regulation,
and that it should not be accounted an Ordination that is done without, or in
Opposition to them. The Evangelists might sometimes ordain Elders by their own
single hands, without the Assistance of any Presbyter, sometimes together with
the Presbytery; our Diocesan Bishops never ordain any to that Order, without
the Assistance of their Presbyters; the Evangelists and Apostles had the
Direction of Church Censures, 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11. 1 Timothy 5.19, 20,
21. Tit. 2.15.
as appears from frequent Instances in the new Testament; as also an Authority
or Elders as well as the People, to admonish and rebuke, and punish those that
were negligent or disorderly; The Bishops claim no more, it is the same
Authority, it is the same Office hitherto, and this is the same of what the
Bishops in all Ages of the Church have pretended to succeed to; they of the
Presbyterian way, make all this Power of the Apostles, as extraordinary as
their Gifts, and to expire together with them: but for this they never offer
any Reason; and if this Notion should obtain, it would follow, that neither
Presbyters nor Deacons could be succeeded in their Offices, because they also
were inspired with extraordinary Gifts as well as the Apostles. But Mr. B.
allows all this, and that they ought to be succeeded even in this Eminence and
Extent of Work and Power; Why then does he find Fault, and exclaim against that
which he cannot deny to be of divine Institution, and of perpetual Use under
the name of Diocesan Episcopacy? From these men the ancient Bishops derived
their Title, to this Authority they pretended to succeed, Act. Conc. Tholi.
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24.
Polycrates reckons himself the sixth from Timothy, and Irenaeus gives us the
succession of the Roman Bishops, from St. Peter, to his time; and if it had
been necessary to his Purpose, did undertake to show the same of the Governors
of the most considerable Churches in the World, which afterward Eusebius has
collected out of their several Registers. Comment. 1 Ep. ad Timoth. Schol.
Graec.
Theodoret does admirably explain the Original of this Title, by showing that
the Apostolic Power was fully conveyed to their Successors. Those that are now
called Bishops, says he, were, in the Beginning, called Apostles, and the name
of Bishop and Presbyter were then of the same Signification; but in Process of
time, the Title of Apostle was appropriated to those who were Apostles indeed;
that is, to the 12. And the name of Bishops was taken up by those that were
before called Apostles. Walo Mess. p. 35. and sequent.
Salmasius a man that never looks behind him, or regards any Consequence, runs
away with this Passage as if he had found the greatest Treasure in the World,
that Bishop and Presbyter signified the same thing in the Apostles time; and is
so transported that he cannot take any notice that at the same time there is a
Distinction made between the Office of Presbyter and Bishop: for the Name they
anciently bore, shows the Nature and Eminency of their Office, that they were
Apostles in Authority; but the Title being too great and invidious, they laid
it down for an humbler name, and were content with the Style that was common to
Presbyters in the Apostles time. Hitherto we have an exact Agreement between
these three sorts of Episcopacy, and find the Members of Mr. B's most
compendious Distinction, to be without Difference.

But it must not be dissembled, that there are some things in which they seem
to disagree, especially-these two; first, That the Evangelists or Apostles were
unfixt, but Bishops are determined to a certain Diocese. Secondly, That the
Apostles and Evangelists had Bishops under their Jurisdiction, which Bishops do
not pretend to.

As to this Unsetledness of the Apostles, there are some that look upon
traveling to be so essential to their Office, that their Commission is in
danger to expire, if they should reside any considerable time in any certain
place. Walo Mess. de Epise. and Presb.
And Salmasius makes so acute a Remark upon the Inscription of St. John's two
latter Epistles, as comes within a small matter of deposing him. Before those
Epistles, he styles himself John the Presbyter, or the Elder, or it may be in
English, no more than John the aged; and what would you imagine so great a
Critic would observe from this? That St. John having fixed his Residence at
Ephesus for some considerable time, had lost the Eminence of his Apostleship,
and sunk into the common Level of Presbytery; and therefore styles himself
Presbyter only, as if he had been conscious his Apostleship had departed from
him. But how comes St. Paul to remain three years in the same place, and remain
his Title, and much longer yet at Rome, where he dyed in the Exercise of his
Apostleship? Clemens Alex. speaking of St. John, tells us he went about, (...).
In some places he appointed Bishops where they were wanting, and none but
Apostolic men could do it; and in some places he himself governed the Church
entirely, i. e. as their Bishop, and probably, appointed another when he left
them, to succeed in the Charge. Vales did not see the Import of this Phrase,
but rendered it, Partim ut ecclesias integras disponeret and formaret. The last
is a Comment that destroys the Sense of Clement, who by (...) could not
understand the setting of a Church, under it is Officers which his former seems
to imply, but the ordering and governing of it by himself, in Opposition to his
setting up of Bishops in other places; and though he had some Authority there
by way of supervising the Bishops, yet he did not take the Care of the whole,
which is, (...).

Now in whatsoever City they lived, besides the general Care of all the
Churches, they looked upon that as their peculiar Charge, and governed not as
ordinary Presbyters, but by Apostolic Authority: as a Metropolitan; who
although he has the supervising of all the Diocesses within his Province, yet
may have his proper Diocese which he governs, as a particular Bishop. And the
Office of an Apostle does not essentially consist in the governing of more
Churches than one, else St. Paul would never have vindicated his Apostleship
from the particular Right he had over the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 9.2.
If I be not an Apostle to others, yet doubtless I am to you, for the Seal of
my Apostleship are ye in the Lord. So that though he had had no more Churches
to govern, yet his Apostolic Authority might have been still exercised over
that particular one of Corinth. The Provinces of the Evangelists were not yet
so large as those of the Apostles, for these were either sent to such Cities or
Parts, whither the Apostles themselves could not go, or left where they could
not stay: The Church of Ephesus was the Diocese of Timothy, from whence
although the greater Occasions of other Churches might call him away, and
require his Assistance, yet his Authority was not Temporal, nor would it have
expired, if he had resided a longer while at Ephesus; so that these Apostolic
men were not so because they were unfixt, but because they had that Eminence of
Authority, which they might exercise in one or more Churches, according as
their Necessities did require, or as the Spirit signified: and that they did
not settle in one place is to be ascribed to the Condition of their Times, and
not to the nature of their Office: for the Harvest was now great, and such
Laborers as these were but few, and therefore their Presence was required in
several Places. And as this Unsetledness is not essential to Apostolic
Authority, no more is it essential to Episcopacy to be determined to a certain
Church. Every Bishop is Bishop of the Catholic Church, and that his Authority
is confined to a certain district, is only the positive Law of the Church, that
forbids one Bishop any Exercise of his Office within the Diocese of another;
and St. Paul seems to have given them the occasion, who would not build upon
another man's Foundation. However, in any case of Necessity, this Positure Law
is superseeded, and a Bishop may act in any place, by virtue of a general Power
he has received in his Ordination: so that this first Exception of the Apostles
and the Evangelists being unfixt, and Bishops determined to a particular
Church, can make no essential Difference.

As to the Visitors of the Church of Scotland, they make evidently against Mr.
B's Notion of an essential Difference between Bishops and Evangelists; for
first of all, the Residence was fixed to certain Cities, and their Jurisdiction
confined within certain Provinces, as the Superintendent of the Country of
Orkney was to keep his Residence in the Town of Keirkwall, Spotswood Hist.
Scot. l. 3. p. 158.
he of Rosse in the Channory of Rosse, and so the rest in the Towns appointed
for their Residence. Their Office was to try the Life, Diligence, and Behavior
of the Ministers, the Order of their Churches, and the Manners of the People,
how the Poor were provided, and how the Youth were instructed, they must
admonish where Admonition needed, and dress all things that by good Counsel
they were able to compose; finally, they must take note of all heinous Crimes,
that the same may be corrected by the Censures of the Church. So far of their
Constitution as we find it in Mr. Knox's first Project of Church-polity,
Spotswood p. 258.
and their practice was altogether the same with that of Diocesan Episcopacy,
as Bishop Spotswood describes it, The Superintendents held their Office during
Life, and their Power was Episcopal, for they did elect and ordain Ministers,
they presided in Synods, and directed all Church Censures, neither was any
Excommunication pronounced without their Warrant. And now let the Reader judge
how the Constitution of Diocesan Episcopacy becomes a Crime, and yet these
Visitors of the Church of Scotland, conformable to divine Institution.

As to the second Exception, that the Apostles and Evangelists were Episcopi
Episcoporum, and had Bishops under their Jurisdiction, which our Diocesans, who
are the Bishops but of particular Churches, do not pretend to; This makes no
Difference, at leastwise no essential one, for the same person may have the
Charge of a particular Church or Diocese, and yet have the supervising Power
over several others. But in this point Mr. B. does but equivocate and impose
upon his Reader; for by his Episcopus gregis he means only a Presbyter, and a
particular Bishop may have Jurisdiction over such, without any Injury or
Prejudice done to the Office, which from it is first Institution has been under
the Direction of a superior Apostolical Power: if therefore these Presbyters
do retain all that Power which essentially belongs to them under a Diocesan
Bishop, how are they degraded? In short, either this Order of Congregational
Episcopacy is different from Presbytery, or the same with it; if the same, how
is it abrogated by Diocesan Episcopacy, since Presbyters are still in the full
Possession and Exercise of their Office. If they are distinct how then comes
Mr. B. to confound them as he does, 16. where he says, That the Apostles
themselves set more than one of these Elders or Bishops in every Church. So
then those Apostolic men, as Bishops of the particular Churches wherein as they
resided, had Authority over Presbyters within the Extent of their Diocese, and
a general Supervising Care of several other Churches, and so they were Episcopi
Episcoporum: in the first, they are succeeded by Diocesan Bishops, in the
latter, by Metropolitans, which yet were never looked upon as two orders
essentially distinct.

But after all this we shall never come to a right Understanding of Mr. B's
Episcopacy, unless we take along with it, his Notion of a particular Church,
which he sets down, p. 6. 19. There is great Evidence of History, p. 6.
that a particular Church of the Apostles settling was essentially only [a
Company of Christians, Pastors, and People, associated for personal holy
Communion, and mutual help in holy Doctrine, Worship, Conversation, and Order]
therefore it never consisted of so few or so many, or so distant as to be
incapable of such personal Help and Communion, but was ever distinguished as
from accidental Meetings, so from the Communion of many Churches or distant
Christians, which was held but by Delegates, Synods, of Pastors or Letters, and
not by personal Help in Presence. Not that all these must needs always meet in
the same place, but that usually they did so, or at due times at least, and
were no more, nor more distant than could so meet, sometimes Persecution
hindered them, sometimes the Room might be too small, even independent Churches
among us sometimes meet in diverse Places, and one Parish has diverse Chapels
for the aged and weak that are unfit for Travel.

Every one of these Churches then had one Bishop, and was, in his Opinion, all
the Diocese of apostolical and ancient Bishops. If in any City or Town the
number of Christians should exceed what might meet in one Congregation, that
then they were to imitate the Commonwealth of Bees, who when they grow too
numerous for one hive, send out new Colonies, commanded by their own Officers;
so when Christians grew too many for personal Communion in Doctrine and
Worship, they must resolve themselves into several Churches, and have as many
independent Bishops, as they have Congregations.

But this model of a Church I am afraid is like to please no Party: for the
Dissenters are of Opinion we have too many Bishops already, but this Project
would make more Bishops in this one City, than are now in the three Kingdoms.

Mr. B. has elsewhere endeavored to take away this Prejudice, Disp. 1. of Chapter
Gov. Chapter Hist. part 2.
by saying, that those many Bishops he is for, are not of the same sort with
ours: it is true indeed, Dioceses are not to be so large, yet their Power within
their own Church, is to be equal to the others within their Diocese; and the
Church would fare no better in this Case, than the Empire did in the times of
Galienus, when the People, generally discontented with his Government, because
it was too remiss, found themselves immediately enslaved by no less than thirty
Tyrants. The Presbyterians would never endure that the Power of their Classes
and Synods, should be settled in congregational Bishops, and the Independent's
Principles will as little admit this Project: the Erastian Party will allow
this Bishop no Power of Censures or Church Discipline. Lewis Moulin, Paraenesis.
who seems to speak in the name of all the English Independents, explodes the
use of Excommunication in a Christian State, and will have no Ruler but the
Civll; and some of the greatest men of that party in their Recommendations
before his Book, though they speak something cautiously, yet do not disapprove
his Notion. What some others of them have writ of the Nature of a Church, is so
mysterious and seraphical, that one must be vere adeptus to understand it: the
plainest thing I believe can be made of it is that they are above Ordinances,
and that these Saints on Earth have as little need of Discipline and Censures,
as those in Heaven.

The Episcopal men are content with the present Form, and do not desire the
Bishops should be multiplied; at least, not according to this Project: for
this, in their Judgment, would lie heavier than the Burden of Issachar, So that
I cannot see what party or principles this would suit, besides the Authors own,
nor since he is so subject to Change, is it likely to please him long: However,
if it be the Primitive Platform, it is Reason, that all Churches
notwithstanding their Prejudices, should conform to it, and therefore it is not
equal it should be rejected, though all the World were against it, before that
great Evidence of History, which he alleges in Favor of it, is considered.

For this Evidence he refers us to another Book of his, 1 Disput. of Chapter
Government and Worship, p, 1659. and dedicated to R. Cromwell. p. 87. Grotius
his Opinion he rejects himself. p 6. Edict. Vossii. Disp. p. 88. (...).
22. where the Proofs are set down at large; the first Authority he mentions
there after the Scriptures, is that of Clemens Romanus, who mentions only
Presbyters and Deacons; but this is besides the present Question. As for the
Pseudo Clement which Mr. Thorndike mentions, and is alleged by Mr. B. though
it may be to the Purpose, yet it is of no Authority. The next and the plainest
as he confesses, is Ignatius, out of whom he cites several Passages, the first
out of his Epistle ad Smyrn. Vbi itaque apparet Episcopus, illic multitudo sit;
quemadmodum utique ubi est Christus Jesus illic Catholica Ecclesia, as in B.
Vshers old Translation, with which Vossius's Greek Copy does agree, from whence
Mr. B. urges, That this Plebs or Multitudo is the Church which he rules, and
not only one Congregation among many that are under him: for this does without
distinction bind all the people one as well as another, to be where the Bishop
is or appears, viz. in the public Assembly for Communion in Worship: It is
plain therefore there, that there were not then many such Assemblies under him;
otherwise, all save one, must have necessarily disobeyed this Command.] To
which I answer, first, That Antiochus cites this Passage, quite differently and
more at large, than it is in the Text, and to this Effect, Wherever the Bishop
appears, Antioch* Ser. 124.
there let the Multitude be, as wheresoever the name of Christ is called, there
let a Church be assembled; it is not permitted the Flocks of young Lambs to go
whithersoever they please, but whither the Sheepherds lead them; those that
remain out of the Flock, the wild Beasts destroy, and devour all that which
goes astray: which Words do not at all imply, whether there were one or more
Congregations under that Bishop, and their design is to prove that Christians
ought not to assemble themselves where they please, without the Leave of, or in
Opposition to their Bishop: this appears plainly from the Context to which Mr.
B. does refer us, these are the Words that immediately precede the Passage
alleged, Nullus sine Egiscopo aliquid operetur eorum quae convenient in
Ecclesiam, (...).
illa firma gratiarum actio reputetur quae sub ipso est, vel quam utique ipse
concesserit. So that here is a plain distinction between a Congregation under
the Bishop, that is, where he is personally present, and a Congregation
assembled by his Permission and Allowance; and these Expressions of Ignatius
can have no other Occasion, than the Usage of the Church even in his time, to
have several Congregations under one Bishop.

The next Proof is out of Ignatius's Epist. to the Philadelphians, where he
exhorts them to come all to the same Eucharist, and these are his Motives, Vna
enim Caro Domini nostri Jesu Christi, and unus Calix in Vnionem Sanguinis
ipsius, unum altar and unus Episcopus cum Presbyterio and Diaconis conservis
meis. Disp. p. 89.
And thus the old Translation, which is word for word according to the
Florentine Greek Copy.

The Passage, as Mr. B. cites it, is in this Epistle interpolated, but making
more for his purpose, he preferred it to the Genuine Reading, where there is no
mention of unus Panis, unus Calix, toti Ecclesiae, but that which he lays his
greatest stress upon is, Vnum Altar, unus Episcopus, and this all Copies do
agree in; from whence he concludes, Here it is manifest, that the particular
Church, which in those days was governed by a Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons,
was but one Congregation, for every such Church had but one Altar.

This Observation of one Altar in one Episcopal Church, he confirms by Mr.
Mede, who propounds it with great Modesty, and only as a Conjecture, and M. B.
has added nothing to his Reason, more than his own Confidence. If he had but
taken leisure to consider, and not have run away with that only which seems to
make for his purpose, he might have found enough in those very Passages cited
by Mr. Mede, to have undeceived him. The Matter in short is thus; The Principal
Church, or Meeting Place, in every City, belonged to the Bishop, where his
Chair was set up, with a Bench of Presbyters on every side, circling the
Communion Table; this whole place was called Altar, Sacrarium, and within the
Jurisdiction of a single Bishop; it is probable there was no more than one: the
Bishop with his Presbyters and Deacons represented the Unity of the Church,
although it might be divided into several Congregations, and every Congregation
might have a Communion Table; so that one Bishop, one Altar, signifies indeed
the Unity of the Church, as being the place of its common Council and solemn
Tribunal, and to set up an Altar is not to have two Communion Tables in a City,
but to have distinct Governments, Mr. B's Dispute of Church Government, p. 90.
The Ancients ordinarily call the Lords Table and the place where it stood,
(...). I say, the Table and the Sacrarium or place of it is standing. And so
says Bishop usher in his Notes upon the passage before cited, Altar apud
patres mensam Dominio eam passim denot at apud Ignatium and Polycarpum,
Sacrarium quoque.
and opposite Bishops and Presbyters; this is confirmed by a Passage of
Ignatius in his Epistle to the Magnesians cited by Mr. B. Omnes adunati ad
templum Dei concurrite sicut ad unum Altar. If this reading which he uses were
right, it would distinguish between Christian Temples, and imply, that some of
them had not Altars, which is not likely to be true, if Altar and
Communion Table were the same. But to speak ingeniously, neither Temple nor
Altar here does signify what Mr. B. would have it; for the Florentine Copy
has, (...), which refers only to the Jewish Temple and Altar, wherein consisted
the Unity of the Jewish Church, notwithstanding they were divided into many
Synagogues and Congregations.

But that one Altar for every Church so frequently mentioned by Ignatius, does
not signify every Communion Table, but that eminent one together with the
Bishops Chair, and the bench of the Presbyters, appears from diverse Passages
in his Epistles. In that to the Magnesians he alleges to this Ecclesiastical
Consistory about the Altar, (...). That well-platted Crown of our Presbyters,
alleging to the Figure in which they sat; and then follows, (...), the
Counsel of the Altar or Sacrifices.

And in his Epistle to the Ephesians, he speaks to this Effect, Unless a man be
(...) within the verge of the Altar, he is no partaker of the bread of God, and
this Phrase, (...), he explains in his Epistle ad Trallenses, he that is within
the Altar is clean, wherefore he obeys the Bishops and the Presbyters; he that
is without, is such a one that does any thing without the Bishop and the
Presbyters: so that Obedience to the Bishop or Presbyter, is an Explication of
that Phrase of being within the Altar: and this might consist with the Division
of the Church into several distinct Congregations. But St. Cyprian in his fifty
fifth Epist. makes this yet clearer, where speaking of the Insolence of such as
having sacrificed to Idols, thrust themselves into Church Communion, without
doing any Penance, he breaks out at last into this passionate Aggravation:
what then remains, but that the Church should yield to the Capital, and that
the Priests withdrawing themselves, and taking away the Altar of our Lord,
Images, and Idol-Gods, together with their Altars, should succeed and take
Possession of the place, proper to the sacred and venerable bench of our
Clergy? the bench of the Clergy then belongs to the Altar, that is, the
Communion Table of the Principal and Episcopal Church, to which all other
Congregations did belong, in as much, as the Presbyters they joined with,
appertained to that Altar, and so there was (...) and (...), and yet several
Assemblies under his Direction and within the Communion of that Altar.

This Usage of one Altar and several Communion-tables depending upon it,
continued a long while after in the Church: Innocent I. in his Letter to
Decentius, mentions the sending of the consecrated Symbols from the Episcopal
Church Altar, to the depending Parishes upon solemn times; and long after that,
all the Parishes of a Diocese paid Homage to the Episcopal Church by sending
some of their principal Members to communicate there, upon Solemn Festivals, as
appears by several Canons that are cited and examined more particularly
hereafter: and here in England there have been Footsteps of the same Custom
till of late in Comparison, though from the first beginning of the Gospel we
have not the least hint of Congregational Episcopacy in this place.

The next thing he alleges is a passage out of Justin Martyr, Just. Martyr Ap.
2. p. 97. Ed. Paris, 98.99.
where he describes the manner of the Christian Assemblies in his time, where
the Eucharist is said to be celebrated by the Bishop, 1 Dispute p. 92.
and that on Sunday all the Christians that lived either in Cities or in the
Country, came together, prayed with, and received the Sacraments at the hand of
the Bishop, and those that were absent, had it sent to them by the Hand of the
Deacons: but what shall we conclude from hence? That all that came together
could come to one place, or because the Congregation of the Bishop as being the
most eminent, is here only described, must we conclude that there was no more
than one in any City? This account is only General and serves only to show what
they did, when they came together, (and the Principal Assembly, was surely the
most proper instance) and not in how many places they might be Assembled. Disp.
p 33.


The Story of Gregory Thaumaturgus makes the next Proof, who being made against
his will Bishop of Ne-Caesarea found but seventeen Christians in the whole
City: this was indeed a small Congregation and hardly numerous enough to make a
Church; but if Mr. B. had been so ingenious, (...)
as to have mentioned the Success of that Bishop's Ministry, he might have
spared any one else the Labor of answering this Instance: for the same Bishop
out of those contemptible Beginnings did so far enlarge the Church of that
place, that when he dyed, he left but seventeen in the whole City that were not
Christians; if the number of Christians at his first Entrance was hardly enough
to make a Congregation, toward his latter end it was surely too great for one:
for the multitude of people in the City and the Country that belonged to it,
Ubi supra.
it is said by Gregory Nysser to be infinite.

The Testimony of Tertullian, Apolog. chap. 39. is as little to his purpose;
his words are these, p. 93.
Where a Body compacted, by the Knowledge of the same Religion, the Unity of
Discipline, and the League of Hope, do come together into one Congregation,
Conus ad deum Ed. Rigalty, and not in caeum and Congregationem.
to offer up Prayers to God, we meet for the hearing of the holy Scriptures, we
feed our Faith with those holy words, we raise up our hope, we fix our
Confidence (...) confirm Discipline by the inculcating of (...) ^ours Precepts;
there are likewise there Exhortations, as being done in the presence of God,
that is looked upon as an Anticipation of future Judgment, if any one has so
offended as to be banished from the Communion of Prayer and the Assembly, and
of all holy Commerce; most approved Elders do preside. Now let the Reader
judge, whether Mr. B. has Reason to be so confident of this Passage, as to say,
page 94.
If I be able to understand Tertullian, it is here plain, that each Church
consisted of one Congregation; and yet out of the words, there can be nothing
brought to favor it, unless it be this, that Christians used in those days to
assemble for Prayer, and reading of the Scriptures, but whether one or more
such Assemblies were under the Discipline of the Bishop and Presbytery, is not
signified in the least. That Elders are said to preside, does not at all
prejudice the Right of the Bishop, for either those are Bishops that are said
to preside, and so every particular Church will have many; which if it be not
against Mr, B's Notion of Episcopacy, is confessedly against the practice of
the Church, in those times when one Church had no more than one Bishop: if they
were Presbyters, then it is probable, there was more than one Congregation. But
it appears by what follows, that these Presidents were all the Officers of the
Church, where they are distinguished from the people, and said to live out of
the common Stock, and the Deacons as well as Priests, did assist at the
Sacrament, and the Bread and Wine was distributed by their hands, a^^ shall
endeavor to prove in due place; (...) cites out of the same Author, De Corona
Militis, to put his meaning out of all doubt, concludes nothing less than what
he would have him to say; his words are to this effect, Presidentium c. 3.
That we must receive the Eucharist at all times, but from no other hand but
those that preside. That those were not Bishops, appears from the next passage
which he cites out of the same place, This Mr. B. mistakes Chapter Hist. p. 7. when
he says, that they took not the Lord's Supper, but only Antistitis manu, I
suppose his Memory deceived him. (...).
where Tertullian, speaking of Baptism, mentions the form of renouncing the
World and the Devil, Sub manu Antistitis, where we may observe, that he uses
another Word, as well as another Number; yet since it is said that Christians
ought not to receive the Sacrament, but from the hands of those Presidents, we
must not conceive the Bishop to be excluded, but by that general Name to be
comprehended together with his Bench of Presbyters: but will not this
Circumstance of Baptism serve to evince, that a Bishop had then but one
Congregation, and every one to be baptized, was to make his Renunciation under
the Bishops Hand? nothing less: for many more might be baptized by a Bishop in
the compass of few years, than there are in the greatest Diocese in the World.
Paulinus could not well wish a greater number in his Diocese, than he baptized
in seven and thirty days: Bed. l. 2. chap. 14.
Pamelius did labor to prove that Antistes is the same with Seniores
Presidentes, and that Presbyters might baptize as well as Bishops; but that is
not the thing in Question, nor does this Passage suppose every baptism
performed by the Bishop; but the Renunciation of the Devil, etc. which was
preparatory to it, to have been made in his presence, he might have a very
large Diocese, and be at Leisure for this, especially when we consider, that
the generality of Christians in those times had such an awe of that Sacrament
and the strict Obligation it lay upon them of more than ordinary Sanctity, that
they deferred it till the last, and were baptized on their Deathbed, and that
not by the Bishop, but by any other Presbyter or Deacon: nor can we find in all
the History of the times we now speak of, that Children had any part in the
solemn and public Baptism, but they might be privately baptized in case of
Necessity, and eminent danger of Death, without the assistance of the Bishop.
And long after these times, we find in the largest Dioceses where a great many
Congregations are affirmed to be under the same Bishop, One Baptistry to a
Church, sufficient for several Congregations.
there were but three days in the year appointed for solemn Baptism, and the
Bishops were so far from being unequal to the Multitude, that they complain of
the general Neglect of the Sacrament, and of their not being fully employed at
those times; so that supposing this Antistes to be the Bishop, and every one
that was solemnly baptized past under his hand; it is far from making out Mr.
B's Notion, that there was but one Congregation under him.

The next thing he makes use of to confirm his Conception of Congregational
Church, is the Consent of the people, Disp. 95. in the Margin. Chapter Hist. p. 7.
as well in the Election of their Bishops, as in several other Ecclesiastical
Acts; but this ^e rather hints by the Bye, than insists upon, and I suppose,
did not value much, since he takes no care to improve it: whoever will take the
pains to examine those passages, will find that the people never polled at the
Election of their Bishops, which was principally the act of the Clergy, (...).
but approved it commonly by a general and confused Voice of the Multitude,
that was present, and the Phrase Vniversa Plebs does not denote every
particular Christian of the Church, but only a general Assembly and
Congregation of as many as could come together, or of the most considerable
Persons of the Diocese, or rather, as it is usually expressed, all the People
that were present at the Action: Cornelius elected, plebis quae tunc adfuit
Suffragio. Cypr. l. 4. c. 2. I shall not forget to answer this Argument more
particularly hereafter, when we shall meet with it confirmed by any Canon of
Councils, or other passages in his History.

Basil. Ep. 194. ad Pleb. Nicop.

As for Nynius's History of St. Patrick and the three hundred and sixty five
Bishops, which he planted in Ireland, I suppose 'twas invented by some learned
Monk, to fill up the Irish Calender, and to leave no day in the year so
forlorn, but that the name of one of these Bishops could vindicate it from
Profaneness.

That which follows of Scotlands having no Bishops before Palladius, Disp.
1.97. Yet England had Bishops long before, as may be seen in the Subscriptions
of the Councils of Orleance and Nice.
but that the people there were instructed by Priests and Monks, makes nothing
at all to our present purpose, though the Authority of Henricus Major, and
Johannes Fordorius were unquestionable, for there is no account of settled
Churches or Discipline, but only that some good men out of their Zeal for
Religion, did endeavor to propagate it among the Scots, and that these were
not Bishops. But Buchanan stretches this point higher than it will bear, and
will have it, that the Churches of Scotland were governed by Presbyters and
Monks, the first time; I believe in Story we meet with Monks amongst the Orders
of Church Government: but I believe that the Story it self may be easily
disproved, and we may expect shortly a fuller account of this and other things,
relating to the ancient British Church, by the hand of one of the greatest
Masters of Antiquity in this Nation.

The last part of Mr. B's Evidence has some of the Canons of ancient Councils,
but I must needs say, he does not cite with that accuracy, that one would
expect from a person that advances so singular a notion; The first is the
fourteenth of the Council of Adge, Can 1.
the Sum of it is this, that if any man should desire a Chapel of Ease for the
benefit of his Family, he might be gratified in it, but with this Proviso, that
upon the most solemn Feasts he should hear divine Service in Parochiis aut
Civitatibus. Mr. B. makes Parochia signify a Diocese, because the word is used
frequently in that sense by Eusebius and other Ancients, but does not consider,
that the Import of it is changed by this time, and is taken for a Parish in the
fifty third Canon of the Council of Adge, whose Title is de Presbyteris
parochianis rei Ecclesiae distrahentibus; and cap. 2. vass. 3. There is express
Difference made where a Presbyter is allowed to preach, Non solum in
Civitatibus sed in omnibus Parochiis. 47.
The next is the thirtieth Canon of the same Council, Benedictionem super
plebem fundere, aut poenitentem in Ecclesia benedicere presbytero poenitus non
licebit; to which he adds the thirty first, 47.
Missas die dominico saecularibus totas audire speciali ordine praecipimus, ita
ut ante benedictionem sacerdotis egredi populus non presumat, quod si fecerit,
ab Episcopo public confundatur. From whence he infers, that all the people
were obliged to come to the Bishops Church, because they were to stay till the
Benediction, which it was lawful for the Bishop only to give; but if Mr. B. had
considered these two Canons, he must have observed, that either they contradict
one another, or the same thing is not meant by the Benediction of the Priest
and the Bishop: by the first, which is reserved to the Bishop, Confirmation
must in all probability be understood: By the second, the Priests Benediction,
that which is pronounced at the dismissing the Congregation; or if he will
understand a Bishop by Sacerdos, the Canon forbids it, in making a Distinction
between them, ab Episcopo confundatur; whereas if by Sacerdos they would have
understood a Bishop, it is not likely they would have either changed the Term,
or repeated it, but have added, ab eo confundatur. But why should we insist
upon this, since nothing can be more notorious, than that Presbyters had
Churches now distinct from Bishops, and every Diocese almost a great number of
Parishes, and there are few Councils of that Age, but oblidge the Bishop to
visit all these Churches once a year.

To these he adds the thirty eighth Canon of the same Council, Disp. p. 99.
Cives qui superiorum solemnitatum, id est, Paschae and Natalis Domini, vel
Pentecostes festivalibus cum Episcopis interesse neglexerint, quum in
Civitatibus communionis, vel Benedictionis accipiendae causa positos se nosse
debeant, triennio communione priventur Ecclesiae. It is not to be denied, but
it was the ancient Custom for all the Parishes or places depending upon any
Episcopal Church on certain times to repair to it, not so much for personal
Communion, as for Homage: but we are not therefore to conceive, that every Soul
under a Bishops Charge, was to appear before him on those solemn times, but
only the most considerable persons of every Division, and this Canon means no
more. Sirmond could never find any more than 47 Canons of this Council, the
rest were taken out of Conc. Epaonense, from whence the true Reading of this
Canon is to be sought for: there is Cives superiorum natalium (not
solennitatum) and so it is corrected in the best Edition of the Council of
Agde, and Communionis is left out: which restoring of this Canon overthrows all
the use that M. B. would make of it, since all are neither obliged to be
present, nor to personal Communion, but what Cives superiorum Natalium
signifies, we must learn from other Councils of this Age: in the 14 chap. of
the Council of Arvern. we have it thus explained, that together with all the
Presbyters and Deacons of a Diocese, Quicunque sunt etiam Cives natu majores
pari modo in Vrbibus ad Pontifices suos in praedictis Civitatibus veniant. And
the third Canon of the fourth Council of Orleans, obliges only the Principal
Citizens to assist the Bishops on these Solemn Times, Quisquis de prioribus
Civibus Pascha extra Civitatem tencre voluerit, sciat sibi a cuncta Synodo esse
prohibitum, which is no other than if the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, the
Liveries, and most considerable Citizens were obliged on certain High Festivals
to come to Church to St. Paul's.

The next of the Canons he produces are either to the same effect with what he
has already alleged, or not directly to his purpose, so that I believe upon a
Review he will judge as well as I that there is no necessity of a Reply.

Mr. B. has heretofore excepted, the Churches of Rome and Alexandria, Chapter Hist.
p. 7. 23.
and has despaired of bringing them ever to comply with his Model; but now it
seems he has found a means to reduce them to a Congregation: he revokes his
former Concessions, and declares, that he finds no reason to believe (that ever
the two chief Cities of the Empire had so long; that is, for two hundred years
after Christ, more than some London Parishes, or near half so many) it is Pity
these great London Parishes should ever be divided, they are so serviceable to
Dissenters on all Occasions; for if a Conventicle is to be kept up, the
Greatness of St. Martin's or St. Giles Parish will justify it; those Churches
will not hold a tenth man that ought to repair to them, and surely, better set
up a meeting against the Law, than that the People go unedified. And again,
when Rome or Alexandria are to be reduced to a single Congregation, then it is
but comparing them to these great Parishes, and the work is done; It is not
likely, that for two hundred years, Rome it self had near so great a number of
Christians as one of these Parishes. Suppose they had not, the Question is not
whether the Church of Rome was more numerous than that of St. Martins, but
whether they could meet in one Congregation: for suppose they were but half, or
a quarter so big, if they could not meet in one place to hear the Word and
receive the Sacraments, but must resolve into several Assemblies for to do it,
it is no matter what proportion they held to our London Parishes.

But what Evidence is there out of History, that the Church of Rome made but
one Congregation for two hundred years after Christ, is it that the People are
said to consent to the Election of the Bishops, or to concur in several
Ecclesiastical Acts? But how shall we be assured, that every Believer was
obliged to be present, or that Matters were carried by Vote; and not by general
and confused Approbation? Besides, though all that had the right of Electing
Church Officers might possibly meet in one place, yet they were not the fifth
part of the number that had right to Congregation and Personal Communion; for
Women and Children, and Servants must be supposed to be excluded, together with
the Poor, and the more inconsiderable Persons: or if this practice of approving
the Election of Church Officers be any Argument for a Churches being no more
than a single Congregation, it will follow, that Rome had but one Congregation
for many hundred years after, for the People were very long in possession of
that right, after the whole City was become Christian, and surely then they
were too numerous for one Congregation.

Anton. de Dom. l. 4. c. 11. makes a long deduction of the Election of the
Bishops of Rome, and proves that they were chosen by the People, until Innocent
the Second, for 1100 years, and that he was the first that altered the ancient
way of Election; Now if any one can believe, that for eleven Centuries there
was but one Congregation in Rome, much good may it do him. As for the Peoples
Right to choose, which Mr. B. does so much insist upon, and seems to give the
People Encouragement to revolt from those Bishops, which they never chose. I
shall give a more particular Account of it toward the latter end of this
Treatise.

Mr. B. makes a Computation of the Church of Rome, in the time of Cornelius,
and finds it to fall much short of one of our great Parishes; for when Novatian
divided that Church, it had but forty six Priests, seven Deacons, and as many
Subdeacons, forty two Acoluti, Exorcists, Readers, and Porters fifty two,
Widows and Poor that were disabled, and lived upon the Charity of the Church,
fifteen hundred: upon which we compute thus, Suppose the Poor the tenth part of
the whole Church, (as St. Chrysostom calculated the number of the Church of
Antioch) the Product then would be fifteen thousand, and not ten thousand five
hundred, as Mr. B. reckons, or the Printer mistakes, and even thus, would they
be too many for one Congregation. We cannot imagine any five Churches of such
as the Christians might be supposed then to have, Chapter Hist. p. 7.
capable of holding them all; Eusebius. l. ^. c. 43.
but if we consider this Passage more narrowly, we shall find Mr. B.'s
Computation to be extremely short: for these (...) were not only poor, but sick
and disabled, for so the word is explained in the Epistle of the Roman Clergy
to the Clergy of Carthage, upon the subject of Cyprians retiring, Ap. Cyr*
Sive Viduae, sive Thlebomeni qui se exhibere non possunt, sive qui in
Carceribus sunt, sive exclusi a sedibus suis utique habere debent qui eis
ministrent. So then these poor were such only, as were not able to help
themselves, that were not able to come abroad; and such as these surely are not
the fortieth part of any people, unless it be in the time of Plague or
extraordinary Sickness.

In the next place let us consider the number of the Priests, what use can
there be of forty six in one Congregation? For they were neither to preach nor
administer the Sacraments in the Presence of the Bishop; for the first Mr. B.
urged it elsewhere to prove no more than one Congregation belonged to one
Bishop, and I hope he will not be so disingenious as to cast it off as soon as
he has served his turn of it. For the Administration of the Sacraments, Justin
Martyr is very clear in his Description, that the Bishop consecrated and gave
it the Deacons to be distributed among the Congregation: ubi supra.
so that unless there were distinct Congregations at that time, those 46
Presbyters could hardly find how to employ themselves.

But Mr. B. does endeavor to remove this Objection, Chapter Hist. p. 8.
by showing the Church Officers were very much multiplied in those days, to the
end, that as many as had any useful Gifts, might be employed in the Service of
the Church: For this, Orat. 1. p. 45.
he brings in Nazianzen, as a credible Witness shortly after, complaining of
the Excess in this part, that the Church Rulers were almost more than the
Subjects: but how shortly after? would you have judged this to have been spoke?
No longer than about a hundred and fifty years, and after one of the greatest
Revolutions that happened in the Church in Cornelius's time: the Christians as
Mr. B. remarks, were not of the greatest and richest, and therefore it is not
likely that the public Charge should be multiplied without Necessity, and
forty six Presbyters be appointed for one Congregation. But in Nazianzen's time
the Church was in a prosperous and flourishing Condition, the Governors were
now become Christians, and great Privileges and Wealth were added to the
Clergy, which made it then so desirable a thing. But in Cornelius's time the
greatest Dignity was Martyrdom, and the Clergy was particularly aimed at by the
Heathen Persecutors, their Portion was Labor and Danger, they were to come and
assist the Brethren in the Prison and at the Stake; and the Office was so
unpleasant, that Novatian (the Author of that Sect which Mr. B. speaks so
favorably of) desired to be eased of the Burden, Eusebius. l. 6^ c. 43.
and renounced his Priesthood: besides, the same Epistle of Cornelius, as if
it were to prevent such a Mistake as this, Ad Fahi^^n Anti.
expressly tells us, that these Officers were not useless and unnecessary, but
calls the Clergy, To (...), and the Necessity of them appears by what
immediately follows, because they had the Direction (...) of a great and
innumerable People: and now with what Reason Mr. B. has retracted his Exception
of the Roman Church, let the Reader judge.

But the Church of Rome had long before outgrown the Stature of a Congregation,
for Euaristus, the sixth from St. Peter, is said to have divided Rome into
Titles or Parishes, the multitude being grown too numerous for one Assembly;
Ep. Pii ad Baron.
or if the Authority of the Pseudo Damasus be not to be depended upon, we have
the two Epistles of Pius to confirm it: in the first we have mention of
Euprepia, that had given to the Poor, Titulum Domus suae ubi nunc cum
Pauperibus nostris commorantes missas agimus. Several learned men do except
against the Word Missa as not being yet in use in the Church, Hospin de Temp.
but it is a very hard matter to show when it was first taken up; certain it
is, that way of speaking was made use of not long after, Remissa for Remissio
being found in Tertullian and Cyprian: in the second Epist. we have these
words, Presbyter pastor titulum condidit and digne in Domino obiit. I must
needs say, Blondel does not deal very ingeniously and equally with these
Epistles, for in his Pseudo Isidocus he endeavors to prove them suppositious,
tho they are not in Isidorus's Collection, yet in his Apology for St. Jerome's
Opinion concerning Bishops, he vouchsafes to make use of one of them, to prove
that Bishop and Presbyter signified the same thing in Pius's days; it is a sad
case, that the Ancients shall have no farther Credit with us, than they serve
our Turn: when they speak what men will not have them, then they are false and
Impostours, let them give the same men but some little Countenance, and then
they are true men again.

The great Liberality of the Church of Rome is no small Argument of its
Greatness, for, besides the maintenance of their own Clergy and Poor, they were
able to relieve most other Churches, Eusebius. l. 14. c. 23.
and it was their practice from the beginning to oblige all the Brethren, by
all manner of kindness, and to send to a great many Churches that were
established in every City, the Necessaries of Life, relieving the Necessity of
those that were in want, and sending necessary relief to those who were
condemned to the Mines. This was the ancient Liberality of the Roman Church,
and Soter is said, not only to have continued, but improved it. Now, if
according to Mr. B's Notion of those Times, not many Rich, not many Noble were
called, the number of Believers must be by so much the Greater, Eusebius. l. 7. c.
5.
to be able to supply the Necessity almost of the Universal Church; and
Dionysius of Alexandria speaks of the Roman Church's Charity in his time, in
these words, All the Provinces of Syria, together with Arabia, (...), which you
relieve every one: The word (...) is there Emphatical, and implies an
admiration of, as it were, the All Sufficiency of the Roman Church, how it
should be able to supply the wants of so many Churches, and to furnish so
Expensive a Charity.

Under the Reign of Commodus, the Church is said to have enjoyed peaceable and
happy Times, and to have thrived so well, that the whole World in a manner was
reduced; the words of Eusebius express a wonderful increase; (...); that every
Soul in a manner, of every sort, came over to the Christian Religion; and at
Rome particularly the increase was so great, (...): that abundance of
considerable Persons for their Nobility and Wealth, came over, with their whole
Families and Relations, Eusebius. l. 15. c. 21.

Certain it is, that the number of Christians at Rome was proportionably
greater than in any part of the Empire, for thither they fled for Refuge in
times of Persecution, and sheltered themselves in a crowd; and if Tertullian's
account of the state of the Christians in his time, makes it very probable that
they made the better half of the Roman Empire; if he boasts of multitudes, and
say that they had possessed themselves of the City and Country, and every
place was full of them but the Temples, if they did in a manner besiege the
Heathen in every part, and were more beneficial to the Public, by the
consumption of all sorts of Commodities, and made Use of more Frankincense in
One Street, than the Heathen did in any one Temple; it is evident that they
were the major part every where, but in Rome more eminently so. See this urged
farther by Mr. Dodwel, in his Letter to Mr. B.

Toward the middle of the Third Century, they received a considerable Increase
from the Countenance of Alexander Severus, the greatest part of whose Family
(and that alone would make a good Congregation) were Christians, Eusebius. l. 6.
c. 21.28.
and this Favourer of Christianity reigned thirteen years. Toward the latter
end of that Age, their condition was most flourishing, and all the World, in a
manner, had received the Faith; let us observe in what glorious Expressions
Eusebius represents the Church before the Persecution of Dioclesian, Eusebius. l.
8. c. 1.(...).
who (says he) can describe(...), their full and innumerable Assemblies, and
the multitude of their Meetings in every City: So that by this time, not only
in Rome, but almost in every City, the Christians had several Congregations.
Valesius, tho he corrects the old Translator, yet it seems did not fully
comprehend the meaning of this place, nor see the Elegancy of Eusebius's
Gradation; for first, he represents the many thousands that came together to
make a Congregation, then the number of such Assemblies, that there were
several of them, and at last mentions the Places that received them, that there
was no Church, no Chapel, no Oratory, but was full in those days. About this
time, or not long after, Rome had above forty Churches, which we must not
imagine to be built all at the same time, but by degrees, according as the
number of Believers did require, and in all probability, there must be more
than one or two, even in the first and second Century. And now I have mentioned
this, it will not be amiss to clear that Passage of Optatus about these forty
Churches, Optat. Mii. l. 2. contra. Parmen*
from the Exceptions of Blondel, whom Mr. B. follows in his mistake Optatus in
that place traces the Donatists of Rome to their first Original: If Macrobius,
says he, were demanded whom he succeeds, he must needs confess it is to
Eucolpius; if Eucolpius be asked in whose Chair he sits? he must say, where
Bonifacius Ballitanus sat before him; and he, where Victor Garbiensis, who was
the first Donatist Bishop in Rome, and there the Succession ends, he having
none to succeed to, Filius sine Patre, Tyro sine Principe, Hospes sine
Hospitio, Pastor sine Grege, Episcopus sine Populo, non enim Populus aut Grex
appellandi fuerant pauci qui intra quadraginta and quod excurrit basilicas
locum ubi colligerent non haberent. It is plain then, that Optatus does not
speak of the state of Rome as it was in his own time, but of Victor Garbiensis,
the first Donatist Bishop; when this was, is not easy to fix.

There is no greater Argument for a great number of Congregations under the
Bishop of Rome, than what Mr. B. observes of their Churches before Dioclesian's
time, that they were but like our Tabernacles, as to the capaciousness, Eusebius.
l. 8.
I suppose, as well as the manner of their Structure, and therefore the lesser
they were, the greater Number there must be of them, and the Church must grow
too big for his Definition, since there must be more than could in those
circumstances, have personal Communion in Doctrine and Worship.

When the Diocese of Rome is reduced within the narrow Bounds of a single
Congregation, what other Church can pretend to more? And if the Imperial City
need not be excepted, Alexandria cannot hope for Exemption, therefore he
proceeds to show that Alexandria the greatest and most populous City in the
World, next to Rome, had no more Christians than could meet together in one
Congregation; and of this he offers a bold Proof, that it was so in the time of
Athanasius, Athan. T. 1. p. 531. Chapter Hist. 9.
whose words he cites, where he excuses himself for having celebrated Easter in
the great Church of Alexandria, and drawn together such a multitude as gave
great occasion of Jealousy to the Emperor; but his Plea is, that the other
Churches were so narrow, that they would have been in danger of suffering by
the crowd: and as if this Church would have held all the People, he adds, that
it was better for the whole Multitude to meet in the Great Church, and to have
the concurrence of the people with one Voice, etc. This Church was newly built
by Constantius, and we may suppose it very large, though not yet so great as to
be able to contain all the Believers in Alexandria; nor does Mr. B. desire it
should, but only the Generality: Chapter Hist. p. 10.
yet granting that it received all, it would follow indeed, that the Church of
Alexandria then was but one Congregation: but what was it before this great
Church was built, when they had no possibility of personal Communion, were not
they then made congregational Churches under one Bishop? And Athanasius in the
same place confesses the multitude was so great, that all the other Churches in
the City could not hold it. Besides the Orthodox were probably much more
numerous before the building of that Church, and the Banishment of Athanasius;
and if this vast Fabric could not receive the party of Athanasius, what Church
shall we imagine could have been large enough for all the Christians in
Alexandria before they were divided by Arrius, and before they were governed by
Gregory and George the Arrian Bishops?

He adds to this of Athanasius, p. 10. 30.
another Argument given him by a learned Friend, which I will take the liberty
to examine: The City of Alexandria, says Strabo, is like a Soldiers Cloak etc.
and by Computation, about ten Miles in Compass; a third or forth part of this
was taken up with public Buildings, Temples, and Royal Palaces; thus is two
Miles and a half, or three and a quarter taken up.] I will not say, this
learned Friend has imposed on Mr. B. but there is a very great Mistake betwixt
them; suppose Temples and Royal Palaces should take up such a part of the City,
must there therefore be no Inhabitants in those Palaces, or no Christians
amongst those Inhabitants? But he believes this to be that Region called
Bruchium, which Epiphanius speaks of in his time as destitute. What? all the
public Buildings of the Town in one Region, and that an outer Skirt too? as it
is described by the Greek Martyrology in Hilarion,(...). And in the Life of
Apollonius Discolus,(...). This Epiphanius says, was destitute of Inhabitants
in his time, and not unlikely, and perhaps, destitute of public Buildings too;
for it was destroyed after an obstinate Siege in the reign of Aurelian, as
Ammianus Marcellinus, or of Claudius, l. 22.
as Eusebius would have it. However, the City must be reckoned by so much the
less, In Chronico.
neither is there any Necessity of this; for they might enlarge upon another
Quarter, being, it may be, forbid to build in Bruchium, because it was divided
from the rest of the City, and too favorable a Refuge of Rebellion, to which
that People was too much addicted; they might dwell closer than before, and so
their Multitude be undiminisht. However, certain it is, that this City long
after the Destruction of Bruchium retainrd it is ancient Greatness, and is
represented by no Writer, as diminisht either in Number or Wealth; but to let
this pass, let us see what becomes of the rest, he adds, A great part of the
City was assigned to the Jews, so Strabo indefinitely, as Josephus quotes him;
others tell us more punctually, that their Share was two of the five Divisions
(Ush. Annals p. 859.) though many of them had their Habitations in the other
Divisions, yet they had two fifth parts entire to themselves (which he might
have found as punctually in Strabo, as in Bishop Usher) and this (continues he)
is I suppose the(...), which Josephus says, the Successors of Alexander set
apart for them; thus we see how six or seven Miles of the ten are disposed of.]
And by the same rule he might have disposed of all at once, and concluded out
of Strabo's Division of the Town, that there was not one Christian it it: For
Strabo lived in Augustus his time, when it was a hard matter to find a
Christian in Alexandria, unless we will take in Justin Martyr's old Christians,
such as Socrates, i.e. all virtuous good men; and then I am afraid, they would
be too few to make a Congregation. The number of these Jews was much lessened
within a little while after Strabo, by an Insurrection of the Alexandrians
against them; the Civil Wars afterward under Trajan and his Successor had
almost extirpated them; and yet even at this time, Alexandria was as populous
as ever, and frequented by almost all the Nations of the Earth, as Dion
Chrysostomus represents the flourishing State of it in his time: but no matter
what number of Jews or Heathens it had in Strabo's days, the Question is,
whether many of both were not converted to the Christian Faith, and that very
early.

There remains now but three or four miles to be disposed of between the
Heathens and the Christians, ibid.
and much the lesser part will fall to the share of the latter: it is kindly
done, to provide for the Christians before they were in Being: surely, Strabo
who makes the Distribution, and Bishop Usher who cites it out of him, never
intended the Christians one Foot of ground in all that Division; and this
learned Friend might have spared his little Town of eight or ten Furlongs,
which he so liberally bestows upon the Bishop of Alexandria before our Savior
was born.

What he adds about Alexander and Meletius I wonder it could escape him, p. 11.
there being nothing more notorious, than that Alexandria had now several fixed
Parishes, or (...), and every one governed under the Bishop, and by it is proper
Presbyter, and his remark upon two Bishops living quietly in Alexandria, is so
disingenious a Suggestion, that he has reason to be ashamed of it: See Epiph.
in Hares Miletian.
for while Miletius lived quietly, and did not set up Altar against Altar, all
was well; but a little before his Death, the schismatical Humor returned upon
him again, and he ordained Priests and other Church Officers, every where, in
Opposition to Alexander, he may find as many or more Bishops living peaceably
in London, though there be but one Bishop of the place, as there was in
Alexandria.

Now because Mr. B. has endeavored to represent the Church of Alexandria so
inconsiderable, even after Constantine's days, it will not be impertinent to
give the Reader a View of that Churches Greatness, even from the first
Foundation of it. In St. Mark's time, Alexandria had several Churches, Eusebius.
l. 2. c. 16 Niceph. l. 2. c. 15. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 24.
though but one Bishop, for that same Evangelist is said to have preached the
Gospel there first, and (...), that is, to have founded several Churches or
Congregations there; (...).
yet for all this the whole was but one (...) in which Annianus succeeds St.
Mark; and Eusebius, in the Chapter before cited, tells us, that the number of
Christians was so great in Alexandria, even at the beginning, that Philo
vouchsafes to take notice of them; but as for the Essaei, which he there
describes, whether they were Jews or Christians, it is not very material,
though this is observable, not only of them, but of all the Jews of Alexandria,
that their Principles had prepared them for Christianity above all other
People: for by their moralizing of the Law, and making Virtue and Holiness to
be the Design and meaning of all those Observances; they were coming, as it
were, to meet the Gospel, and, like the Centurion our Savior commends, were
not far from the Kingdom of Heaven.

In Adrian's time, Vopiseg. in Saturn.
they were, it seems, so considerable, as not only to be mentioned by that
Emperor, but to be set at the Head of all the Sects of Religion in Alexandria,
and they are named first: for that Emperor in his Letter to Servianus,
reproaching the Egyptians with inconstancy and lightness, says, those that
worship Serapis are Christians; and there are that call themselves the Bishops
of the Christians, that devote themselves to Serapis; all these, it seems, were
Christians by inclination, though sometimes they were forced by the Egyptians
to worship their Gods; for he that has the least tincture of Christianity, can
have no great Devotion for Serapis: -- and the Patriarch himself, ibid.
when he comes into Egypt, is forced by some to worship Serapis, by others, to
worship Christ. It is not material to our purpose, whether this Patriarch were
Bishop of Alexandria, as Casaubon and Salmasius will have him, or rather the
chief Governor of the Jews, called (...) by Claudius, Josephus Antiqu. l. 19.4.
and (...) by Philo; it is enough that the Christians then were so powerful as
to be able to oblige him to worship Christ: there is no doubt but that Adrian
does the Christians wrong in this point, for they never forced any to their
Religion, not after they were uppermost, unless we should judge those of
Alexandria to be more violent than the rest; however, this Account certainly
represents them as very considerable, and equal to any Sect or Religion in
Alexandria. -- Vnus illis Deus est, Hunc Christiani, Hunc Judaei omnes
venerantur and Gentes. Salmasius understands Serapis by this one God. Casaubon
looks upon this Passage as spurious, and added afterward by a Christian hand
in the Margin; from thence, by an ignorant Scribe, transferred into the Text.
But, it is most probable, that that one God, which the Christians and Jews are
said in the first place to adore, is the true God, which both worshipped,
although after different manner. And now, by the preaching of the Christians,
the greatest part of the Alexandrians might possibly be brought over, if not to
a perfect Acknowledgment, yet to some Veneration and Esteem of the true God.

The great Catechists of Alexandria, as Panteus, Clemens, Origin, and Heracles,
did not a little advance the growth of Christian Religion in that place, and
Origen's School particularly was so frequented, one Company coming still after
another, from Morning till Night, that he had hardly time to take breath, and
was forced to take Heraclas into his Assistance, to instruct the more ignorant
sort.

Dionysius, who gives an account of Valerian's Persecution in Egypt, represents
the Christians, as well of Alexandria as of other Cities, extraordinary
numerous; the concourse of them to him when he was banished to Chebron, was so
great, that he was forced (...), and afterward, when he was removed from
thence to Coluthio, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 12. (...). Eusebius. l. 8.
which was nearer Alexandria, he comforts himself with this, that those of his
Flock could come to him, and stay with him, and meet there in several
Congregations, as it were in remoter Suburbs. Valesius observes from hence,
that Suburbs, that is, in this sense, Villages of the dependence of any City,
had their particular Congregation, and were not obliged to come to the City
Church, which he believes was but one, even in Alexandria, in Dionysius's time,
but how that is deducible from this passage, I cannot see.

Under the Persecution of Dioclesian, what numbers of Christians might be at
Alexandria, may be judged by the multitude of Martyrs that suffered at Thebes:
Eusebius was an Eyewitness of what he relates concerning them; he saw great
multitudes suffer together, some days ten, some twenty, some sixty, and
sometimes an hundred, and this continued not for a few days only, or a short
space of time, but for several years.

The division of Alexandria between several Presbyters, as it were into so many
Parishes, although it be not mentioned before Arrius's time, Epiphan. Haeres.
Melet. and Arrian.
who was the fixed Minister of one of them, called Buchalis, are to be supposed
to have been instituted before; for Epiphanius, though he observe this as
singular in the Alexandrian Church at that time, yet says nothing at all of its
Novelty, which he would not probably have omitted: and Sozomen seems to imply,
Soz. l. 1. c. 15.
that it was an ancient Custom. Petavius mistakes Epiphanius's his words, and
imagines, in Epiph.
that these Divisions of Alexandria are therefore said by him to be singular,
and different from the Usage of other Churches; because, says he, those which
Epiphanius had seen were but small, and might have but one Congregation, but it
is plain from Epiphanius his words, that what he looked upon as singular, was
not their having several distinct Assemblies, but because they had certain and
fixed Presbyters; and therefore he adds, as an Effect of that Custom, that
every one would be denominated from his Pastor, as the Corinthians did, when
one cried, I am of Paul, I am of Apollos: and this indeed was so singular, that
perhaps no other Church in the World had it besides, Vales. Annot. in S^zom. l.
11. c. 15.
not that of Rome; and Valesius infers from the same Passage of Pope Innocent's
Epistle to Decentius, which Petavius brings to prove the contrary, that
although there were several Titles or Churches in Rome then, and had been long
before, yet none of them was as yet appropriated to any Presbyter, but they
were served in common, as greater Cities in Holland and some other Reformed
Countries, that have several Churches and Ministers, who preach in them all by
their turns.

Lastly, and to conclude this account of the Church of Alexandria, it is
evident out of Athanasius, how the Bishop of that City had from the Beginning
several fixed Congregations under him; Athan. T. 1. p. 802.
particularly those of Mareotes, who, though they must be supposed to receive
the Faith almost as early as Alexandria, yet never had a Bishop before
Ischyrias, (if he were to be reckoned one.) [ Mareotes, says Athanasius, is a
Country belonging to Alexandria, wherein there never was a Bishop, not so much
as a Chorepiscopus, but all the Churches of that place were subject to the
Bishop of Alexandria. And now let the Reader judge, whether the Bishop of
Alexandria had more Congregations than one under him, or no more than could
conveniently meet in one place.

I have hitherto examined Mr. B's Evidence of History for his Congregational
Churches: let us now see whether there be not as good Evidence to the contrary.

The growth of the Church of Jerusalem was so sudden, and so great, as to
exceed the measure of one or two Congregations. St. Peter's first Sermon
brought over three thousand, another five thousand; Acts 2.41.
then the Sacred Historian, as if the Multitude had grown too great to be
numbered, mentions the other Accessions in gross and indefinitely, but with such
Expressions as imply, they much exceed the numbers aforementioned: Multitudes
both of Men and Women were added to the Church, and the number of the Disciples
multiplied in Jerusalem greatly; and a great number of the Priests were
obedient to the Faith, Act. 6.7. Now let us seriously consider, whether all
these Converts could meet together in one place, for personal Communion,
Doctrine and Worship, or whether they could find a room spacious enough to meet
in all together; we find but two sorts of places they met in, the Temple, and
from House to House; the Temple cannot be supposed the ordinary place of their
Assembly, since the generality of the Priests and People did oppose them; and
though the Apostles preached there, it was no otherwise than they did in the
Synagogues acd Marketplaces, and other places of concourse, to gain new
Proselytes, and not to instruct those they had converted: when they preached
from House to House, the fifth or tenth part of them can hardly be supposed to
have convenience for personal Communion: and it is certain, they did break
Bread no otherwise than from House to House, from whence it is plain, that it
was not possible for them all to hold personal Communion in the principal part
of Christian Worship, i. c. the holy Eucharist, which is made by Mr. B. as
necessary to the Individuation of a Church as Communion in Doctrine. The
Presbyterians pressed this Instance very unmercifully upon those of the
congregational way, who made use of all Shifts, and most of them very poor
ones. To elude the force of the Argument, sometimes they turn the Temple into a
Church, another while they send the greatest part of them home to the country,
and whatsoever other means they could find to diminish their number, they laid
hold of them; and this way not succeeding in their own Opinion, they found a
Secret in the Air, Grand Debate. Answer of the Assembly, to the Reasons of the
dissenting Br. p. 27. ibid.
which they fancied to be much more pure, and shine in Jerusalem, than our
Northern Climates, and so more proper to convey a Voice to a greater Distance;
whereas, our dull unyielding Fog, arrests the Voice in every point, as it
passes. However, the Assembly of Divines resolved they would not be paid with
this piece of Philosophy, and undertook to show the Argument to be as thin as
the Air they talked of; and the Lord Bacon relieves them in this Distress, who
was of Opinion, that a Voice could be heard much farther in a gross than a pure
Air, the Resistance perhaps preserving it longer, as Opposition serves, to
lengthen a Discourse, and to make Disputes endless; p. 81.82. but in the second
part of Chapter Hist. takes it up again.
but Mr. B. in his first Disputation of Church Government summing up the
Exceptions of the Independents against the Presbyterian Argument, drawn from
the Church of Jerusalem, prudently leaves out this of the Air, but finds
another Expedient as proper for his purpose; and that is, that men had much
stronger Voices in those times and places, which they may believe that can
fancy Nature to decay, and that our Forefathers were Giants. For my part the
next thing I expect is, that they should believe with Kirker that the Ancients
knew the use of Sir Samuel Morland's speaking-trumpet, for Kirker had a Vision
of some old Manuscript that no body else ever saw, which revealed to him, that
Alexander the Great could speak to his whole Army together, by the help of a
Trumpet; and who can tell, but in this vast Congregation of Jerusalem, such an
Engine might be made use of? However, since Dioceses are to be no larger than
the Sphere of a man's Voice, it will be an useful Instrument to a Preacher, of
weak Lungs, to stretch out the Bounds of his Diocese, and be as serviceable to
the Church as it is to the Camp. Disp. of Chapter Gov. p. 81.


But Mr. B. tells us one thing more which a Friend told him, which I wonder as
much, he should believe, as that he be satisfied with another Friend's
Computation of the Christians in Alexandria in Strabo's time: it is in short
this, That, he, though his Voice was none of the lowdest, yet he preached to a
Congregation judged to be about ten thousand men, 2 part of Chapter Hist. in one
place he has but 6000. but in another he comes up again to 10000.
and that they all heard him; I am afraid that this Friends Calculation
exceeds as much as the other falls short; for we reckon now, that three
thousand makes an extraordinary Congregation, and it may be possible for a
mighty Voice to speak to a thousand more, but it may be, that the World is
degenerated since, and that our Lungs are no more in Comparison with those of
the times he speaks of, than they were compared to those of the Eastern
Preachers.

At last, to make sure work, he concludes that though Jerusalem might have many
Assemblies and yet but one Church, p. 81. and 82.
and after the dispersing of the Apostles, but one Bishop, yet this is no
Precedent; This I must needs say, is something more than the Independents would
adventure to say, they minced the matter and told us, that Jerusalem being the
first born Church, and nursed up by the joint care of all the Apostles might
arrive to an extraordinary Stature, and look gigantick, in Comparison of the
rest, yet they durst not say it had more than one Congregation, and was no
Precedent: What shall we judge then? That the Apostles built the Church of
Jerusalem after one model, and those of other Cities after another, or if they
did, surely they were both lawful; does that overthrow the Church and
Discipline of Christ's Institution, that is, according to the practice of his
own Apostles? Or can a Conformity to the Discipline of the Mother Church of
Jerusalem, become in it is self a Sin? Wherein shall we be saved if the
Imitation of the Apostles do not secure us?

But Mr. B. says, the Office of a Bishop supposes him to have no more than one
Congregation, since he must hold personal Communion with all, in Preaching, and
Administration of the Sacraments, visiting the Sick, relieving the Poor, and
the like: but must all these Acts be performed by himself in Person? Must he
have no Assistance? Is nothing to be done within his Congregation, without his
Presence? May not he do all this occasionally, as the Apostles and Evangelists
did, Every Bishop had Presbyters in the first times, and if he were so
indispensably obliged to do all himself, what use were they of?
and yet appoint Elders for the ordinary and constant Performance of the
Ministry, whom he shall supervise and direct? It is very strange, that the
Bishops should have been so many hundred years in an Office, which it was
impossible for them to discharge, and yet this be never discovered by
themselves or others.

However, the generality of Bishops (you say) for a long while after the
Apostles, had but one Congregation to govern; what then? If all the Believers
in and about a City, would hardly make a Congregation, that is, to be ascribed
to the Condition of those times, and not to be reckoned essential to the
Office: all things have their Beginning, but are not confined to the Measures
of their Infancy; and if the Beginnings of the Church were but small, even the
greatest Cities, it cannot be a prejudice to the Governor of it, if the number
of Believers should increase, since they are appointed in Clemens Opinion, for
the Government not only of those that have already, Ep. ad Corinth.
but of such as shall afterward believe.

The Practice of the universal Church, is evidently on our side, for who has
ever heard of two Bishops in one City, though it were never so great, unless in
time of Schism: and it is strange, when the number of Believers did increase
beyond all Possibility of personal Communion, that none should ever discern the
necessity of dividing into several Churches, and learn this Wisdom from the
Example of Bees; But the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria by their Affectation of
Empire, became evil Examples to others by their first Corruption of Church
Discipline. It is strange then, that among all the Quarrels of the Bishops, and
in all their Accusations of one another, that this Crime of so high a Nature,
should never be objected, that no good man could never complain of this
Corruption, that there should never be laid to their Charge this usurping of
Authority over whole Cities and multitudes of Congregations. But supposing this
an Usurpation in the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria, how is it credible, that
all the great Cities in the World should be carried away with their Example?
that there should be not one honest Bishop left, that understood the nature of
his Office, or the just bounds of his Diocese? Or suppose the Bishops so far
prejudiced with self-Interest as to have neglected a Duty that redounded so
much to the Diminution of their Power, yet were the People who in those times
had some part in their Election, ignorant of this great Secret, would not they
right themselves, and not have suffered their several Congreations to become
Chappelries, etc. Dependencies upon the Bishops Church? Would not they have
governed themselves, rather than become, as it were, a Province to the Bishop;
or if the People were ignorant of this, was there no Priest that was ambitious
enough to be Bishop, that could inform them of their Right, in Expectation that
they would be grateful to the Discoverer of their Privileges. And lastly, was
there no Schismatic learned enough to justify his setting up of an Altar
against an Altar, by this Argument, that there were more Believers than could
hold personal Communion with the Bishops Altar; that there was work enough for
more Bishops than one, and that in populous Cities there ought to be several
Churches: yet they were all so dull, as never to think of this way, but on the
contrary, every one pretended, that there ought to be but one Bishop in a City,
and that himself had the Right, and the other was the Usurper.

In short, since the Nature of the Church requires, that it should swarm, when
Believers grew too numerous for one Assembly, and send out new Colonies under
Independant-officers, Is it not very strange, that it should so far forget it is
Nature, as never to have done this, and to leave not one poor instance, upon
whose Authority, the Independency of Congregations might rely? It is upon
this, that the present Question turns, and not whether Bishops at first had but
single Congregations; for if there were no more Believers within, or belonging
to the City, they could have no more; but after they were multiplied into
several Congregations, still they had but one Bishop: and Mr. B. does not as
much as pretend to any Evidence of History to the contrary, unless it be, when
the Church was divided by Schism.

I thought my self obliged to consider Mr. B's Notion of a Church and
Episcopacy, as it lies scattered in his first Chapter, and explained more at
large in his first Disputation of Church Government; partly because he insists
so much upon it, and bends the whole course of his History to favor it as much
as is possible; partly, because he makes it a plea to justify his Railings
against Bishops and Councils, as if those he dishonored in this History, had
departed from the ancient use of Church Government and Discipline; and their
Usurpation had drawn after it all those evil Consequences and Calamities, which
he relates throughout this Book. It is time now to enter upon his History, and
to examine how truly and how fairly he has represented the Actions of Bishops
and Councils, I shall go along with him as far as the end of the Council of
Chalcedon, and endeavor to vindicate the Reputation of the four first general
Councils, which our Church receives, from those injurious Representations which
Mr. B. has made of them in his History.

In the next place, I shall endeavor to show how little Truth there is in that
general Accusation which this History is intended to make out, that Bishops
have been the Authors of all Heresies, Schisms, and Corruptions: Thirdly, that
the way to remedy this, is not by multiplying Bishops, and that this Expedient
is so far from being the Cure of Church Divisions, that nothing has contributed
more to widen the Breach, and to render Peace and Concord impossible within any
considerable Compass. Fourthly, That though Bishops and Councils have been
guilty of great Miscarriages, they ought not to be imputed to the Order, but
the Men; and if Bishops brought in several Corruptions as well in Doctrine as
Discipline after the four general Councils; Bishops have likewise reformed the
Church from them, and have maintained, and do still maintain and justify their
Reformation. Lastly, that latter models of Church-Governments without Bishops
have been subject to all the Miscarriages that are charged upon the Bishops,
and have not been able to prevent or remedy the Mischiefs of Heresies and
Schisms, and that the Independent model is of all other, the most unlikely to
remedy these Mischiefs, and is justly charged by the Presbyterians to have
given the occasion to all those Confusions in Religion, those monstrous
Doctrines and endless Separations, under which we still labor, and almost
despair to see a Remedy for them.

CHAP. II.
Of Heresies and the first Councils.

THE design of general Councils being chiefly to preserve the Unity of the
Faith, Chapter Hist. c. 2. p. 28, 29, 30.
and to reject and discredit all such dangerous doctrines as appear destructive
of the fundamental Principles of Religion: Mr. B. thought fit before he entered
upon the History of these Councils, to give us some account of Errors which
they were designed to remedy: his Discourse is very favorable to the Mistakes
of men, [and considering the common Frailty, it is but fit that we should
forbear, (as far as is possible) with each others Infirmities] yet still there
are such Errors as are not to be endured, and corrupt the very Vitals of
Christianity: these when they were obstinately maintained, were stigmatized by
the Church, with the name of Heresies, a word which Mr. B. has no Fancy to, and
yet St. Paul and St. Peter made use of it to signify the worst and most
dangerous sort of Errors, and such as are not to be tolerated within the
Communion of the Church. Tit. 3.10.
It is Saint Paul's charge to his Son Titus, an Heretic after the first and
second Admonition, reject; Galat. 5.12.
and reckoning up the works of the Flesh that excluded from Salvation, he puts
in Heresy: and St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1.1.
to render it the more frightful, joins with it the Epithete of damnable,
saying, that wicked men should come, who should bring in damnable Heresies.
Now, since we are warned before hand, that Heresies there must be, that wicked
men will endeavor to introduce wicked Doctrines, the Church would be left in
an evil condition, had it been provided with no Authority, no means to remedy
those Mischiefs that would certainly overthrow the very Foundations of that
Faith, upon which it was built: Now, what defense shall she make against these
Assaults? Arms she has none, but Prayers and Tears, and even those may return
empty; if the Heretic will be perverse, and obstinately fortify himself in
his Errors: must she then suffer this Cancer to eat up her very ^^wels? is
there no way of stopping the Progress of this Plague, or to interpose between
the sound and the infective? Surely, it cannot be left so destitute, so
forlorn, so helpless: there is nothing of Nature or Society but has some means
as well as Inclination, to preserve it self; and the Church being a Society
united upon the Terms of a common Faith and Charity, must be supposed to have
so much Power within it self, as to refuse the Use and Benefit of it is
Communion, to such as violate the Terms upon which they are associated, corrupt
the Doctrine, destroy Holiness, and endanger the Seize of the ends and
Benefits of Religion, not only to themselves, but to those that converse with
them. They had Power to reject a Heresy, to put away from them wicked Persons,
and to refuse to receive into, or shut out of their Communion such as would not
submit to the Laws of their Society. The great condition of their Admission
into the Church, was a Profession of the Christian Faith, and they had no right
to remain in it any longer than they kept up to that Profession; if they
brought in Doctrines that were inconsistent with it, and did persevere in their
mistakes, using all endeavors to propagate them, it is but just and equal, it
is but natural that such should be turned out of the Fellowship of the Church,
and it is but reasonable, after a sad experience of the mischiefs that attend
these Doctrines, to endeavor to prevent the li^^ for the future, by guarding
diligently the Entrances of the Church, and by taking Security of such as enter
into it; and if not of all such as enter into it, yet, at leastwise, of those
that are admitted to teach or govern the People, that they will not revive
those dangerous Doctrines.

It Is this that Mr. B. finds so much fault with, and ascribes all the mischiefs
that have befallen the Church, to an ignorant zeal against Heresy: There is no
doubt but this has been the occasion of great Calamities, the greatest
Heretics persecuting the Truth under the name of Heresy: p. 31.. 15. p. 32.
the Arrians were exceeding violent against the Orthodox Believers, and used
all manner of Cruelties to reduce them from the right way, which they called
Heresy; they, on the other side, returned the infamous name, though not the
barbarous treatment, upon their Enemies; and what shall we infer from hence?
that there is no Heresy, because Truth is sometimes so miscalled, that no
Doctrines are damnable, because men have condemned one another for some that
are not so? Is there no Truth, because Contradictions lay claim to it? and
because that every man honors his mistake, under speciousness of that Title;
for all these confusions of terms, the things are the same, and a real Heresy
is damnable and ought to be reproved, and cast out of the Church,
nothwithstanding, that under this pretense the greatest Truths have been
discredited.

Mr. B. gives such an account of those Controversies that exercised the four
first General Councils, as seems in great measure to excuse those Heresies
which were condemned by them, and to blame their condemnation, calling the
Bishops, in derision, Hereticators and Damners, because they pronounced Arrius,
Macedonius, Nestorius, etc. Heretics, men of dangerous Principles, and not to
be tolerated in the Communion of the Church; yet, for all this, I belive Mr.
B's own Rule will absolve them; for, in his Book called, The true and only way
of Concord, page 291. and seq.
he makes a Catalogue of such Errors, which men ought to be restrained from
preaching and propagating: now all those Errors condemned by the four first
General Councils, are laid down there, not only in the Sense, but in the very
Terms they were condemned in; these Doctrines are by him owned to be dangerous,
and by no means to be suffered to be preached. But what if men grow
incorrigible, and will preach them, notwithstanding these Prohibitions and
Restraints? his Resolution is very moderate, that every one should not be
ejected or silenced, that holds or preaches any one such Error what then?
must he be suffered to propagate the Infections, and to teach these Opinions
that are so confessedly dangerous? nor that neither; for there follows such an
Exception in this Toleration, as wholly overthrows it; for those are to be cast
out, who, consideratis considerandis, are found to do more harm than good: Now,
what if the Orthodox Bishops did find that, consideratis considerandis, those
Heretics they condemned, did more hurt than good, that they destroyed with one
hand much more than they edified with the other; and that the propagating of
one of these dangerous Doctrines was not compensated by all the other Truths
that they preached; there is no variety of wholesome food can countervail the
Mischiefs of one envenomed bit; and that Physician is not to be trusted that
puts in any one dangerous Ingredient, though the rest of the Composition were
very innocent, and this was the Rule they went by; the Heretics in their
Opinions were dangerous men, they were obstinate in their Opinions, industrious
in propagating them, and were mostly upon the vindication of these controverted
Doctrines: it was therefore necessary, since they did more hurt than good, that
they should be cast out of the Church.

Nor is he less displeased with the Form than the Matter of this Condemnation,
and therefore he gives the Bishops the Titles of Hereticating, Cursing, Damning
Bishops; but what Antichristian words are these, that can move a moderate,
healing-man to so great Indignation? Anathema esto, is the usual form of
condemnation in Councils, which he so frequently calls Cursing and Damning, the
word is St. Paul's, 1 Corint^. 16.22.
If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema-maran-atha; and
he had borrowed it from the Jews, which signifies no more than the separation
of any thing from common Use; and is used sometimes in a good, sometimes in a
bad sense. In the first, he denotes any thing consecrated or devoted to God; in
the latter, any thing which we abhor, and separate our selves from for fear of
Pollution; so that the addition of it to those Errors which they condemn is
dangerous: As for Instance; If any man shall say, that there was a time when
Christ was not, let him be Anathema, imports no more, than that we declare our
abhorrence of such Doctrines, and will have nothing common with those that
profess them; but Mr. B. I know not out of what Dictionary, translates it, God
damn you, and calls it the Religion of the Bishops and their Councils; Nay,
though this did imply so much, they may plead the Example of St. Paul even in
that case, since they do no more than apply his general Sentence, which he
repeats more than once, Gal. 1 9.
If any man preach any other Gospel unto you than that ye have received, let
him be accursed. And, that you may not think that this other Gospel does
directly overthrow that which he had preached, and teach men to deny and
renounce our Savior Jesus Christ; we must understand, that all this relates to
the Legal Observances, which some would introduce into the Churches of Galatia,
and their compliance with those Teachers, is by the same Apostle called, a
turning away unto another Gospel; and the preaching of those men, the
Perverting of the Gospel: and so warm is the same Apostle against those
Disturbers of the Church, that he wishes that they were even cut off which
troubled them: chap. 5.12.
Yet the Councils did not go so far in their Anathema's, they did but declare
the Leprosy, as the Priest under the Law turned out the Diseased, and gave
warning to all People of the danger of the Infection; and it was but fit that
such should remain without the Camp till the Disease was healed, lest it should
spread, and the whole Church become an Abomination and Anathema to him, whose
Faith it had suffered to be corrupted.

This was the Design of the Bishops and their Councils; to this end they
directed their Anathema's, and if they have not always met with the Success
that were to be wished, we must not judge uncharitably, and undervalue or
deride their Endeavors.

And now let us consider their Acts, and see what it is that they have done.
The first Councils, about the time of the Observation of Easter, he passes over
with only mentioning, for there is little of them remaining. Pope Victor was
doubtless to be blamed for endangering the Peace of the whole Church, Eusebius. l.
5. c. 24.
upon so light an occasion; Chapter Hist. p. 34.
Whether Victor did actually excommunicate the Churches of Asia, or only
threatened and endeavored to do it, is not very clear, from the Relation of
Eusebius. Valesius is of opinion, and it seems the most probable, that this
proceeded no farther than Letters of Accusation, Vales. in locum.
which he sent to most Churches, to represent the Asiaticks as unworthy of
Communion; but the generality of Bishops not approving it, and advising to
Peace, it is likely the business went no farther; so Schism was avoided by the
peaceable counsel and disposition of the Bishops. The Councils of Carthage,
Labese, under Agrippinus, and that of Arabia under Origin, he does but just
mention; that of Rome, c. 2. p. 35.
after the death of Fabian, held by the Roman Clergy in the Vacancy, he makes
some Remarks upon, that are grounded upon a mistake; for this is rather to be
counted a Consultation than a Council; and, as if they had wanted Authority to
determine any thing in that ticklish point of receiving the lapsed into
Communion, they only agreed this, ap. Cypr. Ep. 31.
That nothing should be changed before the Election of their next Bishop, as
appears by their Letter to the Clergy of Carthage; the Bishops that were here
present, were such as came to assist and advise the Roman Clergy in a time of
so great danger, and not to determine any thing authoritatively in Council,
much less to be presided and governed by the Roman Presbyters.

After this, says he, p. 35. 26.
there was another Council in Carthage, two in Rome, and one in Carthage about
the same Controversy. These he passes over very lightly, and the Schism that
was the occasion of some of them, because it was impossible to charge it upon
any Bishop: Cyprian behaved himself like a prudent good man, and an indulgent
Father, and yet all this could not prevent Schism and Conventicles;
Faelicissimus, Priest of Carthage, makes the first breach, whom Mr. B. mistakes
for Felicissimus the Deacon, 26.
who joined himself afterward with Novatus, against the good Bishop Cyprian.
Novatus, an African Presbyter, improved this difference; and not content to
disturb his own Church, went to Rome, and kindled Discord and Dissension there.
Baronius would have this Novatus to be a Bishop, because he is said by Cyprian
to have ordained Felicissimus a Deacon; but it is plain, as well out of
Cyprian, as the Chronicle of Eusebius, that he was but Priest. Novatus
Presbyter Cypriani, Romam veniens, Ep. 49.
etc. says Eusebius; and Cyprian, after he had showed what manner o^ man he
was, adds, that being conscious of such horrid Crimes, he must expect, non
(...) Presbyterio excitari tantum, sed and Communicatione prohiberi: and as for
the Ordination o^ Felicissimus, Cyprian in the same Epistle shew^ it to have
been done against all Rule and Order, because, he says, that he did it, nec
p^mittente me nec sciente, but, sua factione and ambitione: which plainly
shows, that Novat^^ was Cyprian's Presbyter, and ought not to have ordained a
Deacon, unless it were in Conjunction with him, or by his Permission^ whereas,
if he had been a Bishop, his right to the ordaining of Deacons would have been
unquestionable. This was the Author of that Schism Mr. B. favors so much
throughout his whole History, and claims Kindred with them, as the Puritans and
Nonconformists of those Times; yet having known what manner of man he had been,
he might have been ashamed of such a Progenitor, who, if Cyprian be to be
believed, was always restless, arrogant, proud, perfidious, a Flatterer, and an
Incendiary, that carried a tempest with him wheresoever he went, and was a
sworn Enemy to Peace and Settlement; he robbed the Orphans, cheated the Widows,
purloin'd the Treasures of the Church, he suffered his Father to starve, and
would not as much as bury him when dead; he kicked his Wife, being great with
Child, and caused sudden Abortion: and this was the great Saint and Puritan,
that could find no Church, no Bishop holy enough for his Communion; this was
the severe Judge, that would not admit Repentance, and represented God cruel
and implacable, as himself; for it was really his Opinion, as I shall show in
due place, that there was no pardon for the lapsed, no, not with God; and that
Mr. B. mistakes, when he affirms this Rigor to extend no farther than to
refuse an outward Reconciliation with the Church.

The next is another Council of Carthage, p. 36.
under Cyprian, where one Victor is condemned for making a Priest Guardian of
his Children, and intangling a man devoted to the Service of the Altar, in the
Affairs of this World. All that he has to except against this, is, the Rigor of
the Sentence, that forbids his name to be mentioned in Prayer for the dead; and
that there should be no Oblation made for his Rest: but this shows, that the
ancient praying for the dead was intended rather as an honorable Remembrance
of them, than any act of Charity toward the Soul departed; else it is not
likely, so good and indulgent a man as St. Cyprian was, would have been so
cruel in his Intentions, as to deprive a poor Soul of any Relief he had judged
necessary for it.

p. ^5. ^8.
After this he gives a short account of several Councils called upon the subject
of Rebaptization of Heretics, and here, to do him Right, he is just enough in
his Remarks: The Generality of the World was for rebaptizing Heretics, and
considering what manner of men the first Heretics were, it is probable they
had Tradition as well as Reason on their side: However, Mr. B. endeavors
fairly to excuse these Differences, and speaks of the Bishops with Honor and
respect, allowing them to be men of eminent Piety and Worth: Had he used the
same Candor toward others, who were no less eminent, it would have been no
Disparagement to his Judgment or Sincerity; but his contrary unequal Dealing is
not much for the Reputation of his Charity and Modesty.

There is a mistake 29. where he make; Eus bius to speak that in his own
Person, (...).
which he cites not of Dionysius Alexandrinus, That he does not condemn the
rebaptizing of Heretics, Eusebius. l. 7 c. 6.
which was a Tradition of so great Antiquity.

The Councils of Antioch that condemned Paulus Samosatenus, are in effect
acquitted by Mr. B. when he acknowledges him, that was rejected by those
Councils, a gross Heretic.

That infamous meeting of Traditors at Cyrta, p. 36. 37. A meeting of 12 evil
men that were Bishops. lib. 1. contra Parmen.
was rather a Conspiracy than a Council; and I am sorry Mr. B. has not done
that Right to the Catholic Church, as to show who these men were. Opatus
Milev. reproaches his Donatist Adversary with these Progenitors; amongst these
was Donatus Masculitanus, Victor. Rusicciadiensis, Marinus ab aquis
Tibilitanis, Donatus Calumensis, and the Murderer, Purpurius Limatensis, the
great Promoters of the Schism of the Donatists, and, as it were, the Apostles
of that Sect; yet these men, tho they were confessed Traditors, became of so
tender Consciences soon after, as to abhor Communion with Cecilianus, because
he was ordained by Felix, whom they suspected of the same Crime, that they had
pardoned one another. The Church is so unconcerned with the crimes of these
men, that they are in some measure her Vindication, they went out from us,
because they were not of us, and they left the Communion of the Church, because
their crimes made them despair of enjoying it.

The next Council he mentions, c. 2. 38.
is that of Sinuessa, one of the most nonsensical pieces of Forgery that ever I
saw; three hundred Bishops are said to meet together, to judge Pope
Marcellinus, and could find no better place than a Cave, where they could meet
but fifty at a time; like the Prophets that were fed by Obadiah in the time of
Jezebel's Persecution: and these Judges when they came together, durst not be
so presumptuous as to judge a Pope, but desired him to condemn himself; and
when the poor man is persuaded to pass his own Sentence, Melchiades pronounces
these Words, Just ore suo condemnatus est, nemo enim unquam judicavit
Pontificem, nec praesul sacerdotem suum, quoniam prima seeds non judicatur a
quoquam: and yet for all this, Mr. B. declares, that whether this be true or
forged is too hard a Controversy: Just as hard as that concerning St. Vrsula
and her eleven thousand Virgins, or the traveling Chapel of Loretto, or the
History of the seven Champions.

The Council of Illiberis follows next, that has many very good Canons, and
some have need of a favorable Interpretation; it is very severe in some cases,
denying Communion even at the hour of Death; but this is not the thing which
was condemned in the Novatians, as we shall show hereafter.

The Council of Carthage followed, that began the Schism of the Donatists, p.
39 40.
upon the occasion of Cecilianus his Election; Thus, says he, the doleful
Tragedy of the Donatists began by Bishops, divided about the Carthage Bishop.
Tho it cannot be denied, but that Bishops had a hand in carrying on this
Schism, Opt. lib. 1. contra Parmen.
yet it is not true, that it was begun by them; for Optatus makes Botrus and
Caeleusius, the first Authors of this Schism; for these, desiring themselves to
be Bishops of Carthage, and disappointed of their Hopes, by the unanimous
Election of Cecilianus, left the Communion of the Church, and drew Lucilla, a
rich and potent Lady, into their Party, Et sic tribus convenientibus causis and
personis factum est ut malignitas haberet effectum. Schisma igitur illo tempore
confusa mulieris iracundia peperit, ambitus nutrivit, avaritia roboravit. These
three invited those Traditors of the Council of Cyrta to Carthage, to judge the
cause of Cecilianus, who they pretended, was ordained by a Traditor; and these
inveigled a great many others, by a plausible pretense of Zeal against the
Betrayers of Religion; so Cecilianus was condemned, and Majorinus put into his
place.

The Donatists, says Mr. B. were so called from Donatus, 40.
a very good Bishop of Carthage heretofore, and not from Donatus, a Casis
nigris. It Is true, the former gave them the name, but I wonder where Mr. B.
finds that he was so good a Bishop, De script. Eccles. in Donat.
St. Jerome makes him an Arrian; Optat. lib. 3. contra Parmen.
Optatus represents him as the most arrogant, proud man, that ever was, that he
exacted such a Submission, even from Bishops, as to make them worship him with
no less Regard than God himself, that he suffered men to swear by his name:
Aust. in Joh. tract. 3. prop. Friem.
St. Austin makes him an Impostor, that he made his party believe, that when he
prayed, God answered him from Heaven; and the civil Magistrate found him no
less turbulent than the Church, his contumelious Language to the Emperors and
their Lieutenants, showing sufficiently what Spirit he was of. Gregori Macula
Senatus and dedecus Praefectorum.


Lastly, He mistakes the time of this Council, with Binnius and Baroneus,
placing it in the year of Christ, 306. But Optatus making this Election of
Cecilianus subsequent of the Toleration granted the African Churches by
Maxentius, who had not reduced Africa, Valesius de Schismate Donatist. c. 1. 41.
till about five years after; it is clear, that this Council could not be
before.

An. 308. Another Council was held at Carthage, where no less than two hundred
and seventy Donatist-Bishops, The Bishops now begin to multiply, Schism the
occasion.
for Moderation, agreed to communicate with penitent Traditors, without
rebaptizing them, and so did for forty years. This looks liker a piece of
Policy than Moderation, for it had no tendence to Peace, but to strengthen the
Schism.

For the number of Bishops in this Council we have only the Authority of
Tychonius, Aug. Epist. ad Vincentiam.
a Donatist, who probably, (as the humor of those Schismatics was) might
magnify the strength of his Party, and stretch it a point beyond what it
really was. The time of this Council is likewise very much mistaken, as appears
by what we have said of the Council going before; and, it is probable, that it
was held in the time of Donatus, Vales. de Schism. Donat. c. 3.
Schismatic Bishop of Carthage, and immediate Successor of Majorinus. St.
Jerome, in his Chronicle, sets his Promotion in the year 331. Donatus agnoscitur
a quo per Africam Donatiani; And it cannot be well imagined, that Schism should
spread so suddenly, as in the very beginning of it, to have two hundred and
seventy Bishops of their Party; especially, considering that Constantine the
Great used all his Endeavors to suppress them.

It is observable, that before this time we do not meet any very numerous
Councils, either in Africa or any where else; the greatest falling much short
of a hundred; which shows, that Bishops were not yet so much multiplied, and
that their Bishoprics were of a larger Extent; but these Schismatics having
divided the Church, made Bishops in every Village to strengthen their Party,
and to outnumber the Orthodox; besides that, they had set up an Altar, p. 4. 44.
and made them Bishops in every City, where they could get the least
Congregation to join with them.

Mr. B. complains, upon this Occasion, That some Popish Persons liken the
Separatists among us to the Donatists; who those Popish Persons are, I will not
pretend to ghess; However, this I am sure, that the word Heresy of old was
never worse abused, than that of Popery is now; for whomsoever men have a mind
to render odious to the People, it is sufficient to call him Popish, and then
he is baited under that infamous name, as the Christians anciently were in the
Skins of Beasts: But if a man had a mind to make odious Comparisons, Mr. B's
Defense of our Separatists from the Imputation of being like the Donatists,
would render them but little Service. For his first Exception of our
Separatists having no Bishops, which the Donatists had, makes them differ not
only from that Sect, but from all the Sects and Churches in the World^ till the
last Age: and his second Exception of their being the lesser number, signifies
as little; for so were the Donatists at first, and so may they long continue;
or rather may the name of Separation cease, and all return into one Flock;
under one Shepherd. But the Donatists divided the Unity of the Church,
appointed Bishops against Bishops, and Altar against Altar, pretended to a
greater Purity than the Orthodox, and boasted, that their Church had all Wheat
and no Tares; were great Calumniators of Bishops, and the honest Clergy that
took their part, they gave great Jealousy to the Civil Government, and spoke
Disrespectfully of Princes: I will not say, that any of our Separatists do
resemble them in any of this.

The succeeding Councils of Ancyra, Neocaesarea, and two of Alexandria, escaped
with pretty good Quarter; the Acts of some not displeasing him, and of others
being lost.

The next is that of Laodicea, p. 42. 49. They were so few, that without
Contention, they made diverse good Canons.
of 32 Bishops; not so few, but they could have fallen out, if they had been so
disposed; three Canons of this Council, he cites in favor of his
congregational Church: The forty sixth requires, That those that are to be
baptized, and not already baptized, (as Mr. B. translates) should learn the
Creed, and repeat it to the Bishop or Presbyters, on the Friday of the last
Week, i. e. of the Lent, or any other, next preceding the day of solemn
Baptism. By this, says Mr. B. You may conjecture how large a Bishopric then
was. They might be as large as ours for all this: For though the Bishop may not
hear them all himself, upon the same day yet the Presbyters of his Diocese may,
and the Canon is satisfied with that: And Canon 56 forbids the Presbyters to go
into the Church before the Bishop, but with him: and Mr. B's Inference from
hence, is, That every Church had a Bishop, though some Chapels afar off, had
but Presbyters only. But I cannot see what Service this Remark does him; for
it is confessed, that no Bishop had but one Cathedral, and that is the Church
meant here in the Canon; for it is added, Nec sedere in Tribunalibus, which
were put up only in the Episcopal Church; but that there were other Parish
Churches supplied by Presbyters, and those far from the Cathedral, is
acknowledged by Mr. B. I will not contend with him about their Title, whether
they were Churches or Chapels; it is sufficient to disprove his Notion, that
they were several Congregations. Canon 57. It is ordered that Bishops should
not be ordained in Villages and Hamlets: The Canon does not distinguish between
the small and great, putting Villages indefinitely, but instead of Bishops they
were to have Visitors, i. e. qui circum eant, that should go about, and visit
them: 49.
which Expression imports, that there was no small number of them under the
same Association, and yet, all these were under the Bishop of the City, upon
which they depended, and their Visitor was to do nothing without his Knowledge
or Privity; which Mr. B. translates Conscience: Sine Conscientia Ep. nibil
faciant.
But least he should have forgot the thirteenth Canon, or taken no notice of
it, I would recommend it to his consideration; it is but short, Quod non sit
permittendum turbis, Electionem eorum facere, qui sunt ad sacerdotium
provehendi; which shows, that the Peoples Right of electing Bishops or
Ministers, is not so general, as to have no Exception in Antiquity.

That great Roman Council, of two hundred seventy five Bishops, p. 43. p. 53.
this is confessed to be partly false if not all.
which Mr. B. mentions out of Crabb, is of so little Credit, as either not to
be taken notice of by the following Compilers, or else, as is most probable, is
set down elsewhere; for Crabb sets them down twice. It is uncertain, says Mr.
B. whether it was before or after the Nicene Council: for my part, I believe it
was neither before nor after, but just the same time with the other great Roman
Council, that follows next to it, of 284 Bishops, which is said to be held
after that, ibid.
Constantine was baptized by Sylvester: A hundred and twenty nine Bishops came
to this latter from the City of Rome, and not far from it: How big were
Bishoprics then says Mr. B.?

But had there been no more Bishops in Italy than were in this Council, they
would not have exceeded the number of Christians in Alexandria, when Strabo
described it. After this he finds fault with several things in this imaginary
Synod; first, Because men are cursed for being ignorant of the time of the
Moon; and then he congratulates the Makers and Improvers of the English
Liturgy, (he should have said the Almanack-makers) that they did not live in
those severe times: For alas! one year they mistook the time of Easter, and
this is one of the things for which two thousand Ministers are silenced, for
not declaring Assent, Consent, and Approbation of, yea, and the use of it, and
so to keep Easter at a wrong time. The silenced Ministers have little Reason to
thank him; or any body else, that gives this reason of their Separation; nor do
I believe they would be thought such strict Observers of Times and Festivals;
and it is strange, this should trouble their Consciences, who care no more for
Easter than they do for Christmas, but only that it falls upon a Sunday; and if
the old observance of Easter in this Country, upon the fourteenth day of the
Moon, had continued, we must have expected to have had as many Arguments
against the Feast of the Resurrection, as we have had against that of the
Nativity.

After this, he quarrels with several other Canons of this Council, and at last
ends in these Exclamations, O brave Pope and Clergy! O patient Council! that
subscribed to one man, and pretended to no Judgment. O humble Constantine! that
subscribed to all this, and said nothing, and a Woman's Subscription perfecteth
all; and O credulous Reader that believes this! Why then does he speak so
modestly, that the Fiction is but uncertain? Why does he make Advantage of the
number of these imaginary Bishops? Why does he find Fault, and aggravate, and
exclame; if after all, this is but a dream, and his Reader a Fool to believe it?

Before I close this Chapter, I must give an account of Mr. B's Favorite Sect,
the Novatians, whom he speaks so favorably of, as often as he has occasion to
mention them. The Original of their Schism he slubbers over, p. 35. after this
manner; And Novatus, and Novatian, as it is said, being against their taking (i.
e. the lapsed) into Communion at all, the Councils excommunicated them all as
Schismatics.

One would imagine by this account, that Novatus and Novatian had been thrust
out of the Church, and that their Schism was an Effect of their
Excommunication; but the contrary is notorious, Ep. 39.
for Cyprian charges Novatus with having first departed from the Unity of the
Church, and drawn away several Brethren from the Communion of their Bishop; and
the Reason of all this was, his Consciousness of those horrid Crimes he had
committed, which he foresaw would unavoidably bring the Censures of the Church
upon him, as soon as ever the Persecution was over. This was the tender
Conscience of the Author of the ancient Sect of the Puritans; Eusebius. l. 6. c.
43.
Novatian in like manner withdrew from the Communion of the Church, before he
was excommunicated; and the reason of his being renounced by the Church, was,
because he had first renounced their Communion: this Pharisaical Saint could
not vouchsafe to enter into the same Church with Sinners; and if it were not
purged of all Dross and Corruption, it must be unworthy of his Communion: yet
this severe Refiner, of all others, had least reason to exact this Purity,
whose Entrance into the Church, as well as the Ministry, was by extraordinary
Dispensation and Indulgence; he was baptized in his bed, in great danger of
Death; he neglected to be confirmed by the Bishop; he was made Priest against
Ecclesiastical Laws [that forbid Clinicks to have any share in the Government
of the Church] by the intercession of the Bishop, who promised the People, who
were generally against his Admission, that this Act should never be drawn into
Precedent. Being made Priest, he became no great credit to his Friends that
promoted him, for in time of Persecution, being desired to assist some of the
Brethren that were in distress, he renounced his Office, and Religion, saying,
that he would be Priest no longer, and had an inclination to betake himself to
another sort of Philosophy than the Christian: this is the man that was so
rigid and cruel, as not to receive the Repentance of such as had fallen in time
of Persecution, but, insinuating himself into the good opinion of the
Confessors, such as had endured the fiery Trial, he began to bring them into a
dislike of the Church, since it did receive those that had abjured that
Religion for which the Confessors had so gloriously suffered, and equalled them
to these holy Martyrs in all the Privileges of Communion. Some of these good
men were carried away with his dissimulation, to do countenance to the Schism,
and their Authority brought off several others from the Communion of the
Bishop; but these at last discovering the Wolf in Sheeps clothing, forsook the
Impostor, and returned to the Unity of the Church; he, in the mean time, uses
all diligence to widen the breach, and to make it perpetual, by setting up
himself for a Bishop, which then was thought necessary to the Being of a
Church, although he had sworn solemnly before never to take the Office upon
him. To compass his Design, he sends some of the subtilest of his Agents to
three plain ignorant Bishops, to invite them to Rome, under pretense that this
wretched Schism might be ended by their good Offices: These good men,
suspecting no trick, came; and, overcome with his good Entertainment, with too
much Wine and Persuasion, were forced at last to lay their hands on him, and
consecrate him a Bishop; and not thinking himself secure enough yet under this
Title, he makes every one of his Congregation engage himself by Oath never to
forsake him, or to return to Cornelius, and this in a manner so Solemn, that
the relation of it is sufficient to strike a horror on the mind of the Reader:
for when he administered the Sacrament, after Consecration, he made every one
that received, when the Bread was in his hand, to swear to him by the Body and
Blood of our Savior, that they would never forsake him, or return to their
former Bishop. These were the men, these were the means by which the Schism of
the Novatians was begun and carried on; a Schism no less execrable in the
Conduct of it, than infamous in its Authors, and, which is yet worse than all
this, most blasphemous in its Doctrines.

Mr. B. is too favorable in his representation of the Novatian Doctrine; for,
in the place above cited, he makes these two Observations in favor of them.
First, that Novatus did not deny the lapsed pardon of Sin with God, p. 39.
but only Church Communion. Secondly, That he did not deny this to other great
Sinners repenting, but only to those that lapsed to Idolatry, or denying
Christ; but the Novatians long after extended it to other heinous Crimes, as
upon supposed parity of Reason.

As to the first, lib. 4. c. 28.
Socrates does endeavor to excuse them, by saying, that those who had
sacrificed to Idols in times of Persecution, were to be exhorted to Repentance,
though not to be admitted to Communion, and as to the Pardon of their Sin, they
were to leave that to God, who alone has power to forgive Sins.

It must be confessed, that Socrates is an Historian of good credit, and, it
seems, well acquainted with the History and Doctrine of the Novatians, who
probably in his time might have grown more moderate in their Opinion concerning
Remission of Sin; but nothing can be more evident, than that the Authors of
that Schism denied not only the Communion of the Church, but God's Pardon, to
those who had sinned after Baptism; for this, all the Writers of that time, who
must be supposed to understand their Tenets, do unanimously affirm. Dionysius
Alexandrinus, who lived the same time with Novatian, and writ to him to advise
him to return, and be reconciled to the Church, and lay down that Honor of a
Bishop, which he pretended was forced upon him; this ancient Writer gives us
this account of their Doctrine: Eusebius. l. 7. c. 8.
Novatian, says he, I justly abhor, because he has divided the Church, and
drawn aside several Brethren into Impiety and Blasphemy, and brought in a most
wicked Doctrine concerning God, representing our most merciful Savior as cruel
and void of pity: Besides this, be evacuates holy Baptism, and overthrows the
Faith that was before him: And lastly, He banishes the Holy Ghost irrevocably
from those in whom there is great reason to hope that either it Remains still,
or may return to them again. So far Dionysius.

Cypr. ad Nov. Haer.
S. Cyprian argues, in several places, upon the same Supposition, and looks upon
their Severity, in not admitting Penitents to Communion, as the Effect of a
more cruel Doctrine, that God would never receive them into favor: idem ad
Anton. l. 4. ep. 2.
This was the main Argument against the lapsed, He that denies me before men,
him will I deny before my Father which is in Heaven: and consequently, they
denied them Communion, because they believed Christ would finally reject them.
This the same Father uses great diligence to explain, and confutes their
Inference from it by the Example of St. Peter, who denied his Master, and yet
was received into Grace. He does acknowledge indeed frequently, that Novatus
did exhort those to Repentance he refused to receive; but then he urges, that
nothing can be more impertinent, than to press men to repent, and yet to take
away from them all hopes of Pardon; and therefore, he notes this as a
pernicious Effect of their Doctrine, That it frighted men out of their
Religion, and made them turn Heathen, upon despair of Mercy, and cast away all
thoughts of Repentance, since it would not avail them to Salvation.

Eusebius, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 43.
who had seen all this and a great deal more relating to the Novatians, and in
all Probability, had read several of their Books, understood this to be their
Doctrine; for Novatus, says he, (so he calls Novatian) a Presbyter of the
Roman Church, puffed up with Insolence and Pride against the lapsed, as if
there remained to them no hopes of Salvation, although they should perform all
things that are requisite to a sincere Conversion, became Author of that Sect,
who arrogantly assume the name of Puritans.

These Witnesses are so express and full, that Socrates takes off nothing of
the force of their Testimony; for he says only this, That they remitted Sinners
to God, who was only able to forgive them, but they never give the least hope
that he will do so, or that any Salvation is to be attained out of the
Communion of the Church; so that this is to be looked upon rather a Shift, or a
put off, to divert Envy and Clamor, than to give any Comfort or Encouragement
to the penitent.

As to M. B's 2d Observation, That the Authors of this Heresy did not deny
Pardon to other great Sinners, but only to those that lapsed to Idolatry, or
denying Christ; and that it was their Followers long after, that extended it to
other heinous Crimes: Socrates expressly confutes it, in the place above cited;
where, speaking of Novatian's Letters to several Churches upon the occasion of
his Schism, adds, That several were offended at the Severity of that Rule, that
admitted none to Communion who had sinned mortally after Baptism. The word
there indeed, is Sinned unto Death, but that he did not understand that
particular one of Apostasy by it, appears by what follows in the same Chapter;
That some took part with Novatian, others with Cornelius, according to their
several Inclinations and Course of Life; the looser and more licentious sort,
favoring the most indulgent Discipline, the other of more austere Lives,
inclining most to the Novatian Severity; which implies, that all Sins in the
Opinion of these Schismatics were equally irremissable: And a little before,
in the same Chapter, Novatian confesses as much, where he remits the forgiving
not only of this Sin of Apostasy, but all Sins in general to God alone; which
is fuller confirmed by St. Ambrose, l. ^. de Poe^it. c. 1.
who charges them with the Stoical Opinion that all Sins are equal.

Now let us see whether the Council of Eliberis d^es favor this Doctrine, and
whether Mr. B. had any reason to admire how that Council should be received as
Orthodox, and yet the Novatians be accounted Heretics. p. 39.
He notes in his Margin, that Abbaspinaeus has learnedly made the best of it;
so has Mendoza, in his large Defense of this Council, who vindicates this Canon
by great numbers of Instances of the same nature in other Councils. He must be
a great Stranger to the ancient Discipline of the Church, that has not heard of
Penitents not being received into full Communion at the hour of Death: but this
is far enough from being Novatianism: for such, although they were not received
into the Lord's Supper, or within the Congregation, were yet, upon their
Repentance, received into the Order of Penitents; who, though they were not
admitted into all the Privileges and Familiarity of the Communion, yet they
were received into the Charity and Unity of the Church; they had the Benefit of
the Churches Prayers, and at last were reconciled by Imposition of hands,
though not by the receiving of the Sacrament, which was the more usual way.

We do not find that this Sect was much more mortified than it is Neighbors,
unless it were in Phrygia, where Socrates says, In the place last cited. l. 1.
de paenit.
The People were naturally averse to Pleasures. But at Constantinople, their
Bishop Sisinnius was so gay and luxurious, as to give Offense to the Orthodox
Party: and Saint Ambrose objects the same thing to the whole Sect. Lastly, they
were no less Enemies to Peace, than they were to Truth, though Mr. B. commends
their Moderation in one Instance; for the Catholics in time of common
Persecution, frequented their Churches, and would have made up the old Breach,
Socr. l. 2. c. 38.
but the Novatians would not comply, but kept to their ancient rule of
Separation, and refused to unite.

(...).
Doctor Forbes intended a particular History of the Novatians, to show the
Nature and Method of Schism: it is Pity that great man did not live to perform
what he designed. Steph. Keuchelius writ a Book of the Novatian Heresy (so he
makes it) Strasburg 1651. Quarto.

CHAP. III.
Of the Council of Nice, and some that followed it.

THE great Council of Nice gives Title to Mr. B's third Chapter; Chapter Hist. p.
45. 1.
He cannot deny, but the Controversy about which it was called, was of great
Moment, and that it was brought to a happy end, but lessens, as much as he can,
the Credit of the Bishops, and ascribes very little to their Prudence and
Judgment. I do not envy Constantine the Reputation of having healed the
Differences of the Church, and there is no doubt, but he contributed much to
the stilling that Controversy for a while; yet it seems he did not judge the
Bishops and Councils to be of so little use as Mr. B. would represent, but was
at great Pains and Expense to bring an extraordinary number of them together,
and he knew no other way of composing Differences about Religion, than by
getting a Consultation of the most learned and eminent of those that had the
Direction of the Church. Some of these indeed had their Grievances to
represent, and complaints against each other; but the Modesty of Constantine
put an end to their Quarrels and Disputes, burning all their Accusations
without reading them. It is no wonder, if in so great a number assembled from
all the Provinces of the Roman World, (considering their great Dissentions
about Religion) that there should be some that might retain the Sense of
Injuries received, and complain of such as had done them wrong; but these were
but few, and the matter soon accommodated.

Mr. B. adds, That Eusebius Nicomed. and Arrius were brought but to counterfeit
Repentance, 1.
which satisfied Constantine, though not Athanasius; who, refusing to receive
Arrius into Communion upon Constantine's Request, caused much Calamity
afterward.

This is an oblique Accusation of that great Champion of the Christian Faith,
and seems to charge him with all the Calamities which that unhappy Controversy
brought upon the Church: but how justly, we will refer to Mr. B's own Words,
who calls Arrius's Recantation, A counterfeit Repentance, and Consent to the
Nicene Faith. If Athanasius saw through this Dissimulation, why is he yet
blamed for not admitting him into the Church, before he had sincerely corrected
that Fault for which he was justly cast out? Socr. l. 1. c. 27.
And it was no hard matter to discern the Insincerity of Arrius's Confession,
since he dissembles the very point in Question, and rejects the Terms in which
the Council had expressed it self: If therefore the good Emperor were imposed
upon by a counterfeit Repentance, and would restore that Incendiary to
Opportunities of doing Mischief, Athanasius is not to be blamed, who wisely
foresaw what Mischiefs were like to follow, upon the Reception of that
Heretic. Compliance with Hypocrites, is no likely means to reclaim them; and
there is a sort of Mercy that is more cruel, than Severity: if those few that
dissented from the Determination of that Council, had not been received again
without giving greater security of their Faith and Moderation, it might perhaps
have ended that fatal Controversy.

In the next place, 2.
Mr. B. passes to the case of the Meletians, and thinks it useful (for our
warning in these times) to recite the sum of the Story out of Epiphanius.

The short of it is this, Epiph. Haer. Melet.
Peter Bishop of Alexandria, and Meletus Bishop of Lycopolis, being
Fellow Prisoners for the same Faith, disagreed unhappily about the old
Question, Whether those that denied the Faith in time of Persecution, were to
be received upon their Repentance? Epiph.
Peter was for Indulgence, Meletius for Severity. In Conclusion, they divided
Congregations in the Prison, Peter suffered Martyrdom, but the Schism survived
him, and the Churches of Egypt were upon this occasion, divided into Parties;
Meletius is reconciled to the Successor of Peter, and lives peaceably with him
in Alexandria, content with the Title of a Bishop, but without any exercise of
his Function. At last, the Spirit of Divsion returned upon him again, and he
made new Ordinations, and set Church against Church, and Bishop against Bishop;
His Followers after his Death, joined with the Arrians, against Alexander
Bishop of Alexandria, and became a great Support to that Heresy, p. 46.
Just as if the Nonconformists at this time, says Mr. B. should seek, by the
favor of the Papists, to be delivered from the silencing and destroying
Prelates, upon Condition of common Liberty; the cases are not much unlike.

I do not desire to improve this Comparison to the Reproach of the
Non-conformists, as he endeavors to render Bishops odious, under the Name of
Tyrants; yet I wish they would seriously consider, what Support their
Separation has been to that Faction, they above all men exclame against. They
have made the Breach, and the Enemy has lodged, and fortified himself in it,
and yet notwithstanding the common danger that threatens all, still choose to
pursue their little Scruples and great Animosities, to the evident hazard of
the Reformed Religion, rather than to close with the Church, and to make up the
Breaches of our City, which will be impregnable, when it is at Unity in it
self. But to return to our Story of the Meletians. Mr. B. confesses, page 48.
That Baronius and Petavius say that Epiphanius is deceived in all this History,
and makes the case of the Meletians, better than it was, and that some Meletian
Knave beguiled him. He answers, 1. They give us no Proof of any such Knaves
beguiling him at all. 2. That he who was so apt to overdoe, in suspecting and
aggravating Heresies ( as in Origin and Chrysostom 's Case) was not likely to
make the case here so much better than it was. 3. And how much nearer was
Epiphanius in Time and Place, than Baronius and Petavius? And how easy was it
then for him to have true Notice of such public things? 4. And if they make
Epiphanius so fallacious in such a Story as this, so near him, what a shake
does it give to the Credit of his copious History of the many other Heresies,
which he had less opportunity to know, and consequently, to the Credit of much
of Church History?

Mr. B. has an easy way of confuting men's Opinions, without confuting their
Reasons: If he had but mentioned any of their Arguments, he might have spared
the Labor of his own. As to his first Reason against them, they do not stand
much upon it, whether a Meletian Knave beguiled Epiphanius or no, they prove
him to be deceived, and it is likelier he should be deceived by a Meletian
Knave, than any Body else. As to the second; No body can think he designed to
excuse the Meletians, by that Story which he laid down as he found it. As to
the third, it would have some weight, if Baronius and Petavius contradicted
this out of their own Heads, without any Authority ancienter than Epiphanius.
Is not Athanasius as credible a Witness, who lived in those times, and was
concerned in some of those Actions that are related by Epiphanius; his Relation
contradicts this. Who then is to be believed, Epiphanius, who writ a long time
after, Athanas. Apol. 2.
or Athanasius, who was witness of most of these things, and must needs have
heard of that Quarrel in the Prison, if any such thing had been? But he gives
us this account; which, how it can consist with Epiphanius's, let Mr. B. judge:
Peter, says he, was made Bishop with us before, and suffered Martyrdom under
the Persecution of Dioclesian; he deposed, in a Synod of Bishops, Meletius an
Egyptian Bishop, convict of many Crimes, and in particular, that he had
sacrificed to Idols; he neither appealed to any other Synod, nor took care to
purge himself before Peter's Successors in Alexandria, but made a Schism; so
that his Followers now instead of Christians, are called Meletians; then he
began to asperse and calumniate the Bishops, and Peter in the first place, then
his Successor Achillas, and after him Alexander, and that with great cunning,
borrowing the Instance of Absalon, to render the Fact of his Deposition more
invidious, and to revenge himself by calumniating the innocent. What shall we
now believe? That Meletius who was convict of sacrificing to Idols himself,
should be so severe against others that had fallen into the same Sin? or how
should he be imprisoned for his Religion that had sacrificed to Idols? This,
and the Story of that dividing Mantle, can no more agree, than Peter and
Meletius could in the Prison, according to Epiphanius his Relation. Socrates
and Sozomen have the same Story with Athanasius, and not one word of this
Partition Mantle. In short, is Peter himself to be believed against Epiphanius?
He is represented there as one too indulgent to Sinners, but his Canons are the
severest of any that I have seen, and are downright Novatianism in Mr. B's
Opinion: He appoints very long Penance, for Sins not very heinous; and for
those that fall away under Persecution, Vid. Petr. Alex. Can. ap. Bib. Patr.
apud. Synodic. Bever.
though their Temptations be never so great, and the Terrors of Death never so
forcible, yet he allows them but just Encouragement enough to hope for a Pardon
upon their sincere Repentance; but for such as prevent the danger, and offer
themselves to Sacrifice before the Officers hale them to the Temple, Petr.
Alex. Can. 4. and Argument. Canon.
such were never to be admitted to full Communion, no not at the hour of Death.
Is any man like to find fault with this Bishop for being too indulgent? Is this
any great Encouragement to Apostates? It would be strange after all this, that
men should depart from his Communion, for being too much prostituted to the
Betrayers of Religion: If all this does not satisfy Mr. B. but that he will
still believe those holy Martyrs, as unmortified in Prison, as the Priests and
Jesuits heretofore were at Wisbich, let him enjoy his Fancy, and contempt of
ancient Bishops, and be bound to believe all the Stories in Epiphanius.

Mr. B. confesses, that Epiphanius seems not to be very accurate in his
Disputes nor his Narratives; why then does he maintain him here against the
Authority of Athanasius, and all Sense and Reason? He does acknowledge some
Passages in this History to be mistaken; as that the Meletians joined with the
Arrians before the Death of Alexander; and in his Instance of the time of
Arrius's death, placing it before the Council of Nice. Besides these, there are
other Mistakes no less gross, which Mr. B. swallows down as true History; as
first, that Constantine the Great banished Athanasius into Italy, where he
remained twelve or fourteen years, till after the Death of Constantine. If
Athanasius himself be to be believed, or Socrates out of him, Constantine
banished him into Gallia, and Treves was the place where he abode; nor is there
any Likelihood that he saw Italy during his first Banishment. But the account
of the time of it, Eusebius. de Vit. Constant.
for twelve or fourteen years, is intolerable; for the Council of Tire was not
assembled till the thirtieth year of Constantine, Epist. Praef. Mar^ot.
Constantius and Albinus being Consuls; which agrees with the three hundred
thirty fifth year of our Savior, according to Baronius's Computation;
Athanasius his Banishment is placed the year after, Constantine dies the year
ensuing, and presently after his death, Athanasius is recalled. Baronius places
his return in the year 338, but Valesius proves, from the style of Constantine
junior's Letter, in the behalf of Athanasius, who was then but Caesar, that
Athanasius returned the very same year that Constantine dyed: So that the
twelve or fourteen years do hardly amount to so many Months; which, I believe,
was the true writing of Epiphanius, and that Years are put in, instead of
Months, by the mistake of the Copies. Theodoret computes his Banishment to be
two whole Years, and Baronius follows him. There are several other things in
the same Author no less absurd, as that Athanasius is charged with the murder
of Arsenius, in Constantine's time; that Eusebius baptized Valens the Emperor,
though Eusebius was dead many years before Valens came to the Empire; that
Constantine was the Son of Valerian; that George was put into Athanasius's
place in the time of his first Banishment; that Achillas succeeded Alexanaer in
the Sea of Alexandria, Dalle, l. 4. de Imagine. p. 394. Epiphanius plane aliter
Schisma Meletianum narrat, quam rei veritas poscebat.
and many other such Oversights in History; and one would wonder so great a man
as Epiphanius could be guilty of, or that any one that pretends to
Church History, should follow him in those gross mistakes, which they may
correct out of any Historian that does but make mention of the same things and
Times.

Mr. B. strangely confounds Gregory and George, the Arrian Bishops of
Alexandria; for page 47 he tells us, That when Constans had compelled his
Brother Constantius to restore him (Athanasius) he was again banished; For
George, that had been made Bishop by the Arrians (and by Constantius) was
killed by the Heathen People in Julian's time, and his Corpse burnt, and the
ashes scattered into the Wind, which increased the suspicion of Tyranny against
Athanasius.

I hope George's murder in Julian's time, did not bring Athanasius into
suspicion of Tyranny under Constantius. But page 62. Sect. 45. this George is
called Gregory; Gregory the Bishop, being, as is aforesaid, murdered by the
Heathen, and burnt to ashes.] We no where read, that this Gregory was either
murdered or burned, but that he was turned out of the Sea of Alexandria,
because he was odious to all, and to the Arrians themselves, and that George,
Socr. l. 2. c. 14.
who was afterward murdered, was put in his place. Where he says, Constans
compelled his Brother Constantius to restore Athanasius, he mistakes Constans
for his Brother Constantine, who was the Author of Athanasius his first
restoration: for it was long after his first banishment, and after the Council
of Sardica, that Constans threatened his Brother with War, if he did not restore
Athanasius and Paul into their Churches.

Page 48.. 4. He gives an account of the Heresy of Arrius, and, I think,
heartily condemns him, if these words be his own, He that denies the Deity of
Christ, denies his Essence, and he that denies his Essence, denies Christ, and
is no Christian. Yet he excuses this Doctrine in comparison of Socinianism, and
that very justly. At last, after a short sum of the Arrian Doctrine, he
concludes, this was the dangerous Heresy of Arrius. I must confess, he is so
much given to Figures, that I cannot tell whether he be in earnest here, or
speaks only Ironically; but, sure I am, that what he says in the next
Paragraph, is very much to the disadvantage of the Doctrine of the Trinity:
And, to say truth, Petavius has done it no great kindness by his Defense of it.
It Is true, that some of the Fathers, before the Nicene Council, seemed to speak
sometimes in favor of that Doctrine, which was afterward taken up by the
Arrians; but that they did cadem sentire, is more than ought to be granted.
Before some Controversies have been started, men have spoke less warily, whom,
afterward, Disputation has brought to be more Cautious in their Expressions.
Dalle de usu Patr;
Dalle makes the Ancient Fathers to be of little Use in the Controversies
between us and the Papists, because (though they may seem to favor sometimes
one side, sometimes another, yet) they speak loosly, and without any regard to
our Controversies, which were not then in being; Several Passages extolling
Communion with the Bishop of Rome, were little intended to set him up for an
infallible Judge; and others, speaking with great Veneration of the Eucharist,
may seem to favor Transubstantiation, etc. If any such Opinion had then been
in the Church, their words, in probability, had been more decisive. It is a
commendable Charity of Mr. B. to say, that it is enough to believe those
Fathers to be saved, p. 49.
though we may not believe them to be without Error. Though that Error, by
his confession, is very dangerous, as implying a denial of Christ; yet, he
adds, that God is merciful, and requires not knowledge of all alike. ibid.
But, for my part, I believe they do not stand in need of that Charity: Some of
them spoke loosely, in compliance with a Platonic Notion of the Trinity, not
foreseeing what Consequences might be drawn from their Expressions, or how
narrowly they should come afterward to be examined. Certain it is, that the
Fathers that followed the Nicene Council, Athan. ad Afros. Hist. Tripart. l. 2.
c. 7. Socr. l. 5. c. 10. and Sozom. l. 7. c. 12.
took all the Ecclesiastical Writers before their time to be of their Opinion;
and Sisinnius, the Novatian Reader, afterward Bishop, is said to have
confounded all the Arrian Disputants, by putting the matter to this issue,
Whether they would stand to the Judgment of the Ancient Fathers, in the
Interpretation of such places of Scripture as were controverted between them.
Eusebius, no Enemy to the Arrians, Ep. ad Caesar. Hist. Tripart. l. 2.
acknowledges (...) to be used by some Ecclesiastical Writers, long before the
Council of Nice: the Creed of the Council of Antioch against Paulus
Samosatenus, has it, Vid. Con^. Antioch.
and several other things, that show how much the Doctrine of the Church at
that time differed from that of the Arrians. It would be a great Service to the
Truth, that seems now to labor under some Prejudice, if some learned hand
would take the Pains to show (which I believe is not impossible) how Petavius
has betrayed the constant Tradition of this Doctrine, to establish it by the
Authority of the Church, and relieve the Memories of those holy Martyrs that he
leaves charged with the Suspicion of blasphemous Opinions concerning our
Savior.

Having done with the Nicene Council, p. 50.. 7.
and all that related to it, Mr. B. thinks it worth his labor to add the Sum
of the History of the Audians out of Epiphanius. Epiph. Haeres. Audian.
That the World may percieve what Spirit the hereticating Prelates were then
of, and how some, called Heretics, were made such, or defamed as such, and who
they were that did divide the Churches, and break their Peace; The Author of
this Sect was Audius, a man severe in his Life, and sound in his Principles,
but one that took great Liberty of Speech, and reproved sharply, whatsoever he
found amiss, though it were in the Bishops; they, in Revenge, persecuted him,
and turned him out of the Church. He is made Bishop of his own Sect, and so
exasperated, as to abhor all Communion with the Bishops of the Catholic
Church. If all things were as Epiphanius represents them, Audius had very hard
Measure: but it seems, from Epiphanius his own account, that there was not
wanting just occasion against him; for he held, that God had Humane Shape; a
Doctrine, if obstinately maintained (and such bold men are not easily
reclaimed) altogether intolerable: But I am afraid Epiphanius had this Story
from as bad hands as that of the Meletians; for, this Schism happening in a
remote part of the World, and being scattered afterward into several Parts, it
is likely, that some Audian might impose upon him; l 4. Haeret. ^ah.
For it looks like the Story of one party: and the more likely, because
Theodoret, a man that lived in that Country, where they first sprung, gives an
infamous Character of them, That they held some of the Doctrines of the
Manichees, That God was not the Author of Fire and Darkness, that they
exercised Usury, that they cohabited with Women, without Marriage, that they
were great Hypocrites, of a proud, Pharisaical Spirit, that cried, Touch me
not, for I am holier than thou. If Audius were like his Followers, I know
nothing so like him and them, as Labady and his Disciples: See Labady's Epist.
against Reformation.
This was a man very free in his Reproofs too, he spoke sharply against the
Vices of the Clergy where he lived, though there were no Bishops amongst them;
and it may be, one of his Followers may be able to persuade a learned man in
Constantinople, that he was banished only for his Liberty of Reprehension, and
out of Envy to his Virtue.

Page 52. Section 14. we have several shrewd Remarks upon some Canons of the
Council of Nice; As first, That no Patriarchs are named there; Secondly, That
they nullify the Ordination of scandalous and incapable men.

Can. 9.10. Which will justify Pope Nicholas, forbidding any to take the Mass
of a fornicating Priest. This fornicating Priest of Pope Nicholas, is no other
than a married one; and whatsoever will justify that Prohibition, cannot but
condemn Mr. B. who is himself married. As for deposing scandalous Ministers,
there is none but wishes it, but not in the manner he seems to insinuate by the
Sentence of the people, but by their lawful Superiors, which these two Canons
do suppose. 3. That Rural Bishops were then in Use, and allowed by the Council.
Can. 8. And what can he infer from hence? Not surely, That every Country Parish
had a Bishop, but that, such Cities as had larger Territories belonging to
them, had Ecclesiastical Visitors under the City-Bishop, which were called
Chorepiscopi; Can. 57. Conc. Laodic.
Whether they were Bishops indeed, or Priests, with a delegated Episcopal
Power, is not agreed amongst Learned men: Sure it is, that they had this
Obligation common to them with other Presbyters, not to do any thing of Moment
without the Advice and Approbation of the Bishop. Conc. Carthag. 4.
4. That no Bishop was to remove from one Church to another: yet some other
Councils allow this Translation, and Gelasius understands it only of such, as
out of Covetousness or Ambition, and by indirect means, shall endeavor to
translate themselves; and the Practice of the Church was never very conformable
to this Canon, the most eminent Bishops in the World, Socr. l. 7. c. 36.
having transgres'd it. 5. The Arabic Canons; the fourth, Si p^pulo placebit,
is a Condition of every Bishops Election: Newer Translations render this
Concurrence of the People, Cum consensu Pepuli, Populo consersum praevente;
which implies little more, than that the Bishop ought to be such, as the People
should have nothing material to object against; and not, that they were to
please themselves, and to indulge their Fancies in the Election of their
Bishops, for that did belong to the Clergy, Vid. lo^. ap. Synod. B^^^r. ^0.
and particularly, to the Metropolitan; as the ^^^th Arabic Canon does
expressly inform us. 6. The fifth Arabic Canon, in case of Discord among the
People, who shall be their Bishop or Priest, refers it to the People, to
consider which is most blameless; and no Bishop or Priest must be taken into
another place, if the former was blameless; so that if Pastors be wrongfully
cast out, the People must not forsake them, nor receive the obtruded. Nothing
can be more disingenuous than this Dealing: The design of that Canon is, that
there should be but one Bishop in every City; but if the People disagree, and
one party stand up for one, and another for another, Vid. loc.
they ought to consider the Justice of the Cause, and he that is already
Bishop, ought to continue so, if they have nothing material to lay to his
Charge, and that be not evidently proved: so we see plainly, that this
Disagreement is only between the People, who have no Power to depart from the
rightful Bishop, and factiously to set up another against him; but that the
People should stand by their Pastor when he is canonically ejected by his
Superiors assembled in Synod, is very far from being any meaning of this
Canon, though Mr. B. would force it to that purpose: Besides all this, though
any of these Arabic Canons should directly favor, either his Notion of a
Church, or the cause of Dissenters, or disallow the Practice of our Church in
any thing they scruple: it would give them but very small Relief, since there
is no Church, and much less ours that ever received them, nor were they ever
heard of, till the last Age. 7. Those ordained by Meletius, were to be received
into the Ministry where others dyed, if by the Suffrage of the People, they
were judged fit; and the Bishop of Alexandria designed them. Whither this
tends, is not hard to conjecture, but it would spoil the Drift, if one should
observe maliciously, First, That these Meletians were Episcopally ordained.
Secondly, That they were received into the Ministry, upon the Supposal of their
Submission to the Canons and Orders of the Church. Thirdly, That in that same
place, Sozomen declares in the Name of the Council, that it is not lawful for
the People to elect whom they please.

Page 53. l. 1. c. 24. (...) Cir. Ath. Ep. ad Strap.
The Council of Gangrae, he has nothing to object against; that of Tire is
manifestly Arrian, and abhorred by the Catholic Church; that of Jerusalem is
of the the same Stamp; but here Mr. B. goes along with the common Mistake, that
Arrius was here received into Communion, whereas Athanasius affirms him to have
died out of the Communion of the Church: And it is plain, that comparing
Socrates, Sozomen, and Athanasius, Arrius, the Author of that Heresy was dead
before the Council of Jerusalem; and it is observable, that Athanasius, in his
account of that Council, every where expresses himself thus, Ep. Synod. Con.
Hiero^ ap. Athan. l. de Synod.
That (...), and (...), were there received into Communion. See Vales, his
Annot. Ecclesiast. in Socrat. and Sozom.

The next, of any Note, p. 54. 21.
is the Council of Antioch, of near a hundred Bishops, (of which, thirty six
were Arrians) the most Orthodox, and the holy James of Nisybis, one, yet they
deposed Athanasius, and the Arrians (it is like by the Emperor's Favor)
carried it: Thus far Mr. B. Many have wondered, how the major part of this
Council, being Orthodox, Athanasius should be condemned by it; Mr. B. who does
not seem much to favor him, because he was not kind to the Nonconformist
Meletians, insinuates a base compliance of these Orthodox Bishops, with the
Emperors Inclination; a moderate man, and always for the most charitable
Construction. However, Pope Julius's Letter is express, that he was condemned
but by thirty six Bishops, whether they were Arrians or no, he does not say:
Athanasius reckons ninety, Hilary ninety seven, Sozomon ninety nine; and be
they never so many, it seems, the lesser number carried it; and if the Emperor
made that a Law, the Orthodox Dissenters ought to be absolved. Certain it is,
that this Council lay under the Imputation of Arrianisin, for when it was
objected to Chrysostom, that he resumed his Place, after that he had been
ejected, without the Authority of a Synod to restore him, which the Canons of
this Council did require; his Defense was, that this was not a Canon of the
Church, but of the Arrians. Sozomen makes them all Arrians. The Faction of
Eusebius, (says he) with several others that favored that Opinion, in all,
ninety seven Bishops, assembled at Antioch, from several places, under Color
of consecrating a Church; but indeed, as the Event proved, to abrogate the
Decrees of the Nicene Council: Athanasius rejects them, as sworn Enemies to him
and the Faith, so that there is no likelihood that the majority was Orthodox,
since Constantius and Eusebius had the contriving of this Synod, and by it is
means, the Ruin of Athanasius. But how came this Opinion of thirty six only,
being Arrians, and yet carrying the Cause? Some say, that they acted secretly,
and did not admit the Orthodox to vote with them; for so the Condemnation of
Athanasius past at Tire; or that they might be imposed upon by their specious
Pretense of disowning Arrius; but because there is no account of any Difference
between the Arrians and Orthodox in this case, no Protestation entered, (nay,
if any such thing had been, it cannot be imagined, but that Sozomen must have
mentioned it, where he speaks of the Bishop of Jerusalem, absenting himself on
purpose, lest he should be drawn in a second time, to subscribe to the
Condemnation of Athanasius,) we must conclude. That these were all of a Party,
and packed together upon that design. And perhaps, the reading of thirty six in
Julius's Epistle, may be a mistake of Transcribers, it being easy to mistake
the Greek figure of 90 for 30, unless we shall judge the contrary to be the
true Reading; for the two ancient Latin Translations of Dionysius Exiguus, and
Isidorus Mercator, conclude, consenserunt and subscripserunt 30 Episcopi, and
the Greek Synodical Epistle wants but one of just thirty Subscriptions. Sozomen
mentions another Synod at Antioch, of just thirty Bishops, and confounds the
Acts of it with those of this first; but whether it be his mistake, or the old
Translators, that might confound the second with the first, I am not able to
determine, and the matter is too confused to be extricated here.

Though the Authority of this Council was not great, yet it seems the Canons of
it were so wisely suited to the condition of a distracted Church, and to the
depressing of Schism, that they were adopted afterward by General Councils.
Mr. B. mentions several, that are most of them levelled against Dissenters, and
yet they are such, as the Dissenters themselves, that own any Discipline,
cannot find fault with, and when they are in any Power, find necessary to
observe. The fifth forbids any Priest or Deacons to gather Churches or
Assemblies against the Bishop's will; and if any did, and did not desist upon
admonition, he was to be deposed; and if he went on, to be oppressed by the
exterior Power, as seditious. The word oppressed, it seems, is Emphatical; and
has indeed an old Version to favor it; but what may be Oppression, in his
sense, with the Council was Legal Punishment; and the Greek word it uses
signifies not so much the Penalty, as the End for which it was to be inflicted,
the reduction of Schismatics. (...).
And here Mr. B. ends very angrily, and leaves his sting behind him, in this
sharp Expression, [this is their strength.] There are many as intelligent men
as Mr. B. that are of Opinion, that these [they] have strength of Reason and
Argument on their side, as well as of Power; but there are those that have a
strength that is invincible by any Reason, and that is Perverseness: and that
is the only strength of some that I will not name.

After this, he spares his Gall, for about a dozen times, though not without
one small sally, till he meets with the Council of Sardica, which cleared
Athanasius, p. 55. 28.
Marcellus, and others. Austin and many others, says he, August. Ep. 163. ad
Eleus. Where he rejects it, because Athanasius and Julius were condemned by it.
reject this Council. Surely, not because it cleared these men; for all the
Orthodox World look upon their Cause and that of Religion, as so nearly joined,
that they could not desert the one, without betraying the other: Besides, St.
Austin does not reject this Council, for he had never seen the Acts of it, but
that of Philippo-polis, as appears by his Exceptions against it, that it was
carried on by the Arrians.

I marvel that Mr. B. speaking of the Arrian Synod at Philippo-polis, p. 56. 29.
would seem to give so much credit to the Calumnies those Heretics fastened
upon Athanasius, and other good Bishops, as to be staggered with their
Accusation. Athanasius had already detected so many Subornations against
himself, that it ought not to astonish any to hear the same men, or their
disciples, laid new and incredible Crimes to his charge, no more than the
Centuries of Scandalous Ministers, or the lying wonders of the anni mirabiles,
ought to stagger any man in his Opinion of the Conformists of the Church of
England.

In the next Paragraph,. 30.
we have a soft, kind character of the Circumcelliones, who pass only for
Violent Reformers, taking from the Rich, what, they thought, they had wronged
any of, and righting the injured, and unjustly doing Justice. We need not
despair, after this excusing of the most barbarous and desperate Villains that
ever defamed Christianity, by assuming the Title; but that Mr. B. in a great
fit of Charity and Moderation, may another time give us an Apology for John of
Leyden, or of Venner, and his desperado Saints.

The rest of the Councils, to the end of this Chapter, must be confessed not to
be much to the Honor of the Church; yet the evil Effects and Consequences of
them, are rather to be charged upon the Arrian Emperor than the Bishops. This
was the time of the Arrian Inquisition, and this was the miserable choice, to
subscribe, or to suffer Imprisonment, and scourging, and Banishment, and
Sequestration; and many good men preserved Faith and a good Conscience, against
all this Violence and Compulsion, many fell in the day of Trial, and subscribed
against their own Judgment; yet such are rather to be pitied than insulted on,
considering we have all the same common Infirmities, and without extraordinary
Assistance, are not sufficient to encounter all the Terrors that a resolved
Enemy can make use of to affright us; and in this case, it is evident, that it
was neither the Bishop, nor the Christian, but the Man, and the infirmity of
Humane Nature, was to be charged with these Compliances.

The account which Hillary gives of those times is very sad, but yet, such as
shows, rather the Calamity than the fault of the Bishops, every one, as in time
of an irresistible Conflagration, using his best, though ineffectual Endeavor,
to quench the Flames. This made every one a Projector, and devise new Forms of
Creeds, in hopes at last, that some one or other, might be received by all the
differing Parties. It is an easy thing to mock at the Dissentions or
Differences of the Church, but it is not an easy matter to heal them; and
Reconcilers themselves are at last engaged in the Dispute they would put an end
to. If Mr. B. despises their Unskilfulness, that they did not understand,
either the Cure of Church-Divisions, or the true and only Terms of Christian
Concord, it was their Unhappiness, not to have so discerning a Spirit as his;
and yet, for all his Projects and Methods, we do not find any great Success of
his Undertakings; for neither is he himself free from Contentions, and those
very bitter, in which he is, and has been engaged, against almost all sorts and
Sects of me^^; and some have judged him so much a Stranger to Peace, as to need
a Moderator to stand between the Contradictions of his own Books.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Council of Constantinople.

IT was a malicious Suggestion of the Devil against Job, when he had nothing to
lay to his Charge, to call his Integrity in Question, Does Job serve God for
naught? And Mr. B. though he elsewhere abhors Diabolisme, yet here, condescends
to the odious Arts of the Accuser of the Brethren, and endeavors to disparage
the Faith and Orthodoxness of the Bishops of the West, by insinuating, that it
was but their Compliance with good Emperors: The Bishops (says he) much
followed the Emperors Will: p. 65. 1.
and if the Faith of Constantine Senior and Junior, Constans, Valentinian, had
not failed, the General Councils at Milan and Ariminum, tell us how failing the
Bishops Faith was like to be. What can there be more unchristian, than this
Suggestion? Why could not the Bishops Faith be as sincere and constant as the
Emperors? Nay, that these Emperors did continue Orthodox, must be in great
Measure ascribed to the Diligence of the Bishops, that had any Influence upon
them. But it seems, the Emperors drew Councils on their part, what side soever
they took; And what wonder, since they could call whom they pleased, and pack
their Councils, disable those that were not for their Turn, turn honest men out
of their Bishoprics, with a high hand, and put into their places, such as were
fittest for their purpose. By the same means, England became Presbyterian, as
the World became Arrian, and yet I hope Mr. B. will not charge the Bishops with
too much Compliance in that Particular: Nay, 2.
in the very next Paragraph, Mr. B. does the Bishops Right again, and shows,
without thinking of doing them any Justice, how they were not so complying as
he represented them before; for he tells us, That eighty were burned by Valens
in one Ship, and in all the East, he Deposed, Abused, Murdered many that would
not forsake the Nicene Creed; and then descends to more Particulars of the
Arrian Persecution. And now the Reader may cease to wonder, if he find numerous
Councils in so short a time, contradicting one the other; since good Bishops
are banished, deposed, or murdered, and Heretics forced upon their Churches.
Of this, tho we have not the Particulars of the numbers turned out in the East,
yet we may imagine it, Notitia Affr. una cum Facundo Editae a Sirmondo. Though
Mr. B. makes them 660.
by comparing the Arrian Visitation of Africa, where there were but four
hundred sixty six Bishops in all, and I believe the Schismatics come into the
number, who might abhor Arrianism, no less than the Catholics; and then
Churches must be of greater Extent even in Africa than Mr. B. fancies them: all
these were called before King Hunnericus, to give an account of their Faith, of
whom but eighty eight fell away, and three hundred seventy eight persever'd: It
seems, the majority of Bishops was not then so complying, as they are
injuriously represented in this History.

St. Basil, in the Descriptions he makes of the lamentable Estate of the
Eastern Churches, does not complain of the Temporizing, and Compliance of the
Bishops, but of the hard measure they received, and how they were generally
turned out by the Arrians. Thus that excellent Bishop complains to his Brethren
of the West, Basil. Ep. 70.
The Shepherds are driven away, that the Flocks might be dissipated. And a
little farther, There is no Criminal condemned without some Evidence, but
Orthodox Bishops are punished without any proof at all; some of them never saw
their Accusers, and were never brought to any Bar, nor were ever indicted of
any Misdemeanour; but secretly, in the Stilness of the Night, were hurried away
into Banishment, and died with the Hardships of the Wilderness; and though we
should be silent, yet the World cannot be ignorant of the Banishment of the
Priests and Deacons, and of the Havoc that is made of the whole Clergy. And in
another Place. Ep. 220.
Among all the Dioceses of the Bishops those that are the most eminent
Assertors of the Faith, are driven out of their Country, by Calumnies and false
Accusations, and others brought in who lead Captive the Souls of the ignorant.

And if you would know what persons they were that made up the Arrian Councils,
the same Author tells you, they were such as they put into the places of those
good men that were turned out; Men that would not fail to serve them, Basil.
Ep. 69.
(the Arrians that put them in) to the Destruction of the true Faith, and were
the Slaves and Instruments of those that promoted them in their Revenge upon
the Orthodox Doctrine. And now judge, whether it was the Compliance of the
Bishops, or the Violence of the Heretics, that made so great and sudden Change
in the Church, and in the Doctrines of Councils.

In reckoning up the principal things done in the Council of Constantinople, 4.
p. 66.
he makes the Deposition of Gregory Naz. to be one against all History, and
against himself in the next page, where he says, That Gregory, seeing the
Resolutions, and offended with the furious Carriage of the Bishops in the
Council, resigneth to the Emperor, and departs: Let them be resolved upon
casting him out as much as they will, yet it was not done, only they put
another into his place, which was made vacant by his voluntary Resignation.

Upon this account he represents this Council in a most odious manner, p. 66. 7.
and for this end, makes use of the words of Nazianz. speaking of the general
Corruptions of the Times, and the Divisions of the Church, (and what Age has
been so happy, as not to labor under these Evils?) But he has mangled and
disjoynted the Words of that eloquent Father, more barbarously than ever the
Bishops or their Councils did the Church: The Courtiers, Gregor. Orat. in Synod.
whether true to the Emperor, I know not, but for the most part, perfidious to
God. This is in the Close of his Speech in the Council, among those passionate
Valedictions; but Mr. B. joins with it, his sharp Reproof of the Bishops, page
524. where we may observe his wonted Candor; for Nazianz. speaking of the
Factions of the Bishops, under these Metaphors, (...). Mr. B. thought fit to
render it, Raging like furious Horses in Battle, and leaves out the (...),
Almost; to make the Satyr more full, writes, and like Madmen, casting Dust into
the Air. And, as he thought fit to leave out in one place, so he adds in
another, to the Words and Sense of Nazianzen; therefore he professes, That it
is unseemly for him to join with them in their Councils, as it were, to leave
his Studies and Quietness, to go play with the Lads in the Streets. To join
with them in their Councils, is an addition of Mr. B. the words of Gregory are
these, (...). In like manner, it would not become me, (who know better things
than the multitude) whilst others bustle in a Crowd, to choose rather to be one
of them, than to enjoy my Liberty with Obscurity. There is nothing reflects
upon this Council, before which this Oration was spoken, but only representing
the great Trouble that would attend the Office of a Bishop, and especially, the
Bishop of the Imperial City, that he might obtain the Request he had made
before, and which all this lamentable Description of the Church is designed to
recommend; he desires to be dismissed, Give me (says he) The Reward of my
Labor; What? p. 23.
Not such as some envious men may think, but such as I may safely ask; give me
Rest and Ease from my long Labors, have Compassion on my gray Hairs, have some
Respect to a Stranger, and put another into my place, who may be vexed and
disturbed in my Stead; such as has clean hands, and an eloquent Tongue; such
as is able to gratify you in all things, and may be sufficient to join with
you in an effectual Care for the Church: But as for me, you see how I am wasted
with Time, and Labor, and Sickness --

The Verses cited out of Gregory, Chapter Hist. p. 67.
do not concern this Council at all, but represent the miserable Distractions
of the Church, at that time he accepted the Bishopric of C. P. and his chief
design in it, 1 Carm. de vita sua.
was, to reconcile, if it were possible, these Differences, which were
occasioned by Heretics, who envied the Orthodox Bishops, and had a violent
Passion for their Chairs. However, Mr. B. will have it, That he spoke all this
and a great deal more of this Council of C. P. one of the four which is
equaled to the four Evangelists. He does indeed in several places find fault
with this Council, but is far from making such a Riot as this; and, it seems,
he had a great many Friends in it, as appears by their Dissension concerning
him, which he put an end to, by a voluntary Resignation of his Place: and it is
evident from his own Account, that the Council had not agreed upon his
Deposition till after his Resignation; Carm. de vita sua.
for, after his Speech, he says, That a confused Murmur followed, and the
younger men brought the old over, I suppose, to accept of this Offer, that
since his Case did give some occasion of Dissension, the prudentest way was to
take him at his Word, and so end the Quarrel.

But it seems, Gregory did resent the Injury, and did not bear the Deprivation
of his Bishopric, with the same Generosity he proposed, which made him a
little more sharp than was decent, in his Representation of the Bishops; but
from hence to conclude against the Bishops, as the Disturbers of all the World,
would argue as little Judgment as it would Charity; for Orators draw something
bigger than the Life, and Satyrists love to aggravate. The Age, though wicked
enough, may not be as wicked as a zealous Preacher might represent it; all men
are Liars, says David in his Haste; and St. Paul, when he was neglected by his
own Friends, concluded generally, All seek their own, and not the things that
are Christ's; and what wonder, if this holy man, sharpened with Discontent,
should exclame, with somewhat too great a Passion, against the Administration
of the Church, which he had been forced to quit. His Censure of Councils, that
he knew none of them have any happy End, was not the fault of the Expedient for
ending of Differences, but of the men, and particularly, of the Heretics, that
were uppermost most part of his time, for he does frequently profess a great
Veneration for the Council of Nice, and was one of the greatest Champions for
it in his time.

The Case of Meletius and Paulinus, p. 69. 9.
both Orthodox Bishops of Antioch, was something nice, and determined very
tenderly, that both should be allowed equally the Administration of that
Church, Socr. l. 5. c. 5. Sozom. l. 7. c. 3.
but with a Provision, that this Indulgence should never be drawn into a
Precedent, and that the Surviver should govern alone. Flavianus, and ambitious,
Socr. l. 5. c. 10.15.
popular Presbyter, after Meletius his Death, is elected Bishop, in opposition
to Meletius, which was the occasion of much Trouble in the Church. The
Expedient so extraordinary, showed the Moderation that was used to end the
first Schism: but Flavianus can have no excuse, who, against the Canons, and
the Interest and Peace of the Church, and against his own Oath, set up himself
against his lawful Bishop.

Mr. B's Observation is, That even good Bishops cannot agree, nor escape the
Imputation of Heresy; which refers to Lucifer Calaritanus. It is much to be
lamented, that good men cannot rightly understand one another, but so it has
ever been, and the Apostles themselves had misunderstandings; but this is no
more incident to Bishops, than to any other good men: it is the effect of
Humane Frailty, from which, no Dignity, no Title, can ever free us.

The History of the Priscillianists is related by Mr. B. with his usual
Ingenuity; p. 70. 13.
for, all along, he observes this Rule, to be very favorable to all Heretics
and Schismatics, be they never so much in the wrong, and to fall upon the
Orthodox Party, and to improve every miscarriage of theirs into a mighty Crime.
Aug. de Haer. c. 70.
These Priscillianists joined the monstrous Opinions and Practices of the
Gnostics and Manichees into one Heresy; and, besides their blasphemous
Conceits concerning this World's being created by the Devil, and our Savior's
descending gradually through the several Spheres of Heaven, they were monstrous
in their lewdness, and promiscuous Fornications, men of no Faith, whose
Principle was this, Jura, perjura, Secretum prodere noli: These men, after they
had been condemned by some Councils, (and very justly, I hope) got, by the
means of some Mercenary Courtiers, Sulp. Sev. l. 2. prope fin.
the Emperor's Protection, and his Order to be restored after they had been
banished. Ithacius, and some other Bishops, the most zealous Opposers of this
Sect, applied themselves to Maximus the Tyrant, desiring him to suppress these
Heretics by the Sword. In short, Priscillian, and several others, after they
had been condemned by the Council of Bourdeaux, were put to death at Treves, by
Maximus his Order; and, how justly, let the Reader judge, by this Relation of
Sulpitius Severus; l. 2.
Priscillianum gemino judicio auditum, convictumque maleficii nec diffitentem
obscoenis se studuisse doctriuis, Nocturnos etiam turpium foeminarum egisse
Conventus, nudumque orare solitum, nocentem pronunciavit. But, notwithstanding
the Sentence were most just, and Severus confesses, that these Heretics were
Luce indignissimi, yet all good men were offended that Bishops should procure
their death, and concern themselves in Blood: Whereupon, Theognostus
excommunicates Ithacius in a Council at Treves, as Baronius tells us, Bar. An.
385.29. and an. 386.25. ubi supra.
though Severus brings in Maximus, persuading St. Martin to join with Idacius,
who had been condemned by none but Theognostus, and that upon a private Quarrel.

St. Martin, Chapter Hist. p. 71.
says Mr. B. renounced the Communion of the Bishops and their Synods.] One
would imagine, that now Martin the Saint were become Martin Marr-Prelate, and
turned Presbyterian; but no such matter, he renounced only the Communion of
Ithacius his Party, and that others did as well as he. Amb. Ep. 58.76. Conc.
Taur. c. 5.
Theognostus, Ambrose, Studius, and several others, scrupled Communion with
these men polluted with Blood: how justly, I will not pretend to determine, but
Mr. B. cannot complain, if he calls to mind how often he reproaches and derides
the Tenderness of the Bishops, that are content to enjoin Penance upon great
Malefactors, that had taken Sanctuary in the Church: There he pleads with
Idacius, that it is pity they should live, and that the Gallows should be
deprived of its due: However, forgetting himself, he makes this a Plea for
Separation [and which shows a Divine justification for Separation from the
Bishops and Synods of such a way; yea, p. 72. 19.
though of the same Religion with us, and not so corrupt as the Reformation
found the Roman Papacy and Clergy:] This Divine Justification is the Angel's
Reproof of Martin for having communicated with the Ithacians once, Sulp. Sev.
Vit. Mart.
to save the Lives of some Eminent Persons. How far the Historian is to be
credited in these mavelous Relations of St. Martin, I am as loath to determine
as Mr. B. but sure it is, that, all things confider'd, though St. Martin may
pass for a great Saint, yet several of his actions show more Simplicity and
Zeal, than Knowledge or Discretion; for, though it were much to his credit to
be solicited to an Emperor's Table, Sever.
yet it was a great want of Duty to prefer his own Priest to the Emperor and
Nobles, in outward expressions of respect: and, though it was great Devotion in
the Empress to condescend to be his Cook and Serving-maid, yet it was no great
sign of Humility in him to accept the service. For my part, I must confess, I
should be very loath to separate from the Communion of a Church, whose Doctrines
I could not except against, merely upon this Divine Justification, and the
Example and Miracles of St. Martin.

But this Instance could become no man worse than Mr. B. who, in a Letter to
Dr. Hill, confesses himself to have been a man of Blood, and therefore despairs
of the honor of ever being instrumental in the Peace of the Church. If St.
Martin was so far in the right, why does not M. B. imitate him? why does he not
renounce Communion with those bloody men that instigated the Long Parliament
and People to rebel, that pressed the King's death, and defended it when it
was done? why does he not renounce these, especially, since they never gave the
least sign of Repentance? These were the men that applied themselves to the
Maximi of this Nation, to persecute, not Priscillianists, but a great many
Worthy, Honest Men: And I need not call to Mr. B's remembrance, who were the
sordid Compliers with these Usurpers, who compared Cromwell to David, Disput. 1.
Ep. Ded. to R. Cromwell.
and his wise Son to Solomon: but this has transported me a little too far;
and, to say truth, who can forbear, where men have the confidence to suggest
those things against others, that they stand most notoriously guilty of
themselves?

The next thing, worth Reflection, is, his Remark upon the Council of Capua:.
20.
This Council (says he) had more wit than many others, and ordered, that both
Congregations, Flavian 's and Evagriu 's, being all good Christians, should
live in loving Communion: O that others had been as wise, in not believing the
Prelates that persuaded the World, that it is so pernicious a thing for two
Churches and Bishops to be in one City, as Peter and Paul are said to be at
Rome.] Whatever Wit this Council had, it seems Mr. B. shows little, in
mistaking it so grossly: for the Council of Capua never ordered that the two
opposite Bishops and Congregations at Antioch, should join in loving Communion;
but only that the Eastern Bishops, that had divided themselves upon that
occasion, some taking part with Flavianus, others with Evagrius, Conc. Cap.
that these should be received into the Communion of the Catholic Church, if
they were Orthodox in the Faith: so that if the Schism at Antioch could not be
composed, the Mischief should not go any further, or divide the Catholic
Church; Ambros. Theoph. Ep. 78.
as St. Ambrose writes to Theophilus Alex. Cui bonae pacis naufragio Synodus
Capuensis tandem obtulerat possum tranquillitatis, ut omnibus per totum
Orientem daretur Communio Catholicam confitentibus fidem, and duobus estis tuae
sanctitatis Examen impertiretur: And now Mr. B's violent Exclamation against
those who would persuade the World, that it is so pernicious a thing to have
two Bishops in the same City, might have been spared: but this is to be
pardoned, when we consider, that a Gun makes the same noise, whether it hit, or
miss the mark.

But this Council condemned a new Heresy (Hereticating was in fashion) viz. of
one Bishop Bonosus, Chapter Hist. 21. p. 72.
denying Mary to have continued a Virgin to her death. Here Mr. B. makes
himself pleasant with his own Dream; for, surely, no man, with his Eyes open,
ever saw this Condemnation of Bonosus by the Council of Capua; which determines
only, that the neighboring Bishops should judge between him (Bonosus) and his
Accusers: Ambr. Ep. 79.
sed cum hujusmodi fuerit Concilii Capuensis judicium, ut finitimi Bonoso atque
ejus accusatoribus Judices tribuerentur, and praecipue Macedones, qui cum
Episcopo Thessaloniensi de ejus factis cognoscerent, advertimus quod nobis
judicandi forma competere non posset.

Next (says our Author) we have a strange thing, 23.
a Heresy raised by one that was no Bishop: but the best is, it was but a
lit-Heresie; that of Jovinian.] But how! is it so strange a thing that a
Heresy should be raised by one that is no Bishop? or did he not turn Heretic
because he was not made one? Cerinthus, Ebion, Marcion, Valentinus, Artemon,
Arrius, etc. were they Bishops? I suppose it will be a hard matter to find any
Bishops to have been the Authors of any Heresy, for a long while after Christ;
and even those that gave names to Heresies, were not the first that gave them
being, as we shall show more particularly hereafter.

It is strange (says Mr. B.) that Binnius vouchsafes next, 24.
to add out of Socrates (when he hereticates him also) a Council of the
Novatians.] And why should it be so strange, since Binnius sets down a great
many more Councils that were Heretical in his opinion? But, let Mr. B. enjoy
his wonder, when he is in the fit, he must give others leave to wonder a little
too, at the Transports of a man that pretends so much to moderation [that would
say, as loud as I can speak, if all the proud, ambitious, hereticating part of
the Bishops had been of this mind; O, what Sin, Chapter Hist. p. 73. 24.
what Scandal, and what Shame, what Cruelties, Confusions, and Miseries had the
Christian World escaped!] And what is all this about? The leaving Easter
indifferent; i. e. Whether it be to be observed with the Jews, or the Christian
Church? And yet Mr. B. in this very Paragraph, finds fault with silencing of
Ministers that would not keep it at the wrong time. If all times be indifferent
to observe it in, what time is wrong? and who changes the nature of things
indifferent, the Bishops, or those that make a Conscience of Observing it upon
a mistaken time? He is very much here in the Commendation of the Novatians, as
if none had ever observed this Moderation but these Schismatics. Did not
Irenaeus, and many other good Bishops, show the same moderation before Novatian
was born? But these Heretics, than whom there never was a more proud,
Pharisaical sort of men, must have the Honor of it, when it was their
necessity that put them upon this Indulgence one toward another: and, that you
may understand how peaceably they behaved themselves in this present case, take
this short account of it out of Socrates and Sozomen, who, if they were not
Novatians (as most Learned men, both Protestants and Papists, are of Opinion)
were too great Favorers of that Sect, as all complain of them.

The Novatians, Socr. l. 5. c. 20. Sozom. l. 7. c. 18.
in the time of Valens the Emperor, did think fit, for Reasons unknown, to
change the Rule for the Observation of Easter, which, by the Decree of the
Council of Nice, was become, in a manner, Universal. It may be they would have
no Observance common with the Catholic Church, and especially at that time,
when they were all under the same Persecution, and the Catholics desired a
Reconciliation with them; and therefore they flew off, as much as they could,
to avoid such a Conjunction: However, this Innovation did not so generally
obtain among the Eastern Novatians, but that the contrary Usage prevailed
almost every where in a short time. Sabbatius, a Convert Jew, ordained Priest
by Marcianus, the Novatian Bishop of C. P. began to favor the Jewish time of
observing Easter, established in the Council of Pazus; and for this, and the
pretense of greater Purity, began to separate from the Church; He is called
upon to show the Reasons of his Separation, and declares his greatest Grievance
is about Easter. The Novatian Bishops, perceiving this was but a Pretense, and
that his real Disease was the desire of being a Bishop, were resolved to take
away this Excuse, and leave it indifferent for every one to observe Easter when
he thought fit. And what was the Issue? He seemed to be satisfied for some
time, till he found he had some Followers, and an Opportunity to set up a
Congregation for himself; and then, notwithstanding his Compliance, turned
Schismatic: so little good does Concession do with men that are set upon
Separation. So that though you should take away all Rule and all Order, yet
there is a sort of men, that a Wantonness of Spirit has made restless, that
would never be satisfied; the Disease is fed by Concession, and then it is most
violent, when they know not what they would have.

A great Council (says our Historian) was called at Hippo, p. 73. 25.
and Augustine yet a Presbyter, was there: Good men will do well, and most of
the African Councils were the best in all the World? And why would you judge?
Because their Bishoprics were but like our Parishes, and they strove not who
should be the Greatest, or domineer. I am content he should like any Councils
or Bishops, but I am afraid, this good Opinion will not continue long; for the
Reason of his good Liking is a great Mistake, that they were Bishops according
to his own Model, Whose Dioceses were no bigger than our Parishes. But surely
this cannot be; for all Africa, from Tangier to Egypt, had but four hundred
sixty six Bishoprics, Notitia Affr.
which were thus divided according to the Provinces.

1. Proconsularis. 54. 2. Numidia. 125. 3. Provincia Bizac. 107. Sees without
Bishops. 006.
4. Maurit. Caesar. 120. without Bishops. 006.
5. Maurit Sitifens. 044. 6. Tripolis. 005. 7. Sardinia. 008.
There is some Difference between the Sum in gross, and the Particulars, which
will not agree, though you should deduct the twelve vacant Sees, for then the
Particulars will not come up to the Sum of four hundred sixty six: And now
judge, whether the African Bishoprics were not bigger than our Parishes, by
comparing the vast Extent of Africa, with our England, which is not near so big
as some of those Provinces: and yet the Bishoprics of Africa were multiplied
thus occasionally, as we shall show hereafter, and cannot prescribe to other
Countries: Nor could the Churches of Africa, notwithstanding the Multitude of
their Bishops, and Narrowness of their Dioceses, keep themselves in Peace any
more than their Neighbors, but were divided as soon as any, and their
Divisions were as long and irremediable as their Neighbors; And indeed, Schism
came over from hence into the other parts of the World with Novatus, and who
taught the Roman Presbyters first, to set up against their Bishops. In short,
there was no where a greater Breach, nor more extravagant Schismatics, who
opposed themselves, not only against the Discipline of the Church, but the
Civil Government too. Now, lest this may put our Author out of Conceit with the
Bishops and Councils of Africa, as well as the rest; I must put him in mind of
his own Remark, That good men will do well, whether they be Bishops or not,
whether they have large or small Dioceses, and a very good man in a very great
Diocese, will do an extraordinary deal of good.

A Donatist Council at Bagai, S 29. p. 73.
had three hundred and ten Bishops, who condemned Maximianus; and upon this
Council, Mr. B. makes two observations. 1. How great a number the Donatists
were, and upon what Pretense, as over-voting them) they called others Heretics
and Schismatics. Very unjustly no doubt, for they were Heretics and
Schismatics themselves still, notwithstanding their Increase; Multitude may
render a Sect formidable, but it is but a poor Argument of Right. 2. How small
Bishoprics then were, the number tells us; not so small as our Parishes,
though the Donatists did use all means in the World to multiply them, and to
strengthen their Party.

The Council of Turin ordered, p. 74. 30.
That Communion should not be denied Felix, one of Ithacius his Party, and not
the contrary, according as the false Reading of Binnius; Vid. Conc. Sirm.
So Sirmond. in loc. Male enim in vulgatis qui Felici non communicant, abest
enim in Manuscriptis Negatio.

Another Carthage Council, 31.
called the second, which Binnius says, was the last, is placed next; and so
our Author takes it. This Mistake Binnius takes from Baronius, Conc. T. 2. p.
1158.
as Labbe shows, Erravit post Baronium Binnius vere enim hoc Concilium
celebratum fuit. Anno 390. Sub Genethlio decessore Aurelii cujus nomen necnon
Alypii exulat a MS. optimae notae. The Canons that Mr. B. instances from hence,
in favor of his Congregational Church, will not comply with his Design; ibid.
That the Bishops only, had the Power of making Crisme, and all the Priests
were to receive it from him, that the Bishop alone, was to reconcile Penitents
publicly; this may consist with a great many Congregations, and the Canon,
Can. 3.
"Reconciliare quemquam "in publica Missa Presbytero non licere; may probably,
extend only to the Cathedral Service, and that the Priest should not do this in
the Presence of the Bishops, as he is forbid several other Acts, which he is
supposed to do apart, and in the Bishops Absence, but with the Supposition of
his Consent. Can. 4.
The fourth Canon expresses the Absolution of Penitents, by Reconciliare sacris
Altaribus, the plural; tho, it must be confessed, it is improper, for there was
but one principal Altar, that was properly so called, though several
Communion-Tables depending upon the great Altar, there might be in the same
Diocese, unless the reconciling to one Church, be reckoned a Reconciling to all
other parts of the Catholic Church.

The fifth Canon is disingeniously cited by Mr. B. thus, Can. 5.
When Christians were multiplied, they that desired a Bishop in a place that
had none before, might have one; but he leaves out the Consent of the Bishop,
out of whose Diocese that other is taken, which is made absolutely necessary.
Dioeceses quae nunquam Episcopos habucrunt, non habeant, and illa Dioecesis
quae aliquando habuit habeat proprium, and si accedente tempore, crescente
fide, Dei populus multiplicatus desideraverit proprium habere rectorem, ejus
videlicet voluntate in cujus potestate est Dioecesis constituta habeat
Episcopum. Which is confirmed by the third Council of Carthage, where it is
added, Conc. Carth. 3. Can. 42. Codex. Int. Eccles. Affr. c. 53. Conc. Affr. c.
20.
That since, upon this occasion, many ambitious Priests did seduce some
Congregations to desire them for their Bishops, for this very Reason, Propter
malos eorum cogitatus and prave concinnata Concilia hoc dico, non debere
rectorem accipere eam plebem quae in Dioecesi semper subjacuit, Integ. Cod.
Can. 98. Conc. Affr. 65.
nec unquam proprium Episcopum habuit. This is made yet more difficult by other
Canons, that require, that no People that have before had Bishops, should have
any, but by the Approbation of a full Provincial Council, with the Consent of
the Primate, and the Bishop of the Diocese.

He mentions several other Council of Carthage, some whereof, Chapter Hist. p. 74.
are Collections of Canons, which Binnius mistook for particular Councils; but
there is little that he cites out of them, that favors either his Model of
Episcopacy, or his design to disgrace Bishops; some however, I am obliged to
take notice of, as first, That the Bishop's Cottage should not be far from the
Church; the Word is, Hospitiolum, not quite so poor as a Cottage; for it was to
be the Refuge of the Poor, and the Inn of Strangers, and a place fit for
Hospitality; but it is not hard to guess, why this is particularly noted in the
Margin for, it may be, that he may have a great Passion to have this Canon
executed. Envy is a Passion, may slay the silly one, but it is much more
comfortable, to be the Object of his Envy than Contempt. There are others that
order the Bishops, to regard the Presbyters as his Brethren, and they are much
to blame, that do not; but there are others innumerable, that command the
Presbyters to observe their Bishops as their Governors, as their Fathers, as
the Vicegerents of Christ. 52. is something odd, and shows the Poverty of the
African Church, that a Clerk, or Clergyman, how learned soever in God's Word,
must get his Living by a Trade; this is contrary to the usage of all other
Churches, even in their lowest times, and to the third Council of Carthage,
Can. 15.
which forbids it. Item placuit ut Episcopi and Presbyteri, and Diaconi, vel
Clerici non sint conductores neque procuratores, neque ullo turpi vel in
honesto negotio victum quaerant, quia respicere debeant scriptum esse, nemo
militans. Deo implicat se negotiis saecularibus. This same Canon in some
ancient Books, runs thus, Ut Episcopi, Presbyteri, and Diacones, non sint
conductores, aut Procuratores privatorum neque ullo negotio tali victum
quaerant quo eos peregrinari vel ab Ecclesiasticis officiis avocari necesse
sit. And, that we may not judge that this Canon only forbids them dishonest
ways of Living, which might be understood by Turpe and inhonestum, the Greek
Translation does explain it thus, (...), from any way that is mean or
dishonorable: but of this, more than enough.

The Story of Theophilus, 73. p. 75.
the great Patriarch of Alexandria, comes next, whom the succeeding Ages of the
Church honored as a Saint; but Mr. B. is in a strait, whether he shall believe
him to be a downright Knave, or credible, nay, most credible Socrates and
others, gross Liars: p. 77.
Yet there is no necessity of either, for these Historians might be imposed
upon by false Reports, and the Monks that were the Authors of them, were, it
may be, downright Knaves.

I must crave the Reader's patience, whilst I endeavor to relieve the Memory
of this Great man, from the Imputation of Knavery, which Socrates, and Sozomen,
Palladius, and some others fasten upon it; and with them Mr. B. who sets up
their Evidence and Authority.

Sozomen having written this Story most particularly, I will Translate those
two Chapters out of him that contain the Accusation of Theophilus; and add out
of Socrates what the other has omitted. The Story is thus.

At that time there was a Question disputed in Egypt, Soz. l. 8.11.
which had been started not long before, Whether God ought to be conceived
under a Humane shape? Most of the Monks, understanding those Places of
Scripture, which ascribe to God Eyes, and Face, and Hands, grossly and
literally, fancied him as a man; others, who could penetrate farther into the
meaning of those figurative Expressions, were of the contrary Opinion, and
judged the other Party to speak blasphemously, and unworthy of God. Theophilus
taught publicly in the Church, that this Opinion of the Anthropomorphites,
ought by no means to be embraced; and, in his Paschal Epistle, which he writ,
as his Custom was, every year, he declared, That God ought to be conceived
Incorporeal, and void of Humane shape. The Egyptian Monks understanding this,
came to Alexandria, and, having got together, made an uproar, and would have
murdered the Bishop: He comes out to them, and endeavors to appease the
Tumult, by saying, I see you as the Face of God: This saying did a little
assuage the Tumult, and the Monks, having abated something of their rage,
replied, If thou think as thou speak, condemn Origen's Books, that teach
men to think otherwise of God. This, replied Theophilus, I intended to do long
ago, and most willingly comply with you in; for I dislike Origen's Opinions no
less than you. And, having thus cajoled those Monks, he appeased the Tumult.

There is no downright Knavery in all this; for those words, Genesis 33.10.
I see you as the Face of God, are the words of Jacob to his Brother Esau; and
his condemning of Origin, though not for that which these giddy-headed Monks
fancied, was nevertheless very just; here was no Lie, though there was a
Deceit; and the Danger he was in, the Examples of Holy men in Scripture, and
Ecclesiastical History, will Justify or Excuse him. And now let us pursue the
rest of the Story.

This Controversy would likely have been at an end, Soz. l. 8. c. 12.
if Theophilus had not revived it, upon a Design of ruining Ammonius,
dioscorus, Eusebius and Eutychius, who were sirnam'd (...), long, or tall.
These were Brothers, and very eminent among the Monks of Scetis, as we have
showed before. These, of all the Monks of Egypt, were the greatest Favorites
of Theophilus, who entertained them frequently at his House, with great
kindness and Familiarity. Dioscorus he made Bishop of Hermenopolis; but the
ground of his Quarrel with them, was his hatred of Isidorus, whom, heretofore,
he had endeavored to have made Bishop of Constantinople, after the death of
Nectarius. Socr. l. 6. c. 7.
Some say, that when a certain Woman had come over to the Church, from the
Heresy of the Manichees, and had been received to Communion before she had
made an abjuration of her former Heresy; Theophilus charged the Arch-Presbyter
with this Neglect, but he had a grudge against him before upon another account:
Peter (for that was his name) affirmed, that the Woman was received Regularly,
according to the Law of the Church, and with the consent of Theophilus himself;
and that Isidore could testify all this; which he did at his return from Rome,
whither he then was sent. Theophilus excommunicated both, as having done him
wrong, and belied him: This some say. But, I have heard, from a very credible
Person, who conversed familiarly with those Monks at that very time, who said,
that there were two Reasons of Theophilus his falling out with Isidore; the one
common to him and Peter, because they refused to witness for Theophilus his
Sister, that a certain Person had made her his Heir; the other particular to
Isidore; because he, being Overseer of the Poor, and having a considerable Sum
of Money in his disposal, refused to re-imburse the Bishop what he laid out
upon the Building of Churches, saying, That it it was far better to refresh the
Bodies of the Poor, for whom that Treasure was intended, and which were
properly the Temples of God, than to lay it out upon the building of Churches:
But, whether it were for these, or for other reasons, so it was, that Isidore
was excommunicated, and came to Scetis, to his old Friends the Monks. Ammonius,
taking some of them along with him, goes to Theophilus, and desires him to be
reconciled to Isidore, which, he is said then readily to have promised; but,
after some time, when nothing was done, and they saw plainly that Theophilus
did intend to put them off, they come again, and renew the Request, with
greater earnestness, requiring a performance of his Promise: He takes one of
the Monks, and puts him in the common Prison, for a terror to the rest; but
this would not do; for Ammonius, with the rest of the Monks that came with him,
under pretense of bringing Relief to the Prisoners, got into the Prison, and
resolved to stay there with their Companion; Theophilus hearing this, sends for
them, but they at first desired him to come himself and fetch them out; for, it
was not fit, they said; that since the Affront they had received was public,
they should privately be dismissed; yet, afterward, they were prevailed upon
to come to him: and he sent them away, after he had begged their pardon, and
promised never to molest them more. However, he fretted, and was vexed in
himself, and cast about how he he should do them a mischief; and, since they
despised every thing in the World but their Philosophical Life, he resolves to
attack them in that part, and to disturb their Peace and Quietness: for,
understanding by the Discourse he had had with them, and the Complaints they
were used to make to him of the Anthropomorphites, that they were Favorers of
Origin, he kindled a deadly feud between them and the Monks of the contrary
Opinion, which was blown up by their undecent wranglings and Disputes; in which
they left the Question, and, instead of arguing, reproached one another: So
they that believed God Incorporeal, were called Origenists, those of the
contrary Persuasion, Anthropomorphites.] So far Sozomen.

Socrates differs something in the relation of this matter from Sozomen,
though, as to the greatest part, one has copied out of the other, yet so as to
leave it a very hard Question, to determine which is the Original, and which
the Copy.

Socrates says nothing of Isidor's being the occasion of this Quarrel, Socr.
l. 6. c. 7.
but only, that those Monks, disliking the Covetousness of Theophilus, would
live with him no longer, but returned to their solitude; and when Dioscorus was
had in great Veneration of the Monks. Theophilus envying him, and being angry
with his Brethren, resolved to ruin them, by stirring up the Anthropomorphites
against them; that he wrote to the Monks against Dioscorus, accusing him with
holding God to be Incorporeal; and that he had no Members like men, as the
Scriptures describe him, and by this means he set them all together by the
Ears. Isidor Pelusiota confirms Sozomen, Isid. Ep. l. 1. Ep. 152.
so far as to make Isidor to be the ground of this Quarrel, without any
particulars, but treats Theophilus very outragiously, calling him (...).

Now, if we examine these Relations impartially, we may observe several things
that are very improbable, almost impossible, to conceive. All these men that
are said to be persecuted unjustly by Theophilus, were such as he had an
Extraordinary kindness for; and therefore it is not very likely, without
special Provocation, he should ever endeavor to ruin those he took so much
pains to set up: And,

1. As to the Story of Isidore, it is altogether improbable; for this was the
man he opposed to Chrysostom, as Competitor for the Bishopric of C. P. This
was he that was entrusted with the great Secret, upon which his Life and
Dignity did depend; he that had received double Orders and Letters to present
him that should overcome, whether Theodosius or Maximus; And, is it likely, he
should fall out with this man so desperately about a punctilio of reconciling a
Heretic Woman? or witnessing that himself must know not to be truth? Is it
likely a Person so Eminent in Place and Reputation, of an extraordinary Fortune
too, should suborn two the most considerable men in the Church of Alexandria,
to forswear themselves in favor of his Sister? Surely, he must know them too
well, after so long an acquaintance and experience, to hazard his Reputation
upon so unlikely a Project, He must know them to be very Evil men, before he
would attempt them in that nature; nor is it very likely, that Isidore,
considering his Obligations to Theophilus, should have refused him any Money to
carry on and support his Magnificence in Public Buildings.

However, suppose all this true, they must be only private Reasons, such as
Theophilus kept secret to himself; but he must find some other plausible
Pretense to justify his Excommunication of these persons that were so
considerable in their Place, and Reputation in the World: He could not be so
brutish, as to excommunicate a man, because he would not forswear himself, or
rob the Poor to serve him. There must be something for a Color, and that these
Impartial, Credible Historians, did both forget; for I suppose, the Monks from
whom they had this Relation, did not care much to insist upon that point, which
would make a man suspect, that Theophilus his Cause might be something
justifiable; and surely, it was very plausible, when all the World in a manner,
did approve it. Thus every Malefactor will give out, that he is persecuted out
of Envy and Malice, and such a one they had disobliged in this manner, and
another became their Enemy upon another Account, but not a word of the Crimes
laid to their Charge, or of the Evidence against them. No poor men, though they
talked Sedition or Treason, blasphemed God or the King, and the Fact be
notorious, yet they fall innocent Victims to the Malice or Covetousness of
their Judges.

Sozomen unawares discovers the Secret, (...).
and blabs out his Author, I have heard, says he, from a credible Person, who
was acquainted with these Monks. The Relation shows sufficiently, he was of the
Party, and that he had it from them; and if a Monk cannot tell his Story
sufficiently to his own Advantage, and to the Prejudice of his Enemy, let him
be irregular; and to say Truth, without this Intimation one might taste
something of a Monkish Invention and Spirit, the whole Story is so marvelously
gross. Besides that, Socrates and Sozomen are not so credible in this
Particular, because they every where espouse the Cause of the Novatians, to
whom Theophilus was no great Friend: reason enough to incur a very odious
Character in their History, as many other good men have done upon the same
account.

But other Historians, and more credible than Socrates or Sozomen, discover
sufficiently the Vanity of this Fiction: Posthumianus was in Alexandria
immediately after these things happened; and let us hear what account he gives
of this Affair.

After seven days, Sulp. Sever. Dial. l. 1.
we came to Alexandria, where there was a foul Contention between the Bishops
and the Monks, about the Books of Origin, those condemning and forbidding the
reading of them, because of many dangerous Errors contained in them; the other
Party charging this upon the Heretics that had corrupted the Works of Origin.
The Contention in short, grew very high, and the Bishops according to the
Authority they had, forbid all, good and bad, because there were Ecclesiastical
Writers enough, that might be read with as much Benefit, and much less Danger;
and then instanced in several places of Origin, that were very extravagant; but
this could not satisfy the Favorers of Origin, who began to be in an Uproar,
which when the Authority of the Bishops could not appease, the Civil Magistrate
is forced to take the Church Discipline into his own hands, Saevo Exemplo, says
the Author. Upon this, the Monks were terrified, and made their Escape whither
they could, and the Edicts of the Magistrates pursued them.

This person it seems, was no Favourer of Theophilus, and yet there is nothing
he finds fault with, but the too great Rigor, and the taking of the Governor
to supply the defect of Church Discipline: yet it seems, there was absolute
Necessity for it, for these Monks had mutiny'd, and raised a Sedition, and then
surely, it is time for the Magistrate to look about him. 2. The same Historian
represents this not as any sudden surprising Oppression of the Origenists; for
he mentions several Synods that had been assembled for this purpose. 3. He does
not make this the Effect of any particular Quarrel between the Monks and
Theophilus, but makes the Controversy to be between the Monks and the Bishops;
and which of them had most right to govern the Church, and appoint what Books
were, or were not fit to be read?

But to return to our Author, he tells us farther, Sever.


The Bishop of that place entertained him very courteously, and beyond what he
could have expected; he made him a kind Invitation, that he would stay, and
live with him, but that he refused, thinking it not fit to stay in a place, ubi
fraterna Cladis tam recens fervebat invidia. Then he adds, That though the
Monks ought likely to have obeyed the Bishops, yet, on the other side, they
ought not to have used so great a Rigor.

Here is not a word of Theophilus his Crimes, which he would not have
dissembled, having so fair an Occasion to mention to mention them, and they
would have been very proper Reasons for his Refusal to stay at Alexandria, and
would have very much aggravated the Envy of persecuting those Monks: Theophilus.
But here is not a word of Him, which the other Bishops are not as nearly
concerned in as himself: and lastly, here is a plain Confutation of that pretty
Story of Socrates, That the Origenists were persecuted for believing God to be
incorporeal; whereas, they were the Errors of Origin, as that Christ had dyed
to save the Devils and such like; that the Bishops objected. And, to say Truth,
that was a pretty Suggestion, that they should be called Origenists for holding
God incorporeal. Was Origin singular in that point? Did not every one that ever
had any Reason with his Sense teach the same thing? And therefore the other
Story of the Anthropomorphites, urging Theophilus to condemn Origin upon the
same Account, comes under the same Suspicion; for, by the same Reason, they
must have forced him to condemn all the Ecclesiastical Writers in the World.
Yet such was the Impudence of these mutinous Monks, that they were not ashamed
to tell it all the World, that all those that were against them, were
Anthropomorphites; Hieron. Johan.
And Chrysostom was so credulous as to believe them, and to charge Epiphanius
with that Error, to which no man was a more bitter Enemy: Whereas the
Controversy was indeed, whether Origen's Works were to be read, and this was
started sometime before Theophilus was concerned in it, Ep. ad Tranquil. 76.
Edic. Mar. Victorii.
as appears by St. Hierom, who in a Letter to Tranquillinus, condemns the
passionate Haters and admires of Origin, he allows him to be read sometimes for
his great Learning, as Tertullian, Novatus, Arnobius, Apollinaris, but with
Caution, that we choose the Good, and avoid the Evil: But if these Passionate
Friends and Enemies of Origin will be in the Extreme, and will either reject
the whole as Faustinus, or receive and approve the whole, and admit no mean;
his Determination is, Libentius piam rusticitatem, quam doctam blasphemiam
Eligam; which shows the Controversy between the Orthodox and the Origenists,
and serves likewise to vindicate St. Hierom from the Imputation of having
prevaricated in this case, Sulp. Sev. D. 1. Ruffin. Inv.
as he is charged by Posthumianus and Ruffinus, as if once he had been an
Origenist himself, and that this Letter was writ before the Troubles about that
Question in Alexandria, is clear, from the fathering of that Opinion upon
Faustinus, which he would never have done, if it had so great Patrons as
Theophilus, and the Authority of several Synods to confirm it.

And whereas Theophilus is represented so odiously by credible Socrates, and
the Character is believed by credulous Mr. B. it will not be amiss, to see what
other as credible men as any of his Enemies say of him, whether in general, or
with Relation to the Condemnation of the Origenists: St. Hierom blames him for
his too great Moderation in this Particular, Ep. 68.
Super Nefaria haeresi quod multam patientiam geris, and putas Ecclesiae
visceribus incubantes tua posse corrigi lenitate multis sanctis displicet, ne
dum paucorum paenitentiam praestolaris nutrias audaciam perditorum, and factio
robustior fiat. This does by no means agree with Mr. B's Authors, who intimate,
as if he had circumvented and surpised them: And in another place, Ep. 70.
Dolebamus te nimium esse patientem; and in another Letter, he charges the
Origenists with calumniating Theophilus and others, Ep. 78.
instead of answering to their charge. Now, for my part, I have as much Respect
for St. Jerome, as our Author has for Socrates; and am as loath to believe him a
Flatterer that had renounced all the Enjoyments of the World, as to think
Socrates a gross Liar; but there is no Necessity the Historian should be so,
though the Story should prove false; for he might be imposed upon, but Hierom
has hardly any Excuse unless things were as he represents them. It was the
Observation of a very wise man, that he thought himself to have hit the Point
of Virtue exactly, Aristotle.
which he placed in Mediocrity, when he was charged with having declined into
the two Extremes, by persons of different Interests. How Theophilus did, I will
not judge, but he has this Man's Judgment in his Favor, for one condemns him
with too much Rigor, and others with too much Lenity in one and the same
Action; E^. ad Cyril. ap. Cyril. 7.5. p. 20.
and such Atticus a moderate good man, in the Account of Socrates, describes
him to be, (...). I knew your Predecessor Theophilus, a man equal to the
Apostles in time of Confusion, prefer Peace to a punctilious Exactness.

But that which rendered the Cause of the Origenists most invidious, was the
involving of Chrysostom in the same Quarrel; for he received these banished
Monks, when they came to Constantinople, perhaps, not so much out of Compassion
to them, as out of Purpose to thwart Theophilus, whose opposition to his
Election he could not have forgot. Theophilus resents it too much, and stirs up
Epiphanius to go and dislodge those Fugitives, which occasioned great Disorder:
At last, Chrysostom being in disgrace at Court for having reflected upon the
Empress in some of his Sermons, she is resolved to take the opportunity of his
Quarrel with Theophilus, and other Bishops, to revenge her self; a Synod is
called, and Chrysostom is deposed, and afterward banished: Thus those
troublesome Monks, like many other Sycophants, shifted the Quarrel, and engaged
good men in it: and so they were sure to be revenged of their Enemies one way
or other; if they were worsted, then they triumphed, if they overcame, the
Victory must make them odious. I do not intend to excuse Theophilus in this
Particular, he did certainly prosecute his Resentment too far, but he was not
the only man, Epiphanius a person of great Holiness, Hierom, and several other
persons, renoun'd for their Piety, were concerned in the persecution of this
great man, as well as he: and so it is that the best men have their Resentments
and Piques, as well as others; and to say the Truth, this is their Weakness,
for that Severity which gives men generally a Reputation of Holiness, tho it
mortify some irregular heats, yet is apt to dispose men to Peevishness; and
what kills some Weeds, becomes a Nourishment to others.

I have dwelt so long upon this, not only to vindicate Theophilus, but to show
(once for all) the manner of our Author's dealing with his Reader in his
Church History. Any scandalous Story, though it be as false and improbable as
any in the Anni mirabiles, or White's Centuries of Scandalous Ministers, any
Fiction, that reflects with disgrace upon Bishops and Councils, is set down for
Authentic, no matter who delivers it, whether Friend or Foe; and there it
stands, without adding the least hint that as Credible Historians do
contradict, or confute the Calumny.

He mentions a scrap of an African Council, p. 80. 45.
to petition the Emperor, that the Privileges of Sanctuaries should be
preserved inviolable, and no man forced away to punishment, that had taken
Refuge there; Justice was taken for wickedness, (says our Author.) No such
thing; they might themselves deliver the Offender, if they judged him unworthy
of Mercy; all they desired was, that they should not be forced away, or else
their Sanctuary was no more so. It is a hard thing to please a man that has
such contrary Humors. He is offended with the Bishops, for procuring Justice
upon Priscillian and his Accomplices, and calls them Bloody Bishops, and not to
be communicated with; now he is angry with them for being too merciful, and
reckoning Justice a Crime, which they never did, but desired only, their
Sanctuaries might not be forced, upon any pretense, for that would utterly
destroy the merciful Design of those Privileges that were granted some Places
devoted to Religion; which was, to give Criminals time and opportunity to
repent of their wickedness.

In the Fragments of the Councils of Toledo, there is a Canon, 47.
that makes a difference between the Offerings made at the Parish Churches, and
those made at the Altars. Our Author mistook the meaning of this Canon, which
is thus; Quae ad Parochianas Elclesias offeruntur, in terris, vineis,
mancipiis, peculiis, etc. that is, Whatsoever is given to Parish Churches,
whether in Land, Vineyards, etc. that the Bishop is to have the disposal of it
all; but what is given to the Altars, that is, to the Episcopal Church, he has
but his Thirds: Yet all this notwithstanding, Parish Churches had Communion
Tables, and, wherever there were Congregations, there was the Administration
of the Lord's Supper: Nay, before this time, Altars were become much more
frequent than our Author would have believed; Conc. Carthag. 5. Sub Anastasio.
for a Council of Carthage forbids the erecting of Altars in the Highways, and
in the Fields to the memory of Martyrs, yet the Exception shows how numerous
they might lawfully be; nisi aut ibi corpus, aut aliquae certae reliquiae sunt,
aut origo alicujus habitationis, vel possessionis vel passionis fidelissima
origin traditur.

We have a strange occasional Remark of our Author, That Pope Innocent, 55.
one of the best and wisest Popes, excommunicated Theophilus, Arcadius, and the
Empress] yet did this pass without contradiction. I perceive any thing passes
with him for History; for this Epistle of Innocent, that mentions the
Excommunication of the Persecutors of St. Chrisostom, after Chrysostom's death,
is all forged, which Labbee does as good as confess; for, over against the
place where the Pope threatens Eudoxia with Punishment in this life as well as
that to come, he notes in the Margin, that Eudoxia died before Chrysostom:
Which is a sufficient proof of the Forgery; for Eudoxia died in the year 404.
Oct. 6. and Chrysostom in 407. Nov. 14. Therefore Mr. B. might well have spared
this Note, and his Author, Binnius, might have spared that wise Remark, That
the Pope was a true Prophet, because the Empress died soon after.

Among the Decrees of Boniface, Chapter Hist. p. 82. 50.
one is, that no Bishop shall be brought or set before any Judge, Civil or
Military, either for any Civil or Criminal Cause, so that, as Mr. B. says, a
Bishop had the privilege of a had Physician, he might murder and not be
hanged, etc. This Decree is, I believe, hardly so ancient as the forementioned
Epistle; for we have only the Authority of Gratian for it, a man little to be
depended upon, unless he find Vouchers that are ancienter than himself: but any
thing will serve Mr. B's turn, that will give him occasion to ease his Spleen
against Bishops.

CHAP. V.
Of the First Council of Ephesus, etc.

OUr Author in the beginning of this Chapter, p. 84.. 3.
to prejudice his Reader beforehand against the Acts of the Council of Ephesus,
gives the worst account of Cyril who was the President of it, that he could
patch up out of all the libels and accusations of his Enemies. The first thing
he is charged with is the oppression of the Novatians. This was enough with
Socrates or Sozomen to paint him as ugly as men do the Devil, Socr. l. 7
or Antichrist: and therefore there is no great credit to be given them in
these relations, as manifestly espousing the cause and quarrels of the
Novatians: But suppose he had used severity toward these Schismatics, it may
be they deserved it; and being Schismatics and Alexandrians, it is not
unlikely that they were very troublesome and seditious.

Socrates makes it part of his charge that he took upon him the government of
temporal affairs, Socr. l. 7. c. 7.
(...) and a little before, (...). This was not the usurpation of the Bishop
but the indulgence of the Emperor; and the Truth is, that the Church and State
being now united, and the Schisms of the one causing inevitable seditions in
the other, the Civil Magistrates for the greater security of their Government
did think it expedient to invest the Bishop with a coercive power, since their
Spiritual authority was contemned to the dishonor of Religion, and no less to
the disturbance of the State. And it was it seems a crime in Cyril to accept
this Commission, or to act in pursuance of it: though our Author elsewhere
professes that he shall not dishonor such, p. 23. sect. 59.
nor disobey them. But besides the suppressing of the Novatian Conventicles, he
is charged with executing some Jews, and banishing others, which Orestes took
ill, as an incroachment upon his office, who was Governor of the Province.
Socr. l. 7. c. 13.
But as to this he cannot be very much blamed, for the Jews conspired against
the Christians, and resolved to destroy them all in one night; they gave the
alarm that one of their Churches was on fire, and as the Christians ran out to
quench the fire, they were murdered by those Villains. Perhaps Cyril did not
think this a time to complement the Governor to the assistance of the
Christians, when the danger they were in was sufficient to call him away, but
animated the people to make their defense, and to go in quest of these
Murderers; and it was a sign of his Moderation that there were but some
executed, and that all were not put to the Sword, after so barbarous an attempt.

This or something else offended the governor, Socr. l. 7. c. 14.
so that he became irreconcilable to Cyril. The Bishop like a good man,
endeavored by all means to procure a reconciliation, but without effect; and
why is a Bishop to be worse thought of, if a man of quality become his
implacable enemy without cause? Five hundred Monks came from Mount Nitria in a
fit of wild zeal to take the Bishops part; and Socrates cannot say that he sent
for them, they light on the governor and assault him; he is wounded, and
hardly escapes with life: But how could Cyril help this? or how can he be
charged with the extravagance of those Monks that he had no knowledge of till
they had committed it? But one of those Mutineers (says Socrates) that wounded
the governor being executed for his crime, was honored by Cyrill as a Martyr;
I do very much suspect this story, from the circumstance of changing the
criminals name to Thaumasius, and the most probable conjecture that I can make
of it, if there be any ground at all for the story, is, that the memory of a
Martyr of that name might be honored by him, which his enemies interpreted to
be the Criminal. But this changing of name is a thing without precedent, and
without reason; for either this disguise was put on that it might not be
observed, and he was ashamed of doing it openly; and then it will not be easy
to be certain that this Thaumasius was that Ammonius who was executed: or if he
was the same, and Cyril confessed it, then it is impossible to imagine a reason
why he should use that disguise. But there are men in the world that honor
such as Martyrs that were executed, not for Wounding a Governor, but Murdering
a King after a most unexampled manner; witness the worthy Martyrologies of
Harrison, Speeches and Prayers, Printed A. D. 1660.
Carew, Cook, Peter's, etc. and of Barkstead, Okey, Corbett: with this Motto in
the Frontispiece, these dyed all in Faith: and innumerable other things that
justify their horrid crimes; and make them Martyrs by the cause of their
suffering: Printed 1662.
I hope they were neither Bishops nor Episcopal men that were so fond of
Canonizing these Murderers for Martyrs.

Another thing which our Author cites from the professed enemies of Cyril to
render him odious, was the Murder of Hypatia, the famous She-Philosopher; She
it seems was barbarously murdered, but by whom, or upon what occasion is not
certain. Socrates makes the occasion to have been this, Socr. l. 7. c. 15.
That she being frequently with the Governor was suspected to do Cyril evil
offices, and to dissuade the Governor from being reconciled to him, therefore
some Zealots watched her, and barbarously Murdered her, among whom was one
Peter, a Reader of the Church, and an admirer of Cyril. And this (continues the
same Historian) brought a great reproach upon Cyril and the Church of
Alexandria.] But he cannot charge the Bishop of being by any means conscious to
it: and though it were done upon his account by violent heady Zealots; yet he
could be no further guilty than he contributed to it, by his countenance or
consent. Suidas in Damascius.
Damascius in the life of Isidore the Husband of this Hypatia charges Cyril
directly with this Murder; but his credit signifies very little, as being in
the first place a Heathen, and a violent enemy of the Christians; and secondly,
being more remote from these times, for he lived in the reign of Justinian;
Vales. Annot. in Socr. l. 7. c. 15.
Valesius cites the passage at large out of him, and promises to publish much
more of him than we have had hitherto: This is taken out of Suidas, who I
believe cites the whole out of this Author: In the beginning he makes it
dubious who were the Authors of the death of Hypatia, Some (says he) fasten it
upon Cyril, others upon the Alexandrians, the most seditious of all mankind: as
may be seen by their murdering some of their own Bishops; all which I suppose
are the words of this Damascius: Then he goes on to give a more particular
account of this Woman; and makes Cyril to conceive this envy against her,
because on a certain time passing by her house, and seeing what great resort
there was to her, and what a number of Coaches were at her door, he resolved to
make her away. This whole story is altogether improbable, for Hypatia was an
Alexandrian born and bred, and so publicly known, that Cyril who was bred in
the same place could not be so great a stranger to her as that story makes him
to be after he was a Bishop. He could not be ignorant of her or her School,
without being the greatest stranger in Alexandria: In short, this is no other
than a calumny invented by this Damascius to render the Christians odious,
which he endeavored to do upon all occasions, as Photius tells us.
Bibliotheca, l. 180.
For this is the character he gives of this Author, (...); one that frequently
snarls at our religion, though he be afraid to discover his malice too plainly.

After this, to render Cyril more odious yet, our Author reproaches him with
that unhappy quarrel with Chrysostom, (...) At^^^.
and his opposition, to the restoring his name to the diptychs of the Church;
and his harsh expression that compares that holy man with Judas.] This quarrel
was it seems hereditary to him, and he did prosecute it beyond all equity or
decency against the memory of a dead man. This was a fault, and he that is
without any, or without any particular animosity, especially if he be in any
eminent place, let him cast the first stone. But our Author does charge him
with some things injuriously, as his calling Alexander Bishop of Antioch, that
persuaded Atticus to restore Chrysostoms name, a bold-fac'd man; the word
(though used by Cyril in his Letter to Atticus,) is indeed the expression of
Atticus in his Letter to Cyril, and therefore if there be any indecency in it,
it is to be imputed to the first Author: But however Cyril had behaved himself
in this affair, it is a little unchristian to blast his memory with those
faults he had corrected in his life time; for though our Author affirms, that
no credible Historian tells us that either Theophilus or Cyril ever repented of
this: yet I believe there is sufficient evidence to the contrary to persuade
any reasonable man. For besides that Socrates affirms Theophilus before his
death to have been reconciled to those Monks, upon whose account he had
quarreled with Chrysostom, Cyrils Letter to Gennadius shows him to have been
satisfied in the business of Chrysostom's Honorable Restoration to the
Diptychs. Gennadius was a Presbyter of the Church of C. P. and refused to
communicate with Proclus his Bishop for receiving the Bishop of Elia into his
communion contrary to the Canons, Ep. Cyril. ad Gennad.
which do not own that Bishop as Palaestinae praepositum. Here Cyril urges very
peaceably, that the rigor of the Canons must oftentimes give way to peace and
expedience; whence it appears, 1. That he had changed his mind as to the
necessary maintenance of the Canons, rather than remit any point that would
conduce to peace, which was his arguing with Atticus; 2. It appears from hence
that he held communion with Proclus, else he had never been so urgent with this
Presbyter to communicate with his Bishop; 3. That this communion with Proclus
supposes him satisfied in the restitution of Chrysostom. For this Proclus had
not only kept his name in the Diptychs, but fetched home his bones, and so
ended that Schism of the Joann^^^; so that Cyril must by this have chang'^
(...) judgment concerning Chrysostom: N^^^ ^is Letter to Atticus, which our
Auth^^ cites, lays the greatest stress upon this argument, that it will be
dangerous to restore his name, because it may divide the world again, since the
greatest part had expunged it out of their Diptychs, and could not easily be
brought either to re-admit it, or to communicate with those that did: But
finding the contrary, it seems he followed the examples of other Churches. The
fiction of Nicephorus about Cyril's Vision was (I suppose) invented to salve
the reputation of Cyril. For since after so great opposition he changed his
mind; to remove from him the imputation of levity, and to show that he was
carried away sincerely, and by an invincible mistake, he must be reconciled by
a miracle.

However it were, whether Cyril repented of this fault or no, our Author cannot
forbear exclaiming, upon the occasion of Cyril's restoring the name of
Chrysostom by the authority of a Synod. O ductile Synods! O unhappy Churches
whose Pastors must grow wise and cease destroying after so long sunning, and by
an experience which costeth the Church so dear!] It had been doubtless much
better there never had happened any difference between the Pastors of the
Church, but what Church has been so happy? what government can secure this
uninterrupted Peace? Surely our Author cannot pretend to exempt himself from
the lash of his own exclamations; for I know no man deeper engaged in the
contentions of the Church, or that has writ with greater bitterness on all such
occasions: The writing of a great part of his 80 books being but like so many
pitched battles he has fought, and most commonly in the dark, when he was
hardly able to discover friend from foe: if he scorns to be so ductile as these
Synods, and to recant his mistakes when they are discovered to him, I pray God
give him a better mind, and make him to have a more honorable opinion of
repentance.

The last part of Cyril's accusation is taken out of Isidore's Epistles,. 6.
some of which are very sharp: yet I believe when the Reader shall have weighed
the circumstances duly, this will be no great offense to him; Isidore was
certainly a good man, but very easy to take any impressions; and hot in his
reproofs: this may be evidently seen in his dealing with Cyril. For he reproves
him in one place for prosecuting his private quarrels against Nestorius, l. 1.
Ep. 310.
under pretense of Zeal for the faith; yet the same Author in another place
advises him not to betray, l. 1. Ep. 324.
and give up the cause, (...): and rather to suffer any evil that might befall
him, than to endure so much as to hear false and pernicious doctrines. So that
the same Isidore who reproaches this man upon a false information, retracts
afterward; and gives him commendations no less extravagant than the reproofs
he used toward him before; for he is very large and passionate in his
commendation when he recommends to him the miserable estate of the Church of
Pelusuim, l. 2. Ep. 126.
into which it was brought by the covetousness and ambition of one Martinianus
a Presbyter, If. Pel. l. 2. Ep. 126. O thou best of men, it belongs to thy
Wisdom and Authority, to rescue the poor Church of Pelusium from the Hands of
evil Governors.
(...): nor is this only a general complement, but he goes on to mention
particular instances of his integrity against this Martinianus, who after he
had robbed the Church of Pelusium sent some part of the money to Alexandria to
endeavor to procure himself the Bishopric: Cyril having intimation of this
practice, rebukes him sharply, and threatens if he go on any further in this
base course so dishonorable to Religion, that he will not only excommunicate,
but have him banished. Whereupon Isidore applys himself to him in expressions
of the greatest admiration of his integrity, and does not know how to call him
by a title good enough; What Compe'lation shall I use that may be suitable to
so great worth?
(...); Whoever is the least acquainted with the Spirit and temper of Isidore
will hardly suspect him of flattery, but that he was the real Convert of this
great Bishop, and by these commendations of him endeavored to make honorable
amends, and to wash off the dirt he had before rashly cast upon his name. If I
should take the pains to gather the hands of the Fathers, and to set down the
glorious testimonials they give of Cyril; I believe few Saints could show
greater evidence of their merit toward the Church, Gloriosissimus fidei
Catholicae Defensor, Prosper. contra collat. c. 41. Celest. Ep. ad Nest.. 5.
and Cyrillus Alexandriae Episcopus vir omni sapientia and Sanctitatis exemplo
clarissimus, probatissimus Sacerdos, etc.

But Theodoret it seems was never truly reconciled to him: for in his Epistle
to Johannes Antioch. he looks upon the death of Cyril as a deliverance of the
Church from a turbulent enemy of Peace. But God only knows, says our Author:
Yes sure there are men that know it too, though not Mr. Baxter: They that are a
little more versed in the writings of the Fathers know very well, Baron. An.
44016.
that this Epistle is spurious, and that John to whom it was directed was dead
four years before, which Theodoret could not but know. And it is very well
known that the Nestorians forged several Letters in the name of Theodoret.
Leont. de Sect. Sect. 5.
In short, nothing can be a plainer confutation of this Fiction than Theodorets
own Letter to Dioscorus, the successor of Cyril; where besides that he does
show John to be dead seven years before the time of the writing of that Letter,
Theod. Ep. ad Diosc.
he does also make it appear that there was a full and sincere reconciliation
between him and Cyril before his death: That Cyril when he had written his
Books against Julian the Apostate, and another about the Scapegoat, before he
published them, sent them to John Bishop of Antioch, to communicate them with
the greatest Scholars of the East, He sent them to me, says Theodoret, and I
read them, and sent him an account of them, and I received Letters from him
after that, Ad Flavian.
which I have still by me: And the same man in another Letter gives an account
of this to Dioscorus, that he had sent to him to acquaint him that he
persevered still in that league that had been made between Cyril, of happy
memory, and the Eastern Churches. And now let any man judge whether this forged
Letter that goes under the name of Theodoret, be not as great an injury to him
as it is to Cyril. But with our Author that weeds Church History, any fiction
or imposture is authentic that does but contain some scandalous reflections
upon great Bishops, and this seems to be the mark that directs his choice all
along.

I have been more particular in the Vindication of this great Bishop from those
calumnies our Author raked out of all the Libels of his Enemies, because all
this seems to be brought in on purpose to lessen the reputation of the Council
of Ephesus, that was chiefly directed by the authority of Cyril; and that you
may not take this for an uncertain conjecture of his design he explains himself
[ But (pardon truth or be deceived still) ignorance and pride, p. 94. sect. 20.
and envy, and faction, and desire to please the Court, made Cyril and his
party by quarrelsome Heretication to kindle that lamentable flame in the
world.] Can any man that has any ingenuity or knowledge of those times affirm
this? How could this gratify the Court, since the Emperor was so highly
offended with the contention, that he ordered Cyril to be imprisoned, and was
extremely dissatisfied with both parties? Or how can that be the effect of
Cyril's Envy or Ambition, which he himself did endeavor to prevent by all the
amicable methods imaginable; as may be seen by his Letters to Nestorius? But if
the Reader will not blindly engage in all the groundless jealousies and
malicious suggestions of our Author, then he has much ado to forbear calling
him Fool; but however he dismisses him with that which is equivalent, Let him
be deceived still, as if every one that had any more charitable opinion of
Bishops and Councils than he, that seems to have read little more than what
Binnius has of them, loved to be deceived; and shut his Eyes against the
greatest evidence in the World.

Before we enter upon the Council of Ephesus, it is fit some notice should be
taken of our Authors account of Nestorius.

The worst thing he can say of him is, That he was hot against Heretics, and
desired the assistance of the Civil Magistrate to suppress them; that he went
about to pull down the Church of the Arians, and they set it on fire
themselves, and then called him Firebrand, when themselves were the
Incendiaries; he vexed the Novatians, etc. After all we have this Remark; Thus
Turbulent Hereticators must have the Sword do the work of the Word. When our
Author lays about him, he never minds where the blow falls, and deals alike to
friends and foes: What Hereticators were hotter than the Presbyterians in the
year 1646? the Inquisition is not more severe than their Ordinance against
Heresies, Ordinance against Heresy and Blasphemy: presented to the House of
Commons.
which they desired should be made Felony, and punished by death. And of other
opinions that were to be punished by imprisonment, were there not many that are
yet in dispute between the Reformed themselves? Nay, he that vindicates that
Bloody Ordinance as the Independents called it, does complain against the
Bishops for not being severe enough in the eradication of Heresies: Vindication
of the Ordin. against Heresy, p. 23. Impr. James Cranford.
I will set down the words because they are something remarkable: In the
Bishops times there were some Arians and Blasphemers put to death, according to
the Laws which then were, and for ought I know are still in force. But had the
Bishops had as much zeal for God and his truth, as they had for their own
greatness, they had obtained such a law as this is, if not in all the
particulars, Presbyterian Toleration.
yet in most of them long ago, and thereby prevented many of those monstrous
opinions, which have of late been vented among us, to the great dishonor of
God and our Kingdom, and the mischief to Souls; but they were cast out for
their lukewarmness, and let others take heed of the like: How shall the Bishops
do to please these men? Sometimes when they are in authority, they are
Hereticators, and Persecutors, and Instigators of the Civil Magistrate against
men for Conscience sake: Sometimes they are lukewarm and negligent for not
providing Laws severe enough, and for not putting men to death for errors in
Religion: If I were worthy to advise our Author I would desire him for the
honor of Presbytery, to level his spiteful reflections a little more justly,
lest whilst he lets fly with a good will against Bishops, the Brethren of the
Holy Discipline be not hurt; and lest what he designs against Councils, fall
unhappily upon the Reverend Assembly, Answer to Dr. Stillingst.
for which he expresses no small esteem elsewhere, although Bishops and their
Councils are so abominable in his sight. But enough of this, for our purpose: I
will leave our Author to the judgment of his Brethren, and only crave the
Readers Pardon for this digression.

We are now come to the Council of Ephesus,. 9.
which was occasioned by Nestorius his denying the Blessed Virgin to be the
Mother of that person that was God: this doctrine was broached by his
favorite, Priest Anastasius; though Nestorius being the more eminent person
carried away the name and reputation of it: Our Author says, This set all the
City in a division, disputing of they well knew not what: Nestorius was
suspected by some to deny the Godhead of Christ, but he was of no such
opinion,] It is true, he did not directly deny the Godhead of Christ but
consequentially he did, as we shall show hereafter.

The Emperor weary of this stir, p. 89. sect. 9.
calls a Council; and yet our Author forgets himself not many pages after,
where he will have his Reader believe that Cyril made all this stir to please
the Court.

The truth of it is, the obstinacy of Nestorius obliged the Emperor to
assemble this Council; for Cyril had tried all the moderate ways in the world
to reclaim him before this was thought of. Nothing can be more modest than
Cyril's Letter to Nestorius, Ep. ad Nest.
though he had received several personal provocations from him; and after this
another written with the same Spirit; Secunda Ep. ad Nest.
but Nestorius took all this brotherly admonition for reproach, and endeavored
to maintain his opinion, and to secure himself in equivocal and doubtful
expressions, sometimes seeming to speak the same thing with Cyril, that Christ
had two natures in one person, sometimes considering Christ as a double person,
and always denying Mary to be the Mother of God by any means: This was the
unhappy Controversy that divided the world. Several being deceived by the
Equivocations of Nestorius took his part at first, but finding him obstinate in
denying the Virgin to be the Mother of that person that was God, they at last
deserted him, and joined with Cyril in his condemnation.

It had been happy for the Church if the mysteries of our Religion had never
been curiously disputed. But when busy, troublesome men have started a new
dangerous doctrine, and endeavor to propagate it with all industry imaginable,
it is not fit that the Governors should sit as unconcerned Spectators, but
that they should oppose vigorously all such remedies as God has put into their
hands: i. e. advise, admonish, rebuke; and if these means prove ineffectual to
stop the course of evil doctrine, they must proceed according to the Apostles
advice, a Heretic after admonition reject. This method therefore of proceeding
against Heresies and the Authors of them cannot be disallowed by any reasonable
man. But this case of Nestorius it seems yields a further debate; and the merit
of the cause is yet disputed. Derodon makes Nestorius Orthodox, and Cyril the
Heretic: our Author believes both Orthodox, but that they did not understand
one another; and so by words that themselves did not understand, they set all
the world on fire. As for Derodon, he manifestly condemns Nestorius in a little
Treatise De Supposito, printed with several other Philosophical Tracts of his;
and approves Cyril: the truth is, he has a singular notion of a person there
which seems to approach Nestorianism, which he endeavors to confirm by the
authority of Cyril and other Fathers: but this which our Author cites, I have
not yet seen, nor can I find that it has been yet published; however since the
minutes of his arguments are set down by our Author, I will endeavor to show
the mistake of that learned man, by giving the true state of the question
between Cyril and Nestorius.

Nestorius did first recede from the allowed expressions of the Fathers, who
did all occasionally call the Blessed Virgin the Mother of God; and therefore
was justly suspected to recede from their doctrine: Cyril admonishes him of
this dangerous innovation, and explains himself concerning the Incarnation of
the son of God; Nestorius endeavors to confute it; and now let us see what it
was that they both maintained. I will begin with the Doctrine of Cyril, (...)
the word united the flesh to himself hypostatically or personally: Ep. 2. ad.
Nestor.
and a little after, (...): Ibid.
i. e. distinct natures concurring to make a real Unity; of both which consists
one Christ and one Son: not that the difference of the natures are taken away
by that Unity, but that the divinity and humanity combined by an unspeakable
manner of Union, make one Christ, and one Son. Ibid.
And then (...), uniting the manhood hypostatically to himself: and as to the
order of this Union he explains himself farther, (...): i. e. He was not first
a mere man that was born of the Holy Virgin; which the Divinity afterward did
assume; but the Word being united to the Man from the very Womb, is said to
have undergone a carnal generation. And that this Union does not destroy the
difference of natures in Christ, he shows expressly in that same place, (...):
He became man, but did not therefore cease to be God, but after the assumption
of Flesh, remained still the same that he was before. And to the same purpose
in another place, after the assumption of Flesh he remained very God, Ep. ad
Eulog.
and suffered death upon the Cross, i. e. the Flesh only, and not the divine
nature; but nothing can be plainer than this [ That there is a vast difference
or distance between the divinity and humanity of Christ, l. 2. contra Nestor.
I must needs confess, for they are different things that are signified by
these two names, as to what regards their essence, and have nothing the one
like the other, and (...), the Union does admit a difference, but excludes all
division; Ep. ad Nest.
] and lastly he shows the absurdity of rejecting this Hypostatical Union as
incomprehensible; because it will unavoidably force us to allow two Sons; the
Son of Man: (...), by himself: and the Son of God again by himself, (...),
which he plainly confutes. If this does not sufficiently declare two natures
subsisting in one person, it is not in the power of words to do it.

Thus was he understood by all the world, excepting only the Eastern Bishops,
who had a quarrel against him, and therefore were resolved to cavil; and even
these at last were reconciled to his expressions. Thus the Fathers in the
Council of Chalcedon understood him, and the Catholic Church ever since, yet
all this it seems could not prevail with Derodon, who in opposition to almost
all the world, maintains his Paradox, that Cyril taught the same doctrine with
Eutyches; and that Nestorius was in the right.

For this purpose he cites out of Cyril several passages that affirm Christ to
have but one nature; and this is that which was condemned in Eutyches. It is
true indeed that Cyril does frequently own but one nature, but it is to be
observed that (...) in his sense is the same with (...); and by both he means
nothing but a real Union, in opposition to an imaginary, notional one, which
Nestorius did maintain. This may be easily observed by comparing all those
places where he affirms but one nature, with those already alleged, that
expressly affirm the contrary. But besides this, if he shall be allowed to
explain himself, the matter will be soon decided, (...): Natural, that is,
Confir. Anath. 3.
a real Union. When Acacius presses him with the Confessions of the Orthodox,
Ep. ad Acacium.
that own two natures in Christ, and that those Divines do express this
difference, because there really is one between the Natures: Cyril answers,
that he does by no means take away these terms of distinction, but condemns the
wrong application of them, so as that one should be applied to the word (...),
and the other to the Son of the Virgin (...), that is, so as to divide the
person, and to make the Son of the Virgin different from the Son of God;
therefore, says he, there is (...), one nature of the word; but of the word
incarnate, i. e. one hypostasis. For so he explains himself in the conclusion
of that answer, that those Orthodox that mention two natures, and he, are all
of the same opinion; for since there is but one Son, one God, and Lord; so it
is that we and they do confess one person only; for that was his design by the
expression of one nature: and that those things that belong to the Divinity,
and those which belong to the Humanity must be all ascribed to one Christ: and
justifying himself against such as suspected him of confounding the two natures
in Christ, Ibid.
he denies that ever he took away (...). And John Bishop of Antioch willing to
express the same thing; (...); which though he disowns to be his own words, but
that John expressed himself after that manner, yet he receives the sense of
them; that several things are to be understood of Christ as Man, and others of
him as God; yet that the Godhead and the Manhood make but one Christ.

In what sense Cyril affirmed one nature, appears further from what he
condemned in Nestorius and others: Cyr. Ep. cum 12. Anath.
(...), not dividing and separating God from man, as part from part; nor yet
joining them together by an Unity only of honor and authority; this was it
that he charged Nestorius with, and from which he never did so much as
endeavor to vindicate himself: Whereupon Cyril urges, that unity of dignity or
honor does not imply personal union; and parity of authority does not unite
nature; for Peter and John may be of the same authority and dignity, and yet
they are not one but two persons: besides this, he rejects another way of
Union, (...), by a participation of divine graces, as holy men are said to be
united to God; upon which account he does reject frequently this expression
that Christ is (...); and he no less rejects the way of artificial conjunction,
(...), as being very improper to express this hypostatical union of Christ: But
that which he thinks comes nearest to illustrate this Union, is that
conjunction of body and soul in man, which is a concourse of two very different
natures, which yet make but one man; this is one of the greatest arguments to
prove him a Heretic: but if this will serve to do it, most of the Fathers that
wrote upon this subject, must be Heretics as well as he; since they all make
use of this illustration. Yet though he were singular in this instance, it
would by no means conclude him in the Heresy of Eutyches; for those things
that are brought to illustrate, are not necessarily required to be like the
things they are to illustrate in every point. What Cyril concludes is only
this, that as the Body and Soul make one Man, so God and Man makes one Christ;
and this is the composition that he means: which will be easily understood by
comparing this with other passages of Cyril. If he judged that Christ had but
one only nature resulting out of that Composition, like that of Man; then it
must be either the divine nature which had taken the humane into it self, or
that the divinity should be changed into his humanity, or some third nature
that must result from both, all which he equally abhorrs; for notwithstanding
the incarnation, Ep. ad Nest. ad Acac. ad Joh. 12. Anathim. ad Success.
he affirms expressly, (...); of the humanity he affirms it still remains,
because there is no (...), no (...); no mixture, no changing of it into another
nature. 3. In the Composition of man there is one form joined to matter, which
makes the unity of nature, but in the hypostatical union the man retains his
proper form according to Cyril; who denis that the word informs the body of the
man, but that it is Corpus animatum, a body endu'd with reason and
understanding. So that it appears plainly by the doctrine of Cyril, that he did
acknowledge two natures in one person, and that when he oftentimes affirmed one
nature in Christ, he meant only one person; which he would not have divided and
separated from it self, (...): and the reason of using the phrase of one
nature, as well as of one hypostasis or person, will appear further by
considering the error of Nestorius, against which he opposed those
expressions. This Heretic began to discover himself, by not only scrupling,
The Opinion of Nestorius.
but condemning the Title which the Blessed Virgin bore commonly in that age,
of being (...), the Mother of God; by condemning this expression, Nestorius in
effect condemned all the Fathers who had used it; and this gave a general
alarm, as if the faith of the Fathers, Athan. Gregory, etc. was going to be
condemned in this Word: and there was very great reason for this jealousy.
John Bishop of Antioch, a particular friend of Nestorius, Joh. Ep. ad Nest.
was scandalized at this innovation, and sends a Letter to him to expostulate
about this matter; and presses him very hard with this argument: If you
understand and believe the same thing with the Holy Fathers that have gone
before us (for this I understand by several common friends that you do) why are
you afraid to express an orthodox meaning by a convenient phrase? Especially
since so great mischief and confusion is like to ensue upon your refusal: But
how he explained himself we shall see presently.

In his Epistle to Cyril he expresses himself one would think very Orthodoxly,
Ep. ad Cyr.
(...) but if we examine what he means by (...) and (...), we shall find that
he really maintained two persons as well as two natures. (...) is used not only
for a person, or an intelligent subsistence, but likewise as Persona in Latin,
with relation to office, dignity, authority, and other circumstances of a man:
so it is used in those phrases, (...); and (...); this was the most common
signification of the word; and therefore Cyril does not use it so frequently as
(...) or (...), which he thought more proper to express the personal union of
Christ: and Nestorius does industriously avoid (...). Now let us see wherein he
made the unity of person to consist: Cyr. Cont. Nest. p. 43. Ed. Par.
(...): i. e. It was God that took upon him the form of a servant, it was this
which was assumed: after that there is the dignity of the conjunction; (though
(...) does not signify such a near conjunction as that personal one, but only
an artificial joining, so as that the things do still remain under different
subsistences) the authority is common to both natures; for the same dignity
belongs to both, confess the unity ((...)) of personal dignity not subsistence,
Ibid.
the natures or subsistences remaining still different; and then, there is no
dividing of the conjunction of dignity and filiation; and then, the son is
twofold, not in respect of dignity, but of nature. And the error which he
charges Cyril with, is, as if all those things that are said of Christ as God
and as Man, p. 33.
were understood by him (...), not according to the Honor of the conjunction,
but according to nature, or naturally: than which nothing can be plainer.
Cyril's answer does plainly show what he meant by (...), and what Nestorius, by
his (...): Why therefore (says he) do thou pretend to maintain the true
faith, when thou do manifestly divide Christ into two persons, (...), and
do destroy the manner of that true and real union, (...), which is with him
the same thing as (...), whereby Christ is (...), really one. But thou on the
other side make that equality of honor to be Unity, which is not a real,
substantial, but an imaginary Unity: So that Nestorius does evidently hold two
natural persons (for so I must speak) still distinct in Christ, Vid. Zanch. de
Incarnat. Verbi.
joined together not hypostatically, but into one title, or dignity, which
Cyril explains sometimes very properly by the word (...).

This being premised concerning Nestorius his holding two natures in one
person, we shall see more clearly how all his expressions do point at this
notion, we have now observed, Cyr. cont. Nest.
(...), Where there are two generations, p. 21.
there are two Sons, but the Church knows but one son, therefore the word
cannot be said to be born with the flesh as one person; and so consequently God
and Man is not the person that was born of the Virgin; and Christ was a person
distinct from the word: nor does he hold this consequentially only but in
express terms, therefore, says he, Christ is said to be the Word, p. 47.
because he i. e. Christ is joined for ever to the Word. What, is not Christ
the name of the person? and if there be not two, what can this conjunction of
Christ with the word signify? and therefore Cyril makes this advantage of it,
p. 52.
(...). The same thing is observable from Nestorius dividing his Worship in
respect of God and Man; the first he worships upon his own account, the latter
(...): which Cyril takes to imply another person. There are many more instances
to the same effect, p. 74, 84, 90, 100, 108, 126. Ed. Par.
cited and confuted by Cyril in the same Book.

When Cyril and the Eastern Bishops were agreed, the Nestorians cavil'd as if
Cyril had received those that maintained the same doctrine with Nestorius, and
as if John and the rest had condemned those that held the same faith with them;
Ep. ad Acac.
but Cyril makes it sufficiently appear what difference there was between them
and Nestorius: For he destroys the mystery of the incarnation, denying that the
Son of God was born of the Virgin, for these are Nestorius his own words, I
have read, says he, in Scripture that God proceeded or passed through the
Virgin: (...): but he read no where that he was born of her; and in the same
place, Therefore Christ is called the Word of God, because he is joined for
ever to the word. Christ then in his sense is not the word, but belongs to it;
which manifestly makes two persons: and a while after, I separate the natures,
but I join the adoration; and that upon the account of that equality of honor
and authority which the man had by his conjunction with God, not into one
natural person and properly so called, but into an union of title and dignity.
With respect to which opinion Cyril presses the unity of nature, and makes use
of (...) and hypostasis indiscriminately: And lastly, Nestorius denis Christ to
be truly and properly God, in his first Anathema in answer to those of Cyril,
saying, Si quis Christum verum deum and non Immanuel dixerit, i. e. Whosoever
shall call him True God, let him be Anathema, which shows that the Union he
meant was not personal, but that Christ was no more than what Cyril often
charges Nestorius with holding, (...): If those twelve Articles of Nestorius
were extant in Greek, they would likely discover more of his mind, but as they
are, they have hardly any sense at all.

How far Nestorius dissembles his opinion by those plausible expressions of one
person and two natures, may be judged from what is already observed concerning
him: but our Author falls into a great passion against those that say Nestorius
dissembled when he affirmed two natures and one person; I take them, says he,
to be the Firebrarnds of the World, and unworthy the regard of sober men, who
pretend to know men's judgments better than themselves, etc. It cannot be
unknown to any man that has read any thing in Ecclesiastical writings, that
Heretics were used to take refuge in Equivocation; and to show a fair
plausible doctrine to the first view, but when this was narrowly examined and
compared with other things that dropped from them, either unawares or in
greater confidence, it was found to be nothing but deceit and illusion. Thus
the Arians frequently imposed upon the Orthodox; thus the Nestorians seemed to
own the word (...), changing only the accent, which changed the signification
of the Word from the Mother to the Child and offspring of God; and S. Paul,
who was not unacquainted with the arts of Heretics, gives this caution against
them, that they are not presently to be taken for what they appear, Romans 16.17,
18.
Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses,
contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them; for such serve
not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own belly, and by good words and fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple: But let them be accounted Firebrands
of the World that will not put the most charitable interpretation upon the
expressions of men of suspected doctrines: I am content, and I believe the
Bishops will not be so much concerned in this accusation; I could wish our
Author would look home, and observe those Firebrarnds that will make men of
what Religion they please, in despite of all Protestations and Oaths to the
contrary: Is it not strange that men who subscribe the Articles of the Church
of England, so destructive of all the errors of Popery, which were the
occasion of the Reformation; that renounce Transubstantiation, Popes Supremacy,
Idolatry, Rebellion for the cause of Religion, Adoration of Images and Saints
and Angels; that notwithstanding all this, these men must be Papists and
Popishly affected, and let them say or believe what they will, they must be
accounted so: What shall a man do to these men? who instead of pulling down
Popery strengthen it, by reckoning so many learned and godly persons of that
side? and whilst they endeavor to dishonor these persons by so odious a
name, do no small honor to the Papists by making the most eminent party of men
both for learning and integrity that perhaps is now in the World, to be
favorers of their way: hoc Ithacus velit: The Jesuits indeed are apt to feign
several deathbed Reconciliations to their Church, to gain it credit by the
accession of some eminent opposers of it, but this they do sparingly, as the
easy people can swallow the cheat; But these Papist-makers of ours will
present them with thousands together, and send them the Protestant Churches of
three Kingdoms in one present. If any be Fire brands of the World, if any set
up Popery under the disguise of Protestants, they are surely these men that cry
down all for Papists that they have any prejudice against; and out of spite to
their brethren assist that common enemy, and become the most liberal
Benefactors to the Church of Rome that ever it had since the Reformation; nay,
not inferior to the forgers of Constantine's Donation. These men would deserve
better of Rome than Francis or Dominick, could they but make their words good.
Surely the Papists are not now to learn how to make the best use of a
fictitious title, they will not fail to boast of that strength which dissenters
give them; and have no reason to discover the falsehood of a calumny that is so
much to their credit and advantage! I must beseech the Readers Pardon for this
digression, and Gods Pardon to these false accusers of their brethren, that
they may know in this their day the things that belong to their peace. To
return now to the business we left.

It will not suit the proportion of my design to dwell upon every particular
expression of Cyril's that may be suspected, and to detect the Heresy of
Nestorius lurking under the disguise of Orthodox Expressions, I hope that what
has been already observed, may be sufficient at least to suspend the Readers
judgment from pronouncing Cyril a Heretic with Derodon, or Nestorius (who was
condemned by almost all the world) an Orthodox and sound believer? until some
abler hand undertake that matter, and treat it more particularly.

Our Author though he make use of Derodon's citations to disparage the
authority of these Councils, yet he differs from him in conclusion, and is loath
to give in to that bold Paradox, that Cyril so much celebrated in the Catholic
Church for his defense of the faith, should at last, after twelve hundred years
good credit prove downright Heretic. Therefore he endeavors to moderate the
business, and to make both parties Friends and Orthodox, though they themselves
were not sensible of it! All this stir, says our Author, proceeded only from
misunderstanding, and Cyril and Nestorius and the rest of the Bishops did not
understand one another meaning: It is not unpleasant to observe a man
unacquainted with the language in which these disputes were, pretend gravely to
be Moderator, and to persuade the World they did not understand the terms they
quarrelled about, though the language were vulgar to them all; and by the
strength of Hanmer's, and other miserable translations, to play the Critic:
but whether is most likely that these great and learned men should understand
one another terms; or persons removed from their times many hundreds of years,
and ignorant of the language in which they writ, I leave the Reader to
determine. It is true, that in this case there was great misunderstanding
between Cyril and the Eastern Bishops; yet we find that as soon as ever they
came to debate the matter calmly, they found they differed but in expression,
and yet both found they differed widely from the doctrine of Nestorius.

But though some few men might be transported, and mistake one another in the
heat of their contention, it is strange that all the world should be so blind
and undiscerning, that no man before our Author should find out this
undiscovered agreement between the contending Bishops, and not one have the
fortune to stumble upon this observation. Mr. B. does endeavor to satisfy
this doubt, by showing that besides the factiousness of the generality of the
Bishops, there were but few among them that had any learning; p. 92.
and this he offers to make out by several arguments: 1. That the Fourth
Council of Carthage did forbid Bishops to read any Heathen Authors. Mr. B.
mistakes it for the 6th.
But how should this Prohibition make ignorant Bishops in the East, where it
had no force? Nor do we find any such prohibition there, unless that of Julian
the Apostate to bring Christian Religion into contempt, by making the
professors of it ignorant of all humane learning. 2. When no Bishop was to be
removed from place to place, but they were made in every Church out of an
inferior degree; why should this keep them in ignorance, since they had the
freedom of liberal education; and the lower degrees of the Church did no more
incapacitate men for learning than they did for Episcopacy? 3. Universities
were rare, therefore no wonder if learned Bishops were so rare: If University
education be so necessary for learning; our Author I believe must keep these
ignorant Bishops company, and he will help them to more, if others heed what he
writes of the Universities. But yet Philosophy Schools were not so rare as he
fancies in the Eastern Church, for there was hardly a considerable City that
had not one; and besides all this, the great learning of the world being easily
intelligible to the Eastern part of the World, as being written in their common
language; they had the less need of Professors; and a man might go a great way
with his own private Reading. 4. When Nectarius must be the great Patriarch
that was no Christian, and when Synesius, because he had Philosophical
knowledge, is chosen Bishop even before he believed the Resurrection! Learned
men were very scarce, he would infer; but it is hard to do so from these
instances: for 1. I do not find any where that Nectarius was made Patriarch for
his learning: Socr. l. 5. c. 8.
Socrates indeed says he was noble by descent, and a Prator by office, that he
was of a sweet obliging temper, and an extraordinary, and admirable person,
(...).
which rendered him very popular; and the Multitude in a fit of kindness would
force him to be their Bishop. There is not a word of his learning, or of the
scarcity of learned men, that might justify this extraordinary and irregular
election of a Catechumen into the second Bishopric of the World: and if any
one should yet fansy that to be the reason, let him consult Sozomen; l. 7. c. 8.
who gives a more particular account of this action, and different from
Socrates: He is so far from thinking that there was no Christian of learning
and abilities equal to that dignity, that he tells us there was great variety:
and that several Bishops of the Council that then sat, proposed many as fit
for that Charge: Diodorus Tarsensis happened to be strangely taken with
Nectarius his Country man; and the circumstances, if true, make it look
something like a miracle: He proposed him to the Bishop of Antioch as a sit
person for that high charge; the Bishop wondered at the fancy; and to comply
with Theodorus puts his name among several others that he offered to the
Emperor, but in the last place, little expecting he should be returned Bishop.

The Emperor by an unaccountable impulse passed all by till he came to his
name, and fixed there, and nominated him Bishop: He was no Christian, says our
Author. He was not yet baptized indeed, but he was a Catechumen and a very good
man, and wanted nothing but that consummation; which was Constantine's
condition till within a month before his death: and now let the shrewdest
guesser in the world consider whether the small number of learned Bishops was
the reason why Nictarius was chosen to be the great Patriarch.

Synesius his promotion concludes the ignorance of Bishops no more than that of
Nectarius. For Synesius, besides his learning, had a peculiar eloquence, and
besides that, was a person of an extraordinary life and reputation; so that it
was not his Philosophical learning was the only reason of his preferment: but
he did not believe the Resurrection; and surely there must be a great want of
able men, when a person under that, and several other unqualifying
circumstances should be forced into a Bishopric. But Theophilus understood the
meaning of it, that this was but a fiction to avoid being Bishop: for his
Letter to his Brother was not designed as a secret, Syn. Ep. 105.
but as he suggests there, that it might be showed, and become a remedy against
that fondness the people had of him; and in another to the Presbyters of
Ptolemais after he was made Bishop, Ep. 11.
he does acknowledge that he had used all the arts and stratagems that he could
devise to escape it: Evagrius and Nicephorus did take him at his word, Vid.
Bar. An. 410. Luc. Holst. dissert. de fug. Ep.
and represented him to posterity as he had characterized himself: and excuse
those that ordained him by saying, that they had hopes that afterward he would
believe more Orthodoxly, and correct those errors he confessed: It was not
then for want of able men that he was made Bishop, but it was the extraordinary
affection of Theophilus, and the people of Ptolemais, and the great reputation
he had in the world, having been sent long before by the City of Cyrene to
Arcadius, and delivered that noble Oration de Regno, that alone were enough to
make all ingenious men in love with him for his eloquence and his gravity, and
to render him eminent in the most learned age of the World, though Mr. B. in
the second Part of his Church History, part 1. p. 169. affirms, That there are
diverse poor men, Weavers, Plowmen and others of the Church of Kederminster,
that can Pray, and Teach, and Write as methodical, pious, weighty tractates as
Synesius, notwithstanding he was a Philosopher, and as well as any Eusebius
extolled as famous Bishops of the second and third age, etc. not to say, of
Clemens, Ignatius, Irenaeus, Cyprian; yea even as Holy Macarius, Ephrem Syrus,
Synesius, Isidore, Pelus: By this you may judge how well our Author is
acquainted with those Ecclesiastical Writers.

The last thing by which he proves the scarcity of learned Bishops, is the
ignorance of Nestorius, which Socrates that knew him does affirm: But here our
Author does Socrates wrong, for he does not say that Nestorius was ignorant,
but that he was unacquainted with the Fathers and Ecclesiastical writers, which
made him condemn the word (...), l. 7. c. 32.
which was used by Athanasius and several others: and that he did not vouchfafe
to read the Ancients. As for Philosophy, perhaps he had too much, and his
writings do show that he had no confused illogical Pen: So that this proves the
ignorance of the Bishops of those times no more than the rest.

The truth is, our Author has the worst luck in the world in his observations,
where he ventures to dictate out of his own head, and to speak something new:
He could not have likely pitched upon such another age in all the History of
the Church as this, for multitude of eminent and learned Bishops, and I believe
I may say there is none that has recommended it self to Posterity by so
numerous and substantial Monuments of learning. What shall we think of Hierom,
Ruffinus, Augustine, the two Cyrils, Theodoret? what shall we say of Synesius,
Isidore, Pelus, and infinite others? were these ignorant times that yielded
such eminent lights, such renowned Champions and Ornaments to the Church of
Christ? One may say with great truth that it was not till now that learning was
become general among Christians, and especially in the East.

Yet alas (say our Author) how few Bishops could distinguish then, as Derodon,
and cur conimon Metaphysics do now, between Individuum, prima substantia,
natura, suppositum, persona, and distinguish between a right essence, and
hypostasis or subsistence, etc. and have defined all these? Nature, says
Derodon, is taken in nine senses, but the sense was not here agreed on before
they disputed of the matter. Alas indeed! this was a wonderful ignorance. They
simple men did not understand the art of splitting a good sixpence into two
bad groats; or of evaporating all good substantial sense by multiplying
impertinent distinctions: but for my part I value them not a farthing the less,
for not knowing nine sorts of natures, any more than for not knowing the four
sorts of Seekers, or our Authors twelve species of Episcopacy.

What our Author speaks of the turbulence and factiousness of the Bishops, ^bid.
that blinded them so, as not to distinguish between the Abstract and the
Concrete, and between the qui and qua Deus: It is after his wonted candor. It
is no wonder if good men are vehement, when they think their faith is going to
be overthrown; and if heat and passion is in any thing to be excused, it is
surely here, where the concern is so very great, and easiness and moderation
look like the betraying of the cause of God. But there needs no other answer to
our Author, than the words of our Savior, Mat. 7.5.
First cast out the beam out of thine eye, and then shall thou see clearly to
cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye. If the Bishops were turbulent here,
it was for the faith; but there are those that have been and still are more
turbulent for the circumstances of Religion. I wish our Author would think of
it.

There remains yet one considerable Objection against Cyril, which I have
reserved on purpose to the last place that I might answer it more at large, and
I hope it will give great light unto the subject we have in hand. The objection
is this, That Cyril fathered the doctrine of Nestorius about the Incarnation
upon his Master, Theodorus Tarsensis, and Theodorus Mopsuestenius. But Theodore
Tars. died in the Communion of the Church, and was owned by it, not only as a
sound Member, but as an eminent Champion for the truth. I will take notice at
this time of this Theodore only, whose discrple Nestorius was. Facundus takes
great pains to vindicate him, and does it very effectually; but as for this
charge of Cyril, he does not well know what to say; sometimes he is in doubt of
the matter of fact, whether Cyril did condemn his doctrines, and write against
him; because in doing so, he must depart not only from the rest of the Fathers,
but from himself too: For in some of his writings he is very high in his
commendation: Scripti sunt a Magno Theodore (says Cyril. ap. Fac. l. 8. t. 6.
p. 349.
) adversus Arrianorum and Eunomianorum Haereses viginti forte and amplius
libri, and elia prater hac Evangelica and Apostolica Scripta interpretatus est,
and hos quidem labores nullus est ausus increpare, sed dextro decreto honorare
studium rectorum dogmatum quod in cis est. And therefore he makes it a doubt
concerning Cyril, sive scripserit aliquid adversus Theodorum sive non: But
there is no question to be made about the matter of fact; For Cyril's Epistle
to Successus, where he accuses Theodore as the Father of Nestorianisme, was
never questioned that I know; and another of his to Acacius Melitenus, mentions
not only his dislike of Theodore, but that he had writ against him; because he
conceived he had writ against our Saviors incarnation: and yet Theodore did
expressly maintain two natures in one person: So that Cyril in opposing this
must either be a Heretic, or he must mistake the meaning of those he wrote
against.

Now for the clearing of this matter we must observe, that though Theodore was
no Heretic, yet there was Heresy among his writings, foisted in by the
followers of Apollinaris, and this is the very Heresy for which Cyril condemns
him. I will set down Theodore's own words as they are cited by Facundus: Fac.
l. 10. c. 1.
Ante triginta enins hos annos de Incarnatione Domini Codicem conscripsinus
usque ad 15. versum pertingentem, in quae Arris and Eunomii de hac re delicta,
nee non etiam Apolinarii vanam prasumptionem per totum illud opus examinavi, ut
nihil, sicut mea fert opinio, praterirem ex his qu^^ ad firmitatem
Ecclesiastica Orthodoxia pertinerent, and ad convincendam little impietatem. Sed
hi qui omnia facillime praesumunt, and praeterea rursum ab Apolinario, qui
princeps hujus haeresis fuerat, instituti, omnibus quidem similiter
sentientibus, opus nostrum manifestum fecerunt, siquo modo aliqua invenirent
valentia ad convincendum ea quae in eo sunt scripta; quoniam vero nullus contra
certamen Scriptis suscipere praesumebat, imitati sunt infirmos Athletas and
callidos, qui duni non possunt contra fortiores certare, insidiis eos and
machinamentis quibus possunt conantur evertere. Scripserunt enim ipsi, inter se
proculdubio, quaedam inepta quae a nobis unqnam minime dicerentur; denique haec
ipsa in medio Scriptorum nostrorum in quadam part interposuerunt, and suis
familiaribus demonstraverunt, aliquando etiam and nostris qui per facilitatem
suam omnia pronis animis audiebant; Et hoc quasi documentum, ut putabant,
nostrae impietatis videntibus praebebant. Vnum autem ex his Scriptis erat, duos
filios dicere; sic enim nos fe^erunt in hoc opere dicentes, quod oporteat
putare and dicere duos filios, and vehementer nos illum Sermonem defendere, dum
nos in illa Scriptura manifest ubique diceremus quod non oporteat duos filios
dicere: The sum is, that those Heretics, that could not confute his books,
resolved to corrupt them, and foisted strange doctrines that he abhorred, as
that we must own two sons in Christ; and this cheat was carried on with that
Impudence that they showed these interlopations to some of the Bishops own
Congregation, who were carried away with it at first, but were recovered by the
Bishops reproof, that they should be so foolishly credulous as to give greater
credit to these writings than to what they heard him daily preach in the
Church. If then those that were so near Theodore were imposed upon by this
cheat of the Arians, what wonder if Cyril should light upon corrupted Copies at
that distance of time and place, and take that for the doctrine of Theodore
that was but the Interpolation of those Heretics?

But this is not all; Theodore had several expressions of his own that might be
justly suspected of implying Two sons: so that Sirmond in his note upon that
passage where he disowns two sons, remarks, duos tamen imprudenter statuit: l.
10.
and he himself confesses that he was too negligent in his first writings. Non
quantum oportuit habuimus circa istam rem diligentiam, passi enim sumus
quaecunque incipientes ut evenit in imperitia scribendi constituti, siquidem
and multas immutationes illo tempore quae nostra sunt susceperunt, Sup. Ex.
quas non est praesentis temporis enarrare, ex qua causa magis negligenter a
nobis composita sunt plurima.

And to let you see that Theodore, l. 10. c. 2.
how Orthodox soever his meaning was, used sometime suspected and dangerous
expressions, the same Author cites the Epistle of John Bishop of Antioch to
Nestorius, where he proposes to him the example of his own Master Theodore, who
in a public exposition, having dropped some words that gave offense to several
persons, and among others to Nestorius himself, he made no difficulty to
retract it. Where we may observe by the way, that John's Epistle is to be
corrected from this passage of Facundus, and Theodorus put instead of Paulus,
that was in all the Copies of that Epistle, that had been compared before the
(...) Edition of that Council; L'abbe T. 3. p. 391. part 1. c. 25.
but L'abbe re^^^^s Theodorus, out of Segniers Copy. Let us return now to
Facundus: he urges from this passage, that Nestorius never made use of the
authority of his Master for his defense, which he would probably have done, had
he not been conscious to himself of having departed from his doctrines.

However Theodorus be Orthodox, Cyr. Ep. ad Success.
yet Cyril did not find fault with him without reason; his expressions were
harsh, and that was all he objected to him, and added, that if he were alive
and did not explain himself more Orthodoxly and more commodiously, he deserved
to be condemned: In short, he wrote against the Apollinarists that confounded
the natures in Christ, and as it often falls out, while he avoided one extreme
he seemed to fall into another: This was Cyril's own case, who to assert a real
Union called it Natural; and asserted one nature, meaning by it but one person;
but that term he thought not sufficient, since Nestorius endeavored to shelter
himself under the ambiguity of the term; thus St. Austin writing against the
Manichees seems to be of one mind, and writing against the Pelagians of
another; and although he endeavor here to reconcile his own writings, yet if
the same things seeming so contradictory, had been maintained in those terms by
two several persons, it is great odds but they would have fallen out: So hard
it is to keep steady between two extremes when the subject is nice and
difficult, and it is not easy to find terms that are proper and distinctive.

Having given this account of the doctrine of Cyril and Nestorius, I will give
the Reader a short view of the Proceedings of this Council, which our Author
represents with his wonted candor and ingenuity. Sacra Imper. ad Episc. Metrop.
The Emperor in his Writs for the calling of this Council commanded the
Bishops to be at Ephesus before Pentecost: They hoar date 15 call. Decembr. and
doubtless came time enough to the most remote parts of the Empire: and they do
particularly direct that after Easter they immediately put themselves upon
their journey, implying that the time between Easter and Whitsontide was
sufficient for the remotest Bishops to perform their journey. Cyril and
Nestorius, and near two hundred Bishops were there at the time appointed: Ep.
Joh. ad Cyril.
John Bishop of Antioch stuck by the way, some of his company falling sick, and
several of their Horses dying, and sent notice of it to Cyril and the Synod.
The Bishops that were met, were inclined to open the Council immediately, in
obedience to the Emperors command: many of them had come from far, Ep. Synod.
ad Imp.
some of them did not enjoy their health in that place, and many were poor, and
could not endure the expense of a long stay; besides that they were number
enough, and it was not fit that about two hundred Bishops should stay for
thirty, and stop all proceedings to wait their arrival. These therefore make
their applications to Cyril, and press him to proceed; he gave them good words,
and desired them to have patience for some time, for it would not be long e're
John and the Eastern Bishops would come, who were already upon their way, and
not far from the place; he deferred their sitting therefore for sixteen days
longer, (...).
and the Eastern Bishops still delaying, he was obliged to comply with the
Importunities of the Synod; and John had sent two Bishops before to desire
Cyril to go on, Alexander Apam. Alexander Hierap.
and not to stay for him; upon this, Cyril thinking all were satisfied, opened
the Synod on the 22 of June: The 22 of June falls exactly at the end of the
sixteen days allowed by the Synod.
Nestorius was summoned to give an account of his faith, he sent a surly
answer, that he would consider, and do as he thought fit; the next day they
sent others to him, but now he had fortified himself in his house, and got a
guard of Soldiers, and treated those that were sent to him rudely and
unworthily: So that now there was no other means than to examine his doctrine
out of his writings, Ep. Synod. ad Imp.
which being judged by the Council to be dangerous and destructive of the
incarnation and unity of Christ, he was condemned. I cannot see any thing in
all this proceeding that is very blameable; and John had no reason to find
fault, having given them leave to proceed. But he coming to Ephesus shortly
after, and finding fault with the proceedings of Cyril, became the occasion of
great confusions: which yet cannot be with any justice charged upon the
Council; John with his protesting Bishops countenanced the cause of Nestorius,
and condemned Cyril, being drawn in by Candidianus, who was a favourer of
Nestorius: Act. 1. prope finem.
and it is not unlikely that he had secret Orders from the Emperor to do Cyril
all the ill offices that he could, for the Emperor in his Letter to Cyril
before this Council, shows that he was not a little angry with him. He pretends
his writing to him, Theodos. Cyril. p. 1. c. 31.
and the Empresses, about this question, to have been the cause, as if he had
had a design to divide the Court as well as the Church, and to sow discord in
the Royal Family. But whatever were the reason, it is evident by his
proceeding, that he had a pique against Cyril; who was opposed in every thing
by the Emperors Officers: A little Committee of about thirty Bishops, with
John and Candidianus at the head of them, set up against the Council, condemned
Cyril and Memnon, and gave the Emperor an account of what they had done, he
sent Johannes Comes with Order to depose Cyril, Memnon and Nestorius. This John
gives a sad account of the confusion all things were in, and of the heats of
Bishops; but is very much to be suspected. For the tenor of his relation makes
it evident that he was a partizan of the Eastern Bishops, and therefore
endeavors to lay all the blame upon Cyril and his party: but sure I am that
the confusion which he represents cannot be much greater than our Author makes
in the sense of this John; and the Bishops could not understand one another
much worse than our Author did that Epistle. They would have the Scriptures
read (says our learned Translator) but they that favored Cyril said, that the
divine and terrible Scriptures were not to be read without Cyril; the Bishops
that were with John said, that Cyril ought not to be present at the reading of
the Scriptures. One would imagine that this Officer would have read a Chapter
of Job to recommend patience to these violent Bishops; but it is quite another
matter, for these terrible Scriptures were nothing else but the Emperors
Letter, which in the language of those times was called Sacra; and Sacra
Scriptura in this place, as every body knows that has any acquaintance with
these times, or has but read this Letter; for the secret is discovered within a
few lines, Augustarum literarum lectionem fecit, in quibus depositi sunt
Cyrillus and Nestorius, etc. And now it is no wonder if all things were in
confusion, and all parties, unless that small one of John of Antioch,
dissatisfied; the Orthodox looked upon the faith as involved in the
condemnation of Cyril, and to suffer in the same proscription with him; and the
greatest part of the Christian Church looked upon it self as engaged in the
same cause: therefore the Emperor considering better of it, whether out of
fear that all the world in a manner would oppose this sentence, or being better
informed concerning Cyril, revoked this decree, but confirmed the deposition
and banishment of Nestorius; and considering the party of John was but
inconsiderable in respect of those that owned the Council, the Emperor, who
probably might have made use of them against Cyril, commands them now to be
reconciled to him, to condemn Nestorius, to receive the Council; and Cyril was
only desired to sacrifice his resentments of the injuries received at Ephesus,
to the peace and settlement of the Church; and so at last Cyril and the Council
of Ephesus prevailed against all the little arts that were used to blast their
reputation, and by the means of Paulus Emissenus a perfect reconciliation was
effected, so sincere, that the old contentions are changed into friendship and
confidence, and Cyril sends some of his books to John and Theodoret to revise
and correct. So far were they from thinking him a Fire brand and incendiary as
long as they lived: as our Author represents the matter.

But this reconciliation does as little please Mr. B. as their dissentions:
There is no thanks to the Bishops for this; the Emperors threatening Letter
cured them all of Heresy; and good men! they were all this while of one mind
and did not know it: It is some sign of good nature that they would submit to
the powerful interposition of the Emperor; but there is a temper, which Mr. B.
is acquainted with, that is not to be prevailed upon either by threats or
promises from the Magistrate, and seems to hate nothing so much as compliance
with Superiors: there are some that scorn to preach by the license of the
Government, and place the Kingdom of Christ purely in opposition to Laws and
Magistrates.

CHAP. VI.
Councils about the Eutychian Heresy.

IT is the general weakness of our minds not to think we have sufficiently
avoided one extreme, unless we run into the other; and to be still running away
from what we dislike, we care not whither, without considering what
inconveniences the contrary extreme may expose us to! This is frequent among
us, not only in what relates to our passions and manners, but to our faith.
Nestorius, for fear of blasphemy, dissolved the incomprehensible unity of the
son, and fell into blasphemy on the opposite side, denying Christ to be Deus
verus: Anath. 1, 2.
Eutyches, abhorring this doctrine, thought he was not safe till he had denied
Christ to be verum hominem: Brevic. de Hist. Eutyc.
and this became the occasion of a great deal of stir and tumults in the
Christian World.

This Eutyches (who to our comfort was no Bishop, but an Abbot,) having pleased
himself some time with his notion concerning the person of Christ, was not
content to enjoy it himself, but was ambitious to propagate it: He therefore
drew up a new Creed different from those which had been set forth by all the
Councils before him, and sent a Copy of this Confession into several
Monasteries, to desire Subscriptions. Act. con. C. P.
This got wind, and Eusebius Bishop of Dorylaeum, having notice of this
practice, advises Eutyches as a friend to desist from such dangerous
enterprises, and to acquiesce in the decrees of the Councils of Nice and
Ephesus. Eutyches pursues his course, and Eusebius reports the whole matter to
Flavian: who having called a small Convention of Bishops at C. P. sends for
Eutyches thither. He at first refuses to come; but afterward, being encouraged
by a favorite Eunuch, he comes to the Council as if he had been going to a
war, guarded not only with his Monks but with Soldiers, and the Emperors
guards, where after some tergiversation he discovered his Heresy, and the
Council having admonished him to retract, but without effect, condemned him as
a Heretic.

Our Author makes Eutyches as Orthodox as Cyril; and would show that he was
condemned for the doctrine of the Council of Ephesus. Brevic. de Hist. Eutych.
The Truth of this we shall understand by considering the following particulars
of his doctrine. He held Christum verum hominem non fuisse, nec in co esse duas
naturas, sed unam Dei Verbi, incarnatam; though the last words be the very same
with those of Cyril; Ep. 2. ad Nest. and alib.
yet the rest are expressly condemned by him, for he maintains upon every
occasion, that Christ is truly Man as well as God, and perfect too, as
consisting of Body and Soul, nor did he deny two natures in Christ, but only
said that they were not separated or divided; that there was no (...), but that
both were united in one subsistence. He does indeed frequently assert one
nature, ad Eulog. l. (...).
which in his sense is no more than personal unity; and sometimes too says
there is (...), ad Acac. Melit.
unless we shall read it (...), which is much more agreeable to Cyril's
ordinary way of expressing himself; (...); Conc. Chalc. Act. 1.
and yet Eustath. Beryt. cites Cyril in the Council of Chalcedon according to
the first reading. But not to make any difficulty about this, Flav. Exempl.
fidei Theodos. Dat. Conc. Chalc. part 1. Ep. 5. It. Maxentii Cathol. Professio.
Flavian it seems did not stand much upon that expression. For he owns it with
this interpretation (...); so far he owned one nature as was consistent with
one Christ that must be God and Man, but he condemns all those that shall teach
that there are two sons, or two hypostases, or two persons, and so dissolves
that unity. And yet for all this, he was condemned as a Nestorian; and although
he seems to speak the same words with Eutyches, yet he condemns him; Brevic.
and Ep. Flav.
but you have already seen some difference, and shall sind yet more. He goes on
concerning Eutyches, saying, Christum nobis esse Consubstantialem negavit:
which is an express contradiction to the doctrine of Cyril, who all along
affirms Christ to be of the same substance with us as to his humanity, as well
as of the same substance with the Father in respect of the divine nature: [
Deinde dixit Virginem quidem quae cum genuit secundum carnem consubstantialem
nobis esse, Rescript. Flav. ad Leon.
ipsum antem dominum non suscepisse ex ea carnem nobis consubstantialem; and
Corpus domini non esse quidem corpus hominis, humanum vero corpus esse quod est
ex Virgin: adjecit autem and aliam impietatem; Ep. ad Leon.
Corpus domini quod ex Maria factum est non esse nostrae substantiae, neque
humanae conspersionis. This is something hard to be understood at first sight;
but the Breviculus Hist. Eutych. does explain it, speaking of Eutyches his
opinion concerning Christ's flesh, quam quidem non esse hominis perhibuit sed
humanum, ut similitudo magis humani corporis quam veritas suaderetur. But to
return to that which was more insisted upon for Heresy, his affirming of one
nature, which these passages will serve to explain.

The great Complaint of Eusebius Doryl. to Flavian, and of Flavian to Leo,
against Eutyches was, that he affirmed one nature after the incarnation. Did
not Cyril say the same thing? does not Flavian himself say that he does not
reject it? what then is the Controversy? Surely these men cannot be so mad as
to fall out so violently, when they all say not only the same thing but the
same words. Shall we imagine that Flavian would prevaricate, and accuse
Eutyches to Leo of that Heresy, which he owns for sound doctrine to
Theodosius? Flav. Ep. ad Theod.
It is not to be conceived that any one, much less so great a man as Flavian,
should be either so foolish or so wicked; and if we consider the accusation, we
shall be able to unriddle this difficulty. Flav. Ep. ad Leon.
For after he had charged Eutyches with holding but one nature after the Union,
he adds for a confutation of that error: neque vero unitas convenientium in
Christo duarum naturarum sicut una re, proprietates suas in unitate confudit,
sed manent in unitate perfectae naturarum proprietates; the one nature of
Christ according to Eutyches did (it seems) take away, and confound the
properties of humanity; but according to Flavian they still remained; for how
else could Christ suffer, and the divine nature not have suffered too? The
Monothelites spoke out what Eutyches disguised, whose principle extended to
much absurder consequences than that, if it had been pursued; and the denying
of the body of Christ (for I do not find that he mentions any thing of his
Soul) to be like ours, tends manifestly to this confusion of the nature, the
form, and properties of the humanity of Christ with that of his divinity.

There is one thing more in Eutyches his way of expressing himself which is
liable to exception; and that is, that before the union, there were two
natures, afterward they were but one; if he speaks of the particular natures
of Christ, this must be very impious or absurd; either it must imply that the
divinity was united to Christ after he was come in the Flesh, or that he was at
first but a mere man, and the divinity was united to him afterward, for the
merit of his obedience; or else that the man was before his birth: the first I
think Eutyches did not hold, the latter was suspected by Leo, Ep. ad Flav. and
Julian.
who wishes he had been asked what he meant by this expression, For where were
the two natures before the incarnation? his humanity could not antecede it
self, and be before he was man: and he was never purely and simply man, but
ever from the first moment in conjunction with the Godhead; therefore Leo
fancies that Eutyches was of opinion that the soul of Christ pre-existed, and
so indeed there would be two natures; but it is still absurd to say they were
both in Christ, for Christ denotes the person that is constituted of both, and
so they could be never in him until they were united. Chapter 6. Ject. 1.
Mr. B. makes Cyril say the same thing, which, if it were true, would either
justify Eutyches, or involve Cyril in the same condemnation with him. But our
Author has mistaken Cyril, or Derodon who furnished him with this notion, and
the citations upon which it depends. For Cyril never said there were two
natures in Christ before the Union, but only considers the divinity and
humanity abstractedly; not that the humanity ever had a separate existence from
the Godhead in Christ; and the result of all Cyril's discourses upon this point
is only this, that two different natures very unlike and disproportionable were
joined together in the person of Christ, but never thought that one of the
particulars united, before that union had any separate existence, nay, his
words are express to the contrary, (...), Ep. 2. ad Nestor.
he was not first born an ordinary mere man of the Holy Virgin, and the word
came afterward into him; but being united from the womb he is said so to have
undergone a carnal generation.

It was the luck or the cunning of Eutyches not to engage far in disputes about
his doctrines, or to explain himself much in public; there he seemed Orthodox
enough; but when he instructed his Monks in private, then he discovered himself
more fully. But the circumspection of the Church, and the zeal of good men, did
not suffer it to go on long undiscovered or uncensur'd. This is no unusual
thing with Heretics, to be reserved in public and promiscuous audiences; and
to use greater freedom in select meetings. This was much practiced amongst us
in the late unhappy times: though there was license enough to say any thing in
public, yet the teachers Spirit (it seems) was under some restraint in the
Church, as some men think evil spirits are in consecrated places, and were not
free to reveal the mysteries of their sect: of this we have several instances
in Edwards his Gangr^na, which I would recommend to the reading of such as are
so fond of Toleration; and if the effects of it in those times, as they were
represented there, do not cure them of that mistaken charity, nothing will, but
a too late experience of those evils when they are past remedy.

Having given this short account of the doctrine of Eutyches, which they that
condemned it understood much better than we can; and could doubtless
distinguish from such expressions of their own that sounded like it: We will
proceed to the history of its condemnation.

The Synod of Constantinople having condemned Eutyches, he made his
application, first to Leo Bishop of Rome; and being rejected there, applied
himself to the Emperor by the means of his old friend Chrysaphius, Niceph. l.
14. c. 47.
an Eunuch in great favor and credit at Court. He obtained a review of the
acts of the former Synod, before Florentius and most of the same Bishops that
had condemned him. Florentius was a person of great integrity, and the Bishops
after a second hearing, and after the cause of Eutyches had been pleaded by
three Monks his Advocates, and all things diligently fifted, persever'd in the
same opinion; and the issue of this appeal was not a little to the disadvantage
of Eutyches, and increased the suspicion of his crime.

This way failing him, Niceph. l. 14. c. 47. Lib. Synod. in Syn. Ephesians. Diosc.
he makes use of the Eunuchs authority to call a General Council, that should
be so contrived, that Eutyches might be acquitted, and Flavian deposed. This
Flavian had incurred the Eunuchs displeasure before by sending him his (...),
his Benedictions, in Bread and not in Gold; therefore he was glad of any
opportunity to do him ill offices: and he had such an influence upon the
Emperor, who was too much addicted to this kind of Vermin, Suidas.
as to set him upon the ruin of this Good Bishop. In order to which, he
dispatches several Letters to summon Bishops and others to a Council at
Ephesus, Conc. Chalc. Par. 1. Sacrae, ad Dioscor. ad Elpid. Commit. etc. Pars 1.
which sufficiently show his bitterness against Flavian: intimating that the
Nestorian Heresy was springing again, and that there were several favorers of
it; he forbids Flavian and the Bishops that condemned Eutyches to sit in the
Council; he complains against Flavian that he had called a Synod against his
will, and prosecuted Eutyches, and disturbed the Church, notwithstanding all
his advice and orders to the contrary; and in short, the Letters that called
this Council suggested sufficiently what it was to do, and that their only
business was to condemn a Bishop the Emperor did not care for; though without
any just ground, nay for his honesty, if Nicephorus relate the business truly.
There is no doubt but the Emperor, or rather this Eunuch who contrived all
this mischief, knew how to choose Bishops for the purpose; and the President
did admirably suit with such a design, who besides his emulation against the
Bishops of Constantinople, was, if half be true that is said of him, one of the
most wicked profligate wretches in the World. This Synod in short did the
business it was called for, and that not without force, for they used all the
violence imaginable to fright poor conscientious men to a concurrence with
them: and if any one should offer to speak for Flavian or Eusebius, the next
word was da comites, you shall go the same way if you be troublesome. Act. 1.
Conc. Chalc. T. 4. p. 135.
Eutyches brought in his confession of faith, which was no other than the
Nicene Creed; and added only that he condemned all Heretics: but when Sozon
would have put him to explain himself concerning the incarnation, Dioscorus and
his party would not suffer it, for fear he should betray himself. And upon that
he was absolved. Act. 1. Chalc. T. 4. p. 134.
As if a Socinian were called to a Synod to answer for his doctrines, and would
make a confession of his faith in the Apostles Creed, and when any one should
desire him to explain himself farther, moderate comprehending men should cry,
this contains all that is necessary, there is no need of a farther Test: And
thus some Synods in Poland were so moderate as to be imposed upon, which
occasioned great mischief to those Reformed Churches there, now almost
extinguished under the notion of Socinians. How bad soever Dioscorus and this
Council were, yet they are in my judgment to be looked upon rather as
favorers of Heresy than as Heretics, for although they did threaten to
cleave him in sunder that durst say there are two natures in Christ, yet they
were not of Eutyches his opinion for all that; but followed the meaning I
believe as well as the words of Cyril. And it is observable that Anatolius in
the Council of Chalcedon after Dioscorus's condemnation, Act. 5. T. 4. p. 558.
says expressly that he was not condemned for Heresy, but Misdemeanors. The
Judges said, for this reason Dioscorus condemned Flavian, because he said there
were two natures in Christ. Anatolius said, Dioscorus was not condemned for
Heresy, but because he excommunicated Leo, and being cited to appear before
the Council, refused to obey: The Instrument of his Deposition gives the same
reason, and all the subscriptions that mention any reasons at all; only that of
Paschasinus charges him with not only receiving Eutyches, but of being of his
opinion. But because this Council chose two natures, Act. 3. p. 458.
as the most safe way of expressing the Economy of Christ's incarnation,
Dioscorus cried, cum Patribus ejicior; and his followers were afterward called
Eutychians, though they did not own his doctrines; as some of the Eastern
Christians are called Nestorians, though they do not really hold the doctrine
of Nestorius; but the very same with the Eastern Bishops that mistook Cyril,
and with Theodorus Tarsens. and Mopsuest. who were misunderstood on the other
side by Cyril. But of this we have said enough already.

CHAP. VII.
The Council of Chalcedon.

NOw comes the great Council of Chalcedon under the new Emperor Martian, p.
99.. 14.
where all is changed for a time; yet Pulcheria, who married him and made him
Emperor, and whose power then was great, was the same that before had been
against Nestorius, in her Brothers reign. Thus far our Church Historian. It is
a mavelous observation, that all should be changed for a time, and yet
Pulcheria be the same that condemned Nestorius, in her Brothers reign. She was
the same person I suppose, though I dare not maintain any identity against the
splitting instruments which he borrows of Derodon; (those Metaphysical terms I
mean, which we have mentioned before,) and our Authors charms and imaginary
remedies against Heresy; those Notions that he bewails the ancient Bishops
were so dull as not to be able to find out. But if out of special grace he will
allow Pulcheria to be the same Pulcheria in and after her brothers reign, we
must acknowledge his good nature in the concession. But where is the wonder all
this while? that matters should change, and yet she be still the same? It may
be that she might not have always the same credit and authority with her
brother, and if Nicephorus may be believed in a story that hangs very well
together and is very probable, l. 14. c. 47, etc.
her interest was very low when the Second Council of Ephesus was called; for
the end of it was to ruin her favorite Flavian, who had given her notice of a
Court-plot that was formed against her, to shave her, and thrust her into a
Monastery: So that it is not much to be wondered at if Pulcheria when she had
the power in her own hands, should change some things that had been done
against her will, and perhaps designed by the Court on purpose to affront her.
This then cannot be the wonder; and it would vex a man to see one stare, and
stand aghast, and yet not be able to find out the subject of the admiration. It
may be (for I will venture to guess once more) that the wonder is, that the
same Pulcheria should condemn Eutyches, that had condemned Nestorius before.
But why should we wonder at this in Pulcheria, more than in Flavian, in
Eusebius Doryl. and a great many others that did the same thing at that time?
Nay, did not all the world in a manner, all the Catholic Church, condemn both
these? Will he say, that these are contradictory Doctrines, and therefore one
must be true and the other false? But Mr. B. has determined already, that
Cyril, Nestorius, Flavian, Eutyches, all of them meant the same thing; and what
wonder then is it, if a devout Lady could not find this secret consent of
doctrine under appearing contradictions, when the learned Bishops could not do
it, nor after ages, nor the subtle distinguishing Schoolmen, no nor Derodon
himself? However since we cannot discern the drift and shrewdness of the
observation, we ought thankfully to accept what we can understand, though that
be no great news, That Pulcheria that was Empress after her Brothers death, was
the very same that condemned Nestorius, in her Brothers reign.

This profound Remark is immediately followed by another of great acuteness; p.
100. sect. 14.
That it was never truer than in the case of general Councils, that the
multitude of Physicians exasperateth the disease, and kills the patient.] And
yet our Author will have these Physicians multiplied without end. If every
Congregation have its own Bishop, what general agreement can we then expect?
what unity in a Nation, when Bishops are grown so inordinately numerous? Since
it can be no otherwise than by a consultation of these Physicians, that the
public Peace and Unity can be preserved.

Or if this Expedient should fail, what other way is there left? Our Author
comes in here, and relieves us in a great strait, and offers a remedy more
Sovereign than all the Hereticating Councils in the World. In short it is this:
The word ((...)) the [one nature after Vnion] the words [One Will and one
Operation] had never done half so much mischief in the Church if the erroneous
had been confuted by neglect, p 100. sect. 14.
and Councils had not exasperated, enraged and engaged them, and set all the
world on taking one side or another.] It is an admirable way to cure Heresy to
neglect it; and to preserve the Church by despising such small differences as
may be reduced into a Word. It was but a word that divided the Arians and the
Orthodox; It was but the Trinity, Servetus said, that divided all the World.
Despise the disputes about this, and then Christians, Jews and Mahumetans may
be comprehended under the same Rule. It is but the Import of the word Episcopus
that our Dissenters stand so much upon; why does not Mr. B. persuade them to
despise this Verbal Controversy, and study rather to be quiet than to write
about it? But we find he cannot persuade himself to this, otherwise the Shops
would have wanted diverse books that he has published this year. Nay, we find
that he himself will not be answered with Neglect. So that we are like to find
little benefit of this rare project for confuting the disturbers of the Church.
For though six of his Books that came out in little more than six months were
let pass without any Answer that I know of: yet this Patience has been so far
from mending his humor, that he writes and writes on still, runs us down with
Repetitions, proclaims his own victories, and insults over our silence; and in
short he cannot be more violent and outrageous, more bitter and malicious under
all the provocations imaginable, than he is under that Neglect which himself is
pleased to prescribe for the cure of them. I wish our Author had taken his own
advice before this Book was written, practiced this Mortification upon himself.
And not gone on as he does still to disturb the world with perpetual
contentions to no purpose, but to show how much he wants of a Scholar and a
Christian.

But however men may be confuted, yet they are seldom convinced by neglect, and
therefore, lest that expedient might fail, our Projector slurs in another, p.
100. ubi supra.
One skilful, healing man, that could have explicated ambiguous terms, and
persuaded men to love and peace, until they understood themselves and one
another, had more befriended Truth, Piety, and the Church, than all the
Hereticating Councils did. And why may not this skilful man show his skill in
Councils as well as elsewhere? why may not many such skilful healing men be
found in such great Assemblies as those of General Councils? Or if such as
these are strangers to General Councils, why do they not appear since the use
of such Councils has been laid aside? We have had several new disputes raised
of late, and many of them in the opinion of judicious men, merely about words
and for want of understanding one another, as the Controversy of
Justification, Good Works, etc. yet we have not found that any of these healing
men were able to reconcile parties, any more than the Councils of old, which
our Author according to his manner of respect and charity, honors with the
Title of Hereticating Councils.

Our Author is is so full of his observations in this place that I am almost
weary of observing them, p. 100. sect.
but that in the next Paragraph is so choice, it must not be passed by. If what
Socrates writes of Theodosius Junior be true, (as we have no reason to doubt)
God owned his moderation by miracles, notwithstanding his favoring the
Entychians more than he did any ways of violence.] I am afraid that the
miracles whereby God owned Theodosius, especially those recorded by Socrates,
could do but little countenance to the Eutychian cause. For Socrates little
thought of Eutychians when he related those miracles. That Heresy was not then
known, at leastwise not by that name, when that Historian wrote. Soer. l. 7. c.
48. Prosp. in Chron.
For he ends in the 17th Consulship of Theodosius, ten years before the
beginning of the Eutychian Heresy; and that we may be sure this Controversy
was not yet sprung, the same Author tells us in the same place, that the Church
was then in peace, and That as long as there is peace, there is little matter
for Church History; and that if men had been peaceable and quiet, he should
have been at a loss for materials; and that therefore he does make an end
there; for peace preserving things in the same Order, does not afford variety
enough for an Historian.

From whence it is manifest that Socrates wrote in that peaceful interval
between the first and second Council of Ephesus, and could not think of
Theodosius his moderation in respect of the Eutychians; and so Mr. B.'s
notwithstanding might have been spared; for Socrates says not one word of any
miracles in approbation of his favoring of Eutychians; or that any were done
in favor of Theodosius after that, for the History does not reach so far. But
if it were allowed to comment upon the ways of Providence, one might say, that
he who was heretofore owned by God as being wonderfully protected by him,
seemed to lose the divine favor as soon as he favored Heretics; for he died
soon after; but far be it from me to make such constructions, for who can find
out the ways of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor?

Besides, what can be the meaning of Theodosius his favoring Eutychians more
than he did any ways of violence? Was there ever a more violent outrageous sort
of men than those Eutychians he favored? Were there ever greater violences
committed than in that infamous Conventicle at Ephesus? where Eustathius was
kicked to death, Act. Con. Ephesians. 2. Read Act. 1. Con. Chalc.
and all those that durst defend him were threatened to be served in like
manner; where the cry was, let him be cleft in sunder that says there are two
natures: What now can our Author mean by favoring such men more than any ways
of violence? unless it be that he thinks the Emperor took a particular delight
in that kind of cruelty; and that he had rather one should be kicked to death,
or cleft downright, than that he should be hanged or beheaded, which would not
be much to be credit of his Moderation. And to say the Truth, his Letter to
Valentinian discovers a strange kind of Spirit; Among the ^reambles of the
Counc. of Chalc.
for there he justifies the proceedings of the Eutychians at Ephesus; he says
that all things were carried on with much freedom, and perfect truth; that
Flavian was found guilty of innovating in Religion, and that he had been
treated according as he deserved. I wonder Mr. B. can cite this against
Flavian, and not discover the notorious falsity of it. For who does not know
the Liberty, that was given there, to have been no other than either of
subscribing or of suffering banishment or death? as we shall show presently
more particularly. This is but an ill sign that Mr. B. is a Hater of false
History, when he lets this pass unreprov'd, and puts upon his Reader for Truth
that which he must needs know to be otherwise. And as to Theodosius, whose
Letter this is, it is not unlikely that he was imposed upon by his Eunuch, or
whoever else penned it for him; for he must needs know the Eutychian
Proceedings to be the most violent and disorderly that ever were in any solemn
Assembly.

At last Mr. B. p. 100. sect. 17.
comes to the Council of Chalcedon, and the Acts of it. Dioscorus in the first
place is accused for his Ephesine General Council: Dioscorus alleges the
Emperors Order, and that all the rest of that Council consented and subscribed
as well as he: The Bishops answered that they did it against their wills, being
under fear: condemnation and banishment were threatened, and Soldiers were
there with Clubs and Swords. The truth is, Mr. B. does most disingenuously
mince the Acts of the Council, and uses all the foul play that is possible, to
render Dioscorus his case the more plausible, and on the other side to
discredit the rest of the Bishops that said they were forced. The first Answer
of the Eastern Bishops was, that no man did voluntarily consent to the
condemnation of Flavian, Act. 1. Conc. Chalc.
violenta est facta vis cum plagis, they were beaten to it; this Mr. B. leaves
out, because it would go near to excuse their compliance with a merciful man.
And in Stephen Bishop of Ephesus his vindication of himself, Mr. B. uses the
very same method; for all that he said is slubber'd up in this, that Eulogius
and Elpidius and some Eutychian Monks and Soldiers threatened: Alas! one would
think this was a poor spirited man that would do any thing against his
judgment for the threatening of these men. But let us understand from the Acts
themselves what manner of threatening this was. Stephen says in the first place,
that he communicated with Flavian, Ibid.
and Eusebius Doryl. and their Clergy, and received them kindly. Eulogius and
Elpidius with Monks and Soldiers to the number of about three hundred came to
him, and would have killed him, and then forced him to subscribe before he
should go out of the Vestry. The Answer of Theodore Bishop of Claudiopolis is
maimed by our Abridger of Church History after the same manner, Ibid.
by leaving out that which made most for his defense, and taking that part
which was most liable to Exception: The Leading men, says, he, lead us on; as
simple ignorant men that knew not the cause; and frighted us by defaming us as
Nestorian Heretics: Thus Mr. B. But the most considerable circumstances are
omitted: for Theodore says, they were imposed upon at first by such Acts as
seemed to speak favorably of Flavian, that afterward they were threatened by
Dioscorus his party, not only making them of near kin with Nestorius, but
adding, Cut them in sunder that say two natures, dividite, interficite,
ejicite, cleave them, kill them, cast them out. They were forty two, of one
hundred and thirty which made up that Council, who dissented from Dioscorus and
his party at first, but could have no free debate, and these with this violent
usage were soon reduced to fifteen, and they at last were forced to subscribe a
blank paper, to save not only their Churches but their lives: And Thus, says
Mr. B. they cried they were frighted.] p. 101.
And surely they had great reason to be so: Such as though it could not
justify them for acting against their Conscience, yet might move pity in men
that have any compassion of humane infirmity, considering that they also are
subject to the like; let him that stands have a care lest he fall.

The Egyptian Bishops answered, that a Christian fears no man, a Catholic
(Orthodox) fears no man; if men were feared, there would be no Martyrs.] It is
much easier to say than hold: There have several gone to discover themselves to
the Heathen Judges, with the intention and confidence of Martyrs, p. 101.
that were yet so frighted as to renounce their Religion before they came away.

Upon the reading of the Acts of the Second Council of Ephesus, it appeared how
things were carried; Mr. B. makes the best use he can of them to disgrace the
Bishops; the first thing he takes notice of is Dioscorus his words,
Anathematizing any that should contradict or retract any thing held in the
Nicence Synod.] There is a foul mistake for want of a little Latin, and a
little ingenuity; for Dioscorus says not one word of contradicting or
retracting the Council of Nice. All the debate was whether the Council of Nice
had explained the faith fully, so as to need no farther authentic explication.
The Synod is for this, and will have no Additions; and let him be Anathema.
(...), that goes beyond the bounds given by the Fathers; and then, (...), let
no man add or diminish. Dioscorus adds, what a fearful thing it will be to
offend against God in this particular; and that he is Anathema that shall
presume to examine, or discuss, or revise the faith agreed on in the Council of
Nice, or here. The Latin Translator has indeed retractat, which Mr. B.
translates retract, as if it were the recantation of what was done in this
Council that they provided against. But the Greek word is (...), Con. Labb. T.
4. p. 32.
Examining of a thing anew; and therefore (...) is joined with it: So that as
to this point they were all agreed, and so in the succeeding Councils likewise,
that nothing was to be added to the Nicene faith; but since new opinions were
daily started, they might examine whether they agreed with that faith, and did
not directly or consequentially destroy it; and all this does not add any
thing, but only apply emergent cases to the old unalterable Rule.

Here Eutyches his confession at Ephesus was read, p. 101. sect. 18.
says our Author. But as we have mentioned before in the Council of C. P.
under Flavian, it was only the Nicene Creed without those additions that it
afterward generally received in opposition to Apollinaris and Macedonius, etc.
How far this may secure the Church from Heresy; the multitude of Heresies that
sprung after, whereof the greater part would willingly be tried by the Nicence
Creed, do sufficiently show.

Eutyches adds, Chapter Hist. p. 101.
that he cleav'd to the Ephesine Council, and to Cyril who presided,
disclaiming all additions and alterations, professing that he had himself
Copies in a book, which Cyril himself had sent him, and which is yet in his
hands; and that he stands to the definition of that Council together with that
of Nice: One may very well ask here, what all this means? What is this that
Eutyches disclaims all additions to, and alterations of? What Copies are these
that Eutyches had by him? and what definition of that Council does he join with
that of Nice? Here is nothing but nonsense and confusion. The case is thus,
Eutyches gave the Nicene Creed for his faith, and acknowledged the Council of
Ephesus, and Cyril; and farther adds, that Cyril and the Council of Ephesus
passed a decree, that nothing should be added to the Nicene Creed; and that he
had a Copy of that decree by him. Eusebius Doryl. gives him the lie, and says,
there was no such decree past. The Truth is, such a thing there was, and is
still extant in the Acts of that Council: but not altogether to that purpose,
Conc. Lab. T. 3. p. 689.
for which Eutyches does mention it. The design of that decree is only this,
that the Nicene Creed shall be the only public form, and that no other be
taught, to such as are Converted from Jews, or Heretics, or Infidels; but that
this form should stand unaltered: which is no more than if we should determine
that no Article should be added to that which is called the Apostles Creed,
which is the common form of our solemn confession of faith; and that no Bishop
or Minister should devise new forms to be used in its stead. This is the design
of that Decree; and Cyril could mean no otherwise: for if any one should teach
new doctrines that might not be absolutely contradictory to the express words
of that Creed, yet he should be condemned though he still owned that Confession
of Faith: Nestorius his case was of that sort, and therefore the Synod says,
Con. Ephesians. Act. 6. T. 3. p. 671.
that since several do shelter themselves under the generals of this Creed, and
put their own construction upon the Articles, they were to be confuted out of
the Fathers; and so Nestorius was condemned notwithstanding he professed to
receive the Nicene Creed.

Our Author goes on, p. 102. sect.
and tells his Reader, When Basil Bishop of Seleucia is reproached by Dioscorus
for having prevaricated and despised the says, for the fear of men; He makes
this Answer, If I have been called to Martyrdom before the Judges I had
endured it, Act. 1.
but he that is judged of a Father uses just means, (it is the contrary which
that Bishop says justis non utitur; does not make use even of all lawful means
to vindicate himself.) After this the Eastern Bishops cried, We have all
sinned, we all crave pardon, and this in the next page our Author observes to
the discredit of the Bishops of those times, p. 103, 111.
that they were so far from the Martyrs constancy, that they turned as the
Emperors Countenance and the Times, and worldly interest turned, Voting down
things and persons in one Council, and crying Omnes peccavimus in the next. How
easy they were to follow the Emperors Inclination in this case we have seen
already, in the Account these Bishops gave of the violence used toward them.
When Soldiers and a giddy Rabble of Monks with Swords and Staves, like Bedlam
broke loose, run upon men with open mouth, denouncing death and destruction; We
ought rather to pity the infirmity of those poor men that were overborn with
the Temptation, than to insult over them. It may be they had no mind to be
Martyrs in this Controversy, that must be confessed, as it was managed, to be
something perplexed; though neither these nor any other terrors could have
prevailed with them to betray their religion: And it is not unlikely, that had
they had the cause of the Martyrs which was plain and indisputable, they might
likewise have had their Resolution and Constancy; and Basil Seleuc. does
mention, when this levity is objected to him, that he had behaved himself with
greater courage upon the account of Religion at C. P. probably against
Macedonius, or the Arians. Mr. B. who is here so severe upon the Bishops for
sacrificing their Consciences to their fears, might have remembered, that when
the Jews came with Swords and with Staves to take our Savior, the Disciples
forsook him and fled, and Peter denied his Master out of fear; and yet they
were all received again upon their return, and entrusted with the planting and
propagation of the Gospel.

From these warm debates of the Bishops, Mr. B. observes two lamentable,. 19.
undeniable things. The Reader may observe, that when our Author ventures upon
Observations, it is more than an even lay that he is out; I believe his memory
betrays his judgment, for his eye is no sooner off of the book to consider,
but he loses his story. Now let us see what he infers from what he has recited,
as he says, out of Binius and others.

1. That this doleful Contention, p. 103. sect. 19.
Anathematizing, and ruining of each other, was about the sense of ambiguous
words, and that they were of one mind in the matter and knew it not. Who were
they that were of one mind and knew it not? Eutyches and those that opposed
him? They were far from being of a mind, for Eutyches denied Christ to be truly
and properly man, i. e. to have the proprieties, and the Constituents of Humane
Nature; and the Monothelites, Theopaschites, etc. were the Genuine Disciples of
Eutyches, and owned those Consequences of his Doctrines which he did not think
fit to publish. Or who else were those that were of one mind, and knew it not?
Dioscorus and Flavian? I am apt to believe they were much of the same Opinion
as to the point in Controversy; and knew it well enough; which was the only
reason why Dioscorus, with his party of Bishops and Monks, would not endure to
come to any Debate of that matter, for fear it would appear that they all
agreed, and then there would have been no pretense to condemn Flavian, which
was the design, if not of the Emperor, yet at leastwise of those that governed
him; and several Bishops in that infamous Assembly at Ephesus were about to
make this Mutual consent in Doctrine appear, if the Monks, the Myrmidons of
Dioscorus, would have given them leave to speak? Or lastly, did not the Bishops
in the Council of Chalcedon understand one another? The contrary is notorious,
from their Debates, and their Subscriptions. The Egyptians indeed scrupled
subscribing, not upon the account of the matter, but the form; because they had
no Metropolitan, ( Dioscorus being now deposed) and it was against their usage
to sign any thing in Council without their Metropolitan; and as soon as they
had one, they subscribed willingly. But if they were all of a mind and knew it,
How did they condemn Dioscorus? Anatolius confesses in the Council, and no man
contradicted him, that Dioscorus was not condemned for Heresy but
Misdemeanors: Well; But why did Dioscorus absolve Eutyches, if he had not
thought him to be of his opinion? There is good reason for that: for Flavian
could not be condemned, unless Eytyches were absolved; and that those very men
that received him did not think he was of their opinion, though their
expressions were the same, appears manifestly from the manner of their
transacting that affair; for when some well-meaning Bishops were so curious as
to desire he should explain himself in that point of doctrine for which alone
he had been called in question, Dioscorus forbids any farther search, for fear
Heresy would appear, and then Flavian must be acquitted. The Case was just as
if a Papist were to purge himself of that Imputation in an Assembly of Divines,
and should offer the Nicene Creed for his Faith: But some honest plain men, not
satisfied with this Impertinent vindication in those things he was not
questioned for, putting cross questions about Transubstantiation or Supremacy,
should immediately be checked, and all should cry, we will have nothing added
to the Nicene Faith; would not any one conclude that this Reverend Assembly was
afraid Popery would appear, and that the man that for private Reasons they
would acquit for that time, would discover himself to hold such opinions, as he
could not be able to approve to that Assembly? This is the naked case; from
whence the Reader may judge, how far these were of one mind: and that men of
very different opinions joined to serve a present turn; and united in design,
when they knew some of them, that their doctrines could never be reconciled.

Mr. B. to make out that they were all of one mind, p. 102. sect. 19.1.
shows how they came to be mistaken. The Egyptians (Eutychians) took two
natures and two sons to be of the same sense, which the others did not.] The
Egyptians indeed took two natures to imply two sons; for they took nature in
the sense Cyril used it, for hypostasis, and so it really did imply two
persons: but they acknowledged distinct properties of the divinity and
humanity, which Eutyches did not; and so Eutychians and Egyptians are not
altogether the same thing. 2. Though at first the Egyptians seemed not to
understand what Flavian meant by two natures; yet it is evident that there was
something of wilfulness in that mistake; and at the Council of Chalcedon it was
quite taken away, and all subscribed to two natures, that yet owned Cyril's
expressions of but one Nature Incarnate.

It is plain (says Mr. B.) that while all sides held, p. 103. 11.
that Nestorius held, that there were two sons (which he expressly denied) that
they accused Nestorius in ignorance.] It is true indeed that Nestorius owned
but one son: but how? one in dignity and title only, as we have showed before;
but that unity was of persons, i. e. really distinct according to his notion;
taking person properly for an intelligent subsistence, and not for a notional
unity of two things, really distinct, in the participation of the same common
name or title, which was really the (...) of Nestorius. And Mr. B. is so
confident of this notion of his, as to conclude with his defiance to all
gainsayers, This is true, whatsoever faction shall say against it.] If it were
a Faction that spoke against this truth, it was a mighty strong and general
Faction, and was never opposed by any person before Mr. B. For then all sides
granted they disagreed one from the other, and succeeding ages were of the same
opinion; and all the factions in the world agreed in this, that Nestorius and
those that opposed him, spoke absolute contradictions to each other.

The next remarkable thing that our Author cites out of the debate of this
Council, p. 104.
is that about the words of Cyril, which in the next Paragraph he calls
Eutychian words, they are these: We must not conceive two natures in Christ but
one Incarnate. These words may sound harsh to one that is not acquainted with
Cyril's manner of expressing himself: But they are not yet Eutychians. For
Eutyches his opinion is condemned by Eustathius, (who cites these words of
Cyril,) immediately after. He that says there is but one nature, so as to deny
Christ's flesh, which is consubstantial with us. So Mr. B. translates indeed,
out of the Latin Translator, who mistook the sense of this place. The words of
Eustathius were these, (...), he that affirms one nature to the taking away of
the consubstantiality of Christ's flesh to ours, or to the denying that his
flesh is of the same substance with ours, let him be accursed.] Which was the
doctrine of Eutyches, whereof he was convicted by several Witnesses in the
Council of C. P. and Basil Seleuc. Act. 2.
one of the clearest men in all this Council makes a wide difference between
saying one nature incarnate, or of the word incarnate, and one nature
absolutely, which was the error of Eutyches, as he affirmed. Though in the
Council of C. P. Eutyches makes use of the same expression (unless we may think
those Acts corrupted by the Council of Ephesus in favor of Eutyches, as
Flavian complains they were, to render his opinion more plausible) I have
showed before how ill the notion of Cyril about the Incarnation did agree with
that of Eutyches.

Mr. B. had great reason to note the Impudence of Binius, in calling this
allegation of Eustathius out of Cyril, to be Wicked and Heretical; since he
does no more than cite Cyril's words: but this remark is left out of latter
Editions.

After this, Mr. B. brings in Dioscorus defending himself by the authority of
Cyril, p. 104. sect. 22.
who maintains one nature incarnate, and then concludes, I am condemned with
the Fathers; they say the same that I do. I must repeat therefore once more,
what I had said before, that Dioscorus was not condemned for Heresy, but for
condemning and murdering Flavian, etc. p. 104.
And although our Author seems to be dissatisfied that when Dioscorus offers
satisfaction to God and you, i. e. Eusebius Doryl. his repentance was not
accepted; yet I suppose he is not in earnest; for upon other occasions he is
inexorable in much lesser matters: and surely if any Misdemeanors may depose a
Bishop that has nothing to plead but the Orthodoxness of his belief, Dioscorus
was justly condemned, and yet our Author observes that a verbal quarrel was
turned to personal revenge, because Eusebius Doryl. replied upon Dioscorus,
that he must satisfy the law.

Mr. B. concludes his citations out of the first Action of this Council, with
the subscriptions of the Bishops in the Council of Ephesus whereby they
absolved Eutyches; which being read in the Council of Chalcedon, the Bishops
concerned had no excuse, but to cry, Omnes peccavimus. Our Author it seems
takes great delight in repeating as often as he can this recantation of those
Bishops, looking upon it, I suppose, as a great undervaluing and reproach to
confess an error. The Spirit of Schism is very nice in point of honor, and
reckons nothing so great a disgrace as the acknowledgement of a mistake; where
it is once engaged, no conviction shall be able to reclaim it, though it be in
the most indefensible thing in the World. And though interest and conscience
should oblige to return; yet in honor he must not recede, nor recant what no
Rhetoric is able to palliate. Recantation, whether they be in the right or the
wrong, appears equally infamous. A late brisk defender of Nonconformity out of
fondness for a smart saying in Religio Medici has dropped an unlucky truth,
that he is not so much afraid as ashamed of Conformity. I have charity enough
to believe him that he is indeed ashamed of owning that which he has so
fiercely opposed, not so much by his reasoning, as by his ill manners and
scurrility. For my part I do not envy these men this inflexible stiffness of
Spirit, but do sincerely pity them, although the witty Author just now
mentioned has derided Compassion, no less than Mr. B. has Repentance, and
Recantation. However I had rather be found among those Bishops that cried
Peccavimus after a fault, which yet had all the excuses that can be made from
violence and compulsion; than to maintain a Schism upon a point of honor, and
for shame of confessing to have been in the wrong.

In the third Action, among many things, p. 104.
our Abridger of Church History fastens upon the law of Theodosius for the
confirming of the second Ephesine Council, and the Condemnation of Nestorius,
and of Flavianus, Domnus, etc. One would expect here that our Historian being
tired with throwing dirt at the Bishops and their Councils, should divert the
outrageous Spirit, by giving him one loose at Emperors and Courts. But no such
matter, he scorns to change his game, and therefore charges the Bishops with
the faults of the Magistrate, and lays all the blame upon them; So far (says
he) could fierce and factious Prelates prevail with a pious and peaceable
Prince, by the pretenses of opposing Heresy and Schism.] And what authority
has our Author to ground this observation upon? What if the Eunuchs and
Courtiers prevailed upon the Emperor? Niceph. l. 14. Synod. Ephesians. Dios^. Elib.
Synodico.
and the Emperor prevailed upon some Bishops by fair means, upon others by
force, to condemn those persons as Heretics, and to make way for his Edict
against them? what then? (will you say) no extraordinary matter: Only Mr. B.
when he comes to make observations mistakes the Fact, and the more bitter and
malicious he endeavors to be, the greatest oversights he usually commits. It
was once the hard fortune of the Christians to father every calamity that befell
the public; if the Army had evil success, or the Harvest proved scanty; if
pestilence, or famine afflicted the Heathens, the Christians were the cause of
all this Mischief: To the Lions, to the Stake with them. It fares no better
with the Bishops in Mr. B.'s History; whatever is done amiss, it is by their
procurement. Whose act soever that be, a Princes or an Eunuchs, or a Monks, or
a Woman's, yet still the blame is the Bishops. And this is the cry which some
men teach their Disciples to use. If Trade fail, O these Lordly Bishops spoil
all; if a Brother shut up Shop, and conveys himself away without evening his
accounts, the Bishops have undone him. The truth is, these men or their
neighbors have great reason to pray the Bishops may always continue; for this
peevishness and gall which is so predominant in this party of men, if it have
not its ordinary vent, will taint the blood, and turn into Jaundice and other
evil distempers; or if it fly out, it will disturb the peace of the family, or
of the neighborhood, or it may be of the Kingdom: So necessary it is for this
sort of men to have something to rail at, and to exercise that freedom of
speech upon, which is part of their Liberty of Conscience.

In the next place our Author relates at large out of the fifth Action of the
Council, (which he mistook for the fourth, being deceived by the running Title
in Binius that is false Printed) what passed between the Council and the
Egyptian Bishops; and this he did not think fit to Abridge, because he did not
conceive it much for the honor of the persons concerned. The debate it must be
confessed was something too warm; but that heat was not altogether without
reason. The case in short was thus: The Council had condemned Eutyches for a
Heretic, and Dioscorus for receiving him into Communion, and for other
Misdemeanors. The Egyptian Bishops, considering how far they were engaged in
the same crime, and standing in a near Relation to Dioscorus, began to be
afraid that they might possibly be involved in the same punishment: and
therefore petitioned the Emperor, declaring the uprightness of their faith;
and condemning all Heresies, but not naming Eutyches. This Petition was read
before the Council, which immediately made this exception, Why did they not
condemn Eutyches? They answered, that they condemned him, or any body else,
that taught any thing against the faith. This was looked upon as a delusory
answer: and the Council began to press them closer: At last they condemned
Eutyches. Having been brought thus far, they were called upon to subscribe his
condemnation. This they scrupled, which made the Council jealous of them, upon
the account of their dependence upon Dioscorus, and of their behavior in the
second Ephesine Council: and therefore they resolved to press the point home.
The Egyptians pretended they could not subscribe according to the custom of
their Church without their Patriarch. Their Tergiversation all along made the
Bishops look upon this as a Trick; yet at last, when they understood the case,
they admitted of this expedient; that they should give security that they
should not leave Chalcedon before they had a New Metropolitan, and so the
debate ended. If this business seem to have been managed with too much heat, it
is not much to be wondered at, all circumstances considered, and especially the
injuries and provocations that several of the Council had received before from
Dioscorus and his party. Men will be men, wherever they are placed, whether in
a Council, or in the Church, or even at the Altar.

The next business (says Mr. B.) was with the Abbots of the Monks (it would
have been great news to have found Abbots of Seculars, p. 106. sect. 25.
) who had petitioned the Emperor for a Council to end their broyls, and that
without perturbations. These petitioned that Dioscorus might be called: He was
called indeed several times before, but he did not think fit to come; but they
would have him restored; and the Council opposing them, they began to talk
impertinently about Religion. Among these was Barsumas, who had headed a great
number of the same sort of Cattle at the Second Ephesine Council, and had
assisted in the murdering of Flavian, encouraging his Monks to make sure work,
kill, slay, knock him on the head, etc. It is not unlikely but some of these,
if not all, (for some in this Council charge him with having headed 1000 Monks)
had been with him at Ephesus; and it is not very material whether such giddy
sanguinary fellows were satisfied with the Council or no. If the countenance of
this sort of men signified any thing, there was number enough that owned the
Council, and give the Emperor thanks, that his Christian Authority had cast
out Eutyches, Act. 5.
who had spoke blasphemously against our Savior, and sowed Tares in the Church.

At last (says Mr. B.) there was a dissension whether Leo 's phrase should be
put into their Definition of Faith, p. 107. sect. 26.
(now drawn up anew.) There is no mention there of Leo 's phrases, but only
(...), the Contents of his Letter should be inserted into the Definition or
Rule of Faith. This inserting of it into their Definition was, I believe, no
other than what we find in the larger Declaration of Faith drawn up in this
Council; where the Epistle of Leo is received, together with those of Cyril to
Nestorius, as Expositions of the Faith delivered them by the Council of Nice.
Mr. B. says that Leo's Epistle was a while run down. There was no such thing,
but only some said that their Rule of Faith was full enough without it. It was
not because they had any exception against the doctrine of it, but because they
would preserve their Rule as simple, and with as little addition as they could.
But at last it was yielded to, says Mr. B. when the Illyrican Bishops had
first slighted Rome, and cried, Qui contradicunt (Definitioni) Nestoriani sunt,
qui contradicunt, Romam ambulent: He must be very captious that can interpret
this for a slight; And it does not appear, that the Legates, who were usually
very apprehensive of slights put upon their See, did take any notice of it. I
am not very much concerned whether it were or no, I must confess I do not find
in my self any great devotion for that See to vindicate it from any slights,
yet I believe this we now speak of was never intended as one. Only our Author,
according to the usual success of his observations, misunderstands the matter.
The Judges assisting in this Council propounded it as the Emperors direction,
Act. 5.
that they should appoint select Bishops out of every Province to draw up their
Confession of Faith, or else that every Metropolitan in the name of his
Province should make a Declaration of his Faith; otherwise that the Emperor
would call a General Council in the West, since they would not determine this
present Controversy: Upon which Cecropius Bishop of Sebaestopolis said, We
desire the Definition may be read, and then those that will not subscribe and
conform to rightful Determinations, let them walk to Rome, i. e. to that
General Council which the Emperor threatened to call in the West. And the
Illyrican Bishops seconded this Motion: Those that contradict are Nestorians,
let them walk to Rome. What manner of slight this was, is not easily guessed;
at the worst, these Bishops did no more slight Rome, than Cecropius did the
West, whither he bid Dissenters walk, to be satisfied.

In the next Paragraph our Author makes Theodoret speak what was never in his.
26.
thoughts, nor indeed in any honest man's: Theodoret said, I take not my self to
say true, but I know I please God.] These are not Theodoret's, but Mr. B.'s
words, and very applicable to himself and his Church History: For as mean an
opinion as I have of his knowledge in Church History, I doubt not he can read
Latin when he had the book before him; and yet when he does that, I am afraid
that many times, He takes not himself to say true. But perhaps he may be of
opinion, that a pious fraud may be accepted; and that by calumniating the
Bishops whom he takes for Enemies to the Kingdom of Christ, and gratifyers of
the Devil, he may please God, Disp. 1. of Chapter Gov.
I cannot clear him of that in other places so well as in this: Here our
Authors fault was only ignorance of theodorets language, or a mistake of his
Latin Translation, which I shall rectify, for it is pity the good Father
should suffer by it. His words are these, (...): that is in English, In good
truth, I do not speak, but as I know is pleasing to God: The Latin Translation
puzzled our Author: Vere (i. e. revera) non dico, nisi quomodo novi placere Deo.
The next words of our Author do as much wrong the sense, though not so much the
Reputation of Theodoret: I would first satisfy you of my belief: whereas
Theodoret said only (...), i. e. I would persuade you in the first place that I
regard not preferment. The Latin thus, Prius satisfactio vobis quia neque de
civitate cogito, etc. And at last, after a great deal of that debate about
Theodoret, our Author concludes, do not these words here Translated out of
Binius agree too well with Gregory Nazianzen 's character of Bishops and their
Councils? How well they may agree with Nazianzen is not so material: but they
should have agreed better either with the Original, or at least with the
Translation out of which our Author Translated them: and yet for all this our
Author will understand all these Greek Bishops better than they did one
another, or even themselves.

In the next place we have an account of Ibas Bishop of Edessa; p. 108. sect.
28.
His Epistle to Maris against Cyril was acquitted; at least the Bishop upon the
reading of it. It is a sad Narrative of the Calamitous Divisions which these
Prelates and their Councils made.] In the first place there is no truth in what
our Author says, that this Epistle was acquitted; for the Council says no such
thing. In the next place Ibas was not acquitted upon the reading of this, Act.
10. Con. Chalc.
any more than a prisoner is acquitted upon the reading of his Impeachment; but
he was upon the defense he made, that he communicated with Cyril, and received
his Orthodox interpretation of those twelve Articles which before he thought to
be full of Impiety. Baronius An. 432. (deceived by Gregory the Great, Gregor.
l. 7. Ep. 53. Act. 6.
and the Acts of the Second Council of Nice) concludes this Epistle to be
forged, and falsely fathered upon Ibas; but Anno 448. he recants, and owns it
to be genuine. The truth is, Ibas himself never pretended to disown it, neither
at Tire nor Berytus, nor Chalcedon, where this was objected against him; but
confessed, that before Cyril explained himself, he thought him a Heretic, and
followed the Judgment of the Eastern Bishops. Some say this Epistle was
written whilst Ibas was a Nestorian before the Reconciliation; but the words
of that letter are express to the contrary: for it mentions the Union and Peace
of the Churches by the means of Paulus Emissenus. How then comes he to give
such an odious account of Cyril, and the proceedings of the Council of Ephesus?
The Truth is, the Eastern Bishops were not so ingenuous and fair after their
Reconciliation with Cyril, as he was toward them; however he goes in Mr. B.'s
History under so odious a character. Who ever reads his Letters to Nestorius,
and to John of Antioch; and considers with what candor he acts; must needs see
that he had very hard measure from those whom he treated with great ingenuity
and confidence. The Eastern men are still upon the disparagement of Cyril's
proceedings, and the vindication of themselves; with what Truth or Reason, has
been showed already; and Ibas here pursues the same prejudices, and would
insinuate that his party had the Right, and Cyril was their Convert: But if
here was any change of opinion on either side, it was on theirs: for first they
joined with Nestorius, and afterward condemned him: Yet this Epistle of Ibas
shows that there was a core left still.

In the eleventh Action, p. 109. sect. 29.
two Bishops (Bassia nus and Stephen) strive for the Bishopric of Ephesus;
And, says our Author, while the Bishops were for one of them, the Judges
passed sentence to cast out both. One would imagine here that the Judges passed
sentence against the consent, or inclination of the Bishops; But there is no
such matter; it was not the Judges but the Bishops past this sentence. Act. 11.
When the cause of these two Bishops was examined, the Judges propounded it to
the Bishops to determine of the right that was in Dispute; the Bishops
answered, that the right was on Bassianus his side, let the Ganons take place,
for Bassianus was the first Possessour. The Judges represented to them, that in
their opinion neither of them were fit to be continued Bishops, yet referred
the whole matter to the Council to determine as it should think fit. And this
Mr. B. calls passing a sentence, while the Bishops were against it. The Bishops
finding that Stephen was not like to carry the cause, for they had no great
favor for him, because he had been a very active Instrument of Dioscorus in
the second Council of Ephesus, willingly consented the other should be turned
out too; and were so extremely satisfied with this expedient, that they cried
it up presently, and owned it to be a Divine suggestion: and so the Bishops who
(Mr. B. says) were for one, did indeed pass sentence against both Competitors.

At last our Author enquires after the success of all this: p. 109, 110, 111.
sect. 32, etc.
What Concard did these late Councils procure to the Churches? From that time
most of the Christian World was distracted into Factions, Hereticating and
killing one another. The Alexandrians murdered Proterius their Bishop chosen by
the Council of Chalcedon. And to aggravate the cruelty, Mr. B. says they spared
not to taste his Entrails with their Teeth like Dogs. (Gustare more Canum)
The miracle of tasting with Teeth would be much greater than the cruelty, and
go a great way to justify the barbarity of the Action, if it were true. But
what shall we say to these lamentable consequences of these Councils? Was it
the misfortune, or the fault of these only, not to be able to heal the
differences of the Church? Or else was the defect in the Councils, or the blame
to be imputed to those obstinate men that opposed the Rule established by them?
These were not the first Councils that have miscarried as to their design of
Universal Reconciliation. The Council of Jerusalem under the Apostles, that
determined the Controversy about Circumcision; did not presently silence all
Disputes about that Question: For the Church of Galatia was presently after
divided about it. The Council of Nice, though it quieted the Arian Controversy
for a while, yet it was not able to prevent those lamentable Contentions which
the same question afterward occasioned. Or if Bishops and their Councils could
provide no effectual Remedies for the violent distempers of the Church; let us
see what Presbyterian Synods have done. The Synod of Dort condemned the
Arminians, and Subscribed certain Articles, declaring their Doctrine in the
points in Controversy; yet the disease was so far from ab^ting, that it grew
more violent, and the Civil Magistrate was obliged to second the determinations
of the Synod by inflicting Imprisonment and Exile upon such as would not
subscribe; and yet all this would not do, for the same breach remains unclos'd
unto this day. Our Author in his meek Answer to the Dean of Paul's Sermon says
very kind things of the Assembly of Divines: and yet these, with their
Catechisms, Directory, and Annotations, and Overthrowing of the Episcopal
Church Government, (upon which they charged all the Miscarriages, and Divisions
of the Church,) were so far from Reconciling the people, that after this they
were distracted into innumerable Schisms. Never was there so lamentable a face
of things; never such variety of Heresy, and such wantonness and Extravagance
in Blaspheming God, under pretense of Religion and Conscience; and this is the
state whither the same manner of Men are driving again. Experience (they say)
is the Mistress of Fools, but they are Fools to be begged whom even experience
so dearly purchased is not able to make wiser. But to return to the success of
these Councils.

Now since Councils, whether of Bishops, or Presbyters, have oftentimes so bad
success, what is to be done? What other remedies shall we find more effectual?
The Papists have left the use of General Councils of late, He who had among
them the chief authority of summoning such Councils, being grown jealous of
that way; and the Condition of the Ecclesiastical Roman Empire has been for
some ages not unlike that in which Livy represents the Heathen Roman Empire in
his time, nec vitia nostra far possumus nec remedia.

At last a great part of the Western Church weary of expecting relief by a
General Council from that Tyranny and Corruption under which it labored, was
forced to use extraordinary means to reform themselves; and what they could not
do all together, they did severally, as they had Opportunity. It was the good
fortune of our Church to Reform it self with the countenance and assistance of
the Civil Magistrate, and therefore they could do it by degrees, and with
greater Moderation, than other Churches, who must contend with the Civil power
about it, and who had no other strength than the zealand Resolution of the
People. As soon as this Reformation began to take root deep enough here, the
Clergy, Assembled in a National Synod, established a rule for Unity and peace,
and to prevent disputes as much as was possible: This rule comprehended the
Doctrine, Worship and Discipline of this Church which was at first received
with universal joy and approbation, None but Papists opposing it; But some time
after some few discontented men under pretense of Zeal against Popery, took the
part of the Papists against this rule; and it is observable, that as one
faction grew up and gathered strength, so did the other; that one's right and
left hand can hardly grow in evener proportion; so that one would fancy, that
either they advanced by some secret consent, or were nourished from the same
Common Stomach; It may be from him that Palavicini calls the Stomach as well as
the Head of the Church, the Pope: And what shall be at last done for these
Protestants, as they call themselves? Shall every one be left to himself
without any rule? The effect of this will be, that in a little time we shall
have no Religion at all. Shall this rule be altered? We can have no assuance
that when it is altered, we shall find any Conformity to it then more than now;
and this, as it is, has the advantage of any innovation, if for nothing else,
yet for its standing, and that it is an Ancient Establishment. In short, these
that Cry out against this rule, seem to have a great respect for the
Protestants of Queen Elizabeth's time, and that Reign is counted the Golden age
of this Kingdom. Let us consider then what was(...) their Rule, whether 36 or
39 Articles, and that Rule that made them so happy, may, if preserved entire,
keep us so still.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Authors of Heresies, Schisms, and Corruptions, and whether they were
all Bishops.

I Have hitherto gone along with Mr. B. step by step, conceiving it necessary
to make a more particular Vindication of the Church in these times, as well
because they were the best that the Christian World has had for true piety and
zeal; as also because our Church Professes to receive the four first General
Councils; and lastly because all sober moderate Christians have always had, and
still retain a great esteem and veneration for many of those persons that are
represented so odiously in Mr. B. 's Church History. I do not pretend to
justify every thing that was done by all the Bishops and Councils of those
times. There have been wicked men, and wicked Bishops in all times, and the
Church under the Apostles, nay their own Order, was not so happy as to have
none but good men of it. But I hope I have showed sufficiently that things were
not as Mr. B. represents them; and that most of his particular Accusations are
void of all truth and ingenuity. I must deal with him hereafter more Summarily,
and Answer the drift and design of his Book, which is to render Episcopacy
Odious under the more invidious name of Diocesan Prelacy; a distinction without
ground or foundation, as I have already showed, and will be yet more fully made
out.

The main design or Mr. B.'s History is 1. To charge the Bishops with all
Schisms; Heresies, Corruptions, etc. 2. To show, p. 27.. 7.4
that Diocesan Prelacy and grandeur is not the Cure, nor ever was; And to this
purpose are levelled all the particulars of his Church History. In this Chapter
I will endeavor to take off the first general Charge.

That some Bishops have abused their Office and Authority, and have been the
cause of Heresy, or Schism, cannot be denied; but Priests, Deacons and Laymen
have been so too; and therefore if the miscarriage of any particular man
becomes a prejudice to his Office, and the Order must suffer for the personal
faults of those that are of it, we must have neither Priests nor Deacons in the
Church, since some of them have been Authors of Heresies, etc. But this is not
all, our Author though he speaks indefinitely, that ^he will show the ignorant
(and he must be very ignorant that knows no better) who have been the cause of
Church Corruptions, Heresies, Schisms, Sedition; yet he means they were the
Authors of all these evils; as he is pleased to explain himself p. 72. Next we
have a strange thing, a Heresy raised by one that was no Bishop: and then, as
if that were impossible, he shows that was no Heresy; and so the Bishops
remain under the whole charge of raising all Heresies. I wish he had left
Schism and Sedition out of this charge; for if he can persuade the Ignorant
Readers that the Bishops were the cause of all these too; they will never be
persuaded that any Presbyterians are to be found in Church History. For if they
had been in the world, they must have had their share with the Bishops in
Schism and Sedition.

It is a heavy charge, to accuse the Bishops of all the Heresies and Schisms
that have afflicted the Church, and if it were true, would go near to stagger
the Reverence that one might have for the Order. For though Bishops as well as
other men may be subject to Miscarriages, they might be allow^d the frailty of
Humane nature, from which no dignity can exempt us; But to be found the cause
of All the Evils that have befallen the Church, would argue such a malignity in
the Constitution, as would show plainly that God never designed them for good.
But I believe this can be no more proved against them by matter of fact, than
that Bishops invented Gunpowder, or Hand-Granadoes, or were the Authors of the
Scotch Covenant, or the late Rebellion of the Field Conventiclers in Scotland.

Let us then trace the Heresies and Schisms that have torn the Church in pieces
in several ages of it, to their first original; and examine who were the
Authors of them; and if it appear out of Church History that Bishops raised
them All, or the greatest part, I will give up the Cause, and believe every
thing in Mr. B.'s History; and for penance read over all the fourscore Books
that he tells us he has written.

Where then shall we begin? If the Bishops should be convicted by the first
Instance, it would be ominous: However, because it shall appear that I deal
impartially, I will begin with the first. All Ecclesiastical Writers do agree
that Simon Magus was the Author of the first Heresy in Christian Religion.
Simon Magus.
Epiphanius indeed reckons up about a score of Heresies before this, Epiph.
Haer. 21.
but they are Heathen or Jewish Heresies; and I hope Mr. B. will be so kind as
to allow that the Bishops had nothing to do with these.

That Simon was a Heretic, all are agreed in, though the Scripture say no such
thing; and though Epiphanius confess that his Sect cannot truly be reckoned
among Christians. Haer. 21. p. 55. Ed; Pet.
This man did teach very strange, and, if there be any such, damnable
doctrines. But that he was a Bishop no man ever yet affirmed. Justin Martyr
thought he had seen an Inscription at Rome to this Simon, which owned him a
God, though it is possible this might be a mistake: But that ever any Writing
or Tradition called him a Bishop, I have not heard. It is true indeed, he had a
great mind to be a Bishop; that is, to have power of Confirmation; and that
every one on whom he should lay his hands should receive the Holy Ghost.

And he bid fair for it. For he offered Peter Money (says the Text:) And the
Repulse perhaps disgusted him so, that he resolved to leave the Communion of
the Church, since he could not be a Bishop in it; and it has been the disease
of several other Heretics, to scorn to be any other Member of the body but the
Head.

The next that Epiphanius mentions, is Menander; Menander. Epiph. Har. 22.
who, as Irenaeus (and out of him the rest) says, was Simon Magus his Disciple,
but neither Irenaeus, nor Eusebius, nor Epiphanius, nor Philastrius, nor
Theodoret; and in short, no man that has given any account of Heretics, or any
Historian whatsoever that has been yet heard of, has given the least Intimation
that he was a Bishop. Saturnius, Basilides. Iren. l. 1. c. 22, 23. Epiph. Her.
23, 24. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 7. August. Ep. ad Quodlib. Philast^. Haer. 3, 4. Theod:
Haer. Fab. l. 1. (...)
Saturninus and Basilides follow next; and neither of them were either Bishops,
or of any other Order in the Church, that we can find. The next is the Heresy
of the Nicolaitans, which is generally fathered upon Nicolas the Deacon:
Irenaeus l. 1. c. 27. seems to he positive in this, Nicolait^ autem Magistrum
quidem habent Nicolaum unum ex septem qui primi ad Diaconium ab Apostolis
Ordinati sunt, Nicolas one of the seven Deacons was the Master of the
Nicolaitans; or at leastwise they looked upon him as their Master. Epiph. Haer.
2^.
Epiphanius follows Irenans, and enlarges the story, showing how he was a good
man at first, and did contribute much to the futherance of the Gospel; but that
afterward the Devil entered into him: Philastr. Haer. 5. Bibl. Patr. M. de la
Rigne. T. 4. p. 10.
Philastrius follows the Authority of Epiphanius. But for all this, I believe
Nicolas the Deacon may be acquitted of this imputation; for there are Witnesses
of very good Antiquity that endeavor to Absolve him.

1. Ignatius Interpolated in two several places, warning those he writes to,
Ign. Ep. ad Trall. and Philadelph. Interpol.
to have a care of the Nicolaitans, calls (...) ^^^^uns, and (...) i. e. those
that fals^y call themselves by the name of Nicolas, Sycophants and Impostors.
The old Latin Interpreter explains this farther, and adds, Non (...) talis fuit
Apostolorum Minister Nicolaus.

Clemens of Alexandria is more particular in the Vindication of Nicolas, Clem.
Alex. l. 2. Strom. c. 3.
whose name these Gnostics abused to countenance their lewdness; For speaking
of that Abominable Sect, he has these words, (...). i. e. They that pretend to
be the Followers of Nicolas the Deacon, do pervert a saying of his, that the
Flesh must be thus'd, that is kept under: But these Men like Goats abandoning
themselves to all uncleanness, understand and him to permit men to dishonor
their bodies by indulging themselves in all their lusts.

And the same Author in another place gives a more particular vindication of
Nicolas the Deacon, Clem. Alex. l. 3.
saying: That Carpocrates gave out this story of him, That he had a comely
Wife, and was Jealous of her, for which he was reprehended by the Apostles: But
Nicolas, to acquit himself of this Imputation brought her before them, and
offered to release her to any other that would marry her: and that this action
was suitable to his Maxim which we have mentioned before: Whereupon Clemens
adds, that the Nicolaitans, as they called themselves, following this Doctrine
and Action of the Deacon (...), Rashly and without Examination, give themselves
over to all manner of uncleanness: and then goes on to vindicate Nicolas,
adding, That he had understood by Tradition that he always preserved his faith
to his Wife inviotable; that his children that he had by this Wife, were
remarkable for their Chastity, and all died unmarry'd: And concludes at last,
That this was to be looked upon as an Instance of Mortification: and the Words
that those Heretics insisted upon so much, meant nothing else. Hist. Eccles.
l. 3. c. 29.
Eusebius, who cites this passage at large, seems to be of the same opinion;
and therefore says only that these Heretics gave out Nicolas for the Author of
their Doctrine ((...)) they only cracked and boasted that it was so. l. de
Haeres.
S. Austin speaks with the same caution with Eusebius, and says only, ut
perhibetur, permisisse fertur; though he says, ea qui vellet uteretur, it
cannot be understood of common prostitution, for Carpocrates himself says
(...), that she might be Married to any body that would have her. Theodoret
follows Clemens, allows this relation about Nicolas to be true, Theodor. l. 3.
Haeret. Fab^l.
and excuses him, by saying that He did not intend seriously to be as good as
his word, but only to haffle those that accused him of Jealousy; and at last
concludes, From hence they (the Nicolaitans) are manifestly convicted to be
Impostors, and falsely to call themselves by that name. Petavius does not know
what to determine in this case, Is Epiple.
since the Fathers are divided about is; But I believe one needs not be so
scrupulous: The whole matter depends between the Authorities of Irenaus and
Clemens: Clemens is very particular, and had examined the business it seems as
far as he could; the other speaks generally, and perhaps looked no further than
the name, nor could he so easily have an account of them, as Clemens could, who
lived where the sect was most numerous: Carpocrates who was the Father of it
was an Alexandrian. Besides, the Words of Irenaus, if they are examined, do not
positively affirm Nicolas to have been the Father of the Nicolaitans: Magistrum
habent Nicolaum are the words, which may signify no more than that they hold
him to be so: If the Greek Copy were extant, it might have given more light;
perhaps he said no more than Eusebius does, and the Word might be (...), they
boast that he is their Master. I am to beg pardon for this Digression; If it
can relieve the Memory of a person whom the Scripture intimates to be a Man of
Honest Report, Act. 6.3.
full of the Holy Ghost, and Wisdom; I am content to bear the blame of the
Impertinence. But however it were, it is some comfort, and enough to my
purpose, that he was no Bishop.

The Gnostics had no Bishop either for their founder or promoter that is yet
known: Clem. Alex. l. 3.
Carpocrates was no Diocefan Prelate, but his Sect pretended high, indeed to
something more than a Bishop, to an Apostle. They quoted Matthias for such
another sentence as the Nicolaitans did Nicolas the Deacon, and would have
persuaded the World that they were his Disciples.

Cerinthus, Clem. Alex. l. 6.
Ebion, Valentinus, Secundus, Epiphanes, Isidorus, Ptolemaus, Marcus, were they
Bishops? What Churches did Colarbasus, or Heracleon, or Cerdo govern? Marcion
indeed was a Bishops son, but it does not appear that he was of the Clergy; he
was Excommunicated by his own Father for a Rape, and when he could not obtain
Absolution turned Heretic. It were endless to reckon up all the Heretics that
gave names to Sects; they were most of them bred up the Scholars of other
Heretics, and differing in some things from their Masters, set up for
themselves, and called their followers by their own names.

The 39th Christian Sect in Epiphanius is that of the Cathari or Puritans, and
these are the first that we find started by any of the Clergy.

Novatus an African Priest began this Sect; I have given his History before;
and shown how he seduced Novatianus a Roman Priest, Epiph. Aug. Philastr. etc.
or at leastwise joined with him against his Bishop. Theodotus, whom St. Austin
calls Theodotion, was a learned man indeed, and Orthodox at first: and so was
Bardesanes Syrus; but neither of them was a Bishop. Montanus became the Author
of a Heresy because he could not obtain the highest place in the Church: and
turned downright Fanatic, saying he was the Holy Ghost. In short, the first
Heretic Bishop that we find is Paulus Samosatenus who succeeded Demetrianus in
the Bishoptick of Antioch in the year 262; Eusebius. in Chron.
and who fell into Heresy in the year 267.

His is the 65th Sect in Epiphanius, or the 45th Christian Heresy. This Paulus
was a very ill man, and taught dangerous opinions, that Christ was not God:
Eusebius. l. 7. c. 30.
But though he was really a Heretic, yet he was not the Author of this
Heresy. He is said by Eusebius (and the rest out of him) to have learned this
from Artemas, (as he calls him) or Artemon; Epiph. etc.
as also from Theodotus who began to teach this doctrine, and to gather him a
Sect under Victor Bishop of Rome, by whom he was excommunicated.

But Paulus Samosatenus is said to have revived this Heresy: It is true
indeed; but Eusebius in the place before cited makes it appear, l. 7. c. 30.
that the Sect of Artemas, and Theodotus was then in being; For the Council of
Antioch in their Synodical Epistle sent to several Bishops where they desire
them to receive Domnus, whom they had made Bishop in the place of Paulus
Samosatenus, when he should send his Circular Epistles, and then speaking of
Paulus deridingly, say, Let him (if he thinks fit) write to Artemas, and let
those that follow Artemas communicate with him if they please. But the best of
it is, that if God permitted a Bishop of so eminent a Church as that of Antioch
to fall into Heresy, he on the other hand raised up Godly and Orthodox Bishops
to oppose him, and to vindicate, not only the Christian Religion, but the Order
of Episcopacy also which he had dishonored. For the Neighbor Bishops
assembled in the Second Council of Antioch Condemned and Deposed him: Dionysius
of Alexandria, being now very old and unfit for Travel, could not be there, but
writ to him, says Theodoret: Theod. Haer. Fab. l. 1. Eus. l. 7. c. 30.
Eusebius cites the Epistle of this Synod that expressly denis that; saying,
that Dionysius of Alexandria had writ to the Council, but had not vouchsafed so
much as to salute Paulus. From which passage Valesius concludes that the Letter
of Dionysius to that Heretic Bishop in the Bibliotheca Patrum is forged,
Vales. Annot. in Eus. l. 7. c. 30.
notwithstanding Baronius receives it for genuine. Now because Mr. B. promises
to show, not only Who have been the cause of Heresies, etc. but also How; It
will not be impertinent to show briefly how this Bishop also fell into Heresy.
It was in short by the way of Comprehension, for Zenobia Queen of Palmyrene
after her Husbands death, being very considerable in the East, and being
Proselyted to the Jewish Religion, (for which reason likely L^nginus her
Favorite speaks so favorably of Moses) this Paul Bishop of Antioch thought
that by reducing Christ to be a mere man he might reconcile both Religious, and
take away the Partition Wall that divided the Jews and Christians, nothing
being so great an offense to the Jews as that Christ was owned by his Disciples
to be God: And thus compliance and vain projects of Comprehension, made this
man a Heretic. But Philastrius is not to be regarded, Phil. Haer. 17.
Ap.Biblieth. Patr.
who charges this Bishop with being turned Jew, and teaching Circumcision, and
bringing over Zenobia to Judaism.

Before this time, there is another Bishop reckoned by some Collectors of
Heresies, as the Author of one; Nepos.
Nepos an Egyptian Bishop, who taught out of the Revelation of St. John, as he
pretended, Eusebius. Hist. l. 7. Theod. Haer. Fab. l. 3.
that the Saints should live a Thousand years of pleasure here on Earth.

If this be a Heresy, it was much older than this Nepos: Just. Mart. Dial. cum
Tryph. p. 307. Ed. Par.
For it was so ancient and so general an opinion, that Justin Martyr did not
believe they were perfectly Christians that did not believe it. For all that
were Orthodox did look for the Restoration of Jerusalem, and that Christ
should reign there gloriously with his Saints a thousand years; which he
endeavors to prove out of the Revelations, and the Book of the Prophet Isaiah.
Iren. l. 5. c. 33, 34, 35.
Ireneus endeavors to prove the same thing at large, and derives the Doctrine
from Papias, and by him from St. John, the Beloved Apostle. So that if Nepos
prove Heretic for this, he is like to find very good company, but Author of it
he cannot be: It is some favor to him that Epiphanius and Philastrius pass him
by, for I do not remember that either of them mention him: However you will
say, that though he was not the first that taught this Doctrine, yet he was the
first that divided the Church about it: And that is a heavy fault that Mr. B.
charges upon the Bishops, that they divide the Church about unnecessary, nice
Speculations: But this Nepos is as far, if not farther from the Imputation of
Schism, than that of Heresy; For Dionyfius charges him not with Schism, but
only with writing a book for the Millenary opinion, which others afterward
laid a great stress upon, and by that means several Churches were divided and
some entirely carried away, and all this after Nepos his death: They might have
done the like with Justin Martyr, or Irenaeus if they had pleased, and made the
same stir, and yet those Fathers not at all concerned in the Schism; this is
manifestly the present case; there is no account of any Schism made about this
point till after this Nepos his death; And Dionysius who writes against him,
thinks himself obliged to make his Apology before hand; saying, that he
honored the man for many great good qualities, and was sorry that he was
forced to write against his Brother in the defense of Truth: And as to the
matter of fact, it was thus, He found in the Region of Arsinoe several Churches
distracted about this matter; so that they began to make Schisms in several
places: The Bishops surely must be concerned, where there is any Schism or
Heresy, they must have a hand in it: But here by good fortune no such thing
appears; Eusebius. l. 7
here is mention only of Presbyters and Teachers, whom this Bishop assembled;
Presbyters of the Villages: and these after some Dispute he at last persuaded
to Peace. But what became of the Bishop of that Region will you say? It may be
he was dead, and that this Nepos was the man; unless one may imagine the
Diocese of Alexandria to extend so far; for the Country adjoining to the Lake
Mareotes, and called by that name, was part of the Alexandrian Diocese, as we
have showed before out of Athanasius, and the Arsinoeites was the next Region
to that: But however this be, our point is sufficiently cleared, that this
Nepos was neither Heretic, nor Schismatic: Nor does it appear that any Bishop
was concerned in that difference, save only Dionysius of Alexandria, who by his
Prudence and Authority did compose it. To conclude, For the first three hundred
years after Christ there is but one Bishop found, who was the Author, or rather
the Reviver of a Heresy; and yet Mr. B. looks upon it as a strange thing, that
there should be a Heresy raised by one that was No Bishop.

The following Ages were not so happy; but as Christians generally degenerated,
so did the Clergy too; but yet not so much as our Author would make it appear.
The beginning of the fourth Century was very unhappy to the Church; not only by
reason of a most violent Persecution raised against it from without, but also
of Heresies and Schisms from within. Meletius an Egyptian Bishop, Meletius.
and the first of that Order that began a Schism, forsook the Communion of the
Church, because they that fell from the Faith under Persecution were received
into it, Epiph.
as Epiphanius tells his story; though others of better Authority give other
Reasons, that this Bishop had himself denied the Faith; and being condemned by
a Synod of Bishops, he set up a Schism: But of this we have said enough
elsewhere. Athan. Ap. 2.


About the same time started up the Schism of the Donatists; Donatus.
named so from one of their Bishops, Aug. de Hae^es.
that lived a good while after the rise of that Faction: this was carried on by
evil men that were Bishops and others: but Optatus derives it from two
Presbyters, Botrus and Geleusius, and one Lucilla, a woman of great interest,
and very whimsical.

But the Sect that most afflicted this Age, and divided, almost subdued, all
the World, was that of Arius. Arius.
But Arius by good providence was no Bishop, but a Priest of Alexandria: who
taught that Christ was not of the same substance with the Father, and that he
was not Eternal. This Doctrine first divided the Church of Alexandria, and then
all the World, some few Bishops taking his part, but the generality being
against him. The Original and Occasion of this Heresy is variously related,
though all agree in the Author: Haer. 68, 69.
Epiphanius makes Meletius the Schismatic to be the first discoverer: though
afterward his Sect, if not he himself, joined with these Heretics; just as
our Dissenters join Interests with the Papists to ruin the Church of England.
I would not be so bold to say it, if Mr. Baxter, who knows it much better than
I, had not observed this before: if it be otherwise, they must be satisfied by
him, who I suppose may be able to give a good account of that matter. When the
Bishop of Alexandria had been informed that one of his Presbyters, and the
Divinity Reader of that City (for so Arius was) taught dangerous doctrines,
denying, in effect, the Lord that bought us, he calls him to answer this charge
in the presence of his Fellow-Presbyters; and Arius owning his Doctrine was
condemned. This I should not give so great credit to, upon the word of
Epiphanius (who is unaccountably mistaken in several things relating to this
Heresy) unless the Letter of Constantine did confirm it; Eusebius. de vit.
Constant. l. 2.
who blames Alexander for proposing this question, which it seems by this story
he could not avoid, since this Schismatic (not perhaps out of any good will to
the faith, but as is usual with the separating Spirit, to reproach the Church
with countenancing Heresy,) had given him notice of this Intolerable Doctrine,
and the Industry and Application used by Arius to promote it: The occasion was
the Ambition of the Heretic, Theod. Haer. Fab. l. 4. c. 1.
who could not endure to see Alexander in the Bishops Chair, for which he had
been his Competitor, after the death of Achillas. Sand. Hist. Eriml. l. 2. p.
159, 160.
Sandius impudently affirms (without any proof) that it was after Achillas had
been put out by Alexander: I cannot but warn the Reader against the intolerable
dealing of that Arian Historian, For he has so little shame as to cite Sozomen,
and the Tripartite History, to prove that Achillas was turned out by his
successor, whereas there is not one word of it there, but on the contrary, the
whole story is much to the disadvantage of the Arian cause: For there Arius is
said to envy the promotion of Alexander, Sozom. l. 1. c. 15. Hist. Tripart. l.
1. c. 12.
and to be so impatient as not to live under the tedious expectation of the
Bishops death, in probable hopes of succeeding him, but to seek out any
occasion of quarrel, and then to set himself up. The passage is so very plain
that it is hardly possible to mistake it, and to apply that to Alexander, which
is manifestly said of Arius. The same Historian tells us, Sandius. Ibid.
that Achillas was of the same opinion with Arius, and refers to the same
place, but without the least shadow of Truth. I suppose he took Achillas the
Priest, that revolted with Arius, to be the same with the Bishop, who he says
was deposed, but who was indeed dead before that time. And Epiphanius his
placing Achillas after Alexander, Epiph. Haer. 68.
is a strange unaccountable mistake, as diverse other things are in his
relations of this matter: But let it be as Epiphanius says, it can give no
countenance to Sandius his opinion; For this Achillas that Sandius speaks of
had revolted with Arius, but he whom Epiphanius mentions was Orthodox, and set
up by that party against the Arians. In the next place, it is not likely that
the Achillas that joined with Arius was in Alexandria when Alexander died,
Socr. l. 1. c. 6, 8. Soz. l. 1. c. 21. Theod. l. 1.
for the Council of Nice condemned Arius and his adherents, and the Emperor
having banished him (as some say) or only forbid him to return to Alexandria
(as others) the Presbyters of Alexandria that joined with him were probably
removed for quietness sake, at leastwise, if they did not conform.

Lastly, Though Achillas might recant, and remain in Alexandria, yet
considering the Arian party was now condemned by all the world, it is not
likely that one of the first promoters of it should be chosen Bishop of so
eminent a Church; and much less probable, that being chosen he should resign to
Athanasius, a young man, and but a Deacon; and what is more than all, that one
devoted to the cause of Alexander, and one of the Champions of it in the
Council of Nice: What Sandius says after this, out of Philostorgius: of Arius
his modesty in preferring Alexander to the Bishopric of Alexandria, Philost.
l. 1. t. 3.
is altogether improbable; not one of all those Historians that give an account
of this matter saying any such thing, Theod. l. 1. Hist. Ed. id. Haeret. Fab.
l. 7. Vid. Gotofr. Dissert.
but several of them the quite contrary. But that Arian Historian mistook his
Index, and put l. 3. for the first, and the third paragraph, which would not
have been an easy mistake if he had looked into the book that he cited. But to
return where we left.

Arius who was the cause of all the mischiefs that followed that Controversy,
was no Bishop; and his first followers were not Bishops neither: Socr. l. 1. c.
6. Sozom. l. 1. c. 21.
Some Presbyters and Deacons of Alexandria first took his part, and two Bishops
that called themselves so, being of Meletius his setting up, and who were
indeed no Bishops, as being ordained Schismatically. Arius when he left
Alexandria made his Application to several Bishops, and was rejected by most:
Eusebius of Nicomedia at last undertook his Protection, and prevailed with some
few more to join with him; and the greatest part (as appears by the Letters
sent to Alexander) only out of Moderation, and to endeavor to compose the
difference between the Heretical Presbyters and their Bishop. But this way
increasing the difference instead of healing it, a General Council was agreed
upon; where there were but seventeen Bishops that so much as favored the cause
of Arius, and but five that refused to subscribe, who were afterward banished.
Had Constantine preserved the Rule which that Council had established, and not
tampered with it in compliance with the Arians, and by an Indulgence, and
comprehension, endeavored to bring those under a Rule that were enemies to it,
and to join such doctrines as were Incompetible, there might have been an end
of the Arian Heresy; but the Church is never distracted more by any thing than
projects of Moderation.

And because the calamities that enfu'd upon the Arian Controversy are to be
dated from Constantine's recalling of Arius: It is some Justification of the
Bishops that their authority and credit with the Emperor did not effect it.
Socr. l. 1. c. 25.
But it was an Arian Priest, that insinuated himself into the favor of
Constantia, and by her Intercession prevailed with the Emperor to admit of
Arius his delusory Recantation.

Constantius succeeding his Father in the East, and taking part with the
Arians, it is no wonder if in a little while they grew uppermost, not so much
by the compliance of the Bishops with the Inclinations of the Prince, which Mr.
B.'s charity does so often suggest; as by the violence that was used, by
deposing and banishing, and killing all those that durst be active in the
defense of the Faith: And what was worse than all this, by condemning men for
other things than their Faith, and so taking away from them the reputation of
Martyrdom, Socr. l. 1. c. 28, 29. Sozom. l. 2. c. 25.
by accusing good Bishops of the most heinous crimes, and suborning Villains
and Strumpets to swear the charge; by imposing upon the simpler sort by
plausible pretenses. And so at last, (as Vincentius Lirinensis expresses it) by
force and fraud the whole World in a manner was turned Arian; partim vi partim
fraud factus est Arianus: But of this I have said enough already, to show with
what little reason or humanity the Bishops are charged with compliance in the
case of the Arians.

The Sects that sprung out of Arianism were most of them begun by those that
were no Bishops. Sozom. l. 3.18. id. l. 5.12. Socr. l. 2.29. Philost. l. 3.
Aetius who thought not Arius to blaspheme enough, and added to his Heresy
further disparagements and diminutions of the son of God, was first a
Physician, and then began to teach Heresy; afterward was made Deacon by
Leontius Bishop of Antioch, an Arian, which is the highest Degree we find him
arrive to in the Church; he was at last excommunicated by the Arians themselves
as being too mad for their company.

Eunomius was his Scholar, Socr. l. 4. c. 7.
and his Clerk; bred a Heretic, and by that merit, Heretics prevailing, he
came to be Bishop. It were well indeed if all Bishops had the privilege the
Pope pretends to, to be Infallible as soon as he is set in his Chair. It were
well if that Order were a preservative against Heresy: But since it is in vain
to hope that, it is no wonder to see a Bishop a Heretic, that was so when he
was a Layman, and brought the same disease along with him into the Office.

Macedonius his case is the very same; He was a Heretic long before he was
Bishop; and was for that reason chose by the Arians after the death of
Eusebius, Vid. Athan. Apol. 2. id. Ep. ad Sol. Socr. l. 2.6. Sozom. l. 3. c. 3.
and not after the death of Alexander, as Socrates and Sozomen seem to say. For
at the Synod of Tire, this Macedonius, who at the death of Alexander was but a
Deacon, is said by Athanasius to have been a Presbyter belonging to Paulus
Bishop of C. P. and to have accused his Bishop; which Sozomen likewise
confirms. Vid. Vales. Observe. Eccles. ad Socr. and Soz.
He is said to have been recommended together with Paulus, by Alexander on his
deathbed, to the people of Constantinople for their Bishop; but the character
is not great: Socrates says only for a (...), an outward show of gravity, which
Sandius takes for true piety, and so amends the character: But Sozomen says
that Alexander recommended him only for a man of business, and acquainted with
the ways of the world.

This man it is likely turned Arian when he was Priest under Eusebius, who
removed from Nicomedia to Constantinople, and by that means so ingratiated
himself to the party, Theod. Haer. Fab. l. 3.
that after the death of that Arian Bishop, that party set him up against Paul
who was turned out by Eusebius. Epiph. Haer. 77.


Another improver of Arianism, and leader of a new Sect was Aerius; but he was
No Bishop, and for that reason turned Heretic. For Eustathius and he having
been fellow Students, and Eustathius having the better fortune to be preferred
to a Bishopric: This good man, although obliged by all the promotion his
friend could give him, yet could not be contented; and began to disparage that
Order and Authority of Bishops, since he had not the fortune to arrive at it.
This was the Cartwright of those times; and the Father of the Presbyterian
parity: a Notion brought into the world by the ambitious discontents of one,
who when he could not be Bishop himself, yet scorned to seem inferior to any
Bishop.

There is another Division of the Arians, mentioned by Theodoret, which were
called Psatyriani, or Tapsuriani; who had no Bishop for their Leader, but one
that prepared a certain food well relished in those times; the Critics are not
agreed whether it were Custard or Pudding-Pyes. What this leading man was for a
Scholar I cannot learn; though I believe not inferior to the Weavers and
Plowmen of Kedderminster, whom Mr. B. preferrs before the Ancient Fathers: all
that can be said for this man is, that he had too much learning to follow his
calling, and nothing would serve his turn but mending of Religion. But if I
should join with him Theodotus the Tanner, (who lived indeed a good while
before) Mr. B.'s Weavers and Plow-men might be hard put to it, and reconciled
to their Trades again.

The Audians were a Sect sprung up much about the same time with the Arians,
Epiph. Haer. 70.
headed by one Audius an Anthropomorphite, but no Bishop, till after he had
made this division; and then (as the design of all Heretics generally is,) he
was made Bishop of his Party. Epiphanius gives him and his followers a very
fair Character: which St. Austin seems to suspect, Ep. ad Quodvult. de Haeres.
and observes partiality and favor in the Relation. But Theodoret, who had
most reason to know them, represents this man as a heady fellow, of extravagant
conceits, Theod. Haer. Fab. l. 4.
and his followers as great Hypocrites: These it is probable were the
Anthropomorphites of Egypt, that were so violent against the followers of
Origin, in Epiphanius his time, who he says, communicated with the Catholic
Church; and for that reason it may be, he speaks so favorably of them.

The Errors of Origin, as they were pertinaciously maintained by the Monks of
Nitria, became a Heresy; but the Bishops had no hand but in condemuing those
gross mistakes; and when the Monks began to mutiny, and raise tumults about
them, threaten to kill the Bishop, and when they grew insupportably
troublesome; then they were banished for quietness and peace sake: Of these we
have spoken more particularly elsewhere.

It was not long before this, that the Priscillianists sprang up in the West, a
Sect made up of a mixture of Manichees and Gnostics. It was a lewd infamous
Heresy: But the Author of it was no Bishop. For whether we trace the original
of it to Egypt, and to that Marcus who first brought it to the West; Sever. l.
2. in sin.
It does not appear that he was so much as a Clergyman. Priscillianus, his
Scholar, who gave name to the Sect, was a Layman when he was condemned in the
Council of Saragossa. There are two Bishops indeed that are condemned by the
same Council: but such as were drawn in by the fair pretenses of Priscillianus,
and accessories only to his crime, but he that gave them the name is called by
the same Author Princeps Malorum: whom after he was condemned, those of his
party, to give greater credit to their cause, made Bishop of Abila: But Mr. B.
on this occasion does not find fault with the Bishops as Authors or promoters
of this Heresy, but for calling the civil Sword to their assistance, and
procuring great severities to be used toward the Authors of it.

The Pelagian Heresy had no Bishop either for its Author or Promoter; Aug.
Haer. 88.
Pelagius who gave it its name and being, was a Monk; and Julianus and
Coelestius his Disciples were never Bishops: or if this Heresy be derived from
Ruffinus, Jovinian, Evagrius, Ponticus, Hieron. in Jerem. l. 4. praef.
or lastly from Origin, as St. Jerome derives its Pedigree; It is evident that
Bishops had no hand in it; none of these being Bishops, but most, if not all of
them Presbyters.

Nestorius who gave the name to a Heresy, was not the first Author of it, as I
have showed before, but fell into it by engaging himself in the defense of
Anastasius his Presbyter, who first preached down (...); but as to Heresy Mr.
B. does acquit him.

Eutyches was a Monk, and imposed upon the Council of Ephesus, as we have
showed before; or they connived at his errors, and were not willing to examine
his doctrine to the bottom, for reasons before mentioned. This Heresy was
preserved chiefly among the Eastern Monks, who made such fearful disturbances
about it after the Council of Chalcedon.

Petrus Fullo, who invaded the Bishopric of Antioch, was indeed a great
promoter of Eutychianism, and a very wicked troublesome man; but the comfort
is, he was a Heretic long before: For being a Priest of the Church of
Chalcedon, Theod. Lect. Coll. l. 1.
he was put out for his crimes, or as others say more expressly, for Heresy;
which Liberatus sufficiently discovers, Liberat. in Breviar. c. 18.
when he tells us, that this person seized upon the Bishopric of Antioch, per
vilissim^^n papulum and Haereticum. Alex. Ser. de S. Barn.
His Heresy was the thing that recommended him to the Rabble that made him a
Bishop.

The Eatychians in the East were revived or new modeled by one Jacobus
Zanzalus, no Bishop, but an obscure mean man, (...), Niceph. l. 18. c. 52. In
Haer. 3. Maxim. cum Disput. Pirrho and Theod. An. 633.
says Nicephorus, upon which account he was called Zanzalus, that is, a
pitiful, mean fellow. Matthew Paris gives a more particular account of him,
which is liable to several exceptions, which it is not necessary to urge in
this place.

The Heresy of the Monothelites, though an unavoidable consequence of Entyches
his Doctrine, yet it is generally fathered upon Cyrus Bishop of Alexandria:
Sergius of C. P. Cyrius Bishop of Phasis, and Theodorus Pharanatarius. Baronius
lays it mostly upon the first, and shows how he came to fall into this mistake;
he had a charitable design of uniting the Divisions of the Church, by devising
some project that should comprehend all parties: he thought one Will, and one
Operation would not be so harsh, as one Nature, which had been for so long time
the subject of Contention. But with the same success that usually all such
designs have: when the Rule is changed, the Church is immediately all to
pieces, and those that were united under that Rule divide into parties and
factions; which will hardly ever unite again.

Now because in the following ages of the Church the Devil had another game to
play, and started up but few Heresies until these last ages; let us see what
sort of men the Authors of them have been. The Swenkfeldians, Anabaptists,
Menonists, The Family of Love, Quakers, Ranters, and the rest of the Modern
Sects; did these derive themselves from any Bishops? Servetus (whom the
Ministers of Swisserland prosecuted as far or further than Idacius ever did the
Priscillianists) was he a Bishop? Socinus was he a Prelate? or the Racovian
Divines, were they a Council of Bishops? how then comes it to be so great a
wonder as our Author professes it to be, that a Heresy should be raised by one
that was No Bishop? It is much a greater wonder that any one that makes
Conscience of what he says, should against all truth of History, and against
his own knowledge, charge the Bishops with all the Heresies in the World; that
a person that seems to be so sensible of approaching judgment, as frequently
to put himself in mind of it in his Writings, and even force the belief of good
charitable men by such professions of Sincerity; should yet advance so
malicious and so groundless an Accusation. There is no dallying with the
all-seeing God; and if every idle word will be accounted for, what plea shall
be made for whole books full of Calumny and Detraction? What for blasting the
memory of so many Holy men for ought he knows that are dead? What for aspersing
so many faithful Servants of God, for ought he knows, that are living? What for
defaming the whole Order from which he received his Ministry? and to which he
owes Honor and Subjection, as he will surely find in that day when he comes to
give account of all the hard things that he has written against it.

But if you would have the True Causes of Schism, Heresy, etc. You must not
look upon this or that Order of Men, but go up to the first Original of such
things. These Mischiefs, as all other disturbances of the World, proceed from
our Lusts which war in our Members: and do not flow from any particular
Institution or Order, but from the General Corruption of Humane Nature; by
which means all conditions, and degrees of men, have had the misfortune to have
some that have been wicked and infamous. The Apostles had a Judas, the Bishops
a Paulus Samosatenus, the Presbyters a Novatus and an Arius, the Deacons an
Actius: and in short there is no Office in the World, Sacred or Civil, but has
been in the possession of infamous persons, who have been a reproach and
scandal to it.

Now although the passions of men move them to be troublesome in any State or
Circumstances, yet there are some that qualify them more for Mischief, and
others that dispose them for it: There may be many wicked men that might be
willing enough to make a disturbance, but they may want parts and Abilities for
the work. Any man may pretend to a wicked opinion, but every one cannot
recommend it to others; and there are few that care for being Heretics by
themselves; But where Malice and an evil temper has the advantage of Natural
and acquired endowments, like Sulphur and Salt peter, it does not only
presently take fire, but has likewise an extraordinary force and capacity to
destroy. It is observed by some of the Fathers that most of the Haeresiarchae,
the Authors of Heresies or Sects, Aug. Com. in Psalm.
were men of great wit and accutness in Reasoning, Non Enim putetis Fratres,
potuisse fieri Haereses per parvas quasdam animas, non fecerunt Haereses nisi
Magni Homines: Do not think that Heresies were first raised by ordinary, mean
persons; they were great men that set them up: and within the same page he
mentions several of them considerable men.

The same Observation St. Hierom makes. Hieron. Com. in Os^^ c. 9.
Nullus enim potest Haeresim struere nisi qui Ardentis Ingenii est, and habet
dona natura qua a Deo Artifice sunt Creata. Talis Valentinus, talis Marcion,
quos Doctissimos legimus: Talis Bardesanes, cujus etiam Philosophi admirantur
Ingenium: None but men of Great Parts are able to set up a Heresy: Valentinus
and Marcion we find were very learned men, and Bardesanes was admired even by
Philosophers. Vincentius Lirinensis amplifies upon this subject with great art
and passion; he tells the great endowments of such as raised Heresy, and
reckons up particularly all the advantages they had to recommend themselves and
their Doctrine; and at last concludes they were a mighty Temptation, enough
almost to stagger the most confirmed Orthodox Believe: Vincent. Lir. adv.
Haeres.
alluding I suppose to that of the Apostle that there must be Heresies, that
(by that trial or Temptation) they who are approved might be made manifest. It
was a Question that puzzled the most understanding Heathen I think that ever
was, Cicer.
how God should ever bestow Reason and wit upon such men as he foresaw would
make use of the gifts against the Donor: This Christian Religion renders more
easy, when it shows us the end of this permission, the manifestation of those
that are approved.

Now though these Qualifications of Malice and Wit where they are met in the
same person, do dispose and fit him for Disturbances, yet he seldom breaks out
into any extremity before some outward occasion of Discontent does inflame him.
There is indeed a Temper that no Fortune, no Honors, can content, and render
easy to it self, or restrain from disturbing the world; but this extravagancy
is not Common; and the Generality of men, though not very quiet or peaceable in
their Dispositions, yet when they have gained their point; and are possessed of
wealth, and honor, they are commonly willing to secure the enjoyment of those
Possessions, by letting things run in the ordinary course: But if one of these
men happens to labor under repulse and disappointments, his patience is soon
at an end. Upon this account many of the Inferior Clergy that have stood in
Competition for a Bishopric and lost it, have broken off all Communion with
their Bishops whose Competitors they were; so Novatianus, and several others
became Heretics: sometimes growing impatient with waiting for the Death of
their Bishop, they have revolted against him, and drawn the People after them,
Thus Arius and Macedonius became the heads of Sects; sometimes despair of
Promotion after long waiting, and envy against those they saw preferred before
them has carried away unsteaddy men, to set up for singularity, and to make
new Sects. Thus Aetius Separated from the Arians, and taught new Blasphemies of
his own. Sometimes vain men have been carried away with the applause and favor
of the people (that flocked after them and through'd their Churches) to set up
themselves against their Bishop upon presumption of greater interest in the
people. This St. Austin makes a principal cause of Heresies. Sic enim fiunt
Haereses and schismata, Aug. de Bapt. cont. Donat. prop. sin.
cum dicit plebs carn^lis, quae in charitate dei fundate non est, Ibo post
Amatores meos, cum quibus utique sive per fidei Corruptionem, sive per
elationem superbiae turpiter fornicantur: Heresies and Schisms are caused by
giddy People that have itching Ears, and run after such Teachers as they
fancy. There is no doubt but these pretended greater Edification, for an
excuse of their Curiosity: Yet this good Bishop did not like the reason, and
makes it the cause of all the mischiefs that befell the Church. Nay the Apostle
expresses no small dislike of those that heap themselves Teachers, having
Itching Ears. Were that great Apostle and that Great Bishop alive now, what
would they say, when they should hear men renounce all order and rule, and
profess to follow their fancy, under the notion of greater Edification? Yet
this I must observe farther, that how good soever the argument may be for
separation; It sounds not well from the Teachers whose Commendation is involved
in the reason, They might surely give the People leave to say it, and that
might have saved their Modesty without losing the argument.

To Conclude this Point: Almost all the Heresies and Schisms that have
distracted the Church, have been no other than so many defections of the
Discontented part of the Clergy, and the more pragmatical part of the Laity
from their Rightful Bishop. Cyp Ep. 55
Non aliunde Haereses obortae sunt, aut nata sunt Schismata quam inde quod
Sacerdoti non Obtemperatur; Ep. 69.
Schisms and Heresies spring from no other cause than disobedience to the
Bishop: Inde Haereses obortae sunt, dum Episcopus qui unus est, Contemnitur:
All the disturbance of the Church is purely for want of observing that Precept
of the Apostle; Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they Watch
for your souls, as they that must give account: i. e. Obey those that are
Rightfully over you, and submit to them, not choosing your selves new Teachers,
and running after your own fancy: Epad. S^yr.
Which Ignatius seems to paraphrase as he is cited by Antiochus. Let the people
assemble where the Bishop is present. The sheep ought not to go wandering
whither they please, but as the Shepherd leads them. The people ought to follow
the directions of their Bishop, and conclude what he orders to be most pleasing
to God. And surely any one would think this the securest course; Those that
seduce the people into Faction, they may have interests of their own to serve
by making a breach and a disturbance: but all that love peace should surely
cleave to their Bishop: For his interest as well as duty oblige him to maintain
peace and Unity; for he is unavoidably a loser by the Quarrel, and cannot
rationally be supposed to have any design but to preserve things as they are:
But the Pretenses of others though never so plausible are to be suspected of
design, where the separation is manifestly to the prejudice of the people as
well as of the Bishop; and to the advantage of him only that persuades it.

Now as the Bishops are under the least Temptation to make a disturbance (and
what Governor will raise a Sedition against himself?) so in fact likewise they
are sound to be very few, that being Bishops have raised any Heresy or Schism.
Let any man consult the Catalogues of Ancient Heresies: and Compute how many of
the 60 reckoned by Epiphanius, or of the 88. of St. Austin, or of the greater
number of Philastius, and the more confused account of Theodoret; How many of
them I say were Bishops when they turned Heretics, and he shall find very few
if any one in all those numbers. But if any after they had Debauched the people
from their Rightful Pastors, were by subreption made Bishops of their Party,
They were never looked upon as Bishops but only as heads of a Faction. So that
I believe the reader may by this time easily perceive what truth there is in
Mr. B.'s General Charge, that the Bishops were the causes of the Heresy, and
Schism, and that it was so wonderful a thing that a Heresy should be begun by
one that was no Bishop.

Besides this charge of Heresy and Schism, Mr. B. accuses the Bishops of
having been the cause of Church corruptions, and Sedition: As to the first, if
he means that the Bishops first introduced these corruptions into the Church, I
believe he will be never able to prove it: as to the latter we shall examine it
in due place.

The Corruptions of Christian Religion whether in Doctrine or Worship, have
crept unperceivably into the Church; and by such degrees, that it is a hard
matter to ace their Original, and we are so far from nowing the first Authors
of them, that we are ignorant even of the age wherein some of them were
introduced. Mr. B. charges considently, but proves nothing: But the most
probable conjecture I think can be made of the rise and Progress of these, is,
1. That most of the corruptions in Doctrine crept in together with the Heathen
Philosophy: For great Philosophers especially the followers of Plato turning
Christians, still retained something of their former Notions, which not
appearing to be any way prejudicial to Christianityl; but on the Contrary
rendering it more acceptable to the wiser part of Heathens, were by degrees
owned among the more learned sort, in their Disputations with Heathens, and
passed without contradiction: But afterward busy men building farther
consequences upon this foundation, Improved the corruption, till at last it
grew Gross and intolerable. Hence came the Invocation of Saints, and Angels,
Plat. Pot. l. 5. Orig. adv. c^ll. l. 8. Hieron. descript Eccl. in Orig. Eusebius.
Praep. Ev. l. 12. Virg. Georg. 6. Somn. Scip. etc.
and the opinion of their knowledge of Humane affairs. Hence Prayer for the
Dead, and the opinion of Purgatory; Hence proceeded many other curious
Questions about the nature of God and his Attributes, of the Fatal
determination of events, of free will and the like. And as to the more sordid,
superstitious corruptions in Worship. If any one sort of men are to be charged
with them, I believe the Monks will bid fairest; The Cross, and Relics, that
came first from Judea, are owing as far a I can observe to Melania and her
Monks; Paulin Epad. Sulp. Sever.
and I do believe the story of the finding of the Cross is of no ancienter
standing. Who has filled all the world with fictitious Relics, and fabulous
Revelations concerning them? Who Debauched the reason and common sense of men
by their fulsome Legends and fictions of Miracles? By whose means in short, had
Superstition overspread the face of the Christian world? Were not the Monks the
manifest Authors and Promoters of all this? Superstition was born and brought
up first in Monasteries, and as Monks came into the Church, they brought it
along with them, and the opinion the people had of the piety of these Retired
men, made every thing current that they advanced? What so devoted Instruments
had the Papal usurpation, as the Monks, that pretended exemption from the
jurisdiction of their Bishops, and subjected the Episcopal Authority to it. And
for Transubstantiation, though the Grossness of the conceit were enough to
prove it Monkish; yet besides, it is found by matter of fact to be theirs,
Paschasius Radbertus being the first that broached this Doctrine. All this that
I have but just mentioned in the General may be made out by a deduction of the
rise and Progress of Superstition; but a particular account would exceed too
much the Proportion of this book. This I must add, that the Bishops who are
charged with these Corruptions by Mr. B. were the only opposers of them that we
find in Antiquity: as we may see in the Canons of the African Church, and that
of Spain, and other Countries. The first Picture we read of in a Christian
Church was torn in pieces by Epiphanius a Bishop: the first Councils about
Images condemned the Idolatrous use of them with great zeal, but at last
superstition being still advanced by the Popularity of the Monks, and the
ignorance of the Age, and some of the Emperors joining with them, prevailed
against the Bishops: and so Idolatry was brought for a help to Christian
Devotion; And if at last the Bishops joined in the superstitions, it is no more
a wonder, than that they were engaged in Heresy. For when any number of people
are corrupted, whether with superstition or false Doctrine, they will find
Teachers to their own mind, not that their Bishops will comply with every
popular wind of doctrine, but because men will make themselves Pastors after
their own hearts: and as long as there is a Heretic or an Ambitious man who
will be any thing for applause, or preferment, they will never want Bishops and
heads of their faction; or if the Clergy have no Judas, they will find Teachers
amongst themselves, and give them what Titles they please.

The last branch of the Charge is Sedition, and this is as grievous as any of
the other. Suppose the matter of fact in the first place true, that several
Bishops had been Seditious: does this proceed from their Constitution, or any
Principle the Bishops maintain, that is inconsistent with the people where they
live? This I suppose cannot be pretended. Or is Diocesan Episcopacy such an
enemy to the peace of the Government? We have had the experience of it for many
ages, and find but few that were so troublesome. But because as the case stands
now, we are to reckon only since the Reformation (for if a man be not blind he
may see that this worshipful Church History is only designed against Protestant
Bishops under a general name) They I suppose will receive ample Testimony from
the Government, of their faithfulness and Loyalty: How many acts of Oblivion
have been made for Bishops and their Party? Where were they seen encouraging
Rebels against their Prince with the hopes of Salvation? What Reign have they
disturbed here with their Seditions? or whose Government were they enemies to,
unless it were that of a Rebellious piece of a Parliament, and Oliver Cromwell,
and his Son, the David and Solomon of Mr. Baxter? But Loyalty has hitherto been
the greatest crime of our Bishops; and long may they continue to fear God and
the King, more than the Insolence of any faction; and I pray God they may
always preserve Inviolable that great Treasure committed to them, and the
greatest next that of the Faith: the honor of the most Loyal Church in the
World.

Now although the Bishops of the Church of England since the Reformation need
no defense in this particular, the merit of their Loyalty being so well known;
and what other Bishops may do, does not concern us; yet because in this
Treatise I have undertaken the defense of the Primitive Church, and by
consequence of our own, it will be necessary to add something upon this
subject, by way of answer to such particulars as Mr. B. has brought together to
show the seditious Practices of the Bishops.

The first thing he takes to task, Treatise of Episcop. part. c. 22.
is an old Maxim of King James, no Bishop no King: which is represented here as
if the Bishops were the Authors of it: and if the Presbyterian, had said no
Prebyters no King: you would have taken it for Treasonable, as if they had
threatened that the King shall not be King unless they may have their way, and
shall not the King be King unless you may be Bishops? It is well for the
Bishops that none of them was Author of that Dangerous saying; else I perceive
it might bear an impeachment, and prove by little management at least
Constructive Treason, but the Authority of a King may excuse him of Treason
against himself, though the Scotch Presbyterians have declared him a Traitor to
Jesus Christ and the Holy Kirk: And surely that King had some reason to say it,
for it is not likely he should pass such a complement upon the Bishops, and
make them so necessary to Monarchy, if he had not found some great suitableness
in this Church government to that of the State. The truth is that saying of
King James was the Result of a long experience, of a Turbulent, Seditious,
ungovernable Presbytery in Scotland: and how little he was a King while he was
among them the Historians of those times as Spotswood, Johnston, and others do
sufficiently show: Or if you would have a more particular description of the
Insolences, and enchroachments of that Presbyterian Clergy, look into the
Burden of Isscahar, and you will soon find reason enough for this Maxim. But
Mr. B. goes about gravely to Confute this, as an affected fiction without
proof. Chapter H. p. 2.^.2. c. 22.
For 1. Heathen Emperors were without Bishops: 2. follows the insinuation of
Treason. 3. What is in the nature of the Thing to Warrant this assertion? They
own every Text and Article for Monarchy as well as Prelacy, etc. and the same
reason Holland and Venice must have no Bishops. Would not a man wonder, that
any one should make so great a stir about such a little saying? Suppose it is
not absolutely impossible but Kings may be without Bishops or Presbyters
either, what then? Why then King James was mistaken in his Politics: when he
said No Bishop no King. There is no necessity of that neither: for all Maxims
in Morality and Policy are not to be used so unmercifully as to be judged
according to the rigor of the letter. He spoke this with regard to his own
experience, and his own case; and the Anti-Episcopal men made his words good,
by destroying Bishops first, and the King after: when this or that sort of men
is made either necessary or destructive to government; the meaning is, that
either their Principles or Practices, or interest, do either support, and
assure, or else overthrow and endanger the State: and that their practices upon
all occasions are generally suitable to their principles. This will be clearer
by these instances: Popery is generally looked upon as a Religion destructive
of Civil power, and not without reason. Must there therefore be no government
where there is Popery? The Kingdoms of France, Spain, and Poland, and several
other Countries do manifest the contrary. The Jesuits are looked upon as the
great Incendiarys of the world, and that no place can be at peace where they
have any influence: and yet they are entertained in all Popish Countries: Is
the general charge therefore of Sedition against these false and groundless? No
such matter. Suppose then among Christians one should say with regard to us, no
Protestants no King. I suppose there would be no such mighty absurdity in it.
Therefore if the Principles of those that were Anti-Episcopal, were looked upon
by that wise King as Anti-Monarchical too: and the Doctrine of the Bishops was
much more safe to the Government; it was ground enough for the saying. And now
to vindicate those Primitive Bishops from the imputation of Sedition, that he
has charged in this chapter with desturbing the Church and the world.

The first thing Mr. B. lays to the charge of Bishops is the Usurpation of
Popish Prelacy: Do you not know, says he, that where Prelacy is at the
highest, there Kings and Emperors have been at the lowest? Do you not know, how
the Papal Prelacy at present usurpeth one part of their Government, and is
ready to take away the other when ever Kings displease them? etc. Is it the
Bishop or the Papist that is here to blame? Is this the effect of their Order,
or of those pernicious principles they have inbib'd? If it was the fault of the
Bishops, then we must find the same practice in other Ages; or if the Popish
Bishops are dangerous to Government, are their Presbyters less to be feared?
The Jesuits before our Civil Wars used all the interest they had to prevent
sending of Popish Bishops into England. It was not I suppose out of any great
affection to us, or regard to the Peace of the Kingdom, but because they
thought Bishops unnecessary, since Priests and Jesuits could do more mischief
without them. But the same reason that renders. Popish Priests and Bishops so
dangerous to Government, renders the Presbyterians so too: But first let us
examine Mr. B.'s instances of more ancient Episcopal Sedition.

The first is at Alexandria in the time of Theophilus and Cyril, which I have
considered already. I need say no more here than, 1. That the Alexandrians of
all the people in the world were the most infamous for Sedition, even before
they ever had any Bishops. 2. That their Bishops did never give any countenance
or encouragement to their Sedition. The next is the combustion in
Constantinople about Chrysostom, where Theophilus and Epiphanius were
concerned: To this I Answer, 1. That these Bishops were indeed the occasion,
but never intended this tumult, or gave their party any encouragement to make
this disturbance. 2. That what they did, although it was very unjust, yet it
was not done against the civil Government, but in compliance with the Emperor.
3. That those who began this mutiny were such as favored Chrysostom, but did
it against his will, and against all his entreaties and observations to the
contrary: for he conveyed himself away first of all privately to prevent a
mutiny: and in the whole business he behaved himself so as to endeavor by all
means to prevent any mischief. He saw the civil power was wrongfully against
him, and he would not contend, but endeavored to steal away to prevent
contention.

The story of Theophilus his charging Isidore with double Letters, that whoever
was Conqueror, he might apply himself to him in his name, is of the same piece
with the rest of Socrates his story concerning that Bishop; and in all
probability an invention of one of the Monks of Nitria. He would never have
disobliged that man afterward after such a manner, that he had entrusted with
such a secret. Upon this Mr. B. makes a great outcry: What would have been said
of one of us now, if we had not only complied with a victorious Tyrant, but
also juggled with presents and double Letters before hand: I did my self disown
Oliver Cromwell openly to his death: So did John Lilburn, So did the Levellers.
So did the Presbyterians, as far as they durst, and none of these out of any
great affection to their Prince: but because they saw things run against their
inclination: and these had the same quarrel against Cromwell they had before
against the King: i. e. they could not endure to see the power in any other
hands than their own. But whatever Mr. B. had with Cromwell to his death: It
seems he generously forgets it after his death. And compares the most barbarous
villain in the World to King David in his Epistle to his Son. But as for his
owning his Son Richard Cromwell, because it was given out that he was a Cavalier
in his heart, will surely find excuse as far as it finds belief.

The next thing is the Bishops too sudden owning the Barbarian Conquerors. Do I
need to recite (says Mr. B.) how great Leo himself and other Roman and Italian
Bishops, owned the Barbarian Conquerors? No wonder then if they too early took
Theodoricus for their King, set over them by God, who was a better man than the
rest, and had at last a better Title. The truth is, it is not necessary for you
to recite this at all: because I think their lies no necessity upon any man to
recite that which is not true. For how I pray did great Leo himself own the
Barbarian Conqueror? Vid. Baron. ad An. 461.
Or who were those that he owned? Theodoricus? But Leo. was dead a long while
before, in the year 461. as Baronius; or the year before, as the Chronicle of
Marcellinus fixes it: whereas Theodoricus did not invade Itadly till the year
490: Was it Attila that he owned? He was indeed a Barbarian Conqueror in Leo's
time: But how did he own him? Attilas, when he had laid all Italy wast, and was
come with his Army before Rome, this Bishop is said to have gone out to him:
Suid Cassiod. Chron.
Missu Valentiniani Imperatoris, sent by the Emperor, and prevailed with him to
raise the Seige and leave Italy. If this be owning Barbarian Conquerors, they
were very unreasonable that would find fault. So Lupus Trecassensis, Eusebius
of Milan, Severinus, and several other Bishops of that time, prevailed with
several of those Barbarous Conquerors, to use their victory with moderation;
and by their intercession saved the lives and fortunes of many thousands, But
that they flattered these Kings, or approved of their Titles, we do not find.
But however Leo may escape, the Italian Bishops too early took. Theodoricus for
their King. How does Mr. B. conclude that it was too early. Had they then any
rightful Emperor whose cause they might maintain against this Usurper? the
Western Empire was now extinct, and not so much as the Title remained after
Augustulus: Odoacer had no Title but his Sword, and the possession of 13 or 14
years. The Eastern Emperor, if he had any right, he had given it to
Theodoricus, whom he adopted, Jornand. de Reb. Get c. 57. adampliandum honorem
ejus, in arma sibi eumifilium adoptavit etc. Annuit quae poscebat, dimisit ei
populum and senatum commendans Rowanum.
and sent into Italy to drive Odoacer out thence? So that if Conquest; or
resignation can give a Title, this King had a sufficient one. And besides all
this, the Western Empire was at that time in such a confusion, what by factions
within themselves, what by invasion of Strangers, that it was a very hard
matter to know who had the right; there being no Law of Succession established,
and Theodosuis his line being extinct. So that this is no parallel with our
late Rebellion, when there was a lawful King, of ancient desent, whose right
did not depend upon any election of the people: to raise War against such a
one, and to put him to death, and own the fact, and extol the barbarous
Usurper, is such an instance not to be paralleled by any Nation, and such as no
Christian Sect or Profession, out of Popery could have owned or justified, but
that of our tender conscience Loyal Protestant Dissenters.

In the next place we have the story of Theophilus and the Monks of Nitria
which no reasonable man can believe as it is related by Socrates and Sozomen,
without loving a malicious lie. The reasons I have given in another place, and
do not think it very convenient to repeat them as often as Mr. B. does the
story: But this is added by way of observation. Did ever Presbyterians commit
such an Unchristian, Inhuman villainy as this, by such false dissimulation and
Malice? Yes much more, by the Covenant. Who preached up Rebellion under
pretense of Religion? And destroyed the King under pretense of fighting for
him? Who sold their Master when they had promised to protect him? Were not
these Presbyterians? But because Mr. B. seems now to have gone over to the
Independents, he knows much worse can be said of them. I am entered upon this
much against my inclination, being forced upon it by the confidence of our
Author, than which nothing can be more provoking; quis tulerit Gracchos de
Seditione querentes.

The next instance is that of Eusebius Samosatenus, who when Valens his Officer
had brought him an Order for his Banishment, Theod. l. 4. c. 13.
tells him, If the people should know it, they would drown him in the-river
Euphrates: What would they say if our Churches were such, as this Orthodox
Episcopal Church was? What ever they would say of the people, they must needs
commend your Ministers. But the case is very much altered. Here a Bishop leaves
his people, rather than occasion any disorder: With you the Pastors persuade
the people that notwithstanding all the laws to the contrary, they must not
desert their Pastors. Here the People were incensed with the apprehension of
Arianism, which overthrew the Foundation of the Faith; with you there is no
such reason, since you all confess we are agreed in the Substantials of
Religion, and yet the Teachers press their Congregatios to stand by them
against the Government. Here a good Bishop would not be prevailed upon by any
entreaties to return against the Emperors command, to the manifest endangering
of the public peace; and desire them to have patience, and submit to
Authority: The Presbyterians. Teachers when they had opportunity, did inflame
the people against the Government, and by their seditious preaching kindled the
late Rebellion. What would we say then, if you were like this Church of
Samosata, that lovded their Bishop, and would be governed by him, and take his
advice when he disswaed them from tumult and sedition? We would say then that,
though the first heats were not warantable, yet that you would be much better
than you are, and the Government could be much more secure of you than it is.

Mr. B. pursues this instance farther, and adds, Theod. l. 4. c. 14.
When the Emperors Arian Bishop was set over them, not one of all the people
would come to the Church as they were used to do: Would not wash in the same
water, etc. do our hearers deal as harshly as this? How shall a man deal with
those that have no Conscience, but against Ceremonies, and Episcopacy? Is there
any resemblance between our case and this? The Arians (as Mr. B. confesses)
denied by direct consequence the Being of Christ; and is it any wonder that
Orthodox Believers should have such abhorrence of these men? If any of our
Bishops, Nay, if an Angel from Heaven should preach such Doctrine as this, let
him be Anathema, and be abhorred as much as you please. In the mean time they
are but in evil case, that depend upon the Authority of your instances for
Separation, and will believe they are moderate Men, because they do not use
Orthodox rightful Bishops as harshly, as the Orthodox did the Arian Usurpers;
Although they have no great reason to boast of their civility upon this
account, it being easy to show out of their writings, and Sermons, (to say
nothing of their common conversation) such Language as a Christian ought to be
ashamed of: But these good men are too much mortified to blush, and keep their
blood so much in subjection, that they never suffer it upon any provocation to
flush into their faces.

After this we have another story of the Virgins that sung in reproach of
Julian the Apostate: Who can help Libels, Theod. l. 3. c. 13.
and Lampoons from stealing out against one that is generally hated? Did any of
the Christians enter into any combination against him, or declare it lawful to
Rebel?

Presently we have another story of the Church of Edessa that would assemble,
notwithstanding the Emperors commands to the contrary. And what is all this to
the purpose? Did not the Primitive Christians do so too, and suffered Martyrdom
for it? But did they ever enter into Covenants, and Practices against the
State? No, here is mention of a poor Woman that made have to the Assembly when
she knew it would be disturbed by Soldiers, and in probability be massacred:
but what to do? to see how manfully a field Conventicle would be have it self,
or to plunder the Baggage of the assailants, when they should be put to the
rout? No such thing: but with a design to suffer Martyrdom, and to dye tamely
with the rest, for the profession of the Faith.

In the next place, We have Basil 's answer to the Prefect, Theod. Hist. l. 4.
c. 19.
when he offered him the Emperors favor (upon condition he would turn Arian,
which our Author with great ingenuity forgets,) This (says he) may take with
Children, etc. And as for the Emperors friendship, I much value it joined with
Godliness, but if it want that, I say it is pernicious: Upon this our Author
remarks, In one of us this Answer would have been enough to make us seem as
bad, as it made Basil esteemed good. I must ask your pardon if in this point I
am not of your Opinion. For when your circumstances are the same with Basils, I
believe you may follow his example; and they are unreasonable men that will
find fault, that when any King or Emperors favor upon Earth is offered you
upon condition to betray the Faith, you should reject it with indignation. But
the difference between the substance, and indifferent circumstances of
Religion, strangely alters the case. There is a great deal more to this effect;
of the Orthodox refusing to conform to and keeping separate assemblies from the
Arians; which as they do not prove Sedition against those that were then Non
conformists, so they do not excuse ours. And this must be added, that in all
these lamentable distractions of the Church we find no Orthodox Bishop animate
the people against the government, what persecution soever they suffered; but
on the contrary, restraining all Tendencies to Rebellion, and withdrawing
themselves when the Popular favor toward them grew inordinate and
uncontrollable; whereas too many of our Schismatical Presbyters have kindled
and fomented Sedition.

Mr. B. says, Audas a Bishop in Persia demolished their Temple or Pyreum by
violence, for which the Emperor of Persia killed him, Theodor. l. 5. c. 39.
and destroyed all the Christian Churches. And Audas was very much to blame:
and the fact was disowned generally: and Theodoret condemns it, and antiquity
never approved it. But who follows the example of this Zealot Bishop? I am sure
our Episcopal men are far enough from any such imputation. But there are men in
the world that Mr. B. knows, who have not destroyed Pagan Temples, but
Christian Churches; and some were so zealous as to move for the pulling of them
all down as polluted with superstition.

What Theodoret says of Julian, calling him Tyrant, which Mr. B. takes notice
of, was after Julian's Death, and therefore could not tend to Sedition. But
whoever animated the people to resist him? His Apostasy indeed being
inexcuseable, people took the Liberty to give him such a Character as he
deserved when he was dead; and his successors were not at all concerned in it,
as having no relation to him. Isaak, as Mr. B. observes, l. 4. c. 34.
spoke to Valens with great boldness: but it was with the assurance of a
Prophet, and such a one as spoke immediately from God.

The Christian people of Thessalonica (says Mr. B.) rose and killed some of
Theodosius his officers, Theod. l. 5. c. 17.
which provoked him by his Soldiers, to kill seven thousand of them, for which
Ambrose brought him to do open Penance. The Christian people are much obliged
to Mr. B. for giving them the honor of this Sedition: But Theodoret whom he
cites for this story, says not one word of the mutineers being Christians.
Ruff. l. 1. c. 30.
Ruffinus who is particular enough in relating it, says nothing of their being
Christians, but has some circumstances that make for the contrary. Niceph.
Hist. l. 32. c. 40.
The occasion of this Sedition was about a Charioteer, who had lewdly attempted
one of the Governors Pages, and was put in Prison for it; but being expert at
his calling, the people interceded for his release, to entertain them at the
Public races: It is not likely the Christians would have concerned themselves
for such a villain: or for his Performance at those public spectacles. It
being forbidden by the Canons of the Church to be present at them, and
extremely declaimed against by the Bishops of those times: 2. It is not likely
they were Christians if we consider the method Theodosius took to revenge this
outrage: for as these Chariot Races were the occasion of the Sedition, so he
made them the opportunity of his revenge, for having got a great number
together to that sight the Soldiers put his orders in execution, and slew
7000. in Ludis Circensibus, Ruffin. l. 11. c. 30.
says Ruffinus. 3. That the Generality of those that came to these spectacles,
and consequently of those that were there slain, were not Christians, may be
gathered from the arguments used by St. Ambrose to aggravate the Cruelty; where
there is not a word of their being Christians, and his brethren, but only of
their bearing the Image of God and being men. 4. Zosimus, Theod. ubi sup.
Niceph. l. 12. c. 41.
who omits nothing that is to the reproach of the Christians, does not mention
this Sedition, which if it had been theirs he would have hardly passed. But the
Christians, it seems are more beholden to that Heathen, and professed enemy,
than to Mr. B. Lastly since there are so many Authors Christian and Heathen
that mention this Sedition, and not one of them say the Christians were
concerned in it, Mr. B. is inexcusable for charging such a Barbarous Sedition
upon those of our Religion, as if he affected without any authority to render
Christianity odious. And though all this had been the fault of the Christians,
it is but an accidental Tumult, and the Bishops are no way concerned in it.

Our Author adds, that to mention all the Bloodshed in Rome ( as at Damasus
Election and else) and at Constantinople, and Alexandria, would be tedious,
even that which was shed on the account of Bishops. It cannot be denied but
there were great and bloody Tumults upon the account of Bishops, but there were
not many Bishops that encouraged them; but on the contrary they used all means
possible to prevent and remedy them, by withdrawing, by quitting their right,
and going into voluntary Banishment. But almost all these Tumults were
occasioned by the Popular elections of Bishops, which Mr. B. out of his love to
peace doubtless, and to save effusion of Christian blood, would restore by his
Reformation of Episcopacy.

Lucius (he would say Lucifer) Calaritanus, was a pious Bishop (says Mr. B.)
but so hot for separation from those that had been Arians, that he is numbr'd
for it with the Heretics, though an Orthodox Bishop: And what is all this to
Sedition?

The Novatians were Episcopal, and so were the Donatists (says Mr. B.) and yet
how have they been judged of for their Schism I need not tell: They are very
much to blame that say the Presbyterians or Independents troubled the Primitive
Church: It was impossible for them to be troublesome before they were at all,
it seems all the Sects, and Schisms of that time thought they had no right to
pretend to be a Church, unless they had Bishops: But these Anti-Episcopal
Separatists were reserved, it seems for the last times, as the severest curse,
and judgment that could befall the Church. Those Episcopal Schismatics indeed
divided the Church, but these quite dissolve it.

Besides these Episcopal Schismatics, Mr. B. gives a small list of Bishops
that were Anti-Hereticks. Apollinaris, father and son, Paulus Samosatenus,
Nestorius, Dioscorus, Eusebius of Nicomedia, Theodorus of Mopsuestia, have been
Arch-Hereticks, and the cause of Tumults and Dissension. There is much of this
that is not true, and some of it that Mr. B. does not believe to be so: For 1.
Apollinaris the Father was no Bishop; Hieron de Script. Apoll. Laodic. Syria.
Ep. Patre Presbytero. l. 6. c. 25. Gregor. Nyss. Ephr. Syrus. Philost. l. 8.15.
Gottoffred. Dissert. in Philost.
and this was he that was the Arch-Heretick as Zozomen informs us: and as much
may be gathered from Gregory Nyssen, who makes Apollinaris a very old man when
he should have disputed with Ephraim Syrus. Apollinaris the younger is said to
have been a Bishop by Philostorgius, though Photius adds that he knows not
whence he had it: But Jerome is express, and that is the Common opinion. Yet
whether he were the Author of this Heresy or his father, he was a Heretic
before he was a Bishop, while he was yet reader of the Church of Laodicea:
Socrat. l. 2. c. 46.
and from Socrates, and Athanasius writing against his Heresy, it is plain
that it was long before the younger Apollinaris was made Bishop (if ever he
were so.) Nicephorus makes the repulse of Apollinaris at Antioch, (which seems
to be after he may be presumed to have been Bishop from some expressions of
that Historian, Niceph. l. 12. c. 4.
) to have been the occasion of his Heresy; but this manifestly contradicts,
all ancienter Historians; and indeed the very story contradicts it self; for
Flavian upon the place convicts him of having been a Heretic before: Sandius
thinks he was not Bishop of Laodicea, till after the Council of C. P. because
Pelagius is found Bishop of Laodicea in the subscriptions of that Council;
though I believe this reason of small moment, and the Acts of that Council show
him to have been Bishop of that place before: However, manifest it is, that
whether the father nor the son were Author of that Heresy, he was not a Bishop
at that time. Nestorius Mr. B. himself has taken great pains to prove Orthodox,
yet now it seems his mind is changed. The same he does with Dioscorus. He was
on their side against the Councils that condemned them; but now from Advocate
he is turned Accuser: Eusebius of Nicomedia was no Heretic in the judgment of
Valesius: but if he were, he was not an Heretic: because he did not begin the
arch-Heresie, but followed Arius. Theodorus of Mopuestia was an Orthodox Bishop
as Mr. B. owns out of Derodon, and as Facundus proves at large; though he had
the ill fortune ^o be condemned by Later Councils, upon (...) misunderstanding:
this case I have discussed more Particularly in another place, where Theodore
Tarsensis, his Doctrine was examined. At last Bishops failing, Mr. B. mentions
Aerius, who spoke against Bishops, because himself could not be Bishop: so
Pestilent a thing the desire of such Bishoprics have been: And who can help
it: if men will be Ambitious, and aspiring: must there be no Government,
because it is the aim of ambition, or may be the Possession of an evil man? So
there must be no Kings, because many times a Crown became the occasion of Civil
Wars: There must be no reputation, because Ambitious men affect it, and grow
Seditious to become Popular.

After this we have little hints of quarrels which were far enough from
Sedition, as that of Theodotus and Basil, and of Eusebius and Basil, the former
was a particular humor, and had no consequence. Of the latter, because Mr. B.
says it was sad and scandalous, I will give a more particular-relation, that
the Reader may discern the difference between the Temper of those good men that
are here scandalously represented, and that of our Separatists that Mr. B.
compares with, and prefers before them.

A difference happened between Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea and St. Basil then
Presbyter of that Church; Nazianz. Orat. de Basilio.
how or upon what occasion Gregory Nazian. Was not willing to discover; ^^nking
it not much for the honor of Re^^gon to rip up the faults of Bishops. But he
says indeed that Eusebius, though he was a very good man, yet was in fault; and
seems to say that he envied Basil. But when the falling out was known, the
Monks took Basils Part, and drew many of the people with them, and would have
done him right upon his Bishop: but this good man, though he knew the Merit of
his cause, and of his person, yet for peace's sake retired into the Widerness.
He might have said to his Monks, that the people must stand by them; and
considering his Learning and Eloquence, he might have presumed to have edified
more in a Coventicle than the Bishop could in the Church; yet this good man had
in humbler opinion of his gifts, than to endanger the peace of the Church,
rather than forbear the exercise of them: And after a long Banishment and
silence, he was not grown so resty and Irreconcilable, but that when his
Church, was threatened by the Arian Pest, he returned voluntarily to assist his
Bishop without desiring the Church Walls ( i. e. the Order and Discipline of
it) to be broken down that he might enter Triumphantly like a Conqueror. He
came of his own accord, submitted to his Bishop and lived with him 'till he
died not only in peace and Charity: but in the most entire friendship and
confidence. The Application of the Parable of the merciful Samaritan is not
improper here. Go thou and do likewise.

The contention between Basil and Euthomius ( Anthimus I suppose he means about
the extent of their Diocese was no less (Scandalous) Any unreasonable Usuper
may bring the meekest man upon earth into odious Debates; so Saint Paul himself
was put upon an Invidious vindication of his Authority and Jurisdiction.

The People of Casarea would have torn in pieces Eusebius, the Emperor's (the
Empress he would have said) own uncle, for Basils sake if he had not hindered
them; And does not this show the Loyalty, Greg. Nazianz. Orat 19. de Basil.
as well as the Authority of this Bishop: But the People were Episcopal; all
people, especially those of the meaner sort, as these were, are apt to be moved
into disorder, but it is much for the Honor of the Bishops authority, and
their Duty, that they obeyed him so readily: surely they are much more
Tolerable than those that Assassin Bishops.

The difference between those of Neo Caesarea and Basil is not worth the
mentioning because it contains nothing like Sedition; and is only a quarrel
about Psalmody, and some new orders introduced among them.

The Antiochians for a Tax under Theodosius the Great did Tumultuate and kill
the Magistrates, and destroyed the Statues of Flacilla the good Empress: And
what then? What is this to the Bishops? It does not appear that these mutineers
were Christians. The Heathens indeed were very Turbulent in this Emperors Reign
because he had Ordered their Idols should be destroyed, Zozim. l. 4. c. 38.
and that they were the men principally concerned in this uproar we may
understand by the choice of their Delegates whom they sent to carry their
submission to the Emperor: Zozim. l. 4. c. 42.
Lybanius and Hilarious both Heathens. The Church of Antioch I suppose was not
in such want as to be forced to charge the enemies of their Religion with so
great a trust, nor could they have been so absurd as to commit their cause to
such hands as they could not be assured of, and they could not think they would
be so acceptable to a zealous Christian Emperor, who had so lately put out such
severe Edicts against the Heathen superstition. It shows a strange temper when
a man to render Bishops odious will not stick to raise false accusations
against Christians, and charge them with the Sedition of Heathens. In the
worst, says Mr. B. Good Ambrose at Milan (was not silenced as we are) but by an
Orthodox Emperor desired and Commanded to deliver the Arians possession but of
one Church and he refused to do it and to forsake that Church. etc. Whereas we
left all our Churches at a word: It is strange Mr. B. should take such delight
to compare us with the Arians; surely he would have his Reader believe we are
as unsound in the Faith as those Heretics, or else all this discourse is but
to amuse and impose upon him; But there is great reason to value the peacable
Resignation of the Nonconformists, when we consider by what Usurpation and
violence they were brought in; and what a number of worthy Learned Ministers of
the Church of England were turned out to make vacancies for these Men who were
to instruct the people in new Mysteries of Religion, which their old Pastors
had not the Conscience, or ability to Teach them, that is of the Lawfulness of
Rebellion.

We have several other instances of St. Ambrose his zeal against the Arians,
and some of his Charity in rescuing some of them from the fury of the
multitude, of his popularity, etc. But not a word of his sedition, or his
forcible resistance of the Emperor: The harshest thing he did, was the
shutting of the Church against the Officers of the Emperor, who would have
delivered it to the Arians for a place to Blaspheme Christ, under pretense of
Worshipping him.

But at length, after long straining Mr. B. has found out some Bishops in the
same fault, of owning and flattering Tyrants, and Usurpers, with himself, and
this because it is home to the purpose, and seems to parallel his Dedications
to R. Cromwell. We have the story at length, and set out with all the advantage
of Remarks and comparisons, and thus it begins.

And because the late Revolutions in England are made by some Prelates. The
pretense for the Silencing of 1800 Ministers, of whom one in ten never meddled
with Wars: being fallen again on this case of Maximus, Let it be Noted how like
he was to Cromwell, saving that it was not the Sectaries, but the Bishops that
he studied to please, and rise by: How just the pretense was, Mr. B. can tell
better than I, if he would speak-out: And whether he will or no, others perhaps
will have the Courage and the Honesty to do it.

How like Cromwell was to Maximus I do not find by Mr. B. though he desires it
should be Noted: They were both Usurpers, but as unlike in their circumstances,
as they could well be imagined. For First, Cromwell. Usurped a Kingdom settled in
one Family by a long and unquestionable Descent, upon a King of undoubted
right. Maximus Usurped an Elective Empire at the disposal of Armies, being
chosen by his own Army, and that of Gratian, Sulp. Sev. de vit. Mart. c. 23.
Aur. vict. Socr. Sozom
(as he said) against his will. Gratian against whom Maximus Rebelled, was
killed indeed by Andragathius, an Officer of this Tyrant: by his order as most
suppose; but as he himself protested, without his knowledge: However it was in
pursuit, in open Field, in a posture of Resistance, and at the head of some of
his Troops. Zozim l. 4. c. 37.
But Cromwell murdered the late King in cold blood, after the formality of a
Trial, with all the pomp and ostentation of insolence and cruelty: Maximus when
he had done this, though he entered by Treason, Ambr. ep. 27. Sozom. l. 7. c.
13. Zozim ubi supra.
yet afterward had his Title confirmed by Treaties concluded with Valentinian,
and Theodosius the great, who ordered their names should be joined together in
all public forms, and that his Statues should be every where set up: So that
those who lived in the Provinces under Maximus could not now reject him without
Rebellion; He being their Prince, and no other having any right, or making any
claim. And had he been contented with his first conquest, it is not likely
Theodosius had ever armed against him: But Cromwell, as he entered without any
color of right according to the constitution of this Kingdom, so while he
enjoyed it, the right Heir was still in being, to whom he and all the people in
Conscience still owed Allegiance, and whose interest the invincible Loyalty of
some of his subjects did still promote, and therefore they were not so
excusable that complied with this Tyrant, as those that closed with Maximus.
Lastly, Maximus did pretend something of Title by Descent, as being related to
Constantine the Great. Baron. An. 383.1.
But Cromwell never pretended to be of the Royal Family: So that here was a vast
difference between these two persons before us. But Mr. B. can find no
difference but this, That Maximus studied to please the Bishops, and rise by
them, and not by the Sectaries: If there had been any Sectaries in those days
of the same Principles, with some of ours; He understood his interest too well
to have neglected them. But how is it the Bishops fault, that he studied to
please them? That he studied to rise by them, is more than any body has said
before Mr. B. And if Maximus had such a design upon the Bishops, he was surely
disappointed; for we do not find any where, that any Bishop did ever contribute
in the least to the raising of him. But besides to what would he rise? He was
Emperor already, before we find him take the least notice of the Bishops: And
if after this success of his Army, to establish himself in his new conquest, he
endeavored to oblige all sorts of people, and amongst the rest, the Bishops,
who were popular men in those days; I cannot understand, how it can be any
great reproach to them. Sometimes wicked Men may reverence that Virtue and
goodness in others, that they will not practice themselves Sometimes their
guilty Consciences, and their just fear of reproof, makes them stand in awe of
men of severe conversation, and to endeavor to please them. Sometimes their
interest leads them to oblige those that have any influence or Authority over
the people: And one would think this would hardly be objected by way of
reproach to them that innocently received the obligation. Well, But what did
this Usurper do to please the Bishops? And how far were they instrumental to
his advancement? Mr. B. tells us, When Gratian the Emperor befriended the
Priscillianists; Maximus to please the Bishops, persecuted them to death: But
by this, if he pleased some Bishops, he displeased several others, who were
extremely dissatisfied with these proceedings; although they all were of
opinion those Heretics were not fit to live: Sulp. Sev. l. 2. in sin.
And in the account which Severus gives of this proceeding, he intimates that
the Bishops were generally dissatisfied; that Ithacius to avoid their
prosecution, did lay down his Bishopric; that Theognostus and a Synod
condemned him for it. Yet another Synod, to prevent a Schism in all likelihood,
received him into their Communion: But to proceed, says Mr. B When
Valentinian, Sulp. Sev. de vit. mar. Baron. Ar. 385.29.
by Justina the Empresses's means, did persecute or trouble Ambrose, for
refusing to deliver a Church to the Arians, and also other Orthodox Bishops as
well as Ambrose; Maximus gave to Ambrose and the Bishops the honor of keeping
him out of Italy; and wrote his Letters to Valentinian for the Orthodox
Bishops, telling him how grievous a thing it is to persecute the Ministers of
God, and when under his Father they went for faithful Ministers. Upon this
message of Maximus: he says, that Valentinian being afraid of him, the
persecution ceased, and Ambrose must be sent upon an Embassage to Maximus, to
stop him. As to the when, Mr. B. mistakes the time in the first place, So^r. l.
5. c. 1. l. So^^^ (...)
with Socrates, and Sozomen; Socrates makes this persecution of Ambrose to be
before the Death of Gratian, which that Historian says, so frighted Justina,
that she left off tro^^^^ that good Bishop any longer. But Ambrose himself
contradicts it, Ep. 33. Baron. An. 383.19.
and shows plainly that this happened after his first Embassy, and after his
obtaining a peace of Maximus. In the next place: Maximus is said to have given
Ambrose and the Bishops, the honor of keeping him out of Italy. It was
certainly a great Honor to Ambrose (for other Bishops there were none
concerned in it) But I much question whether ever Maximus designed it as such;
Gloriosum est mihi hoc pro salute pupilli Imperatoris. Amb. Ep. 27.
who (as we shall show presently) not out of reverence to Ambrose, but for fear
of Valentinian's preparation accepted a Peace. But this Usurper, faith Mr. B.
wrote Letters to Valentinian in favor of the Orthodox Bishops and St. Ambrose.
Who can help it, if a busy Usurper will be forward to concern himself in
matters that do not belong to him? But lest the Reader may suspect any
treacherous correspondence between those Bishops and this Usurper, Amb. Ep. 27.
I will give a brief account of Ambrose his negotiation with him. When Maximus
had seized that part of the Western Empire that Gratian was possessed of,
Valentinian, fearing lest the Tyrant should invade his Countries, sends St.
Ambrose to mediate a peace: Maximus having understood that Valentinian was
making some preparations against him, and had entertained the Huns and other
Auxiliaries, began to incline to an accommodation, looking upon the Invasion of
Italy as too hazardous an attempt: Therefore he sent some of his Officers to
meet Ambrose, and to offer him a peace; which afterward was concluded upon
these Terms: That Maximus should be owned Emperor, and retain all the
Countries he was possessed of: This was the first Embassy of Ambrose, in which
negotiation, it was not so much to do Honor to Ambrose, as out of fear of
Gratians preparations, that Maximus did forbear invading Italy. But when this
Usurper perceived that Valentinians affairs were not in so good a posture as he
imagined at first, he was vexed that he had let so fair an opportunity slip, of
adding the Dominions of Valentinian to his other Conquests. Upon this, he
begins to pick quarrels with Valentinian, to take the part of the Orthodox
Bishops, nay of the Heathens, and every one that had reason of discontent,
calling himself Procuratorem Reipublicae. Valentinian jealous of his designs,
sends Ambrose a second time, to desire Gratians body, and likely to sound
Maximus. This good Bishop was entertained this time but very coldly: The
Usurper reproached him with having imposed upon him before, and keeping him out
of Italy. The Bishop replied, that it was not he, but his own fears that
prevailed with him: and in short, when Ambrose would not communicate with him
nor his Bishops, because he looked upon him as a man of blood; He was sent back
without having been able to effect any thing, and with no better answer than
that Maximus would consider of it. This is the sum of this negotiation, as
Ambrose himself, and Paulinus in his life, gives an account of it. And now if
any disloyalty can be suspected in Ambrose, and the Orthodox Bishops, it must
be such a secret as was never yet revealed: Whereas nothing is more evident
from these Relations, than the integrity of that Bishop, and his extraordinary
affection toward his Prince and Country. For from what has been already said
we may observe, 1. That Ambrose was not only a dutiful Subject, but as himself
says, though without vanity, the Father or Guardian of his Prince. 2. The
confidence his Prince had in his integrity, when after so great and fresh
Provocations he would trust him with his life and Empire, and that although he
had been provoked in the most tender part, by his Princess endeavors for the
introducing of Arianism. Others perhaps if they had been in his condition,
would have looked upon this Tyrants declaring for the Truth, as such an
opportunity that Providence had offered for the preservation of the Faith: and
since the Empress was of a false Religion, and the Emperor was Governed by
her, why should no^ they set up this Maximus as the Protector of the true
Faith? But Ambrose and the Bishops were of another mind. They knew what it was
to Dye for their Religion, but did not understand what it was to brigue, or to
resist.

I have thus far observed with Mr. B. what this Usurper Maximus did in favor
of the Bishops, how he studied to please and rise by them. The next thing we
ought to enquire after is, what success his Design upon the Bishops produced,
and whether they answered his kindnesses, by forming any interest to support
his Pretensions, or by declaring in his favor.

Mr. B. gives a full account of it in these words, and the said Maximus, and
the Bishops did so close, that only one Hyginus a Bishop is mentioned, and
Theognostus, besides Ambrose and Martin, that rejected Maximus. I shall grant
Mr. B. here more than he desires. The truth is, that even those Bishops that he
says rejected Maximus, did Really own him for Emperor, as having all the
Confirmation the Laws of that time did require: and it is a mistake of Mr. B.
before, where he tells us that Ambrose would not Communicate with the Bishops
because they owned Maximus, whereas all the quarrel of St. Martin and
Theognostus was against his proceedings with the Priscillianists, and his
Murdering of Gratian, if he Murdered him. But for all that they owned him to be
Emperor, as much as those did that Communicated with him. Ambrose would not
Communicate with Theodosius upon the like account: but never disowned his
Authority, as Emperor all that while; what Hyginus did, Mr. B. cannot tell
without Revelation; he was bannish'd by Maximus (as St. Ambrose tells us,) but
the Reason is not expressed. Well then: if all this be true, Mr. B's.
Observation will be so too; That Bishops can comply with Usurpers that will be
for them, as well as Presbyters. What they can do is not our Question, but this
instance of Maximus I am sure does not discover in them any great inclination
to it, for how I pray did these Bishops comply with that Usurper? Were any of
them instrumental to his Advancement? did they Preach up his cause, and the
lawfulness of his Revolt? Did they ever press the people to bring in their
Plate, and Contributions? Or after his successes and the Murder of Gratian, did
any of these Bishops justify the Usurpers Proceedings, and preach and print in
defense of that Barbarous Regicide? did they flatter him as the Preserver of
Religion, the David, the Champion of Israel? I believe one much better versed
in Antiquity than Mr. B. will find it a hard task to find out any Books, or
Dedications of Bishops to this effect: But Mr. B. can tell who Printed, and
Preached, and gathered subscriptions, for the Approbation of the most execrable
Regicide committed under the Sun: and others can say something, though at
present it is not necessary to be particular. Well: But as to the Bishops that
owned Maximus, what sort of compliance was theirs? What did they do so much in
favor of the Usurper? When he had Conquered the Countries where they lived, and
been owned by both the Emperors Reigning, then they submitted to him; that is,
they did not think themselves obliged to Rebel, or to stir up the People
against him; that was none of their business: and therefore they meddled not
with it. And in short, we do not find they studied any other compliance than
only to be quiet and to do their own business. Some of them indeed desired his
assistance against the Priscillianists; so might Bishops have desired Cromwell
to supress Ranters, Seekers, Adamites, and such like, that were not only a
Reproach to Christian Religion, but to Humane Society: and yet I do believe
such an Address would hardly have been interpreted by the strictest Royalist
for a Criminal compliance with the Usurper. Most of the Bishops in Maximus his
Dominon communicated with him, you will say; and that goes a little farther. I
do not see what great hurt there was in all this: what if he pretended to be
Penitent? what if he excused it as well as he could, by pretending he was
forced by the Soldiers? I believe Ambrose did not scruple his Communion at
first, and he seems to hint as much; but upon his second Embassy he found him
to be a bloody Aspiring man, and then would have nothing to do with him or any
that adhered to him; which he might yet do with greater freedom and decence
than those that were his Subjects, because Ambrose belonged to another Prince,
and owned him only in Titular Conjunction with his own Master. And now let the
Reader judge by this, instance how the Bishops complied with Usurpers, and how
like the case of Maximus and his Bishops, is to that of Cromwell and his
Adherents and flatterers.

The last instance Mr. B. gives out of Antiquity is Ambrose his letter to
Eugenius the Tyrant, which is inscribed, Clementissime. Imperatori Eugenio^:
and in the close of the Letter we have these expressions, in his vero in quibus
vos rogari decet, etiam exhiberi sedulitatem Potestati debitam; sicut and
Scriptum est, cui Honorem, Honorem; cui Tributum, Tributum; nam cum Privato
detulerim cord Intimo, quomodo non differrem Imperatori? i. e. But in this
matter where it becomes us to petition you, we must also give the diligence
due to Power, as it is written, Honor to whom Honor; Tribute to whom Tribute;
for when I honored you, when you were a private man from the inwards of my
heart, how should not I honor you an Emperor? Thus Mr. B. Here it is necessary
in the first place to observe the occasion, and necessity of Ambrose his
writing. Many of the Roman Senate, being still Gentiles, had prevailed with
Eugenius to furnish the expense of the public Sacrifices, as it was used to be
in former times: Ambrose, who had prevented this indignity to Christian
Religion under Valentinian and Theodosius, was earnestly solicited by his
friends, to try his Authority with Eugenius, who was newly set up by the Army;
with much unwillingness he at last undertook it. He gives him the Title of
Emperor, and such Title as the condition of those times afforded, this Engenius
had; being set up by the Army which had been in possession of the right of
making Emperors for several ages. But though he were an Usurper, yet there is
no flattery in using the common Style to him; so Justin Martyr calls Marcus
Antoninus (...) Pious, when he knew him to be an Idolater. St. Paul owns a
respect due to the High Priest, although the office was Abrogated by our
Saviors Priesthood, and the Jewish Priests were now Usurpers. So Protestant
Princes, when they have occasion to write to the Pope, are fain to use the
Style of his Holiness; and yet by that Title are not to be understood to
acknowledge his Usurpations. So Ambrose inscribed his Epistle, Clementissimo
Imperatori Eugenio. But does not he flatter him with these Expressions,
sedulitas Potestati debita? This is but a poor Complement; and owned no farther
than in general Terms; Honor, where Honor. But does not he profess he Honors
him? He says indeed, when he was a private man he had respect for him, and
should not he now pay it when he was Emperor? This question I believe is a
little Artificial; and used on purpose because he would not speak out: as we
may say by the words following, sed qui vobis deferri vultis, p^imini ut
deferatur ei, quem imperii vestri vultis Autorem probari. But Sir, permit that
Honor you would have pai'd you, to be given to him, whom you would have to be
thought the Author of your Empire: whom you would have to be thought, is an
intimation that he begged his pardon that he could not think so.

But for a farther vindication of St. Ambrose, we may see more particularly
from the same letter how he behaved himself toward this Usurper Eugenius. 1.
Understanding he was to come to Milan, the Bishop left the Town, because he
would not be forced to communicate with, or to own him: and in the beginning of
this Epistle he gives Eugenius himself this short account of it; Paulin. in.
vit. Ambr.
Secessionis mea causa timor Domini fuit. Nec pluris facere cujusvis Hominis,
qua^ Christi gratiam consuevi. i. e. The fear of God was the occasion of my
departure: and I am not used to make greater account of any man's favor, than
of Christ's. Then after a large account of what he had urged to Valentinian and
Theodosius, the Reader may see how far Ambrose was from any mean compliance
with this Eugenius; whom he would have no Communication with, not so much as by
writing, though urged and provoked to it: Ideo etiam in primordiis Imperii tui
Seribenti non rescripsi, quia istud pravidebam futurum. In the beginning of thy
Reign I did not answer thy Letter, because I foresaw what would be. Denique
reposcenti litteras cum non Rescriberem, dixi, haec causa est quod extorquendum
ei Arbitror: At last when I refused to writ upon second summons, I gave this
reason, that I thought it must be extorted from him.

And now since Mr. B. upon this Letter of St. Ambrose does Appeal to the
Reader: Saying, Reader do not only judge of my two Epistles to R. Cromwell by
these Passages, but even of theirs that submitted to Oliver himself; and yet
judge of the Inferences that are raised by our Accusers. Since I say he does
Appeal, he cannot be offended, if I set down some passages of those Epistles,
and then let the Reader compare: I will be none of his Accusers, nor make the
least Inference good or bad from them. Before his five Disputations of Church
Government, he has an Epistle to his Highness Richard Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland. And it begins with these words.

Sir,
THese Papers are Ambitious of Accompanying those against Popery into your
Highness 's presence, for the Tender of their service, and that upon the same
account. The Controversies here decided, are those that have had a hand in most
of the Great Transactions, that of late years have here past, and that still
have a hand in the Differences that hinder our desired peace. I observe that
the Nation Generally rejoices in your Peaceable entrance upon the Government:
and are affected with indignation, if they hear but any Rumors that
Troublesome Persons would disturb their hopes. And many are persuaded that you
have been strangely kept from participating in any of our late bloody
Contentions, that God might make you a Healer of our Breaches, and employ you
in that Temple work which David himself might not be honored with, though it
was in his mind, beause he had shed blood abundantly, and made great wars, 1 Chronicles. 22.7.8. I perceive also that some Settlement of Church Affairs will be
expected from you by the most: And then after some bitterness against the
Bishops and their party; and some sharpness against the Sectaries, and some
discourse against a General Toleration in Religion, he comes at last to Advise
the Protector to keep tenderly the Golden mean in this point, and for his own
sake not to Indulge all; where we have this Remarkable passage, If you give
liberty to all that is called Religion, you will soon be judged of no Religion,
and loved accordingly: Then after some more particular Advice how to behave
himself, Mr. B. adds, If you could be the happy instrument of taking away the
Divisions of the Godly -- this would be the way to lift you highest in the
esteem and love of all your people; and make them see that you were Appointed
of God to be a Healer and Restorer; and to Glory in you, and bless God for you,
as the instrument of our chiefest peace. -- I should have been as ready as
another to censure such an Address as this, as guilty of Presumptuous boldness,
but that I consider what is the work of my calling, and what it is to be
faithful to the eternal God, and am Conscious of fidelity to your Highness in
my boldness. My carnest Prayers for your Highness shall be, that your own soul
being first subjected and devoted wholly to God, you may Rule as one that is
Ruled by him, etc. And that God would endue your Highness with that Heavenly
wisdom. -- That so the eternal God may be engaged in the Protection of your
Dominions and you. -- Parliaments will love and Honor you, and Abhor the
Motions that tend to a division, or your just displeasure: Ministers will
heartily pray for you and praise the Lord for his mercies by you. And Teach all
the people to love, and Honor, and obey you. -- I crave your Hhigness Pardon
for this Boldness, and your favorable acceptance of the tendered service of

R. BAXTER.


An Extract out of Mr. B's. Epistle Dedicatory to R. Cromwell before his Key for
Catholics.
Sir,
THese Papers presume to tender you their service, because the subject of them
is such as it most nearly concerns both us and you, that you be well acquainted
with the Roman Canons that Batter the Unity, etc. -- It is only the necessary
defense of your life, and dignity, and lives of all the Protestants that are
under your Protection or Government, and the souls of men, that I desire. The
serious endeavors of your Renowned Father, for the Protestants of Savoy,
discovered to the world by Mr. M. in his Letters, etc. Has won him more esteem
in the hearts of many that fear the Lord, than all his Victories in themselves
considered, we pray that you may inherit a Tender care of the cause of Christ.
-- We humbly Request, that you would faithfully adhere to those that fear the
Lord in your Dominions. Then speaking of several sorts of persons that he calls
Masked Papists, (as I believe some were, and I am afraid there are more of the
sort:) He mentions in the Tenth place, Those that under the pretense of
defending Prelacy, and of uniting us to Rome, do adhere to the course of
Grotius and St. Clara (one without the spirit of Divination may guess who are
meant) and Unchurch all Reformed Churches, degrade all the Minsters that are
not of their way, while they maintain the verity of the Church of Rome and the
Validity of her Ordination. -- These Ten sorts of men we are jealous of, and if
ever you Advance them into places of command or power, It will increase our
jealousies. -- Lastly we beseech you that Toleration may be limited by
execution as well as by Law -- and who would have thought that had not known
it, that they (the Jesuits and Friars) had so Insinuated into the several Sects
among us, and that they were so industrious in their work, as the New Castle
Scottish Jew was, etc. At last after all his Advices and Petitions he adds, --
If you ask who it is that Presumes thus to be your Monitor: It is one that
serves so great a Master, that he thinks it no unwarrantable Presumption in
such a case to be faithfully plain with the greatest Prince; it is one that
stands so near eternity, where Lazarus shall wear the Crown, that unfaithful
man-pleasing would be to him a double crime; it is one that rejoices in the
present happiness of England, and wishes earnestly that it were but as well
with the rest of the world, and that honors all the Providence of God by
which we have been brought to what we are. And he is one, that concurring in
the common hopes yet to these Nations under your Government. And observing your
acceptance of the frequent Addresses, that from all Parts of the Land come to
you, was encouraged to do what you daily allow your Preachers to do, and to
Concur in the Tenders, and some performance of his service. -- That the Lord
will make you a Healer and preserver of his Churches here at Home, and a
successful helper to his Churches abroad, is the earnest Prayer of your
Highness's Faithful Subject,

R. BAXTER.


I hope Mr. B. will find no Reason to tax me of any disingenuity in this
Extract, for I have not torn pieces of sentences, and concealed any thing that
might give words a more favorable Construction; but I must confess it is with
great Reluctance that I have been able to do it at all: And since Mr. B.
himself refers to them, and compares them with Ambrose his Epistle, and
endeavors to justify them by hinting at other instances, I could not avoid
giving some account of them. I have promised to make no Inferences, Malicious,
or not Malicious from them, but as to the occasion that has brought in all
this, I must crave leave to show him, besides the expressions, a great
difference between these Epistles and that he compared them with. For that was
extorted by importunity, these are volunteer services to an Usurper. Eugenius
had written twice to Ambrose before he would make any answer; and then he owns
such a frowardness, that unless the Honor of Religion, threatened by the
Restoration of Idolatry, had required it of him, he would not then have been
prevailed with to have made any Applications to him: although there had passed
an aquaintance and friendship between them, when Eugenius was a Private man:
But Mr. B. was a stranger to R. Cromwell, and had no great temptation to
dedicate books to him, nor any reasonable hopes that the Protector would ever
read this Epistle. In short, if I were as worthy to advise Mr. B. as he was to
advise Cromwell, I would say it were much more advisable for a Christian
(especially for one that thinks he is so near his Eternal State,) to repent and
cry peccavimus with the Bishops in the Council of Chalcedon, whom he something
Unchristianly derides, than to stand upon justification of the fact, and think
to face it out by comparing himself with them that were so unlike him in all
their circumstances.

This odious, unpleasant work is no sooner done, but Mr. B. leads me into a
subject much more Invidious, by his charging the late Rebellion upon the
Bishops and their Party.

But this I must add (says Mr. B.) ad homines, That it has been the Bishops
themselves, that have been the grand cause of our Church Divisions and
Separations. What advantage they have given the Separatists I have showed
before: I am sure in the Congregation where I once was Teacher, and the Country
about, nothing that ever came to pass, has so inclined the people to avoid the
Prelates, as their own doing, especially the silencing, and Reproaching their
Ancient Teachers, whom they knew longer and better than the Prelates did: and
to say truth, the people generally are very Competent judges of their Pastors.
But if the Bishops have been the Cause, the Grand cause of our divisions, how
came it to pass that when the Bishops were gone, that these divisions
increased? in other evils, when you remove the Grand cause, there follows
abatement of the distemper: This strange disease of separation grows more
incurable by removing the cause. But Mr. B. says, the reproaching and
Silencing of the ancient Ministers gave offense, and made the Bishops odious.
If Mr. B. means that which was done after his Majesty's Restoration: it will
be an easy matter to answer, There were many of those Ministers that were
Usurpers, and had intruded into the Churches of other men, who had been
silenced, and cast out by those powers that had reason to be jealous of honest
men. There were many others that were intruders into the Ministry, and such not
a few of them as Mr. B. himself would not have thought fit to have continued.
All the rest were such as would not submit to the Rule that was then Established
in the Church, but chose rather to leave their Livings, and the Bishops could
not help it any other wise than as they were Members of Parliament; for it was
the Law that tied them to that choice, and not the Bishops. If Mr. B. means
what happened before the last Civil Wars; as it is likely he may because that
follows next, then these Ancient Teachers that he speaks of, howsoever they
might be qualified otherwise, were the instruments of an Anti-Monarchical, Anti
Episcopal Faction. They would preach but they would not conform to the
Established Religion. Nay many of them would Preach against it, and against
their Governors too; and Alienate the pople from them by their Sermons. These
were such Incendiaries as no Government would have endured. And what manner of
men several of them were may be observed from the Register of Norwich: where,
Heyl. Life of Land, p. 291.
of four persons who were inhibited preaching, one was by Trade a Draper,
another a Weaver, and a third a Tailor: and perhaps not altogether so learned
as the Weavers and Plowmen of Kidderminster, whom Mr. B. vouches of Abilities
not inferior to most of the Ancient Fathers. Yet by Silencing of these, says
Mr. B. the Bishops caused separation. It is pity the people should know no
better than to follow such men as these out of the Church: but if there be such
an absolute necessity that these men must preach I should think they would
become a Conventicle much better than a Church.

In the next place Mr. B. gives us a new account of the original of the late
Wars: and affirms that it was a Parliament of Episcopals and Erastians, and not
of Presbyterians, who first took up Arms in England against the King. It is
well the Bishops had no share in it. But pray where were the Presbyterians,
when this Parliament took up Arms, were they not yet in being? Or were there
none of them in the House? Or did they Protest against the proceedings of those
Episcopals and Erastians? As many of them as were of the Parliament I hope
consented to the taking up of Arms; and it may be, may give Mr. B. little
thanks for depriving them of the glory of the action. For the Erastians I have
not much to say; but that at last they outwitted the Presbyterians, although in
the beginning they were reckoned all one. But can Mr. B. believe (or think any
body else so weak as to be imposed upon in a matter so notorious) that it was a
Parliament of Episcopals and Erastians, and not Presbyterians; that began the
like War? were they Episcopals that voted down Episcopacy, Root and Branch
before the war was begun? Were they Episcopals that Petitioned the King at York
for Reformation in Discipline and Worship? i. e. for Abolishing of Episcopacy
and Common Prayer? Were they Episcopals who in their humble desires tendered to
the King at Oxford, Feb. 1. 1643.
pray him to give his Royal Assent for the utter Abolishing Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. out of the Church of England; and to promise to Pass other such
Good Bills, for settling of Church Government, as upon consultation the Assembly
of Divines shall be resolved on by both houses of Parliament? Were they
Episcopas that enter into a Solemn League and Covenant against Episcopacy, and
for Reforming of our Church after the Presbyterian Platform? In short were they
Episcopals that set up Presbytery by so many and repeated Ordinances? Aug. 19.
Oct. 20. Feb. 20.
And this was the Parliament that began and continued the War: The Erastians
and Independents were at first inconsiderable, and acted jointly with the
Presbyterians, taking the Covenant as well as they; and some of them were
present at the forming of it in Scotland. But afterward, opposing the
Establishment of Presbytery, they found a device to elude all the force of the
Presbyterian Covenant, by the means of that clause in it, that Reformation
intended was to be according to the word of God; which they conceived
Presbyterian Government not to be. Some of them added, that the Covenant was so
attemkper'd on purpose to take them in; for their Principles they said were
very well known when they took it. Grand. Debate. p. 89.90, 91, etc.
But the Presbyterians utterly denied any such thing, that they knew any
principles of theirs that were contrary to Presbytery; and the Assembly of
Divines in their First Conference with the dissenting Brethren, p. 108. etc.
urge the Honor of this Presbyterian Parliament as an argument against the
Toleration of the Independents, p. 20.
because that in so doing, the Parliament should grant Liberty to destroy, and
pull down, what themselves are endeavoring to set up. Now How these should be
no Presbyterians who set up Presbytery, how they were Episcopals that destroyed
Episcopacy, is (I must confess) too hard a Riddle for a man of a plain
understanding; unless one may think that Mr. B. gives this Bishop-destroying
Parliament the Title of Episcopal, as the Romans honored several of their
Generals with the Titles of those Nations they had overcome: or else that Mr.
B. speaks by a figure, too frequent, though not very decent in History called
Fiction.

As to the particulars, with which Mr. B. concludes this Chapter I have so long
dwelt upon, of the Parliaments Army, Generals, Lord Lieutenants, Assembly of
Divines being Episcopals and Conformists, I had rather and body else should
disprove than I: not that it is so difficult a matter, for who that can
remember so long, or can read English does not know the contrary? But because I
am unwilling to renew the memory of so unpleasant and odious things; and
heartily wish, that as our Gracious King passed an Act of Oblivion for those
matters, so they who enjoy the benefit of that act of Grace would suffer us to
forget the occasion of it, or cease to presume that we have so far lost all
memory and sense that we do not know the same things when we see them acted
over again: But however Mr. B. informs us of the Original of the late
Rebellion, I am sure there was a time when we had a very different account of
things; there was a time when the Presbyterians and Independents contended who
should have the greatest share of the Glory of having carried on that cause;
and there is one who is very particular in this matter on the behalf of the
Presbyterians, Bastwick of Independ. p. 624. and seq.
to whom I refer the Reader for his satisfaction.

CHAP. I.
A short View of the other Governments set up in opposition to Episcopacy.

IF eminent places or offices, as they give authority and jurisdiction, could
likewise secure those that are possessed of them from errors in Administration;
if any character or order could so Consecrate the person that bears it, as to
exempt him from the Common condition of Humane frailty, and from a possibility
of being wicked; the world must needs be happy, by submitting to such a
constitution, and then Schism and Sedition would have no Pretext. But if after
all the Accessions of authority and honor, men retain their nature and their
manners, and are subject to passions as they were before, it is no wonder if
all degrees and Denominations can furnish Numerous instances, of vice and
infamy, and the more eminent any order is, the more frequent examples of evil
men, it commonly affords: For the blemishes of such persons are more
Conspicuous, and exposed to public view and observation, and the eyes of all
men are fixed upon them, so as they will quickly discern what is amiss, nor are
they less forward to censure their miscarriages. Besides it is possible that
the Governing part may not always consist of the best men, for ambition makes
men Industrious in the pursuit of power, and goes a shorter and generally a
more effectual, though less direct way to obtain it. And when they are in
possession, they begin to discover that temper they before Artificially
concealed, and become more open, since they have less restraint. Lastly even
Power it self is a great temptation, and an eminent private virtue has often
times lost it self in the Exercise of Authority, as weak heads grow giddy when
they are placed upon a height.

But however it comes to pass, so it is, that there is no sort of Government
whether of Church or State, which any one that has a mind to disgrace it, may
not show to have been in the hands of very infamous Persons; and that the best
that have possessed it were not without their faults. If one have a mind to
Reproach Monarchy there are Nero's and Caligula's enough; nay Augustus and
Trajan, who are reckoned the best of that rank, had great and some inexcusable
faults: If one he inclined to rail against Commonwealths: the Ingratitude of
Athene or Rome or Carthage toward their best friends and preservers will
furnish him with Infinite matter. If one would Disgrace Episcopaacy, Church
History is full of evil contentious Bishops, Paulus Samosatenus, Eusebius,
Nicomed, Nestorius, Dioscorus, and innumerable others: and the most Orthodox
and holy were not without their blemishes. Theophilus, Cyril, Epiphanius had
very undecent heats. Nay the Apostles themselves had a Judas, and the rest of
them were not free from misunderstandings, which must needs give great offense
to the Church: What shall we do then in this case? Shall we submit to no
Government that has been profaned by evil administration? shall we be of no
Church that has any mixture of the world? Shall we renounce Monarchy because we
have read of Tyrants? or throw down Episcopacy, because some of that order have
been unworthy of it? By this reason we must have no Government or order at all,
or as the Apostle infers, we must go out of the world. But since our
necessities require some kind of order, and there can no number of men live by
any Common Rule, whether of Religion or Law, without authority placed in some
hands or other to enforce it; and since God himself was pleased to appoint the
kind of Government under which his Church was to be; notwithstanding that evil
men might creep into the office, we remain still under an Obligation to submit
our selves to it, and it is not in our power to alter that constitution. This
Mr. B. and all the Dissenters will easily grant, and therefore they say that
they contend only for the Primitive Institution of Church Government. Be it so:
yet this long deduction of reproach and accusation does not prove any thing to
the prejudice of the office; and this notwithstanding, Episcopacy may be the
Church Government of the Apostles settling; for those things that fill Mr. B.'s
Indictment against Bishops are the faults of the men not of the Office, and the
same miscarriages may be discovered in other kinds of Church Government that
are not Episcopal. And since every project is more plausible, and seems to have
fewer inconveniences in the Idea than in the use; lest any one for want of
experience, or History, may think Presbytery, or any Church Government that is
not Episcopal to be subject to no abuse or Disorders, I will give a short
account of the Rise and Progress of that form of Government, that has obtained
in such of the Reformed Churches as have cast off their Bishops; and show that
they have suffered under the same Calamities, that had befallen Episcopal
Churches, and are guilty of most of the same things, as requiring
subscriptions, Conformity, etc. as our Bishops against whom all this History,
and bitterness is directed.

It is not yet a Hundred and fifty years that the Church has known any other
Government but Episcopal; and the newer Models of Church Polity have obtained
but in a small part even of the Reformed Churches; and that in some places
under Persecuting Princes, who more effectually keep under the Tares in the
field of the Church, prevent excesses, and Unite the suffering Church, than any
sort of Church Government or Discipline whatsoever: yet the Histories even of
these Churches can furnish too many instances of Tumult and disorder, of
Heresies Schisms, and contentions, of Wars, and Desolations: and if this cannot
be drawn into any argument against the Presbyterian way, there is less reason
it should be urged against Episcopacy, that for so long time obtained over the
Universal Church: which under this constitution, had passed through fire and
water, and then was brought into a wealthy place, through distresses, and
Persecutions, through all the encouragements of wealth and power. And in short,
through all the Trials that can be made by all the differences of outward
condition, and Circumstances.

They who fancy a time when the Church had no Bishops, do represent it as then
full of discord, and Distraction, (I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of
Cephas.) So that as, they say, it was necessary for the preservation of peace
and Unity to appoint one person over the rest: and if the Presbyterian parity
had any place in the Primitive times as some do imagine, it must needs have
been an intolerable kind of Government, since all on the sudden it was
Universally abolished; it must have given strange occasion of offense when all
the Christian Churches in the world should conspire to Abrogate this Polity,
and to destroy all the memory and footsteps of it, so that in the lamentable
distractions which the Church fell into afterward under Bishops, none should
so much as propose this way of relief, by returning to their Ancient
Government; and the people that were so harrass'd with perpetual contentions
about their Bishops must either think that there could be no Church where there
was no Bishop, or else that Presbyterian parity, or a Popular Church Government
would occasion yet greater mischiefs than those they suffered. That the
inconveniences are not less, will appear from the experience of such Churches
as have cast off Episcopacy, some of which, (at leastwise a good number of very
understanding men in them,) do at time this wish that they might be governed by
Bishops, and conceive it to be the only remedy for their divisions.

Beza in vita Calvini. J. Lassitius de Discip. Frat. Bohem. Calvin. Ep. ad
fratr Bohem. Eccles. Bohem. ad Ang. Paraenes.
In the beginning of the Reformation those Eminent Instruments whom God was
pleased to employ in that work, were so wholly taken up with preaching, and
writing against those gross errors and superstitions which had covered the face
of Christianity, that they had little or no leisure to look after Discipline or
Government; and did do the work of Evangelists, rather than Governors of the
Church. But when they saw to what mischiefs the want of Government and
discipline exposed the Reformed Churches, and were thereby convinced that there
must be building up as well as pulling down; then they began seriously to
consider of some Ecclesiastical Polity: For many had joined with them in
pulling down Superstition and Papal Tyranny, who, when they began to discover
their opinions more particularly, became intolerable, and advanced such
doctrines, as did not only destroy Christianity, but all Government and
society. Muntzer. Swenckfeld etc.
These by good providence were neither Bishops, nor Episcopal men, but against
all sort of Church Government and order, and while there is any of this leaven
remaining, let what sort of Government you please obtain, there will never be
an end of Schism and Sedition. For if Episcopacy be Abolished, what ever is
established in its Room, will be accounted by such men every whit as
Antichristian; and Presbyterian Glasses and Synods, or Congregational
Episcopacy will have no fairer quarter; for these will admit no Government, no
Law, but that which will permit every one to do what he pleases; and that will
set up a State of Grace just like Hobbs his state of nature. It is very much to
be feared, that this is the most prevailing principle among our Anti-Episcopal
Dissenters. And if out of such inconsiderable beginnings they increased so fast
when the fences of our Church had been once taken away, as not only to ruin all
projects of unity and Establishment, but to possess themselves of the
Government; what may we expect now when they are formed into considerable
parties, and outnumber those of the Classical and Parochial Presbyterians; that
is, all that are for any sort of settlement that may be suited to the
Circumstances of this Nation? What may we not have Reason to fear, if the Laws
which give check to their Insolences were once taken away? And if they should
be taken in under the Notion of Protestants? A dishonor from which it has
pleased God hitherto to preserve that name, according to the prayers of the
first Reformers, who dreaded the growth of Sects, no less than the return of
Popery it self.

But besides that Heresy may spring where there are no Bishops, as there were
none in the Reformation, when those Monsters first appeared; There can be also
bitter contentions about Religion, where Bishops have nothing to do. Luther,
and Carolostadius were no Bishops, M. Adams in vit. Carolost.
and yet they could quarrel, and disturb the Reformation they had in hand with
their Jarres. Carolostadius in Luthers. Absence Reformed the Church of
Wittenborg, took away Images. Auricular Confession, etc. Which Luther took
offense at, as being done without his Authority, or advice, which was the
beginning of the Sacramentarian War: and M. Adams blames them both in these
words, visus est uterque cupidior Gloria. Luther was angry that any body should
set up himself a new master in a place where he was so much concerned, and
could not endure, Ordinationes suas in Populo pressa mea authoritate erigi: And
this contention was so Exasperated that after a Conference, Carolostadius was
Banished from Turingia by the Elector of Saxonie's order, and the instigation
of Luther; and some other Ministers were turned out of their places upon the
same Account: and the sufferer did not spare to render all this Treatment as
Invidious as he could, and therefore writes a Letter to the people of Orlamund,
Subscribed A. Bodenstein, non Auditus, non Convictus, a Martino Luthero
Ejectus: If Bishops or their Councils had been concerned in this, what Bitter
Reflections should we have upon the Prelatical persecuting Spirit? But it seems
other men as well as Bishops have passions, and may disturb the Church: Yet we
are not to aggravate, but to cover as much as we can the frailties of great
persons, and to retain still a Reverence for the Authority of their Offices,
and their Personal Excellences.

But wherever the Lutheran Reformation was received, Diocesan Episcopacy soon
became the Church Government; and I believe it will be found to have preserved
those Churches in as great peace and Unity, if not more, than those had that
were Governed without Bishops. The Churches of Sweden and Denmark never knew
what Schism or Heresy was, but by reading or hearsay: and those of Germany,
though something more disquieted, yet it was seldom from within, but by
Projects of Union with other Churches under a different kind of Polity, as well
as of different opinions in some points of Religion: It is to be wished that
the Churches of the Ausburg Confession, as they took care to preserve the
Ancient form of Church Governmet, had been also a little more careful in the
point of Ordination: For their Bishops, though they have the same authority
with Diocesans, yet were at first ordained but by Presbyters; and the
Principles of those Churches touching the right of ordination are so loose,
that I believe those of the Presbyterian Discipline will hardly allow them.
Hunnius defending their Ordinations, says, the power is in the Church
diffusive; and that it may be conveyed, not only by Bishops or Presbyters, but
by Deacons, or any body else if the Church think fit: and I am afraid the
Practice of some of those Churches is not otherwise to be justified.

But before this Lutheran Reformation, was that of the Bohemians; not that of
the Calixtins only, but the Vnitas fratrum Bohemorum; whose Churches were
governed by Diocesan Bishops; and where Discipline was so far from being
Impossible, Commenii. Hist. Eccles. Slav. p. 32.
notwithstanding the Dioceses were very large, that they were perhaps the best
Governed Churches in the world: Bucer speaking of this Government, says, haec
vero est Coelestis potius, quam Ecclesiastica in Terris Hierarchia, and Calvin
was so taken with this Government, as well as Discipline, that he looks upon
their Governing and ordaining Pastors as no inconsiderable blessing, Ep. ad
Pastor. Bohem.
Neque Vero parvo est estimandum quod tales habent Pastores a quibus Regantur
and Ordinentur: and those were their Bishops, as may be seen in that Account
they gave of themselves in Ratio Disciplinae Ordinisque Ecclesiastici in
Vnitate fratrum Bohemorum, printed at Lesna, 1632. and afterward at the Hague
by Commenius, 1660. Whoever would know more of these Episcopal Diocesan
Churches may consult Lasitius, or the short Accout of Commenius, the then only
Remaining Bishop of those Churches. And these had such Bishops as were not only
invested with the full Authority of Diocesans over several Churches, but such
as had been ordained according to the Canons of the Ancient Church, Stephanus.
accito Episcopo altero, etc. Commen. Hist. p. 24.
by the Bishops of the Waldenses, who derived themselves by an uninterrupted
succession from the Apostles.

It is time now to Return to the Principal Design, which was to show, how no
other form of Government can secure the Church from Heresy, Schism, and
Contention, any more than Episcopacy; and that those Churches which put
themselves under new Models of Government and discipline, have been excercis'd
with Schism, Heresy, and Sedition, no less than those under Episcopacy.

The Churches which followed the Reformation of Zuinglius had at first no
Government nor discipline that was properly, Ecclesiastical. All authority
rested in the Civil Magistrate, and the Ministers did only preach and
administer the Sacraments without excluding any. It was from this practice (I
suppose) that the Divines of that way came to speak generally so loosely of the
power of the Keys, making it all to consist in preaching, without any regard to
Ecclesiastical discipline. But the Licentiousness that followed this defect of
Discipline and Government, soon opened the eyes of the Ministers, who
Complained passionately of the Increase of Libertinism under pretense of
Reformation; and endeavored to make the people sensible, that there is more
required to make a true Protestant, than to Renounce the Pope, and
Transubstantiation; and that the Notion of a Church did imply something more
than a Company of sound believers met together to hear a Sermon. Calvin, a
person of extraordinary Abilities, was one of the first that observed and
Complained of this defect in the Reformation; and endeavored to Remedy it in
the Church where he was Pastor, by Establishing an Ecclesiastical Government:
Baza vit Calv.
and that perhaps not such as he thought most perfect and absolute, but such as
the Circumstances of the place would bear. The people of Geneva were
sufficiently prejudiced against Episcopacy, having turned out their Bishop, who
had likewise a title to be their Prince; and to have talked of Introducing a
Bishop there, would have sounded as harsh as the mention of a King would have
done to the Romans after the expulsion of Tarquin. But suppose they could have
been Reconciled to the name and the office, upon assurance it should not exceed
its proper bounds; it is possible Calvin might look upon it as too Invidious a
proposal to his Church, for fear of being understood to recommend himself; and
to affect dominion over his Brethren; Episcopacy then seeming Impracticable in
that place, he devised a form of Government that should be more popular and
consequently more acceptable the Ministers were to be all of equal Authority,
and were in the first place to govern the Church, and with them a certain
number out of the Laity under the Title of ruling Elders were to have a share
in the Church Government; and this mixed Council without any Bishop was to
exercise all Ecclesiastical Censures and Jurisdiction. One would think this
would be unexceptionable, but it proved otherwise; for this frame was no sooner
begun, but it was presently broken in pieces, and the Author banished: But his
Reputation abroad made them reflect upon this Treatment with shame, and desire
him to return: With him this Government was restored, which was so far from
remedying all disorders that it became the occasion of some very great ones;
and the State of that Church as it is discrib'd by Calvin in his letters to his
friends, and by Beza in his life, was most lamentably distracted; and this
Government was made odious in the beginning of it by very harsh, and rigorous
proceedings. The Expulsion of Castellio a man of Great and Polite Learning, was
too Invidious. The opposing of the Senate in the Election of a Minister to such
a point of heat and Contention, Beza vit. Calv.
as to endanger the peace of the City, wanted little of Sedition. Calvin's
quarrels with Perinus came to that height, that the Council of the City had
almost cut one another throats about it. Siquidem eousque semel in ipsa curia
deventum est, coactis Diacosiis, and pene exertis jam Ensibus parum abfuerit
quin mutuis caedibus ipsam Curiam cruentarent. And what was the reason of so
dangerous a Contention? No Article of the Creed was in danger; It was not for
any part of the faith that they contended so fiercely: the greatest occasion of
all this stir was some Recreations, as Dancing, which the People of Geneva were
addicted to, and Calvin forbad upon pain of Excomunication, this bred the first
discontents. Perinus being Captain of the people, and perhaps a lover of
Liberty, began to oppose this Tyranny, and to charge Calvin with false
Doctrine; two of the Ministers joined with him, and were turned out, as
Scandalous and Seditious: and so by degrees the Contention was improved to that
desperate point that the Common Council of the City had almost destroyed one
another. I might add a great many more instances of the Tumults occasioned by
this Discipline; and show how distracted the condition of Geneva was during the
time of Calvin, merely upon the account of this form of Ecclesiastical
Government; But whoever desires to see more may have Recourse to Calvin's life
written by Beza.

But as to the Rigours of that Discipline, I suppose the Highest Tyranny of
Epilcopacay can hardly match them. One was put to death at Geneva for Libelling
Calvin: I wish the Majesty of Kings were so Sacred to the men of this way.
Another was banished the City for preaching against Predestination, a hard
punishment for weakness of understanding. Servetus was burned for Heresy; by
the Instigation of Calvin and the Minsters of Geneva, and such others of the
Neighbor hood as they could engage in that cause; which occasioned no small
disputes between them, and some other more Moderate Divines: the Case of
Ithacius and the bloody Bishops, as Mr. B. calls them, was not half so odious:
for this Heretic Servetus was burned for opinions only, the Priscillianists
for lewd abominable Practices besides.

Nor did Geneva only feel the evil effects of this unepiscopal Government, but
it had in a little while an unhappy Influence upon the Neighboring Churches of
Suitzerland. Erastus having published his Theses of Excommunication, was
confuted by Beza; yet there remained still several Ministers dissatisfied; as
Bullinger, Gualter and diverse others. This occasioned very great jealousies
between the several Parties, and it had almost come to a Rupture. The Churches
of the Palatinate were no less shaken with this new Controversy, Vid.
Bullingeri Epcum Erasti. These. Editas.
and the zealots for this Government and discipline took all occasions
publicly to maintain them; but the Prudence of that Prince prevented the
mischiefs which threatened his Churches from this question. Bullinger in a
Letter dated March. 10. 1574. and Gualter in some Letters of his to the Bishops
of London and Ely, and several other eyewitnesses do sufficiently testify the
Lamentable condition of those Reformed Churches, and the Confusion which
Presbyterian Government brought upon them.

From Geneva this Government was brought into the Churches of France. But what
success it had there, the Miserable distractions and wars that presently
followed do sufficiently declare: I do not charge all that Tragedy upon this
Government; but it seems it cannot prevent Tumults, and Sedition, and War, any
more than Episcopacy: For with what violence the Reformation was carried on in
many parts of that Kingdom, is not unknown to any that has but looked into the
Histories of those times. There were some very wise men who understood the
condition of that Kingdom, of opinion, that had the Reformation there proceeded
with more Moderation, and been content to have left the Ancient Government, and
some observances of unquestionable Antiquity, that Kingdom was in a great
disposition to receive it: and in probability all the following Wars, and
bloodshed about Religion would have been prevented.

That the Reformed Churches of France had no considerable differences between
them, is owing not so much to the Constitution of their Government, as to their
Common danger: which United them closer than all the bands of Discipline and
Government. Besides, when they obtained some Edicts in favor of their
Religion, they Extended them only to such as their Churches would own; and so
every dissenter from them, was left to the Rigor of the Laws against
Heretics, and enjoyed no benefit of that Protection which the Reformed
Churches were to have. Upon this account the Lutherans (of whom there were many
in that Kingdom in the beginning of the Reformation) were obliged either to
Conform to the Rule of those Churches, or to leave the Country: and these
necessities kept them along while Undivided. Besides this, the affairs of that
Reformation were managed, not so much by their Ministers, as by the great
Persons who were the Heads of that party: and their Synods were employed not so
much in making Ecclesiastical Canons; as in taking effectual measures for their
mutual defense and preservation; in receiving assurances of Protection from
foreign Princes; La vie de Mr. Dis Plesses. Mornay. p. 119, 120, 123, 124, 231,
280, and 345.
in making Alliances; in providing for Peace and War, so that they might be
more properly called Parliaments than Synods, although they had their Politic
Assemblies besides.

And yet they were not without their differences about Religion among
themselves. Some Ministers starting new and unprofitable questions in Divinity,
their remedy was no other than that of the Ancients, to condemn such opinions
as they judged to be dangerous by the Authority of their Synods: and they
descended to take notice of very trifling subtilties some times, such being
unregarded, would perhaps have died of themselves. The Synod of Saumur
condemned a Minister of Poictou for questioning the Humanity of Christ when he
lay in the Grave, and the same Assembly condemned the Doctrine of a Suiss, not
under their jurisdiction, about justification by works after Regeneration, a
Controversy merely about words; another Synod at Gap. declared against the
Doctrine of Piscator about Justification, which Alarmed some of the Reformed
Churches; but the Prudence of Du Plessis prevented any mischief that might have
ensued, by stopping the proceedings of that Synod. P. D. Moulin and Tilenus
happened to have some difference of a dangerous nature, about the Mystery of
the Incarnation: and notwithstanding these great Professors had learning and
distinctions enough, (which Mr. B. says the Ancients that first moved this
Controversy wanted,) yet they could by no means agree about it; and disputes
about Person, Nature, Properties had like to have endangered the peace of those
Churches. But how was it prevented? The Litigants were too considerable to be
passed by with Contempt, and the subject of the difference was of so high a
nature, that it ought not to be left to the hazard of so slight a remedy: How
then was this Controversy decided? Not by Niceness of Distinction; no^ by
distingushing nature into 9 sorts, or spliting of Notions; But the wise Du
Plessis having got their Papers into his hands burned them altogether: and the
fire (without making distinction between the Orthodox, and Heretical sense) put
an end to that Controversy. Vid^ Du Pless. p. 388.
But yet it was not quite ended, for it began to revive afterward o^^ of its
own Ashes, and so made some little flattering, but was composed again by the
same Person; to whose prudence the Unity of that Church is in great measure to
be ascribed, as the Instrument of the Divine goodness toward them: for after
his death the peace of those Churches was very much endangered by a new
Controversy about Universal Redemption, and the Nature of Original sin; and
the Dissension was not far from a Schism. Cameron though he had cleared himself
of all suspicion of Heterodoxy at his promotion to the Professourship of
Saumur, had the bad fortune after his death to fall into suspicion of Heresy:
and his Scholars and followers were brought into no small troubles: What had
been allowed by the Synod of Dort as sound Doctrine in the English Divines, was
now called in question in France, and what was approved in Camero while he was
alive, Acts Authentiques per Blondel.
became dangerous and Heretical after his death. It is hardly to be imagined,
what great contention this little, and to some, Imperceptible difference did
create; or how many Synods it employed, Amyraldus, Dallee, Blondel, and several
others were looked upon as little better than Heretics; and their Doctrine
about Original sin condemned in a National Synod at Charenton, and an
Abjuration of it required by all those that were to enter into holy orders; and
a stricct Injunction was laid on all Ministers upon pain of all the Censures of
the Church, not to preach any other wise of this point than according to the
Common opinion. And all this stir, as Blondel deduces it, p. 50.
was raised from little private quarrels between some of the Profesours; and
from the discontents of the University of Montauban that they of Saumur should
be favored too much in the distribution of such Pensions as the Churches
furnished for the maintenance of their Universities; and they thought
themselves wronged and undervalued because their Salaries were less: We see
that lesser matters than a Bishopric can sometimes disturb the Church; and
that others as well as Bishops shops can prosecute their private piques to the
hazard of the Public peace; and that there will be contentions where there is
no Episcopacy.

If we Consult the History of the Reformed Churches in the United Netherlands,
We shall be farther confirmed that Heresy, Schifm, and contention, may arise
under other forms of Church Government as well as Episcopal; and the parity of
Ministers cannot remove all occasions of Strise, and Disturbance; and many
eminent men of that Church are said to be very sensible of this truth, and to
look upon Episcopacy as the most effectual remedy in the world for their
Divisions. The Church Government of that Country was not established without
great trouble and difficulty; and occasioned no small disturbance; the
Ministers taking an authority to themselves of settling the Church as they
thought fit without the consent and Concurrence of the Magistrates. The first
Synod they held, was at Dort, assembled without the permission of the Civil
Authority; Brandt. Hist. vande Reform. l. xi.
where the Heidelberg Catechism was imposed upon all Ministers; and they were
farther obliged to subscribe the Netherland Confession, and to submit
themselves to the Presbyterian Government. (It seems the Bishops are not the
only Church. Governors in the world that require subscriptions and Canonical
obedience,) Nor were the Ministers only bound to subscribe, but all the Lay
Elders, and Deacons, were to declare Assent and Consent to the Articles of
Discipline. The Civil Magistrate was very much offended with these Proceedings
and would by no means confirm, no not so much as take into Consideration the
acts of this Synod: but said they would take care of Religion themselves, and
appoint Commissioners to put in, and put out Preachers as they should think
Expedient; and as for their Consistories and Classes, they declared they knew
of no Power they had. The Ministers on the other side Preached up their own
authority; and vilifi'd the States, calling them in derision Stakes. But the
effect of this Contention about Presbyterian Government was very sad; for while
they were quarreling about Jurisdiction the Spaniards made great Advances, and
took several Towns in Holland.

The Synod of Middlebrough An. 1581. B^and 13.
was held likewife without the Magistrates leave, and the Historian observes
that the Eccleslasticks were thought by several to have extended their
Jurisdiction here a little too far, and to the prejudice of the Civil power.
Here they distributed their Churches, throughout the Country, digesting them
into Classes, and Classes into Synods. Here likewise they excluded the
Magistrates from any share in the Election of Church Officers, and obliged all
Ministers, Elders, Deacons, Professors of Divinity, and Schoolmasters, to
subscribe the Netherland Confession; which was little so known there, that
several members of this Synod had never seen it, and began to enquire what
Confession of 37 Articles it was that they talked of. They ordered likewise
that the form of Excommunication should be, I deliver thee up to Satan;
something more harsh than the Anathema's of Bishops and their Councils. Here
also they condemned Kaspers Colhaes Minister of Leyden for unsound Doctrine.
But he would not stand to the judgment of this Synod, that was Judge and Party
both, and this occasioned strange disorders in the Church of Leyden, which
continued still a kindness for their Pastor notwithstanding this condemnation,
and the Excommunication of the Synod at Harlem. However prevailed they so far,
that he was turned out of his Ministry, and forced to betake himself to a mean
employment. This caused great discontents among the Common people, many of them
fell off to other opinions, and there was no Communion administered in that City
for a year and a half; and when there was a Communion in the year 82 there were
not a hundred persons present at it: If these Synods had been Episcopal what
Clamor might we have expected? What Animadversions? But others can disturb the
Church as well as Bishops.

The Synod held at Harlem did but increase their confusion. For by the
Excommunication of Colhaes and other proceedings, they brought all things to
that confusion, that the Prince of Orange told the States roundly, that unless
they took some care to settle the Church, which was daily more and more
distracted by the Presbyterial Synods, they must expect that the Reformed
Religion, and their Country, would be unavoidably lost. They according to his
advice empowered Commissioners to settle the affairs of Religion; which
establishment the North Holland Ministers in a Synod at Amsterdam publicly
protested against. At Dort, Herman Herberts Minister of the place was accused
of having caused a Book of D. George to be be printed, which he absolutely
denied: and the proceedings were so extraordinary, that one of the Commissiners
that sat with the Classes upon that occasion, said that he had read much of
the Spanish Inquisition, H. van. Nespen.
but that he never was in any place where he saw so lively and effectual a
representation of it as here. An. 1586. A National Synod was called to sit at
the Hague by the order of the Earl of Leicester, without the States; and here
they insisted upon their Ecclesiastical authority, and excluded the Magistrate
from any voice in the choosing of Church Officers; That a National Synod should
meet every third year, without the Magistrates leave; and subscription was more
strictly pressed upon the Ministers under pain of being turned out of their
Churches.

But these were but slight differences in respect of that which followed, that
fatal Schism I mean occasioned by the Arminian Controversy. The seeds of it
had lain in that Church from the beginning; and Colhaes, ^uyrhuis, Herberts,
I'o ^hert, and diverse others had declared themselves against the received
confession and Catechism of those Churches long before Arminius. But his
authority and learning bore up against the Current of the contrary Doctrine,
that had overborn such as before that had opposed it: See the preface to the
Acts of the Synod of Door.
and now, the condition of those Churches was most deplorable, for several
years together there was nothing but perpetual Dispute, and Cla^rour;
Conference after Conference; and Synod after Synod; Appeal, upon Appeal. At
last it came to Tumult and Sedition; to Confusion and bloodshed. Ministers
were turned out of their charges, some Banished, Vid. vit. Episcopii.
others set upon by the Rabble, and in danger to be torn in pieces. Nothing can
be imagined more distracted than the state of those Churches was for a long
wh^le together. At last, after all the interposing and good offices of other
Reformed Churches, but without effect, a general Synod was resolved upon, where
the Remonstrants were condemned, and the Civil Magistrate seconded this
sentence by another more severe, whereby they Banished the Ministers that would
not subscribe, many of them were imprisoned, and in short Bishops could not
have procured greater rigor and severity; which here seemed to be more
grievous, where every body else had liberty of Conscience, and Jews were
allowed a public exercise of their Religion. And yet these very points in
difference, that not only rent these Churches in pieces, but shook those of
France, who confirmed the Decrees of the Synod of Dort, and turned out such
Ministers as favored the condemned Doctrine, and required subscriptions to the
contrary opinions, of such as were to be admitted into the Clergy; these points
(I say,) have not had the same unhappy influence upon some other Churches that
were Episcopal. Men in our Church have taught very differently of these
matters, and yet the Unity of the Church has been still preserved
notwithstanding this difference of opinions: which shows that Episcopal
government is not so subject to Schism, as Mr. B. would make the world imagine,
and to say the truth ours has been troubled with no other such difference but
what has been made in opposition to the very form of Government it self; and
there is no wonder if it seems so difficult to heal it, since the Church can no
otherwise satisfy these men than by destroying the whole frame of its
Government and order, and it is strange any should expect it, that did not
believe all those under the rule of the Church to be Hypocrites. These men talk
much of Ceremonies and Liturgy; but this is the least of the difference, though
it be most pretended, because most useful to render the Governors of the
Church odious, for shutting men out of it for such Circumstances as these. This
makes most noise, as a false, Alarm commonly does; but the real design is upon
the Government. Therefore those that fancy any Accommodation practicable upon
any allowances in this part, seem to my apprehension to mistake the disease;
for Alas! It is not accommodation but Victory that these men aim at. But to
return to the Churches of Holland, whose Schism gave occasion to this
digression.

After the Synod of Dort, though all means were used to suppress the
Remonstrants, yet they remain still in separate Assemblies, and the unhappy
breach continues to this day, without any probability of being made up. Vid.
Spanbmite. Ep. ad Amie.


When they had tired themselves and the world with this Controversy, they were
diverted with new matter of dispute; the names of Voetius and Cocceius, rather
than any difference between their Doctrine, disturbed again the peace of those
Churches. And though the ground of the quarrel is scarce perceivable, yet it is
hardly to be imagined how great the Animosities are. This indeed never came to
a formal Schism, yet it has divided those Churches into formal parties; and in
some occasions the quarrel seems of more than ordinary consequence; and has
great influence upon the Promotions of the Ministry; and the Affections of
several Cites are determined to this or that party.

And as these Presbyterian Churches have been afflicted with Schism and
contentions, so they have been sensible of the mischiefs of Heresy, and labor
more than any part of the Christian world under the Infamy of them. Here the
Ministers have no great Revenues, nor dignities, nor Power; and here are no
Patriarchs, nor Bishops; and yet Heresies makes a shift to thrive; Arians,
Socinians, Menonists, Labadyists, and diverse others; they are neglected, no
general Councils disturb the enjoyment of their errors, and yet they abound,
and are pertinacious.

Nor is it a wonder they take such deep root in Presbyterian Churches; for of
late, like Storks, they have affected a republican Church above all others; and
it is observable that in these last ages, there have been no Heretics that
have not been likewise Anti-Episcopal; and at the same time that they become
enemies of the truth, they declare war against the Bishops who are the
Guardians of it.

If it be objected that our Country swarms with this Vermin too, it ought to be
considered from whence they came to be so rife among us. It was the taking away
of Episcopacy that opened such a door to errors; and there were more Heresies
started here in the space of four years after Bishops had been laid aside, if
Edwards reckons right, than have been known in the Universal Church from the
foundation of it to that time. And those that fall into Herefie here, do it
commonly by degrees; They begin with Schism, and end in Enthusiasm and madness;
first they are Presbyterians, and then, if that dispensation be not spiritual
enough, they are improved in to Independents, and from thence to the fifth
Monarchy or Quakerism. All the extravagant Heresies among us are but the spawns
of the first Schism, and the consequences of those Principles of Separation
that draw them from the Communion of the Bishop.

The Church of Scotland has felt the Distractions occasioned by this Parity of
Ministers more than any of her Neighbors; and though it has not been divided
by a formal Schisin 'till of late, yet from the first setting up of this
Government, it has been exercised with perpetual contentions, and Tumults, and
Sedition, about Church Discipline. Mr. B. tells us that, Treatise of Episc. p.
1. p. 164.
The Church of Scotland is an Eminent instance, that Churches which have no
Bishops have incomparably less Heresy, Schism, wickedness, and more concord
than we have here. For the concord of that Church, it was much greater while it
continued under Superintendents and Bishops, than it has been since Andrew
Melvil diiturli'd it with the Perfection of the Geneva Discipline and
Government. For a long time after, all the Disputes about Religion were reduced
into one point of Ecclesiastical sovereign jurisdiction; which they disputed
against the King and the Government, with such perpetual Seditions, and
Treasons, as at last engaged three Kingdoms in most unnatural and bloody Wars;
which ended in the slavery of them all, and particularly of those that were the
first Incendiaries, through the wise and just judgment of God. What Schism
there arose in the late times, between the disciplinarians, and the rest; and
what disturbances the same sort of men have given of late; is too well known to
need a relation, and the field Conventieles still witness. But because Mr. B.
would persuade us that there is such great concord to be found in
Anti-Episcopal Churches, and particularly in this; I will give one Instance,
that shall let the reader see how far this way is from establishing a lasting
Concord; and withal how this parity that is pretended, is really no more than a
pretense, the leading men against Bishops commonly assuming greater authority,
and exercising it with greater Absoluteness, and more Impatient of being
opposed and contradicted, than any Bishops who are legally Invested with power.

There happened a great division in the Presbytery of St. Spotswood. H. of
Scot. 1.6.
Andrews about preferring a Minister to the Church of Luchars. There were two
pretenders, and Melvil with a few more was for one, and the rest who were three
times as many in number, were for the other; Melvil looking upon himself as an
Apostle, and disdaining to be overrul'd by the Majority of the Presbytery, left
the place, and with his six Presbyters that followed him, made another Synod by
himself: and both these Presbyters, like Anti. Popes, Issued out their several
pleasures. The Gentlemen of the Parish upon this were divided into factions;
some holding with one, and some with the other, which occasioned great scandal:
and the heats grew to that height, that the Presbytery was forced to be
divided; one part of it to sit at St. Andrews, the other at Couper; the one
under the Influence of Melvil, and the other under that of Th. Buchanan; so
hard it was for one Presbyterial Diocese to hold two Topping Presbyters. The
observation that follows the relation of this difference in Spotswood is very
remarkable: Thus was that great strife pacified; which many held to be Ominous,
p. 386.
and that the Government which in the beginning did break forth into such
Schisms, could not long continue; for this every man noted, That of all men
none could worse endure Parity, and loved more to Command than they who had
introduced it into the Church. This sort of men did afterward make not only a
formal Schism, and insurrection against those Bishops placed over them by
authority, but after that Episcopacy was abolished in Scotland, could be as
little at peace among themselves. They were in the first place divided about
the receiving the King, and the Conditions to be Imposed upon him; and in this
they proceeded even to the Excommunication of one another. After his Majesty's
Restoration, when Episcopacy was again established in the Church: the
Presbyterians who separated from the Communion of the Bishops, were divided yet
among themselves some accepting the Kings Indulgence and License to Preach,
others renouncing it as derogatory to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ: and upon
this they parted Communion; Nor could these resolute Renouncers of Indulgence
agree yet among themselves, about the measure of their Contempt of authority;
some were content to Conventicle, and Preach against the Kings order, and carry
their Contempt no farther; the others under Cameron were more fiercely Zealous,
and thought themselves obliged by the Covenant to attempt the deposing of the
King, as they manifested (besides their several Writings to that effect,) by
two formal Rebellions: These are the fruits, this the Peace and Unity that
Presbytery, and the Scotch Covenant produced, the Covenant so much Idolz'd once
by our Presbyterians of England, and which notwithstanding all the Mischiefs
that attended it here, and do still issue from it in Scotland, they are yet
loath to renounce, though required so to do by all the Authority in the Nation.

But what is all this to Congregational Episcopacy? It is not Presbytery, but
this that Mr. B. Contends for: He is for Bishops, and would only pare off the
superfluities of their Dioceses, and reduce them to their first bounds. To
which I answer: First, That Mr. B.'s. Congregational Bishop and Parish
Presbyter is all one; and he has taken so much pains to prove it in his
Treatise of Episcopacy, that it were an injury to his sincerity to question his
opinion of it. But Secondly, That there was some necessity to say all this of
Presbyterian Governments being subject to Heresies and Schisms as well as
Episcopal; because Mr. B. himself had made the comparison between them; and
charged all Schisms and Heresies upon Diocesan Episcopacy, as the fault of the
constitution; it was therefore necessary to see how all sorts of Governments of
the Church, as well as of the State, may be disturbed by evil and factious men,
and are subject to great inconveniences when they fall into evil hands. But
then what Schisms can be imputed to this Congregational way? This cannot well
be answered without asking a question: was this Congregational Episcopacy ever
established in any Churches? If not, it will be as hard a matter to show what
mischief, it has occasioned as it is to discover what Civil Wars happened in
Plato's Commonwealth, or to reckon the Differences of Sects of Philosophers in
the College of Atlantis. If this Government has been set up any where, it is
but naming the time and place, and it may be that some account may be given of
the Schisms and Heresies that molested it. Mr. B. contends it was the first,
Apostolical, and Scripture constitution: and shows at large that a Church was
but one Congregation, and a Bishop could have but one Church. Well: but there
were Schisms and Heresies then: and St. Paul makes frequent complaints of them.
Or if this sort of Government continued for some Centuries after, as Mr. B.
would make it appear; it must be likewise granted that there never were greater
and more Blasphemous Heresies than in those times, and for Schisms, they could
not be avoided, it seems, and though a Diocese were but one Congregation; the
Presbyters could not agree who should govern that, but divided it into separate
Assemblies. But to this Mr. B. Answers, 2 Dispute about Ordination. p. 329.
That the Multitude of Sects and Heresies that sprung up in the first and
second and third ages of the Church was no dishonor to the form of Government
then used in the Church, as should encourage any man to dislike or change it.
Why then does he endeavor to dishonor Diocesan Episcopacy upon this very
reason? and why does he reproach it with the Schisms and Heresies that happened
under that government? But no man can reason against Mr. B. better than himself
does in the very same Paragraph; it is but taking away the word Prelacy, and
putting in the stead of it Congregational Episcopacy, and then nothing can be
more full to our purpose. If it was Congregational Episcopacy that was used,
then Swarms of Sects and Heresies may come in notwithstanding Congregational
Episcopacy (even in better hands than yours). But if it was not Congregational
Episcopacy that was then the Government (but Diocesan Episcopacy) Heresies are
no more a shame to that Government now: I wish Mr. B. had considered this place
when he conceived the first design of his Church History: perhaps he might have
seen the Inconsequence of his design to dishonor Bishops and their Councils,
from a long deduction of Schisms and Heresies which he lays at their door, and
have forborne giving this just offense to all that have any real concern for the
Honor of Christian Religion, which is no less concerned in all these disgraces
than Episcopacy.

Yet I shall willingly discharge Congregational Episcopacy from any Imputation
of those evils that disturbed the Church in the first times, and be content Mr.
B. should lay it all to the account of Diocesan Government, which I shall show
at large in the next Chapter to have been the Constitution of the Primitive
Churches; in the mean time, I must enquire a little farther after the Glorious
fruit of this Congregational Episcopacy.

If the Ancient Church was quite a stranger to this kind of Episcopacy, it will
be a harder matter to find it in latter ages, since Mr. B. tells us that
Bishoprics were enlarged so enormously in process of time, that several
Cathedrals were turned into Chapels, and instead of, one Congregation every
Bishop had several Scores and Hundreds: And the Reformation where it retained
Bishops, made them all Diocesans, and set them over several Congregational
Churches; thus the Bohemians, Denmark, Sweden, and some parts of Germany:
besides these three Kingdoms. Where they Abolished Episcopal, Government, they
threw away the Titles too, so that if Mr. B.'s kind of Episcopacy obtained any
where, it must be under another name, therefore that we may discover it, it
will be necessary to give a short desoription of it, and then we may possibly
find it to have acted under the disguise of another name.

This Congregational Bishop then, Treatise of Ep.
which Mr. B. makes so much a do about, is the same thing with an Elder, as he
tells us, and takes great pains to prove it. 2. This Elder has no necessity of
any ordination by any Bishop, or Elders; but having abilities, and inclination
to exercise them in the service of the Church, 2. Disp. p. 164.165.
he may Interpret it to be sufficient authority to preach, Administer the
Sacraments, etc. Nay is obliged to do the Office of a Bishop or Elder. 1. Disp.
(...) throughout. Treatise of Ep. p. 33.
3. That this Elder can Govern but one Congregation: and there may be more than
one of such Bishops belonging to that one Congregation. 4. That this
Congregation is not to be so great as that of Israel, that had 600000 men; but
is to be restrained to the compass of personal Communion, in hearing, praying,
and receiving the Sacraments. 5. That this Church and Bishop, is independent
and is invested with all Ecclesiastical power within it self: 3. Disp. p. 347.
So that no other Bishop or Synod has any power or Superiority over it but by
its own consent: and then consequently no particular Congregation is obli'd to
enter into any association at all: but may* refuse to submit to any Synod: nay
if it be left in this liberty and Independence by Christ, it ought not to
engage with any associations as should be prejudicial to that original liberty:
and consequently set and determined Synods are to be avoided, and since they
are only prudential means of preserving good correspondence between neighbor
Churches, it is enough, they should be occasional. And what is all this but the
Picture of Independency; and the Congregational Episcopacy upon Examinations
proves nothing else but Congregational Eldership. What a Healing constitution
this is, I shall show first by matter of fact. Secondly I shall show the
natural tendence of such a Government to endless discord and division, that the
Schisms and Heresies that it has hatched were not accidental, but proceeded
from the nature of the Government it self.

1. Some derive this Congregational way from Socinus, Case of the Church of
Engl. p. 249.
who perhaps thought it the most suitable to his design of spreading the poison
of his Heresy, and to prevent all dangers that might threaten it from the
condemnation of Synods; Especially considering the late Union that had been
made between all the Reformed Churches of the Greater and lesser Poland in the
Synod of Sendomiria. Others deduce it from Ramus and Morellus, who placed all
Ecclesiastical authority in the people; and by making the Government of the
Church to be a Democracy, made way for Congregational Independence. This put
the French Churches to the trouble of several Synods, Thorndykes right of the
Chapter p. 67.
which condemned this Doctrine, as pernicious to the Unity of Christian
Churches, and derogating from the honor of Religion. Mr. Thorndyke
conjectures, that it came over hither with Ramus his Philosophy: And that his
credit in our Universities was the first means to bring this conceit in
Religion among us: For about the time that he was most cried up in them, Brown
and Barrow published it. And R. Baly, who endeavors to relieve the English
Presbyterians from the imputation of having begot this ill-faced Child,
Disswasive. p. 12.13.
(as he calls it) would fain also Father it upon Morellius, who (as he thinks)
learned from the Disciples of Munster, this Ecclesiastical Anarchy:

But whoever were the Authors of it, (and none of those yet named can give it
any great reputation,) it is certain that the Fruits of it are to be found only
amongst our selves, where it happened to take root, and grow up into something
considerable.

The Brownists or those of the separation, laid the first Foundations of
Independency among us: and though they had so few followers at first, not
exceeding one Congregation, so as not to have any occasion of entering into any
measures of a general Unity: yet they declared for the independence of
Congregations, and that no Diocesan Prelacy, or Presbytery had any Authority
over Congregational Churches.

Rob. Brown, who gave the name to the Brownists (though Bolton had led that way
to separation twenty years before) seems to have made the first step toward
this Congregational way, Brown in the column entitled the state of Christians.
50. Art 51.
but he speaks of it something more obscurely: Who have the grace and office of
watching and guiding? The Answer is, Some have this Charge together, which
cannot be sundred: Some have their several charge over many Churches, some have
charge but in one Church only: 52.
-- How have some their charge and office together? Ans. There be Synods or the
meetings of sundry Churches, where the weaker Churches seek for help to the
stronger, for deciding or redressing of matter, or else the stronger look to
them for redress: Who have their several charge over many Churches? Ans.
Apostles, Prophets, Helpers or Evangelists: Nor does he determine whether any
may succeed to this general inspection or no.

Those that followed, delivered themselves with greater clearness upon this
point: Confer. with Egerton p. 43. Collection of certain Art. 1590. Art. 11.
Barrow and Greenwood make all Ecclesiastical power to belong to every
Congregation, and call the Bishops Antichristian, because they take upon them
to oversee so many Pastors and Churches: And in another treatise, where they
answer this Question, whether the Queen may be excommunicated by the
Presbytery, they say, That they detest the power of any Person or Presbytery,
usurping Authority over the Church: No Presbytery can do any thing of this kind
without the consent of the whole Congregation, -- but That the Congregation
whereof the Prince is, may Excommunicate him:

Ainsworth went the same way, and declared himself in these words. Ains.
Communion of Saints. c. 24.
We find no Authority committed to our Congregation over another, for
Excommunicating the same, as every Church has over her own members: Christ
reserveth this power in his own hands.

Barrow affirms, Bar. Refuttat of Gifford. 137.
that ordinary set Synods are as prejudicial to the Rights of the Church as the
other, i.e. Diocesan Episcopacy.

But Johnson was the first that cleared this point, and treated of it
particularly: John's. Christian Plea, Treat. 3.
He lays down two things as the foundation of Church Government and Unity: 1.
That all particular Churches, with their Pastors do stand immediately under
Jesus Christ their Arch Pastor, without any other strange Ecclesiastical Power
and Authority interposed between: Whether of Prelates, or their unlawful
usurping Synods. 2. That notwithstanding the estate and distinction aforesaid,
Treat. 3. c. 6. p. 261.262. etc.
yet all the Churches and Ministers of them should be always ready to advise
and assist one another -- and in this manner might be had a lawful and
profitable use of Synods, classes, etc. Provided they do not usurp any unlawful
jurisdiction or power over particular Churches: This man goes yet farther and
maintains Congregational Episcopacy: and shows out of several places of
Scripture and antiquity, That there may be in a particular Church, one Pastor,
or Angel of the Church (properly and specially so called) and diverse teachers
and ruling Elders joined to this Pastor in the Ministry and Government of the
same Church, who may all of them generally be called Pastors, yet so as one be
specially distinguished from the rest, in respect of place and function to be
the Pastor, (so more particularly called) under Jesus Christ the Arch Pastor:
Never did copy agree more exactly with the Original, than Mr. Baxters doctrine
about Church Government, with this of Johnson the Brownist. Vt sit tam fimilis
sibi nec ipse: It is easier to find a difference between Mr. B. and himself
upon other occasions, than to discern the least disagreement between him and
Johnson in this.

Robinson (whom Baylie makes the Father of the Independents) though he left
some tenets of the Brownists, Diss p. 17. Robins. Apol. p. 17.
continued still a separation in the Sacraments and Discipline, and was as much
for this Congregational way as any of the Brownists. In his Apology he
declares, That every particular Congregation is entire without any relation to
other Churches, as Peter or Paul are perfect men without respect to others;
that these Congregations are Independent and under Christ only. Therefore the
Ancient bounds which the Apostles have laid are not to be removed under
pretense of any human Prudence, Antiquity, or Unity: Upon this foundation the
Independent Churches were built, and continue to this day, which though they
may differ in points of Doctrine as their Pastors, or leading men may be
inclined, yet this constitution of Government gives them a common Denomination:
And now having given this account of the Original of this way, at leastwise in
these last times, (the higher Antiquity of it we shall consider elsewhere) I
shall in the next place, give some account of the success of this form of
Government, and show what fruits of Peace, and Truth, it has yielded since its
first planting by the Brownists.

Robert Brown Schoolmaster in Southwark, Baylie diss. Chapter 1.
having seduced out of the Communion of the Church of England such a number of
Disciples as made up a congregation, for fear lest the severity of our Laws
might dissipate this new Church, resolved to remove it to a place of greater
liberty, and accordingly persuaded his followers to transport themselves and
families into Middleborough: Here they had not been long but they began to be
shaken with intestine discords; G. John's. Letter to Fran. John's.
George Johnson says, It was in great measure occasioned by Browns Wife, and
other Women of that banished Church; which caused a mortal feud between Brown
and Harison: and some said it was the occasion of Harison 's death. It was also
the cause of Excommunicating Perriman: And this new fashioned Church in short
broke all to pleces, most turning Anabaptists, and Brown at last seeing himself
deserted, returned with tears in his eyes into the Unity of the Church;
Conformed, and was preferred to a living.

The next Congregation that was formed under this rule was by F. Johnson, Diss.
p. 14.
(for Barrow was hanged before he could fill his Church) and this finding the
air of the English Government not to agree with it, followed its Pastor to
Holland, and settled at Amsterdam, a kind Soil for a young and tender sect: But
this Colony had no better success than that of Brown, for in a little while it
was diminished by the falling away of several to the Anabaptists, who were
Excommunicated by the Congregation they deserted: But the dissensions that were
raised among themselves afflicted them yet more; for G. Johnson having
disobliged his Brothers Wife, by reproving her for the vanity of her Apparel,
and cited a Text of Scripture for it, when he was candidate for the place of a
Pastor in conjunction with his Brother, G. Johnson discourse of some troubles,
etc. 1603.
was required to recant his Doctrine against fine Clothes; he on the other side
drew Articles of Impeachment against the Busk, Stomacher, and Sleeves, etc. of
his Sister in Law, and the contention grew so sharp that the Pastor
Excommunicated his Brother, notwithstanding all the mediation of the
Presbytery, and afterward his father too, upon the same quarrel: I must
confess I never saw any thing more extravagant than this contention, as it is
related by the sufferer with great particularity; the Impertinence, the
Childishness of the whole Transaction is so extraordinary, that a man cannot
reflect upon it without compassion; as men would the strange and extravagant
humors of Bedlam: After this breach followed another between F. Johnson the
Pastor and Ainsworth the Doctor of the Church who divided it yet once more, and
excommunicated one the other, Johnson and his party quit the place, and go to
Embden; where this Church dissolved, and the other part at Amsterdam after the
death of Ainsworth remained a long while destitute of any Officers: Smith who
had transported a new Church to Leyden left it, and turned Anabaptist, and
these Congregational Churches were every where just expiring, when Robinson
revived them with new and more Commodious principles; though the Government
were still the same.

And now part of Robinson's Church with his new amendments being carried over
to New England in a short time overspread the whole Country, for the old
Planters having almost lost all sense as well as neglected all exercise of
Religion, did easily give into this new Model, and so the whole Country, i. e.
as many as were of any Communion submitted to this form, though the greater
part were of no Church at all by reason of the difficulty of admittance into
this: yet what were the fruits of this Congregational Episcopacy in this
flourishing condition? 1. The neglect of Converting the Pagans, which their
Minsters own without any shame or remorse; which seems to have proceeded not so
much out of their principle to make all Saints which should be admitted to
their Communion, (though that was pretended by them, for a reason against
general Conversion) as out of the nature of their constitution; for the Pastor
of a Congregation, thought it not worth his while to go and gather
Congregations over whom he was to have no authority, and such as must be
committed to he knows not whom.

Nor were these Sovereign Congregations, Short story of the rise. p. 32.13, 2.
much more useful for the preservation of truth and Unity, than they were for
the Propagation of the Gospel: For they soon fell into horrid kinds of errors
and blasphemies, that the Holy Ghost personally dwelt in them; That their own
Revelations of particular events were as Infallible as the Scriptures. That sin
in a child of God should never trouble him: That souls, were mortal; that the
Resurrection of the dead was not to be understood literally, with several such
hideous doctrines. Some extravagant women, as Hutchinson and Dyer did affront
these Churches, and drew several of these Congregational Bishops, and the
leading men among them, unto their party, and to countenance their errors that
were no less Monstrous than the births they are said to have had: These began
to affect purer ordinances, and despised their settled Churches as legal
Synagogues: Williams and several others declared they could not conform, and
would have the benefit of Separate. Congregations: But after all these men had
no better remedies against Schism and Heresy than those they railed at so much
here, the Sword and power of the Civil Magistrate: Williams was banished, and
makes woeful complaints of his hard usage; Hutchinson and her company, being
also forced farther into the Country, was with her followers slain by the
Indians: nay some have been so Barbarous as to destroy Quakers upon the account
of their Religion; and in short, there is no place nor Trade nor dealing for
those that oppose their Churches, and their Excommunication is rendered terrible
even to those who are not of their Churches, upon the account of the Civil
deprivation that attends it.

From New England this Congregational way returned back again to Holland, where
notwithstanding all the advantages it might have had by some farther experience
in New England and the late amendments, yet had no better success than when it
was planted there under the name of Brownism: The first Independent Church
there was at Rotterdam settled by H: Peter's an Apostle suitable to the
constitution: Bailies Diss. Chap, 4.
to him succeeded Bridges and Ward: but Simpson coming thither and renouncing
his Ordination, and reducing himself to the state of a private member, was not
long satisfied, the Pastors not allowing the private members sufficient liberty
of Prophesying. Whereupon Simpson erects a new Congregation of his own, and the
contentions between these Congregations were extreme fierce and Scandalous,
Ward is turned out for favoring Simpson, in his pretensions to Liberty of
Prophesying, and at last with much ado the business is made up by the
interposing of 4 Brethren of other Congregations which they called a Synod: but
that peace lasted not long for some time after they were all dissipated, and at
this time I do not know of any one Congregation of this way in all that Country.

At Arnheim where they settled a small Congregation they had no better success,
for they fell into strange Heresies, and Extravagances, setting up Chiliasm,
and Blasphemy, That God is the author of sin, and the like, and now their
remains not the least footstep of their Church or Doctrine in that place.

But no place can furnish a more Tragical History of this Congregational
Episcopacy than England, for this opinion taking new root here about the
beginning of the late Wars, produced such confusion, as nothing but the
miraculous hand of God could have ever reduced to any settlement or order: He
that would see the Influence it had on the Civil Government, the growth and
prevailing of it in the Army; the Slavery of the Nation which immediately
followed the Murder of the late King, and the Abolition of Kingly Government:
the Shedding of so much Innocent blood, under the formality of Justice, though
against all the Laws of this Land and those of God and man; he that would see
how they set up an Usurper, and when he was removed by a happy providence how
they opposed all the means of Union and settlement, may find enough to
entertain his wonder in Walkers History of Independency: and the Histories of
those times: But for the Influence it had upon Religion, there would be no end
of relating the strange confusions, the Heresies and Schisms that this way
brought amongst ^s. Vid Ed. Gangraena.
Tho. Edwards gives some account of them for about 4 years, and reckons near
two hundred several strange opinions with which they infected this Kingdom: nor
did they only beget Heresies but learned to Cherish them us, Baylies Diss. p.
93.
for though this kind of Church Government did open the way to Anabaptism,
Antinomianism, Familism and many more Heresies, yet the Independents commonly
disowned and Excomunicated such as fell ^^to them: But here Independency became
an Uniting Principle, and bound up all sorts of Errors and Blasphemies in one,
and would ^ot disown any that would enter into their Constitution or interest,
let them believe as they please, or believe nothing all: but as to the Sects
that Sprung out of them let us ^^ar Bastwick: 2. part of Indep. Postscript. p.
37.
Before the Independents Ap^^ition in our Horison, there were but three (...)
four Sects known among us, and they were (...) in number and well conditioned:
But out of the ^^dependents lungs are Sprung above 40 several ^^ts of
straglers, which before their coming were never known among us. J. Lilburn
related it unto me, and that in the presence of others, that returning from the
Wars to London, he not forty new Sects, and some so pernicious that he had much
a do to keep his hands off them, though he was in his judgment for a Toleration
of all Religions. There are innumerable and Diabolical Sects; and so
prodigiously Impious, that it is not for a Christian to name their opinions.

And Lastly these Congregational Bishops, men of humble pretenses, that would
not aspire at first beyond a single Congregation, nor desire to govern that any
otherwise than in Conjunction with, and by the advice of all the members, These
men when they had an opportunity, exercised so great, and extensive a Tyranny,
as this Church had never felt under the most Insolent of Diocesan Bishops: for
P. Nigh and H. Pet^r the Archbishops of those times, wh^^ Governed the
Committee of Tryers, (...) no Law, no Canons, but their ow^ pleasures, they
rejected whom they pleased without giving themselves the Trouble (...) the
sufferers the satisfaction of the least reason; and there was no relief, no
Quare I^^pedit against these Church Governors and their proceedings were so
arbritrary that some styled that Committee, The Case of A. S.
The English Inquisition. And this is the fair fruit o^ Congregational
Episcopacy among us. Confusion, Regicide and Slavery in the Common wealth;
Heresy, and endless Sects; and more than Papal Tyranny in the Church.

But surely Mr. B. is not for this Congregational Independent way, but for a
Temperament or Mixture of Church Government, made up of this and Presbytery,
and Episcopacy: Mr. B. tells us that he has not changed ^is opinion these forty
years: Treatise of Episc. praef.
and if we may judge of it by what he has written since, it must be either
Independency, or something so like it, that an ordinary Capacity cannot
distinguish from it. For if to declare (...) Church of Christ's constituting to
be but ^^e Congregation, joined in personal Com^^^ion of Prayer and Sacraments
and that ^^ery such Congregation is Independent; ^^d has all sort of
Ecclesiastical power ^^en it immediately by Christ. If to say, that (...) usurp*
Authority over several of these ^^^ches, and to assume the power of cen^^ over
their Members, is contrary to the ^^^tolick Institution, and unchurches all
^^^^e Congregations, and that no Synods, (...) more than Bishops, have any
Superiori^^ over any one, or more of these Churches, (...) that a Church for
Discipline cannot ^^prehend a greater number than a Church (...) Worship; if
this be Independency Mr. B. ^^^ds it, or else he either does not mean as (...)
speaks, for all these things he plainly ^^^ms) or speaks so as no body can make
(...) other meaning of his words.

Yet how can this be? for he is not against ^^^^es and Synods: no more are the
Indepen^^^, they have not condemned the use of ^^ods, as I have showed out of
F. Johnson: and the Independents Consociation was the cause of those endless
divisions their Churches ran into; but still this is no more than a Neighbourly
consultation, and has no proper authority to impose any rule upon National
Churches: But Mr. B. is for Episcopacy: so is Johnson, and Mr. B. is for no
other. For he does expressly disown any Bishop that is appointed over many
Churches: But he is for Bishop Vshers Episcopacy: It is true Mr. B. says so in
several places: and that Bishop Usher and he had agreed the point in a quarter
of an hour: What might have been the result of Mr. B.'s conversation with that
Learned Primate I cannot tell: But that which Mr. B. so often referrs us to for
Bishop Vshers opinion, shows there is as great a distance between him and Mr.
B. in this point as there is between Mr. B. and the Church of England: There is
a small Paper that bears the name of that Bishop, Entitled The Reduction of
Episcopacy, which Mr. B. often mentions; I will Transcribe the second Article,
that the reader may see how well his notion of Episcopacy does agree with Mr.
B.'s. Whereas by a Statute in the 26 year of K. Henry the Eight (revived in the
first of Queen Elizabeth) Suffragans are appointed to be erected in Twenty six
several places of this Kingdom, p. 6.
the number of them might very well be conformed unto the number of the several
Rural Deanries into which every Diocese is subdivided: which being done, the
Suffragans supplying the place of those who in the Ancient Church were called
(Chorepiscopi) might every month Assemble a Synod of all the Rectors, or
Incumbent Pastors within the Precinct, and according to the major part of their
voices conclude all matters that should be brought into Debate before them. To
this Synod the Rector and Churchwardens might Present such Impenitent persons,
as by admonition and suspension from the Sacrament would not be Reformed, who
if they remain Contumacious and incorrigible, the sentence of Excommunication
might be decreed against them by the Synod, and accordingly be executed in the
Parish where they lived, -- Hitherto also all things that concerned Parochial
Ministers may be referred, whether they did touch their doctrine or their
Conversation: The Diocesans were to remain as now, only to Govern by a Synod of
Suffragans, and incumbents: and their Decrees if occasion were to be revised,
by Provincial, and Metropolitical Synods, presided by the Metropolitans: Now
let us compare this with Mr. B.'s Doctrine of Church Government. First then:
the S^ffragans here mentioned, as the Bishops of the first and lowest order,
are Diocesan for every one is to rule a Rural Deanery, which consists of about
40 or 50, or sometimes more Parishes: is not this the same species of
Government with Diocesan? if a Diocese of 50 Parishes be specifically distinct,
from one of 80 or a Hundred, we must have several species amongst us too,
according to the different proportions of our Bishoprics: the Diocese of
Lincoln will be specifically different from that of Bristol, and by this way it
is possible at last to make out Mr. B.'s Twelve sorts of Episcopacy which he
reckons in his Disputation of Church Government: in short: what kind of
Episcopacy does Mr. B. reject? Diocesan he says: Treatise of Episc. part. 1. c.
vii.
and what is that? By a Diocese we Nonconformists mean only a large Circuit of
Ground with its Inhabitants containing many particular Parishes; and by a
Diocesan Church we mean all the Christians within this Circuit, who have but
one Bishop over them: though they be of mary Parishes. And what Episcopacy does
Mr. B. approve? Bishop Vshers Episcopacy Reduced: and what is this? It is a
Bishop over many Parishes, a Bishop of a Rural Deanery that contains a great
many Parish Churches. It is manifest therefore that Mr. B. says and unsays, and
Condemns himself in that which he approves. 2. Bishop Usher's Reduction
overthrows the Foundations of Mr. B.'s Church, the Essence and Individuation of
it: for he defines a Church by a Congregation, for personal Communion in
Worship and Discipline. and denies that one Church can be any farther extended
in respect of its Government and Discipline, than it may in respect of Worship:
which he expresses thus: I think many of them ( i e. the Presbyterians) do with
Rutterford, distinguish between a Worshipping Church and a Governed Church.
(And sadling the Horse for Prelacy to mount on) do affirm that many, about
Twelve of these Worshipping Churches (like our Parishes) may make but one
Governed, or Presbyterial Church: But Bishop Vshers Project makes 40 or 50
Worshipping Churches, but one Governed Church.

3. Bishop Vshers Reduction deposes Parish Bishops, and turns their Churches
into Chapels, because they are allowed no exercise of the Keys, but only
admonition, and suspension from the Sacrament 'till the Bishop and Synod is
made acquainted with it; Art. 1.
and this any incumbent in the Church of England is allowed to do: But Mr. B.
rejects Diocesan Episcopacy for this fault of turning Churches into Chapels,
and Pastors into Preaching Curats, and yet approves all that he Condemns by
yielding to Bishop Vshers Reduction: It is something strange he should be a Non
Conformist, to himself, as well as to Diocesan Episcopacy, and upon the very
same reasons too.

Lastly, This Project of Church Government (in which there is one thing not so
agreeable to the practice of Antiquity, which is the Major part of the
Presbyters concluding the Bishop, who always had a Negative voice, and nothing
ever becoming an Act, without his consent and Approbation) this I say may
perhaps be of some use to make an accommodation, between Presbyterian
Government, by Classes and Synods, etc. and Diocesan Episcopacy: but it wholly
overthrows Mr. B.'s Congregational way, however qualified by the Independent
Principles of Consociation, beyond which Mr. B.'s Notion of Church Government,
and constitution does not extend.

Therefore, to leave this Episcopacy of Bishop Vshers as destructive of
Independence, why may not they of the Congregational way prevent such
inconveniences as they have fallen into, by some quallifying Principles in
favor of Consociation, and some abatement in their Punctiliousness of
admitting into full Communion, and Church Membership? And thus far no doubt Mr.
B. does comply: to which I answer, That the Fundamental Principle of this
Congregational way does dispose it to all manner of confusion, which I
undertook to show in the last place.

I shall say nothing to such Principles of our Independents as have no
necessary Connection with the nature of their Church Government, as those of
separation from every defect in ordinances and the like, they are besides my
purpose, and the mischief, and unreasonableness of them have been showed
already with so much light, and advantage by the Incomparable Dean of Paul's, as
to be able to convince any men who did mistake in good earnest; as to that part
therefore I will suppose them satisfied in point of Conscience though not
perhaps in point of Honor, and consider only the mischiefs of their
Government, abstracted from their other opinions.

The Independent or Congregational constitution is founded upon these two
Principles.

1. That Christ and his Apostles instituted Congregational Churches, and endued
them with all the Power that is given the Church: as of censures,
Excommunication and the like, without any dependence one on another, or of
several upon one General Pastor, and that the single Congregations planted at
first in several Cities when they came to increase beyond the possibility of
Personal Communion, were to Imitate Bee-hives, and to send out Colonies under
their proper Officers, without any dependence on the mother Hive.

2. That what was thus instituted by Christ and his Apostles must so continue,
it not being in the power of man, or the Church to alter it.

This is the foundation of Independent Government, and if you abate any thing
of these Principles, the whole Fabric must fall to pieces.

If you deny the first that Christ or his Apostles did not institute such
Churches, the Congregational way has no pretense, or if you will say that the
first that were planted were indeed of this kind, but accidentally, there being
no more believers in any City than might meet in one Congregation it equally
destroys it: for when Christians were multiplied into several Congregations
they might put themselves under another form more commodious for preserving
Unity among them.

If you deny the second, that though the Apostolical Churches were of this
Model, yet that it was not necessary, and unalterable; it will remove all just
reason of contention about it; for the Church having made use of its liberty in
the change of that Government which it is supposed to have power to do as it
saw occasion, nothing can be more unreasonable, than to tear it in pieces upon
this occasion, unless it has done something that it had no authority to do, and
so altered the Government Established by Christ with out his leave: in short if
the Apostles did not found Congregational Churches, there is no reason why we
should set them up; if they did found them at first, but did design they should
continue no longer, than till the numbers of Christians should exceed one
Congregation, the success of the Gospel has changed that form: If they were
founded at first, and then the matter left to the discretion of the Church to
frame it self according to its best convenience, the Church has already
determined it, there can be no Controversy: So that if any of these Principles
be denied, the Congregational Government must fall of course.

Independency, therefore being founded upon a firm belief of those Fundamental
Principles, which cannot be left, but the whole frame must sink, I shall
proceed to show the unavoidable mischiefs that belief exposes these
Congregational Churches to.

1. Of the mischiefs that this way occasisions, by rendering any Union between
particular Churches Impossible.

2. The mischiefs it produces in particular Churches or Congregations.

1. Of the Impossiblity of preserving any Unity between Independent Churches.

These Churches like so many little Soveraignties crowded together within the
same Territory, and a great number of them within the Walls of the same City,
their Vicinity and Cohabitation gives them opportunities, and begets a
necessity of a Correspondence and Communication between them; and this
begetting a mutual knowledge of each others opinions and practice, differences
will arise, and endanger their peace; and what remedy is there, since there is
no common Court to put an end to it? It must be a lamentable case when every
quarrel, becomes a War; and there is no end but either Ruin, or at last, when
they are tired with contention, their Voluntary Acquiescence. But you will say
there is the same Inconvenience in Episcopacy; for if Bishops fall out about
Religion who shall judge between them? if you say Metropolitans and Synods;
suppose two Metropolitans then should differ, or two Councils: It were much
better they would agree, but if they will quarrel, it is not quite so bad as if
those that live in the same City, and under the same Government should fall
out; suppose our Church could not adjust all Articles of Faith and Discipline
with the Churches of France or Suitzerland, good men would wish that it might
be made up, and that there were a perfect Harmony in our Confessions: But in
case this could not be effected, yet the Controversy would remain pretty quiet
within the books that should be written about it: But if within the City of
London those Controversies should be unhappily started, and one Parish take one
side of the Question, and another the contrary, it would be something more
dangerous; and an Intolerable defect in the constitution of our Church to have
no effectual remedy to apply to the beginnings of this Division: But what hurt
is it, you may say, let both enjoy their own opinion, if they would do so with
Peace it were something; but these little republic Churches, like Descartes
his Vortexes grate and make Impression one upon the other; Some members of one
Congregation may be seduced by the other, and the whole perhaps in danger of
being carried away with evil Doctrine or example, what shall be done in this
case? They can submit to no Judge; for they are immediately under Christ; they
must have no Diocesan, no Classes, no power to Control them; what then? They
must wrangle to the worlds end; or Dissolve and come to nothing as many of
their Congregations have done.

The Independents have been made very sensible of this by a sad experience of
great and Irremediable dissensions, and some of them have been so ingenuous as
to confess it, and entered into some measures for an effectual Prevention of
these disorders: by way of Consociation or Synods: but neither can relieve them
as long as they maintain the principles before mentioned, i. e. as long as they
are Independents.

For 1. What Consociation can there be between those bodies of men, that cannot
be United under any Common Government, to which the particulars are to be
subordinate? Without any Laws to correct them, without authority to execute
them, without any subordination of the Members: what Permanent Consociation can
be expected, that must depend upon the pleasure of every Congregation of that
Association? that remains still Independent, and under no obligation to submit
any farther than it self thinks good? This is the case of the Independents,
either there must be General Officers to take care of this Consociation, as
Bishops or Supervisors, or some Committees any Synods, and these must have some
powover the particular Congregations under their Inspection, or there must be
no such Officers: If that be allowed, it is no more Independence, but Diocesan
Episcopacy or Presbytery: And overthrows the Fundamental principle, that the
Congregations immediately under Christ, and that the constitution cannot be
altered for any convenience. If they have no Persons appointed over the
Generality, then wherein does this Consociation consist, or how are they
United? But suppose they have Synods, as they had one in the Savoy 1658. What
can they be able to do? They may advise, and discourse the matter, but if any
particular Congregation be obstinate, they cannot censure, that Importing a
Superiority, which destroys the notion of Congregational Independence; to make
this clearer, if possible, suppose something like Hobbs his State of nature,
That Twenty men, who can have no pretense of authority one over the other, were
cast upon an Island; and their Common necessities would oblige them to live
together and maintain some Commerce and agreement, and that every one should
believe firmly that God had not only made him free, but that he had laid an
obligation on him so to continue, and never to subject himself to any Creature,
upon the pretense of any conveniences of life. How should these men do? They
might consult, and agree upon a rule, they might make a distribution of
proprieties, and promise never to hurt or injure one the other: But these men
being subject to the same Appetites and disorders with others, it is not to be
expected they should live long without some bodies transgressing his duty: And
then what shall be done to preserve this Consociation of Kings? Every one is
sacred and cannot be called before any Tribunal, but his own Conscience; and
that perhaps he may dispense with: he must not submit to any one, nor to all
his associates together, nor can they, continuing in that opinion of Original
Freedom, usurp any Authorities over him; What can such a Constitution produce?
Either their indignation, or necessity must prevail over their principles, and
so they must submit to Government, or else if they retain these fancies of
Independent Soveraignity and freedom, they must dissolve and break all to
pieces, and renounce all communication one with the other.

You will say that good men will agree, and preserve such an union as their
common necessities require, without any superior power to enforce it: But the
Independents know by woeful experience, that all have not proved Saints that
they have received for such, though they were as punctilious in the admitting
of them as the Pope in a Canonization; besides this, reason will destroy the
discipline of Congregational as well as of associated Churches: for every good
man will do his duty, and what need therefore of any power in the congregation
to censure.

It is plain therefore that Congregational Churches, unless they renounce the
Principles of their Independence, cannot enter into any solid and lasting
union, having no means to preserve it, and all the union that their Principles
will admit can be no other than that of a heap of sand, where the parts are
loose and unconnected, and therefore unavoidably scattered and dissipated by
the first Wind that shall arise.

Nor is this Congregational Constitution less pernicious to the Peace of
Particular Churches, than it is to a General union of many Congregations, which
I shall make appear by the following reasons. First in General; and then by
examining the different forms there may be of Admininistring this
Congregational power.

1. He that lies under an unjust sentence of a Congregation has no relief; for
this being Independent, there is (...) Appeal left, and this is the more
gri^rous, by how much the deprivation of Communion, is a sorer punishment to
those who have known the value of the Ordinances of Christ, and have tasted the
grace of God in them, than any other that can be inflicted on men's bodies or
estates. And here can be no other relief but by Separation and Schism.

2. When a Pastor is turned Heretic, and has seduced his Congregation into a
good opinion of his Doctrine, they have no relief, because they have no judge
to examine the Doctrine, and to remove the evil from among them.

3. If a Congregation shall conspire to be wicked, turn Libertines and
Antinomians, who shall censure them for it? the Magistrate may not be a
Christian, or may not take notice of it.

But the inconveniences of this way may be farther observed, by looking into
the several forms, whereby this Congregational Supremacy either is or may be
Administered.

1. Suppose the Pastor invested with this whole power, without any appeal to be
made from his sentence; what temptation would this independence be to abuse
that unaccountable power, since no superior Court could revise his Acts? And if
this man s^^uld prove imprudent, and wilful in the Administration of so great a
power, what peace could be expected? And yet we must expect this power should
fall often into the evil hands, and it must be a wretched constitution that
should not make some provision against it. But in the Congregational way, the
first thing is extremity: But I will not urge this, because the Independents
will not allow the Pastor any such power, and therefore let us consider this
way as managed by the Pastor, and a select Presbytery: the inconveniences are
rather greater. For,

1. In many Congregations the Church power must come into the hands of such as
have little capacity, or experience, and by that means would become
contemptible.

2. Suppose they should not all agree upon a Sentence of Excommunication, must
the majority conclude it? and against the opinion of the Minister? This would
be something hard for him to pronounced sentence against his own judgment, and
condemn a person he believes to be innocent; if he does refuse, then he resists
the Authority of the Church, and that must needs produce a Rupture.

3. They of the select Presbytery must be supposed, to have a mixture with the
rest by way of dealing, and commerce, and this begetting differences and feuds
between them, it cannot be ^voided but that Church censures will be abused to
revenge private Animosities: and those upon whom they are to be executed, will
be more loath to submit when they recollect that they proceed from persons they
had disobliged: and instead of reflecting upon their guilt, they will be apt to
ascribe all to private grudge: upon which reason in common Law, he that is
supposed to be judged by his neighbors, has the liberty to reject any with
whom he has had any falling out.

4. This would probably degenerate into a civil Tyranny, when a poor man should
refuse to comply with some of his Ecclesiastical Judges, to his own
disadvantage, they would find some advantage against him: and by disgracing him
in the Congregation, ruin him consequently in his livelihood.

5. The exercising of such censures within so little compass as that of a
Congregation, by the members of it one on the other, must in a little while
engage the whole body in parties and factions, without any hopes of uniting,
the sufferers will be discontented, and when they grow numerous will not
conceal their resentments, but bend them to the disturbance of that
Congregational unity.

But lastly if we suppose the whole Congregation concerned to declare it self
in every act of Excommunication; few of the inconveniences before mentioned
will be removed, and there will be others yet greater. For,

1. It cannot well be avoided but upon many causes the Congregation will be
divided, and when it happens to be upon the subject of removing from, or
restoring to Church communion, such differences do lead them into Schism; for
since there is no judge between them, every party will likely stand by its own
opinion, and will hardly submit their judgments to the majority of the other
side, that out-votes them but by a few voices: Those that were fierce for
turning a Member out of Church fellowship, because they are offended with him,
will likelier quit the Congregation and set up for themselves, than endure the
Communion of that which they cried out upon as so great a scandal.

2. The wisest and best men who are generally the fewest will be of no use, for
they will be overborn with number.

3. It will make a constant trade of Faction, and making of parties.

To conclude therefore, If the Church has been afflicted with Schisms and
Heresies under Diocesan Bishops, we have seen that it has suffered the same
things under other sorts of Government, but that which Mr. B. offers as a
remedy of disorders, has been the least able to preserve the Church from
divisions, nor were those infinite breaches accidental only, as the best
Government in the world cannot prevent all inconveniences, but were the natural
fruit of that constitution, which would not be able to preserve peace between
the Churches of one City, how much less between the numerous Congregations of a
Kingdom: and is such a form as destroys it self, and pulls even particular
Congregation in pieces, by unavoidable feuds and factions first, and then by
formal Schism and Separation.

CHAP. II.
Of the Rise and Progress of Diocesan Episcopacy.

Mr. Baxter in a Book published since his Church History, Treatise of Episc.
Part 1. c. 3.
gives us such an account of the Original of Bishops and Diocesans, as would
make one suspect he had had some late Revelation; for he speaks so particularly
of such things, which no body else ever heard of, and shows all the first
causes of the rise of Episcopacy after so new a manner, that it must be either
new Revelation, or some new Authors found out: But because nothing of these
appears in the Margin, I am apt to believe it was rather a Dream: For he tells
us, That in the beginning there were but few Scholars and Philosophers
converted, who were able to Preach, and these men of parts Overtop'd the rest,
and where such as these were found, they were highlier esteemed than the rest,
and these in some time became Bishops, being made first Arbitratours, and then
as more learned Judges of true and false Doctrine, nay, being wiser than all
the rest, it was fit he should have a negative voice; and Fourthly, they
understood their own value well enough, and that made them proud and desire
pre-eminence. And, Lastly, one Bishop was set over some Churches for want of
more able men, and he having got the start of the others that came after, made
them truckle to him.

Mr. Blondel had a quite contrary dream, and for my part I do not know a better
way of Answering one Dream but with another, he Dreamed I say, (for he had
surely never seen it with his eyes open) That these gifts were not had in any
so great esteem then, Apologia pro sentent. Hieron. Praefat.
but all went by seniority, and of the College of Presbyters, the Senior was
as it were the Bishop, and when he died, the next by seniority took the chair
without any more ado, no Election, or Ordination being necessary: If this
answer does not satisfy, I must profess I cannot help it for want of Authors
that speak particularly of these matters. All that I can affirm is, that the
Ancients talk of Bishops in every age, up to the Apostles times, and make these
Bishops their successors; but of the occasions of their promotion there is not
a word, only St. Jerome a great while after their institution ascribed it to the
inconveniences which parity produced: But as to the time Mr. B. tells us,
Treat. of Ep. Part 1. c 3. p. 15. Hieron. Catalog. Scr. in Marco. Eusebius. Chr.
Hieron. Ep. ad Evagr.
But as to the time Mr. B. tells us, That if Hierom mistake not, it began at
Alexandria some years before the death of St. John the Apostle. If Mr. B. does
not mistake St. Jerome, which is almost impossible, he must know that Mark died
in the eighth year of Nero, which answers the 63. of our Lord. Several years
not only before St. John's death, but before St. Paul's; and before almost any
of the Apostles: So ancient is Episcopacy at Alexandria according to St. Jerome.
His words are these: Nam and Alexandria a Marco Evangelista usque ad Heraclam
and Dionysium, Episcopos, Presbyteri semper unum ex se electum, in excelsiori
gradu collocatum, Episcopum nominabant: i. e. from the Death of St. Mark,
(which Jerome following Eusebius, places in the eighth year of Nero,) to
Dionysius and Heraclas the Presbyters elected their Bishops out of their own
body: And this some years, i. e. almost forty before the death of St. John: But
does Jerome make this the first Original of Episcopacy, surely Mr. B. mistakes
him? For he makes the divisions of the Church, some saying, I am of Paul, and I
am of Apollos, and I of Cephas, to be the first occasion of this institution:
and these divisions happened in the Church of Corinth many years before St.
Marks death; An. Chr. 52.
and that we may not think Hierom speaks this by a figure to express such
divisions as followed afterward in imitation of those of Corinth; he instances
some particulars that require them to be understood of that particular
dissension among the Corinthians, for he adds: After that every one thought
those whom he Baptized to be his own, and to belong peculiarly to himself:
Which St. Paul mentions, and confutes, and thanks God that he had Baptized but
few, lest they should say, He Baptized in his own name: Now this determination
of the Apostle that Baptizing of Converts did not give the Baptizer any right
to Govern them, and that they ought not to bear any name of relation to him,
but his name only in which they were Baptized, it is unlikely that this
controversy should revive after so clear a determination, and therefore the
Original of Episcopacy in St. Jerome's opinion, must be referred to those
dissensions in the Church of Corinth. For which he fancies this remedy to have
been provided: And I cannot but wonder at Blondel, Apol. p. 3.
who makes St. Jerome to speak in this place of things done almost a hundred
years after [ An. 140.] when but a few lines before this passage, he shows
Episcopacy to have been set up in Alexandria immediately after the death of St.
Mark, i.e* about eleven years after this division in the Church of Corinth.

Having considered the sum of Mr. B.'s account of the Original of Episcopacy,
which is partly Fiction, partly a mistaking, or mincing of St. Hierom: I shall
proceed to give an Historical account of the rise of Diocesan Episcopacy, out
of the Scriptures and Antiquity, as far as I am able to trace it, hoping that
some others better acquainted with the Ancients may some time or other give a
more full and perfect Deduction.

Our Blessed Savior 1 Pet. 2.25.
The Bishop of our Souls, laid the first foundation of his Church by his own
Preaching Luke 4.15. Matthew. 4.12. Mark 1.14.
in the Synagogues of Galilee, where he was approved, and glorified by all that
heard him: and now having entered upon that great undertaking of reducing the
World to the obedience of faith; Matt. 4.18. Luke 6.13. John 6.70.
he made choice out of his followers and Disciples of such Persons as he
thought fit to instruct more particularly in the knowledge, and to commit to
them the great work of the conversion of the World. Whom he called Apostles
Matt. 13.11. Mark 4.11. Luke 8.10.
Luke 5.11.28. Matt. 19.27.28. Mark 10.28. Luke 22.28.
These as more specially devoted to him, did constantly attend his Person, and
follow him whither ever he went. John. 2.11.4.53.11.45.
And after that he had converted several out of the great multitudes that
followed him, by the excellence of his Doctrine, and the conviction of his
Miracles, he gave these Apostles Joh. 21 15, 16.
Commission to take care of that Flock which was already gathered, to increase
it, not only by finishing the Conversion of such; as the found of his Gospel,
and the Fame of his miracles had already disposed to receive the Gospel, but to
propagate it to the ends of the Earth, Matt. 28.19. Mark 16.15.
and to Preach to all Nations. When he had justified his Doctrine; as well as
us, by his death and resurrection: The Luke 1^.32.
flock of the Church was yet but very small, and Peter though he were now
allowed to be universal ^^stor, might easily discharge his duty: 1 Cor. 15.6.
The greatest number we read of between ^he Resurrection and Ascension is but
^oo, Act^ 1.15.
and at Jerusalem when they met to^ether they were but about a hundred and
^^enty: But it was not long before these ^^all beginnings, this grain of
Mustard feed grew up with a prodigious and surprising increase, Acts 2.41.
for on the following P^ntecost there were added unto them about three hundred
Souls: The first fruits of the Spirit, who must be supposed to have been
converted, not all by the Sermon of St. Peter, but by the Acts 2.4, 6, 7, 8.
Ministry of the other Apostles, and the number of the Converts makes it more
probable, that the multitude was divided into several Audiences, since the
Acts. 1.13.2.2.
upper Room where they were assembled, could not hold so great an assembly:
This accession made the Church too big for the house, where it first assembled,
and the Disciples having yet no public places of meeting but obliged to Acts
2.46.
break bread from house to house, they were by this means divided into several
Congregations: But those of the Congregational way, endeavor to diminish the
numbers, by making a great part of these new Converts to be strangers, and to
return home* when the Feast was over: To which I Answer, 1. That the Scripture
gives no countenance to this conjecture, but says all those strange Nations
were Acts 2.5, 14.
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the Original word inclines most on this side.
But 2. Suppose they were some of them Strangers* yet how shall we be assured
that they returned home? The Scripture seems to say the contrary: 47.
For as soon as it sets down the number; it adds, That they continued st^^^
fastly in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship and in breaking of bread and in
Prayers: They i. e. the three thousand in the Verse going before: besides there
is no probability of their leaving the Apostles, it is not suitable to the zeal
and devotion of the first Converts, who despised all Earthly concerns, and left
Houses and Land, and Families, for Christ's sake. And these Proselytes sold all,
and had all things in common, which takes away the necessity of their returning
home: Nor did the Church cease to grow and multiply, but proselytes came over
every day; For the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved: But
among these daily accessions, some are very great and remarkable; for not long
after we find no less than five thousand more added to the Church at one time:
v. 47.
Many of them that heard the word believed, and the number of the men, (that is
plainly, of those that heard the word and believed) was about five thousand:
Acts 4.4.
and besides these that were Converted the generality of the people favored
the preaching of the Gospel, so that the Magistrates durst not deal over
rigorously because of the people: v. 21.
This general good disposition was improved by the Apostles into a perfect
conversion of great numbers: For believers were the more added to the Lord,
Acts 5.14.
multitudes both of men and women. And the Christian Congregations were now so
thronged, that they brought out their sick and laid them in the Sreets that the
shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of them.

And now the Church of Jerusalem grew too numerous for the Apostles to take the
whole charge of it upon them, for when the Number of the Disciples was
multiplied, c. 6.1.
their arose a murmuring of the Grecians that their Widows were neglected, and
the Apostles desired the multitude to choose seven men, whom they might appoint
over this matter: And in the mean time they would give themselves up
continually to prayer and the ministry of the Word: and the twelve it seems had
enough to do in this particular, for they declare that they cannot look after
Tables, but they must neglect their more peculiar duty, ^. 2.
leave the word of God: And we do immediately find the success of this Counsel,
^. 7,
The word of God increased, and the number of the Disciples multiplied in
Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the Priests were obedient to the
Faith: And now after all these accessions, Acts 8.1.
we find but one Church in Jerusalem, a great persecution is said to have been
raised against that Church: Now what manner of Church shall we imagine this to
be, a Congregational one, shall all those thousands make but one Assembly, for
Communion in Prayer, and the Sacraments? It is incredible. There was no place
large enough no hold them: and considering the opposition that was made against
them, they cannot be supposed to have the use of any public meeting place; the
Synagogues were taken up by the Jews, and if we may guess at their bigness by
their number, we must conclude they could not be very capacious, since in
Jerusalem there were as Sigonius delivers from the Records of the Jews, no less
than five hundred and eighty: Car. Sigonius de Rep. Heb. l. 2. c. 8. Lightfoot
Hor. Hebr. cap. 36. prooem. Evang. Mat.
the number more generally argeed is four hundred and eighty: In short the
multitude of Believers as it is represented by St. Luke, must be granted to
exceed the measure of one or two Congregations, and considering their
circumstances might probably make up more than twenty Congregations: This
Church then in the singular containing more than one Assembly, was no other
than a Diocese, governed by the common Council of the Apostles, in which Peter
may be supposed to preside, without doing the Pope any Service.

To this the Assertors of the Congregational way make several exceptions, Grand
Debate concerning Presb. and Independ. in the Answer to the reasons of the
Diss. Breath.
and Mr. B. among the rest, but so frivolous, that I wonder after the Answers
made to them by the Divines of the Assembly, any can be so obstinate as to
insist upon them.

They Except, 1. That the first three thousand Converts were not all of
Jerusalem, but returned home after the Feast was over, but of this no other
proof than that there were dwelling in Jerusalem devour men of several Nations,
or as they render it sojourning: and it is not very significant how we
understand it, since the Scripture says expressly, that they continued in the
Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship. But of this already.

2. That the five thousand is not to be added to the other three, but includes
them: There needs no other Answer to this, than to refer them to the place,
which is clear enough of it self: The miracle wrought on the Cripple that sat
in the Gate of the Temple, and the Sermon that seconded it was altogether
occasional, and there can be no reason to imagine the whole Church then to be
met together in that place.

3. That in those Countries there were much greater Congregations than can be
with us, as some of those that followed our Savior, who Preached to Myriads,
and the reason is offered, because the air is more pure and thin. That at
Charenton, the Congregation consists of many thousands: This is manifestly to
trifle, and to Libel their own cause, by reasons that are impertinent, or
ridiculous.

4. Mr. B. Adds, they had better Lungs; in those times and places, he might
have said as well, that they had better Ears, and a quicker hearing, or that
they could understand a man's meaning by his gaping.

5. They say that this being the first Church, and under the joined care of all
the Apostles, might soon arrive to the greatest measure of a Church: What is
this in effect but to yield the question? How they came to that number we see
well enough, but the thing contended is, that their number did exceed a
Congregation; besides they cannot be supposed so well to have multiplied so
very soon, if the Ministry of these Apostles had not been divided, and some
Preached in one Assembly, and others in another.

6. They say there was liberty till Saul's persecution. And what then? Under
that liberty the Church might exceed the measure of a single Congregation in
less time.

7. Mr. B. says, this is no precedent: And why? The Mother Church gathered,
and governed by all the Apostles together, (which is a circumstance that
perhaps no other Church can boast of) Why should not this be a precedent? The
truth is it spoils a notion of Congregational Independent Churches, and because
it cannot be made to comply, it must be protested against that it be not
brought into a Precedent.

Besides these exception, Acts 2.26.5.1.6.5, 6.
they offer testimonies to prove the Church of Jerusalem no more than could
meet in one place; because all the multitude is sometimes said to meet together
(...) and (...): against these proofs there lies one great exception: The
number of Converts on one side are specified, and it plainly thence appears,
that there was no possibility they should all meet together, for all acts of
worship: but on the other side, all the proof is in general expressions, the
whole multitude, and the all may denote only those that were present, and not
all that believed, as it is said Luke 1.10. The whole multitude of the people
were without Praying, i.e. not all the people of Jerusalem, but the whole
multitude that was present; so the meeting (...) may be said of several
Congregations meeting for the same purpose as well as of one.

But the Independents in the Assembly of Divines did seem to give up this
point, and to grant that before the dispersion there might be more than one
Congregation of Christians; but that after they were scattered, there remained
no more than could meet in one place: Suppose all this: what advantage can it
be to their cause: if there were more once than might meet in one Assembly, and
so were forced to divide into several; and this notwithstanding to retain the
name but of one Church, because under one common Government, it follows that
wheresoever the Christians should afterward increase in the same manner, they
might likewise be governed after the same manner, and in several Congregations,
still preserve the Unity of the Church: If there were no more afterward than
one Congregation, it is plain, that it was only casual; if I may so speak of
the circumstances of the Church.

Nor is that true in fact which they affirm of the Church of Jerusalem after
the dispersion, for though they are all said to be scattered besides the
Apostles, Acts ^.1.
yet it cannot be understood of all the Believers, because afterward, we find
Saul entering into houses, and haling out Men and Women: We find good men,
believers doubtless, taking care of Stephens Funeral: Hist. Ecc. l. 2. c. 1.
(...). Nid. Lorin. Cajet. Calvin. Bez. in. Loc.
and thus Eusebius understood it, where he says all the Disciples, i. e. the
Disciples of Christ, mentioned Acts 1. that conversed with Christ, and so the
generality of Expositors; nor is it to be imagined, that the Apostles should
remain alone at Jerusalem, when the whole Church had been forced thence, and
the fury of the Persecution was so great that there was no opportunity to
Preach publicly: Nor is it unlikely that the Preachers were more particularly
marked out for destruction, for in Stephen's case, we find it was his public
Disputing and Preaching, that brought him under the lash of that Persecution,
and his Indictment was made up of what was delivered by him in his public
Discourses; though besides it cannot be denied but that other Converts, Men and
Women were also haled to Prison: But whatsoever numbers were forced away by
that Persecution, it is likely they returned most of them after it was over,
and it did not continue long, for immediately after the the Conversion of St.
Paul, Acts 9.31.
The Churches had rest throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, and were
edified and multiplied: And it is a strange conceit of Baronius, That these are
the Jews of the Dispersion that St. Peter and James directed their Epistles to,
An. 35.
and that they were scattered into all the Parts of the World: After this
Persecution the Church of Jerusalem, Acts 8.14. Acts 11.22.
as the metropolitan of the rest, takes care of them, sends some Apostles to
Samaria, and Barnabas to Antioch: and these as soon as they had fulfilled their
ministry, return home to their Mother Church, which could not but thrive much
more in proportion than the rest, whether we reflect upon the number and
abilities of her Pastors, or the advantage of its situation. For the place it
self was a most convincing witness, as of some very remarkable actions of our
Savior, so particularly of his Death and Resurrection, here the vail of the
Temple was rent, here Rocks cleft in sunder, here the empty Sepulcher preached
with no less efficacy than the Apostles, and though they should hold their
peace, the Stones would become Apostles, and be Witnesses of the Resurrection.

This Church being thus considerable in all its circumstances, Apud Eusib. Ecc.
Hist. l. 2. c. 1. (...) ap. Eusch. l. 2. c. 23.
when the Apostles were called away, was committed to James the just, the
Brother of our Lord: If not before, for as Clemens reports the matter, he was
ordained Bishop of Jerusalem, presently after our Savious Ascension, and
mentions it as an instance of the humility of the Apostles, that would not
contend about it, but chose one that was no Apostle, and Hegesippus one of the
Ancientest Ecclesiastical Writers, co-temporary with Justin Martyr and
Athenagoras, gives much the same account with Clemens as to the time of his
promotion, unless we shall take Jerome's Translation, which if the words would
bear it, is much more commodious: Hegesippus writes, That James took upon him
the Episcopacy of the Church of Jerusalem (...), after the Apostles; Post
Apostolos. Hieron Catal. in Jacobo.
Jerome renders it, but against all Grammar, and therefore Sophronius who
translates him into Greek, is forced to change the case, and write (...), it is
very probable Jerome read so in his copy; though Rufinus who translated the same
passage confirm the Greek reading: However certain it is that James was Bishop
of Jerusalem (whether with or after the Apostles is not so material) not only
from Hegesippus and Clemens Alex. but also from St. Paul, who mentions him as
one of the Apostles, that he had conversed with in Jerusalem, and it is likely
there were no more there at that time but he and Peter. But when they were at
last dispersed, Ecclesiastical History makes James the Ordinary, Bishop and
Diocesan of the place. As for his Episcopacy it will not be disputed by any man
that has left himself any freedom of understanding and belief: and it is
strange to see Salmasius run his head so violently against such solid
Testimonies, as those of Hegesippus and Clemens. But for his Diocese, that I
see will be stiffly denied, though the Scripture Testimonies already alleged,
are sufficient to persuade any reasonable man, that the Church of Jerusalem was
more than a Congregation, and consequently the Bishop of it a Diocesan,
according to Mr. B.'s definition: But besides; we have as ancient Testimonies
from Church History too, of the greatness of that Church, as of any other
whatsoever. For Hegesippus among several commendations of him, says, that
several of the Jewish Sectaries who believed neither a Resurrection nor
Judgment to come, were converted by James. And that when a great number of the
Rulers and and principal men of the City, Apud Eusebius. l. 2. c. 23. (...).
were by his Ministry brought to believe the Gospel, the Jews made an uproar,
the Scribes and Pharisees saying, that it was to be feared, that all the people
would turn Christians: would they fancy themselves in so great danger, if the
Christians in so vast and populous a City should have but one single
Congregation? Suppose they had one Synagogue of four or five hundred, is that
such a dreadful proportion as to fright people out of their wits as if they
were, immediately to be overrun with Christianity; and what should give them so
great disturbance? The Christians had always had one Congregation there, and
surely a pretty full one, from the time of Christ's Death, and if their meeting
places were not increased, and Synagogues with their Rulers and Officers had
not deserted the Jewish Church, and professed Christianity, there had been no
protence for such an apprehension, as if all Jerusalem were about to change the
Law for the Gospel; it was more than a poor Congregational Church, and Bishop
that must give cause to these apprehensions.

It was not long ere this Church of Jerusalem, that was grown so formidable to
the Jews, that they were afraid lest in a little while it might swallow up all
their Synagogues, was removed thence, and by a special warning snatched from
the destruction that was shortly to fall upon that wicked City. There is an
ancient Tradition that the Christians of Jerusalem forsook it before the last
Siege, and went to Pella, Eusebius. Hist. l. 3.5.(...)
a City of beyond Jordan: and because the obscurity of the place may make one
suspect that the numbers of the Church of Jerusalem were not so great, if this
Town could receive them all: We must understand that Town to be their
Metropolis, or seat of their Bishop, but the believers were all scattered
through that whole Country, Epip. Haer. 30. (...). Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 11.
as Epiphanius writes: and his way of expressing himself, makes Pella only the
principal residence of the Church, and here it is probable their Bishop lived,
for after the death of James and the Destruction of Jerusalem, the Apostles and
Disciples, and such of our Savious kindred as remained, met together to appoint
a Successor to James when this Church was departed from Jerusalem, and it must
needs be more than an ordinary charge to occasion so solemn a meeting, to
consult about the Person that should succeed in it. It was more surely than the
oversight of one single Congregation: Id. l. 3. c. 35.(...).
And his Government added yet greater numbers to that Church, many thousands of
the Circumcision receiving the Christian Faith at that time, and among the rest
Justus who succeeded in the Bishopric of Jerusalem.

Now from this account of the Church of Jerusalem it appears manifestly, 1.
That it was Episcopal from the beginning, and some of the Authors that attest
it, lived in that time, when the Apostolical Church Government is pretended to
be changed into Episcopacy, by Blondel, and it shows no less the vanity of Mr.
B.'s conceit about the Original of Bishops.

2. That the Bishops of Jerusalem were Diocesan's having the oversight of
several Congregations, which is necessarily inferred from the express numbers
of Converts, from general expressions of wonderful accessions; from the
jealousy of the Scribes and Pharisees, who apprehended from the progress
Christianity made, that all Jerusalem would soon become Christians; from the
farther accounts of its increase, and of the innumerable multitudes that were
added to it, and this is sufficient to show the weakness of Mr. B.'s
conjecture, who makes Rome and Alexandria to be the first patterns of Diocesan
Episcopacy, and that not till after the beginning of the third Century.

Nor was the Church of Jerusalem singular in its constitution, but all other
Churches of the Apostles planting were of the same kind, and designed for the
like, and yet farther increase: The beginnings of them as of all other things
were but small, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a grain of Mustard Seed, which is
yet capable of prodigious improvement, and the slip when first planted is but
single, yet afterward it shoots out several branches, which though never so
mnumerous, and at some distance one from the other, yet communicate all in the
same same body and root: The design of the Gospel is not like those of the
Authors of Sects, or Religious orders to have only a select company of
followers, that are much at leisure, but great and comprehensive, and suited to
the whole World: There is no Sex, no Capacity, no condition but is designed to
be brought into the Church, and to be digested the most commodiously that may
be, so that there may be one fold under one Shepherd, Christ the Universal
Pastor: The Schools of the Philosophers and the Synagogues of the Jews were to
narrow foundations for such a building as that of the Christian Church; which
are to be larger in proportion to the greatness of the Fabric: and it is no
less the strength than beauty of the whole to have its Stones and Timber, the
parts of which it consists, of something a greater magnitude than those of
private and ordinary building: nor can it yet stand without there be some kind
of coherence and connection, at least wise where the people that are members of
the Church, are likewise united in a political communion, this connection ought
particularly to be regarded, which the Apostles in their first planting of the
Gospel had an eye to, as shall be observed farther in the course of Diocesan
Episcopacy, which after this digression I am going to pursue.

The first Persecution that was raised against the Church of Jerusalem was by
the good Providence of God turned into the happy occasion of planting several
other Churches, and that storm which was designed to quench that fire that came
down from Heaven, scattered the sparks of it into all the Regions round about:
Samaria was the first place we read of that entertained the Gospel when it had
been forced out of Jerusalem, Acts 8.1. v. 4. v. 5, 6. v. 12.
Philip the Deacon Preached Christ unto them, and the people with one accord
gave heed to those things that were spoken by him: and when they believed they
were Baptized both Men and Women. Now the Apostles who remained in Jerusalem
when they heard of this success, send Peter and John thither, who confirm the
believers by imposition of hands, and why could not Philip do this? (...).
Schol. (...), Epiphan.
he could dispossess unclean Spirits, and heal all manner of diseases, he could
Preach powerfully, so as to Convert in a manner a whole City, and why could not
he do all other Acts that were useful to the Church, but that these Apostles
must be taking Authority upon them in his Church? it is something like Diocesan
Prelacy to reserve any Acts of Order or Discipline to themselves: yet so it was
that the holy Ghost was not given (...) by their hands and what kind of
Government they established there, Chrysostom. Oecumenius. Theophylact.
does not appear; and some pretend to give reasons why they did not appoint a
Clergy there as afterward they did in other places, because they say that
Samaria was near enough to Jerusalem where the whole Council of the Apostles
did reside, and thither their Bishop or Presbyters might repair for more solemn
Ordination.

And that we may not think meaner of the success of the Apostles Ministry than
we ought, and measure it by the progress of Sectaries, as Anabaptists and
Quakers, as Mr. B. does, with too much disparagement to the first Planters of
Christian Religion, St. Luke gives us a short account of love visitation of St.
Peter, that lets us see ho^ wonderfully the Gospel prevailed at first for when
that Apostle passed through (...) quarters, and came to the Saints that dwelled
at Lydda, Acts 9.32, 33. etc. Saron Tractus quidam Regionis non procul a
Caesaria. (...) Joseph. Antiq. l. 20. c. 5. (...). Joseph. de Bello Jud. l. 2.
c. 37. Lydda Civitas Palestinae quae diospolis appellatur. Hieron de (...) Heb.
and healed miraculously a Person that had been long bed-ridden: (...) that
dwelled at Lydda and Saron saw him and turned unto the Lord: and this Town an^
Territory mentioned with it was large enough for a considerable Diocesan Church
nor is there any likelihood, it was divided under several Church Governments,
Mr. B. confessing that no City with the villages a^joyning had any more than
one Bishop (...) a long time after this: and in the time (...) the Council of
Nice. It was an Episcopa^ seat, for we find Aetius Bishop of the place among
the subscriptions of the Council,

The next considerable Church that wa^ founded, was that of Antioch, the
greated City of all the East, and the Church d^^ soon bear a good proportion to
the greatne^^ of the City: Acts 11.^1.
For the hand of God was w^^ them (the scattered Disciples) and a gre^^ number
believed and turned unto the Lord: an^ when Barnabar had come from Jerusalem
assist in this work. v. 24.
Much people was added unto the Lord, and when Barnabas had brought Paul to
Antioch, they assembled themselves with the Church, v. 26.
and taught much people: It is not unlikely that all these Proselytes mentioned
hitherto were Jews, or such as were Proselytes of the Gate, and had re^ounced
Idolatry, and such must the Greeks be to whom those of Cyprus Preached the word
at Antioch, v. 20. for Paul and Barnabas sometime after tell the Church of
Antioch as an extraordinary thing, Acts 14.27.
that God had opened the door of Faith to the Gentiles: and there is no doubt
but they were ^ncouraged by that success to Preach to the Gentiles at Antioch
too, while they abode ^here a long time with the Disciples: and the ^ultitude
of these Gentile Converts made ^equestion about Circumcision of so great
^^portance, as to require a determination of all the Apostles and the whole
Church of Jerusalem assembled in Council: for before that, there were not only
several Congregations probably, but separate Churches: and the people were not
only distributed but divi^ed, Gal. 2.12. compared with Acts 15.1. (...).
and rent into separate ^ssemblies: unless we shall ^^terpret this separation
^o be rather a scruple re^^ting to Conversation and ^^iet, than to public and
Church Communi^^^ as it is most likely; though even this must ^ave likewise an
evil influence upon their Communion too: for it is not likely the Jews, if they
stood so much upon the Law about choice of meats, should care much for the
Communion of the Gentiles, when they fansied to be profane and polluted by the
transgression of that Law: Barnius makes two Bishops of Antioch together a^
this time upon the account of these dissersions, Martyrolog. Romans Feb. 1.
Evodius and Ignatius, the one chooses by Paul, the other by Peter, but the
misery is, that the Author that gives this light is confessed to mistake,
Clemens Constable. l. 7. c. 46. Orat. in S. Ignat.
by making Paul (...) choose Ignatius, and Peter Evodius, whereas Chrysostom
says the contrary, that Igna^^^ was ordained by Peter: and to speak freely, I
believe this no better than what Bar^^^^ would forbid his reader to imagine, a
fi^^^^ which he was forced to make shift with i^ reconcile the contradictions
of Eusebius a^^ Chrysostom, Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 22. Ed. Val^s^i. Eusebius.
Chronicon.
the former making Peter to be dead before Evodius, to whom he makes Ignatius
to succeed; the latter expressly afirming that Apostle to have ordained him:
For my part, I believe that the tradition^^ Chronology of Eusebius, and the
preci^^ time of the Succession and Government (...) the first Bishops was no
otherwise known to him) is not a Foundation firm enou^^ to build any Opinion
upon; Vid. Dissert. Spanhemii Blond. Praesat. Apol. pro sent. H.
especia^^ when we consider, that the place as we as time, of St. Peter's
Martyrdom is questioned, not without some appearance (...) Reason, and the
whole business is involve^ in so many difficulties: Blondel takes great pains
to confute the conjecture of Baronius but advances another of his own more
strange and improbable, and what is yet worse draws important consequences from
it, and pretends by these seeming contradictions to discover the nature of
Primitive Episcopacy, and the ancient Law of Succession: But all that is
trifling. It is plain of Chrysostom, that he thought Ignatius the immediate
successor of Peter, and therefore makes no mention of Evodius at all: unless
one shall say that Peter might ordain Ignatius as he did Timothy or Titus as an
Evangelist, and that afterward he became the fixed Bishop of Antioch: though
Chrysostoms words will hardly bear that sense, and refer to the Episcopal
Office at large: But however it fare either with Baronius his divided
Episcopacy, or Blondel's Succession by seniority, it is highly probable, that
the Bishop of Antioch even at this time was a Diocesan, having the oversight of
a Church that was distributed into several Congregations, for if we reflect
upon the multitudes said to be converted, the number of Apostles, and
extraordinary Laborers commonly residing in this City: the conjunction of Jews
and Gentiles under the common title and profession of Christianity, we must
conclude that the Church of Antioch was too great for one Congregation,
especially before the place of assembly can be imagined very capacious: and I
believe Mr. B. does not imagine such vast Cathedrals as Paul's to be very
Primitive.

Orat de S. Ign.
But what ever number of Christians there might be at that time, Ignatius his
Bishop-rick was never the less Diocesan in its constitution and design, or else
Chrysostom mistakes one Topic of his commendation: He reckons five things that
were much to his honor: whereof two bring him under suspicion of Diocesan
Prelacy, (...), the greatness of his Authority, or Government: (...), the
greatness of the City whereof he was Bishop: The first I suppose refers to his
metropolitan Power, the second to his peculiar Diocese, but if this Bishop were
to have but one Congregation, what would the greatness of the City signify?
how many more would have the same honor with him? Or what so great difference
is there between a full Congregation in the heart of the City, and another as
full in Chelsey? at leastwise what honor does the greatness of the City do the
Minister of that single Congregation?

And now to pass by the Church of Corinth, where St. Paul Preached for a Year
and six Months, upon a Divine assurance of extraordinary success, and that God
had much people in that place, Acts 18.8, 9, 10, 11.
and where many effectually believed and were Baptized, where Peter and Apollos
Preached with that effect as to leave many Disciples, 1 Cor. 3.
who called themselves by their names: And to say nothing of Ephesus where a
numerous Church is said to have been gathered by St. Paul who preached there
for two years, and not only they that dwelled at Ephesus, but all that dwelt in
Asia, Acts 19.10.
heard the word of the Lord, and the progress of the Gospel was so
considerable, that the shrine-makers apprehended the ruin of their Trade, when
they saw and heard that Paul not only at Ephesus, but throughout all Asia, had
persuaded and turned away much people. v. 26.
To pass by these, and several other eminent Churches, Let us consider the
Diocese of Rome, as it was yet in the Apostles time.

It is very uncertain who laid the first Foundations of this Church, though
certain it is, that before Paul's coming there the Gospel was not only received,
Romans 1.13, 15, 17. and seq.
but their Church was very considerable; for St. Paul in his Epistle written
long before his coming there, as he himself witnesses, says, that their Faith
was spoken of through the whole World: and by the multitude of salutations in
the end of that Epistle, he makes appear the numbers of Christians in that
City: Salute Priscilla and Aquila, Romans 16. Ostendit Congregationem Fidelium
Ecclesiam nominari. Hieron in lo. (...), Coetum Fidelium: nec mirum est in tam
am pla Civitate distinctos fuisse Fidelium coetus. Beza.
with the Church that is in their house: This was one of the Congregations of
that Church, which is occasionly mentioned, and it is not improbable that
several that are mentioned with all the Saints that are with them, may be the
Officers of several Congregations; For it appears that most of these were of
the Ministry, and such by whose means the Romans believed, and that they were
strangers come thither from other parts where Paul had known them,
Congregationem vert. Eras. Istos amats quos satutat intelligimus ex nomini^us
suiffe peregrinos per quorum exemylum atque Doctrinam non absurd existimamus
credidisse Romans. Hieron.
for as yet he had not seen Rome: And this number was afterward increased
considerably by the coming of Paul, who converted some of the Jews, and
afterward received all that came, whether Jews or Gentiles, and Preached to
them the Kingdom of God, for the space of two whole years, no man forbidding
him: And the progress of the Gospel in this City may be farther observed from
the Persecution of Nero, who is said to have put an infinite multitude of them
to Death, Ingens multitude, hand perinde in Crimint ineendii quam odio bumani
generis convicti sunt. Tac. H. l. 15.
upon pretense that they had fired Rome; and the Heathen Historian says, that
they who confessed were first laid hold on, then a vast company were convicted
by their indication, where by the by, besides the multitude of the sufferers,
we may take notice, that the words seem to be mistaken generally, as if the
Christians some of them had confessed the Fact, and accused the rest, Lipsius
thus understanding the passage, gives Tacitus the lie; but he does not say they
confessed the fact, but they confessed without expressing the particulars; but
what did they confess then? If it were this Crime that the^ owned themselves,
and charged others with, how comes he to add that they were not convicted so
much of this Crime, by this Indication as by the hatred of all mankind?
therefore this confession was no more than owning themselves to be Christians,
and the hatred they were in, made this sufficient conviction.

To these instances of the great numbers of Christians in some more
considerable Cities, Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 3. (...).
I shall add only the general account which Eusebius gives of the success of
the Christian faith immediately after the first discovery of it. That presently
in all Cities and Villages, Churches abounding with innumerable multitudes,
were assembled; and the Granary of Christ was filled up to the top with the
Wheat that was gathered in.

Hitherto I have observed chiefly the growth of Christianity under the
Apostles, and that there was in some Cities such a number of Christians, as
could not meet together in one Assembly, for personal Communion in Doctrine and
Worship: The next thing we must show in order to Diocesan Episcopacy must be,
that such numbers of believers made but one Church Governed by one Bishop.

As to the Church of Jerusalem we have showed already from the most ancient
Ecclesiastical writings, that James the Just was Bishop of that Church, i. e.
of all the Believers in Jerusalem: Nor is that Tradition without ground in the
Scripture it self, for St. Paul reckons James the Lords Brother among the
Apostles of that Church, Sal. 1.19.
though he were none of the Twelve; and in another place he mentions him as a
person in Eminent place and authority there, one that had sent several Brethren
to Antioch [before that certain Brethren came from James.] ^.12.
Here we find the style of the Scripture to alter in favor of Episcopacy, for
hitherto the Messengers who were sent from one Church to another, were said to
be sent in the name of the Church in General: as the Church of Jerusalem sent
John and Peter to Samaria: Act. 8.
In like matter the Church sent Barnabas to Antioch: v. 11.
But now it seems they come from James, and the Acts of the Church, pass in the
name of the Bishop only, although after this we find this Style to vary again;
and sometimes the Church of such a place sends to another without the mention
of the Bishop, though the letter be penned by the Bishop himself, as the
inscription of Clemens his Epistle to the Corinthians does inform us: and
Iastly, as the authority of James appears by sending to the Church of Antioch,
so it does likewise from his speech in the Council of Jerusalem, where he seems
to preside, and determines the question in dispute, Act. 5.
in the name of the whole Assembly. All this considered together with the
Testimonies of Hegesippus and Clemens, there can be as little doubt that
D^ocesan Episcopacy was settled by the Apostles in the Church of Jerusalem, as
there is of any thing that is not expressly set down in Scripture; and it cannot
be denied without resecting the most Authentic records of Church History.

It is to be confessed that the Scriptures have not left so full and perfect
account of the constitution and Government of the first Churches as might be
wished, for the Acts of the Apostles the only Scripture History of those time,
relate mostly the victories of Christian Religion, how several Cities were
converted: By what miracles, by what Argument or exhortation: but before the
Holy Penman comes to give an account of the settlement of those new Conquests,
he carries away the Reader from thence, to follow the Apostles to some other
place, where they begin to lay the Foundations of another Church: Thus we have
no more notice of the Churches of Samarid and of Judea ( Jerusalem excepted)
than that such were founded by the Apostles; but of their Government, and
constitution we are not the least information; and the prospect left of Antioch
in Scripture, is very confused as of a Church in fieri, where a great number of
Eminent persons, labored together to the building of it up, but after what
form does not appear but only from Ecclesiastical Writers, Eusel. l. 3. c. 22.
Chronnon. Chrysostom. Orat. de Ignatio.
who report that this Church when it was settled and digested, was committed to
the Government of Evodius, and after him to Ignetius, and the succeeding
Bishops.

Nevertheless we are not left destitute of all light in this particular even
from the Scriptures, the History of St. Paul, as it is delivered by St. ^^ke in
the Acts of the Apostles, and by himself scatteringly in his own Epistles,
informing us in some measure of the from of the Primitive Church Government in
the Apostles times.

This Apostle of the Gentiles did commonly use this method informing those
Churches he had converted, as may be seen by consulting the Citations in the
Margin.

When he came to any place where the Gospel had not been preached (and he did
not affect much to build upon another was foundation) He preached first in the
Syn^gogues of the Jews, Romans 15.20. 1 Cor. 3.10. Acts 9.20, 13, and 14. Acts
13.46.
and if they rejected the grace of God, he turned to the Gentiles. As Soon as he
had converted a competent number, he took care to improve them in the knowledge
of the truth, 1 Cor. 3.2.
and for that purpose taught them constantly either at his own house, Acts
28.30.19.9.20.20.
or at some public School as that of Tyrannus or any other convenient place
where a good number might assemble together: These converts as they were made
Partakers of the same common Doctrine and Faith; so they were to be perpetually
united by a Communion in worship, in Prayer, and the Sacrament: for it was not
with the School of the Apostles as with those of this World, Acts. 11.26. Heb.
10.25.
which the Disciples leave when they conceive themselves to have learned what
they came for: But there was an obligation upon all these Scholars to Assemble
themselves together, Romans 12.5. 1 Cor. 12.13.12.22. Phil. 2.12.
till they came to a perfect man, which was not consummated till after this
life: Nor was the Relation between Christians dissolved when the Congregation
was dissmiss'd, (...) Orig^c^^^. ^^s. 1.8. in fine.
but they were united farther into one Society or Corporation, into a holy
City, under the Government of Christ their King, and under Apostles and such
other Officers of his, and their appointment: and so far to act and determine
all things within themselves that they were not to appear before any Heathen
Magistrate upon any difference, but to referr it to the Brethren, or to the
Apostle under whose direction they were.

Thus far we may consider a Church without any other Officer than the Apostle
who converted them; but their numbers increasing in that place and much of his
time being taken up in disputing with, and preaching to unbelievers, and
gainsayers, or this Apostle being called away to preach the Gospel in other
places, Acts 9.29.17.17.19.8, 9.
it was necessary to ordain such Church Officers as might take care of this
Church, in the Doctrine and Discipline of it, 6.4. Acts 14.23. Phil. 2.12.20.17.
and others to take care of the poor, lest that Office taking up much time;
might be a hinderance to those who were to guide the Assembly in Doctrine and
Worship: Now this constitution does not take away the relation that was between
this Church and the Apostle that founded it, and these Officer^ act in
subordination to him whether present or absent: and St. Paul therefore looks
upon himself as the Apostle, or Bishop of the Corinihians though he could not
hold personal Communion with them: 1 Cor. 5.3. Acts 15.36.
for sometimes he goes a Circular visitation to examine the State of those
Churches which he had planted: or if the distance, and oceasions of that Church
where he resided, or his imprisonment, and other outward Circumstances, would
not admit this personal visitation, he sends his letters and orders what is to
be done: If any open Scandal be permitted he sends his Excommunication to be
published in that Church whereof the offender was a member, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5.
Cum meo spiritu quipro me erat praesens, sive in mearum literarum authoritate.
Hiero^.
he judges as though he were present; he orders that when they are met together
in his spirit, they would deliver the Criminal to Satan: And because some of
the Teachers in the Church of Corinth began to set up themselves in opposition
to the Apostle, taking advantage of his absence, 1 Cor. 4.18, 19.9.1, 2.5.19.
and using all means to lessen him in the esteem of that people, he is forced
to assert his Authority, and to justify his Title, to let them know that he
was their Father, their Apostle, and that they owed him still the duty of
Children notwithstanding his absence; and lastly, that he would come to them
shortly by way of Apostolical visitation and examine the power of those that
entered into competition with him: For as far as his Line or Diocese, or
Province did extend, so far he pretended a peculiar Authority to govern, Rom
15.19. 2 Cor. 10.13. to 16. (...). Dioecesis sive certus Pastorum and
Ec^lesiarum numerus: Unit. Frat. Bohem. Sect. de Antist. Regulam vocat
Ditionem, and praescriptum Praedicationis Terminum. Salmeron.
and exercised Diocesan jurisdiction upon all within his Rule.

But when this Line was so far extended, that he neither was able to visit
every part himself, and his communication by Letters would not answer all the
occasions of those Churches he had planted, 1. Tim. 1.3, 18. c. 2.14, 15. c.
4.12, 14. c. 5.21.22. Tit. 1.5. c. 2.15.
he provides for them not by leaving every Congregation Independent, and
resigning all Authority into the hands of every particular Presbytery; but by
sending Persons endued not only with extraordinary gifts, but with Apostolical
power to ordain Elders, to end disputes, to censure the unruly and irregular,
whether of the Clergy or People, to confute Heretics, to preach the Gospel,
and in short by all means to provide for thee welfare of those Churches
committed to them: And now as the Apostle had before ordained assistant Elders
in the several Churches which he had planted, for the ordinary attendance of
the Congregation; so now he takes to himself Assistants of another sort,
Suffragans for the Service of his Province, which he distributed as he found
most expedient, (...). Eusebius. l. 1. c. 12. (...). Theod in 1 Timothy 3. Phil.
3.25. (...) acceperat in illis Apostolatus officium. Hieron in locum. (...).
Anonym. (...) Phot. (...).

(...). Chrysostom.

(...). Chrysostom. in Timoth.


and these in the Apostles time were sometimes called Apostles, or Evangelists,
Bishops, Presbyters, Fellow. Laborers, Helpers, Deacons, etc. but their
successors leaving greater and more invidious titles contented themselves with
the name of Bishops, which was common to them with ordinary Presbyters at
first, though the Offices were always distinct.

Of this kind we have several mentioned in Scripture of St. Paul's Province, as
Barnabas, Timothy, Titus, Crescens, Epaphraditus, Sosthenes, and some others
that had no relation to him, as James the Just, Mark, Linus, Clemens, etc.
These exercised Episcopal jurisdiction in that district where they were
appointed, Ordained Presbyters, received accusations against them, Reproved and
censured them as there was cause, and in short governed those Churches over
which they were appointed by full Apostolical power, which was transmitted to
their successors.

But the extraordinary abilities of some of these men, and the occasions of
several other Churches, made their residence less constant in the Diocese where
they were placed, 2 Timothy 4.9.
than otherwise might have been expected, Phil. 2.
and therefore Timothy the Bishop and Apostle of Ephesus is called to Rome by
St. Paul to be employed as the necessities of the Church should require; Titus
is sent to Dalmatia, though Crete were his first Province, but this concludes
no more against their being Diocesans, than the Voyage of Germanus and Lupus
into Britain, to oppose the Pelagian Heresy, would conclude against their
being Bishops. Now what care was taken for those Churches which these
Apostolic Diocesans left, whether they returned again to their Provinces is
not mentioned in Scripture: But Ecclesiastical Records show an uninterrupted
Succession from the Bishops in several Churches.

Nor do we find that they were all so unfixed as they are represented by the
adversaries of Episcopacy, for Mark who was the first Bishop of Alexandria,
remained in that Province, Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 16. Niceph. l. 2. c. 43.
Gelas. in Conc. Romans in decr. de lib. Auth.
planting Churches in the Country round about, and governing them by
Apostolical Authority, which after his Martyrdom there, was derived to his
successuors in the same charge.

Now this order being of perpetual use, and necessity in the Church, to ordain
Presbyters, and Deacons, to exercise discipline, to preserve unity, they were
multiplied according as the Apostles found most expedient for the Church, and
the most eminent Cities became the Residence of these first Bishops, not
because God takes greater care of Cities than he does of lesser Towns and
Villages, but because the Apostles thought it the most natural way to follow
the distribution that was then in the more civilz'd part of the world: St. John
a little while before his death mentions seven in the Lydian Asia, under the
name of Angels of the Churches, nor is it probable there were any more in that
Province: The Seven Churches being the same with all the Churches mentioned in
the next Chapter, Rev. 1.20.2.23. (...). Andr. Caesar. Ego puto simul inveniri
posse Angelum and hominem bonos Ecclesia Episcopos. Origin in Lucam, Hom. 13.

(...), ut Collegas moneat Beza.

Ad Episcopum loci dirigitur. Paraus.


and Carolus a Sancto Paulo concludes the same thing out of St. John, Cum in
Asia septem tantum hisce temporibus essent Episcopi ut in Apocalypsi legere
est, nec majorem little numerum in Ponto tunc fuisse probalile est: Geogr.
Sacra, p. 289. Dissert. 4. c. 5. Quod si de Angelis superiorum Coelorum, and
non de praepositis Ecclesie intelligi vellet, non consequenter diceret. --
Laudatur sub Angeli nomine praepositas Ecclesiae, Aug. Ep. 162.
But Dr. Hammond makes all these Angels to be Metropolitans, having several
Bishops under them, for the reasons I must refer the reader to his
Dissertations.

Thus far the Scripture discovers the rise and progress of Diocesan Episcopacy,
which was the form of Church Government under the Apostles, who had large
Provinces to supervise, and their suffragans, such as are commonly called
Evangelists, had several Congregations to govern, and this was undeniably the
constitution of the Church in the first age; the next thing we are to inquire
is, whether the Office expired with those Persons, or was designed to be of
perpetual use in the Church.

The Adversaries of Episcopacy are not all agreed as to this point, the
Presbyterians generally looking upon the offices of Apostles and Evangelists,
extraordinary as the persons were: Mr. B. is something more scrupulous, because
he does not find any where, that Christ designed to have this altered, and yet
he condemns Diocesan Episcopacy as being altogether different from it. I have
said something to this already, and therefore I shall answer here more briefly:

1. That we have no reason to believe from Scripture that the Office of
Apostles or Evangelists which concerned the Government of the Church was
extraordinary, and for a time only; and the extraordinariness of their gifts
can be no argument against their continuance, for notwithstanding they did many
miraculous things, yet they never could contrive to be in two places a the same
time, and as to their governing of several Congregations, they were under the
same inconveniences with their successors: They visited from place to place,
they called the Presbyters of some Churches to them to give them directions,
they proceeded by information, and legal evidence, and what was possible to
them to do in these cases, is not become impossible to those that succeed them.

2. All other offices had extraordinary men in those days, and the same
argument will hold against Presbyters and Deacons as against Bishops, for the
first Deacons that were elected were men full of the Holy Ghost.

3. The unfixedness of these is no argument against the reason of their
continuance, and all that will follow from that is no more than this, that if
it was essential to their office to be unfixed they ought to be so still, and
not to cease to be at all.

4. All of them were not unfixed, and if they had been so, it does not follow
that the nature of their office requires it, it might be no more than
accidental.

5. That they governed several Churches, and were Archbishops; As to the
notion of Church or Churches, it is not very material whether we say, Bishop of
one or of many Churches; for many worshipping Churches may make but one
Governing Church, and worshipping Churches may have their officers too, as our
Parishes, but still in subordination to the Bishop, as the several Churches
under these Evangelists and Apostles were subordinated to them, in matter of
Discipline, and Ordination.

But because many depend upon the title, which these secondary Apostles have in
Scripture, as Timothy is commanded to do the werk of an Evangelist, it is
necessary to observe that it was not all their work, to Preach and Propagate
the Gospel, but to settle Churches, to govern them, to ordain Officers, to
censure offenders, these are the things particularly given in Charge, that of
Evangelists was common to them with diverse others. But ordination is made their
peculiar right: For why did Paul leave Timothy and Titus, one in Ephesus, the
other in Crete to ordain Elders? Were there not Presbyters in Ephesus already?
Might not they ordain? Might not they receive Accusations, and Excommunicate?
Why then was there one single Person left to do all this? and in Crete, it is
not to be conceived, but that since St. Paul had converted several to the faith
in that Island, he also had ordained some Church Officers in those places of
the Island where he most resided: Or what need had he to leave a Bishop behind
him to ordain, when he might by the ordination of a few Presbyters in one City
provided sufficiently for ordination in the rest? or lastly since this
ordination is made so insignificant by Mr. B. why might not these Believers
have appointed their own Teachers without any further circumstance; and by an
instance of their power have freed Posterity from the superstition of thinking
Apostolical Ordination, and succession so requisite to Authorize Pastors? But
since the Apostles ordained all Ecclesiastical Officers by themselves, or their
(...) their Assistants, their suffragan Bishops, and left some of them on
purpose to do this work, it is plain that they conceived some kind of necessity
for it, and did not look upon the power so common or insignificant, as later
projectors of Church settlements would make us believe.

Now as the Scripture discovers no other sort of Episcopacy, than such as we
have discribed; so the ancient Bishops knew of no other Original of their
Office, for they conceived themselves to be derived from the Apostles, not as
ordinary Presbyters or Deacon, but to succeed them in such a pre-eminence of
dignity and power as their first Assistants were endued with: And Eusebius
whose diligence nothing could escape, and whose judgment was not easily imposed
on, after all his search could find no other Original of Episcopacy, and
derives the Bishops of the most eminent Cities of the Empire from the Apostles,
and their Assistants whom they appointed as the first Bishops of the Church:
Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 4.(...).
How many (says he) and who they were that followed the example of the
Apostles, and were thought worthy to govern those Churches which they founded
is not easy to say; besides these which St. Paul mentions in his Epistles, he
indeed had a great number of Assistants, and as he calls them fellow Soldiers
whose names are preserved in his Epistle: And Luke in the Acts of the Apostles
makes mention of some of them: Among these Timothy is said to have been first
Bishop of Ephesus, (...)
Titus the Bishop of the Churches of Crete. Crescens was sent to Gallatia, as
the present reading of St. Paul's Epistle is, but as Eusebius read it, to
Gallia; Linus whom he mentions in his second to Timothy, was made Bishop of the
Church of Rome next to Peter and Clemens, who succeeded Linus, is owned by Paul
as his fellow labourer. And Lastly, Dionysius the Areopagite whom St. Paul
mentions as the first Convert of Athens is reported to have been the first
Bishop of that Church, by another Dionysius a very Ancient writer and Bishop of
Corinth: This was the rise of Episcopacy according to Eusebius and the progress
of it he takes care to show by setting down the successors of these and other
Bishops to his own time: Ep. ad Smyrn. ad Ephesians. ad Magn.
Ignatius derives the Original of Episcopacy a little higher yet, from Christ
himself the Universal Bishop, and compares the Bishop with his Bench of
Presbyters, to Christ sitting in the midst of his Apostles, and is the most
express and vehement of all the Ancients in setting out the dignity and
pre-eminence of the Bishop: Irenaus deduces the Episcopal Authority from the
same Original; and makes the Succession of Bishops from the Apostles, to be his
principal argument against the Heretics and Schismatics of his time; and
because it was endless to make a perfect enumeration of those who succeeded the
Apostles in all the Churches of the World, Valde longum esset in tali volumine
enumerare Successiones. l. 3. c. 3
he instances in that of Rome where Linus was first ordained Bishop, Lino
Episcopatum administrandae Ecelesiae tradiderunt Apofloli. ibid. Polycarpus ab
Apostolis in ea qua est Smyrnis constitutus Episcopus -- qui usque adbue
successerunt Polycarpe. ibid.
then Clemens, and so on to his own time; and in another place proposes it as
the only remedy against Heresy, to obey those that have a due succession from
the Apostles, who though they are there called Presbyteri, yet it is plain who
he means by them when he adds, that they are the same which he showed before to
have succeeded the Apostles, which were those Bishops he had given a Catalogue
of before. And Lastly, speaking of the Bishops to whom the Apostles committed
the government of those Churches they had planted, he makes them much ancienter
than those Heretics that disturbed the Church, and draws an argument from
their Apostolic institution, and their constant succession in that office,
against those that brought in new Doctrines: Tertullian makes use of the same
Argument, Quapropter eis qui in Ecclesia sant Presbyteris obandire oportet his
qui successionem habent ab Apostolis sicut oftendimus, qui cum Episcopatus
successione Charisma veritatis certum acceperunt. l. 7. c. 42.
and requires of the Heretics a succession from the Apostles; and Origin
speaking of Bishops makes them likewise to succeed the Apostles in their
office: Omnes enim ii valde posterieres quam Episcopi quibus Episcope Ecclesias
tradiderunt.
In short it was the opinion of all the Ancients. And Aerius is looked upon by
Epiphanius if not as a Heretic, (...) Origin. (...) c. 1.
yet at least as an innovator for maintaining an equality between Bishops and
Presbyters: For if the Bishop were only the first Presbyter, and the opinion of
the Church was at that time that there was no Original difference between the
Orders, Haeres. 75.
Epiphanius could not have observed this as a singularity in Aerius, therefore
the common opinion then being contrary to this notion, they must apprehend
Episcopacy, to be the Apostolical Order, derived from the Apostles by a
succession: First to those Assistants we have been speaking of, and from them
to the Succeeding Bishops; I shall conclude with the testimony of Theodoret,
whose judgment and knowledge of Ecclesiastical Antiquity was greater than
ordinary: (...). So also Clemens is said to be an Apostle, by Clemens Alexand.
Strom. l. 4.
He makes Bishops at first to be called Apostles, and Presbyters to be called
Bishops; and from such Apostles as Epaphroditus who was Bishop of Philippi,
Bishops are descended according to his opinion, but that out of modesty the
Succeeding Bishops changed the title of Apostles for that of Bishops, and this
for some time after was common to them with Presbyters, though the offices then
were manifestly distinct.

All this considered, I cannot but wonder that the conjecture of St. Jerome
concerning the Original of Episcopacy, against all the sense of Antiquity and
the traditions of particular Churches concerning the Succession of their
Bishops, gathered by Eusebius, should obtain not only among the professed
Adversaries of that Order, but even among many that retain it: therefore for a
further Confirmation of what we have said concerning the Original of Bishops: I
shall endeavor to remove that prejudice which the Authority of Jerome has done
it, who has advanced a singular notion in this particular, which I shall first
set down as briefly as I can, and afterward examine the grounds of it.

St Jerome observing the name of Bishop and Presbyter used in Scripture
promiscuously, and without distinction, concludes, Idem est ergo Presbyter qui
Episcopus and antequam Diaboli instinctu studia in Religione fierent, communi
Presbyterorum Concilio Ecclesiae gubernahantur: Postquam vero unisquisque eos
quos Baptizaverat suos put a bat esse, non Christi, in toto Orb decretum est,
ut unus de Presbyteris electus caeteris superponeretur, ad quem omnis Ecclesiae
cura pertineret and Schismatum Semina tollerentur. Hieron. in Titum c. 1.
that the Office was not not then distinct, but that Bishop and Presbyter were
but two names to signify the same order, but when divisions were occasioned in
the Church by this parity between the Presbyters, the Churches who were
governed before by a College of Presbyters, for to remedy that evil, consented
that one should be chosen out of the rest, who should be set over them, and be
called more peculiarly their Bishop, to whom the care of the whole Church
should appertain, that all the seeds and occasions of Schism might be taken
away: But that St. Paul and the Ancients make Bishops and Presbyters to
signify the same thing: This is in short the opinion of St. Jerome I will in
the next place examine the ground of it.

Apud veteres idem Episcopi and Presbyteri erant. idem Ep. ad Ocean. Cum
Apostolus perspicue doctat cosdem esse Presbyteros quos and Episcopos. id. Ep.
ad Evagr.


It is manifest by the allegations of Jerome in defense of his opinion that it
was grounded chiefly upon those places of Scripture where Bishops are called
Presbyters, or Presbyters Bishops, and then from the synonomy of the names
concludes to an Identity of the Office; and then he adds, One may perhaps think
this to be my sense and not that of the Scripture, Phil. 1.1.
let him read the Apostles words to the Philippians, his salutation of that
Church with the Bishops and Deacons, which he confirms by Acts 20.27, 28. Heb.
13.17. 1 Pet. 5.1. And now suppose all this is granted, that Presbyters are
called Bishops, and they again Presbyters, yet I am afraid it will hardly
follow that they are the same, and some of those texts cited by St. Jerome are
sufficient proofs to the contrary; for that of Peter, The Elders or Presbyters
among you who am my self an Elder, 1 Pet. 1.5.
if the reasoning of St. Jerome hold, will prove likewise that Apostles were no
more than ordinary Presbyters; and if Peter were but a Presbyter we shall be at
a great loss to find any Bishops in Scripture that were superior to Presbyters;
and to the same purpose Jerome cites those texts of St. John, The Elder to the
elect Lady, 2 John 1. 3 John 1.
The Elder to his beloved Gaius, which plainly overthrows his Argument; for if
an Apostle were of an office superior to a Presbyter properly so called, and
yet is called Presbyter in Scripture, then Bishops might be of a superior
degree to Presbyters though they might some time be so called: or if it be
replied that these Presbyters again are called Bishops, it does not alter the
case at all, for so some Messengers of Churches are called Apostles, as
Andronicus and Junia who were of note among the Apostles: Romans 16.
Besides there were several of the Fathers that observed this Synonomy of
Bishop and Presbyter as well as Jerome, but could not observe the necessity of
his inference, that therefore there were then no Bishops but Presbyters;
Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Phil. c. 1.
Chrysostom confesses the titles were confounded, but he takes notice likewise
that all other Ecclesiastical titles were so as well as these, that Bishops
were sometimes called Deacons, and that Timothy being a Bishop was commanded to
fulfill his ministry or his Deaconship; (...).
nor did he wonder at this at all, since in his own time the Bishops when they
wrote to Presbyters or Deacons owned them as Brethren, and called them their
fellow Presbyters, or fellow Deacons, (...): which he did not take at all to
derogate from the dignity of their Order, no more than the modesty of the
Apostles calling themselves Presbyters or Deacons could be a prejudice to the
Pre-eminence of their Apostleship, which they took care to vindicate when they
were forced to it by the ambition of some teachers that entered into competition
with them: Theodor. ubi supra in Ep. ad Phil. ad Tim. Tit.
Theodoret observed the same promiscuous use of Bishop and Presbyter, but could
yet see that there were Bishops then superior to Presbyters, and in that time
properly called Apostles: The Greek Scholiast, Theophylact, and Oecumenus saw
the same, but were still of opinion that the Episcopal office was always
distinct from the Presbyters; so that the ground upon which Jerome built his
conjecture, was rejected by the current of Ecclesiastical writers, who could
discern the pre-eminence of Bishops above Presbyters, notwithstanding the names
were confounded: And yet this is the foundation upon which that conceit does
wholly stand: all Jeroms allegations are to this effect, all the additional
confirmations of Salmasius and Blondel, are no other than from the phrase of
some of the Ancients, who do not always distinguish between Bishops and
Presbyters, but speak in the phrase of the Scriptures, and yet there is nothing
more evident than that at that time, when these Authors writ, Bishops and
Presbyters were distinguished, and excepting only Clemens Romanus, Blondel and
Salmasius do both acknowledge it.

But to return to Jerome, Let us considet the account he gives of the Original
of Episcopacy something more particularly: Before there were factions in
Religion, the Church was governed by Presbyters of equal Authority: But what
factions were these that gave birth to Episcopacy? What time was that when the
Church was under Presbyterian government? He informs us in the following words:
Before it was said, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas: If we
understand this according to the letter, we must conclude this to be very
early: For this Epistle to the Corinthians, where that division is mentioned,
was written in the year of Christ 52: And then this notion will do little
service against Episcopacy: for this will make it of Apostolic institution.
Besides I do not see how it can be true: for the Church was now Governed by
Apostles, and not by Presbyters: and if in most Cities there were no particular
Bishop ordained yet, it was because the Apostles were their Bishops, and
visited them to establish good order, to ordain officers, to punish the
disorderly, as they had opportunity; and when they were not able to be present,
they sent their orders in writing, and exercised Episcopal Authority at a
distance: But Blondel contends earnestly against the literal understanding of
that passage, and shows that Jerome could not mean this of the Church of
Corinth, but of some following Schism that sprung up after the example of this
of Corinth. His reason is, that the passages whereby Jerome confirms his opinion
of Bishops and Presbyters being the same, were written after that Epistle to
the Corinthians. I have showed before how probable it is that Jerome spoke
without a figure; and I need not repeat it here. But these things you will say
cannot cannot consist. It may be so: and it is not certain that Jerome when he
wrote this passage, did consider in what order of time St. Paul's Epistles were
written: what if it was an oversight for want of stating the Chronelogy of the
New Testament? If it be replied that Jerome a man of that great learning and
diligence, and particular knowledge also in Chronology, as we may conclude from
his translating of Eusebius his Chronicon, could hardly commit such a mistake;
It is to be considered that according to Blondels computation, who makes him to
speak of the second Century, he will be as inconsistent with himself: for
suppose w^ should say that Jerome pointed to the year 135, as the precise time
when the Presbyterian Government was changed, how shall we reconcile Jerome to
himself: For in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical writers, he reckons several
Bishops long before that time, he makes James to be Bishop of Jerusalem, statim
post Ascensionem, presently after the Ascension of Christ. He calls Timothy
Bishop of Ephesus, he makes Anianus to succeed Mark in Alexandria in the eighth
year of Nero. How shall we make all these things to consist? did he think James
to be no more than a simple Presbyter, or Timothy could he fancy him to have
no superiority over the Elders he was to ordain or to govern? it is not
possible: or shall we say that in these relations he only transcribes out of
others, and that he does not speak his own opinion: Well suppose this: Either
he must have some Authority for his opinion greater than that of such Authors
he follows in that Book; or not: if he had none, why should we believe him
against all Antiquity? Nay why should we believe so uncharitably of him, as
that he would deliver those things he did not believe without the least warning
to the reader, or that he would believe any matter of fact against all the
tradition and History of the Church, and yet have no Authority for it? Or if he
had any Authority from Ecclesiastical writers to ground his opinion upon, why
are they not produced? Nay we may be assured in this point that he had none
from that Catalogue of writers we are speaking of, since he had seen none but
what Eusebius had seen before him, and cites as we have showed before for the
contrary opinion, to confirm Episcopacy to be Apostolical, and to have begun
long before this time, which Blondel would have Jerome thought to assign for its
Original. So that what way soever Jerome be understood of the Original of
Episcopacy, he is either manifestly inconsistent with himself, or with
Scripture and Antiquity.

But his Scripture Authorities, you will say, do sufficiently prove that
Episcopacy was not yet introduced into the Church. Nothing less: unless they
can prove that those Presbyteries were not governed by the Apostle that
established them, or by some Assistant, or Suffragan; or unless they can make
out that Timothy, Titus and diverse others of that rank, were no more than
simple Presbyters.

After this time (whenever it was) St. Jerome adds, It was decreed over all
the world, that one of the Presbyters (who governed before in common) should be
set over the rest. In what Church in the whole world was this Decree Registered?
Who ever heard of it before St. Jerome? What general Council passed it? What
Authority made it Authentic? Or by what means did all the Churches in the
World agree to this change? What, was there no opposition made against this
alteration of the Apostolical Government? What, did all the little
Ecclesiastic Aristocracies submit without dispute to this innovation? We may
as well believe that there was a time when all the Republics in the world,
upon the consideration of their being obnoxious to Factions, became Monarchies
by mutual consent: Nay this might with greater reason be believed, for it is
not impossible but that men who are satisfied of their power to set up what
form of Government they please, might agree to shake off together, a form that
they find very incommodious: but that so many Societies as there were Churches
in the World, appointed by divine direction, should so universally change what
the Apostles had instituted without any noise or resistance, and that by one
common decree, is altogether incredible, and one may say with the same reason,
that they conspired at the same time to change their Creed.

Having examined St. Jeroms singular opinion concerning the rise of Episcopal
Government, I should now conclude that point, if Clemens Romanus in his
excellent Epistle to the Corinthians did not seem to favor this opinion;
therefore I think it necessary to consider such passages in it as are alleged
against Episcopacy, and from the whole to make a conjecture of the state of
that Church when that Epistle was written.

The Inscription of it affords Blondel an argument against Episcopacy, for it
is not in the name of the Bishop or Clergy, but of the whole Church that it is
written: The Church of God at Rome to the Church of God at Corinth. (...).
From whence Blondel infers, that since there is no mention of the Clergy, it
follows, that the Church was governed then not by the pleasure of one man, but
by the common Counsel of those that were set over it: This way of reasoning I
must confess to be very extraordinary: Because there is no mention of the
prerogative of the Roman Clergy, Ubi cum nulla peculiaris vel scribentis
mentio, vel cleri Romani Praerogativa vel Corinthiaci Presbyterii a plebe
discretio appareat, sed omnes ad omnes confertim scripsisse compertum sit: luce
meridiana clarius clucescit tune temporis Ecclesias communi Praepositorum
Consilio gubernatas, non unius regi mini a cujus ^utu penderent omnes
subjacuisse.
or of that of Corinth as distinguished from the Laity, it is clear, nay clearer
than the day, that there was no Bishop. It would be a very strange thing to see
two men with their eyes open, dispute fiercely whether it were noonday or
midnight: and yet this is our case; that consequence which to him is as clear
as the Sun, does not at all appear to others. If he had said, because there is
no mention of the Clergy in the Inscription as the Governing part, therefore
there was no Clergy, or the Clergy did not govern, the inference would have
appeared, but what truth there would be in it I need not say. Others inscribe
Epistles in the same style, to the Church of such a Place, where
notwithstanding there is a Bishop and a Clergy: Dionys. Corinth. (...) And yet
in the body of these Letters he mentions the Bishops of those Churches.
Irenaeus ubi supra. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 23.
And this Argument of Blondel may be justly suspected, when we consider that
the Ancients though they were well acquainted with this Epistle of Clemens and
its Inscription, yet they could by no means see this consequence that is now
drawn from it. Irenaeus had doubtless seen that Epistle, for it was in his time
commonly read in Churches: and yet he thought Clemens who wrote it to be Bishop
of Rome, notwithstanding his name be not mentioned in it. Dionysius Bishop of
Corinth says it was read in his Church, and yet he could not find any thing in
it to persuade him that at that time there were no Bishops, but on the contrary
he was of opinion that Bishops were instituted by the Apostles, and that
Dionysius Areopagita was ordained by St. Paul the first Bishop of Athens: so
that these ancient writers it seems were as blind as we, and could not observe
either in the Inscription, or body of this Epistle what Blondel at such a
distance of time could perceive as clear as the noon day, and yet those writers
if they had suspected any such thing might have been easily satisfied by their
Fathers, who might have seen the state of the Church, about which the
difficulty was, and so told them upon their own knowledge whether the
Government was Episcopal or Presbyterian: And therefore this is our comfort
that if we cannot discern this light which Blondel talks of, that those who
lived nearer the East, the rising of it, could see no more than we: But some
men surely have glasses for distance of time, as well as place, and can see
farther in the Apostolic times than the next Generation that followed them.
But to proceed.

Clemens owned but two orders in the Church of Apostolic Institution, (...).
Bishops and Deacons, which he says the Apostles ordained out of the
first fruits of the Gospel, over those that should afterward believe. And
these were appointed in Cities, and the Country, or Regions round about: from
whence Blondel draws many observations, and out of him Mr. B. as 1. That in
those days no body thought of what the Council of Sardica did afterward
decree; that no Bishop should be made in any Village, or small City, lest the
dignity of that office should be undervalued, and grow cheap: This is grounded
as most of the rest of Blondels and Mr. B.'s Arguments from this Epistle, upon
a mistake, and I fear a wilful one concerning the name of Bishop: For if the
Bishops of Clemens who he says were apponited (...), were only Presbyters,
then the Council of Sardica did not do any extraordinary thing by that
prohibition of Bishops in little Dioceses, for Presbyters were still allowed in
the Country Villages by that Council: and therefore if Episcopacy was an
institution later than Clemens, this Council has done nothing so contrary to
this, by forbidding Bishops properly so called, and allowing Presbyters to
reside in Country Villages. Some there are that interpret (...), by Provinces,
but there is no necessity at all for this, though the phrase will very well
bear it, for these Bishops I believe with Blondel and Mr. B. were no other than
Presbyters, such as were first appointed to govern the Church, but in
subordination to the Apostles, who were the proper Bishops of those Churches
they founded, and as they found occasion, appointed others to succeed them in
that eminence of Authority, over such districts of the Apostolical Provinces,
as they judged most convenient for the edification and unity of the Church. And
this distribution of Church Officers, by Clemens into Bishops and Deacons is
the less to be depended upon as exact, (...). Esaias 60.17.
because it seems to be made only with allusion to a place in the Old Testament
where those titles are mentioned: Besides, the mentioning but these two sorts
of Church Officers, may be done only according to the distinction of the
several employments in the Church, some being Ministerial, others Governing,
though the latter may have a difference in the measure of their power, in the
administration of the same Government: An evident instance of this we have in
Clemens of Alexandria, who notwithstanding he distribute the Clergy sometimes
into Presbyters and Deacons, (...). Clem. Alex. strom. l. 6. p. 283. Ed.
Silburgii, in 1 Timothy 1.
as the Governing or Teaching, and the Ministering Parts; yet he does elsewhere
acknowledge three Orders where he comes to speak more distinctly. To the same
effect are the words of the Greek Scholia, collected out of the ancient
Fathers, that Bishops sometime in Scripture comprehend Presbyters too, Because
their offices are much alike, (...). Sch. Gr. (...). Chrysostom. in 1 ad Tim. c.
3. Secundum Presbyterorum, immo paene unum little esse gradum and Episcoperum.
they both administer the Sacraments, they both teach and guide the Church, and
exercise discipline, and the difference between them is not very great* and
what is that, since they are both qualified for the same Acts? Besides
Ordination there i^ hardly any thing, but that they act in subordination to the
Bishops, in whom the principal Authority of Teaching and governing is placed,
and the Presbyters are the Assistants, and supre^^ Council of the Bishop, and
both making as it were one Bench; the directive governing part of the Church.
Salmasius would understand Chrysostom, when he says the distance between
Bishops and Presbyters was not great, to speak of his own time only; which is
so impudent a construction that one would wonder how any man could be guilty of
it, since every one that has the curiosity to consult the place, will discern
the imposture, and there is none of the Ancients that does more expressly
distinguish between Bishops and Presbyters from the beginning than this
eloquent Father, and nothing can be more plain than that he speaks there of the
constitution of Episcopacy and Presbytery without any regard to time; for it is
evident from him that he thought there was no difference in this particular
between these orders of the Church in his time and that of the Apostles, as any
man may see that will but look into his comments upon Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy c. 1,
Tom. 4. Ed. Savil.
and c. 3.

There are several other passages in that Epistle of Clemens that make mention
of Presbyters appointed by the Apostles to guide the Church, of the Presbyters
of the Church of Corinth who were turned out by a faction; but nothing that
affords any argument against Episcopacy but such as the same answer may be
extended to, which I have given already to the allegations made from thence.
But to clear this business of the Church of Corinth as far as possible, I will
show the state of it as it may be gathered from this Epistle, and then take
liberty to offer a conjecture concerning the form of its Government at that
time and the occasion of the Schism.

The Church of Corinth in the first place is said here to be an Ancient, (...).
and sound Church, that for a long while had enjoyed all the benefits of peace,
and order, and was had in great esteem and veneration of all those that knew
it, until at last having eat, and drank, and being enlarged and growing fat, it
lifted up the heel. From this prosperity sprung all the evils of emulation and
discord, (...), etc. (...).
the meaner sort setting themselves up against the better, and silly men
growing conceited and pragmatical, set themselves against men of wisdom and
experience: But because in all the insolences of the people against their
Rulers there are commonly some persons of note that first animate the sedition,
(...).
it was no otherwise here; a few ambitious discontented men and they too not
very extraordinary Persons for knowledge or endowments; instigated the common
people against their Governors, (...).
and having popular parts, they knew how to insinuate themselves into the
multitude, and to manage the credulity and passions of the people to their own
advantage, (...).
and prejudice of the public. Therefore Clemens aggravates this sedition by
comparing it with that mentioned by St. Paul, (...).
when they cried some for him, some for Cephas, some for Apollos, for they were
two of them great Apostles, and the other one highly esteemed by the Church,
But now (says he) consider by what manner of men you are perverted: And now
what could give occasion to all this disorder? What would these troublesome men
have? this is not expressly set down, but such hints are scattered as are
sufficient to ground a probable conjecture. 1. They are said to be great
Zealots about things not material or requisite to salvation: (...).
and hot disputants about such matters. 2. They were such as magnified the
power of the people, and persuaded them that they had a right to turn out their
Pastors, therefore Clemens shows what course Moses took to establish the
Priesthood, and how the Apostles foreseeing there would be contentions about
the name and office of a Bishop, (...).
appointed chosen men which the people cannot with any justice turn out. (...).
3. These men were ambitious, disobedient, despisers of their superiors, and
yet such as would bear rule themselves, (...).
and lift themselves up above their brethren; and their discontents arising
from the ill success or opposition their ambitious pretensions met with, were
probably the occasion of this Schism: and therefore Clemens advises them to be
content with their statition, and choose rather to be inconsiderable in the
Church, than to be never so great out of it, than to be the heads and Bishops
of a Faction.

From which Circumstances one may conjecture, 1. That the Church of Corinth at
this time had no Bishop, the Sea being vacant by the death of the last or
otherwise. 2. That this sedition was (...), a contention about this Bishopric.
3. That the Clergy and people were divided about it, the people setting up some
they had a favor for, whom the Clergy did not approve: and when they could not
be prevailed with, (...).
the people persisting in their kindness toward these persons, broke out into
extremities, and turned out part of the Clergy that would not comply with their
choice: Which is yet further confirmed from the directions which Clemens gives
upon this account; that these men would go regularly to compass their design by
just means, that they would enter in at the right gate; and happy are those
that enter that way, behaving themselves peaceably. For let a man be faithful,
let him be never so powerful a Preacher, let him be never so wise and
discerning, holy in his life, yet by how much he seems to excel others, by so
much ought he to behave himself more humbly, and seek the common good of all,
and not his own particular.

Besides this the passionate expostulation of Clemens with the Ringleaders of
this sedition makes this conjecture yet more probable; Who is there among you
generous, and charitable? Let him say, if this Schism and Sedition has been
raised upon my account, I will withdraw, I will be gone withersoever ye please,
only let the Fold of Christ live in unity and peace with the Presbyters that
are over it: and to encourage them to this generous resignation, he tells them
of many Kings that have offered themselves a Sacrifice for the safety of their
Countries? How many to put an end to sedition have left their own Cities? Apud
Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 45.
with more to that effect, which Dionysius of Alexandria borrows out of this
Epistle, and sends it as an exhortation to Novatus to put an end to that Schism
he had caused: and what is there so proper against a Schismatic Bishop, we may
judge not without reason to have been applied by the first Author upon the same
occasion. And thus much of the state of the Church of Corinth at the writing of
this Epistle.

The last thing I shall observe out of Clemens is a passage that seems to
favor the distribution of the Clergy into three Orders, (...).
Bishop, Priests, and Deacons: The High Priest (says he) has his proper
office, the Priests have a proper place appointed for them, and the Levites
have their peculiar Ministry, and the Layman is obliged to keep himself within
the bounds of his own station. Brethren let every one of you glorify God in
his own place, and keep himself within his own line, not breaking over the
bounds of his own Office and Ministry.

Having now given an account of the Original of Diocesan Episcopacy out of
Scripture and Antiquity, and examined the singular opinion of St. Jerome
concerning it, I come now to give a short view of the progress and advancement
of it.

The first Bishops after the Apostles according to the opinion of Rabanus
Maurus, In 1 Timothy 4.
had very large Dioceses, Primis temporib^^ Episcopi Provincias integras
regebant, Apost^lorum nomine nuncupati: i. e. In those first times Bishops
governed whole Provinces being called then Apostles: and this conformable to
Theodoret who affirms not only the same thing of the first Bishops being called
Apostles, Is Argumento Ep. ad Tit. (...). Theod. in 1 Timothy 3.
but also that they had large Dioceses too; for speaking of Titus, he calls him
Bishop of Crete, though it were a very great Island; and in another place he
says, that Epaphroditus was the Apostle of the Philippians, Titus of the
Cretians, and Timothy of the Asians. i. e. In his language their Bishops, and
the Canons of the Apostles signify as much, where they order every Bishop to
medale only with his own Diocese and the Regions that belong to it. Can. Ap.
33. (...).


But as Christians were multiplied in the World, so the number of Bishops
increased, every considerable City with the Country about becoming Dioceses;
(...). Phil: 1. Chrysostom in loc. (...). Oecum. Theoph. nor. ^^i^ una in urbe
plures. Episcopi esse potuissent. Hieron. It could not be: It was against the
design of the institution. Loci ipsius Episc^^o scribendum esset, non duobus
aut tribus. Ambr. in Loc.
so Asia toward the latter end of St. John had seven Bishops, and by
proportion we may conjecture of other Countries: and the first advances of
Christianity being very wonderful, and the success of our Religion giving
occasion to envy and persecution, the condition of those times seems to have
proportioned the distribution of the Church, and to multiply Dioceses. For in
those troublesome times, it being very difficult to maintain* such a
communication as ought to be, between a Bishop and all the parts of his
Diocese, it was found necessary to multiply Churches, and that every City with
some Portion of Country belonging to it should have its own Bishop: who though
his flock might at first be but small, and not exceed a Congregation; yet was
he properly the Bishop of the place, i. e. (...), of those that afterward
should believe. Whatever accessions were made to this Church, though the whole
City and Country should be converted, (...). Cornel. ap. E^seb. l. 6. c. 43.
Episcope cedunt; they accrue to the Bishop of the place into how many
Congregations soever they might after be distributed; and therefore the Church
of a Bishop retained still the singular number, though distributed into several
Congregations: and in such a Church they contended there ought to be but one
Bishop, though it had never so many Presbyters, as that of Rome had, when
Cornelius pretended there ought to be but one Bishop, and Novatus did not
contradict him; but the dispute was about this, which of them were the rightful
Bishop.

Episcopacy being settled upon these foundations with a regard to the future
increase, as well as the first condition and small beginnings of the Church, we
do not find that for the first three Centeries the number of Bishops was near
so great as it became afterward; although in a little while the multitude of
believers was so great, that there was no Country, no City, no village in
several Provinces of the Roman Empire, where there was not a good number of
Christians. Before the persecution of Trajan they were so increased that in the
Province of Bithynia, as Pliny complains, the Heathen Temples were become
desolate, Prope jam desolata Templa coepisse celebrari, and Sacra Solemnia diu
intermissa repetl; paffimque venire victimas quarum ad hu^ rarissimus emptor
inveniebatur, ex quo facile est opinari quae turba hominum emendati possit. Yet
after the Apostasy of so many, the numbers are still great: Visa est mihi res
consultations digna, maxim proper periclitantiam numerum, multi enim omnis
aetatis, omnis or di^is, utriusque sexus, -- neque enim Civitates tantum, sed
and vicos and agros superstitionis istius contagio pervagata est. Plin. Ep. l.
10. Ep. 100.
the Sacrifices neglected and laid aside; and notwithstanding the severity of
that persecution made great numbers fall off, yet those that remained unshaken
and resolved to dye Martyrs for their Religion, were exceeding numerous. Not
long after Arrius Antoninus found so many of them in Asia that it was an
endless thing to put them to death, though they made no resistance; and when
they thronged so much about his Tribunal, offering themselves to death, he
sends them back again, desiring them if they had such a passion to dye, that
they would hang themselves, because he had not Executioners enough: And at
Carthage the number of Christians was so great that they could not have been
destroyed without making the City desolate, as Tertullian tells Stapula the
Governor of the Province: If thou should go about to destroy the Christians
here, what would thou do with so many thousands of people? when men and women
of all degrees, of all ages, should offer themselves to the Executioners, how
many Swords, Tertull. l. ad Scap. c. 5. Hoc si placuerit and hic furi, quid
facies de tantis millibus hominum, tot viris ac foeminis omnis Sexus, omnis
^tatis, omnis dignitatis, offerentibus se tibi, quantis ignibus, quantis
gladiis opus erit? paree tibi si non nobis, parce Carthagini si non tibi.
what fires would be necessary for the Execution of so great a multitude? Spare
the City by sparing us. Nor are we to imagine Carthage to abound more with
Christians than the rest of the Empire, for the same Author tells us, that the
whole world was oversprend with Believers, and that the Heathen cried that they
had ever run the City and the Country, Obsessm vociserantur Civitatem, in
agris, in Castellis, in Insulis, Christianos: omnem sexum, (...) a^^m,
dignitatem transgredi ad hoc nomen, quasi detrmento moerent. Apol. c. 1.
and every place was full of Christians: that persons of all conditions, sexes,
and age was over to this name. Nay, so great were their numbers, that it was
not want of strength but want of will that hindered them from becoming masters
of the Empire: Loyalty was part of their Religion, and that was the reason why
they did not force the Government to a Toleration of, or a submission to it.
The barbarous Nations that overran the Empire were not near so numerous: Plares
nimirum Mauri, and Marcomanni, ipsique Parthi omnia vestra implevimus, urbes,
insulas, castella, municipia, contillabula, castra ipsa, Tribus, Decarias,
Pala^ium, Senatum, forum.
The Christians had filled all Places, their Cities, their Towns, their
Councils, their Tribes, the Court, the Senate, and what not: and though they
had been yet inferior in number and force, yet their contempt of death would
render them a very formidable Enemy: Nay without Rebellion we might easily
ruin our Persecutors, should we but withdraw, Potuimus inermes, nec Rebels,
sed tantummodo discordes, solius divortii invidia adversus vos dimicasse; si
enim tanta vis hominum in aliquem orbis remoti sinum abrupissemus a nobis,
suffudisset vestram dominationem tot qualiumcunque Civium amissio, imo etiam
ipsa destitutione punisset, proculdubio expavissetis, ad solitudinem vestram,
ad silentium rerum and stuporem quendam quasi mortuae urbis, quaesiss^tis
quibus in ea imperassetis, plures bosles quam Civis remansissent, nunc autem
pauciores hosts habetis prae multitudine Christianorum, pene Omnium Civium,
pe^e Omnes Cives Christianos habe^do. Apol. c. 37.
and retire to any corner of the World, the loss of so many subjects of any
kind would unavoidably ruin the Government; How you would be astonished at the
strange solitude our departure should cause, at the silence, and stilness of
your City, as if it had expired by our departure? you would be to seek for
Subjects to govern, and wore enemies than Citizens would remain with you; but
now your enemies are more inconsiderable by reason of the great multitude of
Christians, who are your Citizens, and almost all your Citizns are Christians.

And because the Heathens complained that Christian Religion was an enemy to
trade, and that it would destroy the commerce of the East, which depended upon
the consumption of Frankincense and Spices in the Temples, the Apologist
answers: that the Arabians sell more for the Christian funerals than they do to
the Heathen Temples: and the Christian Charity spent more in a street, than the
Heathen superstition did in a Temple. Sciant Sabaei pluris and charioris suas
merces Christianis sepeliendis profligari, quam diis fumigardis -- Interim plus
misericordia nostra insumit vicatim quam vestra Religio Timplatim. c. 42.


Now the largeness of the Dioceses of those times will appear by comparing the
vast multitude of Christians and the small number of Bishops; and first no City
how great soever had more than one Bishop: this is so well known that it would
be great impertinence to go about to prove it by instances, and I have showed
already how the Fathers were of opinion that there ought to be no more.
Besides, the Bishops of most Cities if not all, had a considerable Territory
belonging to their jurisdiction, which was commonly the Country lying round
about their City: So Alexandria besides the Ager Alexandrinus, which was of
very large extent, had likewise all the Region called Mareotes, containing
above an hundred and fifty Villages, as Athanasius rightly understood, computes
them. For every Presbyter had ten or more Villages under him, Athan. Apol. 2.
(...). Singuli autem Presbyteri p^^prios habent pages, ^osque maxemos, denos
interdum aut pl^res: ex bis apparet singul^s Mareotice pages non habuisse snum
Presbyterum, sed unicum Presbyterum denos pages rexisse, atque interdum plures.
Valesius.
and probably some Assistants or Curates to take care of some of them: This
Region always belonged to the Diocese of Alexandria, and never had as much as
a Chorepiscopus. But I have before given a particular account of Rome and
Alexandria, and therefore I shall say no more here, than that there being but
one Bishop in each of those Cities, his Diocese must be very large, and contain
several distinct Congregations.

The African Dioceses, which Mr. B. fancies to be no bigger than our Parishes,
were at first very large, till the Schism of the Donatists had divided that
Church into small pieces: the manner and the reason of this change I shall show
in due place, and even then it will appear that there were some very large
Bishoprics in Africa.

Carthage in Tertullians time had an infinite multitude of Christians, as we
have showed already; and Cyprian who was made Bishop there not long after,
gives us hints enough of the greatness of his Diocese. Tempestas maxima ex
parts plebem nostram prostravit -- ita ut cleri portionem sua strage
perstringeret. Ep. 6. Multi adbuc de Clero absentes. 28. Presbyteri qui illic
apud confessores offerunt, singuli cum singulis Diaconis per vices alternent,
quia mutatio^ersonarum, and vicissitudo convenientium minuit invidian. Ep. 5.
The number of the Clergy there even in time of persecution, when he confesses
several of them to have fallen away; yet even then there were so many
Presbyters left in the City that he advises them to go to the Confessors in
Prison by turns to Administer the Communion to them, that the changing of the
Persons, and the seeing of new faces daily may render it less envied or
observed. Besides when four of his Presbyters, and those probably living at
some distance from Carthage, had writ to him about something relating to the
Church, he tells his Clergy that he was resolved from the time he was made
Bishop, Ad id vero quod scripserunt mihi Compresbyteri nostri, Donatus, and
Fortunatus, and Gordias and Novatus; solus rescribere nihil potui, quando a
primordio Episcopatus mei statuerim, nihil sine consilio vestro, and sine
consensu plebis meae privatae sententia gerere, sed cum ad vos -- venere -- in
commune tractabimus. Ep. 6. Decipientes quosdam fratres ex plebe nostra. Ep. 28.
to determine nothing without advising with his Clergy; which intimates, that
they were not of the Clergy residing at Carthage: for it is not likely that
four persons would pretend to write to their Bishop about any public concern
of the Church without consulting their Brethren, if they lived together with
them, and met daily at the same Altar; and Cyprian's speaking of them with this
strangeness, makes it improbable that they were among this Clergy, to whom he
wrote concerning them. Besides we have express mention of one Country Presbyter
and Deacon belonging to the Diocese of Carthage, Gaius, Diddensis Presbyter,
who from several passages of that Epistle appears to have been near the City
and under its jurisdiction; and it is not improbable that this is one of those
Presbyters Cyprian complains of in another place for their presumption in
receiving the lapsed into communion Quorundam immoderata praesumptio plebis
universae tranquillitatem turbare conetur -- aliqui de Presbyteris. nec sibi
praepositum Episcopum cogitantes, quod nunquam omnino sub Antecessoribus
nostris factum est, cum contumelia and contemptu Prapositi totum sibi
vendicent. Interim prohibeantur offerre acturi apud nos, and apud confessores
ipsos, and apud universam plebem, causam suam. Ep. 10.
without consulting their Bishop, or the Clergy; and the nature of their fault
makes it evident that there were several Congregations now in Carthage, for
this could never have been done by a few in the Episcopal Church in the
presence of all the Presbytery, it is not probable they would have endured it;
or if they had, then they had been all in equal fault, which Cyprian does by no
means lay to their charge, but lays it upon a few, and orders they should be
suspended from their office by the rest of the Presbyters, and their cause
reserved to be tried before him and the whole Church at his return: Beside this
the Charity of the Diocese of Carthage toward the redemption of the Numidian
Captives, was so considerable, that it cannot be supposed to be gathered in one
o^ a few Congregations, Misimus autem Sestertia centum millia nummum, quae
istic in Ecclesia cui de Domini indulgentia praesu^us, cleri and plebis apud
nos consistentis collatione collecta sunt: -- And if the like should happen
again, he makes no doubt but his Diocese will relieve them: libenter and
largiter Subsidia praestare ad hoc opus tam necessarium Fratres and Sorores
prompte and libenter operati sunt. Ep. 60. LL. S. centum millia: LL. centum, as
Pamelius corrects it, though without the Authority of any MS S. Potest inter
caeteros, qui alimentis Ecclesia sustinentur, hujus (Histrionis) necessitas
adjuvari -- Si illic Ecclesia non sufficit ut laborantibus pr^stet alimenta,
poterit se ad nos transfer, and hic quod sibi ad victum and vestitum
necessarium fuerit, accipere.


especially when we consider, that Cyprian when he sends it to the Bishops of
Numidia with a Letter, and particulars, does not take notice of it as any
extraordinary matter; and all the observation he makes of the Contributions of
his flock is, that they were done prompte and libenter, readily and willingly,
and he promises that they will be as ready upon any such occasion. 2. The
Ordinary charge of that Church was so great for the support of the Bishop,
Presbyters, and a very numerous Clergy, besides poor, who were plentifully
relieved, and especially in dangerous times, besides the maintenance of such,
as when they became Christians were obliged to quit their former callings as
inconsistent with that holy profession, and the extraordinary charge of
Messengers that passed perpetually between them and other Churches; This
ordinary charge was so great, that the sum collected in this Diocese for the
redemption of those C^ptives, at the lowest computation, must suppose a
considerable Diocese to furnish it, especially so soon after a terrible
persecution, as that which this is supposed to follow. Lastly, the Diocese of
Carthage is not extraordinary in all these circumstances, but the rest of
Africa were some of them distributed into several Parishes: For Caldonius an
African Bishop makes mention of one Felix, Faelix qui Presbyterium
subministrabat sub Decimo, proximus mihi vicinus -- before c^gnevi ^^ndem. --
Cum ergo universi pacem preterent -- quamvis mihi videa^tur debere pacem
accipere, tamen ad consultum vestrum ^^s dimisi, ^e videar aliquid temere
praesumere. Caldon. Ep. ad Cypr. 19.
who did the office of a Presbyter, under one Decimus, another Presbyter of
Caldoniu^'s Diocese, as will appear from some passages of that Epistle, though
Goulartius be of opinion this Decimus was a Bishop, and Felix his Presbyter:
But Pamelius his conjecture is much better grounded, who makes him the Vicar or
Curate of Decimus. For 1. If he and his wife Victoria had belonged to another
Bishop, why do they make their Application to Caldonius to reconcile them to
the Church? Why do not they go to their own Bishop Decimus; or if he were dead
and no other yet ordained in his place, Why not to the Presbytery there who
ought to have reconciled them? and in a vacance took care of Ecclesiastical.
Discipline, as the Clergy of Rome declare, that at such a time they are to take
care of the Church, Cum nobis incumbat, Ap. Cypr. ep. 3.
qui praepositi esse videmur, and vice Pastoris custodire gregem. But their
making their application to Caldonius makes it clear that he was their
Diocesan, that the Cure in which Felix officiated was in his Diocese. 2.
Caldonius his remitting them to Cyprian as the first Bishop, makes it probable
that he was their Ordinary; for what else had he to do to meddle with, or remit
the cognizance of any persons belonging to another Church, to any other than
their own Clergy, and let them remit them to the Primate if they judged the
case difficult? Therefore it is much more probable that Caldonius was the
Bishop of the Suppliants, and that the Priest mentioned, exercised his charge
in some Village or Town in his Diocese.

But since there is no Record left as Ancient as the times we speak of that
gives the just extent of any Diocese, and what we mentioned already are only
accidental hints; we must take some other way to make more just observations of
the magnitude of those Stars, and of the Orbs in which they moved.

And since most of the Remains of Ancient writings do either concern Religion
in general, and are taken up in the defense of it against Idolatry, and
Blasphemous Heresies; or else in giving some account of the general
administration of the Church, by Bishops met in Councils: we must try whether
we may not ground a probable computation of the Bishoprics of those times in
some Provinces, upon the number of Bishops that usually met there, to determine
such things as concerned the general Union and the peace not only of the
Churches within such a district, but also the Church Universal.

Now the Church of Africa at this distance of time stands in the best light of
any, which is owing to the excellent writings of Cyprian, who gives several
particulars concerning the state of the Churches of that part of the world in
and before his time. The first Council mentioned there, was under Agrippinus
Bishop of Carthage, about rebaptizing of Heretics; but the number is not
mentioned, which if it had been any thing extraordinary, Cyprian would not have
forborne to allege, to add weight and Authority to the precedent he cites in
favor of his own opinion. Cypr. Ep. 71. Agrippinus bonae memoriae vir cum
caeteris Coepiscopis suis qui illo tempore in Provincia Africa and Numidia
Ecclesiam Dei gubernabant.


The next we find is at Lambese against one Privatus of that place, where there
were present ninety Bishops, the most numerous Council we read of in Africa
before the Schism of the Donatists: Ep. 55. compared with 30.
nor is it to be wondered there should be so many Bishops met together in a
Provincial Synod, since the Province of Cyprian contained Africa properly so
called, Numidia and the two Mauritania's; Latius fusa est nostra Provincia,
habet enim Numidiam and Mauritanias duas sibi cohaerentes. Ep. 45.
and we find several Councils composed of the Bishops of all these Provinces
less numerous than this against Privatus: Nanc cum in unum convenissemus tam
Provinciae Africaequam Numidiae Episcopi, numero 71. Ep. 73.
However this passage of Cyprian of Provincia nostra, whether it be understood
here of the Civil or Ecclesiastical Province, yet it was usual for the Bishops
of those Provinces in Cyprians time to meet at Carthage to consult as the
occasions of the Church did require. Cum in unum Carthe^ini Convenissent Kal.
Sept. Episcopi plurimi ex Provincia Africa, Numidia, Maurit^nia. Sententiae
Episc. ap. Cypr. T. 2. ed Goulart.
And it is further observable that there is a great difference in the number of
the Councils of Africa properly so called, and the other more general ones of
the several Provinces united: all the Bishops of that Country or the greatest
part coming together upon extraordinary occasions, as we shall show presently
from the simplicity of their constitution, which continued longer in that
Church than in any other of the Christian World; and the strict obligations
every particular Bishop had of coming to the Synods, which here were more
indispensable, because there were no Metropolitans to represent the Suffragans
of their Province, but of this hereafter.

After the persecution that forced Cyprian from Carthage, was ceased, a Council
was assembled to settle the Discipline of the Church relating to the lapsed,
Cum quies and tranquillitas data esset, and Episcopis in unum convenire
indulgentia divina permitteret, tune communicate and librato de omnium
collatione, consilio, statueremque quid fieri oporteret: Si quis vero ante
concilium nostrum, and ante sententiam de omnium Consilio statutam lapsis
temere communicare^, ^yse^^ communion^ arceatur. Persecutione s^pita, copi^sus
Episcoporum numerus, quos integros and incolumes, fides sua and Domini tutela
protexit.

Ac si minus suffici^^s i^ Africa Episc^porum numerus, etiam R^mam, etc. Ep.
52. and Epigraph. Ep. 54.

Cypria^u^ liberalis, etc. Numero 42.


or such as had fallen away in time of Temptation: and since Cyprian in his
recess would never determine any thing concerning it, before the storm were
over, and all the Bishops permitted to come together to establish a general
rule concerning it, it is to be imagined that all that could possibly come
together would meet upon this occasion, where they were all concerned: and so
no doubt they did, and Cyprian intimates as much, where he says that all that
had stood and persevered under that persecution came together, and their number
did hardly exceed forty; it is likely that only the Bishops of the Province of
Africa appeared here, the business requiring some speedy remedy, and all of
that Province that had not lapsed doubtless came together; and Cyprian with
regard to the number of Bishops in the Province, calls this a great number of
Bishops.

Another Syned is said to be called shortly after by the Author of the Libellus
Synodicus in the cause of Novatian which appears to be after that which we have
mentioned last, (...). Lib. Synod. Sed cum statuissemus Collegae complures qui
in unum conveneramus ( perhaps in Hadrumettina Colonia) and legatis ad vos
coepiscopis nostris, omnia interim int egrasuspenderentur, ut t^ universi
nostri Collega and communicationem tuam, i. e. Catholicae Ecclesie unitatem --
probarent, firmiter ac tenerent: and these universi Collegae it seems were the
84. above mentioned: who came from Africa, Numidia, and the two Mauritani^'s,
for the Union and consent of all these was designed by Cyprian, in order to
which some Bishops were sent to Rome to inform them of the whole matter. Cypr.
Ep. 45.


as well from the number which was eighty four, and supposed the Church in a
peaceable condition, as from Cyprians Letter to Cornelius about the Clergy in
Hadrumettina Colonia, which though it be placed in the order of Pamelius before
the Synod of Carthage about the lapsed; yet from several circumstances I
conceive was written some time after: For 1. From the Epistle of the Synod last
mentioned it appears that it was the first after the Persecution: 2. It makes
no mention at all of Novatian: 3. The Letter of Cyprian about Polycarp and his
Clergy gives the reason why they deferred to determine the difference between
Cornelius and Novatian: because they staid for an account of the whole matter
from those Bishops they had sent to Rome, that the cause of Cornelius might
want no advantage of evidence to justify and clear it, though he, Cyprian, was
well enough satisfied of the justice of it, and had communicated with Cornelius
before; All this he says in the same place was done in order to establish a
general consent about communicating with Cornelius, which was to be done in a
full Council of all the Provinces, the same that we have set down here from the
Libellus Synodicus.

Another African Council whose Epistle to Fidus about the Baptism of Infants is
still extant, Ap. Cypr. Ep. 59. Aug. ^^^tr. du^^ Ep. ^th. l. 4. c. ^.
had sixty six Bishops, as St. Augustine reports, and names the number as
extraordinary, to add greater Authority to their Testimony. That concerning
Basilides and Martialis had but a very small number; and the first about the
validity of Baptism by a Heretic, had no great number, as we may conclude from
the Inscription of it, which shows that the Bishops of Numidia were not there,
and that it consisted only of the Province of Africa properly so called. Cyp.
Ep. 68.70. Ep. ad Januarium and caeteros Episcopos Numidas.
And Cyprian though he mentions this Council in several places, yet he says
nothing of the number; nay though he mentions it in the very same period with
that which followed upon the same account, yet he does not say any thing of the
multitude of Bishops there, but expresses that of the other, because he thought
it remarkable, considering the number of Bishops at that time, when we had met
together the Bishops of Africa and Numidia seventy one in number: Quid in
Concilio cum complures adessemus, decreverimus -- Et nunc quoque cum in unum
convenissemus tam Provinciae Africae quam Numidiae Episcopi septuaginta unus.
Ep. 73.
And this Council as if it had not been full enough is confirmed by another of
greater extent and number, Cum in unum convenissent Episcopi plurimi, ex
Provincia Africa, Numidia, Mauritania, Sententiae 87. Epis^c ap. Cypr. T. 2. c.
15
consisting of eighty seven Bishops assembled out of the Provinces of Africa,
Numidia, Mauritania; and of these eighty seven, two left their suffrages with
Proxies: and this is the most numerous of all the Councils in Cyprians time,
and the last of that Country we have any account of in that age.

This was the state of the Church of Africa and the number of their Bishops,
which if we compare with the vast increase of Christians there described by
Tertullian, and the Accession, we may probably conceive to have been made after
by the care and ministry of those good Bishops that governed that Church: we
must conclude the African Dioceses to be very large, and to contain each of
them not only a very great number of Believers, but those also dispersed
throughout a great extent of Country.

But it may be objected that all the Bishops of Africa might not meet in these
Councils, and therefore there is no computation to be made of their number from
this observation: To which I answer first, that it is possible every individual
Bishop might not be present, yet the greatest part was, and none was to absent
himself without absolute necessity, as of sickness or the like: and the number
of such would be inconsiderable. And the Canons of that Church are very strict
in this point in after times, Codex Canon. Afric. c. 53. vid. Conc. Carth. 3.
c. 43.
and give strange encouragements to such as have otherwise but ill titles to
their Bishoprics, to hold them to the prejudice of him who has the juster
title, if the one frequent their Councils, and the other neglect them: On the
otherside neglect of duty in this particular is made liable to deprivation.
Carth. 4. c. 21. Episcopus ad Synodum ir^ non sine satis gravi necessitate
inhib^atur, fic tamen ut in sua persona ^egatum mittat.
2. In Cyprians time when the African Bishops had no dependence one upon
another, and no subordination to Metropolitans, and the Decrees of their Synods
did, and could oblige only such as were present and consented to them; it was
necessary that all should come together or send their Proxy, in order to
establish that Unity among them which was the design of these Councils, and yet
all the number even of their most solemn Councils is not great. 3. The practice
of the African Church within half an age after this time confirms this
inference from the number of the Bishops at Councils, to the number of Dioceses
in that Country: for we find presently, as Bishoprics were multiplied by the
Schism of the Donatists, so Councils became much more numerous: and whereas
ninety was the greatest number that ever met there before this Schism,
afterward we find several hundreds. But however this inference will hold, it
is some comfort to find some others of great knowledge and judgment in
antiquity to hold the conclusion: that the number of Bishoprics was not great
in Cyprians time; which is assigned as a reason why his Province was so large.
Aucto numero sedium Episcopalium, adeo ut omnibus invigilare haud facile esset
Carthag^nensi Episc^po. Carol. a S. Paulo. Geogr. sacr. p. 84.


But to make this point clear beyond all exception, I will endeavor to show
from unquestionable testimonies, how Bishoprics came to be multiplied in
Africa more than in any other part: and then notwithstanding this, I will make
it evident that those Bishops were Diocesans, and some of them after the
crumbling of that Church into small pieces, had yet very large Dioceses, not
inferior to most of ours for extent of Territory.

The Schism of the Donatists, though it broke not forth with any violence till
after Caecilianus was made Bishop of Carthage, yet it was hatching long before
in the time of Mensurius, Aug. Ep. 163.
when the faction was kept up under hand, and had its Agents in several places:
But being grown ripe, it took occasion from the promotion of Caecilianus to
declare it self. Secundus Tisnigensis being called to Carthage with his
Numidian Bishops to set up another, He came accordingly with about seventy
Bishops, all the strength he could make, and perhaps more than his own Province
could afford him: These declare they would not communicate with Caecilianus,
and therefore set up Majorinus against him; and in like manner, where ever they
could make the least party imaginable, they appointed a Schismatical Bishop;
and not content to equal the number of the Catholics, they divided the ancient
Dioceses, and erected several new Episcopal seats, that by the number of their
Bishops at least they might appear to be Catholics, as they afterward laid
claim to the title upon that account: It was not long after this breach, Aug.
Ep. 48.
but we hear of unusual numbers of Bishops met in Council; and one of the
Donatists of Carthage according to Tychonius his relation, vid. Valesii Dissert
de Schism. Donat.
had no less than two hundred and seventy Bishops, which if it be true shows
this change to have been very sudden; though it cannot be so soon as Balduinus,
and out of him Baronius would understand it to be: but of this I have said
enough before.

Some time after when they quarrelled among themselves, they called a Council
of three hundred and ten, Bagatense against Maximianus. The Catholics
observing what advantage this reputation of having a great number of Bishops
gave their adversaries, Conc. Carth. 2. c. 5. Codex integ. can. Eccles. Afr. c.
53.98.
thought it necessary to make use of the same course themselves, and to make as
many Bishops as they could; therefore they order, that where part of a large
Diocese should be willing to have a Bishop of its own, if the Bishop under whom
they were should consent, a new Bishopric might be erected. But it was
commonly at the cost of the Schismatics that they multiplied Dioceses; for
where there were two Bishops in a Diocese, the one a Catholic and the other a
Donatist, and the Donatists would return to the unity of the Church, Codex Can.
118.
the Diocese was to be equally divided between them, and that with so much
exactness, that if the number of the Towns happened to be odd, the odd Town was
adjudged who it should belong to: nor was this all, but where the Donatists had
driven out or perverted all the Catholics, there they set up a Bishop as soon
as ever they had any party, and sometimes in the same Donatist Diocese there
were three or four Catholic Bishops. This is made out so clearly in the
conference at Carthage, that I need only cite some passages out of it, and
leave them to the Reader without farther inference or application.

Petilianus Episcopus dixit sapientissime ac praescie omma pravidisti vir
nobilis, Collatlo Carthag. Cogn. Primae gesta. 65.
nam in Plebe mea, i.e. in Civitate Constantmensi adversarium habeo Fortunatum,
in medio autem Dioecesis meae, nunc institutum habeo, imo ipsi habent,
Delphinum: pervidet jam hinc prastantiatua duos in unius plebe fuisse
imaginary constitutos, ut and numerum augeant, and tamen plebium numerus non
sit, qui sit illarum, scilicet, Personarum: and hoc Argumenti est maximi, ut
videantur nos hoc genere superare, si du^ contra unum constituti sunt vel tres:
Nam etiam in plebe praesentis sanctissimi Collegae, ac fratris mei Adeodati, i.
e. in Civitate Milevitana, ita commissa res est, ut unum ibidem habeat
Adversarium, alterum in Tuncensi Civitate, qui ad hujus scilicet plebem
antiquitus pertinet, and ante biennium esse videtur constitutus: Tertius vero
sit in loco qui dicitur Ceramussa: Ergo cum unus sit Civitatis Milevitanae
Episcopus a partibus nostris, tres videntur ab his constituti fuisse, ut
illorum numerus augeretur, aut fortasse excederet numerum veritatis:
Requirendum est igitur quando auctus est illorum numerus, quam Originem
ha^^e^it, utrumhoc novitas fecerit, an dederit Antiquitas, utrum ut ita
dixerim, contra vetustatem canam vitium h^c^ fuerit novitatis.

Petilianus (Donatist Bishop of Constantina said: Noble Sir, you have wisely
foreseen all things: for in my Diocese, i. e. in the City of Constantina, I
have Fortunatus an opposite Bishop; and in the middle of my Diocese, I have,
nay they have, Delphinus another Bishop: Your excellence may perceive by this,
how they have set up two imaginary Bishops in the Diocese of one to increase
their number, and yet the number of Dioceses will not be so great as that of
their Bishops: and this is a great argument that they would seem to out do us
in this kind, if they do but set up two or three against ones for in the
Diocese of my worthy c^llegue Adeodat^s who is here pesent, i. e. in the City
of Milevis, the matter is so ordered, that he has one Anti Bishop there in the
City, another in the City of Tunca which has belonged of old to his Diocese,
and it is not above two years since he is set up there* a third is in a place
called Ceramussa. Therefore whereas there is but one? Bishop of Mil^^is of our
party, they have three, that they may increase their number, and perhaps exceed
the number of the truth, or of the True Church: we ought therefore to ask them
when their number increased thus, what was the Original of it? Whether this be
an innovation, or Reverend Antiquity, or rather whether this novelty has not
been irregularly introduced against reverend Antiquity.

And what Answer is there to all this? No other than that it was impertinent,
it was nothing to the business of the conference, which was to dispute the
cause of the Church, whether it were to be found among the Catholics, or only
amongst the Donatists.

Fortunatianus Episcopus Ecclesia Catholica dixit, Multiloquio Ecclesia causam
agi non debere perspicit mecum tua dignationis sensus, Cognitorum optime.

Fortunatianus Bishop of the Catholic Church said, Best of Jndges, you
perceive as well as I that the cause of the Church ought not to be maintained
by much impertinent talk.

Therefore the Catholics could not deny the matter of fact, but despised the
argument, and perhaps looked upon it as a credit to their cause to be so
watchful and industrious in it; and since Schism would needs divide the Church,
they thought it allowable to return them the same measure and devide Schism
too, by parcelling their Dioceses between several Catholic Bishops.

And that we may not think this instance* singula^, Col. Carth. Cogn. 1.117.
I will proceed to cite some more passages to the same effect.

Petilianus Episcop^s dixit, in una Pleb^ Jan^^ri^ Collegae nostu^ praefer^is,
in una dic^cosi qu^^icor sunt constuenti contra ips^^n, (...) numer^^ stilicet
augeretur.

Petilianus said, In the single Diocese of my Brother Januarius, there are no
less than four Bishops set up against him, that their number may be increased.

To this and some other little reffections the Answer of Marcellinus the
President was, Hac ad praesentem non pertinent actionem: These things are not
to the purpose.

And these, checks were the cause why we have not many more particulars of the
divisions of Dioceses in Africa; yet for all this, some could not forbear
making their complaints when it came to their turn to speak.

Verissimus Episcopus dixit, Agnosco illum, Coll. Carth. Cog. 1.121.
quatuor sunt in plebe mea, Datianus, Aspidius, Fortunatus and Octavian^s.

Verissimus said* I know him, (for before the Conference the subscriptions were
to be examined, and the Donatist Bishops were to confront the Catholics, i. e.
the Bishop of each City his opposite Bishop there) there are four Bishops in my
Diocese, and names them.

Now that we may not think this way was taken up by the Catholics only to
increase their party, In ipsa antem Ecclesia Mustitana apparuit and ipsos
Episcop^^ alium antiqua Cachedrae addidisse, and bot in allis locis se fuisse
po^^^^ doclarat^m, 25. Bre^. Col.
they when it comes to their turn charge the Donatists with the very same Arts.
For,

Sumnius Episcopus Tiguallensis idem dixit, praesto sum: in Dioecesi mea duo
sunt Gaianus and Privatus.

Alypius Episcopus Ecclesiae Catholicae dixit, animadvertat nobilitas tua etiam
in nostrorum Dioecesi eos ordinasse Episcopos.

Sumnius Bishop of Tigualla said: I am here: there are two set up against me in
my Diocese, and names them.

Alypius Bishop of the Catholic Church said, Your Honor may please to
observe, that they have set up several Bishops in single Dioceses of ours.

Marcellinus V. C. Tribunus and Notarius dixit: ibid.
Talia ab utrisque partibus constat objecta; si haec vultis diligenter inquiri,
ad hanc causam superflue venisse noscemur.

Marcellinus, Tribune and Notary, (the moderator of this Conference) said: It
is evident that these things are objected on both sides; if this be the
business you would examine, I am come hither to little purpose, for this is not
the thing I came about.

This check had so much effect that we do not find any make this impertinent
complaint for a long while together, but the opposite Bishops own the knowledge
one of another, and so the subscriptions are read and passed with little
interruption. At last Alypius not being able to hold out longer, would make his
general remark upon a great number of Donatist Bishops.

Alypius Episcopus Ecclesiae Catholicae dixit: Scriptum sit illos omnes in
villis vel in fundis esse Episcopos ordinatos, non in aliquibus Civitatibus.

Alypius said, Let it be recorded that all these were made Bishops in Villages
and Hamlets, and not in any Cities.

Petilianus Ep. dixit: Sic and tu multos habes per omnes Agros dispersos, immo
crebros ubi habes, sane and sme populis habes.

Petilianus Answered: And you have many dispersed in the Country, and of those
several without any people to govern.

And now the reader may perceive by wha methods the Dioceses of Africa came to
be so numerous: Subscribed 266, 14 present that did not subscribe: absent of
the Catholics 120. Brevic. Col.
It was not the example of the Bees that made Bishops swarm so much there, but
an unhappy Schism, and the affectation of number to support the credit of it,
then a necessity that lay on the Catholics to add number to their weight, and
to turn the balance on their side, no less in point of reputation, than it
inclined of it self as to the justice of their cause: and yet after all this
the Dioceses were not so little as our Parishes; C^ll. Carth. Cog. 1.212.215.
for reckoning after the utmost computation there will be a great difference:
for the number of subscribers on the part of the Catholics in this Conference
was two hundred sixty six, vacant Sees sixty four, absent two hundred and
twenty: in all five hundred and fifity Dioceses: The Donatists had two hundred
seventy nine subscribers, said they had more absent than the Catholics,
Augustine writes but 120, which probably is the truth, Brev. Coll. c. 12.
besides vacant Sees, but mention no number: Augustine shows from the
confession of the Donatists, that they had not not so great a number absent as
the Catholics, because they had confessed that all their Bishops young and old
were there, excepting only those that were hindered by sickness. ibid.
and since by this Conference it appears every Diocese had two Bishops at least
one with another, the Dioceses will not be found to be very small; and perhaps
if the absents and vacancies of the Catholics were to be examined, they would
not all have proved effective, or not far to exceed the number of the Dioceses
of Africa as they were after reduction by the Emperors edict at the time of
Hunnericus his conquest of that Country, which I have mentioned before out of
the Notitia Africa published by Syrmond.

And yet in all this division several Bishoprics in Africa had the fortune to
remain entire, Conc. Carthag. 3. c. 39.
and so large that they were not inferior to our Dioceses in England for
largeness of Territory: For in the whole Province of Tripolis there were but
five Dioceses, Codex Can. 49. A^. 397. Tripolita^a Provincia abortu habet aram
Philenorum, and lineam ab ea ductam ad Lybicas gentes, ab occasu Tritonem
flavium qu^ dividitur a Bizacend, a Septentrione terminatur mari Africo, a
meridie desertis Libycis. Carol. a S. Paul. p. 91.
at the time of the third Council of Carthage, and the Notitia Africae which
was taken some years after, sets down but one more, for which reason the
African Councils made several exceptions in their favor, as that there should
be required the presence but of one Bishop of that Province in any Council: and
that few Bishops might be allowed to ordain there, in consideration of their
number.

Besides there were several large Bishoprics in the other Provinces: Codex
Can. 56.
for we find in the Canons of the African Councils, that one Bishop had such
extent of Territory as might be divided into several Dioceses, and where it is
permitted any part of a Diocese, as a considerable Town, and the Territory
belonging to it, to choose a Bishop for themselves, with the consent of him,
part of whose Diocese they were; It is added, ut ^adem Dioecesis permissa
proprium tantum habeat Episcopum, caeteras sibi non vindicet Dioeceses, quia
exempta de fasce multarum sola meruit honorem Episcopatus suscipere: It is
enough, when a Bishop gives way that another Bishop should be set up in part of
his Diocese, that that part which he grants this to, may have their own Bishop;
but this new Bishop is not to assume any right over the other parts of his
Diocese: Because his part being taken out of the bundle of several Dioceses,
(i. e. such as would make several like his, but belonging all to the same
Cathedral,) was alone designed for this new Bishopric: And to the same effect
he calls that ancient entire Diocese out of which another is to be taken Massa
Dioecesium, an aggregation of Dioceses, or as we would now speak, of Rural
Deanries: The same thing is supposed by the Canon that forbids a Bishop to
leave his Cathedral, and live in any other Church in his Diocese. Con. Carth.
5. c. 5. Con. Carth. 4.36.
And by another to this effect, That the Presbyters who are Rectors of Churches
in a diocese, ought before Easter to repair to their proper Bishop for Chrism,
and not to take it of any other, who perhaps may be nearer: It would be endless
to cite all the circumstances that imply the greatness of the African Dioceses
even at this time; I will select some Dioceses there whose extent is mentioned
occasionally, but without any remark of their being extraordinary in comparison
of others.

The Diocese of Hippo Diaretorum, Codex Ca^. 78.
not Regia, where St. Augustine was Bishop is said to contain many Churches, by
that Canon whereby it is provided that Equitius the Bishop of it is to be
deposed, and another put in his place; and for the easier effecting of it, it
is said, Ecclesiae ibi ab his retinentur qui Equitii facinorosam communionem
declinaverunt.

The Diocese whereof Xantippus was Bishop must be supposed of good extent,
August. Ep. 236.
for Augustine complains to him of one Abundantius a Presbyter in fundo
Strabonensi, at a great distance from his Bishop, and near it seems to
Augustine, as may be gathered from the nature and manner of the complaint: in
the same place there is (...) Presbyter Gippitanus who was neighbor to this
Abundantius, or rather they lived both together, though they had several Cures.

Alypius Bishop of Tagastis, id. Ep. 289.
had likewise the Church Thyana under him, which probably was a considerable
City, as may be gathered from the Epistle of St. Augustine to Melania, whose Son
was forced by a tumult of the people of Hippo to take Orders.

Hippo Regia the Diocese of St. Augustine was very large, Ep. 74.212 236. Ep.
He mentions many Parochial Presbyters and Parishes in it, as Presbyter
Germaniciensis, Armemansis, Subsana, where Timothy was ordained Reader, which
occasioned no small trouble: Malliana, Turres, Ciran, Vitalis, etc. And such
was the number of Churches in his Diocese, that he excuses himself to a friend,
whom he had promised to assist in some kind of Study, that he could not be as
good as his word, because he was gone upon his Visitation, which would hold a
considerable time: and therefore he remits him to one of his Presbyters:
Quoniam visitandarum Ecclesiarum ad meam curam pertinentium necessitate
profectus sum: But we have a clearer account of the extent of this Diocese than
of any other in Africa, id Ep. 261. Volens prodesse quibusdam in nostra
vicinitate. This Neighborhood which Mr. B. sometimes argues from, to show the
smallness of Dioceses then, was not the next door or the next Town.
in his Letter to Celestinus Bishop of Rome, where he mentions a place in his
neighborhood, as he expresses it, that belonged to his Diocese, and had never
had a Bishop of its own; yet forty miles distant from Hippo: the passage
because it is something remarkable I will set down in St. Austins words.
Fussala dicitur, Territorio Hipponensi confine Castellum, antea ibi nunquam
Episcopus fuit, sed simul cum contigua sibi Regione ad Paroeciam Hipponensis
Ecclesiae pertinebat. -- i. e. The place is called Fussala, a Town adjoining to
the Territory of Hippo, which never had a Bishop of it own, but belonged to the
Diocese of Hippo with the Country about it: Sed quod ab Hippone memoratum
castellum millibus quadraginta sejungitur: because it is forty miles distant
from Hippo, and the miserable condition of that Church requiring the presence
of a Bishop, he ordained one for them, which not proving as useful as he
expected, he sends this Letter to excuse himself:

Nor are we to imagine that the Diocese of Hippo was singularly great above all
the rest of Africa, Collat. Carth. 1.65.
but that Carthage, Cirta, Milevis, and many others of the more eminent
Bishoprics, had more Churches under the inspection of their Bishops: and the
Diocese of Milevis particularly had besides Towns and Villages, Cities likewise
belonging to it; for besides Milevis, Civitas Tuncensis belonged to that Bishop.

And now if Mr. B. and the Nonconformists in whose name he makes Diocesan
Episcopacy a reason of Separation, had lived in Africa in the time of Cyprian
or Augustine, they must have renounced their communion, or must have renounced
these principles, they must have been Nonconformists there, and abhorred the
largeness of the Bishops Dioceses, no less than the Donatists did the largeness
of their Charity: Augustine would have been reckoned for all his learning and
holiness, no better than an Antichristian Bishop, and our Reformers must have
had toleration to Separate from him; and what is the sweetest liberty of all,
to discharge their gall and bitterness upon him. So that this is our comfort,
that these men that are such irreconcilable enemies to our Church, would have
been no otherwise to the Prophets, the holy Primitive Bishops that have gone
before us. And for the same reason they reproach us, they must reproach the
ancient renowned Churches of Christ: Nay the Church Universal, as will further
appear by what follows.

Although it may seem sufficient for my design to have showed the progress of
Diocesan Episcopacy in Africa, the Country that Mr. B. singles out, as
retaining the clearest footsteps of the Congregational form; yet for farther
satisfaction in this point I will briefly show the progress of Diocesan
Episcopacy in other Nations, and show how at first they were but few in
comparison, not only for want of Christians in all Cities and Villages, but by
choice; and when they came afterward to be multiplied, it was not so much from
the increase of believers, as from Schisms and divisions in the Church, and
from the increase of Metropoles by the Christian Emperors: in order to which I
shall proceed upon the same grounds I have done hitherto. From the great number
of Christians that were dispersed into all parts and Cities, and the small
number of Bishops that met in Councils, especially Provincial, where all were
obliged to be present; as also from some general expressions of the condition
of some Bishops in the earliest times, as it is to be presumed that in the
earliest times of the Church, the Provincial Synods were the majority at least
of the Bishops in the several Provinces; so the first Synod had so few Bishops
that we must needs conclude their number then to be very small. For instance
therefore,

The Gallick Synod assembled at Lions under Irenaeus, Ex Libello Synod.
against Marcion and other Heretics, had but twelve Bishops in it.

The Synod of Hierapolis under Apolinarius against Montanus and Maximilla had
twenty six. Ibid.


The Synod of Anchialus under Sotas had twelve or thirteen Bishops. Ibid.
And Eusebius having cited two or three subscriptions out of Serapions Epistle,
Hist. ^ocl. l. 5. c. 9.
adds, that there were the subscriptions of many more, not naming the number,
perhaps because in his time it would have looked but inconsiderable, all being
but twelve.

The Synod of Ephesus under Polycrates about the time of Easter, was probably
more numerous than most of the Provincial Councils of this age, as consisting
not only of the Bishops of Asia, but of those of the neighboring Countries; as
we may conclude from Victors attempt to excommunicate them: (...), Eusebius. l. 5.
c. 25. (...). Libal Synod.
Polycrates in his Letter to Victor says they were a considerable number, and
if he should write down all their names, it would seem a great multitude: But
no number is any where expressed.

But a Synod held at Rome about the same subject had but fourteen Bishops, and
several other Synods about this Controversy had not many more. That of
Jerusalem under Narcissus had but fourteen: Papa Victor direxit Authoritatem:
not the language of that time. Praecepta it aque authoritate praedictus
Episcopus nonsolum de sua Provincia, sed de diversis Regionibus omnes Episcopos
evocavit.
And the famous Council under Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea had but twelve
besides him; Eusebius makes but one of both these: Bid represents it as an
extraordinary great Assembly, for the Preface to it I conceive to be his, he
makes him to assemble not only the Bishops of his own Province, but from
several other parts.

The Council of Lions under Irenaeus made up but fourteen: That of Corinth
under Bachillus eighteen: That under Pasna or Palma the same number: That of
Osroena eighteen, but the President of it is not known: That of Mesapotamia
which follows had the same number, and it may be was the same Synod; as that of
Rome which follows is it may be the same with that which is mentioned before to
have had the like number; and the occasion of such mistakes as these, is, that
when men find a Synod cited upon several accounts, although it might be the
same meeting that determined several things, they are apt to conclude they were
several Synods.

However it is plain from hence, that there were but few Bishops in comparison
of what they grew to within an hundred years after, and that I take to be an
argument of the largeness of their Dioceses.

But you will say, there were but few Christians in these Parts: The countrary
is notorious to all the Word, for these parts where most of these Councils were
held, were the best planted and furnished with Christians of any in the World:
But it may be there were but few in the world at this time. It is not long
after this that Tertullian wrote his Apology, and what number of Christians
there were then, we have showed already. How then can this be imagined, for
every City, if it have a Church must have a Bishop; there is no absolute
necessity of that, that it should have its peculiar Bishop: for we have seen
already one Bishop, as that of Milevis, had more Cities than one in his
Diocese, and it had been so from ancient time, or rather from the beginning,
antiquitus pertinuit: And in this time we are now speaking of, it is likely the
Apostolic constitution of Bishoprics, which in the beginning, as Rabanus
Maurus observed, were very large, did hold; and it was the best suited to the
infancy of the Church, when one general visit our should take care of several
Churches scattered as yet, and incoherent: and because a persecution might
overthrow these little beginnings, it was necessary there should be one, whose
office it should be, to cultivate these new Plantations, and where they were
rooted up, to set anew, and to confirm those that were shaken with a competent
district. But when Christians multiplied every where, and most Cities had such
numbers belonging to them, as must be distributed into several Congregations,
the Diocese of the first constitution became too great, and every City with
some of the Territory belonging to it, became a Diocese, and had its proper
Bishop. And this seems to be most agreeable both to the Scripture History of
the Church which we have made a deduction of before, and to the progress of the
Church in succeeding ages; and particularly to the numbers of Bishops which are
found in the first Synods: But to proceed,

The Synod at Rome under Victor wherein Novatus was condemned was much more
numerous than any mentioned before, (...). Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 43.
and consisted of sixty Bishops besides Priests and Deacons; and Eusebius
speaking of this, observes the number to be very extraordinary, consisidering
the circumstances of those times, and the numbers assembled in foregoing
Synods: (...).
But the Libellus Synodicus reckons but eighteen, which it may be was a small
Synod previous to this greater one mentioned by Eusebius.

The Eastern Synods about Rebaptizing Heretics were reckoned as for those
times very numerous; Eusebius. l. 7. c 5. Plurimi tractavimus, Firmil Ep. ad Cypr.
contra Crescon. l. 3. c. 3.
and yet that of Iconium the greatest of those of the East consisted of but
fifty Bishops, and these met together out of several Countries, as Galatia,
Cappadocia, Cilicia, and other neighboring Provinces. St. Augustine despises
the smalness of their numbers, though Dionysius confesses these were mighty
Synods in his time, or rather before his time; for they seem to be earlier than
Baronius places them: But what were these against so many thousand Bishops as
were in the world then? says Augustine. I believe it would have been a very
hard matter to have found so many thousand Bishops at that time; I am sure the
Acts of the Church discover no such multitudes of them, and they must be very
negligent, if they should be so many, and yet suffer things to be carried any
way in Councils by a very few persons: that Father judged of former ages by his
own, when Dioceses were exceedingly multipyed, even to be the grievance and
complaint of the African Church. But Baronius goes to mend the matter by
telling us, that this opinion could find but fifty to countenance it among all
the Bishops of the East: One would imagine by this that the Councils of Iconium
and Synadae, An. Chapter 258
were but a small number of Bishops, protesting against the general suffrage of
their neighbor Bishops. But if this were true, Stephen Bishop of Rome had
acted very extravagantly and upon ill information, when upon the account of
those public resolutions taken by fifty Bishops, he goes to excommunicate all
the Bishops of Cilicia, Galatia, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 5.
Cappadocia, and the bordering Nations.

What number of Bishops France had at this time appears from the Council, Vita
5. Pauli ap. Bosquet Hist. Eccl. Gal. par. 2.
where Paul Bishop of Narbonne was accused of in continence, Evocatis paucis
Episcopis Galliae, quia nondum erant plures, having called a few Bishops
together, for at that time Gallia had not many.

Nor do we find that Dioceses were much multiplied in Spain as yet, the famous
Council of Illiberis, which decreed so many things relating to Communion, and
such as all the Churches there must be supposed to consent to, had but nineteen
Bishops; a number so small that Baronius takes occasion from hence to despise
the Authority of the Assembly. But what ever may be inferred from the smalness
of their number, surely one must infer that their Dioceses were Divided into
Parishes from Canon seventy seven, Siquis Dia conus regens plebem sine Episcopo
vel Presbytero aliquns baptizaverit, etc. Conc. Illib c. 77. Hic regere posse
plebem Diaconum, hoc est curam Parochiae habere, Hispani Episcopi docent, and
Baptizare posse, Mendoza.


where it is ordered, That if a Deacon who has the government of a Congregation
or Parish without a Bishop or Presbyter, shall Baptize any, the Bishop shall
perfect it by Confirmation; or if in the mean time the party dies, we are to
hope well of him

The Council of Neocaesarea in like manner does signify the same distribution
of Dioceses into several Parishes, (...), etc. Conc. Neocaes. c. 13.
where the Country Presbyters are distinguished from those of the City, and the
former are forbid to officiate in the Citie's Cathedral in the presence of the
Bishops or Presbyters belonging to them.

Now when Constantines conversion had made so great and happy a change in the
affairs of the Church, when the Civil power that hitherto used all means
possible to destroy it, took it not only into its protection, but to special
favor and kindness; and studied all means possible to render it great and
honorable, the number of Bishops and Dioceses were so far from being
diminished, that they soon after were exceedingly increased, partly by the
Emperors multiplying Metropoles, partly by the unhappy Divisions that soon
after afflicted the Church, as will appear by the progress of this deduction.

When Constantine Indicted the Council of Nice, it appears from Eusebius that
he used all means to have as great an Assembly of Bishops as could well come
together; Eusebius. ^e vita Constant. l 3. c. 6.
for which purpose he furnished many of them, especially such as were at a
great distance with convenience for Travail: and there is no doubt but as many
as could have any means of going, would be carried thither by their curiosity
to see and enjoy the Presence of a Christian Emperor, that new Miracle that God
had wrought in favor of his Church: and accordingly they came from all parts
of the Roman Empire, and some from the Nations beyond it. The Countries that
lay next to Nice did doubtless send the greatest part of their Bishops: as may
be inferred by comparing the subscriptions of the Bishops of Palestine
Phoenice, Coelosyria, Egypt, and some other Countries, either with the Ancient
Noti^^^ of the Dioceses of those Countries, or the subscriptions of following
Councils; and it is observable that the Province of Bithynia where this Council
was held, had but 13 Bishops Present, though the principal Bishop of the
Province were extremely concerned, and at last condemned by this Synod
therefore we cannot but conclude that that Province had very few more. Yet
after all this care to make a full assembly, the number of Bishops scarce
exceeded 250. as Eusebius who was present does affirm; 232. according to the
MS. cited by Mr. Seldom in Eutich (...) Which Sandius takes to be Sabinus often
mentioned by Socrates: and one that exposed this Council, as consisting of poor
Illiterate men.
and Eustatius Bishop of Antioch reckons but 20 more, though the Common opinion
reckons 318. and yet how small a number is this in comparison of some
succeeding Councils, where we find without half the Apparatus, that belonged to
the Nicene Council, double the number meet together: The Council of Sardica on
the part of the Catholics, had near 300. the Heretics had great numbers at
the same time in Philippopolis: the Arrian Council of Sirmium had 300 Western
Bishops besides those of the East; that of Ariminum had 400. Bishops from the
Western parts of the Empire; for in the East there was another Council called
at Seleucca: and lastly, that of Chalcedon had no less than 600. There can be
no reasonable account given of this difference, (...). Eusebius. vit. Constable. l.
3.17.
but that the multitude of Dioceses was strangely increased; for Constantine
designed the Council of Nice to be as great and Magnificent as was possible,
and yet it was nothing in comparison with those that followed, nay was outdone
by some Provincial Councils of Africa.

And as the number of the Council of Nice shows that Dioceses in those times
were not so many, nor small as they became afterward; so the Canons of the
same Council, do suppose Bishoprics to be very large, and forbid the dividing
of them: for one Canon orders that every Bishop should be ordained by all the
Bishops of his Province. Can. 4. (...).
And considering how large Ecclesiastical Provinces were then, they cannot
suppose all the Pastors of every Congregation to meet, nor indeed the
Ministers of every good Town or substantial Village, which in several Provinces
would amount to several thousands, without making such an Assembly more
numerous than any general Council that ever was in the world: Can. ^.
another Canon provides against the dividing of Dioceses in case a Novatian
Bishop shall happily be willing to be reconciled to the Church; but that he
should be content with the place of Presbyter, unless the Catholic Bishop
should think fit to leave him the title of a Bishop; if not, Inveniat e^ locum
ut sit in Parochia Chorepiscopus.
then to make him a Chorepiscopus, i. e. the Rector of a Country Parish in his
Diocese, or a City Presbyter, lest there should be two Bishops in the same
City: The African Councils took another course as we have seen, and divided the
Diocese in such a Case; but when they considered the Authority of this Council,
we find them changing their Practice: for Augustine when he had designed his
Successor, yet would not suffer him to be ordained in his life time, because
he would not violate this Canon, although his Predecessor had permitted his
Ordination while he was alive; August. Ep.
but Augustine makes his excuse, that he did not know of this Canon then, and
yet his Diocese was large enough to hold two; but he understood this one City
with all its dependencies; and thought that by virtue of this Canon there ought
not to be two Bishops together in the Diocese of Hippo that was above forty
miles in length. The Diocese of Constantinople to which Constantine was so
great a Patron, (...). Eusebius. vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 46.
was very considerable in his time; for it had so far outgrown the measure of
one Congregation, that the Emperor thought it necessary to build a great many
Churches, and very large Temples, or Martyria, because they were dedicated to
the memory of Martyrs; and this not only within the City, but in the Suburbs,
that is, in the language of that time, the Territory belonging to it: And it is
great pity there was no Bishop or Presbyter that could inform the welmeaning
Emperor, that this was mistaken devotion, to submit all these Churches to one
Bishop.

The Council of Antioch supposes Bishops to have large Dioceses, An. Chapter 341.
Can. 8.
and therefore provides that Country Presbyters shall not give Canonical
Epistles, not so much as to the next neighboring Bishop, but the Chorepiscopi
may send such as were called (...), for friendly correspondence and concord.
And the next Canon about the power of Metropolitans, (...) Can. 9.
where it is forbid any Bishop to do any thing of great moment that may concern
the whole Province without the concurrence of the Metropolitan, does
notwithstanding allow, that he may govern his own Church, and all the Regions
under his jurisdiction.

Another Canon supposes more than one City in a Diocese, and therefore Orders,
That a Bishop shall not Ordain a Presbyter or a Deacon in another City than his
own, (...), etc. Can. 22.
or that is not subject to him.

Council Agrippin An. 346. Non opinione, sed veritate cognovi, pro finitimi loci
conjuncta Civitate
The Council of Colen discovers the Dioceses thereabout to be very large, for
the Bishops assembled had most of them their Seats at a great distance from
Colen: Servatius Bishop of Tongres in his Subscription adds something
concerning his own knowledge of Euphratas Bishop of Colen; and he gives for his
reason that he was his next neighbor, and yet their Cities are fifty or sixty
English miles distant one from the other: and the extent of the Diocese of
Colen appears from the same Council, where not only the people of the City
exhibit their complaint against him; but of all the Towns of the second
Germany, Subscriptio Servatii. Cumque recitata fuisset Epifiola plebis
Agrippinensis, sed and omnium Castrorum Germaniae secundae. Ap. Conc. acta.
Provincia Germaniae secundae Metropolis. Civitas Agrippinens, Colozia. Libel.
Provinciar.


whereof Colen was Metropolis, and most of them belonged to that Diocese.

The Council of Sardica considering what course the Arians took to strengthen
their party, by increasing the number of Bishops, as the instance of Ischyras
Presbyter of Mareotes shows, who was Ordained Bishop of a Village by the Arian
Council of Tire, thought fit to declare against such proceedings, as derogating
from the dignity of a Bishop: and therefore Decree; That no Village or
inconsiderable City shall have a Bishop, (...): Con. Sard. c. 6.
or any place where a Presbyter may suffice: -- and lest you may imagine this
an innovation to favor the growing greatness of the Bishops, they add
immediately, That the Bishops of a Province shall Ordain Bishops in those
Cities where there were any before; which supposes, that there were several
Cities after the Empire became Christian, that had never yet had Bishops: Nay
they add farther, That when a City grows very populous, so as to be fit to
receive a Bishop, it may have one: To the same purpose is the Decree of the
Council of Laodicea, held after that of Sardica, and much later than is
generally pretended: That Bishops ought not to be made in Villages, (...).
Visitatores qui circumtant, Isid. Merca.
or in the Country but Visitors: who by the name they bear appear to be
Diocesans, because they have several Congregations under them which they are to
visit: and as for such Country Bishops as are already, they must take care to
act nothing of moment without the advice and privity of the City Bishops.

Yet all this while Dioceses do multiply against all means used to prevent it:
as we may perceive by the extraordinary numbers that met in Councils, Acciti
atque tracti 400, and amplius Episcopi. Sul. Sev. l. 2. (...) Epiph. Synod. ap.
Athan. de Synod.
exceeding very much the greatest of those that had gone before: Extraordinary
numbers met at Sirmium and Ariminum; at the latter all the Bishops of the West
are said to have met; for the Emperperors Officers were sent all over
Illyricum, Italy, Africa, Spain, France, to summon the Bishops to meet at
Ariminum: and all the Bishops are said to come thither from all the Cities of
the West.

And now as we may observe the number of Bishops and Dioceses to increase; so
we may make some judgment concerning the occasion, from that little light that
is left in this particular: We have but a very obscure account of the erecting
of Bishoprics, how and when most of them were founded; but those instances
that are preserved are sufficient to make us comprehend how the numbers came to
increase so sensibly after the breaking out of the Arian controversy: and in
Egypt some time before upon the occasion of the Meletian Schism, Epiph. Her. 68.
Meletius having left the Communion of the Catholic Church, formed a separate
faction, and Ordained Bishops and Presbyters in every Country, and in every
place through which he passed; nor was he content to set up only one Altar
against another, but to erect several in the same Diocese.

Nor is there yet any end of dividing Dioceses, but these increase in
proportion to the divisions of the Church; Meletius: (...), etc. Epiph. Haer.
68.
and as the Meletian Schism multiplied Bishops in Egypt, the Author of that
Sect Ordaining Bishops in every Region, and in every place that he passed
through, several in the same Diocese, and as the Arian Controversy made Bishops
where there never were any before: so it is not to be doubted but the
Controversies which followed, Athan. Ap. 2.
multiplied Dioceses no less than these.

But besides this the multiplying of Metropolitans by the Christian Emperors
contributed no less to multiply Bishops. We have an eminent instance of this in
the Province of Cappadocia in the time of Basil the Great: The province being
divided between two Civil Metropoles; the Bishop of Tyana the new Metropolis
thought that accordingly all that part of the Country that belonge^ ^o the
Civil jurisdiction of his City, became no less subject to him as his
Ecclesiastical Province, which occasioned great disputes and animosities
between the two Metropolitans. Basil complains of the Bishops of the second
Cappadocia that they presently renounced him in a manner: Ep. 259.
and when he made any difficulty of Ordaining any Bishop belonging to his
Province, Anthimus was ready to admit him, as it happened in the case of
Faustus. Therefore to oppose the power of this new Usurping Metropolitan, he
betakes himself to the ordinary relief of making more Suffragans* that by this
means he might have some remedy from a Provincial Synod: Epist. 58. and
195.(...): Naz. de Vit. sua: and Ep. 22, 23.
To this purpose Sasima a small Town belonging to Caesarea is made an Episcopal
Seat, and Gregory Nazianzen is preferred to it much against his will, as a
Person that might be of use to him against his Antagonist, which he complains
of in his Epistles to Basil, and in his account of his own life, and so
sensible was he of Basil's engaging him in this quarrel, (...). Naz. Or. de
Basil.
that he cannot forbear expressing his resentments even in the Funeral
Oratition of his friend: where besides this new Bishopric he shows that
se^^^al others were erected upon that contention, and that the Church had this
advantage that, By the increase of Bishops there would be a more exact and
particular care taken of Souls, and every City should be governed in all
Ecclesiastical affairs within it self: which before in that Country it seems
they were not used to: And Lastly That by this means the strife endeds, After
what manner he does not say, perhaps this increase of Bishops carried the cause
for Basil against Anthimus, and so the controversy ended: However Nazianzen
commends Basil here for multiplying Dioceses, yet in the Verses before cited,
he makes it a very unnecessary innovation for him to set up a Bishop at Sasima
having no less than fifty Suffragan Bishops in his Province already; (...).
yet if we consider how far Sasima was probably from Caesarea we must conclude
the Diocese of Basil out of which this is expressly said to be taken, to have
been very large: for that this place was at some good distance from Basil, we
may perceive from Nazianzen's complaint as if he had been banished by this
promotion into some remote place. 2. If any guess may be made by comparing the
itinerary from Constantinople to Jerusalem, Printed ^^th that of Antonius with
the Tabulae Peuterigeranae, Apud Itinerarium Antonini Sasus in finibus
Ciliciae: But this cannot be the same with Sasime in the other Itinerary.
the distance must be as great at least as between Hippo and Fussala; for in
that Itinerary there is reckoned sixteen miles from Sasima to Andavalis, which
in Peutingers tables is a great way from Caesarea. 3. Sasima in the Ancient
Greek Notitiae Printed with others by Carolus a S. Paulo, Ordo Metropolitarum
prout descriptus est in Chartophylacio.
is set down in the second Cappadocia, which was under the Metropolis of
Thyana: and therefore it is not likely to be very near Caesarea the Metropolis
of the other Cappadocia: And one may observe that the Dioceses of Cappadocia
notwithstanding this division were yet very considerable, and far from being
reduced into Congregational Churches. It is plain from Nazianzen that
Cappadocia had but fifty Bishops, for so many he says Basil had under him,
(and no doubt he owned him as Metropolitan of the whole Province) and
considering the extent of that Country, the Dioceses must needs be large: for
the Country as Strabo computes, Strab. l. 12.
is near four hundred miles in length, and little less in breadth, as Causabon
restores the reading of one thousand eight hundred furlongs in the twelfth
book, by a passage in the second, where the breadth is made two thousand eight
hundred. And in this compass Bishops may contrive fifty Dioceses of very
competent extent, and not inferior to many of ours.

Basil writing to the Presbyte^^ of Nicopolis, Salutes the Clergy of the City,
and the Clergy of the Diocese. And in a Letter to the Citizens of the same
place, Bas. Ep. 592.(...).
desires them to show a good example of affection toward their new Bishop, to
the rest of the Diocese: Ep. 94.
And in another to the Brethren of Colonia whence Euphronius was chosen to
Nicopolis, he tells them that he who was their Chorepiscopus before may take
care of them still, and continue to be their Bishop: The same Father in another
Epistle, Ep. 72. Evasenis.
shows that Ancyra was a Diocese of good extent, for Eustathius passing through
the Territory of that City, is said to have overthrown the Altars of Basilides
the Bishop of it, and to set up his own Tables; which supposes several Country
Churches under the jurisdiction of that Diocesan. Bas. Ep. 406. Amphilochio sub
nomine H^racleidae. (...), etc.
And Lastly when Basil directs Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium to constitute
Bishops in the Province of Isauria which at that time was it seems distitute,
upon what occasion I know not; he enters upon a comparison between the
convenience of large and small Dioceses, and debates for sometime, whether it
were best to Ordain one Bishop of the Metropolis, Seleucia I suppose, who shall
take care of the whole Province, and Ordain more Bishops as he shall find
expedient, or else appoint a number of lesser Bishops first: And here he
confesses that if he could find one that would answer the character of St.
Paul, that were a workman, who needed not to be ashamed, such a one would go a
great way, and be worth many little Bishops; would be of greater use to the
Church, and by that means we might with less hazard undertake the care of the
Souls of the Province: But if this cannot be done, then let there be made
Bishops in the lesser Cities and Villages where there were Bishops before, and
the matter be so ordered that the Bishop of the Principal City may not disturb
us hereafter in point of Ordinations. By which it appears that Isauria was then
part of Basils Province; and we may perceive the reason why he chose rather to
Ordain the Country Bishops first, to form an interest in the first place, and
to diminish the strength and power, and to prevent the usurpations of the
Bishop of the chief City.

Nor were these Chorepiscopi Country Bishops other than Diocesan, as to the
extent of their Church, which consisted of many Congregations, and those at a
good distance one from the other; for these were not as Rectors of a single
Parish, but Visitors of several Churches, to the proportion it may be of our
Rural Deaneries, though like them they were more immediately related to a
certain Parish or Town: But their Episcopacy was in relation to the association
of several Churches. So Basil says he sent to the Chorepiscopus of those
places, not of one Country Town; (...). Bas. Ep. 355.
and therefore the Council of Laodicia calls them (...), Visitors; and where
Cities were not very thick, some of them had the inspection of a large
Territory: But yet these were but the Deputies or Surrogates of the City
Bishops in point of jurisdiction, for they were to do nothing of moment without
their Bishop, and several Councils provide against their Usurpations. Basil
whose Diocese and Province we come from giving an account of, is so resolute
upon his prerogative, that he will not endure they should ordain as much as the
inferior Clergy, as Deacons, Subdeacons, Readers, and several others which the
Church of that time reckoned among the Clergy without his consent, Bas. 181.
and if they do let them know (says he) that whosoever is admitted without our
consent, shall be reputed but a Layman: What would he have said if they had
pretended to ordain Presbyters or Bishops in opposition to them? The Bishops of
the Church of England desire no more than S. Basil assumed, That none should be
reputed Priests or Deacons that were ordained in their Dioceses without their
consent, and that by simple Presbyters who were never Chorepiscopi, or had any
character to distinguish them from other Presbyters. Therefore the case ought
not to be reckoned so hard as it is commonly represented by the more moderate
Nonconformists, who pretend this point of Reordination the only bar that keeps
them out of the Church, since there was never any other Church, not any in
Ancient times would have received them upon any other terms: and they must have
remained Nonconformists under Basil, Athanasius, and all the ancient Bishops,
whose names are, and always have been had in veneration with all Christians;
not one of these would have ever been persuaded to own a Pastor that his
Presbyters had ordained in opposition to him, nay hardly could they have been
prevailed with to admit such as any other Bishop should Ordain within their
Diocese; so extreme punctilious they were in this matter; and there is hardly
any one thing that caused so frequent and dangerous contentions between them as
the point of Ordination.

Nor was this Province singular in the extent of its Bishoprics, or the manner
of their Administration, but all the parts of the Christian World went by the
same Rule as to Diocesan Episcopacy, and most of them had much larger Dioceses
than these we have been speaking of: The Frontier Provinces of the Empire
toward the East, being more remote from the contentions that afflicted the
Church, were not cantoned into so small Dioceses as other Countries, and being
likewise less divided in their Civil Condition, because it might render them
less defensible against Invasion, the Ecclesiastical Dioceses likewise remained
entire in the the measure of their first Constitution.

The Diocese of Edessa seems to be of extraordinary extent, Conc. Chal. Act. 10.
even at the time of the Council of Chalcedon, when the ambition of some
Metropolitans, and the contentions of Heretics and Schismatics had reduced
Bishoprics to be very small. For 1. some of the misdemeanors charged upon Ibas
Bishop of this place, show that Diocese to be extremely rich: (...).
The Collection for redemption of Captives amounted to fifteen (...), and though
it is not easy to reduce that sum to our money, yet we must conclude it to be
a considerable sum, when we reflect upon another accusation of Daniel Brother
to Ibas, as if he had bestowed on Calloa, the money of the Church, for she had
let out to use two or three (...); which must be a considerable sum, since
it is taken notice of as an argument of her wealth: Besides the Church of Edessa
had six thousand more of these Numismata besides its ordinary Revenues, (and
one of its Manors called Lafargaritha is mentioned there) and two hundred
pound weight of Church Plate. 2. (...).
The City of Battina was in the Diocese of Edessa; for Ibas is accused of
having endeavored to make one John Bishop of it; who was suspected of Magic:
But Ibas his Archdeacon of that place opposed it. 3. Maras who was one of Ibas
his accusers was Excommunicated by another Archdeacon of his. 4. The Clergy of
the City of Edessa was above two hundred persons, not reckoning that of the
Country within his Diocese; and this was a Diocesan Bishop to purpose, who
besides a large Diocese had Excommunicating Archdeacons, and a great Revenue:
And if Mr. B. or his Brethren had been of that Diocese we might have found them
among his accusers.

The Diocese of Cyrus whereof Theodoret was Bishop was yet larger, Theodor. Ep.
113.
containing eight hundred Churches, as he writes to Leo Bishop of Rome: The
exceptions which Mr. B. makes against this Epistle are so fully answered by the
incomparable Dean of Paul's, that nothing can be added. But if Mr. B. should
quarrel with any writings of this time for mentioning great Dioceses, we must
have a new Critic; and disgrace a great deal of the Fathers that have hitherto
been received by a general consent: It is a very hard matter to convince men
that imagine all that time for them whereof we have little or no account, and
reckon silence of Antiquity for consent; and then if any thing shall appear
against what they have once fanfi'd, though it be never of so good credit it is
spurious; it is all Imposture, because it makes against them: who would ever be
convicted, if it shall be Defense enough to say the Evidence is a Lie?

Petavius mistaking a passage in Epiphanius, Not. in Epiph. Haeres. Arr. Epiph.
Ep. ad Joh. Hieros. ap. Hieron.
thought the Dioceses of Cyprus to be very small, but from Epiphanius his
Letter to John Bishop of Jerusalem it appears that his Diocese was of good
extent: John had a quarrel with him for having Ordained a Presbyter in his
Diocese, though it was only for the use of a Monastery: and he excuses himself
by showing how common a thing this was, and how frequently it was done in his
own Diocese; and he was so far from taking offense at it, that he thought
himself obliged to some of his neighboring Bishops for using that liberty: and
therefore commends the good nature and meekness of the Cyprian Bishops who
never quarrelled with one another upon this account; and then adds: That many
Bishops of our Communion have Ordained Presbyters in our Province, that we
could not take (because they fled from us on purpose to avoid that honor,
which was the modesty of those times -- Nay, I my self desired Philo of blessed
memory, and Theophorbus that they would Ordain Presbyters in those Churches of
Cyprus which were near them, O vere benedicta Episcoporum Cypri mansuetudo and
bonitas: -- multi Episcopi communionis nostrae and Presbyteros in nostra
ordinaverunt Provincia quos nos comprehendere non poteramus -- and ipse
cohortatus slim b. m. Philonem, and sanctum Theophorbum, ut in Ecclesiis Cypri
quae juxta se grant, ad meae autem Parochiae videbantur Ecclesiam pertinere, to
quod grandis esset and late patens Provincia, ordinarent Presbyteros,
and belonged to my Diocese; because my Province, ( i.e. my Docess) was very
large: Now that this Province which is here said to be of so large extent was
no other than his Diocese, appears from the nature of the thing. For if we
shall imagine that it was his Province, as Metropolitan, the words will have no
sense: for then are not there Bishops enough dispersed through this great
Province, who may Ordain within their respecture Dioceses, and to them belonged
the Ordination of Presbyters, and not to the Metropolitan? If we shall take
this Province for a Civil division, there will be yet greater absurdity; for
there may be other Metropolitans as well as he, and by what Authority could he
dispose of their Dioceses or Provinces? In short there he gives leave to Ordain
Presbyters where the right of Ordaining them belonged to him; and that being in
his particular Diocese only, it follows that this great Province was no other
than his own Diocese or Parochia as he calls it also in the same passage.

Nor were the Dioceses of the West generally any thing inferior to those we
have been speaking of: Italy indeed had the smallest, not only by reason of the
great multitude of Cities there; but by the policy of the Bishops of Rome who
having always had some Authority over the greatest part of the Country,
strengthened themselves by making as many Bishops as they could within the
dependence of their City; and by that means secured themselves from all such
dangers as might threaten them from general Councils; having a strong party of
Bishops at hand to send whither the Popes occasions should require their
service: What effect this policy of multiplying Bishops in Italy had we see in
the History of the Council of Trent, whither several Bishops came from France,
Spain, and Germany, with design of reforming most of the grossest abuses in the
Church, and to moderate, if not wholly to remove that insupportable Yoke of the
Papacy: But the Italian Pensioners being too many for the well-meaning Bishops,
that Yoke was settled more grievous than before, and weight added to the
oppression; No remedy being left but vain complaints, (and Dudithius makes a
very lamentable one to the Emperor) and then submission. Yet after all this the
Italian Dioceses were never reduced to a single Congregation, and some of them
remain still of a very considerable extent.

The Bishoprics of Spain were at first very large as may be observed from the
small numbers of Bishops that met in the Councils of that Country: The Council
of Eliberis had but nineteen Bishops, and the first of Toledo had the same
number; Hinc colligo Nationale fuisse Concilium cum to tempore sede^ Toletana
tot Suffraganeos non haberet Episcopos: Similiter de Eliberitano statuo, cum
eodem Episcoporum numero fuisset celebratum: -- add etiam quod in
subscriptionibus Marcellus subscribit qui suit Episcopus Hispalensis. Gar.
Loyasa.
from whence Garsias Loyasa infers that these were general Councils of all
Spain, because the Province of Toledo (says he) had not so many Suffragans at
that time; and that Marcellus Bishop of Sevil who was a Metropolitan of another
Province was there. But the extent of the Spanish Dioceses does appear not only
from the number of Bishops in their Councils, but also from the Canons made in
them: As that of the Council of Toledo is very express about the making of
Chrism, that it belonged only to the Bishop, Quamvis paene ubique custodiatur
ut absque Episcopo Chrisma nemo conficicat; tamen quia in aliquibus locis vel
Provinciis Presbyteri dicuntur Chrisma conficere, placuit ex hac die nullum
alium nisi Episcopum Chrisma facere, and per Dioecesin destinare, ita ut de
singulis Ecclesiis ad Episcopum ante Diem Paschae Diaconi destinentur, ut
confectum Chrisma ab Episcopo destinatum ad diem Paschae possit occurrere,
Conc. Tolet. 1. Can. 20. Fratri autem Ortygie Ecclesias de quibus pulsus
fuerat, pronunciavimus esse reddendas. Exemplar. Defin. sent.
and that all the Churches of his Diocese should send before Easter every year
for it to the Bishop, who was to be put in mind of it by the Arch Deacon. And
in the same Council there is a definitive sentence, whereby Ortygius is
restored to his Bishopric, out of which he had been unjustly ejected, that
shows that his Diocese consisted of several Churches; for so the Sentence runs,
That he be restored to his Churches.

Nor can any one think it strange that these should be general Councils of all
Spain, when he considers the numbers that usually met in Provincial Synods of
that Country. For the Council of Saragossa had but twelve, and that number is
extraordinary compared with some following Councils: Concilium Gerundense had
but seven Bishops; that of Ilerda eight, whereof one was present but by Proxy;
that of Valentia seven: And lest we may imagine the Bishops of Spain neglected
their Synods, the sixth Canon of the Council of Arragon (which consisted of ten
Bishops) Orders, That if any Bishop having received Summons from his
Metropolitan, Si quis Episcoporum commonitus a Metropolitano ad Synodum nulla
gravi intercedente necessitate Corporali, venire contempserit, sicut statuta
Patrum sanxierunt, usque ad futurum Concilium cunctorum Episcoporum Charitatis
Communione privetur. Conc. Tarracon. c. 6.
shall neglect to come to Council, being not hindered by sickness, shall
according to the Decrees of the Ancient Fathers be excluded the communion of
the other Bishops until the next Council following. And the same Council by
another Canon signifies the extent of the Dioceses in Spain, Multorum casuum
experientia magistrante reperimus non nullas Dioecesanas Ecclesias esse
destitutas, ob quam rem hac constitutione decrevimus ut Antiquae consuetudinis
Ordo servetur, and annis vicibus ab Episcopo Dioeceses visitentur, and siqua
Basilica reperta fuerit destituta, Ordi^atione ipsius reparari praecipiatur,
etc. Can. 8.
where it Orders every Bishop once in a year to visit his Dioceses according to
the ancient usage of that Church, and see what Churches there were out of
repair, and ordered them to be repaired out of the Revenues of those Churches,
there being a third part reserved for that purpose by ancient custom and
tradition; and the thirteenth Canon of the same Council makes a distinction
between the Presbyters of the Cathedral, and those of the Diocese; Non solum e
Cathedralis Ecclesiae Presbyteris, verum etiam de Dioecesanis ad Concilium
trabant. Can. 13.
and that the Metropolitan take care to summon some of both sorts to the
Council of the Province. And this was the state of the Dioceses in Spain from
the time of the first Council of Nice, to the latter end of the fifth, and the
beginning of the sixth Century.

The Churches of France as they had a near correspondence with those of Spain
in several other things, Bona de Reb. Litur. l. 1. c. 12.
and as Bona conjectures had anciently the same Liturgy before Pipin's time; so
they were not unlike in the extent of their Dioceses: For Gallia before the
time of the Council of Nice, seems to have had but very few Bishoprics;
although it is to be supposed the number of Christians there was much greater
than in any other part of the Empire Constantius the Father of Constantine the
Great having favored the Christians in the Provinces under his Government,
Eusebius. de vit Constable. l. 1. c. 13.
while his Colleagues used all manner of Violence and Arts to root them out
every where else: vid. Conc. Arelat. 1. apud Sirmond. Conc. Gall.
Yet when Constantine the Great called a Council at Arles to resume the cause
of the Donatists, the Gallican Bishops it seems were so few that we find but
eight of them subscribe in that Council.

The Council of Valence had twenty one Bishops, and this is very extraordinary
for the Province of one Metropolitan, in these times; and therefore it is more
probable that it was a general one of several Provinces, or of all Gallia: For
there is an Epistle of this Synod directed to all the Bishops and Churches of
Gallia, by way of Preface to the Canons of it, a thing never assumed by the
particular Synods of a Province; and this will appear yet more probable by
comparing this with other Councils that followed.

(The Council of Regium or Riez*) consisted but of thirteen Bishops personally
present, and one Presbyter who was Proxy for a Bishop.

The first Council of Orange had but sixteen personally present, and one Proxy.
And that we may not imagine the Gallican Bishops to be so negligent as not to
attend these Provincial Synods; let us but consider the eighteenth and
nineteenth Canons of the second Council of Arles, which provide against this
neglect: There its ordered, That if any Bishop be hindered by sickness, he shall
not fail to send his Proxy: But if any Bishop shall neglect to come, or depart
before the conclusion of the Assembly, let him know that he is shut out of his
brethrens communion, and so to continue until the next Synod shall restore him.
Yet for all this injunction the Synod of Angers assembled the year following
had but eight Bishops, and the third Council of Arles, within three years after
had but thirteen Bishops; The Synod of Tours ten, whereof one subscribed by
Proxy, and another subscribed being absent, the Canons being sent to him: The
Council of Vennes (Venetum) had but six Bishops, and there were but two more in
the whole Province, as appears by the Epistle of that Synod to those two that
were absent, desiring their confirmation of such Canons as they had made: And
Lastly another Council at Arles about Predestination, had but twelve
subscriptions. From whence it appears how large the Dioceses of Gallia were at
that time.

The Ancient Notitia Galliae published by Sirmond, and written as is
conjectured in the time of Honorius and Arcadius, reckons in all the seventeen
Provinces of Gallia one hundred and fifteen Cities, taking in all the Country
between the Rhine, and the British Sea: Carolus a Sancto Paulo will by no
means allow this to be an Ecclesiastical Notitia, Geogr. sacra Galliae, p. 124.
because there are several Cities mentioned in it that never were Episcopal
seats, and several Episcopal Sees are omitted; indeed the Ancient Notitia of
the Gallican Bishoprics published by that Author, reckons about one hundred
twenty and six in all that vast tract of Country; nor are they so few at this
day, taking in Savoy, Suitzerland, Alsace, and all the Countries bordering upon
the Rhi^^, to Cologn and the Country of Cleaves, besides all the Spanish
Netherlands, all reckoned within the Ancient Gallia, which will afford very
fair Dioceses.

But the Acts of the ancient Gallick Councils do make yet clearer proof of the
largeness of the Dioceses there: Proculus Bishop of Marseilles lays claim to
several Churches as having been anciently Parishes of his Dioceses; Con.
Taurin. c. 1. Easdem Ecclesias vel Parochias suas fuisse, vel Episcopos a se in
ilsdem Ecclesiis ordinatos,
and left that the ambiguity of the word Parochia may make the sense doubtful,
he lays claim in the same place to others as depending upon his Metropolis,
and where he had Ordained Bishops.

The Council of Regium Orders, That if one be Ordained against his will Bishop
of any City by fewer than three Bishops, Liceat ei unam Parochiarum Ecclesiam
cedere, -- nec u^quam duarum Ecclesiarum gubernationem obtineat.
or without the consent of the Metropolitan, that he may be made Rector of one
Parish in the Diocese, if the Bishop thinks fit; but is to have the government
of no more than one Parish, and the City Bishop to Ordain all his Assistants.

The First Council of Orange appoints, That if a Bishop shall build a Church in
another Bishops Territory; Gone. Arans. 1. Can. 10.
the Ordination of Minister to serve it shall belong to the Bishop in whose
Territory it is; but the right of Presentation and Patronage shall be in the
Founder of that Church: which supposes a Diocese of more Congregations than one.

The Council of Vaison (Vasense) enjoins all the Ministers of Parishes within
every Diocese to repair to their Proper Bishop for Chrism every year before
Easter, Per singula Territoria Presby^eri vel Ministri ab Episcopis, non prout
libitum fuerit vicinioribus, sed a suis propriis per annos singulos chrisma
petant, appropinquante solemnitate Paschali. Con. vas. c. 3.
and not to go to other Bishops that may be nearer to them.

There would be no end of instances of this kind, within the space of five
hundred years after Christ: but this is sufficient for our present design,
which is only to give a view of Diocesan Episcopacy; of the Rise and Propress
of it in several parts of the Christian World.

As to our own Country of Britain, for whose use Mr. B.'s Church History is
more especially calculated, and against whose Bishops all the Venom is
directed, it is certain indeed that we had Bishops betimes; for we find some of
their Subscriptions to the great Council of Arles. A. D. 314. Sulp. Sever. l. 2.
And there were some of them present about forty years after in the Council of
Ariminum: But how large their Bishops were then will be a very hard matter to
demonstrate. Hist. Brittan. l. 2. c. 1. ed Ascens.
Jeffrey of Monmouth reckons twenty eight Bishops, and three Archbishops in
Lucius his time, set up in the place of so many Flamins and Arch-Flamins, who
were the directours of the Heathen Religion here; Vid. usser de Primord. Eccl.
Brit. p. 57. Gild. bis denis bisque quaternis Civt tibus munita. Bid Hist. l.
1. c. 1. Bid, l, 2. c. 2
and this it seems he had from Gildas de Victoria Aurelii Ambrosii: But all
this I suppose has no other foundation than a passage out of Gildas de exidio
Britanniae, where he mentions twenty eight Cities in Brittian; and another out
of Bid who follows Gildas: The Flamins I suppose were added for ornament
afterward, by some imposture under the name of Gildas. But all the account
that I know of the number of Bishops here, is in Bid, who says, That in a
Synod assembled in Worcestershire about the receiving Augustine the Monk, there
were seven British Bishops present, and probably all the Bishops in the
Country were there, this being the second Synod assembled upon that subject,
and that wherein the matter in controversy was to be finally decided, the
Bishops that were present in the first Conference pretending they had not
sufficient Authority to make an Accommodation.

But whether it were upon the Authority of this Testimony, or of something else
more express, so it is that the succeeding Historians deliver it for certain,
that Wales had but seven Bishops: Jeffrey of Monmouth tells us that when Austin
came over, Hist. Brit. li^ 1. c. 12. Ed. Heid. Gyrald de Eccles. Men. did. 2.
and Itiner. Camb. l. 2. c. 1.
he found in the Province of the Ancient Britains seven Bishoprics, and one
Arch-Bshoprick. And Gyraldus Cambrensis gives the reasons why there were but
four in Wales in his time, since anciently there were seven: Either (says he)
there were more Cathedrals within the compass of Wales in former times, or
rather because Wales was of a larger extent heretofore than it was in his
days, and reached as far aa Severn: And so indeed it was of much greater
extent than it is now, having all the Country of Hereford, a good part of
Glocestershire, Worcester, Salop, and Cheshire belonging to it. And Baleus
gives this account of the Bishops assembled in that Synod mentioned before out
of Bid: That seven British Bishops met there, for in those days the
Britains had just so many under the Archbishop of Menevia, according to the
number of the Bishops of Asia mentioned in the Revelation of St. John: Baleus
Script. Brit Cent. 1. c. 70.
and then gives their names: Hereford, Landaff, Llanbaderne, Vowr, Bangor,
Asaph, Worcester, and Morganensis or Glamorgan, though this was the same with
Landaff: And therefore Bishop Usher thinks, that either Chester must make up
the seventh, or Caer Ilyby, i. e. Holyhead in the Isle of Anglesey; and so
perhaps it is Episcopus Monensis, and not Morganensis. But as to the number of
the Welsh Bishops at Austins coming over, if any one desire to know any thing
more particularly, he may consult the learned Primate of Armach, Usher de
Primord. Eccles. Brit. (...) 87, and seque.
who has exhausted that point: But as to the form of the British Church
Government, that it was Diocesan, and not Presbyterian or Independent, we have
a modern Testimony, which though it be of no great Authority for the Credit or
Learning of the persons that give it; yet it is something remarkable, because
they were professed enemies of the Church of England, and of all Diocesan
Churches: It is the testimony of an Independent Synod assembled in the Savoy,
Preface to their Declaration of Faith, near the end.
A. D. 1658. For Novelty (say they) for which we are both charged, ( i. e. the
Presbyterians and Independents) by the enemies of both: It is true in respect
of the public and open profession, either of Presbytery of Independency, this
Nation has been a stranger to each way, it is possible ever since it has been
Christian.

And now having given an account of the Rise and Progress of Diocesan
Episcopacy, and the extent of Ancient Dioceses in several parts of the
Christian World, I shall conclude this Chapter with a general Testimony of St.
Jerome concerning the custom of the Church in and before his time: Jerome
speaking of Confirmation, makes the Orthodox person in the Dialogue say these
words: I do not deny (says he) this to be the custom of the Church, Non quidem
abnuo hanc esse Ecclesiarum consuetudinem, ut eos qui long in minoribus
Urbibus per Presbyteros and Diaconos baptizati sunt, Episcopus ad invocationem
S. Sprritus manum impositurus excurrat. Hieron adv Lucifer.
for the Bishop to go about his Diocese to confirm by imposition of hands, such
as are Baptized in lesser Cities remote from the Episcopal Seat by Presbyters
and Deacons And the same Father speaking to the same purpose, that this was
done rather to honor Episcopacy than by any absolute necessity, adds: Otherwise
(says he) those are to be mightily bewailed, In viculis and Castellis, and re.
motioribus locis per Presbyteros aut Diaconos Baptizati.
who being Baptized in Villages, Towns and places remote from the Bishop, have
dyed before they were confirmed. Therefore it was the custom of the Church
then; nor does he speak only of his own time, but of the constant practice of
the Church, that Bishops should have Presbyters and Deacons under their
jurisdiction in places very remote from their Cathedrals; and that little
Cities, Towns or Castles, i. e. fortified Towns and Villages, might be remote
from their Bishops Seat: and so Dioceses be then and before that time of a very
considerable extent.

FINIS.
Books sold by Moses Pit at the Angel in St. Paul's Church yard, Are
All that are Printed at the Theater in Oxford (a Cataloge of which he gives
gratis to all that please to send to him for it) As Bibles in Folio for
Churches, Bibles in Quarto, Octavo, and Twelves. Testaments in Octavo and
Twelves. Common Prayers in Folio for Churches. Common Prayers in Quarto,
Octavo, Twelves and Twentyfours.

The English Atlas, or a description of the whole Word: the which will be
twelve Volums in Folio: The two first Volums whereof are published, the third
is now in the Press. The price to subscribers is Forty shill. a Volum in
quires, they paying Forty shill. always before hand on the delivery of every
Volum.

Catalogue of the Books in the public Library at Oxford, Folio.
Historia Vniversitatis Oxoniensis, Fol. Marmora Oxoniensia, Folio. Pocock on
Micha and Malichi, Folio. Jamblichus de mysteriis Aegyptiorum, Gr. Lat. Folio.
Charltoni Onomasticon Zoicon. Fol. Sir William Dugdale's History of our
Civil-Wars, Fol. Dr. Henry Hammond's Sermons. Fol. Dr. Cole's four
Controversial Dialogues, Quarto. Lord Clarendon against Hebs, Quarto. Prideaux
maimonidis Heb. Lat. Qua.

