THE LAWFULNESS Of Taking the New Oaths ASSERTED.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for J. Mills, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor near
Stationers' Hall, 1689.

The Lawfulness Of Taking the New Oaths, etc.
THough our late Common Danger united us all in hearty Desires of Deliverance,
yet when those Desires are granted, we are so unfortunate as to divide again
about the Methods of securing that Blessing: We all agreed, That upon the late
King's withdrawing we were left without Government, or else, Why was the
Government seized? It was then thought not only necessary but lawful to put the
Supreme Administration into his hand, who had been the Instrument of our
Deliverance; and therefore the Prince was desired to take it on him: We
generally believed a further Settlement necessary, and that a Convention was
the best way to make that Settlement, otherwise, Why was a Convention advised?
Or, Why were the Members so unanimously Chosen? But (...) they met* and
happened to (...) about (...) Ex^e^^^n* (...) who (...) without Scruple or
Regret, began then to fly off and grow discontented: Now since all the People
virtually or actually chose their Representatives, or sat there in their own
Right, or by virtue of this Election, it (...) to me, that all Persons did
refer this Matter to the Arbitration of this Convention, and are obliged to
submit to the major Vote of this Assembly, which were Judges of their own
Choosing: And if we consider how various, and how positive, particular* Men and
Partys were in th^^r Opinions of the ^es^ mea^s to settle (...), we shall
conclude there was no way to compose us, but by leaving it to our
Representatives to adjust, for otherwise we must have had an eternal Squabble,
and no settled Government at all: Some were for Treating with, and Restoring
King James, and educating the Prince of Wales a Protestant; others for a Regent
with Royal Power; others for Crowning the Prince of Orange alone, some for
Crowning the Queen alone, and some for a Commonwealth: Now in this variety of
Opinions, whatever way the Convention had taken, many would have been disgusted
that their Method was rejected; wherefore, though some are dissatisfyed with
the Course which was approved by the major. Vote, yet if settlement were
necessary, and this referring it to the decision of a Convention the only way
to procure it, then all Persons seem obliged to submit to the way they have
chosen.

But they say:

The Decree is unjust, because it alters the Succession, and injures the* Title
of both the Princesses, to which, being sinful, they cannot Consent.

We Answer, The Princess who is generally believed the Right Heir, is made
actual Queen, and the public Acts are in her Name; but her Modesty and
Prudence is such, That the deemed herself unfit in this juncture to manage the
Supreme Power alone, and therefore by the Consent of her self and her Sister,
the Prince was joined in the Title, and trusted with the Supreme Administration
for his Life only: Now considering his fitness for this place, and his high
Merit, both as to the Princesses, in res^^ing their Title from a designed and
final Defeat, and as to the People of England, in delivering their Religion and
Laws from an intended Subversion, we cannot think it very unreasonable to
requite this unparalleled Service with the highest Personal Reward,
especially, since it ceases with his Life, and then returns into the old
Channel: It was as small a Deviation from the Right Line, as the Case would
bear, which Case was so extraordinary, That since the like Circumstances will
scarce ever happen again, there is no great danger that this can be made a
Precedent: It was more irregular in that Convention, which while the Lady
Elizabeth, the true Heir of the Crown was living, declared Henry the Seventh
King, without joining her in the Title, or taking Notice of her Right; yet all
the Nation swear Allegiance to him before his Marrying that Lady, and he is to
this day owned a Lawful King, and his Laws are still in force: But here the
Right Heir is declared Queen, and Allegiance sworn to her, and the Prince
however is King, de facto, and it is from him we all principally expect
Protection, and therefore he may, and must expect Allegiance from us, even
though his Title in our opinion be not without Exceptions. We know the Jews
were to seek the Peace of that Government, by which they were made Captives,
and to pray for it; and the Primitive Christians enquired not whether their
Emperors were set up by the Sword, or the Senate, but prayed for them, and
were faithful to them, when they were set up without any scrutiny into their
Title: Besides, if there were any Injustice in this, those Members of the
Convention who dissented, are clear of the supposed Guilt, and have done all in
their power to hinder it. But being overruled, they are to submit, and since
they as well as others desire to be protected, they must consider that it is
impossible for this Government (if those who are under it will not give
security for their Allegiance) to preserve it self or defend them in a time
when there are so many Divisions at home, and so great Dangers threatening us
from abroad: They desire to live quietly, that is to enjoy the benefit of this
Government, and the necessary means for attaining that Quiet, is for all under
the Government to be faithful to it; otherwise we decline the means, and yet
would have the end; we refuse the Duty, and yet expect the Reward.

Secondly, It is Objected*

That these Persons have Sworn Allegiance to King James, his Lawful Heirs and
Successors, and declared, that no Power on Earth can Absolve them from this
Oath.

We Reply: All political Writers (except some late English Authors) do suppose
some Cases whereby a King may forfeit his Dignity, and consequently his Right
to our Allegiance. Now if this be the Case of King James, we need no
absolution, for he devests himself of his Right to Govern us, and then our Oath
cannot oblige us: And these Men cannot deny his Breach of his Promises and
Oath, his Arbitrary Suspension of Laws, his manifest Endeavors to subvert our
Religion, and change the whole Constitution of our Government, his open
Invasion of Liberty and Property; and his first voluntary deserting us in a
time of danger, leaving us without Government or Means of Defense: Now one of
these by some Writers is affirmed to be a Forfeiture, but all of them
concurring as in our Case* are abundantly sufficient to take off the Obligation
of that Oath. And we cannot but think many of those who are now dissatisfyed,
did once believe they were not obliged by that Oath of Allegiance to King
James, because they did not discover those Plots against him, which they could
not but have some notice of, and were so far from giving him Assistance, that
they stood by and let him sink, yea, they seized on the Government upon his
withdrawing, and offered the Administration of it to his Enemy, without his
Consent, and against his Will: They also obeyed the Prince's Orders, and by his
Summons, came and sat in a Convention, not Called by King James his Authority,
and all this while were well pleased, yet these and many other Acts are
directly contrary to that Oath, so that we must either charitably hope they
believed that Oath was not obligatory, or suppose them wittingly guilty of such
Perjury, as their Integrity and Characters forbids us to suspect them for: If
these Scruples however had been moved soon, they might have been serviceable
to King James his Interest, of which they seem now very tender; but as they
come too late to serve him, so they can now be of no use, but to hinder our
Settlement, and increase our Divisions: The publishing them now being as great
disservice to this Government, as the concealing them before was to that of the
King withdrawn: And since Conscience in Wise Men; is always Uniform, this
unseasonable Niceness is by their Adversaries thought to be the effect rather
of Passion, than tender Conscience; But allowing that Censure to be unjust, we
will suppose their Oath obliged them to defend King James his Title, and his
Person, while he was here, which few then endeavored to do; yet it will not
follow, that therefore It obliges them now to stand by him when he has
deserted them, when his Person is withdrawn, his Power broken, and his
Government in Fact dissolved; since a Soldier who has sworn, Allegiance to
his own Prince, when the Army is routed, may take Quarter from his Enemy, and
bear Faith to him that preserves him without any breach of his former Oath. And
I cannot but wish these Gentlemen would be sparing however of urging the
obligation of their Oath to King James, because that makes it more necessary
for the present Government to insist upon a new Security for their Allegiance,
lest upon any opportunity they should so far pursue their supposed Duty as to
join with King James to the Ruin of this King.

Thirdly, They Affirm:

They will give all imaginable assurance to live Peaceably under the Government
of the present KING and QUEEN, and this they hope may be sufficient.

It Is Replied, Though it be not doubted but the best of these scrupulous
persons would live peaceably, yet if the example should spread, it cannot be
hoped that all who pretend the like scruple will imitate them in their
submission and integrity, and if the Government shall need a considerable
actual assistance, peaceable nutrality is not sufficient; in such a case not to
assist the Government is to subvert it: But to look more narrowly into this
offer of assurance, to live peaceably, it is not easy to apprehend how such as
believe themselves to be still obliged by their Allegiance to King James, can
give security to live peaceably under this KING and QUEEN, since they take
themselves bound to assist King James, and Defend his Title as soon as they
have opportunity; So that when the present Governors shall stand in most need
of their help, they must fail them; yea and oppose them, and therefore this is
a promise which ere long they may believe themselves bound in Conscience to
break; and so it is no security to King William, etc. but a mere artifice to
delude them, a promise which may very shortly contradict their former Oath, and
therefore they cannot in Honor offer it, nor the Government in Prudence accept
it as a Security or Assurance. And if they do intend to assist King James upon
the first opportunity, they ought not to make this promise; if they do not,
then they actually pay Allegiance to the present King, and therefore there is
no reason why they may not swear they will bear Faith and true Allegiance, who
in a case of Danger resolve to keep that Oath. And when we consider the brevity
and modesty of this New Oath, which determines not the New Kings Title to the
Crown to be strictly Legal, but only supposes him King de Facto, and obliges
Men to swear they will be in no Plots against him, but obey him so far as by
LAW they are bound. We shall find very little just ground of refusing to take
it to him who has Delivered them, and will Defend them; for whatever we
honestly intend to do, we may swear (when Authority requires it) we will do
that, especially when the consequence and example of our refusal will create
Faction at present, and does tend to the Ruin of our Nation hereafter.

Finally, they Allege:

That some Men now at the Helm, design to Alter the Established Government in
Church and State, to which they cannot Comply, and will rather suffer for
opposing such Attempts, than sin by promoting them.

We Answer, That if we grant there are some such in our public Counsels, their
number is not able to balance those of better Principles, as many late
experiments have declared: However, Nothing contributes more to the
accomplishment of these evil Designs, than for so many of our Principal Friends
in both Houses, who love the Monarchy and the Church, to desert their Stations
in so critical a juncture; by this we lose their Advice and Votes in our
public Counsels, and the adverse party gains both strength and advantage by
their absence: Nor will they omit to improve this occasion by representing them
as dangerous and disaffected to the present Government, which in its own
Defense will think it necessary to encourage those who will more readily assist
it, which may be justly feared will end in giving a greater Liberty to those
who dissent from us, than is consistent with our safety. Wherefore instead of
complaining at the growing Interest of others, and our own seeming to decline;
we should consider whether this be not necessity rather than choice in our
Governors; and if our Stifness and Noncompliance drive them upon that
necessity, we must not accuse others for the natural and necessary consequences
of our own actions. It Is evident, the Principles of the Church of England,
though never so moderatly Stated, are more suitable to the Interest of this
Monarchy, than those of any other Party; so that if the Members of this Church
would unanimously comply with the present Settlement, none would have so great
Favor as these: Others have been promised Ease and Liberty, and on the account
of the common Protestant Interest they may justly expect it; but if our
dissatisfactions hinder not, the Church may still flourish, and the Monarchy be
safe, which cannot be supposed to slight its best Friends, or seek its own
Destruction; so that our compliance will not only secure us against the Fears
of any dangerous Alterations, but keep those who wish us well in such posts,
that they may have the conduct of such condescentions as ought to be granted in
this juncture. In a Word, if it be in these Men's opinion a Sin to promote the
Designs of evil principl'd Men, that non compliance which promotes them is the
very crime they are afraid off: And those sufferings which they seem to covet,
will be neither for their Honor, nor the Churches benefit; nor can they suffer
in this Cause single, but the poor Church will suffer not only with, but
perhaps for them; to be an occasion of which woeful consequence will scarce by
Wise Men be accounted Meritorious.

To Conclude.
EIther Men do well to take this Oath, or they did very ill who contributed so
much toward the present Settlement; these later Acts are done in defense of the
former, and if we had been more early scrupulous, things had not gone thus far.
However, if we think the present methods were either strictly lawful, or
absolutely necessary, we may safely comply with them; and though we do judge
them not exactly regular, yet we may rather wonder (in so great and strange a
Revolution, and under so Dire a necessity of a speedy Settlement) things are
not more amiss, than complain of some few deviations from ancient rules and
usuages: This juncture could not bear nice and accurate proceedings; but if we
all Unite, a little time will bring all things into the former current:
Extraordinary Cases, such as this was, must have extraordinary Cures; and that
necessity which drives us a little out of the Road, excuses us for so doing; or
however, from any guilt by submitting to that which is done by others. It was
generally agreed in our public Council, that a Popish Successor would be
dangerous and destructive to this Government; and is not a Popish King so also?
And then, is not paying allegiance to him the means to effect that destruction?
Can our Religion bind us to assist him whose main end was and will be to
extirpate it? Or can our Conscience oblige us to oppose him who comes to rescue
and secure that which we believe in our very Consciences to be God's Holy
Truth? That small alteration in the Government is but merely temporary, but the
consequences of not submitting to it, will be as lasting as they are dismal. We
have brought all the Protestants of the Royal Family into extreme danger; and
if we desert them now, we give them and all our hopes under God together into
the hands of such as will destroy them. We pretend to fear Popery and
Fanaticism, yet some of us take the ready way to let in one or both of these
upon us. Nothing but our Union can prevent these mischiefs, and nothing
promotes both those Interests more effectually than our Divisions: It Is
certain, those who are of our Church have for the main the same principles and
the same reason to desire its welfare, yet very many of great Honor and
Prudence, and of Eminent Piety and Integrity, do hold it lawful to take these
Oaths. And such as differ from this opinion cannot prove it unlawful; therefore
methinks a little humility might teach us to yield up a disputable point for
the safety of our Religion and Country, especially when the scandal of our
differing is so notorious, and the consequences of it so fatal to the whole
Community. We see the late King has done more than the generality of Casuists
think is necessary to a Forfeiture of his right to our Allegiance. And we know
he can never be actual King here, but by an absolute Conquest, which will be to
our utter Ruin; And do we dote upon that Allegiance to him, which his own Acts
have both freed us from, and rendered as destructive as it is unpracticable?
Shall we in this Age expect a Miracle to preserve us from that misery from
which God has already once saved us, when we wilfully run a second time into
it? Have we not now (as Protestants generally believe) the next in Succession
on the Throne, and by her consent a fit and able Person joined in the Royal
Dignity, who aims at nothing more than the safety of Religion, and the good of
the whole Nation; and shall we Ruin all his Glorious Designs by denying him
that Allegiance which our Laws say is due to every King de Facto? Can we desire
the benefit of his Protection, and the Privileges of Subjects, and not pay him
that Duty and Service which his Dignity requires, and his singular Merit
deserves? Let us but seriously resolve to lay aside all peevishness and pride,
and that esteem we are so apt to have for our own notions: And then I doubt not
but it will appear to be both our Duty and our Interest to take this Oath, to
be lawful, reasonable and necessary, as well to promise as to Pay our
Allegiance to our present KING and QUEEN; under whom if their Subjects do
agree, they cannot but enjoy all the Temporal Happiness they can expect or
desire; and may certainly escape all those dangers to which they were so lately
exposed.

FINIS.

