A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, ON JANUARY the 30th, 1681.

By HENRY MAURICE, B. D. Chaplain to His Grace the Lord Archbishop of
CANTERBURY.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1682.

ISAIAH XXXVII. 3. This is a day of Trouble, of Rebuke, and Blasphemy.


IT was the manner of the Ancient Christians to observe the Anniversaries of
their Martyrs, not with the mournful Rites of a Funeral, nor the dejectedness
of Fasting and Humiliation, but as the days of their Birth and Coronation, with
the highest expressions of Joy and Thanksgiving, with the same cheerfulness and
serenity that they had suffered. Nor could it be conceived proper to remember
them with Tears, whose happy condition was raised above the assistance and
charity of the Church's Prayers; for those glorious Spirits take sanctuary
under the Heavenly Altar, where no Persecution, no Sacrilege can invade them.
Those as the Fellow Sufferers of Christ, have the special privilege of
immediate admission into Paradise: and tho the passage be rough and boisterous,
yet the speed and the dispatch is proportionable; and the Fire as it hastens to
destroy, becomes at the same time a swift and rapid Chariot to transport the
Martyrs into glory. What wonder then, if when one Member be so eminently
honored, the whole body take occasion to rejoice with it?

But besides this recompense of the Sufferers, which the Church was wont to
congratulate with a joyful Remembrance, the honor done to Religion by those
who owned it with their dying Confessions, and subscribed it with their Blood,
required yet a farther Acknowledgment and Thanksgiving. For what were the
Passions of the Martyrs, but so many Victories of the Christian Faith, that
proclaimed it to be stronger than Principalities and Powers: stronger than the
Counsel and Indignation of Men: stronger than the desires of Life, or Terrors
of Death? By these Conquests was the Kingdom of Christ enlarged; by these
Invincible Sufferings was the perverseness of the Nations reduced. When
Christians knew how to die better than to dispute, but none understood yet how
to rebel for their Religion: What then can the Commemoration of these Victories
be, but the common Triumph of Christianity?

How then are we departed from this ancient and reasonable Practice? How comes
this black and melancholy appearance to obscure, and as it were eclipse this
Day of our Royal Martyr? Is the Crown of Martyrdom now become less glorious?
or, is it not at least an equal recompense for the loss of Earthly Kingdoms? or
the Cause for which he suffered, the Cause of God, and of his People, was it
not sufficient to entitle him to the dignity of Martyrdom? This part admits of
no suspicion, for the Title of the Martyr, as it is more honorable, so it is
no less clear and undoubted than that of the King: Nay, the Malice of his
Enemies, prophetic as that of Caiaphas, foretold this his heavenly
Inauguration, and accomplished their own prediction, by making him a glorious
Prince indeed.

We bewail not him therefore at this time, but weep for our selves and for our
Country, stained with this Innocent and Royal Blood, which was shed not by the
hands of a Pagan Invader (for so some of our Kings became Martyrs in the
defense of their Religion and their People) but by a new and unhear'd of
Treason of his own Subjects. And had the Conspiracy of a few desperate Wretches
prevailed against him, the suddenness and secrecy of the stroke might have
been our Excuse, and covered the Nation from the guilt and infamy of the Fact:
But this Treason usurped the name of the Senate and People of the Land; and as
if the Fears and Astonishment of the Nation had been taken for their consent
and approbation, Murder was dressed up in the form of Public Execution, and the
Coronation of the King was not more solemn, had hardly more Spectators than
that of the Martyr. Had he fallen in the day of Battle by the blind and
undiscerning fury of Rebellion, or afterward in the dark recesses of his
Prison; the reproach had been common to us with many other Nations: But this
was the first time that Treason affected to make it self a Spectacle, and grew
Impudent and desperate enough to undergo the horror and envy of a Public
Regicide. And not content to trample all Earthly Majesty under foot, the name
of God and of Religion, and what is our more peculiar disgrace, of Reformed and
Protestant Religion, were brought to suffer together with our late Sovereign,
while they were abused into a pretense to carry on, and to justify the
Wickedness of this day.

These are the sad Reasons of our present affliction, that render the
remembrance of this Martyrdom so bitter. These are the Clouds that overcast the
day, and give it so different an appearance from the Feasts of the Ancient
Martyrs. It Is this in fine which renders it so exactly agreeable to the
description of the day in the Text; A day of Trouble, of Rebuke, and Blasphemy.

The Trouble, as St. Jerome explains these words, belongs to us whose was the
loss, whose was the sin. The Rebuke proceeds from God, whose Judgment this was.
The Blasphemy is the part of our Enemies, who are glad of this occasion to
insult us and our Religion. It is the Echo and repercussion of that execrable
stroke, returned upon us with the censures and reproaches of the World. Of
these I shall speak severally, according to the order of the Text, and begin
with the Trouble of the day.

(1.) Of all the Blessings God is pleased to bestow upon a Nation, there is
none either more beneficial or more magnificent than a good King; who
represents not only the Authority of the Universal Monarch, but the affection
and tenderness of our Heavenly Father; and is the Image of the love and
goodness, no less than of the Power and Majesty of God. What happiness may not
a People enjoy under a Prince after Gods own heart? How must Religion flourish
under his protection? how must Virtue reign in his Laws, and triumph in his
Example? what Peace and Prosperity must adorn his Reign? what Security and
Content must possess his Subjects, whose Power is sufficient to secure them
against foreign depredations, and whose Justice and Clemency interpose between
them and the Terrors of his own Power? This Condition of all things seems to
approach nearest to that of Gods Heavenly Kingdom, where the Saints do not Obey
so much, as Reign together with their King. But when it shall please God to
recall this great Instrument of Humane Welfare; when this mighty Vessel, that
contained so many, and such variety of Blessings, shall be drawn up again into
Heaven, and this Earthly God comes to die like other Men, the Joy and Delights
of the People expire with him; and it is not an ordinary Affliction and
Mourning that he leaves behind him, nor is any Loss lamented with more sincere
or more obstinate Tears. The Heathen were so sensible of this Trouble, that to
relieve themselves they ran headlong into Idolatry, and changed their
Allegiance into Adoration. Nor would they be persuaded, that the best of their
Kings did Die like one of the Common People, but that Death made them Invisible
and Divine: neither would they be comforted otherwise than by this persuasion,
That they still remained under the Government and Protection of their beloved
Princes. Thus Assyria, Egypt, and almost all the Nations of the Earth were
first distracted into Superstition, and the People of Rome would not be
satisfied for the loss of their first King, before the Senate had decreed
Worship, for him they were suspected to have destroyed. Nay, sometimes this
Trouble grew too strong for all the amusements of Superstition; and Osyris,
notwithstanding the Opinion of his Divinity, was remembered with perpetual
Lamentations.

But be this the Extravagance, and Madness of Heathen Zeal. Even the People of
God himself were not above the reach of this Trouble; and though they were
taught, that the same Providence did always watch over them under all the
differences of Government, yet they could not sustain the loss of a good Prince
without some jealousy, that God was going to desert them; at leastwise, not
without singular Trouble and Affliction. When Moses, the Great Prince of
Israel, whose mighty Scepter commanded the Sea, and made it a Bulwark and
Defense for his People on the Right hand, and on the Left; in whose time plenty
came down from Heaven in Bread and Flesh, and Rivers ran in dry places; Moses,
the prodigy of Wisdom and Modesty, of great Understanding, and greater Mistrust
of it; slow indeed of Speech, but wonderful in his Writings; Moses, the Meekest
Man upon Earth, easy to forgive Injuries (and happy were it, if the same
Virtue that is so forward to pardon, could as easily reclaim the Offender;)
easy in the Concession of his own Prerogatives, and sharing his Authority with
the Elders of the Congregation; Such a Prince in short, whose Government had
more in it of the Father, than the King: When he came to take his leave of the
People in order to go to the place where he must die, with how sad a
Countenance, with what discontented Murmuring was he answered? He found their
Affection now more querulous and ungovernable than all their former Seditions.
And tho Corah and his Faction had represented him odiously, as one that
affected Arbitrary Dominion, yet when he came to Die, such was the Peoples
resentments of that Loss, that God seemed to grow Jealous, and to mistrust
their Affections toward Himself, and therefore thought fit to conceal him by a
private Interment at some distance from the Camp, on a high Hill, from whence
is the fairest Prospect over all the Land of Canaan. Nor could all this prevent
the Grief and Lamentation of Israel for so great a Loss; for, notwithstanding
they were upon the point of taking possession of the Promised Land yet, they
deserred to accept the fruit of Forty years labor and expectation, till they
had paid a Sorrowful Duty to the Memory of Moses, whom they bewayl'd Thirty
Days in an extraordinary manner; and Josephus adds, that they were never so
much afflicted for any loss.

JOSIAH, the good, but unfortunate King of Judah, who had repayr'd the Temple
of the Lord in Jerusalem, and restored the neglected and profaned Service of
God into its ancient Purity and Splendour, having been unhappily slain in
Megiddo, was lamented in an Unusual manner by the Inhabitants of Judah and
Jerusalem; nor was the Mourning ended within the accustomed time, but
transmitted to Posterity. Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the Singing Men
and Singing Women spoke of Josiah in their Lamentations unto this day, and made
it an Ordinance in Israel. And after the Return of the Captivity from Babylon,
when one would think that all their former Sorrows had been forgot, yet this
Grief was still fresh and undiminish'd; and the Prophet Zachary, when he would
have described the Mourning of the Children of the Bride-chamber, when Christ
their Bridgroom should be taken from them, could not find a greater Instance
than that for Josiah: It shall be like the Mourning of Hadadrimmon in the
Valley of Megiddo.

But this is the least part of our present Trouble, nor would it be just to
remember that Loss with so much Affliction, which God has long since so
gloriously repaired: Had our late Sovereign therefore died the death of Moses
or Josiah, and the course of Nature, or the chance of War, or any thing else
than our own Sin and Madness deprived us of so great a Blessing, the Trouble of
this Day might have ceased before this time: but when we consider the Manner,
and the Hands by which He fell, His Blood (like that of Murdered Persons, upon
the approach of the Murderer) seems to run still afresh, and to fly in the face
of this Guilty Nation, threatening it with yet more severe Judgments. For if the
Sin of Corah, which proceeded no farther than Insolent Expressions against
Moses and Aaron, (the lowest step of this days guilt, and scarcely to be
reckoned in the Computation of it) was punished with Fire and Pestilence; How
much sorer Punishments shall we expect, whose oblique Contempt of Authority was
soon improved into open Insolence, and (since no Faction did ever Insult a
Prince they did not mean to destroy) that Insolence was asserted by Rebellion,
and this carried on through Rapin, and Devastation, and Blood? And the success
of that Rebellion rendering it still more daring and wicked, the Guilt grew up
with wonderful Increase, and exceeded all Computation and the Power of
Discourse; for who can express the succeeding Treatment of Captived Majesty,
the Indignities of His Imprisonment, of His Trial, of His Death, but with
Tears, unless the greatness of the Trouble intercept even those Expressions?
Who can reflect upon so barbarous a Fact without the greatest disorder and
tumult of Thoughts? And now, if we yet retain any thing of English Nature and
Affections, How can we look upon this Land thus defiled with Royal Blood, and
laden with such crying Aggravations, and not weep over it? How can we reflect
upon the Singularity of this Guilt, and not be troubled with the apprehension
of some Exemplary Vengeance, as new and singular as the Crime?

But why are We concerned in this Trouble, who have no share in the Guilt? For
how many here present may justly boast their Services to that Excellent Prince,
and the honor of Suffering with him? How many here present are the Noble
Offspring of that brave, but unfortunate Loyalty, that contended so long with
a Prosperous Rebellion, with unequal Force? How many more are wholly
unconcerned in the Sin, who were yet unborn when this accursed thing was
committed? Yet none above the reach of this Trouble, none beyond the necessity
of this Humiliation: For Public Sins of such Example and Scandal as this, like
the first Rebellion of Man, may remain a Debt upon Posterity, and involve more
in the unhappy Consequences of it than the Seed of the Evil Doers. For when God
upon this Occasion comes to reckon with a Nation, and to call all their Sins to
Remembrance, who can endure the Visitation? Noah, and Job, and Daniel, may save
their own Souls indeed by their Righteousness in such General Calamities; but
few, I am afraid will be able to make use of their Plea, and stand upon their
Righteousness and Integrity. They were but few, in comparison of the whole Body
of the Jewish Nation, that were immediately concerned in putting our Savior to
Death: they were not many, and perhaps but a Mercenary Rabble, that Petitioned
for his Crucifixon, and undertook to Answer all the Appeals of His Blood at
their own, and their Childrens peril; yet when the time of their Visitation
came, (which was not till Forty years after the Killing of their King, when
most of his Betrayers and Murderers were dead) every Age, and Sex, and Family,
did share alike in the Common Calamity, and the Famine, and Pestilence, and
Swords of the Romans, had no Commission to distinguish; only the Christians are
said to have escaped: And lest We might presume, and grow secure with this
Example, we must remember, that the holiness of their Lives was no less
wonderful than their Preservation. And if the Post-nati, such as had yet done
neither Good nor Evil, may have reason to apprehend the Consequence of this
Day, the Remains of the Last Generation cannot be unconcerned in this Trouble;
for they were all in some measure Accessory to this Evil; and if they were not
the Instruments, yet were they the Occasion of what we now bewail, and by
contributing every one his part to the general Provocation, helped to draw down
this heavy Judgment upon us. Many, whose Arms and Affection waited upon the
Royal Standard, fought against it more effectually by their Sins; and like the
Soldiers of Ptolomy, the last of that Race, while they followed their pursued
King, sunk the Vessel on which he was Embarked. In short, All had joined to
provoke the Wrath of God, and Fanatic Fury was but the Instrument to Execute
it. Therefore we will no longer regard those wretched Authors of this Cruelty,
whose Memory is as odious and abhorred, as the Profane Relics of their
Carcasses; but we will look a little farther into the Nature of this Calamity,
and in God's permission of so barbarous, and unnatural Wickedness, read the
severity of his Judgment, and the sharpness of his Rebuke, the Second Part of
this Days Character. It is a day of Rebuke.

2. As it is a high Presumption to Interpret all the Acts of Providence, and
Unchristian to resolve every Calamity into a Judgment; yet on the other side
there are some so remarkable, so manifest Instances of Gods Indignation, that
there needs no Handwriting nor Prophet to explain them. There may be a mighty
Wind, and yet God may not be in that Wind; there may be a Fire and Earthquakes,
and God be in neither of them: But when Fire and Brimstone shall come down from
Heaven to destroy Wicked Cities, Fire as prodigious and unnatural as the Lusts
that kindled it; when an Earthquake, which is a kind of Sedition in nature,
shall overwhelm the Seditious Corah and his Accomplices, and single them from
the rest of the Congregation of Israel; there is no room either for Infidelity
that believes nothing, or for Charity that believes all things, to dispute such
Demonstrations of Gods Judgments. Nor may we understand the Rebuke of God only
from such Acts of his immediate and flaming Hand; but many of those Judgments
which are Executed by the hands of Men are no less manifest. But of all the
Evil Symptoms of God's Displeasure toward a Nation, there are few more
certain, or more fatal, than the Murmuring and Sedition of the People. And tho
this may be of less Consequence when it is natural, and the effect of Tyranny
or Oppression: yet when it is without Reason, and all hope and prospect of
Advantage; when it is as unaccountable as the Misunderstandings of Babel, like
Thunder in a clear Sky, it is to be accounted a Prodigy, and the Voice of God.
When the happiest People on Earth, had They but a due sense of their happiness,
secured with favorable Laws, and a more favorable Prince: When a Nation
Wealthy and Prosperous, to the Envv of all their Neighbors, shall grow
Discontented and Clamorous, fancy themselves oppressed; as Corpulent Persons
imagine they are Hag-ridden: When they shall give themselves up to believe
Lies, as Incredible as they are Malicious, and affect a Change when they know
not what to wish; we must conclude with Elias, that this Evil is from the Lord,
and that his hand is in the Infatuation.

But the Judgment of God may be yet more visible in the success of these
Disorders, from his permitting them to proceed to Extremities, to Acts of
unusual Violence and Cruelty. The Malice of the Devil, and the Wickedness of
Men, are always contriving Mischief and Disorder in the World; and that their
Designs do not take effect, is owing to those Invisible Chains of Divine
Providence, that checks and restrains them. Therefore whenever these Furies are
let loose, and permitted (for they need no other Commission) to destroy without
Control; whatsoever Ravage they commit, we must impute not so much to their
Malice, which is always the same, as to the removal of the Divine Protection;
and look upon the Effects of their Cruelty, as the Execution of some Secret
Judgment pronounced upon us. But the Divine Judgment is never more remarkable,
than when he gives way and permission to such things as he most of all detests,
and casts away without regard such things as were wont to be most dear to him:
so that where Treachery and Falsehood, where impudent and fulsom Hypocrisy,
when Perjury and Rebellion come to prevail and triumph over a Righteous Cause,
there Wrath, we may be sure, is come to the uttermost: When God has recourse to
such odious Instruments of our Punishment as these, the more vile or wicked
they are, the more plain and more grievous is the Judgment. They that are
overcome by the force of an Ambitious Conqueror, are a Lions Prey, and fall by
a Noble Fury; but for a great and generous People to become the portion of
Foxes, to be devoured like Jezabel by sordid and Domestic Fury, to be made a
Sacrifice to Hypocrites and Apes, the ridiculous Counterfeit and Burlesque of
Men and Christians, is to be punished with the most Insolent Blasphemers of
God, mentioned in the Second Psalm, not only with the fierceness of his Wrath,
but with his Contempt and Derision.

But when God shall forsake the Tabernacle in Shilo, and the Tent he has
pitched among Men; when he shall deliver up Religion, and Royal Majesty, the
most Sacred things on Earth, to the Insolence of Treason and Sacrilege, it is
too clear, that he is wroth with his Inheritance. It is no Common Event; it is
no Casual concourse of things; but by the Common Consent of Mankind, it is the
manifest Rebuke and Judgment of God.

The Heathen fancied sometimes, that they had fixed their gods so surely to the
Temples and Altars dedicated to their Honor, that it was not in their power to
forsake those Places of Sacrifice and Incense: But yet, when the Temples
themselves were destroyed by Lightning, and the Altars and Images were struck
from Heaven, they began to apprehend, that the Indignation of the gods against
the Wickedness of the Worshippers, might prevail over all their affection and
fondness to the Place and Rites of their Worship. And the Jews thought God so
wedded to their Church and Nation, that it was not possible for him utterly to
forsake them: For how could he relinquish his People whom he had Chosen, the
Seed of Abraham his Friend? How could he forsake the Ark of the Covenant, and
the Law written with his own hands? How could he cast away the Crown of David,
which he had promised to preserve to his Posterity in a perpetual Succession?
How could he abandon the House called by his own Name, the most happy
Magnificent Habitation he had upon Earth? Or, could he forget all these things,
yet surely he could not forget Himself; his Honor was so far engaged, he must
for his own sake preserve what he had established. But if all these
Considerations are neglected, and this People, together with their Religion,
come to fall under the Feet of Heathen Oppressors, and all those Holy Things in
which they trusted come to be carried away, to adorn the Triumphs of Assyrian
or Roman Idols, the Judgment is then as manifest as the Calamity, and the Wrath
of God becomes a bright and shining, as well as a Consuming Fire: Nor can the
Provocation be ordinary, when God takes such Extreme Resolutions as these,
against all the Reluctance and Contradiction of his own Goodness. Thou art
Gilead unto me, and the top of Lebanon; but I will make thee a Wilderness, and
Cities without Inhabitant; and in another place, Tho the King of Judah, were
the Signet on my Right hand, yet would I pluck him off.

Yet all former Instances of Divine Judgments seem to be surpassed by the
Rebuke of this Day: when the World, that was grown Old under the Tautologies of
Sin, and the Circulations of repeated Judgments, was surpised with a New
thing, which it could not have imagined, either that Men should ever be so
wicked as to Attempt, or God so angry as to Permit. For this Day, a holier
Religion than that revealed to Moses, was exposed to Contempt and Derision; and
a Church more dear to God than that of the Jews, given up to Sacrilege and
Oppression; a Church honored with the first Royal Defender of the Christian
Faith; preserved amidst the Corruptions of the World, and the Contradictions of
Heresy and Schism; a Church lately Rescued from the Rust of a tedious
Superstition, and the Tyranny of an Insolent and Powerful Impostor. And what is
more singular, both in the Punishment, and the Sin, the Head, the Mortal and
Earthly Head of this Church, an Orthodox and Holy Prince, whose Virtues raised
him higher above the People than his Throne, and the least of whose Titles was
that of a KING; Such a King, such a Man, was this day given up a Sacrifice, to
a prevailing Rebellion; and as a Sacrifice led in Procession through pretended
Courts, and the formalities of a Process, through infinite Indignities, to a
Solemn and Ceremonious Slaughter. Pass over to the Isles of Chittim, and see:
go unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see whether there be any such
thing. And we may Answer in the words of Joel, There never was any such thing,
nor ever shall be. And as the first part is sufficiently verified in the
Singularity of this Judgment: so We beseech God the Promise may belong to us
too, That there never may be any such thing; and that God would put his Bow in
the Clouds, and declare, That he would never destroy us after this manner any
more.

And now, tho the Loss may be Repaired, and the Guilt done away by Repentance
and Pardon; tho Judgment may turn again into Mercy, and the Terrors of this
Rebuke cease; yet who can wash away the Reproach and Infamy? who can silence
the Blasphemy of this Day? which is the Last Part of the Character of the Day,
It is a Day of Blasphemy.

The English Nation had been long held in singular Reputation, for good Natured
and Loyal Courage; and not only the Neighboring Nations, but the more remote
Parts of the Earth have been Witnesses of Their Dutiful Affection to their
Kings, whom they followed in their Expeditions with forward and unwearied Duty.
But alas! the Blasphemy of this Day has silenced all our Ancient Praise, and
the Stains of this Royal Blood has Blemished all the Glories of our former
Loyalty; and that Name which was once the Praise and the Dread of the Nations,
by this Act became a Proverb of Reproach, a Detestation, and a Hissing among
all People: Nay, We our selves were almost ashamed of it, nor could we own the
Name of English without Distinction or Excuse, without Diffidence and Blushing.
And, what was there once left of the Name that we could own? the Honor and
Majesty of it had been Ignominiously put to Death with our Martyred Sovereign;
and the Sordid name of Common Wealth had defaced the Royal Image and
Inscription of our Ancient Monarchy: nor could we tell our selves whose the
Vile Superscription was, and could not but be amazed with our own Blasphemy and
Degradation of our selves.

Pontius Pilate, willing to give some check to the Importunate Malice of the
Jews, who demanded the Crucifixion of our Lord, puts this harsh and
dishonorable Question to them, Shall I Crucisie your King? That Name contains,
if not always the whole Power and Authority, yet at leastwise all the Honor
and Dignity of a People: He cannot be Crucified, but Your Name must be
Crucified with him in the Inscription of his Titles. This was a Wickedness too
great for the tender Consciences of Scribes and Pharisees directly to own: This
was a Dishonor Jews could not digest; then, and ever since, the most Vile and
Abject Race of Human Kind: Wherefore they first Disown him, and then desire he
should be Crucified; We have no King but Caesar, and therefore cannot be
concerned in the Disgrace of this Person. And their Ignorance was their Excuse;
They had never submitted to the Government of Christ; they never understood his
Title. But the Blasphemy of this Day receives none of these Excuses; here can
be no plea of Ignorance or Mistake: The Superscription of the Cross is here
owned, as well as the Crucifixion; and the Treason was grown too Impudent and
Vainglorious to dissemble or extenuate. And now, all that we can answer to this
Blasphemy, is, but Repentance and Restitution, or rather the Mercy and
Compassion of GOD, who has restored Us to our Ancient Honor and Dignity, by
the Restoration of our Gracious Sovereign.

And tho all this Reproach and Obloquy may be justly come upon us, yet what has
our Innocent and Holy Religion done to be Involved in the same Blasphemy? The
rest of the Calamity was grievous enough, and like the Arrows of God sticking
in the Flesh; but this breaks the Bones, according to the Expression of the
Royal Psalmist, My Bones are smitten asunder, as with a Sword: while mine
Enemies that hate me, cast me in the Teeth. Nor was it any Personal Reproach
that wounded him so deep, but the Dishonor of God: Namely, while they daily
say unto me, Where is now thy God? And I would to God, the Enemies of our
Religion had wanted so fair an occasion to Blaspheme it: just, there can be
none; and this is but too plausible. For, when Religion was made the Disguise
of a most Unnatural Treason; and the most Wicked Wretches upon Earth did
Impropriate to themselves the Name of Saints, together with all the Sacred
Functions of the Ministry, and took a singular delight in the style of a
Preaching and Praying People: When Prayer and Fasting was made the Prologue to
some Bloody Tragedy, and served as the Eve or Vigil to the Day of Sacrifice:
When Scripture was alleged in Defense of the greatest Villainies, even that of
this Day; and where Scripture could not be colourably perverted, Immediate
Revelation was pretended, and Special Commission from God: In sum, When all the
Mischiefs which We now bewail, were carried on under the disguise of Conscience
and Religion, what wonder is it if the Name of God, upon this occasion, be
Blasphemed among the Gentiles? Great and grievous was the Blasphemy, and too
fatal was the Influence it had upon Weak Minds, that had been Trayn'd up in the
Opinion of Christian Religion. Many began to run away from all Form and
Appearance of Religion, and were afraid to make any show of Piety, for fear of
being suspected for Rebels and Impostors: Many were ashamed of that Profession
that was covered with so much Infamy and Reproach; and True Piety was almost
out of Countenance, and forced to hide it self. Yet, after all this, The
Blasphemies of Irreligion are but false, and mistaken Triumphs. For if a True
Jewel lose nothing of its Value, because there are many Counterfeits; if the
sincere and precious Metal preserve its Esteem, notwithstanding all secret
practice to Embase it; If an Angel of Light cannot lose his Integrity and
Honor, because Satan transforms himself into his Likeness; why should
Christian Religion, why should Holiness and Virtue suffer for the Wickedness of
detected Hypocrisy? Nay, on the contrary, it is clear, that the Real Value of
any thing makes Men so industrious to Counterfeit; and if there were not some
great Excellency in True Godliness, Evil men would never take the pains to
pursue the Shadow of it, and to carry on their Wicked Designs under that
Disguise.

But, besides the Common Enemies of Christian Religion, the Peculiar
Adversaries of the Reformation are not wanting to so fair an Occasion of
Blaspheming it. The Church of Rome, which we charged but too truly with the
Treasonable Doctrine of Killing Kings, and Practices correspondent, do not
neglect to return the Charge with Insolence and Triumph, and appeal to this day
for the Loyalty of Protestant Religion. It cannot but be a great grief to any
one, who owns the least Affection to that Name, under which so many Noble
Churches united against the Common Oppressor, that any who make Profession of
it, should give the Enemy so great occasion to Blaspheme. But Men will take
what Appellations they please, and Act afterward as they think fit; and it
would be too hard measure to charge the Crimes of some Usurpers upon the whole
Denomination: the Lewdness of the Gnostics might have been as reasonably
charged upon Christianity; and the Piracy which the Turks exercise under the
Counterfeit of our Colors, may with the same Justice be imputed to Us. And
this is our Comfort in the present Case, That whatever Agreement the Authors of
this Days Wickedness may own with other Churches, they have done us the Favor
to disown Us. And doubtless We have great Reason to own the Kindness of their
Separation. They went out from Us, and would not be of Us; because Our Doctrine
was too Loyal and Passive for Men of so fiery Temper: and the greatest Tyranny
they found in Our Religion, was the Restraint that it laid on the Conscience of
Men from resisting against the Higher Powers: This was, nay is yet, more
grievous to them than all the pretended Oppressions of the Hierarchy; This is a
more real and greater grievance to their Consciences than all the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church: And had they been Enemies only to the Dignity of our
Church, or the Decence of our Worship, some Accommodation might be expected;
but alas, these things are but Pretenses, to cover the Restless and the
Factious Spirit, and to disguise their Practices against the Government. It Is
this we know not how to reconcile to our Communion; It Is this which no honest
Comprehension can admit: Nor is this a new Charge raised by Zealots of Our
Church to render them odious to the Government: For a Great Statesman of this
Nation, and reputed no Ill Friend to the Party, has long ago acquitted Us from
any note of Persecution on their Account, and confesses Their Sedition to have
been the sole ground of all those Laws that have been made against them; and
adds, in behalf of the Government then, That it was Wise enough to distinguish
between Conscience and Faction. And how much Wiser, at leastwise more Knowing
in that Point, sad Experience has made us since, I need not say, This Day shall
speak it for me.

But now to Return to the Blasphemy of the Church of Rome: If Community of Name
be not so much to be regarded, as Agreement in Doctrine, our Accusers will be
found to have a greater part in these Sectaries, than We; for both Agree in the
Fundamentals of Rebellion, and the Lawfulness and Merit of Resisting the Higher
Powers. And if we Trace backward the Footsteps of our Troubles, we may easily
see, that it was from thence the Faction borrowed their Arguments; and from
their Catholic Authors, the Semons and Speeches of the Party, had derived all
the Art and Color of Their Treason. But, this is not a Time to Justify, but
to Humble our selves; nor is it so material, from whence these Barbarous Men
derived their Principles of Disloyalty, since it is too certain that they owe
all their Success and Advantages to our Sins; as these Increase, so do They;
they have both one Common Fate, they multiply and decrease together. Our
Profaneness and Contempt of Religion, begets in them a Contempt of Authority and
the Laws; and the Neglect of that Holy Service we pretend to Extol, adds
greater Numbers to our Enemies, than all their Arts and Industry can pervert.
If we would weaken that Faction, let us take away the Support they have among
our selves, the Open scandal and Viciousness of our Lives; and then they are
lest without Pretense, and fall without our Trouble. Let us confute their
Reproaches by a Reformation of our Manners, and detect their Hypocrisy, not by
washing off the Paint with Satyr, but by Confronting their Pretense and Form
with solid and sincere Piety: Without this, all other Means will be to little
purpose. Without this, Loyalty is but Affectation, a thing no less
Unserviceable, than it will be Uncertain; for he who Fears not God, will have
but little Reverence for a Man, whatever Title or Authority he may bear; and he
who has no due Conscience of his Duty to his Prince, and Obeys not for Gods
sake, but his Own, is a Servant but during his own Pleasure or Advantage: Or,
if the Treacherous foundation do not betray that frail Faith to Change and
Ruin, yet what Fruit can be hoped from the Services of those who are at
defiance with GOD, upon whom all the Success does depend? Be not deceived, God
is not mocked, especially not by an open and professed Contempt: and if the
different Mockeries of Hypocrisy and Profaneness should come to Contend for
Victory; who can tell, but that God should rather Incline to favor the Shadow
and Resemblance of Religion, rather than a Wanton Contempt of all that is
Sacred and Good; and that Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites of transparent
Disguise, may yet be preferred to Sadduces and Libertines, that believe neither
a Spirit, nor a Resurrection, and Live, as if neither Body nor Soul were to
render any Account? And now let us Learn from this Unhappy Day, (and how shall
we Learn, if this cannot Teach us) the Necessity of Joining Religion to
Loyalty, to Fear God and the King together. It is the same Power that is to be
Reveronc'd in both, they cannot be separated but to the manifest Disadvantage
of all Human Authority. Let us Lastly, out of a due Sense of the Trouble,
Rebuke, and Blasphemy of this Day, Learn, to detest all the plausible
Beginnings and Witchcrafts of Rebellion, and Confirm our selves with steadfast
Resolutions of perpetual Obedience to our Sovereign: And further, Since it is
not the Affection and Loyalty of Men, but the Favor of GOD that supports the
Royal Throne; Let us Beseech Almighty God, That he would Protect the Person of
his Anointed, and make the Government to Prosper in his Hands; that at length
He would Recompense all the Sufferings of the Royal FATHER, with Double
Blessings of Prosperity upon the SON, Our Dread Sovereign, that under him We
may live Quiet and Peaceable Lives, in all Godliness and Honesty, in all humble
Obedience and Loyalty.

FINIS.

