Thomas May Esquire Aetatis Sua. 55.



A BREVIARY OF THE HISTORY Of the Parliament Of ENGLAND.

Expressed in three PARTS: 1. The Causes and Beginnings of the Civil War of
England. 2. A short mention of the Progress of that Civil War. 3. A compendious
Relation of the Original and Progress of the Second Civil War.


First written in Latin, and after done into English, By Thomas May, Esquire

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by J. Cottrel, for Thomas Brewster, at the three Bibles near
the West End of Paul's. 1655.

The Causes and Beginnings OF The Civil War of England.
OF the Parliament of England, and beginning of that sad War, which for so many
years raged within the bowels of a distressed Kingdom, whosoever will write,
though never so briefly, must of necessity premise somewhat touching the Causes
(according to the state of the affairs and times) of assembling that Parliament.

And though the condition of Scotland and Ireland were during that time no whit
happier, (which being subject to the same King, were exposed to the same
Calamity) our discourse especially shall be of England, as the noblest Kingdom,
and the Royal Seat; from whence the distemper might first arise, and be derived
to the rest. And wonderful it may seem, how great the distemper of that
Government was, which ingendered so great a disease! how great the malignity of
that disease, to which a Parliament was not sufficient Medicine!

Forty years old was King Charles, and fifteen years had he reigned, when this
Parliament was called: so long had the Laws been violated, (more then under any
King) the Liberties of the people invaded, and the authority of Parliament (by
which Laws and Liberties are supported) trodden under foot: which had by
degrees much discontented the English Nation.

For the King, within the first four years of his Reign, had called three
Parliaments, and soon dissolved them all, before they could any way benefit the
Commonwealth, or redress the least grievance of the People. In the second, he
granted and signed the Petition of Right; but suddenly breaking up that
Parliament, he acted the same things in violation of Laws, which he had done
before. So that it was manifest, that the Peoples Liberties, by grant of that
Petition, were not fortified, but utterly overthrown; and it appeared, neither
Laws themselves could give protection, nor the Kings Faith security to the
People. After the dissolution of the third Parliament, men were forbidden by
Proclamation to speak any more of Parliaments. In this Interval, the people at
home were fleeced by Monopolies, and many ways exacted upon by illegal Taxes:
abroad, scarce any Negotiations were made, but such as were destructive to
Religion and the Commonwealth. In the beginning of his Reign, an unhappie and
dishonorable Expedition was made against the Spaniard, to surprise Cales:
another, more sad then that, against the French, in the following year, at the
Isle of Rhee: but that, of all other was most destructive to the Protestant
Religion, that King Charles, not long before that time, had lent a strong Navy
to the King of France; by whose force the Protestants Ships through all France
were vanquished and scattered, and the miserable Town of Rochel subdued by
Famine, the worst of all Enemies.

The King, in the mean time, by many illegal ways, raised money through
England: large sums of money were exacted throughout the whole Kingdom; default
of Knighthood, under the shadow of an absolute Law. Tunnage and Poundage were
received without the ordinary course of Law; and though they were taken under
pretense of guarding the Seas, yet that great Tax of Ship Money was set on foot
under the same color, etc.

These things were accompanied with the enlargement of Forests, contrary to
Magna Charta; the forcing of Coat and Conductmoney; taking away the Arms of the
Trained Bands in many Counties, etc.

Nor was there any remedy left: for no Courts of Judicature could give redress
to the people for these Illegal sufferings; whilst Judges were displaced by the
King, for not complying with his will; and so awed, that they durst not do
their duties: for, to hold a Rod over them, a clause was altered in their
Patents.

By this time, all thoughts of ever having a Parliament were quite banished; so
many Oppressions set on foot, so many illegal actions done, that the only way
to justify all, was to do that one greater, To take away the means which was
ordained to redress them, the lawful Government of England by Parliaments.

Whilst the Kingdom was in this condition, the serious and just men of England
who were not interessed in these Oppressions, could not but entertain sad
thoughts of what mischief must needs follow so great an injustice: But another
sort of men (especially Lords and Gentlemen) by whom the pressures of
Government were not much felt, did nothing but applaud the happiness of
England, calling those ungrateful and factious spirits, who complained of the
breach of Laws and Liberties; that the Kingdom abounded with wealth, plenty,
and all kind of elegancies, more then ever; and, that it was the honor of a
people, that their Monarch should live splendidly, and not be curbed at all in
his Prerogative, etc.

The Courtiers would begin to dispute against Parliaments in their ordinary
discourse, That they were too injurious to the Kings Prerogative: some of the
greatest Statesmen and Privy Counselors would ordinarily laugh at the
ancient language of England, when the word Liberty of the Subject was named.

Though the Kingdoms Liberties were thus oppressed, yet Peace continued; and
England seemed happy in that tranquillity, until the fatal Coal, which
afterward was blown into so great a fire through the three Kingdoms, began to
be kindled in the year 1637. by a design which the King had upon Scotland;
which was (as pretended) to make a Conformity of Church-Worship, and
Ecclesiastical Government, between the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland.
The dignity and pomp of Prelacie had been much of late promoted in England; in
pursuance whereof, many temporal Offices and Honors were conferred upon
persons Ecclesiastical, many Ceremonies and Innovations brought into the
Church, and too near approaches made in some points of Doctrine to the Romish
Church, and a great contempt thrown upon the other Reformed Churches in Europe:
Popery seemed to be much countenanced in the Court; and by reason of the Queens
great power with the King, several Nuncio's from the Pope, as Panzani, Conn,
and Rosetti, had been received with great honor in the Court of England.

The King had made great preparations for that work in Scotland, and bestowed
many temporal offices and dignities upon Bishops in that Kingdom. In
particular, 11 of the Scottish Bishops (being in all but 14) were made Privy
Counselors. But this displeased the Scots, to whom Episcopacie it self was not
acceptable; and having been once thrown out of that Kingdom, was not restored
but by great endeavor and policy of King James.

A book of Lyturgie was sent by the King into Scotland, in the year 1637. with
an express Command, that they should read it publicly in their Churches. The
Scots complained, that a thing of so great concernment, having not been allowed
by their Church in a National Synod, should be imposed upon them: they
complained likewise, that it was not the same with the book of England, but
alterations were made, some of them (they confessed) were for the better, but
more for the worse. Lastly, they affirmed, that wheresoever that book varies
from the English Lyturgie, it approaches directly to the Roman Missal, and all
the parts of Popery are there. But the King seemed to excuse those alterations,
in his great Declaration. These are his words, (which were not satisfactory to
the Scots:)

We supposing that they might have taken some offense, if We should have
tendered them the English Service Book totidem verbis; and that some factious
spirits would have endeavored to have misconstrued it as a badge of
dependencie of that Church upon this of England, which We had put upon them, to
the prejudice of their Laws and Liberties: We held it fitter that a new Book
should be composed by their own Bishops, in substance not differing from that
of England, that so the Roman party might not upbraid us with any weighty or
material differences in our Lyturgies; and yet in some few insensible
alterations differing from that, it might truly and justly be reputed a Book
of that Churches own composing, and established by Our Royal authority, as King
of Scotland.

This Book of Lyturgie was read, as the King commanded, in the great Church at
Edinburgh, but not without a great uproar, in which the Bishop that read it
hardly escaped. The Plebeians first stirred; but presently after, the Nobility
and Ministers publicly avowed their detestation of that Book: some therefore
were sent to the King, to entreat him that he would recall his command
concerning it.

But the King was immovable, and sent another peremptory command for reading
of the Book; and that all people who came as Petitioners against it, should
depart from Edinburgh: which did but increase the number of Petitioners, who
entreated the Council once more to send to the King concerning it: in the mean
time, they much accused their Bishops, as the causers of this Innovation.

The King commanded his Council to receive no more Petitions from them; and
sent the Earl of Traquare into Scotland with a Proclamation, which was
published at Sterlin; wherein he declared, That the Bishops were wrongfully
accused about the Prayer Book; that he himself was the Author of it, and all
done by his Command: he condemned their proceedings as tumultuous, and
denounced the punishment of High Treason to those who persisted.

Against this Proclamation the Lords of the Commission protested, and so did
the Ministers and others; justifying their assembly to be lawful, as tending to
Gods glory, the Kings honor, and Liberty of the Nation. Immediately after,
they entered into a Solemn Covenant for defense of their Religion and
Liberties: This Covenant was subscribed not only by the Nobles, but all sorts
of men, that their number within few months was many thousands: the King
enraged, did by many Messengers condemn that Covenant: the Scots defended it.
What was alleged on both sides, is more largely expressed in that book
entitled Tumultus Scotici.

In June, the Marquess Hamilton, as Commissioner from the King, came to
Edinburgh; who in vain dealt with the Covenanters to renounce their Covenant;
but published a Proclamation of the Kings, wherein he forbears to press the
reading of that Prayer Book upon them, and resolved to call both a Parliament
and Synod: but the Covenanters in their Protestation declare, that the Kings
grants were not large enough to cure their present distempers; and offer some
particular Exceptions. So great grew the differences and alterations upon
several points, that the Marquess Hamilton was enforced that year to make two
journeys into England to the King; and at last, by the Kings command, called a
National Synod, which accordingly began at Glasco, November. 1. but within seven
days, the Marquess dissolved that Synod, alleging for reasons, that they had
broken the Laws of a free Synod, both in the manner of their Elections, and in
other businesses during their sitting. But they protested against that
dissolution, and continued their Synod, after that the Marquess was gone away;
and proceeded in such Laws and Decrees as they judged fit for the present
State: after which, they dissolved the Synod, and published a Declaration from
Edinburgh to all sincere and good Christians in England concerning their
innocence and intentions.

The King, after a sharp Proclamation against the Scots, which he commanded to
be read in all English Churches, raised an Army to subdue them by force; in
which, the Nobles and all Gentlemen his servants were commanded to attend him
at York the first of April, with Horse and Arms suitable to their degree: the
Earl of Arundel was made General; and a rich and well-appointed Army at that
time and place attended the King.

But the people of England in general abhorred that wicked War, as a design to
enslave both Nations; and loved the Scots as brethren, persecuted by the same
power which had long oppressed themselves: they likewise hoped that such an
occasion might necessitate the King to call a Parliament in England, so long
wanted there. But the King, while he could make any other shift, how low
soever, and dishonorable, would not endure to think of a Parliament.

The Covenanting Lords of Scotland published a Remonstrance in answer to the
Kings Proclamation, and wisely provided against all Invasions that might be
made upon them on any side: they seized the considerable Forts, and disarmed
all suspected persons, without any great trouble; electing Sir Alexander Lesly,
an old Soldier, for their General; to whom all the Noble men were content to
give obedience: at which time, the King commanded the Parliament of Scotland to
dissolve; and his command was obeyed.

But the threatened War did not proceed: it pleased God, that by the happy
mediation of some honest Lords of both Nations, and upon a Conference granted,
that the Pacification was made and solemnly declared, on the 18 of June 1639.
and both Armies were disbanded within eight and forty hours. The King granted
to the Scots a National Synod, to begin upon the first of August following; and
a Parliament to begin on the 24 day of the same month: so that both sides
peaceably retreated home.

But when the King had been but a little time at London, his heart was again
estranged from the Scots, and thoughts of peace: He commanded by Proclamation
that Paper, which the Scots avowed to contain the true conditions of the
Pacification, to be disavowed, and burnt by the hands of the Hangman: and the
honest people of both Nations began to fear another War. The King, about the
beginning of December, told the Lords of his Council that he intended to call a
Parliament in England, to begin in April following; which being spread among
the people, made them almost amazed; so strange a thing was the name of a
Parliament grown. But rational men did not like it, that it should be deferred
so long, and that preparations for a War with Scotland went on in the mean
time. They were likewise troubled, that the Earl of Strafford, Deputy of
Ireland, a man of deep policy, but suspected honesty, one whom the King then
used as a bosom-Councellor, was first to go into Ireland, and call a Parliament
in that Kingdom: besides, the King at that time had broken up the Parliament in
Scotland; which the Scots complained of, (the business of State depending) as a
great breach of their Liberties, and against the Laws of that Kingdom.

Upon which, they sent some Lords into England, to entreat the King to grant
them a redress of such Injuries as they had received since the Pacification:
which were, That their Parliament was broken off, before any business done:
That Edinburgh-Castle was Garisoned with far more Soldiers then were needful:
That Dun-Britain-Castle was Garisoned with English Soldiers: That the Scots
that traded in England and Ireland, were enforced to take new Oaths, contrary
to their Covenant, and altogether contrary to the Articles of Pacification. The
King imprisoned those Lords, sending one of them (the Earl of Lowden) to the
Tower, and commanded a Charge of Treason to be drawn against him, concerning a
Letter which the Scottish Covenanters had written to the King of France for his
assistance, and Lowden had subscribed: but the accusation was frivolous, easily
answered, and came to nothing, because those Letters were not sent at all; and
besides, it was before the Pacification, upon which an Oblivion of all things
was agreed; although the King at the beginning of the English Parliament
produced that Letter against them, as a ground of his second War: for now on
the thirteenth of April, the Parliament of England was begun; before which
time, the Earl of Strafford was returned out of Ireland, where he had held a
Parliament, and gotten four Subsidies.

The King was very urgent with his Parliament to give money to enable him for a
War against Scotland, and pay that Army and Officers which he had already
raised; he demanded twelve Subsidies of them, for which he promised to release
Shipmoney: he promised them that he would afterward redress the Kingdoms
grievances, but desired money in the first place to go on with his designed War.

It was answered by many Members of the House in several Speeches, that redress
of Grievances was the chief end of Parliaments, and should go before
Subsidies: That the King asked a great sum of money for releasing of that
which he had no title to hold, but had taken illegally by power: That the
people had no reason to pay for a War which they desired not, but abhorred; a
War not for their good, but their own ruin: that nothing was so just as to
punish the contrivers of that wicked War.

But so strange was the obedience and compliance of that Parliament toward the
King, that although the money which he asked was against themselves, yet they
took the Subsidies into consideration; but while they were debating, the King,
whatsoever his reasons were, whether he thought it a delay or not, came into
the House on the fifth of May, and dissolved the Parliament. The people were
grieved in an extraordinary manner to see this Parliament so suddenly broken
up, and as much to see the King break his word so immmediately upon the
dissolution of it: for he protested in the House at that time, that he would
rule for the future as legally as if a Parliament were constantly sitting: Yet
nevertheless he imprisoned some Members the next day after, Mr. Belosis, Sir
John Hotham, and M. Crew; he commanded the Lord Brooks his Study, his Cabinet,
and pockets to be searched for Letters: He Commanded the Convocation of Divines
to continue their sitting, an unexampled thing, who by authority from him made
Canons, and imposed Oaths upon the people, contrary to their Laws and Liberties.

The King to defray the charges of this War, besides the Contribution of the
Clergy, and Papists, issued out again Writs of Shipmoney in a greater
proportion then before: he seized the Bullion in the Tower, and took up
Commodities to be sold again at an underrate; and consulted about Coining of
brassmoney; but that went not forward.

But the War went on; the Earl of Strafford commanding in chief, the Earl of
Northumberland not being in health, who had been appointed General: but the
Scots had not been backward; for having been debarred of their trade, and lost
their ships by seizure, they entered into England with an Army, expressing
their intentions in writing to the English, and bringing with them a Petition
to the King.

But the King in this War found a greater want then that of Money, which was
the hearts of the Soldiers, especially the common Soldiers, who could not be
easily brought to engage against the Scots, as hating the Cause; many of them
mutinying against their Officers and Commanders; which might be one cause that
the War proved not so bloody and fatal as it was designed: some Skirmishes, but
not very considerable, happened at Newburn, and at Dunsian, not far from
Barwick.

Thus proceeded this unhappie business, until some English Peers, Earls, and
Barons, about twenty, grieved at the dishonor which England suffered by the
unhappie actions of the King, made a Petition to him, declaring in some part
their former sufferings by illegal Government, the dissolution of the last and
other Parliaments, the miserable condition of the Kingdom at present, the sad
consequence of this wicked War; desiring him to summon a Parliament within some
convenient time, where the Kingdoms Grievances may be redressed, this War
composed, and the Authors of these wicked counsels punished.

Upon this Petition, the King caused all the Lords to meet at York, on the 24.
of September, And there told them his intention of calling a Parliament with
all possible speed; which was to begin on the 3. of November.

It was there also consulted and debated how to end this War upon fair terms:
and after some time spent between Lords chosen out of both Nations, the matter
was composed according to these Articles.

1. A Truce or cessation of Arms was made for two months till the 16. of
December. 2. That 850. li. a day should be paid to the Scots, during that
Truce. 3. That if it were not paid, the Scots might force it from the Counties
of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland, and Durham. 4. That those Counties
should be allowed the Scots for their Winter Quarters. 5. No new preparations
for War, to be made. 6. That private Injuries should not break the Truce, so
satisfaction were made upon complaint. 7. That Merchants might freely traffic
in either Kingdoms, without letters of safe conduct; but Soldiers without
leave might not pass their limits.
Thus was the state of things altered, and that War, which was intended for an
enslavement of both Nations, became the bond of Concord between them, and the
happy cause which necessitated the King to call a Parliament in England;
whereby their just Liberties might by the blessing of God be vindicated and
more ascertained for the future. Great was the expectation of this English
Parliament, on which the hopes of the people were wholly fixed, as a certain
cure of all their long sufferings; to which they thought the King (having so
much transgressed) could not deny any thing, or make the least opposition.

That was the cause for which they extremely loved the Scots, as the
instruments of that happiness to them; who by resisting the Kings intrusions
upon themselves, had enforced him to this visible means of a cure for England;
which made the King more hate the Scots, as the stoppers of his general design;
which hatred he could not conceal in his first Speech that he made in this
Parliament; in which, promising all favor and concurrence to any thing that
might procure the happiness of England, and promising to put himself freely and
wholly upon the love and affections of his English Subjects in this Parliament,
he inveighed against the Scots as Rebels, and desired that by force of Arms
they might be chased out of England: but the English Parliament was of another
affection toward the Scots, as will appear more hereafter.

The Parliament showed a great and wonderful respect to the King, and in many
expressions gave him humble thanks for Calling them together, without any
reflection upon his Person for what had passed in former misgovernment; but
since no cure could be made without searching wounds, and that grievances must
be recited, they resolved so to name them, as to cast the envy of them upon
evil Counsel, and still mention the King with all honor and reverence
possible; as will appear to any that read the printed Speeches, which at the
beginning of that Session were made in the House by men of Eminency.

Great was the business, and of various natures were the crimes which this
Parliament were to examine, and find out Delinquents, whom so long a
misgovernment had made so.

Many Committees were made by the House to ease them in this business: they
began with matters of Religion. Diverse Ministers who had been of good lives and
conversations, conscientious in their ways, and diligent in Preaching, and had
by the Bishops, and those in authority been molested, deprived, or imprisoned
for not conforming to some ceremonies which were imposed on them, were now by
the Parliament relieved, and recompensed for their sufferings. Others on the
Contrary, that had been scandalous, either for loose and wicked living, or else
offenders in way of superstition (both which, to discountenance the Puritains,
had been frequently preferred) were censured and removed.

The Earl of Strafford, Leiutenant of Ireland, was impeached of high Treason,
and sent prisoner to the Tower of London: and on the eighteenth day of
December, William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury impeached of the same crime,
was committed to the same custody.

The next day after the Archbishop was impeached, Dr. Wren, Bishop of Norwich
was accused of many misdemeanors in matter of superstition in his
Ecclesiastical Government: which tending to the detriment of the Civil State,
he was also accused of Treason, and entered into a recognizance of thirty
thousand pounds to appear, with three sureties bound, each of them in
obligations of ten thousand pounds. Sir Francis Windebank, Principal Secretary
of State, a man nearly in friendship with Laud the Archbishop, who was thought
to be a means of his preferment, was about that time accused of extraordinary
connivence toward Popish Priests, or rather of favor to them; and that contrary
to the Laws in force against them, he had bailed and released a great number: a
Committee was appointed to examine his offense, but he, conscious of the crime
objected, and fearing the consequence, about the beginning of December fled in a
disguise, and went into France. Immediately after his flight, the Lord Keeper
Finch was constrained to take the same course, and fled out of the Kingdom into
Holland: the crimes objected against him were of a various nature.

The first committed when he was Speaker of Parliament in the House of Commons
in the fourth year of King Charles: which was, for that he disobeyed the House,
in refusing to speak when he was commanded by them.

2. The second was for giving illegal and cruel judgments in the
Forrest-business, when he was Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

3. The third was for threatening of some of the Judges at that time, to give
their extrajudicial opinions for Ship-mony.

The last was for drawing an injurious Declaration, after the dissolution of
the last Parliament: for which Offenses he was Voted by the House of Commons
guilty of high Treason; a Charge drawn up against him, and carried up to the
Lords upon the 14 of January, three weeks after his flight.

Upon the 15 of February 1640. a Bill for the Triennial Parliament was
presented to the King, and by him signed: which Act being of such great
importance to the security of the peoples Liberties by Parliaments, Take the
substance thereof as follows.

BE it Enacted, That in case there be not a Parliament summoned by Writ under
the Great Seal of England, and assembled and held before the tenth day of
September, which shall be in the third year next after the last day of the last
meetting and sitting in this present Parliament, the beginning of the first
year to be accounted from the said last day of the last meeting and sitting in
Parliament, and so from time to time, and in all times hereafter, if there
shall not be a Parliament assembled and held before the tenth day of September,
which shall be in the third year next after the last day of the last meeting
and sitting in Parliament before that time assembled and held; the beginning of
the first year to be accounted from the said last day of the last meeting and
sitting in Parliament: That then in every such case as aforesaid, the
Parliament shall assemble and be held in the usual place at Westminster, in
such manner, and by such means only as is hereafter in this present Act
declared and enacted, and not otherwise, on the second Monday which shall be in
the month of November then next ensuing. And the Lord Chancellor of England,
the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and every Commissioner and
Commissioners for the keeping of the Great Seal of England for the time being,
shall within six days after the said tenth day of September, in every such
third year as aforesaid, in due form of Law, and without any further Warrant or
Direction from his Majesty, His Heirs, or Successors, Seal, issue forth, and
send abroad several and respective Writs to the several and respective Sheriffs
of the several and respective Counties, Cities, and Boroughs of England and
Wales, and to the Constable of the Castle of Dover, Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports, or his Lieutenant for the time being, and to the Major and
Bailiffs of Barwick upon Tweed, and to all and every other Officers and Persons
to whom Writs have used to be directed, for the electing of the Knights,
Citizens, Barons, and Burgesses, of, and for the said Counties, Cities,
Cinque Ports, and Boroughs of England and Wales, respectively, in the
accustomed form, to appear and serve in Parliament to be held at Westminster on
the said Monday, which shall be in November aforesaid: which said Knights,
Citizens, Barons, and Burgesses chosen by virtue of the said Writs, shall then
and there appear and serve in Parliament accordingly. And the said Lord
Chancellor, Lord Keeper, Comm^ssioner and Commissioners aforesaid, shall
respectively take a solemn Oath upon the holy Evangelist for the due issuing of
Writs, according to the tenor of this Act, viz. in haec verba.

YOu shall Swear, that you shall truly and faithfully issue forth and send
abroad all Writs of Summons to Parliament for both Houses, at such time and in
such manner as is expressed and enjoined by an Act of Parliament, entitled, An
Act for the preventing of inconveniences happening by the long intermission of
Parliaments.

Which Oath is forthwith to be taken by the present Lord Keeper, and to be
administered by the Clerk of the Crown to every Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper,
Commissioner and Commissioners aforesaid; and that none of the said Officers
shall henceforth execute any the said Offices before they have taken the said
Oath. And if the said Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or any the said
Commissioners shall fail or forbear so to issue out the said Writs, according
to the true meaning of this Act, then he or they respectively shall, beside the
incurring of the grievous sin of perjury, be disabled, and become by virtue of
this Act incapable, ipso facto, to bear his and their said Offices
respectively, and be further liable to such punishments as shall be inflicted
on him or them by the next or any other ensuing Parliament.

And in case they neglect, then the Peers of this Realm shall by virtue of this
Act be enabled, and are enjoined to meet in the old Palace of Westminster, in
the usual place there, on the third Monday in the said Month of November; and
they or any twelve or more of them, then and there assembled, shall on or
before the last Monday of November next following the tenth day of September
aforesaid, by virtue of this Act, without other Warrant, issue out Writs in the
usual form, in the name of the Kings Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, attested
under the hands and seals of twelve or more of the said Peers, to the several
and respective Sheriffs of the several and respective counties, for the
electing of the Knights Citizens, Barons, and Burgesses, to be and appear at
the Parliament at Westminster aforesaid, to be held on the third Monday in
January then next following: And in case the said Lords, or twelve or more of
them, shall fail to issue forth such Writs, or that the said Writs do not come
to the said several counties, cities, cinque ports, and borroughs, so that an
election be not thereupon made; And in case there be not a Parliament assembled
and held before the three and twentieth day of the said Month of January; then
in every such case as aforesaid, the Parliament shall assemble, and be held in
the usual place at Westminster on the second Tuesday which shall be in the
month of March next after the said three and twentieth day of January: At which
Parliament the Peers of this Realm shall make their appearance.

And for the better assembling of the Knights, Citizens, Barons, and Burgesses
to the said Parliament, as aforesaid: It is further Enacted, That the several
and respective Sheriffs of their several and respective counties, cities, and
boroughs of England and Wales, and the Chancellor, Masters and Scholars of
both and every of the Universities, and the Major and Bailiffs of the Borough
of Barwick upon Tweed, shall at the several courts, and places to be held and
appointed for their respective counties, universities, cities, and boroughs,
next after the said three and twentieth day of January, cause such Knight and
Knights, citizen and citizens, Burgess and Burgesses of their said counties,
universities, cities and boroughs respectively, to be chosen by such persons,
and in such manner, as if several and respective Writs of summons to Parliament
under the Great Seal of England had issued and been awarded. And in case they
do not before ten of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, wherein the
several and respective courts and places shall be held or appointed, for their
several and respective counties, universities, cities, and boroughs as
aforesaid, begin and proceed on according to the meaning of this Law, in
causing Elections to be made of such Knight and Knights, citizen and citizens,
Burgess and Burgesses of their said counties, Universities, cities, and
boroughs as aforesaid; then the Freeholders of each county, and the Masters and
Scholars of every of the Universities, and the citizens, and others having
voices in such Election respectively, in each University, city and borough,
that shall be assembled at the said courts or places to be held, or appointed,
as aforesaid, shall forthwith, without further Warrant, or direction, proceed
to the Election of such Knight, etc.

And it is further enacted, That the several and respective Sheriffs shall
after the said three and twentieth day of January, and before the eighth day of
February then immediately next ensuing, award and send forth their Preceps to
the several and respective cities and boroughs, within their several counties,
and likewise unto the said Cinque Ports respectively, commanding them
respectively to make choice of such citizen and citizens, Barons, Burgess and
Burgesses, to serve in the said Parliament, at the time and place aforesaid:
Which said cities, cinque ports, and boroughs respectively, shall before the
last day of the said month of February, make election of such citizen and
citizens, barons, burgess or burgesses, as if Writs for summoning of a
Parliament under the Great Seal of England, had issued and been awarded. And in
case no such Precept shall come unto the said cities, cinque ports, and
boroughs respectively, by the time herein limited; Or in case any Precept shall
come, and no election be made thereupon before the said last day of February,
That then the several citizens, burgesses, and other persons that ought to
elect and send citizens, barons, and burgesses to the Parliament, shall on the
first Tuesday in March, then next ensuing the said last day of February, make
choice of such citizen and citizens, barons, burgess and burgesses, as if a
Writ of Summons under the Great Seal of England, had issued and been awarded;
and shall each of them be liable unto such pains and censures, for his and
their not appearing and serving then and there in Parliament, as if he or they
had been elected and chosen by virtue of a Writ under the great Seal of
England; and shall be likewise subject unto such further pains and censures, as
by the rest of the Knights, citizens, and burgesses assembled in the Commons
house of Parl. etc. And the Sheriffs and other Officers and Persons to whom it
appertains, shall make returns, and accept and receive the returns of such
elections in like manner as if Writs of Summons had issued, and been executed
as has been used and accustomed. And in default of the Sheriffs and other
Officers respectively in not accepting, or making return of such elections, it
shall and may be lawful, to and for the several Freeholders and other persons
that have elected, to make returns of the Knights, etc. which shall be as good
and effectual to all intents and purposes, as if the Sheriff or other Officers,
had received a Writ of summons for a Parliament, and had made such returns; any
Writ, etc. to the contrary notwithstanding. And in case any person shall be so
hardy as to advise, or put in execution any such Writs, etc. then he or they so
offending shall incur the penalties contained in the Statute of Praemunire, made
in the 16 year of Rich. the 2d. and be deprived of the benefit of the Law in
any case, etc.

And if any Sheriff, Constable of the Castle of Dover, or Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports, shall not perform his duty enjoined by this Act, then he shall
lose and forfeit the sum of one thousand pounds; and every county, city,
cinque-port, and borough, that shall not make election of their knights,
citizens, barons, and burgesses respectively, shall incur the penalties
following (that is to say) every County the sum of one thousand pounds, and
every City which is no County, two hundred pounds, and every Cinque-Port and
Borough the sum of one hundred pounds. All and every of which several
forfeitures, and all other forfeitures in this Act mentioned, shall and may be
recovered in any of the Kings Courts of Record at Westminster, by and in the
Name of the Lord Major of the City of London for the time being, by action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint, etc. wherein no Essoin, Protection, etc. shall be in any
wise prayed, granted, or allowed.

And if any person after notice given, that the Action depending is grounded or
prosecuted upon or by virtue of this Statute shall cause or procure any such
Action to be staid or delayed before judgment, that then the said persons so
offending shall incur and sustain all and every the pains, penalties, and
forfeitures as aforesaid.

The fifth part of all and every the forfeitures in this Act mentioned, shall
go and be to and for the use and behoof of the City of London; and the other
four parts and residue to be employed and disposed to and for such only uses,
intents, and purposes, as by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in
Parliament assembled shall be declared and appointed.

And be it further Enacted, That the said Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to
be assembled at any Parliament, by virtue of this Act, shall and may from time
to time, at any time during such their assembly in Parliament, choose and
declare one of themselves to be Speaker for the said Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses of the House of Commons assembled in the said Parliament, as they
shall think fit.

And it is further enacted, That all Parliaments hereafter to be assembled by
authority of this Act, and every Member thereof, shall have and enjoy all
Rights, Privileges, Jurisdictions, and Immunities, as any Parliament summoned
by Writ under the great Seal of England, or any Member thereof might, or ought
to have, and have voices in such Parliament, before, and without the taking of
the several Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, or either of them; any Law or
Statute to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

For Signing of this Bill, thanks were given to the King at White Hall the same
afternoon by both Houses of Parliament.

By this time, being the end of December, that Cessation of Arms which was
spoken of before, between the English and Scottish Armies, was expired, and by
the Parliament now renewed for a month longer; for the Paliament, although the
King (as is said before) called them Rebels, and desired to have them driven
out of England, had a better opinion of them, and at this time of renewing the
Cessation, ordered that the Scots should be recompensed for all their charges
and losses by that mischievous war which the King had raised against them; and
within few days, after examination of those losses and charges, the Parliament
ordered that the Scottish Ships, taken since that war, should be restored to
them, and 4000. l. in money given them to rig those ships: it was further
resolved by both Houses, that the full sum of 300000 l. should be given to
them, in these words, Toward a supply of the losses and necessities of our
brethren of Scotland; And that the Parliament would in due time take into
consideration the manner of raising, and days of Payment; for which, three
days after, the Scottish Commissioners, then Resident at London, gave thanks to
the Parliament, not only for that great Sum of 300000. l. but for the style of
Brethren which so kindly they had used toward them.

The Parliament of England, as a further strengthening of the Nations amity,
Ordained at that time, That all Books, Libels, and Proclamations against the
Scots should be called in; and a thanksgiving to God should be in all Churches
of England for that happy Peace.

The payment of two Armies for so long a time was a great charge to the poor
people of England; which they without any grudging or repining at the King, as
cause of that great burden, in hope to gain him for the future, bore with
exceeding patience; they willingly parted with six Subsidies, and were content
with the taxation of Poll-money, a personal assessment of the whole Kingdom,
wherein every Duke was assessed at 100. l. a Marquess at 80. l. Earls at 60. l.
Viscounts and Barons at 40. l. Knights of the Bath at 30. l. Other Knights at
20. l. Esquires at 10. l. Men of 100. l. per annum at 5. l. every common head
at six pence.

The King in February had declared to the Houses his intention concerning a
marriage for his eldest Daughter, the Princess Mary, who was then betwixt 9 and
10 years of age; the husband appointed for her, was the young Prince William of
Nassau, Son to Henry Prince of Orange, a youth about 16 years of age: the
matter was then in agitation, and fair Propositions, made upon it to the King,
by the Ambassadors of the States General: The Parliament were pleased with the
marriage; and not long after the young Prince arived in England, and was by the
King and Queen, with all the Court, joyfully received, and entertained at
London. After convenient time spent in the English Court, he was upon the
second day of May, with great solemnity, Married at White Hall to the Princess
Mary.

On the tenth day of May, Thomas Earl of Strafford, who had been committed to
the Tower six months before, was beheaded. Of this man, of the crimes laid to
his charge, as likewise of his Pompous and remarkable trial, we cannot but make
some mention. About the end of January a charge was read against him in the
House of Commons, consisting of nine Articles: out of which by subdivision were
branched many more, which (though too tedious to be verbally here set down) I
shall deliver, by expressing the contents. He was accused for ruling Ireland,
and the North of England in an arbitrary way, against the Laws. For retaining
the Kings revenue without account. For increasing and encouraging Popery. For
maliciously striving to stir up, and continue enmity betwixt England and
Scotland; of which some particulars are expressed. For laboring to subvert
Parliaments, and incense the King against them. Upon which occasion, Mr. Pym, a
Member of the House of Commons, in his Speech and Declaration to the Lords,
showing the quality of the offense, spoke as follows: It is an offense
comprehending all other offenses, in that he governed contrary to Law: the Law
is that which puts a difference between good and evil.

It is the Law that does entitle the King to the Allegiance and service of his
people; it intitles the people to the protection and justice of the King. It is
God alone who subsists by himself, all other things subsist in a mutual
dependence and relation. He was a wise man that said, That the King subsisted
by the field that is tilled: it is the labor of the people that supports the
Crown: If you take away the protection of the King, the vigor and cheerfulness
of Allegiance will be taken away, though the obligation remain.

The Law is the Boundary, the Measure betwixt the Kings Prerogative and the
peoples Liberty: Whiles these move in their own Orb, they are a support and
security to one another; The Prerogative a cover and defense to the Liberty of
the people, and the people by their Liberty are enabled to be a foundation to
the Prerogative; but if these bounds be so removed, that they enter into
contestation and conflict, one of these mischiefs must needs ensue: If the
Prerogative of the King overwhelm the Liberty of the People, it will be turned
into Tyranny; If Liberty undermine the Prerogative, it will grow into Anarchy.

The Law is the safeguard, the custody of all private interest: Your Honors,
your Lives, your Liberties and Estates are all in the keeping of the Law;
without this, every man has a like right to any thing, and this is the
condition into which the Irish were brought by the Earl of Strafford: And the
reason which he gave for it, has more mischief in it than the thing it self,
THEY WERE A CONQUERED NATION. There cannot be a word more pregnant and fruitful
in Treason, than that word is: There are few Nations in the world that have not
been Conquered; and no doubt but the Conqueror may give what Laws he please to
those that are Conquered: But if the succeeding Pacts and Agreements do not
limit and restrain that right, what people can be secure? England has been
Conquered, and Wales has been Conquered; and by this reason will be in little
better case than Ireland. If the King by the Right of a Conqueror gives Laws to
his people; shall not the people by the same reason be restored to the right of
the Conquered, to recover their Liberty if they can? What can be more hurtful,
more pernicious to both, than such Propositions as these?

A little after: Such arbitrary power is inconsistent with the peace, the
wealth, the prosperity of a Nation; to industry, to valor, etc. For who will
take pains for that which when he has gotten, is not his own? Or, who will
fight for that wherein he has no other Interest, but such as is subject to the
will of another? The ancient encouragement for men to defend their Countries,
was this, That they were to hazard their persons in defense of their Religion
and their Houses; but by such arbitrary ways as were practiced in Ireland, and
counseled here, no man had any certainty of either, or of any thing else, etc.
Such arbitrary courses have an ill operation on the courage of a Nation, by
embasing the hearts of the people; a servil condition does beget in men a
slaves temper and disposition: shall it be Treason to embase the Kings Coin,
though but a piece; and must it not needs be the effect of a greater Treason,
to embase the spirits of his Subjects? etc.

A little further: As it is a Crime odious in the nature of it, so it is odious
in the judgment and estimation of the Law; to alter the settled frame and
constitution of government, is Treason in any estate; The Laws whereby all
other parts of a Kingdom are preserved, should be very vain and defective, if
they had not a power to secure and preserve themselves.

The forfeitures inflicted for Treason by our Law, are of Life, Honor, and
Estate, even all that can be forfeited; and this prisoner having committed so
many Treasons, although he should pay all these forfeitures, will be still a
Debtor to the Commonwealth: Nothing can be more equal, then that he should
perish by the Justice of that Law which he would have subverted. Neither will
this be a new way of blood; There are marks enough to trace this Law to the
very original of this Kingdom: And if it has not been put in execution, as he
allegeth, this 240 years, it was not for want of Law, but that all that time
has not bred a man bold enough to commit such Crimes as these; which is a
circumstance much aggravating his offense, and making him no whit less liable
to purishment, because he is the only man that in so long a time has ventured
upon such a Treason as this.

The Commissioners of Scotland, then resident at London, had a charge also
against this Earl, for matters done against their Nation; which were
notwithstanding implied in the Parliaments Charge. To this Charge the Earl gave
in his Answer in the House of Lords, where the King himself was present at the
reading of it, upon the 23 day of February; but his trial in Westminster Hall
began on the 22 day of March following, and was a most memorable fight. The
Hall was Scaffolded on both sides, to contain the whole House of Commons,
sitting there in a Committee; the Peers sat all there, besides the
Commissioners from Scotland, and besides other spectators and auditors, and a
great number of the Lords of Ireland. The Earl of Arundel was Lord high
Steward, and the Earl of Lindsey Lord high Constable: the King himself sat
privately in a close Gallery every day, taking Notes in writing of what passed
in the trial. Fifteen days the Earl answered personally, from the 22 of March,
with few days intermission, till the 16 of April. Misdemeanors in an high
degree were proved against him, but that which the Earl labored to maintain for
himself, was, that Misdemeanors, though never so many and great, could not make
Treason, put together, unless some one of them in his own nature had been
Treason: for that was his Charge, which he strove to avoid.

Yet many of those particulars in his accusation were put into his Bill of
Attainder afterward; for a Bill of Attainder was drawn up, and read against him
in the House of Commons April 21. where he was Voted guilty of high Treason.

Mr. Saint John the Kings Solicitor, and a Member of the House of Commons, on
the 29 of April, for satisfaction of the Lords, opened the Bill in
Westminster Hall (where the Earl of Strafford was at the Bar, and the King
present in his accustomed place) and made the Bill good by many precedent
Statutes. Upon which the Lords, being somewhat satisfied, were afterward more
confirmed, when the Judges, in their House, delivered their opinions concerning
it; And voted him guilty of high Treason also. But the King told the Lords, he
was not satisfied in Conscience, to condemn him of high Treason; But
acknowledged that his misdemeanors were very great; until at last, wearied with
Petitions for Justice, the King calling a Privy Council at White Hall,
commanded the Judges to deliver their opinion before him there; and sent for
some Bishops to resolve him in scruple of Conscience. Which wrought so, that he
granted a Commission to four Lords, to sign that Bill for execution of the Earl
of Strafford; which execution was done at the time and place before mentioned.

The death of this great Earl seemed to be the more violently sought, and more
hastened, by reason of some Treasons against the Parliament, which were at that
time discovered; being partly in favor of him, contrived to prevent his death
by an escape out of the Tower.

For one part of this Treason was to that purpose. Soldiers were raised by Sir
John Suckling, and some others, under pretense of service in Portugal, to
gratify the Ambassador of that Kingdom; those Soldiers the King himself (who
was now found to be privy to all those Treasons against the Parliament)
commanded Sir William Belfore the Lieutenant to admit into the Tower; but he
perceiving it was a Plot for the Earls escape, disobeyed the Kings Command.
Another part of this Treason, chief of all the rest, was a design to bring up
the English Army, which was in the North, and not yet disbanded; this Army they
had dealt with to engage against the Parliament sitting, and (as they alleged)
to maintain the Kings Prerogative, Episcopacy, and other things against the
Parliament it self. In this Plot were Henry Piercy, brother to the Earl of
Northumberland; Mr. Henry Jermin, Master of the Horse to the Queen; Col.
Goring, Col. Wilmot, Col. Ashburnham, Pollard, Suckling, and others: the Kings
discourses to Mr. Piercy concerning these things were discovered in a Letter of
Piercie's to his Brother Northumberland out of France, which was read in the
House upon the 14 of June (for Piercy, Jermine, and Suckling at the beginning
of May, when this Treason was in some part detected, fled the day before they
should have been examined, and passed over into France) upon which reading,
Wilmot, Ashburnham and Pollard, three Members of the House, mentioned in the
Letter, as privy to the Plot, were all committed: If the Earl of Strafford had
escaped out of the Tower, he should have Commanded, in aid to this Plot, that
Irish Army, consisting of eight thousand, most of them Papists, which the King
would not grant to have disbanded, when the Parliament, on the 28 of April
before had desired it of him; but told them he could not disband them, for
reasons best known to himself.

Colonel Goring, for some discoveries which he made, was not at all committed;
but Oneale, an Irish Papist, that was deep in the Plot, was apprehended and
committed to the Tower, from whence he afterward escaped.

The Parliament finding such disturbance in their business, and treasons
against them, and not at all assured of the Kings reality; weighing besides the
great charges of paying two Armies, for which money must be raised by Loan upon
the public Faith: moved the King to sign a Bill for continuation of this
present Parliament; which was, That it should never be dissolved without the
Consent of both Houses.

That Bill so drawn up, the King signed on the 10 of May, the same day that he
signed the Bill for Straffords execution.

This Bill was a thing, that former ages had not seen the like of, and
therefore extremely was the Kings Grace magnified by those that flattered, but
much condemned by others, who hated Parliaments and Reformation, complaining
that the King had too far put the staff out of his own hands. But many men who
saw the necessity of such a thing, without which no money upon the public
Faith could be borrowed, did not at all wonder at it, saying, That as no King
ever granted the like before; so no King had ever before made so great a
necessity to require it: but some men were of opinion that it was not of
security enough to make the Kingdom happy, unless the King were good; for if he
were ill-affected, he had power enough still to hinder, and retard them in any
proceeding for the good, and settlement of the Commonwealth; and so by time and
delays lay a greater Odium upon the Parliament, for not satisfying the peoples
desires, then if they had not had that seeming power to have done it: Which
proved in the conclusion too true, when the King by such protraction of
business, not at all concurring with them in the main, had raised a party to
himself against them, to cut asunder that Knot by the sword, which by Law he
could not unty.

The Parliament after this, began with easing the Kingdoms Grievances; and
because the charge of the two Armies lay upon them, and every day was
considerable, till they were disbanded, that was the first thing intended;
Toward which a great quantity of Plate was appointed, with more than ordinary
haste to be melted and coined.

And for making up the sum, that Bill of Poll-money was to be signed, which was
tendered to the King, and two other Bills with it, one for putting down the
High Commission Court; and the other for putting down the Star Chamber.

The King signed only that Bill of Pollmoney, and took time to consider of the
other two: but hearing how ill it was taken at his hands, what murmurings there
were in the City; and thinking it not now seasonable to distaste them much,
three days after he came and passed those other two Bills for putting down the
High Commission Court, and Star Chamber.

The Queen Mother of France about that time took her leave of the King, and
passed over the Seas into Holland, the people desiring to be eased of that
charge; for the King had kept her for the space of three years in England at
the allowance of 100. l. a day.

The Parliament proceeded then against the delinquent Judges about Ship Money;
and Charges were drawn up and read against them in the House of Commons: for in
December before, when the debate had been concerning Ship Money, and the
offense of those Judges who had given their extrajudicial opinions for it, was
examined; upon which the Lord Keeper Finch fled; the thing was condemned as
most illegal. Three Judges had been honest, Judge Crook, Hutton, and Baron
Denham, whose Arguments were very famous: the other were examined by sixteen
Members of the House of Commons, who were appointed to present those particular
Charges against every Judge; who were, Judge Bramston, Baron Trever, Baron
Weston, Baron Davenport, and Judge Crawley; for Judge Barclay was charged with
high Treason.

Of this, a certain Gent. spoke as follows; The Root of most of our present
mischiefs, and the ruin of all posterity, do I hold to be that extrajudicial
(Judgment I cannot say, but rather) doom, delivered by all the Judges under
their hands out of Court, yet recorded in all Courts, to the subversion of all
our Fundamental Laws, Liberties; and Annihilation, if not Confiscation of our
Estates: That in case of danger, the King may impose upon his subjects, and
that he is the sole Judge of the danger, necessity, and proportion; which in
brief, is to take what, when, and where he will; which though delivered in the
time of a gracious and merciful Prince, who we hope will not wrest it beyond
our abilities, yet left to the interpretation of a succeeding Tyrant, if ever
this Nation be so fortunate to fall into the hands of such; It is a Record
wherein every man might read himself a slave that reads it, having nothing he
can call his own, all prostitute to the will of another.

What to do in such a case, we are not to seek for precedents, our honorable
Ancestors taught us in the just and exemplar punishments of chief Justice
Tresilian and his Accomplices (for giving their judgments out of Parliament
against the established Laws of Parl.) how tender they were of us, how careful
we ought to be to continue those Laws, to preserve the Liberty of our
Posterity.

Those Charges were now brought in about the beginning of August, but little
was afterward done against any of them, or almost any other offender: the King
had designed a journey into Scotland, and would go, though the Houses earnestly
entreated his stay for a while longer, because the Kingdoms business required
his presence; the King alleged that the affairs of Scotland did necessarily
require his presence: and further told them that he would Pass any good Bill,
which they had for him, before he went. Which he accordingly did, and signed a
Commission for passing of Bills in his absence; the Commissioners were the
Lord Keeper Littleton, the Lord Privy Seal Earl of Manchester, the Lord great
Chamberlain Earl of Lindsey, the Marquess of Harford, Earl of Essex, Earl of
Bath, Earl of Dorset; The Earl of Essex also by a Bill, which the King then
signed, was made General of all his forces on this side Trent, with power to
levy Arms in case of necessity.

But before the King went, the Earl of Holland, chosen both by him and the
Parliament as General for that purpose, was gone into the North to disband the
English Army there.

The King departing from London the tenth of August, made haste toward
Scotland, and passed by the Armies as they were disbanding. Whether he did
underhand attempt any thing with the Scottish Army (as a Scottish writer has
published) to engage them against the Parliament of England, with large
promises of Spoil, and offering Jewels of great value in pawn for performance
of it, I leave as uncertain, for the reader to judge, by what afterward fell
out. But if he did, it was a matter of great falsehood, having as yet declared
no enmity against the English Parliament. But what the Kings design was of
going into Scotland, was not understood in England. The same Author says, it
was to make sure those Noble men of that Kingdom, whom he doubted of, as not
willing to serve his turn against England. And true it is, that about
September, Letters came from Scotland to the standing Committee at Westminster
(for the two Houses had rejourned themselves from the eighth of September, till
the twentieth of October, and appointed a standing Committee of fifty Members
during that time) that a Treasonable Plot was discovered there against the
lives of some of the greatest Peers in the Kingdom; upon which the standing
Committee fearing some mischief from the same spring, placed strong guards in
diverse parts of the City of London.

However the mischiefs might fall out by chance, or by design, the Kings
journey into Scotland was sure to hinder the English business, and to retard
the cure of all their Grievances; which was little less then a plain
destruction. For after the tenth of August, the day of his departure, little
was done in the Parliament, until the recess.

On the 23 of October, whilst the King remained in Scotland, broke forth that
cursed conspiracy of the Irish Rebels, and the inhumane butchery of Protestants
through the whole Island, more tragical then any effect of a calamitous War; in
which was put in execution whatsoever could be imagined from the licentious
cruelty of a barbarous people, so long kept under the English yoke, or whatever
the dire dictates of superstition, or wicked exhortations of Priests could
infuse into them. It was wonderful that so devilish a design could so long be
kept close; whereby 200000 Protestants in two months space were murdered, and
many by exquisite torments, and many more despoiled of all their wordly
fortunes.

This divelish design was to be put in execution on the 23 of October; upon
which day not only the Castle of Dublin, the Kingdoms chief Magazine, a
storehouse of ten thousand Arms at that time; but all other Forts and Magazines
in that Kingdom were to be surprised; and all the English or Protestants, that
joined not with them, to be murdered.

The seizure of Dublin Castle (to which purpose many of the chief Rebels came
to the City the day before) was prevented by timely discovery of the Plot to
the two Lords Justices, by one Owen O Conally, a Servant to Sir John
Clotworthy; which discovery was but the very night before that fatal day, and
the occasion of it very accidental (or rather, a strange providence of God) by
Mac-Mahons unadvised trusting this Owen with some relations concerning it at a
Tavern.

Upon which discovery, Mac-Mahon, and the Lord Maguire were presently
apprehended by the Lords Justices; and many Conspirators of great note escaped
that night out of Dublin. So was Dublin saved, that all Ireland might not be
lost in one day. But the horrid design was past prevention, as to the general;
for the Conspirators were up at the day in all Counties round about; and poor
English Protestants arrived at Dublin every day, robbed and spoiled of all they
had, relating how their houses were seized, how Towns and Villages in all parts
were fired, and cruel outrages committed.

The Lords Justices, Sir William Parsons, and Sir John Burlace taking those
Arms which they found in Dublin, and arming whom they could on a sudden to
defend themselves, dispatched Letters to the King in Scotland, and the Earl of
Leicester, then chosen Deputy, but staying in England. Money was wanting, and
no supplies nearer then England.

Owen O Conally, the first discoverer of the Plot, brought the first Letters to
London; upon receipt of which, they rewarded Owen with a gift of 500.l. and an
annuity of two hundred pounds per annum; and presently both Houses of
Parliament met at a Conference, and the House of Commons forthwith resolved
into a Committee, to consider of Irelands relief, and also to provide for the
safety of England, for distractions began then to appear in England; the
Parliament every day considered of Irelands relief, and presently ordered
supplies of money to be borrowed of the City of London, Victuals, and
Ammunition for that purpose. But all relief could be but slow in such a sudden
disease. For the Rebellion increased, and spread through all the Kingdom; and
many Papists and ill-affected fled from Dublin into the Country to join with
the Rebels, whilst the City in their rooms, was daily filled with poor spoiled
Protestants, who came naked, and famished thither; many of them being past
relief, and there perished in the City. It were an endless thing to relate the
pitiful condition of those woeful people, and what sad stories they there told
concerning the bloody rage of those inhumane Irish Rebels, and several tortures
by which the unhappy English were brought to their ends.

But the Lords of the Council, and Lords Justices in a short time, with those
Arms of Dublin, had armed many well-affected Gentlemen, and sent many active
Commanders out of the City to defend places near, against the approach of the
Rebels. About the middle of November were in Arms Sir Charles Coot, Sir Henry
Tichburn, the Lord Lambert, Sir Thomas Lucas, Capt. Armstrong, Capt. Yarner;
and the Earl of Ormond came to Dublin with an hundred Horse well armed. At
which time the Parliament of England, till greater sums could be raised, sent
them over, as a present comfort, twenty thousand pounds. But it was a long time
before they could send over any forces to the relief of that bleeding Kingdom;
the first was a Regiment Commanded by Sir Simon Harcourt, who arrived on the
last of December, 1641.

While Ireland was thus miserably distressed, the King returned out of Scotland
into England, and was entertained by the City of London with most pompous
solemnity; the whole multitude of Citizens distinguished by their several
Companies, in such costly Equipage as never before was known, with Horse and
Arms met the King, and guarded him through the whole City to his Palace at
White Hall. Some condemned that costly entertainment of the City at such a sad
time; others hoped it might gain the Kings dubious affection to his people; but
it wrought a contrary effect in the King; who began now to think he could never
lose the love of the City, whatsoever he did; and was flattered by some, with a
hope that the City would assist him in curbing of the Parliament it self; he
grew therefore more disdainful toward the Parliament; and to endear the City,
invited diverse of the chief to Hampton Court, where he feasted them, and
Knighted some.

But the honest Citizens perceiving that no good use was made of their dutiful
expressions toward the King, but that some bad people did openly say that the
City were weary of the Parliament, and would join with the King against it;
they framed a Petition to the Parliament, wherein the contrary is professed;
and that they would live and die with the Parliament for the good of the
Commonwealth.

While the King remained at Hampton Court, the House of Commons presented him
with a Remonstrance, wherein the Grievances of the Kingdom are expressed; but
no fault laid upon himself in plain words, but a Malignant party (as they call
them) and evil Counselors.

Irelands calamities seemed to be quite forgotten, or rather, that those
inhumane Rebels were countenanced; every body wondering that the King would not
proclaim them Rebels; and some honest Lords advising the King to proclaim them
speedily, that a better course might be taken against them; they desired him to
wash off that foul stain from himself, by proceeding severely against those
wicked villains; who reported every where that they had authority from him to
seize upon the Holds of the English Protestants; that they were the Queens
Soldiers, and rise to maintain the Kings Prerogative against the Puritan
Parliament in England; they therefore advised him by all means to purge himself
of that crime; then which, a greater on earth could not be.

But so strangely were things carried, that although the Rebellion brake out
upon the twenty third of October, the King did not proclaim them Rebels till
the first of January; and then gave a strict command, that no more then forty
Copies of that Proclamation should be Printed, and that none of them should be
published, till his Majesty's pleasure were further signified, so that a few
only could take notice of it; which made all men extremely wonder, when they
observed the late contrary proceedings against the Scots; who were in a very
quick and sharp manner proclaimed, and those Proclamations forthwith dispersed
with as much diligence as might be through all the Kingdom.

But before this Proclamation came out, the Parliament, being somewhat troubled
with some speeches, of which they had been informed, as if a Plot were
contrived against them, desired the King to allow them a Guard for security of
their persons and that the Earl of Essex, then Lord Chamberlain of his
Majesty's Household, might be Commander of it. But the King denied them a Guard,
giving them many fair promises of his care for their safety; and that he would
command such a Guard to wait upon them, as he would be responsible for to
Almighty God.

Three days after the Proclamation against those Irish Rebels, being the fourth
of January, the King attended with about three hundred Armed Gentlemen, came to
Westminster, and entering in Person into the House of Commons, and seating
himself in the Speakers Chair, demanded five Members of that House to be
delivered to him; Mr. Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hamden, and Mr.
Strode.

Those five Members had by command of the House, upon information of the Kings
intent, absented themselves. Which the King finding, went away after a short
Speech delivered, concerning them, That he intended a fair Trial against them,
and that he was, and would be as careful to maintain the Privileges of
Parliament, as ever any King of England was. He had the day before demanded
them by his Attorney, Sir Edward Herbert, a Member of the House of Commons,
pretending a Charge of high Treason against them, and with them, against the
Lord Mandevile, a Member of the House of Lords. But the Parliament did not
think fit to let their Persons go. Whereupon the King sent and sealed up the
Closets and Trunks of those five Members; He made also a Proclamation against
them, for their apprehending and imprisonment, as men guilty of high Treason.

This great breach of Parliament-Priviledge happened in a strange time, to
divert the Kingdom from relieving of Ireland; and so the people every where
complained, and called to mind what they had heard by some of those poor
Protestants, who fled out of Ireland; who reported that those Irish Rebels did
confidently say, It was for no purpose to sly for safety into England, for that
Kingdom would be as much distressed as theirs, and that the King intended to
forsake his Parliament in England, and War against it; which when he did, they
would come over, having done their work in Ireland, and help the King against
the English Parliament. Those things were sadly remembered.

On this occasion the Parliament voted, that These things were an high breach
of the Privilege of Parliament, a great scandal to the King and his
Government, a seditious act, manifestly tending to the subversion of the peace,
and an injury and dishonor to the said Members, there being no legal Charge or
accusation against them. And that there could be no vindication of those
Privileges, unless his Majesty would discover the Names of those who advised
him to such unlawful courses. They therefore desired him to satisfy their
legal desire in that, to let them know their informers (which by two Statutes
then in force, upon such occasions the King is bound to do) but he refused to
grant their request. Upon which they committed his Attorney, Sir Edward
Herbert, (having been examined about it, but confessing nothing) for breaking
the Privileges of Parliament in prefering the Articles, etc.

The King the next day after this, entering into the House of Commons, went
through the City of London; where the Citizens in many places, flocking about
his Coach, humbly entreated him to agree with his Parliament, and not to break
the Privileges thereof. To which purpose, they afterward presented him with a
Petition, beseeching him for poor Irelands sake, to accord with his Parliament,
to allow them a Guard, and do right to the accused Members; with other things
of that nature, expressed at large in that Petition. The people about that
time, discontented with the Kings actions, and those obstructions which they
found in all businesses of Parliament, used to flock to Westminster in great
throngs, though unarmed, by way of Petitioning, and many times to utter rude
speeches against some Lords, whom they conceived to be evil advisers of the
King; which howsoever it were meant, proved of ill consequence to the
Commonwealth, and did not so much move the King to be sensible of his grieving
the people, as arm him with an excuse for leaving the Parliament and City, for
fear of what might ensue upon such tumultuous concourse of men.

Upon this ground, twelve Bishops at that time absenting themselves, entered a
Protestation against all Laws, Votes, and Orders, as Null, which in their
absence should pass; by reason that they durst not, for fear of their lives,
come to perform their duties in the House, having been rudely menaced, and
affronted. Whereupon it was agreed both by the Lords and Commons that this
Protestation of the Bishops was of dangerous Consequence, and deeply entrenched
upon the Privilege and Being of Parliaments. They were therefore accused of
high Treason, apprehended, and committed prisoners to the Tower.

Thus was the Parliament daily troubled with ill work, whereby the relief of
Ireland was hindered: but other particular hindrances of Irelands relief then
fell out, which we shall express briefly.

When the Parliament were considering of Forces to be sent out of Scotland,
being a short cut, many things happened to divert, or delay it. There was a
Bill for Pressing of Soldiers to that purpose depending in the House of Peers,
which the King took exceptions at, as to the putting of it into that way;
being, as he said, a diminution of his Prerogative: but because he desired
Ireland might be relieved, he was content that a Bill should pass for that time
with a Salvo Jure both to King and people. This speech offended the Parliament;
who declared in a Petition, that the King by taking notice of the debate in the
House of Lords concerning the Bill for pressing of Soldiers, had broken the
fundamental privilege of Parliament, which he ought not to do concerning any
Bill, till it be presented to him in due course of Parliament; for every Member
has free liberty of speech in propounding, or debating, and the King ought not
to be displeased at him for such opinions or propositions. For this great
breach of Privilege they desired reparation, and that the King would make
known who they were by whose evil Counsel he had done it, that they might
receive condign punishment.

It was then also desired, that an Army of Scots should be sent into Ireland
first; but the Scottish Commissioners answered, That they had no Commission from
their State to send over a less number thither than 10000. The House of Commons
consented, out of Zeal to the Cause; and Voted the sending over of ten thousand
Scots. But the Lords would not yield unto it, unless the House of Commons would
give assurance that ten thousand English should be sent over as speedily; which
was impossible to be done. And no other reason given for this Opposition, but
that it was dishonorable for England, that Ireland should be reduced by the
Scots; and that the Scots would make too great an advantage by it. But this
reason was not thought by honest men, of weight enough to hinder so good a
work; when the cause of Religion, and the deplorable estate of so many thousand
poor Christians groaned for assistance.

A third Obstruction of Irelands Relief was thus: Two thousand five hundred
Scots were in readiness to be transported into the North of Ireland. Concerning
the condition of their going, the Commissioners of Scotland delivered to the
English Parliament eight Propositions: Both Houses consented to all the
Propositions, but the King excepted against one of those Propositions; which
was the third in order: That the Scots would have the keeping of the Town and
Castle of Carrickfergus, with power to remain there, or enlarge their Quarters
at discretion; and if any Regiments or Troops in that Province should join with
them, that they receive Orders from the chief Commanders of the Scottish Forces.

This Article the King said that he doubted might be to the damage of England;
and therefore would have the Parliament think upon it again. Nevertheless if
they would have it so, he would confer with the Scottish Commissioners about it.

The Scots answered the King, That they were sorry that his Majesty, being
their native King, should show less trust in them, then their neighbor Nation
had freely done; and should think that Article too much for them, which both
Houses of Parliament were pleased with. The King at last (though too much time
were lost) was contented to admit of that Article, as the Parliament had done.

But that way which the Parliament thought most powerful to Reduce Ireland, was
by adventuring for proportions of Land there to be shared amongst the English
Adventurers, according to those sums of money, which they would disburse or
subscribe: That so whosoever in person or purse helped toward the conquest of
those bloody Rebels, might be recompensed, if the Work were done. Propositions
were framed in Parliament to that purpose. The King confirmed these
Propositions, though at first he laughed at them, and was heard to say, That
they were like to him, who sold the Bears skin before the Bear was killed.

At last an Act was made, enabling the Parliament with power to carry on that
War until Ireland should be declared wholly subdued; and that no Peace, or
Cessation of Arms should be ever made with the Rebels, unless both Houses of
Parliament consented to it. The King then offered to go in person over into
Ireland. But the Parliament thought it was not fit to hazard the Kings person
in such an expedition.

The King was then at Hampton Court, distasted at the City, and pretending the
reasons of his absence to be fear of Tumults: for besides what was before
spoken of the numbers which flocked to Petition at Westminster, the King was
advertised, That the day after he retired to Hampton (which was about a week
after his going to the House of Commons) diverse Citizens, with Boats, and Guns
in them, brought the five Members to Westminster, with many promises not to
forsake the Parliament.

From thence, upon the twentieth of January, the King sent a Message to the
Parliament, desiring them, that seeing particular grievances were so many, as
that it would be tedious to present them by themselves, they would digest them
into one Body; that so a clear Judgment might be made upon them; And then they
should see how ready he would be to equal or exceed the greatest examples of
most indulgent Princes in their Acts of Grace and Favor to the People.

The Parliament gave him thanks, and resolved speedily to consider of it; but
desired the King, in the mean time, to give them a sure ground of security
(while they discharged their Trust) by putting the Tower, with other principal
Forts, and the whole Militia of the Kingdom, into such hands, as the Parliament
might trust, and recommend to him.

The King refused to grant that Petition; alleging, that he would reserve to
himself the disposal of all those places, as a principal, and inseparable
Flower of his Crown; nevertheless, he promised to entrust none but faithful
Persons in any of those places.

Many reasons were showed on both sides, and many Petitions and Answers passed;
they still pressing for this Grant of the Militia, and the King still denying
it.

The King then residing at Hampton Court, had found out a new way to weaken the
Parliament in their number, by sending for some, who were his Servants, to
leave their sitting in the House to attend him. Especially he aimed at the Earl
of Essex, his Lord Chamberlain; and the Earl of Holland, Groom of the Stool;
both whom he sent for: but they chose rather to obey his Parliament-Writ, than
his private Command; and continued sitting. For which he sent a Messenger to
demand the Staff of the one, and the Key of the other, being the Ensigns of
their Offices; which they willingly resigned.

The Lord George Digby about that time had written a Letter to the Queen from
Midleborough in Zealand (whither he had fled from England, when the Lords in
Parliament had sent for him upon some Misdemeanors, and if he appeared not in
twenty days, had proclaimed him Traitor) in which he intimates, That if the
King will declare himself, and retire to a safe place, he should be able to
wait upon him from thence, as well as from any part of England, over and above
the service which he might do for him there in the mean time.

This Letter was intercepted, and brought to the Parliament; whereby they began
to understand that the King had some design in hand against them; which they
more plainly afterward discerned.

The King and Queen, about the middle of February, with their eldest Daughter
Mary, Princess of Orange, went to Canterbury: From which place (while some of
the Members of both Houses went between London and that City upon diverse
businesses) the King signed the Bill for taking away Bishops Votes in
Parliament.

From Canterbury they went to Dover: from whence the Queen passed into Holland,
under pretext of keeping her Daughter company to her Husband: But she carried
with her the Crown-Jewels of England, and pawned them there; whereby she bought
Arms for that War which ensued, and was it seems then designed by the King
against the Parliament.

After her departure, the King taking the Prince and Duke of York with him,
went to Theobalds; there he received a Petition from the Parliament on the
first of March, one thousand six hundred forty one, wherein they desired him to
Grant the Militia, to abide near London, and not to carry the Prince away.

All which he denied; and went immediately to New Market.

There he was presented with a Declaration drawn by both Houses. The Earls of
Pembrook and Holland, with some Commoners, carried it; In which they repeat the
old Grievances; his wicked War against Scotland, the Irish Rebellion raised
here by many presumptions, his attempt of engaging the English Army against the
Parliament, his entering the House of Commons, with the like; and that his fear
to reside near London is without ground, and pretended for nothing but to
perplex the Commonwealth, to hinder the relief of Ireland, and encourage the
ill-affected party in this Kingdom: to which the King Answered with great
indignation, and afterward answered it by a long Declaration of his own,
endeavoring to clear himself of some things, and extenuate, or excuse others;
accusing them for coining to themselves needless Fears and Jealousies; and so
these Commissioners departed from Theobalds (while the Parliament suffered him,
without any real hinderance) to the Peoples great griefs, he passed to the City
of York.

The Parliament in the mean time sit, and Vote only against the Kings evil
Counsel, and make three Votes.

1. That the Kings absence, so far remote from his Parliament, is not only an
obstruction, but may be a destruction to the Affairs in Ireland.

2. That when the Lord and Commons in Parliament shall declare what the Law of
the Land is, to have this not only questioned, and controverted, but
contradicted, and a command that it should not be obeyed, is an high breach of
the Privilege of Parliament.

3. That they which advised the King to absent himself from the Parliament, are
enemies to the peace of this Kingdom, and justly to be suspected as favorers of
the Rebellion in Ireland.

From York the King sent a Message to the Parliament, on the eighth of April
1642. that he would go in person over to Ireland against those bloody Rebels;
and therefore intended to raise by his Commission near Westchester a Guard for
his Person (when he should come into Ireland) of 2000 Foot, and 200 Horse, whom
he would arm from his Magazine at Hull.

But the Parliament suspecting, as well by my Lord Digby his intercepted
Letter, as by other presumptions, That the Kings chief end of going Northward,
was to seize the Magazine of Hull, and arm himself from thence against them;
sent a Petition to him, for leave to remove that Magazine to the Tower of
London; and accordingly had sent Sir John Hotham thither, who prevented the
King, and kept out the Earl of Newcastle, whom the King had sent thither also
for the same purpose; at which action of theirs, the King was much moved.

On the three and twentieth day of April 1642. the King, attended by some
Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Soldiers, came at the Walls of Hull, and demanded
entrance; but the Gates were shut, and Sir John Hotham appeared upon the Wall,
and kneeling there, entreated the King not to command that, which he, without
breach of Trust, could not obey: in conclusion, the King not getting entrance,
proclaimed Hotham Traitor; and sent a complaining Message to the Parliament
concerning that affront.

The Parliament labored to appease him, but justified Hothams act; and
Declared, That proclaiming Sir John Hotham Traitor, without due process of Law,
was against the Liberty of the Subject, and Laws of the Land.

Upon this business of Hull, passed in (...) short time many Declarations on
both sides, with Arguments drawn from the Statutes and Laws of England; and
many commands contrary to each other; the Parliament authorizing Sir John
Hotham to issue out Warrants to the Constables and other Officers, to come with
Arms to the defense of Hull: and the King on the other side forbiding any such
Warrants, or Training, without authority under his hand.

The King, while the Parliament let him alone in the North, daily Summoned the
Gentry of those Counties to attend him at York, and daily gained some to his
party; whose proceedings there in every particular, are too tedious for this
Relation; but his frequent Orations to them were in substance, That he was in
danger of the Parliament, and desired a Guard for his person: and when the King
made Proclamation for all Gentlemen and others, to attend him in Arms as a
Guard; the Parliament at London only declared, That such Arming of men to the
disturbance of the Kingdoms peace, was against the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdoms: Thus did Proclamations and Declarations for a long time encounter
each other.

But nothing made the Kingdom fear a War, until that great defection of
Parliament Members, who left their Seats, and went to the King at York: Which
happened about the end of April, and continued a great part of May following;
in which space a great number of the Lords, some sent for by the King, others
for their own discontents, fears, or ambition, quitted their Seats in
Parliament, and went to him one after another.

The Lords that left the Parliament were these;

Duke of Richmond, Marquess Hartford, the Earls of Lindsey, Cumberland,
Huntington, Bath, Southampton, Dorset, Northampton, Devonshire, Bristol,
Westmerland, Barkshire, Monmoth, Rivers, Newcastle, Dover, Carnarvan, Newport;
the Lords Matrevers, Willoughby of Eresby, Rich, Howard of Charleton, Newark,
Paget, Chandois, Falconbridge, Paulet, Lovelace, Savil, Coventry, Mohun,
Dunsmore, Seymour, Gray of Ruthen, Capel.

Within that time also many of the House of Commons did so far break their
Trust, as to forsake their Seats in Parliament, and go to the King.

This Revolt of so many Members of both Houses, was generally looked upon, as a
thing of most sad consequence, and likely to produce no effects, but lamentable
and wicked: as to nourish and increase the Kings dis-affection to Parliaments;
to encourage his distance from it, and attempts against it; to secure the Irish
Rebels, to subvert the dignity of that high Court, and make the King, by this
diminution of their number (as he did in his following Declarations) call them
a Faction, a pretended Parliament, and such like names.

The Parliament continued still Petitioning the King; and on the twentieth of
May sent to entreat him, that he would Disband his Forces, and rely for his
security (as his Predecessors had done) upon the Laws, and Affections of his
people; contenting himself with his ordinary Guards; declaring, that else they
held themselves bound in duty to God, and the trust reposed in them by the
people, and by the fundamental Laws, to employ their utmost care, and power,
for securing the Parliament, and preserving the Kingdoms Peace.

Upon which, these Votes were made in Parliament.

That it appears that the King seduced by wicked Council, intends to make a War
against the Parliament, who in all their consultations and actions have
proposed no other end to themselves, but the care of his Kingdoms, and the
performance of all duty and loyalty to his person.

It was likewise Resolved upon the Question, That,

Whenever the King makes War upon the Parliament, it is a breach of the
Trust reposed in him by his people, contrary to his Oath, and tending to the
dissolution of this Government.

As also,

That whosoever shall serve or assist him in such Wars, are Traitors by the
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and have been so adjudged in two Acts of
Parliament, II Richard 2, and 1 Henry 4, and that such Persons ought to suffer
as Traitors.

But those Lords who had forsaken the Parliament, continued still with the King
in the North; wherefore the Parliament by an Order of the thirtieth of May,
Summoned nine of them, who first had gone away, to appear at Westminster; viz.
The Earls of Northampton, Devonshire, Dover, and Monmoth; the Lords Howard of
Charleton, Rich, Gray of Ruthen, Coven^ry, and Capel. But they refused to come
away, returning an Answer in writing; which the Parliament judged to be a
slighting, and scornful Letter; upon which, a Vote was passed against them in
the House of Commons, and presented on the 15 of June to the Lords by Master
Hollis, with an Oration concerning the importance of the business.

Upon the impeachment of the nine Lords, the House of Peers about a month
after, being in their Robes, entered into debate of the said impeachment; and
after diverse Speeches made, setting forth the greatness of their offense, they
were Censured, 1 Never to sit more as Members of that House. 2 To be incapable
of the Benefit or Privilege of Parliament. 3 To suffer imprisonment during
their pleasure.


After which Censure, it was concluded, That the said Lords should be demanded
in the behalf of both Houses of Parliament, to submit to the said Censure.

After this, another wound was given to the Parliament, encouraging the King in
his Designs; the Great Seal of England was carried away from the Parliament at
London, to the King at York, by the Lord Keeper Littleton, a man that had
continued some time, after the rest were gone, firm in appearance, Voted with
them, and gave his Voice for settling of the Militia by Ordinance of Parliament.

But about the end of June, one Master Eliot a Courtier, was sent closely from
York to him; who having gotten privacy with the Lord Keeper, so far prevailed
at last, that he got the Great Seal into his hands, and rid away with it to the
King at York.

The Lord Keeper Littleton, after some serious thoughts with himself, not being
able to answer it to the Parliament, rode away himself next day to the King
also. The reason which he gave to some friends of his afterward for so parting
with the Seal, was this, The King when he made him Lord Keeper, gave him an
Oath in private, which he took, That whenever the King should send to him for
the Great Seal, he should forthwith deliver it. This Oath, he said, he could
not dispense with in Conscience, but was sorry he had taken the Office with
such an Oath. The Seal was given him since this Parliament sat; which made it
appear what intentions the King even then had to the Parliament.

The King having now gotten the Great Seal, issued forth many Proclamations;
and among other, one, That no man should obey the Parliaments Warrants about
settling the Militia: and they on the other side by Ordinances forbad any man to
raise Arms by Warrant from the King, without the authority of Parliament.

The Parliament being then intent upon settling the Militia by Land, they took
care also to seize the Navy into their hands, for security of the Kingdom
against foreign invasions.

To that purpose, the Earl of Warwick, a Nobleman of good experience in
Sea-affairs, and undoubted fidelity to his Country, was by an Ordinance of
both Houses chosen to be Lord Admiral. But the King had chosen Sir John
Penington to that place, in the room of the Earl of Northumberland; and sent a
Command to the Earl of Warwick to resign the place to him.

But the Earl-chose rather to obey the Ordinance of Parliament, and with great
courage and policy got the Fleet into his hands, though many of the Captains
stood out against him, alleging they had the Kings Command to obey Sir John
Penington; but the Earl deprived them of their Commands, and possessed himself
of the Ships; taking shortly after another Ship called the Lion, of great
import, coming out of Holland, and laden with Gunpowder; which proved a great
addition to his strength.

All men at this time began to despair of the Kings return to his Parliament,
and therefore on the 10 of June was an Order made in Parliament for bringing in
money and plate, to raise Arms for the Cause; the public Faith for repayment
to them that brought it in, was engaged by the Parliament, and interest of
eight in the hundred. Which was accordingly brought in in great abundance by
well-affected people: as also Horses and Arms for that service.

The King at that time had received Money, and Arms, with Ammunition out of
Holland, upon the pawning of the Crown-Jewels which the Queen had carried over
in February before. He then sent out his Commissions of Array to Arm the
people, into all Counties: wherein he used the Parliaments own words, as in a
Jeer of them. For the Parliament professed that their receiving of plate and
money, and levying of Forces was, To maintain the Protestant Religion, the
Kings Person, dignity, and authority, the Laws of the Land, the peace of the
Kingdom, and privilege of Parliament. The Kings words were the same; namely,
To maintain the Protestant Religion, his own person and authority, the Laws,
Kingdoms Peace, and privilege of Parliament.

And whereas the Parliament in their Declarations, both then, and afterward,
used to say, That they did arm against a malignant party, by whom the Kings
person was in danger; he in his, said the like, and that for the safety of his
own person and people, there was an inevitable necessity of putting the Kingdom
into a posture of defense; using those very words in his Commission of Array,
which they did in their Ordinance for the Militia. And invited people to bring
plate and money to him, in that language which the Parliament did: nor did it
prove less effectual; for many Lords, Gentlemen, and others very freely brought
in Money and plate, to serve the King, within a short space.

In all this heat of preparations, the King, before those Lords that were with
him in the North, made a solemn Protestation, as before God, that he would not
engage them in any War against the Parliament, but only for his necessary
defense; that his desire was to maintain the Protestant Religion, the liberties
of the Subject, and privilege of Parliament.

Upon which, those Lords made a solemn Protestation, as before God, and
subscribed their Names to it, That they did believe the Kings intention to be
as he said; namely, That he had no purpose to Levy War against the Parliament;
and that he endeavored only to maintain the Protestant Religion, the Laws,
Liberties of the Subject, and just privilege of Parliament.

The King immediately after this took a progress about the Countries adjacent,
and at diverse places made speeches to the Gentlemen, and inhabitants, full of
gracious promises, and declaring his intentions to preserve the peoples
Liberties, and privilege of Parliament; after which he returned to York: and
having raised an Army of three thousand Foot, and one thousand Horse, went to
Beverly, with an intention to besiege Hull; making Proclamation beforehand,
That no man should presume to assist Hull, against him, or bring any force
thither. The Parliament, on the other side published a Declaration, for the
preservation and safety of the Kingdom, and of the town of Hull, with assurance
of satisfaction to all those who sustained any loss by their service for the
safety of that Town, or by overflowing of water upon the grounds there.

The King was within two hours march of Hull, when Sir John Hotham calling a
Council of War, by whom it was thought so fit, drowned the Country about Hull,
drawing up the Sluice; giving the Owners time to remove their Cattle and Goods,
the Parliament being to satisfy their damages upon the public Faith.

Sir John Meldrum, an old Soldier, was assistant to Hotham; who sallying
bravely out of the Town with five hundred Townsmen, made the Kings party
retreat to Beverly, some being slain, and taken in the Chase.

Within a short time after, (when five hundred men sent from London arrived at
Hull) Sir John Meldrum made a fiercer Sally, and forced most of the Leaguer to
retire disorderly, one and twenty of them being slain, and fifteen taken
prisoners; and following his good success, came to Aulby, where the Kings
Magazine of Arms, Ammunition, and Fireballs were kept in a Barn; all which he
took, and fired the Barn: Upon which, the King calling a Council of War, upon
their advice broke up the siege before Hull.

On the twelfth of July the Parliament Voted that an Army should be raised for
the safety of the Kings person, and defense of the Parliament. Of which the
Earl of Essex, a man of eminent fidelity and worth, was by an unanimous consent
of both Houses chosen General.

Some Lords and Members of the Commons were sent down into the Counties to
settle the Militia, and raise Forces for defense of several Towns and places.

And diverse Members of the Houses Listed themselves in the Lord General Essex
his Army; and took Commissions from him, as Colonels.

But immediately after this time, the Kings Commissions of Array were sent down
into every County (though often declared by the Parliament to be illegal) and
were obeyed in many places, more than the Parliaments Ordinances for the
Militia; by reason that so many Lords and Gentlemen adhered to him now against
the Parliament.

But there were scarce any Counties free from contention, betwixt the
Commissioners of the one, and the Ordinances of the other; which strugled
together, with great Nobility, and Gentry on both sides: Neither had the Kings
Proclamations, nor the Parliaments Ordinances obedience from all, only as far
as the now-drawing swords enforced it.

During these Divisions in several Counties, London it self was not free: for
the Lord Major of London, Sir Richard Gurney, was by the Parliament committed
prisoner to the Tower of London, for moving sedition in the Kingdom, by causing
the Kings Commission of Array (a thing declared illegal by both Houses) to be
proclaimed in the City: and afterward an additional impeachment was brought in
against him by the Common Counsel of London, for diverse breaches of his Oath in
that Office, and contemning the Orders of Parliament.

After many days attendance concerning these Accusations, on the twelfth day of
August he received his Censure at the House of Lords; which was,

That he should be turned out of his Majoralty.

That he should never bear any Office in the City, or Commonwealth.

That he should be incapable of any Honor or, Dignity to be conferred on him by
the King; and Committed Prisoner to the Tower during the pleasure of both
Houses.

Many Proclamations about that time passed from the King, and Declarations from
the Parliament; one from the King against the Earl of Essex, as a Rebel, and
all that adhered unto him; and a Declaration from the Parliament, recounting
all that the Kings evil counsel (for so they call it) had done illegally
against them: the Parliament likewise published what in particular had been
done by his party against Ireland; and how that unhappy Kingdom had been of
late robbed of many Reliefes, of Clothes, Victuals, and Arms which the
Parliament had sent them, by the King and his party.

While these writings on both sides lasted, the King removed often to gather
strength, and in several places made Speeches to the Countries, with many
Protestations of his affection to the people. At last he came to Nottingham,
where, about the middle of August, he set up his Standard-Royal. Very few
People came to it, nor had the King at that time any considerable strength; nor
if the Parliament would then have seized upon his person, could he have kept
himself out of their hands.

From Notingham on the twenty fifth of that Month he sent a Message to the
Parliament, by the Earls of Southampton and Dorset, and Sir John Culpeper.

In that Message he signifies a desire to compose the difference by a Treaty;
that a certain number of Persons sent, and enabled by the Parliament, may treat
in some indifferent place, with the like number authorized by him.

The Parliament answer, That until he put them in a condition to treat, that
is, until he take down his Standard, and recall those Proclamations, wherein he
calls (a thing unheard of before) both Houses of Parliament Traitors and
Rebels, they cannot, by the Fundamental Privileges of Parliament, or by the
public trust reposed in them, or with the general good of the Realm, admit of
any such Treaty.

The KING denied that he advanced his Standard against the Parliament, or that
he called them Rebels: but within few days, in his Instructions to his
Commissioners of Array, Marquess Harford, the Earl of Cumberland, and the Lord
Strange, he again called the Earl of Essex Rebel and Traitor.

Thus did they contend for some time, by Declarations and Proclamations; which
proved all fruitless, as to satisfying of the people; nor could this lamentable
War be averted.

Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice, the the second and third Sons of the late
King of Bohemia, were now come into England the beginning of September, to
offer their service to the King, their Uncle; whom presently he put into
Commands. Prince Rupert, the Elder and Fiercer by nature, Commanding a Body of
Horse, flew with great fury through diverse Counties, raising men for the King's
service in a rigorous way, Committing outrages to those who favored the
Parliament; upon which, the Houses fell into a debate, agreeing, that a Charge
of Treason should be drawn up against him, for endeavoring the Destruction of
this State, and abusing that Court which represented it.

The King marched another way; and passing through Derbyshire, Leicestershire,
and Nottinghamshire, he commanded the Trained Bands of those Counties to attend
and Guard his Person; and when they were met, he disarmed the greatest part of
them, taking as many Arms as served for two thousand men, besides good sums of
Money, which he borrowed by constraint; protesting still (as usually he did) to
maintain the Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the Subject, and
the privileges of Parliament.

The Parliament-Army, raised under the Conduct of the General Essex, was now
grown into a considerable Bulk; consisting of about fourteen thousand Horse and
Foot; their general Rendezvous was at Northampton, where many of the chief
Commanders stayed with them, expecting the presence of the General himself. The
Lord General Essex, on the ninth of September, taking his leave of the
Parliament and City of London, went toward Northampton, and was waited on by
the trained Bands, and a great number of armed Gentlemen from Essex-house to
the end of the City, with great solemnity. The Parliament sent a Petition to
the General at Northampton, to be by him presented to the King in a safe and
honorable way; the effect of which was, humbly to entreat his Majesty to
withdraw his presence from those wicked persons about him, and not to mix his
danger with theirs; but that he would return to his Parliament; and suchlike
things.

The King intending to seize upon Worcester, sent Prince Rupert thither with
some Horse; which Essex fearing, to prevent the King, commanded part of his
forces to march thither speedily, himself following with his Army.

Some Skirmishes happened between that party of Parliamentarians and Prince
Rupert, before the coming of General Essex; but Prince Rupert, when the
forerunners of Essex his Army were in sight, with great speed fled out of
Worcester. General Essex, leaving a Garrison at Northampton, marched to
Coventry; which Town he also garisoned, as likewise Warwick, and marched from
thence with his main Army to Worcester; where he made some stay.

The King at that time with a small Body of Horse went to Shrewsbury; to which
place he caused a Mint to be brought; and Coined his Plate: for many Gentlemen
about that time, had, besides Money and Arms, brought Plate in unto him. At
Shrewsbury he grew wonderful in strength; so that within three weeks after his
coming thither, from a small inconsiderable Body of Horse, he was grown into an
Army consisting of about six thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse, and two
thousand Dragoneirs.

From Shrewsbury the King marched along by Coventry, and came to Southam; being
but a small distance from the Lord General Essex his Army: from whence he
struck a terror (though so far off) into the City of London it self; for he was
then nearer to London by a days march, then the General was; insomuch as that
London made great provisions to Guard it self, and the Parliament sent twelve
Companies to possess and Guard Windsor-Castle.

The General thought it his chief work to follow the King's Army, for fear he
should march toward London; and by reason of that haste, left behind him a
great part of his Forces, and great Artillery.

The King perceiving that, and loath to lose so good an advantage of fighting
(before the Parliament-Forces were conjoined) turned back against General
Essex; who was also resolved to give battle.

A fair Champion Ground there is near Keynton, a Village in Warwickshire; and
not above twenty furlongs from that Village, a great and steep hill, upon which
the King's Army had spread themselves; and at the foot of that Hill, a large
Plain, called The Vale of the Red-Horse: here first the battle joined; the
Royalists descending cheerfully down the hill, and the Parliamentarians from
Keynton approaching toward them. The fight was begun with great courage, and
much slaughter on both parts: on one side the Earl of Lindsey; on the other,
the Earl of Essex manfully discharging the parts both of Generals and Soldiers.

But presently after the Battle was begun, Prince Rupert, who commanded the
Horse in the King's right Wing, fell in with so furious a Charge upon the
Parliaments left Wing, (where most of their Horse were placed) that immediately
he put to flight all those Parliament-Horse, whose Foot likewise, being left by
the Horse, betook themselves to flight. Prince Rupert following the chase far,
and greedy of pillage, whilst he was busy in seizing the Carriages and
Baggage of his Enemies, spent so much time therein, that the King's Victory
(which was almost gotten) was by that means quite lost: for in the King's left
Wing the fortune was nor equal, whom Sir William Balfore charged so roundly,
that he broke the best Foot-Regiments, and seized upon the King's Artillery.

There was a bloody fight: in that place the Kings Standard was taken, but soon
lost again: there were slain and taken Prisoners many brave men, among whom
Lindsey the King's General was taken Prisoner, who died within few hours, of
his wounds.

Night parted the fight, and gave a safe retreat to both sides: both sides
challenged the Victory to themselves; for which, thanks were publicly given to
God both by the Parliament and the King; for on both sides appeared some marks
of Victory, as Ensigns, Canons, and Prisoners taken. Concerning the number of
the slain was no agreement, both parties reporting too falsely: but it was
thought that of both Armies (though more of the King's side then the other)
were slain in that battle above five thousand.

General Essex marched to Coventry, to refresh his Army: the King to Oxford, as
to his Winter Quarters. Prince Rupert with a Body of Horse flew up and down the
Country Night and Day, plundering and robbing Towns and Villages; and made his
Excursions so far out of Oxford, that he struck a terror into the City of
London it self, insomuch, as that they desired General Essex (who had designed
to follow the King) that he would bring his Army nearer to London.

Essex on the seventh Day of November, came to Westminster, (quartering his
Forces in the adjacent Villages) and was received with great Honor by both
Houses of Parliament, and was presented with five thousand pounds as a
gratuity, with a large acknowledgement of his valor and pains undergone for
the Commonwealth.

Before the General departed from London, another bloody Battle was fought
about Brainford. And so happened the occasion; the Parliament grieved for this
unnatural War, desirous to save the Kingdom, and recover Ireland, had agreed
upon a Petition for Accommodation to be presented to the King, being then at
Colebrook, by the Earls of Northumberland and Pembrook, the Lord Wainman,
Master Perpoint, and Sir John Ipsley.

The King gave a fair Answer, protesting before God, That he was grieved for
his peoples sufferings; and in order to peace, was willing to reside near
London, and receive such Propositions as they would send, and treat with them.

As soon as the Commissioners were gone with this Answer, the King's Artillery
(for so all Relations agree) advanced forward with the Horse, through Colebrook,
after them toward London; and taking advantage of a great Mist, which happened
that Night, they marched to Brainford, and fell upon the Parliaments Forces
that were quartered there, which was a broken Regiment of Colonel Hollis's.

The King's Army killed many of them, and had, in likelihood, utterly destroyed
them all, if the Lord Brook's and Colonel Hamden's Regiments, that were
billeted not far off, had not come in to their relief; who maintained a great
and bloody fight against the King's Army, till both sides at Night retreated:
many were slain and taken Prisoners on both sides, and both reported themselves
Conquerers, as before it happened at Keynton Battle.

News of this unexpected Fight was soon at London, where the General was
sitting in Parliament, whither also the noise of their great Artillery was
easily heard: he took Horse immediately, to get strength together, and relieve
his engaged men; but Night had parted them, and the King was retired to his
best advantages.

All that Night, Forces came out of London thither, so that on the Sunday
Morning, being the fourteenth of November, a wonderful number of armed men were
met, and had so far encompast the King's Army, (small in comparison of them)
that many hoped for an end of the War: but God was nor so pleased; for the King
escaped by reason of this error: Three thousand Parliament Soldiers were then
at Kingston; they were commanded to leave that Town, and march speedily through
Surrey, and over London Bridge, so through the City, to Brainford, to stop the
Enemies passage to London. A reason of that Command was afterward given,
because the Lord General was not assured of strength enough to stop the Enemy
from going to London; nor could he be beforehand sure of so great a Force, as
he afterward perceived to be come to him before morning.

Thus did the enclosed King escape, and retreated through that Town of Kingston,
being so abandoned by the Parliaments soldiers; and after he had plundered the
country thereabouts, retired safely to his Winter Quarters at Oxford.

The Parliament considering this action of the King, began to hope little upon
any Treaty; resolving, That the General should speedily pursue the King's
Forces, and fall upon them: and the City of London, to encourage the
Parliament, made a Petition to them; wherein they entreated, That they would
proceed no further in the business of Accommodation, because evil counsel was
so prevalent with the King, that he would but delude them; that they had heard
his Forces are weak; and entreat, that his Excellency would follow, and fall
upon them; the City, as heretofore, being ready to spend with all willingness
their lives and fortunes to assist the Parliament.

For which Petition and Protestation, the Parliament returned thanks to the
City; and according as they desired, it was decreed in Parliament.

FINIS.
Book II.
A Short mention of the Progress of this Civil War.
THe beginnings of the Civil war, together with the Series of causes from
whence it sprung, as likewise the degrees by which it grew, have been already
briefly and clearly showed; The things which remain to be unfolded are of so
great a weight, of so various a nature, and of so many pieces, that scarce any
Historian (I might say History it self) is sufficient to weave fully together
so many particulars: my intention therefore is to make only a short mention,
not a full Narration, of that Variety.

For the War went on with horrid rage in many places at one time; and the fire
once kindled, cast forth through every corner of the land not only sparks but
devouring flames; insomuch as the kingdom of England was divided into more Wars
than Counties; nor had she more fields than skirmishes, nor Cities than Sieges;
and almost all the Palaces of Lords, and great Houses were turned every where
into Garrisons of War: they fought at once by Sea and Land; and through all
England (who could but lament the miseries of his Country) sad spectacles were
of plundering and firing Villages; and the fields; otherwise wast and desolate,
were rich only and terribly glorious in Camps and Armies.

The following Summer, namely in the year one thousand six hundred forty three
proved for a long time fatal to the Parliament, and Fortune seemed to have
condemned the cause of liberty; so exceedingly did the Kings party flourish in
successes and Victories, and the Parliaments condition every where low so that
they were near to ruin, who in the end prevailed.

In the West Sir William Waller, a Parliament-chieftain, who had gotten diverse
Victories, and then almost quite vanquished Sir Ralph Hopton, was at last
(namely in July) utterly defeated by the Lord Wilmot, who came from Oxford with
an Army of the Kings and having lost all his Army, returned to London: and such
as the fortune of the Field was, was the condition of Towns and Garrisons; for
immediately after Wallers defeat, the two greatest Cities of all the West were
yielded up, Bristol to Prince Rupert, and Excester to Prince Maurice.

At the same time, in the North of England, was the like success; where the
Lord Fairfax, who, with his valiant Son, had long and prosperously maintained
the cause of the Parliament, being now over-powred by a puissant Enemy, the
Earl of Newcastle, and almost all his Forces scattered, was driven into Hull,
and there besieged.

Essex himself the great General at the same time, his Army decreasing
suddenly, some dying of sickness, others for want forsaking their colors, was
constrained to leave the field, and return to London, quartering the sick and
weak remnant of his Army at Kingston, and other adjacent places, until a
Recruit could be made for him.

The Parliamentarians were now in a desperate condition, and their strengths
every where broken; on the other side the Royalists strong and dreadful in
Arms, Men, and Horses, conquerours of all the West, of Wales, and the North of
England, as far as the very borders of Scotland. One only Town of Note in the
Midland Country, Gloucester, stood out yet, faithful and constant to the
Parliament, and much desired by the King; who in great disdain that this Town
(after Bristol and Excester were yielded) should stand out* came in person to
besiedge it with a great Army.

The Queen was now arrived in England, and had brought with her great store of
Arms, bought in Holland with the money which she had raised by pawning the
Crown-Jewels there; whose coming at this time seemed rather to a Triumph than a
War.

Gloucester not only staid the career of the Kings Victories; but made a great
change in the Conditions of the sides. The City was gallantly defended against
a great and flourishing Army; wherein Massey the Governor justly gained a
wonderful renown; so long did he defend the City, until General Essex could be
recruited with an Army great enough to raise the Siege, and march thither, from
London, eighty miles.

Famous and honorable, in the judement of all men, was that expedition of
General Essex, who by solong a March, fighting often with great bodies of the
Kings Horse by the way, brought notwithstanding his whole Army safe to
Gloucester, raised the Siege, relieved that Town, and in his retreat from thence
encountered, and vanquished the Kings Army in that memorable Battle of Newberry.

After this time the parliament revived; of whose condition Wise men might
justly have doubted, if the King, leaving Gloucester, had marched directly with
his Victorious Army to London; which was then not at all fortified, and
miserably distracted with factions within it. Or besides, if the Earl of
Newcastle, letting alone the besieg^ng of Hull (which likewise proved
fruitless) had powered out his numerous forces upon the Eastern associated
Counties: but it otherwise pleased God, who is the only Lord of Hoasts, and by
whose providence all things are guided.

Both sides now, by this Victory of Essex, seemed to be put into an equal
balance both of strength and reputation; and this sad War not only likely to
be continued, but extended to a greater latitude: on one side the Parliament
inviting to their assistance their brethren of Scotland: on the other side the
King calling in his Irish. The Scots by a Covenant to be taken by both Nations
for conservation of Religion, Laws and Liberties: the Irish by a cessation of
Arms granted by the King (a peace being also promised) were drawn in.

The Scots promised to the Parliament (from whom Commissioners were sent to
Edinburgh about that business) that they would bring into England to their
assistance an Army consisting of one and twenty thousand Horse and Foot: the
Parliament engaged themselves to pay the Scots one hundred thousand pounds
toward the charge of raising that Army.

But the King dealt not so openly with those bloody Irish, in bargaining for
their assistance, but by a pretense of cessation of Arms for the behoof of the
English Protestants in that Kingdom; which cessation notwithstanding was for
the benefit of the Irish Rebels; in lieu of which favor, they gave the King
thirty thousand pounds.

This was that cessation of Arms so much spoken against by honest men in
London* for that reason especially, that it was directly against a Law, and the
Kings faith: for it was enacted by authority of Parliament (the King also
signing the Act) in the year one thousand six hundred forty one, That the War
against those bloody Irish Rebels should proceed, until it were declared by
Parliament, that Ireland were fully subdued, and that no peace, nor any
cessation of Arms should be made with those Rebels, without the consent of both
Houses of Parliament.

Thus was assistance brought to either side; to the King (which he especially
aimed at in this business) that English Army, which for almost a whole years
space had fought valiantly and victoriously against those Rebels, was now
brought into England (within five months after that cessation) to fight
against the Parliament of England: but the cause being changed, the fortune of
those Soldiers was likewise changed, for they had no success in England, but
within a short time after their arrival, that whole Army was utterly defeated;
and all their chief commanders, with seventeen hundred common Soldiers, were
taken prisoners by Sir Thomas Fa^rfax.

The Scottish Army, that Winter following, about the middle of January, passing
over Tweed came into England. The Earl of Leven was General; his kinsman David
Lesley commanded the Horse: the snow that fell at that time covered the ground
in an unusual depth, and as great a frost had congealed all the rivers; but the
heat of fighting was greater than the rigor of the air; and the patience of
Soldiers overcame the hard weather: The Earl of Leven marched with his forces
against the Earl of Newcastle; who with a great Army possessed the Northern
parts of England for the King; nor did the War go on with less vigor in other
parts. In the beginning of the Spring great Armies were raised on both sides,
and filled all the countries with terror: all the following Summer, which fell
in the year one thousand six hundred forty four, they fought with equal fury,
and almost equal fortunes; insomuch as that England by the dubiousness of
success on both sides, and sad vicissitude of calamitous slaughters, was made
an unhappy Kingdom.

The Kings fortune was sustained by brave Armies in the West, under the
Princes, Rupert and Maurice; in Wales under Gerard, and others; in the midland
Counties under Sir Jacob Ashley an old Soldier; other Armies were commanded by
Sir Ralph Hopton, and Colonel Goring, and in the North the Earl of Newcastles
great Army.

Nor were the forces of Parliament inferior; the chief Army under the General
Essex; Waller commanded another; the Earl of Manchester, to whom Crumwell, a
stout and successful Soldier was joined, led a strong Army toward the North,
where the Lord Fairfax and his Son had good forces, and Sir John Meldrum not
far off; the Earl of Denbigh a stout Commander was with a fair Party about
Strafford; and besides these, the great Scottish Army.

At the beginning of that Summer the Parliament attempted a thing of great
moment, to besiege Oxford, or at least to block up the King within that Town,
which was endeavored by two Armies, Essex on the one side, and Waller on the
other; but the King deceived them both, and with a few light Horse, escaping
out of the Town, went to join with his greater Armies.

General Essex marched farther into the West, but the expedition proved unhappy
both to himself and the Parliament: Waller followed the King, but in vain, for
he could not hinder his designed March, only some skirmishes happened between
parts of their Forces: but nothing was done of any great moment, until Waller
returned with his force to encounter enemies in other places Various were the
successes this Summer in most parts of the Kingdom; in the West, South, and
midland Counties, the Kings forces prevailed above the Parliament, which
perchance had been ruined, if the North had not made them amends with some
achievements, besides one great Victory.

For Leve, with his Scottish forces coming the last Winter into England,
besides the taking of some Towns and Forts, had much weakened Newcastles Army,
lessening their number, not by fighting, but enduring the sharpness of that
weather, which the other could not so well do. To Leven the Lord Fairfax
(after Selby was so miraculously taken by valiant Sir Thomas Fairfax) joined
himself with all his forces, to whom also the Earl of Manchester after his
Lincoln expedition) came with a gallant Army.

Three Parliament Armies, under three Generals, Leven, Manchester and Fairfax;
with great concord, and unanimity had marched together, and with joined forces
had besieged the great City of York, whereof the Earl of Newcastle was
Governor; to raise the siege Prince Rupert was come with a great Army out of
the South; the three Generals left their siege to fight the Prince; under him
also Newcastle having drawn his forces out of York, served; who on a great
plain called Marston Moore gave battle to the three Generals.

This was the greatest battle of the whole civil war; never did greater Armies
both in number and strength encounter, or drew more blood in one fight. The
Victory at first was almost gotten by the Royalists, whose left Wing (Fairfax
his men being disadvantaged by the inconvenience of the ground) had routed and
put to flight the right wing of the Parliamentarians: but this loss was more
than recompensed in the other Wing; where Crumwell (who fought under
Manchester) charged with such force and fury the right wing of the Royalists,
that he broke the best Regiments which Prince Rupert had, and put them all to
flight: Crumwel, together with David Lesley, pursued them; and wheeling about
with his Horse, came opportunely to the releif of his oppressed friends in the
other Wing, where they ceased not, until they had gained a complete Victory,
and all Prince Rupert his Ordnance, his carriages, and baggage were possessed
by the Parliamentarians.

After this Victory, Rupert with the remnant of his forces fled into the South
some of the Victorious Armies Horse in vain pursuing him for some miles; the
Earl of Newcastle, with some of his chosen friends, leaving York (of which City
Sir Thomas Glenham took the government) went to Scarborough; where within a
while after he took shipping, and passed into Germany.

The three Generals, Leven, Manchester, and Fairfax after this great Victory
returned to besiege York; to whom that City soon after, upon conditions, was
rendered; after which they divided their forces, and Leven with his Scottish
Army returning into the North, about the end of that Summer took the rich Town
of Newcastle; about the same time that the General Essex unfortunately managed
his business in the West, and having lost all his Artillery, returned to London.

This Summer the Queen passed into France, and used great endeavor to raise
aid for the King her husband, among the Roman Catholics, but those endeavors
proved fruitless, yet notwithstanding, the War in England, without strangers
help, went on with rage and blood enough.

In midst of these calamities of War, some hope of peace began to appear
(though it soon vanished again) and conditions were proposed both by King and
Parliament; upon which, in the following February (as hereafter shall be said)
they both treated. The end of this year, and beginning of the next were notably
tragical in the punishment and death of eminent men: the two Hothams, Father
and Son, having been condemned for Treason, for breaking the trust of
Parliament, and conspiring with the enemy to betray Hull, with other crimes,
after they had been imprisoned above a whole year in the Tower of London, were
this December both beheaded; and Sir Alexander Carew not many days before, who
was condemned for the same crime, suffered the same punishment: Famous also at
that time was the death of William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury; the crimes
objected against him were too many, and of too various a nature to be here
related: four years almost had this unhappy old man been a prisoner, yet not
enjoyed so much as the quiet of a prison; for oftentimes (about fourscore
several days) he was carried from the Tower to Westminster, and there
arraigned in the House of Lords; so the Fates were pleased in a sad
compensation to equal his adversity, even in time with his prosperity.

This January he was beheaded, his life being spun out so long, till he might
see (which was the observation of many) some few days before his death, the
book of Liturgy abolished, and the Directory, composed by the Sinod at
Westminster, established.

Though the King and Parliament were both thinking of a Treaty for Peace, yet
the care of War was not neglected; the King being solicitous about getting of
foreign aid, and the Parliament about new modelling their own Army: About this
business (which seemed of the highest concern) there was some debate between
the Lords and Commons; the Lords were against that Change, alleging that there
was no need of new Commanders, where the old ones could be accused of no fault,
that men of the noblest rank were fittest to command Armies, the contrary
whereof might breed confusion in the Commonwealth. The House of Commons on the
other side, though they made a noble mention of the Earl of Essex, and those
other Peers, which commanded in the Armies, alleged notwithstanding that the
Parliament forces had been often distracted through the emulation of
Commanders, from whence it proceeded, that some things very well designed, had
not had a prosperous issue, that the Army would be better disciplined under one
sole Commander.

At last, when they were agreed, a General was chosen to command the new Army,
which was Sir Thomas Fairfax, a man of eminent valor, and as much modesty, who
was then absent in the North; but so great a business could not suddenly be
finished: and now the time approached for the Treaty of Vxbridge, in which
three heads were to be debated.

1. Of Religion and Church government. 2. Of the Militia of England. 3.
Concerning the business of Ireland.
But the King, before this Treaty began, used all means to assure himself of
foreign aid; by Letters he urged the Queen, who was then in France, to
solicit that King, and other Catholics to assist him, and that the Queen
Regent would detain the Parliaments Ships in France. He was very earnest
likewise for assistance from the Duke of Lorraign, that he might get into
England that wicked Army of his, so notorious through Germany and Flanders for
all Villainy; of which Army, as of that of Marius, when the entered Rome, it may
be said.

-- Nulli gestanda dabantur,
Signa Ducis, nisi qui scelerum jam fecerat usum,
Attuleratque in Castra nefas.
-- No man his Ensigns bore,
But who the badge of some known mischief wore,
And brought guilt to the Camp.
At last hope was given him from the Duke of Lorraign, of ten thousand men; and
for bringing of these Soldiers into England, Goffe was sent into Holland to
negotiate for shipping and other necessaries.

The King likewise desired assistance at that time from the bloody Irish
Rebels, and by his Letters commanded Ormond to make a peace with those Rebels,
and to promise and grant to them a free exercise of their popish Religion, and
to assure them, that if by their assistance he could but finish his War in
England, he would abrogate all those Laws heretofore made against the Papists
there: he gave thanks likewise to Muskery, Plunket, and other of those Rebels,
promising a pardon for all that was past. But they were much troubled at the
Treaty for peace with the Parliament, not being ignorant, that one necessary
condition of such a peace must be, that the War in Ireland against them should
be continued and prosecuted: The King therefore, to remove this their
scrupulous fear, wrote to Ormond to this effect: That he could not refuse to
make a peace with his Parliament, only in favor of those Irish; yet
notwithstanding from that very consideration (if Ormund handled the matter
wisely) he might raise an advantage to hasten a peace with those Irish, in
letting them know their own danger, how they were excluded from all hope of
pardon by the Parliament, For (says he) if we agree upon all other conditions,
it will not be convenient for me to disagree only concerning those Irish;
therefore let them take what I offer, while time is, and hasten the Peace, and
when once my faith is passed, no humane force shall make me break it.

The Queen also (remaining in France) writing to her husband, seemed to grieve
much, that at Vxbridge they were to treat of Religion in the first place;
affirming, That if any thing severe against the Catholics should be concluded,
and yet a peace not be made, the King could not hope hereafter for any
assistance from the Catholic Princes, or from the Irish, who must needs think,
that after they had done their best, they should at last be forsaken. She often
entreats the King, that he would never forsake the Bishops, the Catholics, nor
those faithful friends of his that served him in his Wars: the King promises
her, that he would never forsake his friends for a peace, only persuades her
to hasten, as much as she can, the aides from France, saying, That whilst
London is distracted between the Presbiterians and Independents, both may be
ruined.

In February the Commissioners on both sides met at Vxbridge to treat for
peace. For the King came the Duke of Richmond, the Marquess of Hartford, the
Earls of Southampton, Dorset and Chichester, the Lords, Dunsmore and Capel,
with Seimour, Culpeper, Gardener, Hide, Lane, Bridgman, Palmer, and others. For
the Parliament, the Earls of Northumberland, Pembrooke, Salisbury, and Denbigh;
of the House of Commons, Wainmar, Vane, Perpoint, Hollis, Prideaux, Saint John,
Whitlock, and Crew; and besides these, six Commissioners of the Nobility and
Gentry of Scotland.

But nothing at all was concluded at that Treaty. The King would by no means
consent to the abrogation of Episcopacy; not in the second place, would he
suffer the Militia to be taken out of his hands, which he conceived to be a
chief flower of his Crown. Yet he was contented that for three years it should
be governed by twenty equally chosen out of both sides. Lastly, to the
prosecution of a War against the Irish he could not consent, having made a
cessation of Arms with them, which in Honor he could not break.

Thus nothing at all being done toward peace, the War must decide it. The
Parliament hasten the modelling of their new Army. The Earls of Essex, Warwick,
Manchester, and Denbigh, freely and voluntarily lay down their Commissions.

The new modelled Army of the Parliament consisted of twenty one thousand,
namely, fourteen thousand foot, six thousand Horse, and one thousand
Dragoneers. Sir Thomas Fairfax was made General; Philip Skippon, an excellent
soldier, was made Major General: Colonels of the Foot Regiments were Holborn,
Fortescue, Barclay, Craford, Ingolesby, Mountain, Pickering, Rainsborough,
Welden, Aldridge: of Horse Regiments, Sir Michael Leves^y, Sheffield,
Middleton, Sidney, Graves, Vermuden, Whaley, Fleetwood, Rossiter, Py. The King
on the other side had great Forces under diverse Commanders, to whom he
distributed several Provinces: the Princes Rupert, and Maurice, with numerous
forces possessed some of the Northern parts of the Kingdom; others were held by
the Earl of Derby, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale: Sir John Biron and Gerard held
Wales and some adjacent Counties. The West was wholly possessed by three Armies
of his, under the several Commands of Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Richard Greenvile,
and Colonel Goring. All these three, though Generals by themselves, yet served
under the name of Charles Prince of Wales, as their supreme General.

But the King, not content with so great a force of English Soldiers, was more
earnest than before, to get over the Irish Papists, with whom he had before
committed the business to Ormund to make an absolute peace: but when the King
perceived that those Irish made too high demands, and that nothing was effected
by Ormund toward the peace in so many Treaties, and so long a time, he thought
of another way, which was, to the Lord Herbert of Ragland, Son to Worcester
(whom he had created Earl of Glamorgan) a zealous Papist, and therefore most
acceptable to those Irish Rebels; the King gave full power by his Letters, to
make a peace with, and indulge to the Irish whatsoever should seem needful: It
seemed strange to all men (when these things were brought to light, which was
before the end of that year) that such a business should be carried on, and yet
concealed from the Lord Digby, Secretary for Ireland, and Ormund the Lord
Lieutenant, to whom the whole matter of that peace had been before committed.

But the King, when he saw it too hard a thing otherwise to make such a peace,
as would bring a certainty of assistance from them, that he might throw all
that Envy upon Glamorgan, empowered him, unknown to the rest: for so the Rebels,
sweetened with large promises (unknown to Ormund) might the better admit of
conditions just in show, and openly excusable, and the King might draw from
Ireland such Soldiers as would more firmly adhere to his side, and he might
trust (as being the greatest haters of English Protestants, and despairing of
pardon) against the Parliament of England.

He therefore gave Letters of authority to Glamorgan, in these words:

CHARLES by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To our Trusty and Well beloved Cousin, Edward, Earl
of Glamorgan Greeting: Being confident of your wisdom and fidelity, We do by
these Letters, as if under ^ur great Seal, grant unto you full power and
authority to Treat and conclude with the confe^erate Roman Catholics of
Ireland, and to in^ulge to them all those things which necessity ^^all require,
and which we cannot so commodi^^sly do by our Lieutenant, nor our Self
publick-^own at present. Therefore We command that (...) do this business with
as much secrecy as can (...) whatsoever you shall think, fit to be prom^^^^ in
my name, that do I attest upon the word of a King, and a Christian, to grant to
those Confederate Catholics, who by their assistance have abundantly showed
their zeal to us, and our Cause. Given at Oxford, under our Royal Seal the
twelfth day of March, and twentieth year of our Reign.

Nor into England only did he endeavor to bring those Irish, but into
Scotland, which he effected, to the great damage of that unhappy Kingdom, by
Montross, about the beginning of the year, 1644. when the Scottish Covenanters
came into England to assist the Parliament, Montross went to Oxford to the
King, to offer his service against the Covenanters in Scotland: The King, to
fit him for that purpose, created him a Marquess, and gave him his Commission,
to be Lord Governor of Scotland, and General of all his forces; the King then
also sent for the Earl of Antrim, to participate with Montross his Councels,
who entering into a confederacy with him before the King, engaged himself
there, that he would send to Montross the next April into Arguile (where the
passage is short into Ireland) ten thousand Irish.

This promise at the appointed time A^trim performed in part, but was very
deficient in the number of Soldiers, for instead of ten thousand, he sent
scarce twelve hundred Irish into Scotland under the conduct of Macdonald.
Montross notwithstanding with these men, with the addition of his Atholians,
made up a sufficient theeving Army, and making sudden excursions, he fell into
the neighboring Countries, wasting all, robbing houses, and burning up the
Corn where he came, insomuch as that the State had need of great Armies to
restrain his violence, whilst the craggy Mountains of Atholia, and rough woody
places there gave safe retreat to his Highlanders and Irish.

In this manner did Montross, for the space almost of two years, lie within the
bowels of his Country like a pestilent disease; such were his retreats, and so
great his boldness in excursions* that no less an Army than twelve thousand was
thought sufficient to defend the Provinces against him.

But Montross was tossed with various turns of Fortune. The first Summer after
his arrival in Scotland, he gave the Earl of Arguile a great blow, through the
negligence of his men, where fifteen hundred were slain and taken by Montross;
whereupon the Parliament of Scotland raised an Army of ten thousand against
him, and the same parliament condemned Montross (with some other Lords) to be a
Traitor and Enemy to his Country. Montross afterward received a great
overthrow from Hurry, and was enforced to fly to his craggy retreats; and
shortly after he was again beaten by Hurry near to Dundee, and absolutely
forced to hide himself in his old receptacles: from whence notwithstanding on a
sudden (as shall be showed anon) he showed himself, and from a contemptible
estate grown justly formidable, he overwhelmed Scotland in a miserable calamity.

While the King persisted in these courses, the Kirk of Scotland, from the
Synod at Edinburgh sent Letters to him, containing a serious admonition; which
(because the admonition of a National Church may seem a thing of some moment)
shall be set down verbatim, the Preface only omitted, because long, though
very humble.

THE troubles of our hearts are enlarged, and our fears increased in your
Majesty's behalf, perceiving that your Peoples patience is above measure
tempted, and is like a Cart pressed down with Sheaves, and ready to break,
while as besides many former designs and endeavors to bring desolation and
destruction upon us, which were (and we trust all of that kind shall be) by the
mavelous and merciful providence of God discovered and disappointed; our
Country is now infested, the blood of diverse of our brethren spilt, and other
acts of most barbarous and horrid cruelty exercised by the cursed crew of the
Irish Rebels, and their accomplices in this Kingdom, under the conduct of such as
have Commission and Warrant from your Majesty: and unless we prove unfaithful
both to God and your Majesty, we cannot conceal another danger, which is
infinitely greater than your Peoples displeasure. Therefore, we, the servants
of the most high God, and your Majesty's most loyal Subjects, in the humility
and grief of our hearts, fall down before your Throne, and in the name of our
Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who shall judge the World in Righteousness, both
great and small; and in the name of this whole National Kirk, which we
represent, we make bold to warn your Majesty freely, that the guilt which
cleaves fast to your Majesty, and to your Throne, is such, as (whatsoever
flattering Preachers, or unfaithful Counselors may say to the contrary) if not
timely repented, cannot but involve your self, and your posterity under the
wrath of the ever living God: for your being guilty of the shedding of the
blood of many thousands of your Majesty's best subjects: for your permitting
the Mass, and other Idolatry, both in your own Family, and in your Dominions:
for your authorizing by the book of sports, the profanation of the Lords day:
for your not punishing of public scandals, and much profaneness in and about
your Court: for the shutting of your ears from the humble and just desires of
your faithful subjects: for your complying too much with the popish party many
ways, and namely by concluding the cessation of Arms in Ireland; and your
embracing the councels of those who have not set God nor your good before their
eyes: for your resisting and opposing this cause, which so much concerns the
glory of God, your own honor, and happiness, and the peace, and safety of your
Kingdoms: and for what other causes, your Majesty is most conscious, and may
best judge and search your own conscience (nor would we have mentioned any
particulars, if they had not been public and known) For all which it is high
time for your Majesty to fall down at the footstool of the King of glory, to
acknowledge your offenses* to repent timely, to make your peace with God
through Jesus Christ (whose blood is able to wash away your great sins) and to
be no longer unwilling that the Son of God reign over you, and your Kingdoms,
in his pure Ordinances of Church Government and Worship.

They conclude with a profession and protestation of their constancy in so just
a cause, against any opposition whatsoever. This admonition of the general
Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland was sent first to the Scottish Commissioners
at London, and by them delivered to the Kings Secretary, but Ecclesiastical
admonition, in the heat of War, little availed.

When the Spring began, the War with great heat and courage on both sides was
renewed. General Essex had laid down his Commission, and Sir Thomas Fairfax
went to Windsor to his new-modelled Army; a new Army indeed, made up of some
remainders of the old ones, and other raised forces in the Countries; an Army
seeming no way glorious either in the dignity of Commanders, or antiquity of
Soldiers; never hardly did any Army go forth to War with less, confidence of
their own side, or more contempt of their enemies, and did more bravely deceive
both, and show how far it was possible for humane conjectures to err. For in
their following action; and successes they proved such, as would too much pose
antiquity, among all the Camps of their famed Heroes, to find a parallel to
this Army.

He that will seriously weigh their achievements in the following year,
against potent and gallant Enemies, and consider the greatness of things, the
number of Victories, how many battles were won, how many Towns and Garrisons
were taken, he can hardly think them the work of one year, or fit to be called
one War.

But whosoever considers this, must take heed that he do not attribute too much
to them, but give it wholly to Almighty God, whose providence over this Army,
as it did afterward miraculously appear, so it might in some measure be hoped
for at the first, considering the behavior and discipline of those Soldiers.
For the usual vices of Camps were here restrained, the discipline was strict,
no theft, no wantonness, no oaths, nor any profane words could escape without
the severest castigation; by which it was brought to pass, that in this Camp,
as in a well ordered City, passage was safe, and commerce free.

The first expedition of General Fairfax, as it was ordered by the Committee of
both Kingdoms, was into the West, to relieve Taunton; a Town that had long,
with incredible manhood and constancy, under Blake their Governor, endured a
sharp siege by Sir Richard Greenvile, and seemed to emulate (though with more
happiness) the fidelity of old Sagunthum: but this work was not done by the
General himself, but Colonel Welden, who was sent thither with seven thousand
of the new Army. Fairfax himself was recalled by the Committee of both Kingdoms
to go upon other action.

But because the King had sent for Prince Rupert from Wales to come to Oxford,
that he might join forces, and march into the field; General Fairfax, before he
went from Windsor, sent Cromwell with a party of Horse to hinder the Kings
designs; who marching speedily from Windsor, with great felicity vanquished a
part of the Kings forces at Islipbridge, taking diverse of the Commanders
prisoners, the remainder of that party flying into Bletchington House, were
there besieged, and yielded to Cromwell; with the same success at Bampton-bush
he took Vaughan and Littleton, and defeated their forces.

The King, when Prince Rupert and Maurice were come to him with their forces,
designed his march toward the East, to take possession of the Isle of Ely,
which he hoped would be betrayed to him by some of his party there. Cromwell,
and Major General Brown the Governor of Abington, were commanded to follow the
King, but soon recalled, as too weak in forces to encounter the King, and to
assist General Fairfax in besieging of Oxford, for then Fairfax was ordered to
besiege Oxford; but the design was not good, and the Commmittee of both
Kingdoms, though too late, repented it.

For in the mean time the King securely marched Northward with his Army, and
took the considerable Town of Leicester.

Fairfax recalled from the siege of Oxford, (while Cromwell was sent away to
strengthen the Eastern Counties) with all his forces followed the King; nor was
the famous battle long deserred, in which all men conjectured what the
liberties and Laws of England, and what the Kings power should he, must be
tried by the sword. Naseby fields, not far from Northampton, were the place
where the fate of England was to be determined. The fourteenth of June was the
memorable day: nor was the number of the Armies very unequal (the Royalists
only were strongest in Horse) nor the ordering of their Battaliaes much
unlike: The Kings Front was filled with brave Troops of Horse; the Foot stood
in the second Body. The right wing was commanded by the Princes, Rupert and
Maurice; the left by Sir Jacob Ashley, other Commanders of great quality
susteining their parts.

The Parliamentarian Foot made a firm Body in the midst. The wings were guarded
by the Horse, the right wing was commanded by Cromwell, who to the exceeding
joy of the whole Army, that very night before the battle was fought arrived
there: the left wing by Ireton: Colonel Rossiter, a brave Commander, but a
little before the battle began, came with his Horse, and took his place with
Cromwell on the right wing: the Foot was commanded by Major General Skippon,
and divided into two Bodies. The Parliamentarians word was, God with us. The
Roialists, God and Queen Mary.

Fortune at the first (as in some other battles) seemed a while to slatter the
Kings side, for the left wing of the Parliament was worsted, and the Commander
Ireton, receiving two wounds, was taken Prisoner, and kept so during the fight.
Prince Rupert with great fury fell in, and pursued that routed wing, insomuch
that the day had been lost, if Cromwell, who came on with as great force, had
not in like manner routed and overthrown the Kings left wing: the business now
seemed in an equal balance, and the wings on both sides being thus scattered,
they fought some time upon dubious hopes: magnanimous Skippon was grievously
wounded, yet would not forsake the battle, but with all possible endeavors
discharged his part till the Victory was obtained: the Fairfaxians at last
charged so fiercely upon the Roialists, that they no longer could endure the
brunt; the Horse in all disordered have fled toward Leicester, and forsook the
whole body of their Foot, with their Artillery and carriages, who being
surrounded by the Fairfaxians, threw down their Arms, crying for Quarter, and
were all taken Prisoners.

This battle was the happiest of all other to the Parliament, the Victory
absolute, and undoubted, and almost five thousand prisoners carried to London;
the Kings Standard, and one hundred other colors were taken, with all their
Ordnance, and a very rich booty; a great quantity of gold and silver, and all
the secret Letters of the King came by this means into the Conquerous hands;
but so few were slain in this battle, that a reader may justly wonder how so
many prisoners should be taken, and so much wealth purchased with the loss of
so little blood, for on the Kings side scarce four hundred were slain, on the
Parliaments scarce an hundred. Cromwell with his Horse pursued the vanquished
Roialists (who fled apace, and betook themselves to diverse of their own
Garrisons) and bringing back a great number of Prisoners, returned to the
General, who now marched with his Victorious Army to Leicester, which was soon
rendered to him. Fairfax, leaving a Garrison in Leicester, that he might make
use of his Victory to the good of the Commonwealth, and hinder the King from
recruiting himself, to protract this sad War, resolved to follow him close; he
therefore marched Westward, that he might both pursue the King, and raise the
Siege of Taunton.

The Kings letters taken at Naseby were publicly read in London before a great
Assembly of Citizens, where many of both Houses of Parliament were present, and
leave was given to as many as pleased, or knew the Kings hand (to refute the
calumny of those who said the Letters were counterfeit) to peruse them all, out
of which a selected bundle were printed by command of the Parliament.

From the reading of these Letters many discourses of the people arose, for
there appeared his transactions with the Irish Rebels, and with the Queen for
assistance from France, and the Duke of Lorraign, of which before is spoken.
Many good men were sorry that the Kings actions agreed no better with his
words; that he openly protested before God, with horrid imprecations, that he
endeavored nothing so much as the preservation of Protestant Religion, and
rooting out of Popery: yet in the mean time under hand he promised to the Irish
Rebels an abrogation of those Laws against them, which was contrary to his late
expressed promises, in these words, I will never abrogate the Law against the
Papists: and again, I abhor to think of bringing foreign Soldiers into the
Kingdom: and yet he solicited the Duke of Lorraign, the French, the Danes, and
the very Irish for assistance* they were vexed also, that the King was so much
ruled by the will of his wife, as to do every thing by her prescript, that
Peace, War, Religion, and Parliament should be at her disposal.

It appeared besides out of those Letters, with what mind the King treated with
the Parliament at Vxbridge, and what could be hoped by that Treaty, when
writing to the Queen, he affirms, that if he could have had but two more
donsenting to his Vote, he would not have given the name of Parliament to them
at Westminster: at last he agreed to it in this sense, That it was not all one
to call them a Parliament, and to acknowledge them so to be; and upon that
reason (which might have displeased his own side) he calls those with him at
Oxford, a mungrel Parliament.

The King, after his overthrow at Naseby, fled to Lichfield, and from thence he
went to Hereford, to raise forces (especially Foot, for he had still store of
brave Horse, that came to him after that Battle) in Wales, in Cornwall, and in
other places; but nothing at all that following year prospered with the King,
Fortune enclining wholly to the Parliaments side, whose cause it appeared that
God approved, by the grant of so many strange and signal Victories to them; the
valor of the Roialists availed not, and all their endeavors fell to nothing.

General Fairfax, after the Battle of Naseby, by long Marches passed into the
West. Taunton was releived only by the fame of his approach, for Goring raised
his Siege, and went away: That constant Town had been reduced to great
extremities; it had suffered much, and done great things against strong
Enemies, and could not at this time in possibility have held out long without
some releif. The Parliament rejoiced much at the delivery of that Town; three
Parliament Garrisons about that time, and the foregoing year, behaved
themselves with such courage and constancy, as might deserve to be celebrated
in a larger History, viz. Lime, Plymouth, and Taunton, all which, having been
often besieged by Prince Maurice, Greenvile, Goring, and other Commanders, had
not only held out against those strong Enemies, but much broken their Forces.

The things which that new Army under the conduct of Fairfax did that following
year (taking no rest all that sharp and bitter Winter) were much to be wondered
at, how many strong Towns and Forts they took, how many field Victories they
obtained, the stories of evey several month will declare; of which, because
they are more acurately described by other pens, I shall here only make a
short mention; for within the space of one year all the Western Counties of
England, great Armies under the conduct of Prince Rupert, Greenvile, Hopton,
and Goring, being utterly vanquished and brought to nothing, were reduced to
the obedience of Parliament.

In the months of August and September were taken Bath, and Sherburn, and
Bristol it self, the greatest and most wealthiest City of the whole West, was
by Prince Rupert surrendered to General Fairfax.

The Army also, when it was divided, by reason of the multiplicity of their
work, was not less successful in the parts of it; Winchester, and Basing taken
by Cromwell, the Devizes and Barclay by other Commanders, Fairfax himself
marching (that cold December) into Devonshire, took Tiverton, and with strange
felicity stormed and took Dartmouth, and afterward drove the Kings Armies into
Cornwall, whom Fairfax pursuing, at Torrington gave Hopton a great overthrow.
In the month of February with his Victorious Army he entered Cornwall, for fear
of whom Prince Charles fled into the Islands of Silly; and in March following,
all Hoptons forces, by the Command of the Conqueror Fairfax, were disbanded
and sent away, and the whole County of Cornwall reduced to the obedience of
Parliament.

In the following April, Excester, and Barnstable were surrendered to Fairfax,
and Bridgewater stormed, but when they yielded, taken to mercy. S. Michaels
Mount, the farthest angle of Cornwall, was also surrendered to Colonel Hamond.
Thus Fairfax, the Conqueror of the West, having fitted all things for his
expedition, to make an end of the War, is marching to besiege Oxford: Woodstock
was already taken by Colonel Rainsborough; but in all these months that the
General had done such great things in the West, the other Commanders of
Parliament were not unfortunate (the Fates seeming to conspire at that side) in
the North, and midland Counties of England; about the midst of Summer Carlise
was surrendered by Glenham the Governor, to the Scottish Army, a Garrison of
Scots was put into that Town, of which the English complained, as being against
the Covenant: the Parliament also wrote to Leven to restore Carlisle to the
English; not that they did suspect any evil from their Brethren, but that
conditions might be observed, and the mouths of illaffected people stopped, who
were too apt to say, that The Scots came into England, not as friends, but
Freebooters: From that time the Parliament ordained to have their Commissioners
(as the Scots had theirs at London) resident in Edinburgh, to be present with
the Parliament of Scotland: and to that purpose the Earl of Rutband, the Lord
Wharton; and of the Commons, Sir Henry Vane the Elder, Sir William Armin, Mr.
Hatcher, and Mr. Goodwin were chosen Glenham with his men, after the surrender
of Carlisle, went to Newarke. The Scottish Army about that time marched under
Leven to Newark, to besiege that Town, but the Scottish horse staid not long
there, being forced to return into the North, to the assistance of their
distressed Country. For the English Parliament at that time, in midst of their
own prosperity, were notwithstanding mourners for the calamity of Scotland, a
great, unexpected, and wonderful calamity; in which the frailty of humane
affairs, and the mutable condition of Kingdoms was set forth by a memorable
example; all Scotland within the space of one month was lost and recovered,
quite sunk, and again emergent.

The man that thus plagued Scotland, was the Earl of Montross, one on whom the
Kings hopes so much then depended, that out of an earnest desire to join his
forces to Montross, the King with a body of good horse marched Northward, but
by the forces of Pointz, Gell, Rossiter, and others, the Kings expedition was
stopped, that he could not meet Montross: for it had been agreed betwixt the
King and Montross, that at the same time he from the South should march
Northward and the other from the North, to meet him, should come Southward,
that the Kings horse joined to his foot, might make a considerable Army in
those parts; but the Kings passage, though he tried many ways, was (as
beforesaid) stopped. Montross mindful of his promise, broke out into the
Southern parts of Scotland, with greater success than could be hoped, having
scarce 4000. Highlanders and Irish.

A place there was near to Kilsithe, which the craggy Mountains and straitened
passages had made fit for ambushes, where Montross had seated himself, thither
the Army of the State, confident of their number, whilst unadvisedly they
pursued the theeving Highlanders, fell into the cunningly-disposed ambushes,
and were cut off with a miserable slaughter; above five thousand were slain,
and none almost escaped, but whom the wearied Conquerours had not strength to
kill, for cruel Montross spared none, crying out, They had no need of Prisoners*

This overthrow of Kilsithe at one battle had utterly ruined the State of
Scotland, if David Lesley (about a month after giving an absolute overthrow to
Montross) had not restored it; for after this so unexpected a defeat, the State
of Scotland had no Army for a Reserve, or Force to stop the passage of the
Conqueror, to whom almost all their Towns presently yielded. The papists and
Malignants, and all neuters, with those that had before dissembled their
affections, now joined with him, the rest were cut off; all the chief Nobility
of the Covenanters were forced to fly into England.

A public Fast and Humiliation was kept by the English, for the calamity of
their brethren of Scotland General Fairfax, and other of the chief Commanders
wrote to Leven, That they accounted the Calamity of Scotland to be their own;
and that if their affairs at home would permit, and the Parliament would
command it, they would earnestly undertake that War, and venture their bloods
as freely for the Scots as for the English, till the Enemies of the three
Kingdoms were fully vanquished.

But Montross his cruel reign lasted not long, scarce a whole month; to
vindicate Scotland David Lesley was sufficient, who with his Horse coming
thither, at Selkirk gave Montross so total a defeat, that it seemed fully to
recompense Kilsithe; the Victory was gotten in an hours space, and (as it was
observed by a German Writer) upon the same day that the Queen of England at
Paris was singing Te Deum Laudamus for Montross his Victory at Kilsithe.

Thus was Scotland recovered before the King could come to Montross; which
notwithstanding the King soon after attempted, and marching Northward with a
strength not contemptible, having Gerard and Langdale with him, came to
Routenheath, his design was, that if he could not join with Montross, yet at
the least that he might raise the Siege of Chester, for the King was
exceedingly solicitous for that City, as being the most convenient Haven to
receive the transported Irish, whom he so long in vain expected. But that
expedition proved most unfortunate to the King; for in a battle fought upon
Routenheath, where Pointz was Commander of the Parliaments Army, the King was
vanquished, and eight hundred of his men slain.

Nor was the Lord Digbies expedition to Montross more fortunate, who in the
following month, together with Langdale, having got together one thousand
Horse, marched into the North to that purpose: for at Sherburn in Yorkshire he
was beaten, and put to flight by Pointz* Copley, and other Parliamentarians;
and afterward at Carlisie he was defeated by Brown and Lesley; and having lost
all his forces, fled into the Isle of Man to the Earl of Derby, from whence
shortly after he passed into Ireland. When Digby was defeated at Sherburn,
other secret Letters and papers of the Kings were taken, whereby some designs
of his were laid open, and some things more clearly discovered about his
transactions with Danes, Irish, and others: the Roialists at Oxford did much
blame Digby his carlessness, that would carry such papers with him into a
Battle, which were scarce safe enough in the strongest Fort, especially
remembering what a stir was made about the Letters taken at Naseby.

Digby was now in Ireland, and (about the end of December) together with
Ormund; treating about a peace with the Irish; when on a sudden the Kings
affairs began to be endangered there, by divulging of Glamorgans secret
transaction with the Irish Rebels, of which we spoke before; Ormund and Digby,
fearing least if this discovery should grow too general among the people, that
all the former rumors would find credit; as namely, that the King was Author
of the Irish Rebellion, and sought to confirm Popery, from whence a general
revolt of all the Protestants might be feared; and although Digby thought
Glamorgan to be an unadvised man, yet could not suppose him so foolish, as to
undertake such a thing as that without any warrant at all. Therefore it was
agreed betwixt them, that (for fear least when this discovery were grown more
general* it might be too late to vindicate the King) Digby should presently
accuse Glamorgan of Treason. But Ormund and Digby were both troubled with this
fear, (because at that time three thousand Irish were promised to go over to
the releif of Chester) lest by this unseasonable vindication of the King,
Chester might be lost, for want of transportation of those forces; but when
they understood that, according to Glamorgans compact, those Irish were not to
go for England, before the King had made good the conditions which Glamorgan
promised, and confirmed the peace; and while they were consulting about this
perplexed business, it was told them, That the Protestants of Dublin, upon that
news were in a great mutiny, and the worst was feared within few hours, unless
the danger were speedily prevented; Digby was enforced to make have, and accuse
Glamorgan (who was not at all dismayed, knowing it was only to deceive the
people) of high Treason, Glamorgan therefore with great confidence and alacrity
went to prison, affirming, That he did not fear to give account at London, or
before the Parliament, of what he had done by the Kings warrant: but it was
wonder to see what a change in the Protestants at Dublin this feigned
accusation of high Treason suddenly made, and they who before murmured were
now appeased,

But yet there remained another difficulty to be extricated; Ormund was
fearful, lest the Irish, incensed by this injury done to Glamorgan, should
suddenly fly to Arms, before the Kings forces were ready for them; to prevent
that danger, he wrote to Muskerry concerning the reasons of this action, and
the extreme necessity; and withal he seemed to approve the conditions for
peace, as the Rebels had proposed them, and sent them to Kilkenny to be further
discussed, with some dubiousness of the event, this might spend time, until
some new hopes of relieving Chester, or otherwise supplying the King, might
arise.

But all these devices nothing availed the King, all his designs were
frustrated, nor ever could he bring into England an Army either of Irish
Rebels, Lorraigners, or Danes, (God providing better for that Kingdom) until at
last all his forces every where were vanquished, and wholly subdued by the
Parliament; for in the following month, February, that very City of Chester,
for which he has been so solicitous, a City so often besieged, and now long
defended by Biron, came into the power of the Parliament; for Biron the
Governor upon honorable terms delivered it up to Breerton.

Nor was the Kings side more lucky in any County of England; for besides the
whose West (that Winter, and the following Spring) by many field-Victories, and
gaining of Towns, conquered by Fairfax; in the midland Counties also* in the
North, and in Wales, in several battles all that time the Roialists were
vanquished by eminent Commanders of the Parliament, such as were Massey,
Pointz, Brown, Rossiter, Mitton, Gell, Breerton, Laughorn, and others; and in
the month of March (which was the last noted field-Victory) Ashley himself the
Kings General was vanquished by Morgan in a memorable battle, and taken
prisoner, with one thousand six hundred of his men. Ashley, when he was taken,
spoke aloud these words: You have done your work, and wholly vanquished the
Kings party, unless your own dissentions raise them again.

At this time Newark the strongest Garrison of the Kings, which had long, and
much infested the adjacent Countries, was straightly besieged by Leven, Pointz,
and Rossiter; and General Fairfax, after reducing of the West, having provided
what was sit, hastened to besiege Oxford, the head of the War. The King having
now no Garrisons left, but Banbury, Wallingford, Worcester, Ragland, and
Pendennis, all which in a short time after, were also taken, and could glory
only in this, that they had held out after Oxford.

The besieged Newarkers, though the Plague raged in the Town, and they began to
want victuals, yet sustained themselves upon hopes of some dissentions that
might arise between the English and the Scots.

For now the Scots began to complain of want of pay, of the neglect of
Church Government and the Covenant: the Parliament answered, that that Scottish
Army in two years space had received above two hundred thousand pounds for pay,
besides a vast sum of money, which they had by force extorted from the poor
weeping Inhabitants of the Northern Counties; and besides that, their Army had
not satisfied the expectation of the English, but had lain idle in the best
time of the year; if they were so precise in observation of the Covenant, why
then, contrary to the Covenant, did the Scots put Garrisons into Newcastle,
Tinmouth and Carlisle; neither was it just in the Scots to object any thing in
the case of Religion, seeing the Parliament are now laboring in it, being a
business which requires time* and mature deliberation.

From these jarrs the King hoped for some advantage to himself; and now Oxford
began to be blocked up by Ireton and Fleetwood, and every day the coming of
Fairfax himself, and a straiter Siege of that City was expected; therefore
before this should happen, the King resolved to go out of Oxford, and
communicating his mind to some inward Counselors, above all other places, he
pitched upon the Scottish Camp; to the Scots therefore, as they lay before
Newark, the King sent Montruel the French Ambassador, and himself soon after,
as Ashburnhams man, with a Cloak-back behind him, escaped unknown out of
Oxford, and came to Newark.

From this enterprise the King was dissuaded by some, who loved the safety of
their Country, and entreated rather to deliver himself to Fairfax, which might
in prohability put an end to the War; but the King was obstinate in his design,
not doubting but that dissentions daily growing between the two Nations, he
should be the more welcome to the Scots, safe from harm, and be able by this
means either to make a peace upon his own conditions, or kindle a new war.

The King came first to Montruels house, and from thence to Southwell, into the
Scottish Camp; the besieged Newarkers understanding of the Kings coming, and
being brought into great straits, harkned to conditions, and surrendered the
Town.

The Scots seemed to be amazed at the Kings unexpected coming to them, and so
signified the matter to the English Commissioners, then present with them upon
the place. Letters were immediately written of it to London, and to Edinburgh,
the English Parliament required the Scots to detain the King at Southwell, but
they, contrary to that Order, carried him away to Kelham, where a greater part
of their Army lay, and soon after, without expecting any further Orders from
the Parliament of England, removed their Camp, marched Northward, and carried
away the King with them to Newcastle.

The Scots excused their departure, because Newark being yielded, no work was
left for them, but alleged, That as the King came to them of his own accord,
unexpected, so he followed their Army, neither being entreated, nor fobidden by
them: but they seemed to hasten their departure, by reason of a rumor (whether
true or falsely pretended) that Cromwell with all his Horse was marching toward
them.

But the English upon this, complained much both against the Scots and the
King; To the Scots they objected the breach of Covenant and Treaty; To the King
they imputed it As a great obstinacy and despite toward the English Nation,
whom he had so long injured, that now in his low ebb, he should in England,
leaving the Parliament of England, go to the Scots, their Mercenaries: if he
desired peace, why did he not embrace it, being offered upon such conditions,
as besides his necessities, the common safety of his People invited him to?
rather than go about to kindle new fire between the two confederate Nations.

In the beginning of May, General Fairfax with his whole Army came within sight
of Oxford, and disposing his quarters round about the City, summoned the
Governor Glenham to surrender it; Glenham answered, that he would first send
to the King, and when he knew his mind, would do what was fitting; this answer
was not allowed. Nevertheless Fairfax considering with himself (which was also
the opinion of all his Commanders) that it was likely to prove a long Siege,
being a City excellent well fortified, and a strong Garrison in it, consisting
of at least five thousand, most of them old soldiers, stored with provisions,
arms, and ammunition for a great while, yet was put into hope of sooner
obtaining it, by intelligence which he had gotten out of Letters, and by some
Spies, that within they were much divided in their opinions; and the greater
part especially those of the Nobility) desired it should be surrendered, that
they might have, while time was, honorable conditions. Therefore they began to
Treat, and not only between the Army and the City, but in Parliament at London
it was debated, and at last decreed, That the besieged should rather have the
best conditions, than that their precious Army should be consumed before so
strong a place, whilst in the mean time many things might fall out ill to the
Commonwealth.

But the chief reason of granting such large conditions was, that the
conquering Army, it being now Mid-summer, might be transported into Ireland, to
vindicate that afflicted Country against the barbarous and bloody Rebels, but
that so pious an intention of the Parliament was quite frustrated by the Kings
going to the Scots, of whom at that time there were some jealousies, and that
the King went to the Scots for that very purpose, it was believed by Letters
(which were intercepted afterward) written to Ormund, before he went out of
Oxford, We hope that this design of ours, though it may seem dangerous to our
person, will prove advantageous for Ireland, in hindering the Rebels (meaning
the Parliament) from transporting any forces into that Kingdom.

Thus Oxford was surrendered; and at the appointed day all the soldiers of that
Garrison marched away by Fairfax his Army, with great quiet and modesty on both
sides. The Duke of York was honorably conducted to London, where two of the
Kings children remained; thither also went all the Noble men, nor was it denied
to any of the Besieged to go to London: but the Princes, Rupert and Maurice,
being commanded to go out of England, prepared for their departure.

The great Seal of England, with other Ensigns of Majesty, were laid up in the
Library, which afterward carried to London, was by the command of Parliament
(for the Parliament, when the great Seal three years before was carried away to
the King, had made a new one) broken in pieces, together with the other smaller
Seals.

Prince Charles about that time, distrusting the condition of his side, fled
from Silly, with a few of his inward Counselors, and went to Jersey, that from
thence he might pass into France to the Queen his Mother. While the Prince
remained in Jersey, the Commissioners both of England and Scotland entreated
the King that the Prince his Son might continue within his Dominions, lest if
he should go into France, it might be inconvenient at this time, and an
obstruction to the desired peace; but the King promising them that he would
think of it, wrote in the mean time this short letter to the Prince.

CHarles, I write to you only that you should know where I am, and that I am
in health, not to direct you at this time in any thing; for what I would have
you do, I have already written to your mother, to whom I would have you
obedient in all things, except Religion (about which I know she will not
trouble you, and go no whither without her, or my Command; write often to me,
God bless you:

Your loving Father, C. R.


This Letter was intercepted going from Newcastte to Jersey in a small Vessel,
and read in Parliament, to their great grief.

Soon after the surrender of Oxford, followed the end of this fierce War, for
Worcester, Wallingford, Pendennis, and Ragland, yielded also to the Conquerors.
Peace now seemed to be restored to England, but they had no security; for the
Parliament (having vanquished the common Enemy) were grievously troubled with
Factions among themselves, and divided under the unhappy names of Presbyterians
and Independents; nor was it only in those things which concerned
Church Government, but in the transaction of almost all other businesses, they
debate fiercely, and were divided in their Votes.

The same difference (namely of Presbyterian and Independent) troubled not
only the Parliament House, but the City, the Country, and some of the Camps,
seeming a thing that threatened danger; and the Parliament feared that Massey's
forces (which had deserved very well of the Commonwealth) being quartered
about the Devizes, might under that name make a Mutiny: wherefore General
Fairfax was sent from Oxford into the West to disband (the War being ended)
those forces of Massey, being two thousand five hundred horse, which thing was
quietly done within eight days, and all those Soldiers with ready obedience
left their Colors, although they were not fully paid at that time; for which
Massey (as for other things) was much commended in being careful, by advising
his soldiers, that this business without any difficulty should be so ended.

The War being now quite finished, Fairfax, the Victorious Preserver of the
English Parliament, returned to London, about the midst of November. All good
men longed to see that great Soldier, whom they could not but admire, by whose
valor they were delivered from the worst of evils, and were now in expectation
of an happy peace.

The next day after he came to London; That he might see the gratitude of the
Parliament, the House of Peers sent their Speaker, Manchester, whom the Earls
of Northumberland, Pembrook, and many other Nobles accompanied; who
congratulated his return, and gave him great thanks for his most faithful and
happy services to the Commonwealth.

When the Lords were gone, Lenthal, the Speaker of the House of Commons with
almost 300. Members of that House, came to congratulate the General, to whom
Lenthal made a speech, wherein he discoursed of the greatness of his actions,
extolling them by examples of the most great and famous Heroes of ancient
times. You (said he) noble General shall all posterity admire and honor, and
the people of England, since they can give you no thanks equal to your merits,
do freely confess themselves for ever indebted to you, as the happy instrument
of God, and finisher of our Wars with incredible suceess: To which the modest
Fairfax made a short reply, Acknowledging himself unworthy of so great an
honor, and giving most humble thanks to the Parliament, accounting it his
greatest happiness in this world to be made by God instrumental for the good of
his Country.

But the General staid not long at London, being presently after sent to carry
the money for the Scots into the North; of which we shall speak afterward; in
the mean time we will return to the King, and Scots.

On the sixth of May, 1646. long before the surrender of Oxford; when the
Parliament of England understood that the King was with the Scots, when the
Scots also had disobeyed their Orders; which were, That they should detain the
King at Southwel, and that Ashburnham, with the rest of his followers, should
be sent to London, (of which the Scots obeyed neither, letting Ashburnham and
the rest escape, and carrying the King into the North) the Parliament, after a
long debate of both Houses, at last Voted, That the person of the King should
be disposed of by the authority of both Houses of the Parliament of England.

But the Scots excusing themselves, and defying to deliver up the King, a great
dissension happened between the two Nations, which did much animate the
Royalists, and seemed dangerous to the two Kingdoms. Many complaints were made
upon this occasion, and many sharp invective Writings on both sides for the
space of diverse months.

The Scots alleged, that he was no less King of Scotland than of England; and
that therefore their Kingdom had some right to the disposing of him; the
English affirmed, that his person was to be disposed by the authority of that
Kingdom in which he then was; but that they set forth, as a very strange thing
that a Scottish Army, paid by the Parliament of England, and which by the
Compact of both Kingdoms, was to be governed by Commissioners of both Kingdoms
upon the place, should notwithstanding receive the King of England, without the
consent or knowledge of the English Commissioners, and carry him away to
Newcastle, a Town of England, and there keep him without the consent of the
Parliament of England.

In the midst of these great dissentions: which notwithstanding the prudence of
some men did so well moderate (whilst the common enemy and factious spirits
sought to aggravate them) that they proved not pernicious to the Kingdoms, the
main business, and things necessary for the Common good were unanimously and
friendly transacted by the two Nations: and among other things, concerning the
sending of propositions to the King for a firm and well grounded peace, it was
debated, and at last agreed, that nineteen Propositions (so many therewere)
should be sent to Newcastle, to the King; which because they are long, and
fully recited in a larger History, I will not relate in this Epitome.

These Propositions were sent away to the King upon the fifteenth day of July
one thousand six hundred forty six, and presented to his hands at Newcastle by
the Commissioners of both Houses of Parliament, namely, the Earl of Pembrooke,
Earl of Denbigh, and the Lord Mountague of the Peers; and six of the House of
Commons; the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland being present, and
consenting to them.

And that the King might conceive himself dealt withal like a King, not a
vanquished man, and a captive, this preface by the consent of Parliaments of
both Kingdoms, was set before the Propositions.

May it please your Majesty,
WE the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, in the name,
and on the behalf of the Kingdom of England and Ireland; and the Commissioners
of the Parliament of Scotland, in the name, and on the behalf of the Kingdom of
Scotland, do humbly present unto your Majesty the humble desires and
propositions for a safe and well grounded Peace, agreed upon by the Parliaments
of both Kingdoms respectively; unto which we do pray your Majesty's assent:
and that they, and all such Bills as shall be tendered to your Majesty in
pursuance of them, or any of them, may be established, and enacted for Statutes
and Acts of Parliament, by your Majesty's Royal Assent, in the Parliaments of
both Kingdoms respectively.


The Lords and Commons, Commissioners of the Parliament of England, staid long
with the King at Newcastle, humbly entreating him, that he would vouchsafe to
sign and establish those propositions being not much higher than those, which
had been offered to his Majesty at Vxbridge, when the chance of War was yet
doubtful; the same thing did the Commissioners of the Parliament in Scotland
humbly entreat; and the like did others daily, who came with renewed
supplications to that end from the Parliament sitting at Edinburgh.

But in vain were the supplications of both Kingdoms; the King persisted
obstinately in denial of his Assent; but daily he seemed to take exceptions at
some particulars, whereby time was delayed for some months, and the affairs of
both Kingdoms much retarded, which happened at an unseasonable time, when not
only the dissentions between the two Nations about Garrisons, money, and other
things were justly feared, but also in the Parliament of England, and City of
London, the factions then increasing between the Presbyterians and
Independents, from whence the common enemy began to swell with hopes not
improbable, and this perchance was the cause of the Kings delay.

But those hopes of the enemy soon vanished, and this very aversness of the
King did in some measure compose the dissentions of the Parliament; insomuch as
they began unanimously to consult, how they might settle the affairs of both
Kingdoms (since it could not otherwise be) without the King; Therefore it was
debated in the Parliament of England, to pay the Scots for their assistance in
this War, and at last agreed that the Scots should receive four hundred
thousand pounds; half of that sum, namely, two hundred thousand pounds was to
be paid in present, upon receipt of which, the Scots were to deliver up
Berwick, Carlisle, and Newcastle to the Parliament of England, according to the
compact. It was also debated, though with much time and difficulty, where the
Kings person should be disposed, in case he did absolutely and utterly deny his
Assent to the Propositions; at which meeting it was freely granted by the
Parliament to the Scots, that they might carry the King (if they pleased) to
Edinburgh; but that the Scots refused, affirming, that by his presence in an
unsettled Kingdom, new commotions might arise; they rather desired (which was
also the Kings desire) that he might be carried into the Southern parts of
England, and live in some of his Palaces near London, which they thought more
convenient for treating of a peace, as if England were not in the same danger
by his presence. So that in all that whole debate they seemed to contend, not
who should have the King, but who should not have him.

Whilst these things were transacting, and the King daily was humbly entreated
by both Kingdoms to grant his Assent to these Propositions, the Earl of London,
Chancellor of Scotland, about the end of August, when the Commissioners of
both Kingdoms were present, made an Oration to the King, which because it opens
the business in some measure, shall be recited.

YOur Majesty was pleased on Monday last to call the Commissioners of the
Parliament of Scotland, and imparting the Propositions to them, to promise that
you would likewise impart your Answer before you sent it; but so short is the
Commissioners prefixed time, and of so great moment (either to the safety or
ruin of your Crown and Kingdoms) is your Majesty's Answer, that we should be
wanting both to God, and our own trust, if we should not represent to your
Majesty how necessary it is (in this conjuncture of time) That you grant your
assent to these Propositions; and what an incurable malady, and sudden ruin
must needs follow upon your denial. I shall begin with the disease, and speak
after of the remedy: The differences betwixt your Majesty and Parliament (known
better to no man than your self) are at this time so high, that (after so many
bloody Battles) no composure can be made, nor a more certain ruin avoided,
without a present pacification. The Parliament are in possession of your Navy,
of all the Towns, Castles and Forts of England; they enjoy besides
Sequestrations, your Revenue. Soldiers and moneys are raised by their
Authority, and after so many Victories and Successes, they have a standing
strong Army, who, for their strength, are able to act any thing in Church or
Commonwealth at their own pleasure. Besides there are some so fearful, others
so unwilling to sumit to your Majesty, that they desire neither your self, nor
any of your Issue to reign over them. The People weary of War, and groaning
under taxes, though they desire Peace, yet are so much against the pulling down
of Monarchy (under which they have long flourished) that they which are weary
of your Government, dare not go about to throw it off, until they have (once
at least) offered Proposition of Peace to your Majesty, lest the Vulgar
(without whose concurrence they cannot perfect the Work) should fall from them.
Therefore when the whole People, weary of War, desire security from pressures,
and arbitrary rule: the most Honorable Houses of Parliament have consented to
offer these Propositions to your Majesty without which the greater part of the
people do suppose the Kingdom can neither enjoy Peace nor Safety; therefore
your Majesty's friends, and the Commissioners of Scotland, though not without
some reluctation, were forced to consent to the sending of these Propositions
(for else none had been sent) or else incur the public hatred, as enemies to
peace. Now Sir if your Majesty (which God forbid) should deny to sign these
Propositions, you would loose all your friends, both City and Country; and all
England as one man would rise up against you; it may then be feared (all hope
of reconciliation being taken away) that they may cite you, depose you, and set
up another Government. Moreover they will require of us to deliver your Majesty
to them to restore their Garrison Towns, and carry our Army out of England.
Lastly, if your Majesty persist in denying, both Kingdoms will be compelled to
agree together for their mutual safety, to settle Religion and peace without
you, which (to our unspeakable grief) would ruin your Majesty, and your
Posterity. But if your Majesty shall despise the council of us (who wish
nothing more upon earth than the establishing of your Majesty's Throne) and by
obstinacy loose England, your Majesty will not be suffered to enter Scotland,
and ruin that, Sir, We have laid our hands upon our hearts, we have prayed to
God to direct us, and have seriously considered of the remedy for these
mischiefs, but we can find nothing else (as the case now stands) which can
preserve your Crown and Kingdoms, then that your Majesty should sign these
Propositions; in some things (we confess) they are higher than we (if our wish
might have gone) would have made them; but seeing that no other way is left to
cure the Kingdoms wounds, and consolidate the ruptures between your Majesty and
the Parliament: We do in all humility and loyalty advise your Majesty, that out
of your gracious goodness, you would assent to them, as being the only remedy
left to procure a firm and happy peace, from whence also many happinesses will
accrue to you, etc.

But neither this Oration of Londen, nor all the endeavors of both Parliaments
could after the Kings mind; yet did not the Commissioners give over their
hopes, but persisted in entreating; so that many months were spent in this
business, and the time consumed till the midst of Winter, in which space they
could not persuade the King to hear any Ministers of the Synod preach before
him, being constant only to his own Chaplains.

Upon which they began to endeavor that amity might be preserved between the
two Nations, and that the two Kingdoms (things standing as they did) might be
peaceably settled without the King.

Therefore after some debate between the Parliament of England, and the
Commissioners of Scotland, they at the last agreed upon the aforesaid sum,
namely that two hundred thousand pounds should be forthwith paid to the Scots;
which money being told out, was by General Fairfax, with part of his Forces
conveyed out of London, who afterward committed the business to Major General
Skippon. He with six Regiments marched away in the midst of Winter, and in
January came to Newcastle upon Tine with the money.

The Scots, when they had received their money, according to the compact,
delivered up the English Garrisons, Berwick, Carlisle, and Newcastle into the
Parliaments hands, and marched quietly home into Scotland; they delivered also
the King to the English Commissioners to be carried into the South, Who was
received with great respect and honor by the Earls of Pembrook, and Denbigh,
and the rest of the Parliament Commissioner^ and by them waited on with great
observance, and an honorable guard to his Pala^^ of Holmby in
Northamptonshire. Th^^^ things were done in the Month of February at which
time the Earl of Stanford, Mr. G^^win, and Mr. Ashhurst of the House of Commons
were sent Commissioners by the Parliament into Scotland, that at Edinburgh th^^
might treat with the Scottish Parliament about the Common Affairs.

Though the Kings party, which had foug^^ against their Parliament and
Liberties, w^^^ absolutely subdued, yet a quiet liberty (...) security could
not be suddenly obtained the victory. For the Civil War being ended dissension
more than Civil arose among the Conquerors, which seemed therefore more sad to
all good men, because it was between those, who before had with most united
affections and desires, thrown their lives and Fortunes into the hazard against
a common Enemy, whom the same cause, the same fervor of reforming Religion,
and restoring liberty, and the same prayers had linked together in the nearest
bond of conscience.

By this division, under the names of Presbyterian and Independent, still
increasing, the minds of men began beyond all measure to be embittered against
each other; one side complained, that the Covenant was broken; the other, that
it was not rightly enterpreted by them, nor so, as that it could any way be a
vindication of the cause undertaken, or the public Safety; on both sides were
men of great reputation.

Yet did they not at first so far dissent, but that both sides seemed forward
to vindicate the Common cause against the Kings party, called Malignants. It
must be a longer time, that must by degrees so far work upon the consciences of
that side, which seemed weakest, as to make them cleave to the Malignants for a
prop. The Malignants were ready to join with either side, that they might ruin
both. They themselves (though disarmed) being now the greatest number*
especially by reason of the unconstancy of many men, either upon particular
grievances, or the burden of Taxations. A great number of the Citizens of
London, not of the mea^est, but highest rank, had revolted from their former
principles; insomuch as that City (all the Kings Garrisons being by Fairfax his
bloudless Victories emptied thither) became to be of that condition, as that
the Parliament, without the Armies help, could not safely sit there. These
dissentions of Presbyterian and Independent (because the motives and intentions
of men are not enough known) our purpose is to touch with more brevity than the
actions of open War, and plain hostility, though they also are here shortly
mentioned.

It were a work of too much length and difficulty, to recite how many Calumnies
were raised by the other faction against the Army (before so much admired) as
maintainers of the Independent faction. How diverse Petitions were drawn up, and
sub-scriptions eagerly sought in the County of Essex, against this Army, which
was then quartered about Walden, in the month of April. And in the Parliament
it self it was so far, and in that manner debated concerning disbanding of that
Army; that they (being now taught to value their own merits) conceived
themselves much injured; and in the month of May presented a Petition to their
General. In which they desire to be satisfied, not only for their due pay, as
Soldiers, but in things concerning (belonging to them as free born sons of the
Nation) the public liberties, which they had fought for. Of which Petition
great complaint was made by those of the other Faction. These and some other
Alterations wrought at last so far, as that the Soldiers, about the beginning
of June (upon what design, or what jealousies I leave to Judge) took away the
King from Helmby, out of the Parliament-Commissioners hands, and carried him
along with them in the Army. So that his person was to be in some Town, or
Palace near to their Quarter. When this was known, it was ordered by both
Houses of Parliament (and their order sent to the General.)

1. That the King should reside at Richmond. 2. That he should be attended by
the same persons that he was at Holmby. 3. That Rossiters Regiment should guard
him.
But the next day from the General, and his Council of Officers, was brought to
the Parliament an Impeachment against eleven Members of the House of Commons,
viz. (honored names many of them) Hollis, Stapleton, Waller, Glyn, Massey,
Maynard, Lewis, Clotworthy, Long, Harley, and Nichols. Wherein diverse things
were objected concerning hindering the Releif of Ireland, obstructing Justice,
and acting somewhat against the Army, and the Laws of England. The Impeached
Members declared themselves ready to answer to any crime that could be objected
against them. But another request came from the Army, that those Impeached
Members, until they had brought in their answer, might be secluded from their
Seats in Parliament. This at the first was not granted, as a thing judged to be
too high, and too much against the privilege of Parliament. But when the Army
iterated their desire, those accused Members, by leave of the Parliament, made
a voluntary Secession for six months. Concerning that Order of Parliament,
that the King should go to Richmond, the General desired to be excused;
entreating them not to command that; until things were more quiet, and that
they would appoint no Residence for the King nearer to London, than they would
allow the Quarter of the Army to be. After which the King was conveied to
Roiston, thence to Hatfield, no long after to Causum, while the Army quartered
at Reading. From whence, when the General with his Army marched to Bedford, the
King went to the Earl of Bedfords House near Ouborn.

About that time was rumoured a very dangerous conspiracy in London, of
Citizens, Apprentices, and others against the Army, namely, that many Citizens,
and Apprentices, and other people had privately listed themselves to make a
Force against the Army. The General hearing this, certified the Cities
Commissioners, who were then with him at the Headquarters of it. Who made have
to London, to examine and quiet those troubles; but at that time between the
two embittered Factions, nothing but suspicions and tumults could be. These
Jealousies daily increasing, on July 22. the Parliament made an Order to change
that Militia of the City, which had been established upon the fourth of May,
and put others, which were better affected to the Army, in their rooms. Upon
which Order, the Citizens of that faction were wonderfully incensed, and
petitioned the House on the twenty six of July, which being read, seemed rather
a command than a petition. This was carried, and followed by a dissolute
multitude of Citizens, Apprentises, and other unruly persons, who pressed to
the very doors of the Parliament, and cried out in a threatening way, that
before the House rise, they must order according to their Petition; and so far
did their violence prevail, that they extorted an Order for the re-establishing
of the former Militia. But not content with that, when the House was rising,
they took the Speaker, and rudely thrust him again into his chair, detaining
both him, and the rest of the Members there, (an unheard of violation of
Parliament!) until they enforced from them another Order, which was, That the
King should come to London.

After this rude violation, the Houses adjourned until Friday next, which was
the thirtieth of July. Upon which day, both the Speakers being absent, (for
they with the greatest part of the Members had left London, and withdrawn
themselves to the Army) new Speakers were chosen, the Lord Hunsdon and Mr.
Henry Pelham a Barrester, by whom Orders were made that day: 1. That the King
should come to London. 2. That the Militia of London should be authorized to
raise Forces for defense of the City. 3. Power was given to the same Militia to
choose a General for those Forces.


It was likewise Ordered, that the aforesaid eleven Members, Impeached by the
Army, should return to their seats in Parliament.

The Citizens armed with these Orders, presently proceed to raising of Forces,
of which they Elected Massey to be their General.

In the mean time the Lords and Commons, who had left London, consulting with
the General and chief Commanders of the Army, made an Order, That all Acts and
Decrees, that had passed on the 26. of July, and since, should be accounted
null and void, and that they did adhere to the Declaration of the General and
Council of the Army. It was likewise Decreed, that the General with his Army
should march to London.

But when the Citizens heard of the Armies approach, their stomachs being
somewhat abated, and their opinions so much divided in Common Counsel, that it
appeared impossible for them suddenly to raise any forces to oppose the Army;
they sent to the General for a Pacification, which (by the consent of the
Members of parliament then with him) was granted to them upon these conditions:
1. That they should desert the Parliament now sitting, and the Eleven Impeached
Members. 2. That they should recall their Declaration lately divulged. 3. They
should relinquish their present Militia. 4. They should deliver up to the
General all their Forts, and the Tower of London. 5. They should disband all
the Forces they had raised.


And do all things else which were necessary for the public tranquillity. All
which things none of them daring to deny, were presently ratified.

On the sixth day of August the General with his Army came to Westminster, and
with him the Speakers of both Houses, together with the rest of the Lords and
Commons, whom he restored all to their former Seats. Both the Speakers, in the
name of the whole Parliament, gave thanks to the General; they made him
Commander of all the Forces in England, and in Wales, and Constable of the
Tower of London; a months pay was likewise given as a gratuity to the Army.
The next day General Fairfax, Lieutenant General Cromwell, Major General
Skippon, and the rest of the Commanders, with the whole Army, marched through
London, from the Western part thereof to the Tower, where some Commands were
changed, and the Militia otherwise settled. Then least the City should swell
with too much power, her Militia by Order of Parliament was divided, and
Authority given to Westminster, Southwark, and the Hamblets about the Tower, to
exercise and command their own Militiaes.

Thus was the Presbyterian faction depressed; and the Parliament thus restored,
were very intent upon the business of annulling all those Acts, which in their
absence, and by that tumultuous violence had been made, and in punishing the
Authors of those Seditions.

FINIS.
Book III.
A short mention of the Original and Progress of the Second War.
THe Parliament restored, the Militia of London settled, and the other Commands
fitly disposed, the General Fairfax marched out of London, and quartered his
Army in the Towns and Villages adjacent, only leaving some Regiments about
White Hall and the Mews to guard the Parliament, his Headquarters being at
Putney; the King about the middle of August was brought to the most stately of
all his Palaces, Hampton Court.

While the King remained at Hampton Court, he seemed not at all a restrained
man, But a Prince living in the splendour of a Court, so freely to his presence
were all sorts of people admitted, to kiss his hands, and do all obeysances
whatsoever. None were forbidden to wait upon him. Nor did the people from
London only, and the adjacent Towns resort to the King, but his Servants also
from beyond the Seas, even those, who by Order of Parliament had been
forbidden, and Voted Delinquents, such as Ashburnham, Barkley, and the rest,
who now by the permission of the Army, had safe recourse to him. But upon what
reasons, or design this permission was, many wondered.

Stirred up by these examples (if not sent for by the King) the Lords formerly
of his Council at Oxford, the Duke of Richmond, Marquess Hartford, the Earls of
Southampton and Dorset, with the Lord Seymor, about the beginning of October
came to the King, as if to consult and give their advice to him concerning the
Propositions of Parliament, or other business. The Parliament were displeased
at this thing; neither would the Army long suffer it, considering that the King
had not yet in any thing at all given satisfaction to the Parliament. Whereupon
those Lords being told of it, after two days stay at Hampton Court, returned
to their own houses.

On the seventh day of September, Propositions agreed upon by both Houses of
Parliament (the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland concurring also) were
sent to the King at Hampton Court. To which they did humbly beseech his
Majesty, that he would give his answer within six days. The Commissioners
appointed for this business, of the Parliament of England, were the Earl of
Pembrook, Lord Mountague, Sir James Harrington, Sir John Cook, Sir John
Holland, and Major General Brown. For the Kindom of Scotland, the Earl of
Louderdale, and Sir Charles Erskins.

The King, although he denied (as before) to grant the Propositions, wrote
notwithstanding an Answer to the Parliament, in which he says, That to some
things he can assent, namely, about establishing Presbytery for 3 years, about
granting the Militia, as it was before offered to him. But in the other things
he must altogether dissent. He affirms, that he could rather hearken to the
Proposals of the Army, (for the Army had lately published some proposals, in
the manner of the Parliament Propositions, about settling the peace of the
Kingdom) and desired the Parliament that they would consider of those Proposals,

The Parliament, not yet deterred by these often denials of the King, fell upon
debate about making Propositions to him again. When the Commissioners of
Scotland residing at London (after that Louden and Lanerick, who came newly out
of Scotland, had talked privately with the King at Hampton Court) sent Letters
to the Parliament, in which they require that the King may come to London, and
then personally treat with the parliament about the things controverted; those
very Scots, who not long before, both in their Orations and Letters, Denied it
to be just, or convenient for the Commonwealth, that the King, before he had
given satisfaction and security to the People, should be admitted to London; or
to any Personal Treaty with the Parliament. Those very Scots, who denied to
receive the King into Scotland, for fear he might raise commotions in their
Country, would now have him brought to London, a City filled with Malignants,
and fit for any Tumults, in which the Parliament it self, without the guard of
an Army, could not safely sit. That which moved them to this demand (as they
alleged) was because the King had been taken from Holmby against his will, and
without the consent of Parliament, by the violence of Soldiers, and still
remained under the power of an Army, not in that freedom, which was thought fit
for a King, treating about a business of so great moment.

At the end of their Epistle they seem content that he may stay (if London be
denied) at Hampton Court, so he be not under the power of the Army, but in such
a condition, as that the Commissioners of both Parliaments may have a free
recourse to him. But the Parliament were again framing Propositions (with some
alterations) to be sent to the King, when lo, on a sudden they were stricken
with an unexpected Message, That the King was privily fled out of Hampton
Court: To which purpose Letters came about midnight from Cromwell to the
Speaker. For on the twelfth day of November, whilst the Commissioners of
Parliament, and Colonel Whaley, who commanded the Guard, expected when the King
should come out of his Chamber to Supper, and wondered at his long stay; at
last about nine of the clock, some of them going in, and not finding the King,
they found his cloak left there, and a letter written with his own hand to the
Commissioners, to be by them communicated to both Houses of Parliament; in
which letter, after he had discoursed somewhat about captivity, and the
sweetness of liberty, he protested, as before God, that he had not taken this
design of withdrawing himself, to disturb the public peace, or any treaty
tending to the establishment thereof: but only to preserve his own safety,
against which he understood there was a treasonable Conspiracy. But toward the
end of his Letter, he uses these words;

Now as I cannot deny, but that my personal security is the urgent cause of
this my retirement: so I take God to witness, that the public Peace is no less
before mine eyes. And I can find no better way to express this my profession,
(I know not what a wiser man may do) then by desiring and urging that all chief
interests may be heard, to the end each may have just satisfaction; as for
example, The Army (for the rest, though necessary, yet I suppose are not
difficult to consent) ought (in my judgment) to enjoy the Liberty of their
Consciences, and have an Act of Oblivion, or Indemnity (which should extend to
the rest of all my Subjects) and that all their Arrears should be speedily and
duly paid; which I will undertake to do, so I may be heard, and that I be not
hindered from using such lawful and honest means as I shall choose. To conclude,
let me be heard with freedom, honor and safety, and I shall instantly break
through this cloud of retirement, and show my self ready to be Pater Patriae.

Charles Rex.


But the Parliament being much at first troubled with this unexpected news of
the King's departure, at last, lest the Kingdoms peace should thereby be
disturbed, they ordered, that men of fidelity should be speedily sent to all
the Seaports, lest the King should pass into any Foreign Country. And when
tidings (though false) were brought unto them, that the King was concealed
within the City of London, they ordered, That if any man should closely detain
the King's Person, and not reveal it to the Parliament, he should be punished
with the loss of his estate and life.

This Cloud soon dissolved, and the Parliament were informed by Col. Hammond
(who was newly by consent of both Houses, made Governor of the Isle of Wight)
that the King was come into that Island, and had delivered himself into his
protection. Hammond signified himself to be ready to obey the
Parliament-commands in all things. The Parliament commending Hammond, did also
command him with all diligence to guard the King; but to wait upon him with all
respect and honor; promising, that they would take care that provisions of
every kind should not be wanting, nor money to defray the King's expenses.

While the Parliament were again deliberating about Propositions to be sent to
the King in the Isle of Wight, a Letter of great length from the King,
superscribed, To the Speaker of the Lords House, to be communicated also to the
House of Commons, was read upon the eighteenth day of November. In which he
delivered his Sense and Opinion concerning many things contained in the former
Propositions, especially concerning the abolition of Episcopacy; he disputed
out of the dictates of his conscience much, and gave touches also of the other
matters. Of all which he hoped that he should satisfy the Parliament with his
reasons, if he might personally treat with them. Therefore he earnestly desired
to be admitted with Honor, Freedom, and Safety, to treat personally at London:
the Commissioners of Scotland, with great vehemence, also pressed, that this
desire of the King might be granted.

The Parliament weighing these things, lest they should betray themselves and
friends by admitting of a personal Treaty with the King in London, so Malignant
a City, before he had given any satisfaction or security, (which was before the
Scots Opinion) after so many mischiefs done to the Commonwealth, resolved upon
a middle way.

Therefore after a long debate on the twenty sixth of November, they concluded
that four Propositions, being drawn up into the form of Acts, should be sent to
the King in the Isle of Wight, to sign; which when he had signed he should be
admitted to a personal Treaty a London; that his Majesty giving the Kingdom
security by passing these four Propositions, there may be a personal Treaty
with his Majesty, for passing the rest of the Propositions. The four were these.

1. That a Bill be passed into an Act by his Majesty, for settling of the
Militia of the Kingdom.

2. That a Bill be passed for his Majesty's calling in of all Declarations,
Oaths, and Proclamations against the Parliament, and those who have adhered to
them.

3. For passing an Act, that those Lords who were made after the Great Seal was
carried to Oxford, may be made incapable of sitting in the House of Peers
thereby.

4. That power may be given to the two Houses of Parliament, to adjourn, as the
two Houses of Parliament shall think fit.

The Commissioners of Scotland would in no wise give their consent that these
four Bills should be sent to the King, before he treated at London; therefore,
in a very long Declaration they protested against it. Notwithstanding that, the
Bills were sent by Commissioners of both Houses of Parliament, and on the
twenty fourth of December presented to the King at Carisbrook-Castle. But the
King understanding the mind of the Scots, and the factions in London,
absolutely refused to sign those Propositions; and the Commissioners with this
denial returned to London.

On the third of January the House of Commons debated of this denial of the
King: the dispute was sharp, vehement, and high about the State and Government
of the Commonwealth; and many plain Speeches made of the King's obstinate
aversness, and the peoples too long patience; it was there affirmed, that the
King by this denial had denied his protection to the people of England, for
which only subjection is due from them; that one being taken away, the other
falls to the ground. That it is very unjust and absurd, that the Parliament
(having so often tried the King's affections, should now betray to an
implacable Enemy, both themselves and all those friends, who in a most just
cause had valiantly adventured their lives and fortune: that nothing was now
left for them to do, but to take care for the safety of themselves and their
friends, and settle the Commonwealth (since otherwise it could not be) without
the King.

Therefore on the 17 of January, a Declaration and Votes passed both Houses of
Parliament, in this manner.

The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, after many Addresses to his
Majesty for the preventing and ending this unnatural War, raised by him against
the Parliament and Kingdom, having lately sent four Bills to his Majesty, which
did contain only matter of safety, and security to the Parliament and Kingdom,
referring the composure of other differences to a personal Treaty with his
Majesty; and having received an absolute Negative, do hold themselves obliged
to use their utmost endeavors, speedily to settle the present Government in
such a way, as may bring the greatest security to this Kingdom, in the
enjoyment of the Laws and Liberties thereof. And in Order thereunto, and that
the Houses may receive no delay nor interruptions in so great and necessary a
work, they have taken these Resolutions, and passed these Votes following, viz.

The Lords and Commons do declare, That they will make no further Addresses or
Applications to the King.

Resolved, etc. By the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That no
Application or Address be made to the King by any Person whatsoever, without
the leave of both Houses.

Resolved, etc. By the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that the
Person or Persons, that shall make breach of this Order, shall incur the
penalty of High Treason.

Resolved, etc. That the Lords and Commons do declare, That they will receive
no more any Message from the King: and do enjoin, That no `Person whatsoever do
presume to receive or bring any Message from the King to both or either of the
Houses of Parliament, or any other Person.

Within few days after these Votes of Parliament were published, a Declaration
of the General, and general Council of the Army, (their Headquarters being
then at Windsor) was made and humbly presented to the Parliament; for which
Declaration thanks were returned from the Parliament to the General, and
Council of the Army: which take in the full expression.

A Declaration from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the General Council
of the Army, of their Resolutions to adhere to the Parliament in their
proceedings concerning the King.
NOtwithstanding the high violations of the Kingdoms Rights and Liberties, and
the endeavors to swallow up the whole interest of the Kingdom into the power
and will of a King, which the present King's Reign has afforded; we have
observed, that the Parliament was (through his necessities) and against his
declared intentions to the contrary, called, but in a condition of vindicating
the Kingdom in those things, has yet enacted with that tenderness toward the
King, (as to any thing of right that might be in him, or duty toward him) as
that in the Protestation, Covenant, and many Declarations published by them;
that have held forth a careful regard to the preservation of the King's person,
and just rights, with, and in the preservation and vindication of the public
interests, and safety of the Kingdom, and by the whole service of their
actions, and their many-fold humble Addresses to him, for the preservation and
settlement of all, they have, we conceive, abundantly demonstrated the reality
and innocence of their intentious toward him: in all which, we have still
understood the sense and intention to be no other, then that the preservation
of the King's person and particular rights, should be so endeavored, as it
might be consistent with, and not destructive to, those great and more obliging
public interests of Religion, and the Rights, Liberties, and safety of the
Kingdom; and not otherwise.

And accordingly, in the late Declarations and Papers, that have occasionally
past from this Army, as to our desires of settlement to the Kingdom, we have
expressed our real wishes, that if the King would in things necessary, and
essential to the clearing, settling, and securing of those public interests,
give his concurrence to put them past future disputes, then his Rights should
be considered and settled, so far as might be consistent with those superior
interests of the public, and the security thereof for future.

And that by an Address to the King upon things so purely essential to those
public ends, it might once more come to a clear trial, whether we could, with
the preservation of the King's person, and in particular interests, have a
security to the other, has been our earnest desire, our great expectation, and
our endeavor, that we and others might be in a patient waiting for such an
issue.

Now in the Parliaments last Addresses to the King, we find they have insisted
only upon some few things, so essential to that interest of the Kingdom, which
they have hitherto engaged for; as that without betraying the safety of the
Kingdom, and themselves, and all that engaged with them in that cause, without
denying that, which God in the issue of the war, has been such a Testimony
unto, they could not go lower, and (those things granted) they have offered to
treat for all the rest.

Thus we account that great business of a settlement to the Kingdom, and
security to the public interest thereof, by, and with, the King's Concurrence,
to be brought unto so clear a trial, as that (upon the King's denial of those
things) we can see no further hopes of settlement or security that way.

And therefore understanding, that upon the consideration of that denial, added
to so many other, the Honorable House of Commons, by several Votes upon monday
last, have resolved not to make any further address or application to the King,
nor receive any from him, nor to suffer either in others; We do freely declare
for our selves, and the Army, That we are resolved, through the grace of God,
firmly to adhere with, and stand by the Parliament, in the things voted last
monday concerning the King, and in what shall be further necessary for
prosecution thereof, and for settling and securing of the Parliament and Kingdom
without the King, and against him or any other that shall hereafter partake
with him.

Windsor, Jan. 9. 1647.

The Parliament also made a public Declaration about the beginning of
February, for satisfaction of all men in general, concerning the causes of
their Votes; in which (besides the Kings former misdeeds, related before in
other Remonstrances) they declare how often they had treated with him, That
although they were never forced to any Treaty, yet no less then seven times
they had applied themselves to the King with Propositions, containing nothing
but what was necessary to the peace and security of the Kingdom: How they had
offered him Propositions at Oxford, afterward at Uxbridge, and then (after he
was quite vanquished in war) at Newcastle; and lastly, after the departure of
the Scots, at Hampton Court. All which has been perpetually denied by him.

By such a Declaration did the Parliament endeavor to appease the unquiet
minds of people: but no Arguments nor Decrees could serve to assuage their
fury, nor prevent the storms which were then arising. Force only was required,
and wise Council to search out conspiracies, and suppress the Tumults which
were feared. Therefore part of the Army was quartered about Westminster, the
Mews, and other places of the City: And the month before these high
transactions, some Lords and Commons were chosen out of both Houses to be a
Committee for the safety of the Commonwealth, and sat together at Derby-house,
in the same place where the Committee of both Kingdoms (England and Scotland)
had sitten before. To this Committee power was given to suppress Tumults and
Insurrections; and to that purpose, to raise Forces as they saw occasion.

The Members of this Committee were seven Lords, namely, the Earls of
Northumberland, Kent, Warwick and Manchester, the-Lords Say, Wharton, and
Roberts; and thirteen of the House of Commons, Mr. Perpoint, Mr. Fines, Sir
Henry Vane Senior and Junior, Sir William Armin, Sir Arthur Hazlerig, Sir
Gilbert Gerrard, Sir John Evelin, Lieutenant General Cromwell, Mr. St. John, Mr.
Wallop, Mr. Crew, Mr. Brown.

The Parliament, though victorious, though guarded with a gallant Army, no
forces visibly appearing against it, yet was never in more danger. All men
began in the Spring to prophecy, that the Summer would be a hot one, in respect
of Wars, seeing how the Countries were divided in Factions, the Scots full of
threats, the city of London as full of unquietness. And more sad things were
feared where least was seen; rumors every day frightning the people, of secret
Plots, and treasonable meetings. From whence every man began to foresee
slaughter and war, as Mariners use to foresee a rising Tempest.

-- Cum longo per multa volumina tractu
Aestuat unda minax, flatusque incerta futuri,
Turbida testantur conceptos aequora ventos.
The threatening waves in tracks voluminous
Boil up; the Seas by blasts uncertain blown,
Betoken many winds conception.
The King's Party began to swell with great hopes, and look upon themselves not
as vanquished, but Conquerors; nor could they forbear vaunting everywhere, but
talked of the Kings rising, and ruin of the Parliament. The same thing seemed
to be the wish of those whom they called Presbyterians, who were ready to
sacrifice themselves and their Cause to their hatred against the Independents;
who wished that quite undone, which themselves could not do; and desired, that
liberty might be quite taken away by the King, rather then vindicated by the
Independents.

The King himself, though set aside, and confined within the Isle of Wight, was
more formidable this Summer, then in any other, when he was followed by his
strongest Armies. The name of King had now a further operation, and pity of the
Vulgar gave a greater Majesty to his Person. Prince Charles also by his absence,
and the name of banishment, was more desirable by those Vulgar people, and by
his Commissions (which his Father privately sent him) as if armed with lawful
power, did easily command those that were willing; and by commands under his
name, was able to raise (as will afterward appear) not only Tumults, but Wars.

The beginning was by Tumults, and in the City, from whence also the following
Insurrections in the near Counties had their original; and was by Apprentices,
and loose young people playing in More-fields upon a Sunday, the ninth day of
April, who dispising the authority of Magistrates, set upon a Captain of the
trained Bands, and with stones beat him out of the fields; and taking away his
colors, with them they marched, a disorderly rout (gathering up many of the
scum of the people as they passed) to Westminster; crying out as they went,
that they were for King Charles. But they by a Troop of Horse out of the Mews
were quickly scattered. But running back, and getting into London (while other
disorderly fellows came into them) they remained all night in a whole body,
filling the City with fears; so that the Lord Major, a man cordial to the
Parliament, was enforced to escape privily out of his House, and fly into the
Tower. In the morning, General Fairfax, to crush this mischief in the
beginning, before the wound were grown incurable, by the concourse of wicked
men, sent a part of his Army into the City; who vanquishing the Seditious, and
driving them into Leaden Hall (of whom some they carried away Prisoners) with
great valor, and no less prudence, quieted the Tumult. For delivering the City
from so horrid a danger, thanks were given to the General, both by the
Parliament, and the honest sober Citizens, and a thousand pounds in money given
as a gratuity to the Soldiers.

In the very Petitions also, at that Malignant time, nothing but sedition and
War was contained; as appeared in those of Surrey and Kent. From Surrey, about
three hundred came to Westminster on the twenty sixth of May, bringing a
Petition to the Parliament, in which they did not so much entreat, as command
in high words, That the King should presently be restored to his former
dignity, and come to Westminster with Honor, Freedom and safety, to treat
personally there about all Controversies; that the Army should presently be
disbanded, and the free people of England be governed by their known Laws and
Statutes; with other things of this nature. Nor would these Surrey-men, that
brought the Petition, endure any delay, no, not so much, as till the Parliament
could debate about it; but being extreme insolent, cursing and railing openly
at the Parliament, they set upon the Soldiers who were their guard; of whom,
some they hurt, and one they killed. Upon which, a troop of Horse from the
Mews, and some Foot, were sent to help their Fellows, who soon vanquished and
scattered those Country Fellows, and slew some of them. This was the end of
that seditious Petition of Surrey.

At that time the Kentish-men were coming with a Petition of that nature; who
being in number of a good Army, seemed afar off to threaten the Parliament.
They had been the more stirred, by reason of a severe punishment of some of
their Countrymen, who had lately raised a sedition about Canterbury: against
these Kentish-men the Parliament provided no smaller defense, then the General
Fairfax himself, who with seven Regiments marched away to Black Heath near
Greenwich; of whose success we shall speak afterward.

The Parliament had before designed, that General Fairfax should march into the
North to defend those parts; but nearer dangers detained him in the South. For
at this time scarce any part of England was quiet; in every place tumults,
insurrections, and Wars were threatened. To quell all these, (which was
wonderful) one only Army sufficed, by the great blessing of God upon it. Which
Army, as when it was conjoined, in one year, Anno Dom. 1646. it quite
vanquished and broke all the Kings flourishing strength, and reduced the
Kingdom to the obedience of Parliament: so at this time with no less fortitude
and felicity, being divided into parts, in all corners of the Kingdom, it
continued Victorious; so that fortitude and fortune might seem in that Army
(as the soul in an humane body) to be all in the whole, and all in every part.
For besides those light, and soon-suppressed insurrections of Suffolk in the
East, and of Stamford in the mid-land part, by Col. Wait and others, and of
Cornwall in the West by Sir Hardresse Waller, more great and formidable
insurrections happened in the Northern parts, and in Wales.

In the beginning of May the North was infested by some of the Kings
Commanders; Sir Thomas Glenham, who had before governed so many Garrisons of the
Kings, as Carlisle, York, and Oxford; and lost them all; had now, with no
better success, seized upon Carlisle. And at the same time Sir Marmaduke
Langdale (of whom we spoke before) had seized upon Berwick, and fortified it.
The strong Castle also of Pomfret was then taken by the Royalists, who by
treachery had slain the Governor thereof. To manage these Wars in the North,
Lambert, a stout Commander, and Major General of those Counties, was left with
some Regiments of the Fairfaxian Army.

But dangers of a more horrid degree seemed to threaten the Parliament in
Wales; not only from ancient, and formerly-vanquished Enemies; but those, who
had before been Parliament-Commanders, and had now forsaken their side and
cause; namely, the Colonels, Poyer and Powel, and him that had so often so well
deserved of the Parliament, Laughorn himself. Poyer, who had hitherto kept the
Town and strong Castle of Pembrook for the Parliament, now (strengthened by the
concourse of malignant people) with great animosity maintained it against them.
Laughorn a Commander of great esteem in those parts, had raised a gallant Army,
under whom Colonel Powel served. In a small time (the Welsh coming in apace to
him) Laughorns Army was so increased, that he mustered 8000. Both Laughorn and
Poyer (as it afterward appeared) entered into this War by a Commission received
from Prince Charles; whose Auspicy proved no better then his Fathers. Colonel
Horton with a small part of the Fairfaxian Army, and some other raised forces,
went against them with three thousand men, But it pleased God, the giver of all
Victories, that the success was not according to the number; for Horton on the
eighth day of May, between the two Towns of Fagans and. Peterstone encountering
with Laughorn, totally routed, and put to flight his whole Army, consisting of
eight thousand Horse and Foot. A great slaughter was made upon the place, and
the number of Prisoners (being three thousand) equalled the number of the
Victorious Army; among whom were taken about an hundred and fifty Officers; a
great number of Colors, and quantity of Arms, with all their Ordnance.

There was scarce a more happy Victory (as the condition of things then stood)
to the Parliament, then this of Hortons; for which, by order of Parliament, a
public thanksgiving to God was celebrated. Laughorn and Powel escaping by
flight, got to Poyer into Pembrook Castle. Cromwell himself about the beginning
of May was sent into Wales with some Regiments, who on the eleventh day of that
month came to Chepstow Castle, which he resolved to besiege; but hastening to
Pembrook, he left Colonel Ewer at Chepstow, who within fifteen days took that
Castle, and killed Kemish, to whom before the place had been betrayed; and
Cromwell on the twentieth of May came to Pembrook.

Poyer relying on the strength of the place, refused all conditions, knowing
besides, that time was now precious to the Parliament, being then entangled in
so many difficulties at once. But Cromwell not being accustomed to despair of
any thing, prepared for the Siege, being much furthered in his work from the
Sea, by the great industry of Sir George Ayscough, who commanded there a
squadron of the Navy. Sir George Ayscough with much care and diligence from
time to time furnished Leiutenant General Cromwell with great Guns, with
provisions of all sorts from Bristol, and other places, and every thing
necessary for a Siege.

While these things were acting in Wales, General Fairfax, sent (as before was
said) with seven Regiments to suppress the Kenrish Risers, pursued them toward
Rochester. A great number of Kentish men not far from Gravesend were gotten
together into an Army; with whom were above twenty Knights, Esquires, and
Gentlemen of the County; and among them diverse commanders formerly of the King
Armies; though they were more in number, they durst not give the General
battle; but some marched away to Maidstone, a few kept together about
Rochester, another part of them went to Dover, and besieged that Castle; to
raise that Siege the General sent Colonel Rich, and Sir Michael Levesy; who
very happily performed that work.

The General himself marched with his Army to Maidstone. Into that Town about
two thousand of the Risers were gotten, and resolved to make good the place.
The General likewise prepared to besiege them. In no chance of War before, was
the virtue of Fairfax and his Soldiers more tried, nor a Victory bought with
greater danger. For after that the Soldiers had broke into the Town (which was
done with great difficulty) they found a War in every street, and Ordnance
planted against them, and were put to fight for every corner of it. At last the
General, with the loss of forty of his men, took the Town, two hundred of the
Enemies being slain, and about fourteen hundred taken prisoners; four hundred
Horse, and two thousand Arms were taken. One thing was wonderful, that an Army
of many thousand Kentish men, more in number then the Generals Army, coming
from Rochester to the aid of their friends, yet notwithstanding, when they came
near, durst not venture to assist them; but stood in sight, while the General
took the Town. Public thanks were given to God, by order of Parliament, for
this great victory.

Now all Kent seemed to be quieted (except some Castles, which also within a
short time were taken, or yielded to the Parliament) when suddenly a new head
of this Hydra sprung up; the Lord Goring gathering together a remnant of the
Kentish Army, with about two thousand men, had marched as far as Greenwich,
from whence he sent some to see how the Citizens of London stood affected to
the business; but whilst he staid expecting an answer, some Troops of the Army
came in sight, upon which Goring and all his company fled: the Horsemen
pursuing, took some Booty and diverse prisoners: the Kentish men for the most
part fled to their own Houses: The Lord Goring, with about five hundred horse,
flying from Greenwich, and getting Boats, crossed the Thames into Essex, where
(as if the Fates sought out new Victories for Fairfax every where) the Lord
Capel, with Forces out of Hartfortshire, and Sir Charles Lucas with a body of
Horse, at Chensford in Essex joined themselves to Goring, to whom within a
short time diverse, that formerly had been the King Soldiers, and many
Londoners, with others, flocked. Some also of higher rank, as Mr. Hastings,
brother to Huntingdon; and Compton, brother to the Earl of Northampton.

The General Fairfax, crossing the Thames at Gravesend, passed with a part of
his Army into Essex; and sending for the rest of his Forces out of Kent and
London, pursued the Enemies; whom at last he drove into Colchester, and in that
Town besieged them: where (because it proved a long siege) we leave him for a
time, and pass to other actions.

The greatest of all dangers which threatened the Parliament, was from the
North, not contained within the bounds of England only, but from the Kingdom
of Scotland; Major General Lambert, the chief Commander in the North, laboring
to suppress Glenham and Langdale, wrought so much, that he kept them within the
bounds of Cumberland and Westmerland; but they expected the march of the
Scottish Army, to which they intended to join themselves. Lambert, too weak to
oppose so great a Force, omitted no diligence in strengthening himself from the
neighbour-Counties, who were very forward to his assistance, especially
Lancashire, who raised two Regiments of Horse, and four of Foot, to be
conducted by Major General Ashton, and join with Lambert in Yorkshire. The
English Malignants alone were not very formidable in the North, but that the
Kingdom of Scotland joined with them against the Parliament. Wars were made
from another Kingdom, that Cromwell might be victorious as well against
Forraigners, as Englishmen.

The faction of Duke Hamliton was then prevalent in the Parliament of Scotland,
by whom Designs were hatched, dangerous to both Kingdoms, contrary to peace,
and contrary (for so it was judged by the Church of Scotland) even to the
Covenant it self. England was to be invaded, and a great Army raised under the
Command of Duke Hamliton, a man ambitious and subtle. The English Malignants
(for it was given out that they took Arms for the King) were invited to join
with them, and pay promised to those that would serve; all this was done,
though Arguile, Louden, and the honester Lords protested against their
proceedings; and the Kirk of Scotland cursed that War as impious.

But the greater part prevailed, who therefore styled themselves the Parliament
of Scotland by a kind of right; and to curb men of the adverse faction, a
Commitee was made, with power given to them to punish all those who should
attempt any thing against the Decrees of the Parliament; and a penalty set
down, to be inflicted upon all Ministers, who should from their Pulpits teach
the people otherwise: by which means it was brought to pass, that many
Ministers were silenced, others punished; and some Lords of the other faction
retired themselves to their own strengths; yet could they not stop the mouths
of all the Ministers; some with a constant Zeal denounced the wrath of God
against that Army of Hamilton; and by the wretched success of that unfortuneate
Army, the curses of the Kirk seemed not in vain, no more then of old the
Tribunes curse upon the Parthian Expedition of Marcus Crassin.

Conspiracies by Land (though over the whole Island) against the Parliament of
England, seemed not enough, unless the Sea also had rebelled against them:
Diverse of the chief Ships in the Royal Fleet revolted from the Parliament about
the beginning of June, and set the Vice Admiral Rainsborough ashore; affirming
they were for the King, and would serve Prince Charles, sailing toward
Holland, where the Prince then was, and with him his brother the Duke of York;
who not long before fled privately (being persuaded thereto* by Letters from
the King his Father) out of London, where he had been kept with great
observance and state by the Parliament.

The Parliament were much troubled at the revolt of these Ships, as a thing of
extreme danger; and sent to the Earl of Warwick to take the Command of their
remaining Navy, and reduce the rest if he could. Warwick cheerfully accepted
the employment, and was by the Parliament created (which Title he had born at
the beginning of these Wars) Lord High Admiral of England.

Whilst Warwick was serving the Parliament, his Brother the Earl of Holland
unhappily rise in Arms against it. Relying (as it seems) upon the opportunity
of time, while the Navy was revolted, whilst Fairfax in Kent, Cromwell in Wales
were busied: he built likewise upon the affections of the Citizens of London;
of whom he made trial; and joining the young Duke of Buckingham, and his
Brother with others to him, he appeared in Arms by Kingston with five hundred
Horse; but by Sir Michael Levesey, and others, who took occasion by the
fore-sock, he was thereput to flight, and the Lord Francis Villiers was slain;
Holland flying with the remainder of his Horse, was within few days after, at
the Town of St. Needs* by Col. Scroop (whom the General had sent from
Colchester for that purpose) altogether subdued; Dalbeer, and some other
Gentlemen slain, Holland himself was taken, and by the Parliament committed
prisoner to Warwick-Castle.

At the same time Rossiter also obtained for the Parliament a gallant victory
over the forces of Pomfret-Castle, whom as they were pillaging the Country, and
plundering up and down, being a thousand Horse, Rossiter fell upon, vanquished,
and took prisoners all their Commanders, took all their Arms and Baggage.
Rossiter himself (which for a time abated the joy of this victory) was
grievously wounded, but he recovered.

These victories obtained everywhere by the Parliament, though some of them may
seem small, yet will appear great, and worthy of commemoration to all those who
consider how much the Commonwealth, if but one of these fights had miscarried,
had been endangered: and the Parliament it self, weighing the number and
variety of their hazards, may the better acknowledge the continuance of Gods
providence, and his very hand with them. By these little victories also a way
was made for higher Trophies, and an absolute subjugation of all their Enemies,
which about this time miraculously happened.

For now most opportunely was Pembrook-Castle surrendered to Cromwell, which
Poyer and Laughorn, confiding in the strength of the place, had so long stiffly
maintained. But at last, brought to extremities, they delivered it without
conditions, rendering themselves Prisoners at mercy. Which fell out at the same
time (Fates calling Cromwell to a greater atcheivement) that Duke Hamilton with
a numerous Army of Scots had entered England, and about the beginning of of
July, was further strengthened by the addition of Langdales Forces. Hamilton
marched above five and twenty thousand stong, striking a great terror
everywhere; scarce in the whole time of these wars did any Army exercise
greater cruelty toward the poor inhabitants of England. And yet when the
Parliament debated concerning this Army, the House of Peers could hardly be
brought to declare them Enemies. For the House of Commons had declared, That
the Scots that under Duke Hamilton Invaded England, were Enemies; and that all
the English which joined with them were Traitors to their Country. To which
Vote the Lords at last, after much debate, assented. The chief Citizens of
London, and others, called Presbyterians (though the Presbyterian Scots
abominated this Scottish Army) wished good success to these Scots, no less then
the Malignants did. Whence let the Reader judge of the times.

Lambert, though too weak in all probability for so potent an enemy, was not
discouraged; but resolved to oppose the present danger, and, if need required,
to fight the Scots: but he daily expected the coming of Cromwell, to whose
conduct, this victory was reserved. In the mean time, with prudent retreates,
and some Skirmishes, not only with Langdale, but Hamilton himself, he spun out
the time so long, until that Hamilton's great Army having on the twentieth of
August entered into Lancashire, Cromwell was arrived with his forces, who, with
the addition of Lambert's strength made an Army of almost ten thousand.

This famous battle was fought near to Preston in Lancashire, in which all the
forces of Hamilton and Langdale were vanquished and put to flight, whom the
Conqueror pursuing as far as Warrington, (about twenty miles) and killing many
in the chase, took Lieutenant General Baily prisoner, with a great part of the
Scottish Army, granting them only quarter for their lives. In this battle were
slain three thousand Scots, and taken prisoners about nine thousand: Duke
Hamilton himself within few days after, having fled with a good party of Horse
to Uttoxeter, was there taken prisoner by the Lord Gray, and Colonel Wait: with
Hamilton were taken about three thousand Horse. Langdale also, not long after,
was taken prisoner in a little Village, by Widmerpool a Parliament-Captain.
This was the success of Hamilton's invading England.

Presently after this famous victory of Cromwell, Colchester was surrendered to
General Fairfax: three months almost had the General lien before that Town,
with a small Army, in respect of the number of the besieged, in a lamentable
rainy season; where the Soldiers patience, no less then their valor, was
tried. Goring, Capel, Hastings, Lucas, and the other Commanders, until they
were reduced to extreme necessity, would not hear of yielding, but despised all
conditions: their courages were long upheld by vain hopes (besides the smalness
of the General's Army) of aid by insurrections at London, and of the success of
Hamilton, Langdale, or the E. of Holland; and more especially, of succor by Sea
from Prince Charles, who was now possessed of those Ships which had revolted
from the Parliament; and having taken diverse Merchants Ships besides, was
himself in person, with no contemptible Fleet, come into the narrow Seas.

But about the end of August the besieged in Colchester, despairing of any
relief, and reduced to extremities, (for they had long fed upon Horseflesh)
yielded themselves to the mercy of the Conqueror. Two only suffered, Sir Chapter
Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, who were shot to death. Goring, Capel, and
Hastings were sent to prison, to abide the doom of Parliament.

Thus was the Parliament everywhere victorious by Land, nor were they unhappy
by Sea. For considering that revolt of the Navy, it was to be accounted a great
felicity, that no more revolted after them, or no farther mischief ensued. But
the Earl of Warwick was very careful; and it pleased God by this fright, rather
then loss, to let the Parliament know the frailty of their own condition.

About the end of August, Warwick with a good Fleet was in the River Thames;
when Prince Charles with a greater force, about twenty sail, was come upon the
River against him, and sent a command to Warwick to take down his Flag, and
yield obedience to him as supreme Admiral, having the King's Commission to that
purpose. But Warwick true to the Parliament, obeyed not the Summons; nor was
there any convenient place in that narrow Channel (especially for the larger
Vessels) to make a naval fight; and Warwick's Fleet not strong enough to
encounter the Prince, stayed for the coming of their friends the
Porchmouth-Fleet. The government, and bringing about of that Fleet was
committed to the care of Sir George Ayscough; nor did the Lord Admiral Warwick
know certainly what was become of that Porchmouth-Fleet, whether that also were
revolted, for so the rumonrs were every day in London. And certain it is, that
the Mariners being so ill-affected in general, and daily corrupted by the
Townsmen in Porchmouth, that Fleet had been lost from the Parliament (by which
means the other could not have subsisted) if the discretion of Sir George
Ayscough, his estimation among the Seamen, and their love to him, had not
(happily for the Parliament) then appeared. He wisely sounding the affections
of them, cashiering the worst, to prevent the spreading of that contagion, did
with many endeavors, and great difficulty, so well prevail at last, that he
confirmed the whole Fleet in the Parliaments obedience; And very successfully
sailing by Prince Charles in the night, brought all his Ships safe to the Earl
of Warwick. Who now strengthened by Ayscoughs coming with the Porchmouth Fleet,
resolved to make toward his Enemies. But finding that the Prince for want of
Victual, was gone back into Holland, he followed him, not long after, with the
whole Fleet, to Gore, upon the Coast.

Cromwell, after he had given that great defeat to Hamilton, following his
Victory, entered into Scotland, to help Arguile, and Leven against the Forces
of Monroe and ^^nerike; Which he effected with great felicity, and reduced
those Garrisons, which the Scots and English Malignants had before seized,
namely Berwick and Carlisle into the Parliaments power. Then going into
Scotland, to consult about the safety of both Kingdoms, he was most honorably
entertained in the Castle of Edinburgh. Many of the Scottish Nobility and Gentry
were sent from the Commitee of Estate to meet Cromwell; who, after
congratulatory Orations made, conducted him to Edinburgh; where Arguile, Leven,
and other Lords entertained him, and the rest of the English Commanders, with a
most magnificent banquet in the Castle. Thanks were given by the Ministers to
Cromwell, who was by them styled the preserver of Scotland, under God. Such also
is the testimony of the Committee of Estate, written to the English Parliament
concerning Cromwell; presently after, the forces of Monroe and Lanerike were
disbanded, and all other forces, except fifteen hundred Horse and Foot; which
were to stand under the Command of Leven, until the Kingdom were settled. It
was also decreed both by the Committee of Estate, and Assembly of the Kirk, For
preservation of Religion, and brotherly amity with the English Nation, That no
man, which had joined with Hamilton in the late invasion of England, should be
chosen into the new Parliament, (which was then called) or into the Assembly of
the Kirk. For the Faction of Hamilton were judged Enemies to Religion, and both
the Kingdoms.

It was worthy of noting, that that English Army, which were by the religious
Party of Scotland called A bundle of Sectaries, and reviled by all opprobrious
names, should now be acknowledged by the same Scots to be the Instruments of
God, and Vindicators both of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland. The greatest
Peers of Scotland also did ingenuously confess their Rashness and Error the
year before, for accusing this Army as Rebellious, for acting the very same
things in England, which now themselves were enforced to act in Scotland, for
preservation of that Kingdom.

This great change in the Council of Scotland had been to be wondered at, if the
change that then happened in the English Parliament had not been a greater
Miracle. Who would not be amazed at this, That Cromwell, for vanquishing a
Scottish Army, by which he delivered England from the worst of Miseries, should
be acknowledged there the Preserver of Scotland, and not here allowed the
Preserver of England! and that the same Victory of his against Scots, should
please the Presbyterian Scots for Religions sake, and for Religions sake
displease the Presbyterians of England! Oedipus himself cannot unriddle this;
especially if he judge according to Reason, not according to what Envy, Hate,
and embittering Faction can work.

The face of the English Parliament was now suddenly changed; and the Votes
which passed the year before, namely, of making no more Addresses to the King,
were annulled and made void: those Votes, upon which the Parliament (as before
is said) had published a Declaration to inform the World concerning the reason
and necessity of their proceedings. Their Counsels were now quite changed, and
new Addresses to the King (the formerly impeached members being again restored
to their Seats) with more submissive earnestness then ever before were resolved
on. The Houses then fell into a Debate about propositions to be framed, and a
Treaty to be had with the King (before he had given any satisfaction or
security to the people) personally at London, with Honor, Freedom, and safety.

But that was not carried. Only a Treaty was Voted to be in the I Will of VVight,
and that the King should choose the place within that Island. Therefore on the
fourth of August the Earl of Middlesex, with two of the House of Commons were
sent to the King. Who made answer, that he was very ready to treat of Peace;
and named Newport in that Island to be the place. For that business
Commissioners were presently chosen out of both Houses; Five Peers,
Northumberland, Pembrook, Salisbury, Middlesex, and Say. Ten of the Commons,
Lord VVainman, Hollis, Perpoint, Vane junior, Grimstone, Pots, Brown, Crew,
Glyn, and Buckley.

The King, during this treaty, found not only great reverence and observance
from the Commissioners of Parliament: but was attended with a Prince-like
retinue; and was allowed what servans he should choose, to make up the Splendour
of a Court. The Duke of Richmond, the Marquess of Hartford, the Earls,
Southampton and Lindsey, with other Gentlemen of note, and a competent number
of them, waited in his train; his own Chaplains, and diverse of his Lawyers, to
advise him in the Treaty, were allowed there.

But while this Treaty proceeded, and some months were spent in debates,
concessions, and denyals; behold, another strange alteration happened, which
threw the King from the height of honor into the lowest condition. So
strangely did one contrary provoke another. Whilst some labored to advance the
King into his Throne again upon slender conditions, or none at all; others
weighing what the King had done, what the Commonwealth, and especially what the
Parliaments friends might suffer, if he should come to reign again with
unchanged affections, desired to take him quite away. From hence diverse and
frequent Petitions were presented to the Parliament, and some to the General
Fairfax, That whosoever had offended against the Commonwealth, no persons
excepted might come to Judgment.

The first Petition of that kind was presented to the Parliament upon the
eleventh day of September. The Title of the Petition was, To the most
honorable the Commons of England assembled in Parliament:

The humble Petition of many Thousands of wellaffected men in the Cities of
London and Westminster, in the Borough of Southwark, and the neighboring
Villages, Inhabitants.



This Petition, which broke the Ice, was followed, in the space of one month,
by many other Petitions of the same kind, from diverse Counties of England, and
several Regiments of the Army; namely, from the County of Oxford, on the 30 of
September: from the County of Leicester, on the second of October: from many
Commanders in the Army, on the 4 of October. Three other Petitions brought upon
one day; namely, the 10 of October: another from Ireton's Regiment, on the 18
of October: and another from Inglesbies Regiment, on the 21 day of the same
month.

The scope of all these Petitions was the same, That Justice might be done, and
that the Chief Authors of so much bloodshed in England, and so many calamities
to the Nation; namely, those, who had been the raisers of this Second War, and
were now in the Parliaments custody, Hamilton, Holland, Capel, Goring, and the
rest, might be punished. But especially they entreat, that the King himself,
the Chief offender, the raiser of the whole War, and author of Englands
calamity, might be called to Judgment: That the Parliament would give them
leave to remember what the Parliament it self had the year before decreed and
declared against the King; and what the Kirk of Scotland in 1646, had declared
against the same King; That he was guilty (besides other horrid Crimes) of
shedding the blood of many thousands of his best Subjects. Which things, if
they were true, and not at all punished, nor any satisfaction made; it might be
feared would provoke (by so much injustice) the wrath of God, who had delivered
that King (after so bloody a War) into their hands. They therefore humbly
entreat the Parliament, that they would not ungratefully throw away so many
miraculous deliverances of Almighty God, nor betray themselves and their
faithful friends, by deceitful Treaties, to an implacable Enemy.

This was the sense of all those Petitions, which, during the Treaty, were
daily presented to the Parliament, and by them laid aside. But at last, these
Desires prevailed; especially after that the Remonstrance of the Lord General,
and the General Council of Officers held at St. Albans the 16 of November 1648.
was presented to the Parliament on the 20 of the same November.

But by what means, or what degrees, it came at last so far, as that the King
was brought to trial, condemned, and beheaded: because the full search and
enarration of so great a business would make an History by it self, it cannot
well be brought into this BREVIARY; which having passed over so long a time,
shall here conclude.

FINIS.

