PErlegi hanc Concionem, eamque dignissimam judico quae publicam lucem aspiciat.

Geo. Stradling, S. Th. D. Reverendi in Christo Patris Gilberti Episc. Land.
Sacellanus domest.
Feb. 24. Anno Salut. 1661.
A SERMON Preached at the CONSECRATION OF The Right Reverend Father in God,
Herbert, Lord Bishop of Hereford.

By JASPER MAIN, D. D. Canon of Christ-Church, and one of His Majesty's
Chaplains in Ordinary.

JOHN 20. 21. As my Father sent Me, so send I You.

LONDON: Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1662.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, BRIAN, Lord Bishop of Winchester, Prelate
of the Honorable Order of the Garter, and Almoner to His Majesty.
My Honored Lord,
THose learned Jews and Christians, who have been curious to find out the
reason of some Visions in the Scripture, do affirm, That the Bush which Moses
saw unburnt in the midst of fire, was an Emblem of the Israelites then in
bondage to the Egyptians, who were not only preserved in the midst of
Persecutions, but thrived under their Oppressions, hard Tasks and heavy
Burdens; and grew more numerous from the politic Arts which strived to lessen
and destroy them: till at length God contrived them a miraculous Deliverance,
which with their Calamitios concluded in a Song.

When I look back upon our late suffering Times, (the saddest which I think any
History has recorded) where Oppression backed with Power made the Ruin of our
Church the horrid step and ladder to the Usurpation of the Crown; and where the
name of a Bishop was so criminal and odious, as to verify Tertullian's sad
complaint of his brutish Times, Nominis and vocabuli rei fuimus, We were made
guilty of a Word, and condemned for being Christians, and the style was punished
with public Sales and Sequestrations: and when withal I do consider, by what
unlookt-for way of Providence your Order and Religion, like a Treasure snatched
from shipwreck, were stupendiously restored after many years Confusion:
Methinks that Bush which Moses saw was the Emblem of our Church, kept safe by
Miracle in the midst of hungry fire: and the Ship in the Gospel was presented
to my eyes, where Christ and his Apostles were tossed in an hideous Storm; but he
waked and stilled the Winds, and put a calmness to the Sea.

In these days of public Calamity, I was curious to observe how several men
behaved themselves in struggling with their dangers. I saw some take for their
pattern the Prophet Jonas in a storm, who slept securely and untroubled when his
Shipwreck rolled about him. I saw others so much Cowards, that to preserve
their wretched Fortunes they compounded with the Tempest, and made a League and
Friendship with the Winds; nay, Servilely revived the Religion of those base
timorous Heathens, who worshipped every thing they feared, and sacrificed to
Furies, and built Altars to their Plagues. I saw others of a nobler and more
stout and Christian Temper (whose just reward is now to shine like Stars of
Honor in the Church) immovably resolute to maintain their Loyalty and
Conscience with the loss of their Lives, as they had already with their
Fortunes.

Yet, I hope, it will be no diminution of their Virtues, if I say, That your
Lordships Carriage in these Times of Persecution was to me most remarkable; who
by your happy Restitution, and addition of more Honor, have been made a
greater Bishop, but not a greater Person, then you were in your lowest ebb of
Fortune.

The payment of your Vow in your building of an Almshouse on the place where
you your self so ofter sat, not wanting of an Alms, but weeping over the
Prospect not then pleasant to your Eye, because your proper business there was
to ask the passers by, If ever there were sorrows like to the sorrows of this
Nation; Your large Bounty to the College of which I am a Member, which, if I
should name the Sum, would make the world believe you meant to found a new
College, and not complete an old; Your dying Liberalities bequeathed to others
in your Will, even to your meanest Servants, who were your servants in
distress, are things which do proclaim you a great and noble Benefactor. But
these are but the good deeds of your Fortune, done by the Bishop of Winchester,
the Charities of one possessed with plenty and abundance; your Rents and Manors
here share with you as Co-founders: and your new Almes-house might have it
written on the Walls, A poor Bishop vowed this House, but a great and wealthy
built it.

That which made you truly great and reverend in my eyes, was to look into your
noble Heart, your large and bounteous Mind, where your Good Deeds now, were
then but Wishes and Designs. You were truly great to me, when I saw you in your
Poverty anticipate your Almes-house, and be liberal at your door: and the poor
people in your House now, had then places at your Gate; when being reduced to
the last Cruse of Oil, you made the drops run to others; and when there was
but a handful of Meal left in the little Barrel, you then dealt your Loaf to
those who wanted daily bread. In short, when you had but two Coats left, to
give one to the naked; when you had hardly more then one Dish, to make the poor
your Guests; to see you walk up your Hill with not much money in your purse,
and return back with none; but then to think of laying up Treasures in Heaven,
when you had so little left on Earth, was a Charity which raised in me a
religious Admiration; and looked something like the Miracle wrought by our
Savior in the Gospel, where Multitudes were fed with two fishes and five
loaves.

Nor may I, without some Injustice to your Virtues, forbear to let the world
know, That I never saw Afflictions born with a more serene and even temper then
you did yours; who in the worst of Times stood like a firm unshaken Rock in
the midst of angry waves; your Courage still the same, unbroken or undisturbed
with any sad Disasters not more public then your own. The old Church of
England still kept up in your House, with all its Forms and Rites, though
publicly forbidden; Prayers constantly, and twice a day, read by you for the
King, at a time when such Devotions were made Treason by the Tyrant; and Weekly
Sermons preached before you, filled with so much Loyalty and Truth, as would any
where else have cast the Preacher into Bonds, if not sent him from his Pulpit
to the place of Execution.

To all this your Lordships continued Kindnesses to me, by which I can compute
my self almost grown aged in your Favors; your encouragement of my younger
Studies, which grew up under your Example; your Rescue of me from a Shipwreck
in the late undoing Times, when being tossed, and stripped of all, you were the
Plank to save me, and threw me out a line which drew me safe to shore; are
Reasons sufficient to let the World know, that of most sins I think Ingratitude
the worst.

Being therefore fairly invited at first to preach this Sermon, and since by
several Hearers of it to make it this way public, I beseech your Lordship to
allow it the shadow of your Wing; and to accept it, not as a full payment of my
Debts to you, (for this very Dedication of it sets me deeper on your score) but
as a Testimony how much greater my Desires are then my Abilities or Parts, to
let the World know how unfeignedly I am

Your Lordships Most obliged and very grateful Servant, JASPER MAIN.
Feb. 26. 1661.
1 TIMOTHY 4. 14. Neglect not the Gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
Prophecy, with the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery.
THE PREFACE.
AS in the raising of the noblest Heights and Buildings, that they may be
exact, and gain a reverence from the Eye, great preparations are made toward
the Erection of the Pile; the best Masters in that Art are taken into counsel,
and Vitruvius is consulted to assist it with his Rules; Platforms are drawn,
and Models are contrived, that what was but a Scheme may be brought into a
Structure: Which made Aristotle say, when he spoke like a Philosopher, but so
as that his saying holds in Architecture too, That a material House or Palace
springs from an immaterial; and the Pile, which is the creature of the Workmans
Tool without, was first shaped and formed by some designing mind within:
Lastly, as when the materials are all ready and prepared, some are set on work
to hew and square the Stones, others to dispose them into their several seats
and stations, others to oversee that the Workmen do their Duties, and that all
things be done regularly as the Surveyors shall direct: So God has proceeded
by the same course and method, in the designing, shaping, forming and building
of his Church.

Upon whose rude beginnings if we cast our eyes, as it first appeared in the
times before the Law, though it began with the World, and be as ancient as
Mankind, and had the same Cornerstone laid which now supports the Building, in
the promised Seed, which was to bruise the Serpents head; yet that Cornerstone
being wrapped up in a Mystery, and many thousand years required to remove the
Veil and Cloud, 'twas but then a Church creeping forth out of the Quarrey,
without a hand to give it its just feature and perfection. It Is true indeed,
the Light of Nature, helped by the light and guidance of Tradition, sufficiently
informed men that God was to be worshipped; but the way or manner how, the work
and person of the Priest, the time when, the place where, with what holy Forms
and Rites, was left wholly to their Reason to discover and find out.

So that in the state of Nature the case stood with Religion, as some have
observed it did with the first Essays in Painting; unskilful men at first drew
faces with a Coal, to which aftertimes found Colors, and gave beauty by
their Pencil. Or, if you will hear me speak in the language of a Poet, in this
imperfect state of Nature the case stood with God in a way of Service and
Religion, as it did with the first Jupiter at Rome; Aedibus exiguis habitabat
Jupiter ingens,
Inque Jovis dextra fictile fulmen erat.
He was so rustickly adored, that a Thatcht. Cottage was his Temple, where he
stood holding an Farthen Thunder in his hand.

To redeem himself from so much rudeness of Devotion, and to contrive a Worship
some way worthy of his Greatness, in the times of the Law he chose unto himself
a select, peculiar People, which he formed into a Church; and placed it for
some Ages like a City on a Hill, to invite the erring World to be its
Proselytes and Converts. His Service here below was taught to move like the
Heavens above, in a well-tuned harmony and music of the Spheres. A High Priest
was appointed, and the Miter set upon his head; and inferior Priests and
Levites had their lower Orbs assigned them. Sacrifices were prescribed, and the
business of the Temple proportioned and cut out to the several Orders and
Degrees of those, who thus distinguished were to wait upon the Altar: and the
distinction was so sacred, and the several bounds so set, that as the Levite
was not to invade the Office of the Priest, so those inferior Priests who
broke beyond their bounds, and attempted to invade the Office of the
High Priest, were not said to offer Sacrifice, but strange fire before the
Lord, and perished for their boldness with their Censers in their hands: To let
us see, that God was then the God of Order, and turned such men's Oblations into
their ruin and destruction.

Yet the Jewish Church thus modelled by Almighty God himself, was but the
imperfect draught and platform of a much holier Church to come. 'Twas but like
their Tabernacle, their House of Offerings and Oblations, a moveable Pavilion,
or Tent fitted for a march toward a Land of Promise, not yet discovered to
their eye; where that transitory Building, that Temple made of threads, was to
be taken down to make way for one more lasting. In short, as it is observed,
(and it is St. Austins Observation) That in the forming of the Jewish Church the
platform was first drawn, and presented in a holy Scheme to Moses in the Mount;
so when that Scheme or Platform was wrought into a Fabric, when that which was
a Pattern became a bodied Truth, even that glorious Church, in the midst of all
its splendor, was but a type and shadow of the Christian Church to come. Some
of the old lines were indeed to be preserved, but with the addition of new
colors drawing nearer to the life; a High Priest was to be retained, but with
his Robes and Miter changed; the Order of Aaron was to pass into the Order of
Melchisedeck; no longer to remain the Priest of one private, single People, but
to be the public Priest of all the Nations in the World. The inferior Priests
and Levites too were to shift and change their Ephods, and to pass into the
Christian Presbyter and Deacon.

And now to hold you no longer in the Porch and Entrance of this Sermon, but to
draw this large Circle to its intended Point and Center; to reduce those
Shadows into Substance, and those Platforms into Building; to form a new Church
out of the ruins of an old, stupendous in the raising, and eternal in
duration; to make the Scripture-Prophecy become true authentic Story, and the
Glory of the second Temple to eclipse and drown the first; to break down the
Partition Wall which divided Jews from Gentiles; to square disproportioned
Subjects, and unite all Nations in one Faith, and by one common Gospel to bring
them to Salvation; was a Work reserved for none but Christ the Son of God
himself. Who, as he was before designed to be the Head of this new Church, so,
that he might be the Founder and Foundation of it, the chief Cornerstone and
great Master Builder too, all the Powers of Heaven did help to carry on the
Work.

I think I need not tell you, that the Gospel, like the Law, was at first
proclaimed by the Ministry of Angels; that Jacobs dream and vision was made by
them true story; a Ladder was set up which reached from Earth to Heaven, and
they ascending and descending with sacred Messages to Men. Nay, the Holy Ghost
himself, who foretold this in the old Testament, was most busily employed to
fulfill it in the new: every Sermon preached was attended with a miracle; and
the Doctrine signed and ratified with holy prodigies and wonders; the Preachers
all inspired with gifts proportioned to their Work, and enabled by those gifts
to go and teach all Nations. Nay, so sollicitous and careful was this holy
Spirit of God to provide fit Successors to those inspired and gifted Teachers,
that for many years after the first plantation of the Gospel, not a Bishop was
installed or admitted to his Chair, not a Pastor to his Charge, not a Deacon to
his Table, which was not first designed, and named, and qualified by him. And
this I might prove to you by several places of the Scripture, but none more
clear then this which I have chosen for my Text; where St. Paul says to one of
those new consecrated Bishops, Neglect not the Gift that is in thee, which was
given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery.

IN which words you have these considerable Parts. The Division.
First, the Person here consecrated to the sacred Office of a Bishop: that was
Timothy, expressed in this word Thee. Next, his Qualification for that divine and
sacred Office: he was a Gifted man, a man fitted for that Honor; expressed in
this word (...), The Gift that is in thee. Thirdly, his Conge D'Eslire, or
Designation to that Office by the Holy Ghost, Author of that Gift: 'twas given
him (...), by the prediction of the Prophets. Fourthly, the Form of his
Consecration to that Office: the holy Ghost designed him, but the Church gave
him Ordination; 'twas done by the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery.
Lastly, St. Paul's fatherly Advice to him for his Deportment in that Office; in
these words, Neglect not the Gift which was thus bestowed upon thee. Of these
in this order; and first of the Person, that was Timothy, expressed in this word
Thee.

The Person.
that none but one who was compounded of both Natures was fit to reconcile
them, or to be a Mediator; so in reconciling the Jews to the Gentiles, to make
them piece and join in one united Church, none was so fit to procure a good
liking and agreement, as one in whom both parties had an equal Interest and
claim.

Now of all the men designed by God to accomplish that great Work, I know none
in all kinds so well fitted and proportioned as this holy man, the Bishop in
this Text; whose very birth disposed him to break down Partition-walls, and to
be a Reconciler of both parties from the womb.

For, if we enquire into his Original or Birth, as it is set down in the
Church-book, Acts 16. his Mother was a Jewess, but a Jewess made a Christian;
and his Father was a Greek, but well-affected to the Jews, as you may read in
the first Verse of that Chapter: not a Greek Hellenist, or Jew bred in Greece,
called so from the Grecian Language which he spoke; nor a Greek in the Grecian
sense, a man opposed to a Barbarian: but a Greek in the general acception of
the Scripture, which divides the whole World of men into two Members, Jews and
Greeks. For, if we may give credit to the Syriack Translator, he was Aramaeus,
that is, no Greek, but Syrian: or as the Latin Interpreter more largely has
described him, he was Homo Gentilis, that is, no Jew, but Gentile.

And as his Birth did thus prepare him to preach the Gospel to all Nations, so
St. Paul, who well knew the advantage of this mixture, and how readily a Jew
would hearken to a Jew, and a Gentile be persuaded by one who was a Gentile, to
make his Capacity more passable and current, thought fit to circumcise him,
though he were before a Christian; as you may read at the fourth Verse of that
Chapter. That by employing one to preach who was a baptized Jew, and one who
withal was a circumcised Believer, all prejudices might be stopped, and no
objection left to hinder or obstruct the free passage of his Sermons. For that
this was the reason why he circumcised him, namely, not to oblige him to
observe and keep the Law, but to remove obstructions from his preaching of the
Gospel, is evident from the end and close of that Verse, which says, that St.
Paul in a holy prudence did it, because They all knew that his Father was a
Greek.

And certainly, as St. Paul by this action, this politic design, gained justly
to himself the reputation of that style, which he bestows upon himself, of
being (...), A wise Master Builder, in the third Chapter of his first Epistle
to the Corinthians, at the tenth Verse; one who knew how to fit his Tools to
his Matter, to hew rude Subjects to his Ends, and to give them shape and form,
so as to work upon the tempers of disagreeing Minds: so no passage more
confirms that rare Description of his Art, which he makes in the 9. Chapter of
that Epistle, at the 20. Verse and forwards, where he says, That he became all
things to all men; as a Jew to the Jews, and as a Gentile to the Gentiles; to
them under the Law as a man locked up in shackles, to them without Law as at
perfect liberty and freedom: And all this to compass his great Catholic
Design, which was to bring, if possible, both parties to salvation.

Next then, as his Birth did much contribute to his Function, so his Education
contributed much more. He was bred in a Family upon which Religion seemed
entailed, where Piety ran in a blood, and lineally descended, like Virtue of
Inheritance, from the Parents to the Child. St. Paul speaking of his Mother
Eunice, and his Grandmother Lois, in the 1. Chapter of his 2. Epistle to him,
at the 5. Verse, says, It very much rejoiced him to find the same unfeigned
Faith in him, which in a holy Pedigree he received and took from them.

And certainly, as ill Example has the power to convey hereditary Vices, to
infect by being seen, and to corrupt by imitation; nay, as Vice in the Parent
has such an influence on the Child, as to think it disobedience where the
Parent is a sinner, not to be as wicked and as great a sinner too: (As the
young Virgin in the Poet seeing her unchaste, lascivious Mother write Letters to
her loose Adulterer and Servant, thought her self obliged to think Chastity a
sin, and so learnt in time to write such Letters too; or as the young
Gentleman, whose Father was a Gamester, learnt to handle Dice, and stake whole
Manors at a Throw) So good Example has the like power to infect by being
seen, and Virtues may like Vices be made hereditary too.

But besides those seeds of Virtue sown in him by his Parents, St. Paul himself
had been his Tutor, and had the forming of his manners; he was bred up in his
School to that ripeness and perfection, that he superscribes this Epistle to
him as to one begotten by him: To Timothy my Son, says he; nay, (...), To
Timothy my own Son, says our English Translation.

But the word (...) in the Greek, if we may believe St. Jerome, is a word to
which no other Tongue can find a word to match it; a word which in all kinds
signifies the Son to have such a near resemblance to the Father, as almost to
confirm the Opinion of Andreas Dudithius, who, in his book De Conjugio
Presbyterorum, maintains that St. Paul was married and had children, like St.
Peter. Of which, but that we know his Father was a Greek, the word (...) might
persuade us that this Timothy was one.

Indeed the resemblance between them was so great, that as in other births and
natural generations the marks to distinguish the true-born from the spurious
are the likeness of the child in shape and visage to the parent, Sic oculos,
sic ille manus, sic or a ferebat; If he have his Fathers eyes and cheeks,
looks, hands and gestures too, we may conclude him genuine, and the Parent
twice the same: So St. Jerome in his close Interpretation of that word,
proceeds by a distinction, which holds comparatively true; St. Paul had many
Sons, says he, whom he converted to the Faith, as the Corinthians and
Ephesians, whom he vouchsafes to call his Sons: But the style of (...), or
Filius germanus, the style of true-born Son, so in all things like himself, as
not to be more the Son of the Parents that begot him, then he was his morum
filius, the Offspring of his Mind, so furnished with his virtues, so
accomplished with his gifts, so zealous in his preaching, so valiant in
afflictions, so active in his spreading the Gospel through the World, was a
style bestowed on none but this Timothy and Titus: As if all others were his
Bastard-sons, begot upon some Hagar, and only these two were legitimate. It is
St. Jerome says so.

In short, as likeness in manners begets a dearness in affections, and as a
friendship in affections begets a likeness in engagements; so St. Paul made him
his Fellow Laborer and Associate. When the Decrees of the Apostles were to be
dispersed, made in their general Council assembled at Jerusalem, this Timothy
was chosen to assist him in his Travels; as you may read in the 16. Chapter of
the Acts, at the 4. Verse. When an Evangelist was to be sent to confirm those
distant Churches, which St. Paul himself had planted, but was not able to
re-visit, this Timothy was sent as his Deputy-Lieutenant; as you may read in
several Epistles to those Churches.

To all this, such a holy prudence shined forth in all his actions, his Morals
were so good and so seasoned with Religion, that his Name was like that
precious Ointment in the Scripture, still breathing forth perfumes in all
places where he came: For, he was well reported of, he was above all reproach
and scandal; as you may read at the 3. Verse of that Chapter.

And of such Instruments as this did the Holy Ghost make choice to be Preachers
of the Gospel, and Rulers in the Church: Men, whose Life as well as Doctrine
was still Sermon to the People; men, who confuted Vice not more by argument and
reason, then by their blameless carriage and virtuous conversation. 'Twas
against the Economy and Discipline of Heaven, to send men into Gods Vineyard
who went drunk into the Field; and who minded not the vine, but the vintage,
grape and wine. And the Holy Ghost himself had erred, had he given his Pearls
to Swine, to the sensual or intemperate, still wallowing in the mire: or had he
taken his holy things, and cast them unto Dogs; no sooner eased of one
distemper, but returning to another. No cloven Tongues of fire did sit upon
their heads, whose tempers were still cloven, still kindling Flames and
Factions, still breaking of Gods people into divisions, rents and schisms. The
gift of Knowledge was not dropped upon the ambitious, proud, high-minded; their
Bladder swelled too much, and was too much puffed up before. To him that has
shall be given, was the Rule Gods Spirit went by; and more gifts were given to
him who had well employed the former. Which leads me on to the (...), or Gift,
here in this Text, and comes in the next place to crave a room in your
Attentions.

The Saying of our Savior Christ when he His Qualification.
in the 10. Chapter of St. Luke at the 2. Verse, The Harvest truly is great,
but the Laborers are few; that to increase their number, and to fit them for
the work, the Holy Ghost was fain to interest himself in the choice of workmen,
and the qualifying of them too: His work and business 'twas to send men into
the Field, and to teach them how to manage and use their Sickle too.

The Men already chosen, if their number had been greater, where a World was to
be converted, were too disproportioned for the Harvest. Besides, they wanted
parts for so great an undertaking; unless they could have done like the man in
Eunapius a Greek Historian, who tells us of one Aedesius, who had so much the
Spirit of Divination in his power, that he would but clap a Wreath of Laurel on
his head, and straight speak by Inspiration, straight put himself in Raptures,
and utter learned Oracles, to the great amazement of the Hearers.

The Apostles were not all bred at the feet of Gamaliel, but were as yet
unlearned, men called from mending Nets, fitter to deal with Fishes, and to put
forth a Boat to Sea, then to cast their Nets on Land, and there catch men in
the Enclosure. Besides, being Jews, they were hardly fit to preach to Jews; for
where was their gift of Miracles to work upon the Jews, who were only to be
gained by Miracles and Wonders? Had they preached to the Gentiles, where was
their gift of Tongues, to preach to all Nations, who could speak no Tongues but
one? Had Christ sent to Athens to stock himself with Preachers, he might have
found great Scholars there, but hard to be persuaded to forsake their own
Schools, and to list themselves in his: Nay, these for some Ages were the
greatest Enemies of the Faith; men who measured Truth by Aristotle's Precepts,
and would believe no more then what some Plato taught: Nay, men who, like
Porphyrius, called the Christian Religion Barbaram philosophiam, A barbarous
Philosophy; A new Doctrine creeping forth into the World by the foolishness of
Preaching; afraid to enter combat with any rational Dispute, or to endure a
trial where right Reason was opponent. According to that which St. Paul has
delivered in the first Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, at 22,
23. Verses, where he says, The Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after
wisdom. That is, the Jews would believe no more of the Gospel then they saw
confirmed by miracle, and proved by signs and wonders: And the learned Greeks
or Gentiles would admit no more then they saw confirmed by Syllogism, and
proved by Demonstration. In this scarcity of Preachers then, to win upon all
parties, and to captivate both Jews and Gentiles to the obedience of the
Gospel, the Holy Ghost poured forth his gifts, proportioned to the work which
each man was to do, as Time, Place and Country needed: To one was given the
Word of Wisdom, to another the Word of Knowledge, to another Prophecy, to
another the gift of Healing, to another the gift of Miracles, to another the
gift to discern true Prophets from the false, to another the gift of Tongues,
to another the gift to interpret the sense and meaning of those Tongues: And
all these wrought that one and self-same Spirit, (...), for the building of the
Church; as you may read in the 12. Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, the 11. first Verses.

Now in the distribution and imparting of those gifts, unless it were our
Savior Christ the Son of God himself, in whom this holy Spirit had no limit,
bound or measure, he never did pour forth himself in such overflowing gifts as
he did on the Apostles, the first Preachers of the Gospel. The old Prophets had
him sparingly, more sprinkled then poured forth; he was to them a little Brook,
to these a full-tide Sea; he fell in single drops on them, on these in
full-grown showers. Besides, they had him but sometimes, these to themselves
and heirs: they were able, like a firm Estate, to bequeath him in their Wills,
and to make him their gift to others, as he was his own gift to them; for
wherever they laid their Hands the holy Ghost still followed. The gift of
Tongues, of Prophecy, of Miracles and Healing, were as naturally diffused by
them as the Sun sheds light and beams.

And now I speak of Miracles, methinks the persons were the greatest, upon whom
this holy Spirit did thus pour forth his gifts. That men not bred to Letters
should suddenly grow wise, and be every one a School and Athens to himself; to
be able to maintain Disputes with great Scholars of all Sects; to make a
Sadducee confess there was a Resurrection, and to make a Pharisee recant his
false glosses on the Law; nay, to make Aristotle's school send forth Disciples
unto Christ, and to erect a new Church in Plato's Commonwealth; to see a Zeno
or Chrysippus surrender up his Chair, and sit at the feet of a poor Fisherman
inspired; to hear an Apollos so eloquent in Preaching, as if some Tully or
Demosthenes were got up into the Pulpit; to hear men speak all Languages, who
had learned no Tongue but one, so as to be thought Natives in all Countries
where they came, and who traveled through the World, yet never went from home;
lastly, to see a plain unskilful man, who never heard of Galen, and to whom
Hippocrates was utterly unknown, without the help of medicines do Cures beyond
the power of Physic, to cure Palsies, Fevers, Dropsies, Gouts, by the bare
virtue of a Word; to make blind men see, and lame men walk, by virtue of a
Touch; nay, to make their shadows do the business of Physicians, and to cure
all Diseases by their bare shadows passing by: These, these indeed were gifts
which bore down the World before them; these changed the face of Empires, and
gave new form to States; converted Heathens into Christians, and Idolaters to
Saints.

Now, whether all these gifts, or any one of these, were the (...) or gift here
given to this Bishop, because this Text is silent, I cannot well determine.
Grotius thinks it was the gift of Tongues; and perhaps his reason was, because
being an Evangelist and Co-adjutor to St. Paul, whose task and business 'twas
to preach the Gospel to all Nations, this could not well be done without the
Language of all Nations.

Others think it was the gift of Wisdom, by which without the help of Books he
was inspired with Knowledge. But then why did St. Paul, in the Verse next
before this Text, bid him improve himself by study, and addict himself to
reading and exhortation till he came? Where by Reading sure is meant the Theory
of Knowledge, by Exhortation the exercise and reduction of it into practice.

Others therefore think, that here is meant the gift of Healing. But then St.
Chrysostoms dispute in his Homily on that Text, Drink no longer Water, but use
a little Wine for thy Stomachs sake and often Infirmities, will deserve to be
considered, and to have the Question asked, Why, if he had the gift of Healing,
did he not heal himself? unless this may be an Answer, That being but a Novice,
or young man, endued with the gifts and parts of old, God would not give him
leave to cure this weakness in himself, lest his gift of Knowledge should
swell and puff him up. Since the gifts of the holy Ghost are not so secure from
danger, but that they may degenerate into highmindednesse and pride.

Nay, this it seems was St. Paul's very case; who though he had the gift of
healing to that miraculous degree, as to be able to raise men from the dead;
yet after his strange Rapture up into the third Heaven, after all the glorious
Visions and Revelations of that place, lest he should be exalted above the
measure of a man, A thorn in the flesh, called the Messenger of Satan, was sent
to buffet him, and to humble him again: in the 12. Chapter of the 2. Epistle to
the Corinthians, at the 7. Verse. Where some too injuriously, and too
unchastely too, by that thorn in the flesh conceive some concupiscence or lust;
but he himself calls it an infirmity or weakness, for which his gift of
Healing could not contrive a cure; as you may gather from the 8, and 9. Verses
of that Chapter.

But now after all this which I hitherto have said, what if the (...), or gift,
here mentioned in this Text, were none of all these, but the very Office of a
Bishop, here given him by Prophecy, with the laying on of hands? Certainly, if
those ancient Fathers and great Lights of the Church, who living near the
Springhead did see the stream run clear, wrote not by a false light, which
deceived themselves and others; St. Jerome, Ambrose, Haymo, Primasius, and some
others, in which number was Lyranus, were of this Opinion. Nay, the 2. Canon of
the Nicene Council, the 18. Canon of the Council of Ancyra, the 101. Canon of
the Council called in Africa, do speak as if those Fathers did either make
those Canons, or did inspire the pen of the Scribe or Register who wrote them.
And truly, if I may join Historians to those Councils and those Fathers,
Eusebius in his 6. Book and 8. Chapter, Socrates in his 7. Book and 41.
Chapter, do make the word (...), the last word in this Text, bear the same
sense and meaning with (...), which signifies not a Presbytery of Elders, but
the very Office of an Elder, ordained and made a Bishop.

Indeed this Text in Greek, if we transpose the words a little, does seem to
favor this Opinion, and may be made to run thus; (...). That is, Neglect not
the gift of Eldership which is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, with
the laying on of Hands. Where it would not be hard to prove to you by the best
primitive Records, That the word Eldership, where ere it is used in the Writings
of the New Testament, signifies the dignity and office of a Bishop.

Nay, if you will hear me quote a more authentic Author then all these, not
for his integrity, (for he was no friend to Bishops) nor yet for his parts,
(for St. Jerome sure had greater) but for his authority, which ought not to be
questioned, when the Enemy of a cause bears witness to the Truth; Mr. Calvin
himself was of this Opinion; who in the 4. Book of his Institutions, and the 3.
Chapter, has translated this Greek Text into this modern Latin, Fac ut gratia
quam per manuum impositionem accepisti, cum te Presbyterum crearem, non sit
irrita. Take heed the grace or favor which was bestowed upon thee by the
laying on of Hands, when I made thee a Presbyter, were not given thee in vain.
Where though he do mistake the word (...) for (...), which signifies a grace or
favor, as the other does a gift; yet he did not err when he made both words
agree in this, that in this place they signify an Office given by the Church.

But what need I quote Authorities either ancient or more modern, when I have a
clear demonstration of Gods Spirit, that by the gift here in this place is
meant an Office given? For does not St. Paul remove all Clouds, and lend a
Sunbeam to this Text, in the 4. Chapter of the Ephesians, from the 8. to the
12. Verse? Does he not there strike one of the chief strings in David's harp,
and say, That Christ ascended up on high, that he led captivity captive, and
that he gave gifts to men? And what were those gifts? The 11. Verse resolves
you; they were the several Offices and Orders in his Church: He gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and some Teachers; as
you may read in that place. And all this for the perfecting of the Saints, for
the work of the Ministry, for the building of his Church; as the End is expressed
in the 12. Verse of that Chapter.

Only by the way I cannot but observe, That in the bestowing of those gifts,
those Church- Offices and Functions, as none were to partake them without
commission from the Church; so lest the Church should err in the admission of
the persons, they still brought their Letters Testimonial from Gods Spirit. He
first by some Prophet designed and named them to their Office, before the
Church drew up their Patent, by the Imposition of their Hands. Which is the
Conge D'Eslire, or third part of this Text, namely, the Prophecies which marked
out this Bishop for his See.

Prophet 'twas, His Designation.
or whether one or many, by whom the holy Ghost designed this Bishop to his
Office, is wrapped up in a Cloud which affords no light to see by. But sure 'twas
none of the old Prophets, who though they were called Seers, yet this person
stood too distant to fall within their view. And because the name of the new
Prophet is not set down in particular, the most we can do is to seek for him by
conjecture.

In the 21. Chapter of the Acts, at the 8, 9. Verses, it is said, that St. Paul
in his Travels with this Disciple in his Train, came to Caesarea, where dwelt
Philip the Evangelist; Into whose house they entered, and abode there many
days: And that Philip had four daughters, Virgins, which did prophecy. Again,
it is said at the 10, 11. Verses of that Chapter, that Whilst they staid there,
a certain Prophet named Agabus came down from Judaea, who prophesied against
Paul's going to Jerusalem. Now the circumstances of Persons, Time and Place thus
laid together, have made it probable to some, that some one of these
She-prophetesses, conversing daily with him, or that Agabus, who forewarned St.
Paul of his imprisonment and bonds, were opportunely moved by Gods Spirit in
that place, to nominate this Timothy to his Bishopric and Charge, of which St.
Paul no longer could be an Over-seer.

And great reason there was why the Prophets should have a hand in all such
sacred Nominations; who standing next to the Apostles in the Bill and Catalogue
of Honor, (for there were first Apostles, then Prophets, then Evangelists,
then Pastors) As an Evangelist was a (...), a Fellow Laborer or Assistant to a
traveling Apostle in the dispersion of the Gospel; so when he was to fix and
settle in some one certain place, and from an itinerant Preacher or Evangelist
was to pass into a Bishop, for order sake some Prophet, who stood next in rank
above him, was to recommend him to the Consecration of the Church, to point him
out his Diocese where he was to reside, with the full power of an Apostle fixed
and seated to his charge. So that the business of those Prophets was partly to
foretell the contingent future accidents which were to happen in the Church,
partly to provide fit Guides and Rulers for it.

But whoever the Prophet was (for it is but Curiosity to search) the same holy
Spirit which did consecrate our Savior to be the Head of the Church, and to
publish his own Gospel, in the 4. Chapter of St. Luke at the 18. Verse, where
he says, and quotes the Prophet Esaias for it, The spirit of the Lord is upon
me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel; and the same holy Spirit
who commissioned the Apostles to go and plant a Church in all Nations of the
World; the same holy Spirit, I say, did direct and guide the Church in the
choice of the persons who were to follow and succeed them.

For here if I may draw waters from the same Fountains and Spring-heads from
whence others have poured forth their Discourses on this subject, In the first
Age of the Church, when 'twas but yet a tender plant, the first business of
the Apostles was in their Travels through the World, to convert it from
Idolatry, and to gain Proselytes to Christ. When the number of Believers was
every where increast, and the name of Christian, which at first began at
Antioch, was every where dispersed as far as Words were Names of persons; the
next business of the Apostles (whose commission like the Sun's was never to
stand still or settle in one place, but still to move like him from one
Country to another) was to mould their new Believers into well-form'd and
governed Churches, especially in great Cities, such as Ephesus and Corinth; and
to appoint them Overseers, who should both teach and rule the Flock: lest
being left like Sheep without a Shepherd to o'relook them, they either should
be swallowed up by their own Heresies and Schisms, or should break out of the
Fold, and relapse back again to Heathens.

These Overseers, or, as the Scripture calls them, (...), These Bishops of the
Flock, they were compelled to choose out of their new Converts and Disciples;
who in that infancy of time, that famine of great Parts, were generally men
whose Faith was far greater then their Knowledge; men not bred in Schools,
unskilled in Tongues and Arts, especially the Art (...), the Art of Ruling
well. Indeed they were such men as St. Paul describes in that mean and humble
Map which he drew of those Times, in the first Chapter of his first Epistle to
the Corinthians, at the 26. and 27. Verses, where he says, Ye see your
calling, Brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty,
not many noble are called: But God has chosen the foolish things of the World
to confound the wise, and weak things of the World to confound the mighty; and
base things, and things despised, and things that are not, has God chosen, to
annihilate and bring to naught the things that are.

To supply this great Defect, the holy Ghost was fain to assist the very
Apostles in the making of their choices, and to furnish men with gifts and
parts which might fit them for Elections. Nay, the persons generally were so
ungifted, raw, unlearned, in all kinds so unfit to rule or govern in the
Church, that he was fain to qualify them in a way of new creation, to make
Things which were not bring to naught the things that were; to give form to
shapelesse matter, to change their Ignorance to Knowledge, to make unwise men
wise, and to raise their Wisdom out of nothing; to call Light out of Darkness,
and then divide it into Stars; to make those learned Shepherds who were but
lately Sheep, able to defend their Flocks from the most fierce and learned
Wolves: In short, to call a Church out of a Chaos, and give a beauty to
confusion; to dispose the several parts into well-tuned Orbs and Spheres; to
place great Lights in this new Firmament, which were to rule the Day, and
lesser Lights to drive and chase away the Night; was a Work which required the
Illumination of Gods Spirit, to hold a Torch to those who had else stood in the
dark.

And this is that which St. Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Theodoret, Theophylact, and
many other ancient Writers have very well observed. For St. Chrysostom in his
Comment upon this very Text says, that in this childhood, this nonage of the
Church, (...), That nothing was done as Man's Wisdom did direct; (...), but by
the direction of Gods Spirit: whose business 'twas not only (...), to foretell
things to come; (...), but to reveal things present too, especially in the
choice of fit Rulers in the Church. Clemens Romanus speaking of those Rulers
says, That the first Bishops which were made were made by the Apostles, (...),
having tried them by the Spirit. Oecumenius also speaks as if the other held
his pen, and says almost in the same form of words, (...), The first Bishops
were made Bishops by the appointment of Gods Spirit. Thus St. Paul and Barnabas
were of Preachers made Apostles, Act. 13. 2. thus Titus was made Metropolitan
of Creet, Tit. 1. 5. and thus Timothy in this Text was made the first Ephesian
Bishop, (...), by the Spirit of God designing of him by the Prophets.

Nay, Eusebius in the third Book of his Ecclesiastical History, taking Clemens
of Alexandria for his Chronologer and Warrant, says, That this way of making
Bishops, by the Appointment of Gods Spirit, was observed in the Church till the
death of St. John, who after his return from his banishment to Ephesus, being
entreated by the Church there to provide for succession, went through all the
Regions near in a holy Visitation, (...), and ordained such a Clergy as the
holy Ghost revealed. So that they who have been curious to compute St. John's
return, which was in the Reign of Nerva, the 98. year of Christ, 30. years
after St. Paul's martyrdom, do reckon, That from the day of Pentecost, in which
the holy Ghost descended on the Apostles in cloven Tongues of fire, to the time
of St. John's death, which was in the 100. year of Christ, this way of making
Bishops by the designation of Gods Spirit, continued in the Church 66. years
complete.

At which time the Church having taken general root, and from a grain of
Mustard Seed being become a spacious Tree, able to diffuse it self without
Miracles and Wonders, those gifts of Gods Spirit which had brought it to this
Growth, and had every where furnished it with Rulers sent from Heaven, like the
Manna in the Scripture, ceast to fall on those who had now the Promised Land
given to them in possession.

But yet though all this be true, we are not to suppose that Gods Spirit did so
wholly ingrosse this business to himself, as to obtrude those new Rulers on
the Church without their Allowance and Approbation too. He only did direct and
name and recommend them; 'twas left to the Church to admit them to their Cures:
he but designed the Persons, the Church gave them Ordination, by the laying on
of the Hands of the Presbytery. Which describes to us the Form of this Bishops
Consecration, and comes in the fourth place to be considered and examined.

It Is observed, that the Spirit of God, who Jewish Church spoke by the several
sparklings of those precious stones or Jewels, The form of his Consecration.
which shined in the Breast Plate of Aaron the Highpriest, where a Diamond and
Amethyst gave Oracles and Answers, and an Agate might be reckoned into the
number of the Prophets, removed those precious stones into the twelve Apostles,
and made them twelve Foundation- stones in the new Building of Christ's Church;
as you may read in the 21. Chapter of the Revelation, at the 18, 19. Verses.

Certainly, whatever in that Church conduced to Piety and Order, whatever might
be made a pattern for religious Imitation, the Christian Church transcribed as
holy Platformes of their building. The Waters of Baptism, the Bread and Wine in
the other Sacrament, the Distinction of their Hierarchy into Higher Priests
and Lower, and the Ordination of those Priests by the laying on of Hands, were
borrowed and translated from the old Temple to the new.

In the pursuit and handling of which last, namely, the laying on of Hands,
(which is the proper Theme and Subject of this Text) two things I will observe
to you: First, the several Ends and Uses to which it was applied: next, who the
Persons were who were commissioned to apply it.

First, as for the several Ends and Uses of this Ceremony, in the times of the
Old Testament 'twas sometimes made use of in a way or form of Blessing. Thus
Jacob laid his hands upon the two sons of Joseph, and blessed them on his
Deathbed; in the 48. Chapter of Genesis, at the 14. Verse. Nay, in this way of
blessing, if we may believe Lipsius in his Book De Cruce, or several sorts of
Crosses, the same holy Spirit who revealed the Shiloh to him, the promised
Messiah, Christ, who suffered on the Cross, did direct and guide his Hands to
do something like a Christian: for in laying his right hand on the younger Son,
and his left hand on the elder, the cross postures of the Children on whom he
laid his hands, made his Imposition bear the figure of a Cross.

Next, this laying on of hands was sometimes made use of in the making and
creation of a great Minister of State. Thus Moses did choose Josuah to succeed
him in his Power, in the 27. Chapter of Numbers, at the last Verse. And thus
Senators were admitted into the great Sanedrim or Council, (...), by the laying
on of the hands of some of the elder Senators; as the Thalmudists report.

In the New Testament this Ceremony was as diversely applied. Our Savior Christ
laid his hands upon the little children brought unto him, and blessed them, says
the Text, of which this was the mark and sign; in the 10. Chapter of St. Mark,
at the 16. Verse. 'Twas also made use of in the Visitation of the Sick; in the
16. Chapter of St. Mark, at the 18. Verse. But it never was omitted in the
Consecration of a Bishop, Ordination of a Priest, nay, of a Deacon too. Only
to make it the more solemn and effectual, the Church added usually their
Prayers and Fastings too. Thus Saint Paul was made a Preacher by the laying on
of hands, in the 9. Chapter of the Acts, at the 12. Verse. And thus Saint Paul
and Barnabas were of Preachers made Apostles: the Elders and Prophets which
were at Antioch having fasted, and prayed, and laid their hands upon them, sent
them away; in the 13. Chapter of the Acts, at the 3. Verse. And thus Timothy in
this Text was made the first Bishop of Ephesus, (...), by the laying on of
Hands.

But why by the laying on of Hands? some disputing men have asked. Why by such
a Form, such a Ceremony as this? Why not by a License drawn up in Writing
from the Church? Nay, says the Independent Preacher, by a License from the
State? I must confess the Question is not so hardly answered as his, who asked
what God did before he made the World, what kind of Fruit 'twas by which our
first Parents fell, where they had the Needle which stitched their Leaves
together, or where they had the Thread before the Art of Spinning was found out.
For here suppose I should reply, and give this for an Answer, That 'twas Gods
Will to have it so, so directing by his Spirit: Who then art thou, O Man, who
dare dispute with God? Must the Potter give a Reason of his Actions to his
Clay?

But God, who made the World in Number, Weight and Measure, who never did a
thing superfluous or vain, but made Order to distinguish his Creation from a
Chaos, without which his six days Works had still lain in a confusion,
proceeded by a Reason, nay, a multitude of Reasons, in this way of giving Order
to his Church.

For, First, what would men have him do? Issue forth commissions to the Rulers
of his Church, as he did to the Apostles, in Miracles and Wonders? Had he gone
no further, he must have still wrought Wonders, to persuade the doubting World
that they were Rulers sent by him. And so when such Miracles, such Signs and
Wonders ceast, the Church for want of Miracles must have wanted Rulers, and
then for want of Rulers must have ceast to be a Church. The Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, which I mentioned to you before, though they made men fit, and prepared
them to be Rulers; yet being invisible, secret, and unseen, without some
outward mark to make them owned and known, to those who knew them not would
but have past for private Spirit, not able to gain public faith to the persons
thus commissioned.

Some outward Mark was needful then to let the People know who the Persons were
whom God designed to be their Guides. As to let the Jews know that Christ was
to be their Head, the Holy Ghost descended on him in the figure of a Dove; and
to let all Nations know who were to be their Teachers, in the sight of all
Nations then assembled at Jerusalem, the Holy Ghost fell on the Apostles in
cloven Tongues of fire: So to let after-Ages know who were to be their Leaders,
the same Holy Ghost appointed the laying on of Hands, as the way and form of
issuing forth his commissions by the Church. And the Reasons of this Ceremony
were yet more clearly these.

There be two ways, says the Civil Law, by which men take possession, and so
gain a propriety in a thing which was not theirs. If it be a thing immovable,
as Lands, Tenements or Houses, by treading on the Soil they take Possession by
their Feet; if it be a moveable, as Goods, Money, Ware or Servant, to gain to
themselves a property, they take possession by their Hands. So when God called
a Man to be his Minister or Servant, as to preach, or bear some public Office
in his Church, by the Hands of his Church he took possession of him, and the
person thus laid Hands on was no more his own, but Gods.

Next, this laying on of Hands, as it was a form of Alienation, by which the
person thus ordained did quit all Interest in himself, and past himself away to
the Service of Gods Church; so it was a form of Hallowing and Consecration
too. The Case stood with men ordained as it did with other things made holy. As
for Example, In the Old Testament, a Beast in the herd was but a common
creature of the Field, indifferent for the Shambles or to be made a Sacrifice:
But being fetched from thence and brought into the Temple, when the Priests
which waited there had laid their hands upon him, he was no more one of the
herd, but an Oblation for the Altar; and of a Beast became the Expiation of a
Sin. The Stones in the Quarrey are but vulgar, common stones, indifferent to
be wrought into a Kitchen or a Temple: But being fetched from thence, and made a
consecrated Building, that which was a common heap becomes a house of Prayer.
Once more: The Waters running in the Stream, or drawn out of the Well, are
but a common Element, no holier then the Stream: But being poured into the
Font, and there applied to Baptism, that which was common Water puts on the
nature of a Sacrament. And I might say as much of the Lords Supper too; The
bread in the common lump is indifferent for all Tables, no holier then the
Sheafe, or Corn ungathered in the Field: But being made into a Loaf, and set
upon the holy Table, and there being touched and hallowed by the Priest, that
which was a Loaf becomes the body of our Savior. In short, as Holiness, in
the best and strictest Definition of it, is nothing but the separation or
apartment of a thing from a common use to a religious and divine, (as the
Sabbath was called holy, because a common part of Time was divided from the
rest, and allotted to Gods service:) so a man thus ordained by the laying on of
hands, became a person separated from the common heap of Men, a person hallowed
for a Work whose Institution was divine.

Thirdly, how shall men preach except they be sent? says Saint Paul, in the
10. Chapter of the Romans, at the 15. Verse. Where the Question is not put as
if it were physically impossible for men to preach to others without Authority
or License from the Church. In our late licencious Times, where Men inspired
themselves, the Cobbler, Weaver, Tinker, and Lay-preaching Soldier did it, and
went up into the Pulpit with a Sword by their Side, or with an Awle, or
Shuttle, or Trowel in their Hand. But Quo Jure? Where was their Warrant or
Commission to do so? Who signed and sealed their Patent by the laying on of
hands? Certainly, if Men have not power to preach without this Authorizing
Form, I am not Erastian enough to believe that they may assume the power and
usage of the Keys, Excommunicate, Ordain, Confirm, Deliver up to Satan, and
judicially pass Censures upon Schisms, Heresies and Scandals.

This then being clear, the next thing to be enquired is, who the Persons were
who were commissioned to do this. If we may believe Irenaeus, Eusebius and
Tertullian, the Apostles singly did it by their laying on of hands. Thus
Polycarp at Smyrna was made a Bishop by Saint John, thus Euodius at Antioch was
made a Bishop by Saint Peter, and thus by the same hands were Linus, Cletus,
Clemens Romanus made at Rome. Nay, in the first Chapter of the second Epistle
to Timothy* at the sixth Verse, it is said, That by Saint Paul's hands alone
this Bishop was ordained; Stir up the Gift of God which is in thee, says the
Apostle in that place, which was given thee by the putting on of my hands.

Why is there mention made then in this Text of a Presbytery? What means this
Presbytery, with their laying on of hands? Do you not wonder, holy Fathers,
that the same Master Calvin, who took this Word Presbytery for the Office of an
Elder, should from the same Word set up his (...), his compounded mixed
Presbytery of Spiritual and Lay Elders? A thing of which Aerius the Heretic
never dreamt, nor did Iscbyras or Colluthus ever receive into their Fancy.
Certainly, those famous Lights and Fathers of the Church, Saint Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Theophylact, and others, were so far from allowing of Lay Elders in
this Work, that they would not allow a Presbyter to lay hands upon a Bishop;
(...) Inferior Priests assisted not at this higher Consecration. 'Twas still
done by an Apostle, or by some other Bishops* at least by two or three, say the
Canons called Apostolic.

Which cleares the seeming contradiction between this Text, which says, That
Timothy was ordained by the hands of the Presbytery; and that other Text 2 Timothy
6. which says, That Saint Paul ordained him by his laying on of hands: Both
Texts joined together are thus fairly reconciled; he was ordained by Saint Paul
assisted by the Bishops, called here the Presbytery or Elders on the place.

And now, holy Fathers, if you will hear me draw your Pedigree from the
Springhead down the Stream, your Order and the Christian Church, with its
Religion too, had the same divine Original, and derives it self from Heaven;
God sent his Son, his Son sent Apostles, the Apostles made Bishops, and
those Bishops made their Successors: And all this by one and the same
authentic Patent, As my Father sent me, so send I you, says Christ in the 20.
Chapter of Saint John, at the 21. Verse. An Order which has stood out all the
Injuries of Time, Persecutions of the Heathens, Opposition of Philosophers,
Contradiction of Heretics, even all the Powers of Hell, which have strived to
shake it by their violence and storms. An Order which has filled our
Calendars with Saints, our Histories, with Fathers, Holy Confessors and
Martyrs. An Order which is promised to be as lasting as the Sun; for, Lo, I am
with you to the end of the World, says our Savior Christ the Founder of your
Order, in the 28. Chapter of Saint Matthew, at the last Verse. Lastly, an Order
in our English Church recovered out of Ruins, made glorious after Shipwreck,
victorious over the Rage and Sacrilege of those who raised a Storm in hope to
enrich themselves with Spoils. In short, an Order which nothing can eclipse,
endanger or expose to the Malice or Designs of those who would destroy it, but
the Negligence or want of care in those whose Order it is. Which should be the
last part of this Text, expressed to us in these words, (...), Do not neglect
your Gift.

But this being a piece of holy Counsel, The Conclusion.
much fitter for Saint Paul to preach out of this Pulpit to Men so like
himself, then for me so much inferior in Gifts and Station to you: For me to
teach a Bishop how to overlook his Charge, to prescribe him Rules of
Government, or to hold a Candle to him in his laying on of hands, or Work of
Ordination; for me to instruct him how to admit fit Pastors to their Cures, fit
Shepherds to their Flocks; where to let loose his holy Thunders, and to call
them back again; where to use the Rod, and where to pour in Oil; lastly, how
to deport himself with all Gravity in public, and how to demean himself with
all Piety at home, would be an undertaking like the foolish Orator's in Tully,
who in a Speech to Hannibal taught him the Art of War; for which by that great
Soldier he was accounted mad. Having therefore, Reverend Fathers, professed my
Submission and Obedience to those Rules and Orders which you shall prescribe to
me, but my very great unfitness to preach Laws and Rules to you; I hope my
Modesty will gain me your pardon and excuse, if I here put a period and
conclusion to this Sermon.

FINIS.

