THE Efficacy and Extent OF TRUE PURGATION. SHOWING, I. What this Operation is;
not as Vulgarly understood. II. How Performed in Human Body. III. By what Means
fitly to be done. IV. When; How often; and in what Cases to be used: And what to
be avoided; in this most frequent, and helpful Administration.


Distinguished from Promiscuous Evacuations; iujuriously procured, and falsely
reputed PURGING.

BY EVERARD MAYNWARINGE, M. D.

LONDON, Printed for D. Brown, at the Swan without Temple-Barr; and R. Clavel,
at the Peacock near St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet street, 1696.

THE Efficacy and Extent OF TRUE PURGATION.
OF all the Physical Operations in Order to Curing; and to prevent Diseases
approaching or feared; Purgation is the most general, useful, and advantageous:
For this alone, being well and truly performed, seldom fails to give good
Relief, and great Assistance; in most, and almost all the Complaints of
diseased, and infirm Bodies.

Hence it is; that this Operation is so frequently appointed, and used by all
Physicians, in their Undertakings of the Sick; as most necessarily required, in
the various Methods, and Designs of Curing: The Energy and Effects whereof are
so conducing to Cures; that look through the whole Catalogue of Diseases, and
their Methods used, in any of the great Practical Authors; you will rarely find
Purgation omitted: But on the contrary; more often repeated, and insisted on,
than any other Operation performed by Physic.

And most People of their own Inclination, and Choice; have Recourse to this
Help (without the Advice of a Physician) when they find themselves, heavy and
indisposed; full at Stomach; Appetite abated; restless, or pained in any Part.
And in so doing; they design rationally, and well for themselves; but they miss
it, in the Performance; not knowing with What, or How to do this Work, as it
ought to be done: For, of all the Operations procured by Physic, none so much
abused and mistaken, as Purgation; not only by the Unskillful in this Art; but
also by the Learned; as appears upon the Enquiry and Examination anon.

Indeed, there are many sufficient Reasons; why Purgation should be so
frequently used, and confided in for Help in various Cases; both as Preventive
and Curative means.

First; Because Nature in her common Course, daily requires Evacuation that
way; is thereby unloaded and alleviated by such discharge of the excremental
Faeces; which if they are retained beyond due Time, and longer than usual; Man
is not so light, easy, and pleasant; but finds some Alteration and
Discomposure in the Body.

Secondly; Diseases take their Rise, more often from depraved Matter, the
Relicts of vitiated Digestions; not being duly separate, and sent away by
Stool; but remaining in the lower Region of the Body, infesting those Offices
and depraving the nutrimental Juices which supply the Blood: From hence, the
vital Stream becomes degenerate and impure; producing various Diseases, and
symptomatical Appearances in diverse Parts of the Body.

Thirdly; Nature by her own Effort and Abilitity to strive; more often frees
her self, from the Oppression of peccant Matter, by casting it forth at the
Backdoor; than by any other way.

Fourthly; A Purgative Operation leads foremost, and begins the Method
regularly in most Cases (very few excepted:) And is more often repeated than
any other Operation, by the Learned and most Experienced Practisers: For if the
Disease do not lie (in primis viis) in the Stomach, Pancreas, Mesentery, or
Guts; but seated in some remoter Part; yet the lower Region of the Body must
first be unloaded, and the foulness of those Parts abstersed; before Medicine
can arrive at the Part remotely affected: Which being well performed; you may
then hopefully expect, what other Medicinal Operation the Case may properly
require, will be effectual; (if farther Prosecution be necessary) having thus
far rightly proceeded, and laid a good Foundation for Cure.

Fifthly, Purgation being in Imitation of Nature's Performance; or an
Assistance of Nature to do that Work effectually, where in she has been
deficient; is probably and rationally the best Operation, to restore her into
the Rectitude of Government; for a due execution of all the Bodily Functions.

Sixthly; True Purgation is so Catholic and Comprehensive; so powerful and
prevailing in its Operation; that it checks and abates Diseases considerably,
acting alone, by its single Virtue and Power: And sometimes does perform the
whole Work, that nothing more is needful to be done. And farther; this
Operation, being seasonably and duly made use of; is the best Preventive to
keep of Diseases; and to Preserve Bodies in a good state of Health.

Since Purgation is of such Importance; so necessarily required in the Cure of
Diseases; and also for Preservation from Diseases: You are then rightly to
understand, 1. What this Purgation is; in its proper signification, and the
true Operation thereof. 2. How, or after what Manner, it is performed in the
Body. 3. By what fit Means or Medicines, it ought to be done; that truly and
fully answers, the Intention of this most effectual Operation. 4. When
seasonably and fitly, Purgation is to be used: And what Contraindications do
forbid it. 5. What Diseases, and Cases do require it.


Purgation, by the Import of the Word, is Purification; and Purging is
Purifying. That is a separating, and cleansing away of impure, feculent, and
preternatural Matter, that vitiates and depraves the nutritious Juices; and is
unfit for the Service of the Body. And without such Purification, there is no
true Purgation; but the Operation frustrate; as not effecting what it was
intended for. Therefore all Evacuations, procured by Physic at the Fundament;
are not Purging properly and truly: But which are so performed, as to depurate,
and render the Body more clean, sound, and wholesome.

From this Doctrine, I shall make some Observations, as cautionary and useful;
to distinguish the Abuses and Counterfeits, from true and effectual Purgation.

That a number of Stools procured by Physic, does not always perform the
Intention and Office of Purgation; nor is benefit to be expected thereby: But
such an Evacuation as is promoted by wholesome good Medicine; causing a gentle
fermenting Secretion, and separation of peccant unserviceable Matter, calmly
sending it forth. This is the only Purging that gives Relief; and great Benefit
will follow from such amicable Operations, in most Cases that present: And by
Purgation after this manner (though often repeated) Nature is not impaired or
weakened; but alleviated, refreshed, and more able.

But by forced promiscuous Evacuations; hurrying out all that lies in the way,
both good and bad together; though the Body is unloaded thereby, and perhaps
some good may be done by chance; but more certainly some Hurt; and probably
this has the greater share, in such rude Operations, as often it falls out so:
For, after those churlish Doses, made up of malign Ingredients; the pale thin
Faces do appear, to testify how ill they have been treated in Physic: But
they let fly lustily, and Fools think that was bravely, having forgot the
Gripes and the sick Fits; thinking it was all as it should be; and do not
suspect any mischief done thereby: But they will find the Effects afterward;
and must take Physic again, for the Disease of Physic.

Many People esteem their Purging Medicine, by the Number of Stools: If it
works half a score, or dozen Times; then they have made a good Day's Work; and
think their Time and Money well bestowed. But a Medicine that operates, but
four or five times in a Day; they make no Account of; and have not Patience to
prosecute their Diseases with such flow Purgers: They must have their Business
done speedily, and probably that is the way, not to have it done; for commonly,
and in this case especially; the more Haste, the worse Speed. For if Purgation
be a fermentative Motion, procuring a Secretion; Reason and Experience tells,
that is not a quick, hasty Work. They don't consider, and they have not been
well taught; that gentle Purging, and oftener taking; deliberately and gradually
collecting depraved Matter; and placidly conveying it forth by wholesome good
Medicine; this is the most hopeful, and helpful Operation.

Eradicativa Evacuatio, optime per plures Evacuationes Minorativas perficitur.
Therefore when much emptying, and many Stools are required, to complete the
Work of Purgation; let that Operation be gentle, and repeated the more often
(with Intermission and Respite) until Purification be perfected: In so doing,
the Life will not be tired and weakened; nor the Body exhausted and impaired;
by such gradual selecting, and moderate discharging of unserviceable Matter
only.

After what manner PURGATION is performed in the BODY.
It was the Opinion of the Ancients; and so continued by many at this time;
that Purgatives operate (elective) by attracting this or that Humor peculiarly;
and that by their different formal Propriety and specific Qualities, they do
attract (Sympathetice) a different Humor or Matter: Some Water, others Choler;
some draw out Phlegm, others Melancholy. Thus Hippocrates and Galen taught;
from which Judgment, diversity of Purging Medicines have been contrived, to fit
several Constitutions (as they suppose.) Some Bodies abounding with Choler,
others with Phlegm, etc. Therefore it was thought reasonable, that Purging
Medicines should be diverse: And from hence the reputed Purgatives have been
distinguished and distributed into several Classes: Phlegmagoga, Cholagoga,
Melanagoga, Hydragoga All which will appear but an Accumulation of Errors.
Dato uno absurdo; multa exinde consequuntur.

Contrary to this Opinion; Paracelsus, Joubertus, and others, have asserted;
Purging Medicines to operate (per Antipathiam) in a hostile manner; that they
do prosecute, expel and drive out noxious Humors, as having Enmity therewith,
and performing after the manner of Alexipharmacals.

But neither of these Opinions will stand good upon Examination and strict
Enquiry; as having no sound Foundation to support either of them; but involved
with many Difficulties, as not rationally to be maintained: Notwithstanding,
upon such supposed Truths; pretended Purgative Operations has been designed
and grounded thereon, to the Prejudice of Millions of People: For, if manifest
Evacuation were but procured, by the common injurious Means; it always passed
currently for Purgation; not being able to discern and distinguish, between
Evacuating promiscuously, and Purging.

The two former Opinions being set aside; I shall produce a third, more
rational, and clearer from Intanglements.

Purgation being an Operation, imitating Nature in her ordinary daily course;
setting forth the Causes, and Order of natural Evacuations; illustrates and
declares the Manner of Purgation artificially procured by Medicine.

Food received into the Stomach, is there digested by Fermentation, into a
Chyle or Juice; then sent out into the Guts: where the Alimentary Part thereof,
is conveyed by proper Vessels, for the use and supply of the Body: The
excrementitious and unserviceable Part, is carried down for expulsion. The
motion for conveyance out of the Stomach, is performed by Fibers contracting
and compressing that Bag; the lower Orifice of the Stomach then opens, and
transmits into the Guts; where also the Fibers of the Intestines contracting,
do cause a vermicular motion, protruding the Contents from Part to Part, until
the Faces arrive at the Fundament for excretion. Thus much only in short, which
at large might be set forth, if necessary.

In like manner Purgation is performed (but more vigorously, and oftener
evacuating) which is a Repetition of doing Nature's Work, to perfect by Medical
Assistance, what could not be done without such Help. A Purgative Medicine
being received into the Stomach, causes a Fermentation there; raising up
indigested Relicts, and subsiding depraved Matter, cleaving to the corrugated
Tunicles of the Ventricle; and puts it upon motion to be sent downwards into
the Guts; there to be distributed as aforesaid.

But this is not All; Purgation extends yet farther: For, the Stomach being the
Center of the Life, where the Regimen of the Body is more eminently managed;
this principle Part; or rather the Principle of Human Nature, being there
affected with the Purgative; causes the whole Body to be drawn into Consent
and Cooperation; by Unity and Identity, of the ubiquitary vital Principle: So
that this depurating Fermentation is promoted by the Life, in all the Veins and
Arteries; some Branches whereof, having their Insertions into the cavity of the
Guts; impure and useless Matter is brought from all Parts, to be discharged
into the Kennel, or Sink of the Body, and sent forth by that commom Outlet, the
Fundament. Thus the whole Mass of Blood, is defecated and cleared, from
heterogeneous Admixture, by Purgation; after this manner performed, and not by
Attraction, as commonly supposed.

The Regimen of the Life, is not always necessitated and obliged to visible
Organs; but acts sometimes influentially, without visible corporeal Mediums;
and therefore in the Economy of Human Nature, many Actions are performed at
distance, without the connection of Tubes or Vessels for conveyance. But our
traditional Learning gives no such Information; and therefore extraordinary
Enquiries have been made in Anatomy (where it is not to be found) that they may
render an Account of such internal Operations; as they can give no Reason for
otherwise.

Thus they would have the World believe; that by an exact Knowledge in Anatomy;
satisfactory Accounts may be given, for all the preternatural Phoenomena, and
Defections of Human Nature: And how Medicine is transmitted, to operate upon
every Part of the Body. But herein they are more industrious for enabling
themselves to talk finely; than to design curing successfully: Or give the true
Account of Diseases; and how curing is performed in the Body: Forgetting, or
neglecting this Axiom; Natura est Morborum Medicatrix: (And sometimes Morborum
Factrix) which caused a Reproof from an intelligent Observator, for their
over-Curiosity and expense of Time in Dissections. Sufficiebat namque pro
Anatome; situm, colligationem, and usus Partium: Non autem tota vita Cadaverum
Lani^nam, ad minimae venae ductus inveniendos, exercuisse. Joan. Van Helmont.

The denominating Principal Part of Human Nature (the Regent vital Spirit, that
makes, mends, and maintains Bodies) has not been regarded and enquired into as
ought; being the Efficient and Rector of all Human Actions; internal and
external; both in the state of Health, and Sickness. But they think themselves
concerned, no farther than Humors, and Organs; and by them to set forth a full
Account of Humanity, and morbous Alterations; as also the manner of Curing.

Purgative Fermentation begun in the Stomach, is promoted through the Body; not
by Consent of Parts, and Communication by Vessels of Conveyance, as vulgarly so
accounted: But (per Identitatem Medii) by Continuity and Unity of the Life;
spreading and residing in every Part of the Body. From whence it is; that the
Life being touched in the Center, with a fermenting Purgative Virtue; is also
affected likewise, to the Confines of vital Government. But the common Learning
does not acknowledge, and teach any Communication or Conveyance; but by visible
Ductures and Conduits, transmitting from Part to Part.

That this may not seem strange; but probable and practicable, for Nature (the
Life) to operate after such a secret manner; take these following Examples as
parallel, to confirm the Verity thereof. The first an Operation artificially
procured by Medicament, for Purification: The latter, merely natural and
spontaneous by Aliment, for Refection and Restoration.

1. A Sudorifick Medicine being received into the Stomach; the virtue thereof
is diffused sometimes in an hour, or two; and affects the whole Body; causing a
moist Transpiration in every Part: And this must be by Irradiation, not by a
long passage of Circulation, through visible Ductures of Conveyance: For, it
cannot rationally be supposed, that in so short space of Time; the Medicine can
be carried materially into every Part of the Body; but is virtually conveyed,
by influencial Power of the vital regent Principle; residing in the Stomach,
(there eminenter) and praesiding over all the Faculties. And to perform this
Operation, there needs no Vessels of Conveyance out; because the whole Body is
prompt and ready, for such a vaporous Transmission: Totum corpus est
perspirabile.

2. When a Person is faint and feeble by too long fasting; Meat and Drink, then
received into the Stomach; enlivens and strengthens all Parts immediately (long
before the Food can be distributed through the Body) and only by refreshing the
Life in the Center: Such radiant Influence streams from thence, as to affect
the whole Body. So Purgative Virtue is diffused, and communicated from the
Stomach; causing a fermentative motion in the Veins and Arteries; arriving
therein much shorter Time, than with common Conveyance by the known Vessels;
which would be long and tedious to expect.

Hence it does appear, how Purgative Fermentation is raised, and extended at
distance influent ially, by conduct and co-operaration of the Life; without
visible Ductures: But the feculent Matter separated for Excretion, is exported
manifestly by Vessels.

From this Doctrine you may understand; that the World has been deceived in
the great Business of Purgation: For, Practisers not having a right Notion
thereof in the manner of Performance in the Body; they could not well adapt a
Purgative Medicine for the true Execution of that Operation: And Failure
therein, has given great Delays and Disappointments, in the Practice of
Physic: Forasmuch as true Purgation contributes mainly in the cure of all
Diseases, arising from, or depending upon depraved humoral Matter; and gives
the deepest stroke, in eradicating the Seminaries thereof.

By what means True PURGATION is to be Effected.
Since it is manifest, that Purgation operates by Fermentation to produce
Purification: Then we are to enquire, what Properties a Medicine is to be
endowed with, that really and effectually can perform that Work.

The primitive Professors having no Guide to direct, nor Footsteps to trace and
follow; but making the first Attempts in designing Purgation; did venture upon
diverse Experiments; and what raised a Disturbance in the Body, forcing Nature
to expel downwards and evacuate; was then noted for a Purgative. The Ancients,
as Hippocrates, Galen, etc. coming after the first Projectors: They revised
those rough inartificial Exemplars; and produced something better: And Modern
Practisers have made some Amendments; but fall short of completing true
Purgative Medicines: That we can only say; the latter Inventions are not so bad
as the first; or what they were a Thousand Years ago; but not what they ought
to be now.

If a placid and benign Fermentation, is praevious; the direct and only way to
design Purgation, which is Purification: Then no Medicine composed of virulent,
or malign Ingredients; is a proper and fit Instrument to perform that Work: Nor
is it reasonable to expect so good an Effect, should be wrought by such bad
Means. We may from hence conclude; that all those Purgatives (so called) which
in their Nature have malign injurious Qualities to Human Bodies; are improper
and mistaken to produce such an Operation as Purging; which is Purifying.

Now we are to examine, the common reputed Purgatives; so much esteemed, and so
often used, by Practisers in this Age; that we may see how far they answer the
Title given: Whether they be innocent, wholesome, and harmless; as true
Purgatives ought: Or otherwise; affecting the Body with their ill Qualities,
and operating by stimulating and noxious Impressions upon the Life.

In the Number of common reputed Purgatives, are: Euphorbium, Scammony,
Colloquintida, Hellebore, Elaterium, Jallap, Briony, Gutta Gamandrae, Turbith,
Sena, etc. many others: Wherein there are degrees of Badness; some not so
mischievous as others are: But none to be called wholesome and purely good; but
what has some ill Quality injurious to Human Nature: And are not what true
Purgatives ought to be; which I shall prove, 1. By the manner of their
Operations. 2. By their Effects. 3. By the Account given of them, from
Authentic Writers, Ancient and Modern.


The Operation of common Purgatives, is usually attended with Uneasiness,
Dullness, and Lassitude; nauseating, or vomiting; grinding or griping Pains;
exhausting Evacuations and Excoriations; raking, and sometimes racking the
Bowels: Some of these at least; and sometimes all of these, are concomitant
Symptoms: Which do manifest their discordant, and malign Properties; inimical
and destructive to Human Nature.

Few there are that have been used to Physic; but can attest some Part hereof,
by their own Experience: And some of them, will tell dreadful Stories; how they
have been abused by purging Physic.

Secondly: The ill Effects wrought from virulent Impressions of the common
reputed Purgatives, that pervert the Digestions, and vitiate the Blood: They do
not appear presently, but some Time after; and then not suspected, from whence
or what Cause, such Alterations do come: For, after the irksom Operation is
over; the next Day, perhaps, the Patient Sufferer is more at ease; and then
begins to have a good Opinion of his Purge (when the Storm is over) and says it
has done him good. And I can tell how much good that is: The Body being
unloaded thereby; and probably some of the morbific Matter complained of, may
be carried out, (if it lie in the way ready for Passage;) and this makes a
mitigation of former Pains, and at present the Patient is better. And this is
the best of it, that can be told: Which happens but sometimes: As when the
diseased Person is strong and able to bear bad Medicines; and the cause of
Complaint not so considerable, as to require much Physic.

But if the Disease be great; radicated and stubborn to yield; that there is
need of repeated, and often Purgations: Then, and in such Cases; the common
Purges, do show their Hostility to Human Nature; leaving the Characters of
their Malignity behind them. Such as are so engaged into a Course of Physic;
change their former Countenance, for pale, thin Chaps: Strength wears away, and
feeble Legs are the effects of that kind of Purging. So it is with the stronger
fort; that are able to walk about, when their Disease makes a Cessation.

And if you count the Number of those that receive no Benefit; but are rather
worse; you will find them to be many: As when the Patient is Sick and weak;
that wants a true Purgative, a Medicine extraordinary good; or no good to be
done otherwise: Then in such cases, the common Purges sets the Sick and Feeble
forward, toward their long Home. But such as do recover (by good Providence)
from Sickness, and seemingly are well; and have escaped the evil of bad
Purgatives at present: Yet all the mischief is not past; there comes an after
Reckoning to account for: The Relics and Impressions of your virulent Purges,
has laid the Foundation of another Disease, which you will hear of in a little
time; and you cannot imagine how it should come.

Most People have this Apprehension, that Purging Physic is next to Poison;
and therefore if it does not work, they are dreadfully afraid; and well they
may: But if it does operate; then they think all is well enough: but not so
safe as they think: For though there be Evacuation sufficient, as to the number
of Stools; yet the Taint impressed upon the Body, both continent and contained;
and also upon the Life, to alienate and infect the Regent Spirit: There must be
a Depravation from thence; the effects whereof will not be smothered; though
the cause you do not imagine, when those effects do appear, a good while after:
For, although some part of the Purgative Venom, comes away by Stool the Day of
Purgation; yet there is a Remainder that infects the Blood, and will produce
various ill effects, in diverse parts of the Body.

That it does mix with the Blood, and by that vehicle is carried into all parts
of the Body: I find a late Author of the same Opinion; where he says,

Extra dubium ponatur, Medicamenti Purgantis corpuscula quaedam in sanguinem
admitti, perque totum ejus liquorem diffundi. D. Willis. And soon after these
words do follow: Quippe necesse erit quasdam Cathartici particulas, succo
nutricio permistas, per vasa lactea obrepere. Idem.

Now since it is so; that the Purgative Venom commixeth with the Blood, and
therewith runs through the whole Body; how careful, and fearful ought People to
be in the matter of Purgation: But when the ill effects of former Purgatives do
bud forth, they have no other Remedy, but to the same, and such like Purges
again: They know not how to get better; they are such as the Shop's are
furnished with; and such as are Prescribed to the Shops, upon all occasions.
What do you think will be the end of such Accumulation of Errors? or how soon
the end may come?

Here by the way, I must Remark, and set down this injurious Repetition, for
one eminent cause, of Man's infirm diseased Nature; and consequently has
contributed much, to the Abbreviation of Life; and the Offspring in Ages to
come, will degenerate yet more, and be of shorter Duration; being descended
from such depraved Progenitors.

Is it reasonable to suppose, that one virulent Medicine; should raze out the
Impressions of another, that went before? If the Axioms be true; Natura est
Morborum Medicatrix: We cannot in Reason think, that Nature will, or can work
with such bad Tools: Purification cannot be effected, by depraving and
corrupting Medicines.

And the forenamed Author; giving an Account of Purgation; yields in a great
measure, to this censure of Purgatives: Nec enim de nihilo est quod vulgus adeo
pertimescat, si quando Medicemen minus operetur; ne virulentia exinde
contracta, and derelicta, post quam diu in corpore delituit, tandem aliquando
affectus malignos produceret: a tali namque occasion, interdum pathemata quasi
leprosa excitantur. D. Willis. It is not without cause, that People are afraid,
when their Purge works not sufficiently; least the virulency thence contracted,
and remaining in the Body; at some time or other (tandem aliquando) should
produce malignant Affects: from such an occasion sometimes Leprous Maladies do
appear.

He owns Purgatives to be virulent; which virulency, if it comes not out, but
lodges in the Body, it produces mischief: And I cannot see how it should be
otherwise: For if it be true as this Author affirms; that some part of the
Medicine is carried by the Blood all over the Body; it is not like to come out
again presently; not that Day of Operation; The Venom then lies a breeding; and
will bring forth in time. So that, when you Purge; you must take another to
fetch out the virulency of the former: But if the second be no better than the
first; you must then take a third Dose: And so you may Purge all the Year long
at that rate of Purging, and be never the better, but much worse hereafter.

After this manner, there will be no end of Purging; but there may be an end of
the Patient. If it be so, and I think it is plainly so; Then such pretended
Purgations, is but Tinkerly Doings-Physitians and Pothecaries are very honest
Men; but Physic cheats all the World.

It is plain from the Words of the foregoing Author; what Opinion he had of the
common reputed Purgatives: Yet being urged to use them, for want of better, and
more safe; he also did comply, with what his Judgment had condemned: As his
Purgative Exemplars following do declare; and also his Prescripts in Practice
upon several Diseases, in his Works extant.

And other Men of repute in this Faculty, are of the same Sentiment in this
matter; and have acknowledged as much: But for (a Salvo Judicio) to excuse
themselves from persisting in known Error; and to render the common Purgatives
tolerably useful; until wholsomer, and safer be found out: They tell you of
Correctives, invented to subdue the Venom; to curb and tame the extravagant
molesting Qualities of the Purgatives; that they shall perform the Office of
Purging, and not disgust or molest you in the Operation.

True, part of this may be; and the Purgatives still what they ought not to be.
Perhaps the Patient does not find present Inconvenience or Disturbance: But
that does not prove the Innocence and Wholsomness of the corrected Purgatives;
and yet most commonly it is otherwise, and the Operation unpleasant. Injurious
and unwholsom Diet does not show its ill effects presently: You eat and drink
with Pleasure, and perceive no Hurt; but you will find it afterward; perhaps a
good while after: And so it is with bad Medicines, such as stand in need of
Correctives.

Now this Question arises; whether the Correction given to virulent
Purgatives, be due Correction, or only a Palliation? Whether your Correction
does raze out, and extinguish the Venom; as to make the Concrete purely
innocent and wholesome? I believe not so.

You may possibly correct, or smother some extravagant Quality more eminent,
and apparently noxious to Human Bodies; but you do not change the whole Nature
thereof, which is Malign and Hostile. If you correct the smell of a T -- with
Musk and Civet; that the offensive scent thereof is not perceived; yet it is a
T -- still; an impure Excrement.

So you may correct some of the first, or second Qualities of the Purgatives,
that are not sufferable in the Operation: But being malign (tota substantia) in
their whole Nature; the Correctives are not sufficient security to save
harmless, from future Damage. You may allay, and blunt the edge of some fierce
Punging, or Lancinating Property, and make the Operation more placid, and
painless; but there may be other injurious Qualities, which are dormant at
present; and may produce ill effects, some Weeks, or Months after. If you knock
out one Tooth; there are more left that will bite, and do hurt.

After this manner you may eat a Toad, and have a correcting Antidote, that it
shall not poison you. But I don't like such Food, that wants so much
Correction; Nor such Physic: For when you think all the danger is past; there
may be mischief breeding. So that you cannot say you are secure; though at
present you are seemingly well.

Some that are dextrous in Poisoning; can give that which does not soon
discover its venomous Nature to hurt you: But after some Time, it will operate
upon you sensibly, and by Degrees; continuing to tabefie the Body, and so
infest the Life; that you shall dwindle away, and know not what was the cause.

Some Poisons are Mortal, and kill presently: others not so Mortal, but very
hurtful; acting slowly and gradually: Disguised under the Name of some common
Disease; producing different effects. Some cause Dullness, Melancholy, and
Stupidity: others provoke Laughter, Lust, or Fury: and some cause Convulsions,
Dysenteries, Inflammations, etc.

Some Poisons more peculiarly and immediately affect the Heart; others seize
the Brain; some invade the Liver; others the Lungs: some hurt the Bladder, as
Cantharides: others dart their Venom chiefly upon the Genitals, and disable
either Sex, causing Barrenness. All which is confirmed by Authors of Repute.

I shall not point at the Parts of the Body, particularly this or that
Purgative, shall more especially injure: But we may conclude it will fall
somewhere; and you must take it for your Pains, as it falls out

Your Correction sometimes is before Composition; and then you do something to
meliorate, at least mitigate: yet, after you have done all you can; it is but
(minus malum) not so bad as it was; and that is the best that can be said. But
who is the Supervising Corrector, in these weighty Matters; that require much
Care, and Skill? The Doctor he referrs all, and trusts the Apothecary; the
Apothecary trusts the Boys: Then the Patient he must Trust in God; for there is
no Trust in Man.

He that Purges with Medicine, that requires so much Correction, and is not
Operator himself; He also deserves Correcting Reproof.

But more often, the Correctives are added in composition: And such are not
properly so called; but are only Palliatives: For, being thrust into the Crowd
of Ingredients, they do not expunge or raze out the Venom of Purgatives; but
only enable Nature to bear the Assaults; to resist and expel downwards, for to
free her self by Evacuation. And such palliating Correctives are the Aromatics
and Cardiacs; that are associated with the malign Purgatives; that the Patient
shall not be so sensible of the mischievous Properties of the Medicine in the
Operation; and for a quick and expeditious Expulsion.

By this same Art of Sophistication; an ingenious Cook will prepare you a Mess
of Pottage, made with tainted unwholesom Flesh; corrected with a high Season of
well-savour'd Herbs, Onions and Spices, and suchlike Correctives. The Broth
may be pleasing enough to the Palate, and nothing ill discernable: But you may
judge they cannot produce wholesome Nourishment. And so adulterate Wines are
made palatable and pleasant in the drinking; but the ill Effects come after.
And thus it is, with virulent Purgative Medicines.

I think it unreasonable, that the Work of Purgation, which is cleansing and
purifying; should be intended and attempted to be wrought, by such means as
stain, vitiate, and defile the Body; if not expelled and cast out. And all this
has arised from a Mistake; supposing every thing that causes Evacuation, does
perform the Office of Purgation: But that is a grand Error; which has
introduced so many virulent Productions of Nature (designed for other Uses) to
be reputed and established, in the Classes of Purgatives.

In the Works extant of our Predecessors; that have been Physicians to
Emperors, Kings, and Princes, I find their Practice has been managed by such
injurious Purgatives, (very likely it is so now:) And we may reasonably
conclude; that those greatest Men of the World; had their Share, and their
Fate; in such mischievous Drugs: For, had their Physicians known better; they
would have been more benign to Mankind, than to have concealed them; and
recommend that which is worse to Public Use.

If the Topping Men of Government he so served; How are their Fleets, and
Armies provided for? Bad enough I know; and too bad. The Soldiers, and the
Seamen, they have Physic, such as it is; and that must serve. But how can it
be otherwise? since the Inspection, and Care is committed to them, that know no
better: And therefore all is approved very well.

I do assert; and not without good Reason and Experience; that Curing may be
managed, without virulent Purgatives, or loathsome nasty Physic; and that much
more pleasing to Patients, and more hopeful in Effect: But Dogs-Tird,
Horse-Dung, Piss, and many such sordid Inventions; I don't like, nor use: But
they that know no better, must make use of such. Because some in their
necessity have been constrained to use such, for Help in their Extremity, (not
knowing what was more wholesome and pleasing to Nature) and casual Success has
happened thereupon: This is set down in Receipt-Books, and noted for specific
Remedies in such Cases; as if nothing else could do it; at least, nothing so
well. As if there were not Physic sufficient in the wholesome Stores of Nature,
to perform all necessary Operations in Curing; but we must seek among the
Venoms, and Excrements of Animals, to fetch it from thence, for internal
Medicine; though unwholesom, or loathsome and disgustful.

Thirdly; From the Censure, Cautions, and Corrections of the evil Qualities, of
reputed Purgatives; by Physicians of Note, that have used them in former Ages;
and also by such, as do continue the use of them at this Time.

Scammony is a Purgative most frequently used; and is in most of the purging
Medicines, both Electuaries and Pills of the Shops. The Ancients, and among
them Aegineta and Mesue; sets down Five great Faults in Scammony, which
Fritagius rehearses, and concludes; Scammonium nunquam esse exhibendum, quin
sit Correctum; nisi Animas negotiari, and Christianam charitatem abjicere
decretum sit. Auror. Med. lib. 2. cap. 13. And therefore great Cautions, and
Inventions are used, to correct the virulent and malign Qualities of this Drug:
And about these Corrections, there are different Opinions among Physicians, how
rightly and best to be done; which I forbear to recite.

Turbith, another Purgative much used; has its Faults too: Tres inesse noxas
in Turpetho ferunt sapientes, says Fritagius. Which I forbear to set down for
brevity sake. And that this has had a bad Name in the World, the old Verse
does witness: Nolo damnosum Turbith, mea Viscera turbet. And because it
nauseates and offends the Stomach; some will have the Word Turbith, derived a
turbando; says Fallopius. But correctves must help all these Faults: And
therefore it is put into several of the Shop-Compositions; as a good Ingredient.

Coloquintida is a Purgative very often used; an Ingredient in many of the
common purging Medicines. The virulence and violence thereof is noted by many
Authors. Fallopius he says, Est medicamentum periculosum, nisi maxima
adhibeatur custodia. And Solenander, in the the last of his Counsels, calls
Coloquintida (Poma Diaboli) the Devil's Apples. Mesue gives it the Name of fell
terrae, and mors Plantarum: Because it kills the Plants that grow near it.

Freitagius reckons up the evil Qualities of this Drug. Observatione constat,
ventriculo, jecori, and cordi admodum nocere; hoc malignitate sua oppugnare,
omniaque viscera mirifice disturbare; Stomachum valde concutere, ejusque and
Intestinorum parietes vellicare, arrodere and eradere; vasorum and vinarum
oscula reserare, etc. p. 336. Since it is manifestly so; then they consult how
to master this Devil, that he shall not do so much mischief: Some will fetter
him after this manner; others think it more secure, another way.

Scammony, Turbith, and Coloquintida; these three famous Drugs are in use:
Being in diverse Compositions of the Shop-Medicines; both in the Electuaries,
and Pills.

As Benedicta Laxativa; Diacharthamum; de Citro solutivum; Confectio Hamech;
Hiera Logadii, etc. Pilulae Aggregativae; Pil.Cochiae; Pil. Foetidae; Pil. de
lapide Lazuli; Pil. ex Duobue; Pil. Rudii, where is more of Art: But after all
the Labor by Trituration, Infusion, and Distillation, it is but a rude
Medicine; not a true Purgaive. Who can bring a clean thing, out of an unclean?
Nil dat, quod non habet.

These Inventions surpass my Understanding, and every one else; to give a
rational Account of the Designs thereof.

There is much to be said upon the Examination of these Compositions (if it
were my Business now) and I could allow Time to enquire into the Reasons of
their several Associations of Ingredients; and to note their incongruous and
superfluous Additions: Which proceed from Imbecility of Judgment, to compose a
regular true Medicine; or else designed to amuse the World, in compounding and
confounding Ingredients, good and bad together discordantly.

Such farraginous Mixtures caused Helmont's Dislike and Complaint: Commiseror
in Officinis tot Simplicium connexiones, and confusas miscellaneas, proditrices
ignorantiae and incertitudinis: sperant enim Scholae, Si non juvet unum,
alterum juvaturum: sicque multa associant invicem. Van Helm. Pharmacopolium.
And in the same Page, these Words do follow: Vndiquaque enim pro suo Nummo
decipitur Aeger; tam scilieet fide ac fraud Seplasiae, quam jurejurando
Doctoratus.

Esula is the genus of Tithymals, comprising under that Name several sorts: Bad
is the best. Esula minor is accounted the safest, and most in use; supposed to
purge watery Humors: But it must be corrected; else it will do great hurt. Quod
Cordi, Epati, Ventriculo, Visceribusque noxia vim alioquin inferret maximum;
Intestina raderet, nobiles interiorum parts inflammaret, Venarum ora
reseraret, Febres excitaret, Sperma exsiccando consumeret, potentiamque
Aphrodisiam extingueret. Freitag. page 414. A foul Account of this noble
Purger: One of the Ingredients of these Medicines. Pilulae Mechoacanae; Pil.
Foetidae; and Electuar. Benedict. Laxativa; that blessed Electuary: (A fair
Title to a foul Medicine.) But how often it comes into the Recipes, I cannot say.

Euphorbium, a condensate Juice; supposed to purge Phlegm, and watery Humors;
is commended and used against Apoplexies, Palsies, soporiferous Diseases,
Convulsions, Tremors, Dropsies, and Gout. These are great Diseases; and
therefore it was thought, they must have Medicines extraordinary, (but let them
be extraordinary good then) not extraordinary dangerous, as this Euphorbium is;
more likely to make a Disease than to cure one: And therefore it is cautiously
to be dealt with, and so advised. Circumspecte per omnia ejus usus est
ineundus; quod Fauces inflammet, interiora vellicet, urat and arrodat,
Stomachum and Epar mirifice lacessat; adeo ut sudorem frigidum, summam Cordis
angustiam, and demum syncopen concitet, etc. Freitag. auror. Med. page 341.

Now you see what a hopeful Account is given of this Purgative, But for a
Mitigation, and to bridle the Fury of this Drug; there are several ways
proposed for Correction, according to the different Judgments of Physicians.
Mesue, Avicen, Serapio, Manardus, Quercetan, and others. But I intend never to
use it internally; and therefore shall not examine the Corrections, which is
best: For I think it best not to meddle with it internally. But it may be used
outwardly in Epipastic Plasters, to raise Blisters; as it is so used sometimes.
But I find it an Ingredient in Pil. Foetidae; and de Hermodactilis: Probably it
comes sometimes into the Recipes; for I meet with a Correction of it in the
Pharmacopoeia Londinensis; and for external Application, there needs no
Correction.

I might proceed on, and go through the whole Catalogue of reputed Purgatives;
after this manner to show their Virulency; or Insufficiency to perform the Work
of Purgation, by such ill Qualities they are pregnant with: But that would be
tedious to examine all of them, singly by their Names, and recite the Censure
that is given of them, by Physicians that have used them: I shall therefore
give the Character of them in the gross; according to the Sentiment of some
Authors.

Van Helmont giving Judgment upon Medicines, has these Words: Laxativa
peculiariter sensi operari duntaxat, propter latens intus sibi venenum. That
the common Purgatives operate as Venoms. And soon after he adds: Sensi ideo
Laxativa putrefacere vitales Succos. That they putrefie the vital Liquors.
Potestas Medicaminum, page 383.

And another Author, whose Writings are well known, and esteemed in this
Kingdom and abroad, says: Porro alia Cathartica, uti Jalapium, Colocynthis,
Elaterium, and quaedam Mercurii praeparatu, particulis acrioribus and non raro
septicis constant; quae propterea ab Intestinis suscepta, indeque sanguini
transmissa, Massam ejus insigniter fundunt, and in serositatem valde
praecipitant; imo interdum quasi venenant, and Crasin ejus corumpunt. Dr.
Willis de Purg. page 71.

This is muchwhat to the same purpose, as the foregoing Author determined of
Purgatives. And a little after ( page 72.) relating how two Children were
killed with a Mercurial Powder, by an Empyrick at Oxford: Nec tantum a
mercurialibus, sed ab aliis interdum Catharticis, e vegetabilium familia de
sumptis, Massa sanguinea it a depravatur, ut non nisi longo tempore restitui
aut renovari possit. Not only mercurial, but vegetable Purgatives, sometimes do
so deprave the Mass of Blood; that it will be a long time before it can be
restored. Dr. Willis.

Then he confirms what Helmont had said of the common Purgatives, in these
Words: Adeo non immerito prorsus Calumniatur Helmontius dicens Pharmaca
Cathartica non semper, aut solummodo humores in corpore prius existentes
educere; sed potentia sua corruptiva, depravatos efficere. Idem, ibidem.

Now what do you think of the common Purges; made with half a douzen, or half a
score, of such Ingredients as have been discoursed on? Magis a Remedio, quam ab
ipso Morbo timendum sit. If you like'em, much good may do you; but I do not,
and never shall; because I know better things.

You may see now, (if you have Eyes and Understanding) what Effects are to be
expected from such Purgatives; how apt they are to deprave, instead of
purifying the vital Juices, for reducing an ill habit of Body to a sound state:
And it is the Judgment of the Learned; but they have a learned way of
Correction; that they shall not do so much Hurt, as otherwise they would.

There is another Help found out; and that is the cause why Physicians send so
many to the Waters: To rinse out, and fetch off the Stains, and virulent
Impressions of counterfeit Purgatives. I should like the Waters well enough; if
they would operate, and perform the Intention in a lesser Quantity: But to pour
down two or three Quarts in a Forenoon; to charge and chill the Body with so
much; though some do bear it pretty well; yet others receive Prejudice, instead
of a Benefit. He that is Master of a wholesome Purgative, will do better
Service, than all the Waters in England.

Purgative, is a promising good Name; which invites, and makes the pretended
Purgatives go down the better. They are such as the World has been used to;
and the People take them; because others have taken them before: They know no
better, and therefore these are the best, and they must try their Fate with
them. They are such as Tradition has handed down from Age to Age; to the
present Time; and Custom has made them familiar: They are recommended
(sometimes discomended) and appointed by the Learned in vogue; and therefore
they are willingly, and readily received, as if they were sent by Divine
Appointment, to heal the Infirmities of human frail Nature.

But all this is, no convincing Argument; to prove their sufficiency and
fitness, for the important Work of Purgation; Error is as old as Time it self;
but such false Substitutes, will wear out of Date, and out of Use; when better
shall appear manifestly and convincingly; as by comparing these pretended and
fallacious; with what is purifying and truly purgative, as follows.

Having showed negatively, what true Purgatives are not; by examining and
setting forth the malign Nature of common reputed Purgatives: In their
Operations; in their Corrections; by their Effects; by the Judgment and
Censure, of Ancient and Modern Physicians.

I come now to assert positively; and set down the Qualifications of a true
Purgative Medicine; that performs the Office of Purgation, according to the
Intent, and Meaning of that Operation, in due Manner, and also in Effects.

A Medicine adapted truly Purgative, is endowed with these eminent and
excellent Properties.

1. Balsamic, wholesome and harmless in all the Ingredients. 2. Fermentative, to
separate and depurate; wherein is comprised Aperitive and Abstersive Faculties.
3. Lenitive and Placid in Operation. 4. Catholic and Comprehensive; as adapt
and applicable to all Cases, requiring Purgative Energy
First: A true Purgative wants no Correction, as being wholesome, and innocent
in all the Parts of Composition: That Is a Medicine amicable and pleasing to
Nature. And if no good can be done, (as in Cases irremediable, and past hope)
it will do no hurt; but give you the Satisfaction of a Trial. And in Diseases
obstinate, and difficult to be removed; requiring a Method, and Medicines of a
different Operation to be assistant; then the Purgative performs only a Part;
but necessarily conducing to the Cure; and without this probably no perfect
Cure. But where there is a capacity to receive Relief; you may be bold in the
repeated use thereof, for obtaining the desired Effect.

But if it wants this wholesome Qualification, it cannot be a true purifying
Purgative: And that Defect, makes a great Abatement in Virtue; or Frustration
of the Intention.

Secondly: A true Purgative acts by a benign and placid fermentative Operation;
which is diffusive through the Body; opening and searching into all Parts;
separating that which is bad, to be brought down, and sent away by the
Intestines; leaving that which is good, to support and maintain the Body: Does
not contaminate, nor drain out the alimentary Juices; from whence Alleviation
does follow, and natural Strength preserved.

And every Evacuation, that is not performed after this manner; cannot rightly
be called Purgation; nor in Reason can you expect the good Effects otherwise:
For, true Purgation is not a promiscuous Evacuation; an emptying of the Guts
only; of a draining of the Body by force, without distinction of Matter: But
separating all useless, superfluous, and degenerate Humors; that the vital
Liquors may be preserved pure.

Thirdly: A true Purging Medicine, operates gradually and gently; takes Time to
search out, and fetch out the morbific Matter. Moderate and gentle Evacuation,
is one sign of a true Purgative: But you do not deserve a good Medicine; if you
will not allow Time sufficient for the Operation.

A good wholesome Medicine is working secretly within the Body, all the
Intervals of Evacuation; collecting impure Matter together out of diverse Parts;
and in due time sends it forth calmly without disturbance: For if it do not
work moderately and deliberately, it cannot perform the Office of true
Purgation: This is an Operation of Time, and no hurrying Business.

Many People are for a Purge that works quick and often; and are very impatient
if it operates little, and slowly: They must have a galloping Purge; one of the
virulent and worser sort; such they like best. It is not the many Stools, that
makes Purging so advantageous in Curing; but Matter offending collected in a
few Stools; is that which makes Evacuation helpful and successful.

If you spurr Nature, with a stimulating venomous Purgative, out of her own
gentle Pace; you must not expect Purgation (which is Purification) from such
rough, rude, hasty Proceedings: You have then but a promiscuous Evacuation;
good and bad together; and that may be more injurious, than beneficial.

A Placid and Moderate Evacuation, proceeds from wholesome Purgatives: But when
they are venomous, and disgustful; Nature cannot suffer them to abide long in
the Body; but labors vigorously to expel in great haste: And that is one sign
of a bad Medicine; not a true Purgative.

Fourthly: A true Purgative Medicine, so qualified as before related; is also
Catholic and Comprehensive, in the Classis of Purgation.

Purgation is a Catholic and Comprehensive Operation; required and useful in
all Cases, and Diseases: Either singly, and to perform alone; or is premitted,
and leads foremost in a Method: Or is used intermittingly in the Course; or
else comes in at the latter end, to carry off the Relicts of a Disease; and is
so used as necessary, in the most malignant Cases, Small Pox and Pestilential
Fevers.

If Purgation be so efficacious and extensive; as requisite in all Diseases;
then a Purgative and Depurative Medicine, that performs forms this Office well
and truly; deserves the Title of Catholic, for being serviceable and useful in
all Cases. But although Purgation may be granted such a Latidude of Operation:
yet Universality of a single Medicine, few there are, can allow of that; and
are more ready to deride, than approve of such an Expedient; for the Learned in
Physic never taught them so: And they say, there is no such thing in Nature.

This is not the first time, the Learned have been mistaken: I am not guided by
all what they say; but sometimes by my own Reason, and Experience herein: And
therefore I do assert, (against any traditional, false-bottom'd Learning) That
a true Purgative, and Purifying Medicine; performs that Office in all Persons
and Cases. But this is against the Physicians Interest; and therefore they will
not have it so; that the Design of Adaptation to different Constitutions, might
pass unquestioned. I have much to say upon this Intrigue, if I would ravel into
it, and examine the Politics thereof: But let it pass.

This Practice, of appropriating Purges to Constitutions; was rational enough,
and then necessary; when Purgatives were supposed to operate (elective) by
attracting peculiarly this, or that different Humor, luxuriant and infesting
several Bodies: But now the Case is altered; and Purgatives are acknowledged to
operate (fermentative) by Fermentation; thereby to separate and cast off any
Humor abounding, or degenerate Matter.

True Purgative Fermentation, does not respect and level at this, or that
particular Humor; but separates all superfluous and degenerate Matter; makes it
ready for Protrusion, and Exclusion. Quali quisquis Humore abundaverit; talis
evacuatur. Now elective Purgation is out of Doors; fermentative Purification
comes in; as a more generous, general, and comprehensive Operation.

I meet with an Author concurring herein, and asserting muchwhat to this
purpose. Nec quidem Philosophum, aut quempiam (...), and ratione utentem decet
asserere, Pharmaca ulla propter substantiae similitudinem, aut virtutes nescio
quas specificas, in determinatum quemvis humorem agere, cumque sineerum and
peculiarem for as educere. Dr. Willis de Purg. p. 70.

Although this Author did not intend by those Words, to prove what I now drive
at; yet they are useful for my Purpose, and confirming what I have asserted;
touching Universality of a single Medicine in Purgative Operation: For, if no
Purging Medicine acts peculiarly upon; or selects and draws out any Humor from
the rest; but only raises a Fermentation, and excites Nature thereby to
separate, depurate, and exclude what is peccant and disturbing: Then that
Medicine which does procure, such a Fermentation benignly and placidly;
performs the Work of Purgation, to all Intents and Purposes, in diverse Persons,
and various Cases.

From hence you may understand; there is no necessity of forming Purgative
Medicines to Constitutions, and different Diseases; but that a true Purgative
is Catholic, and advantagiously useful in all Cases whatever, requiring such an
Operation: Yet I do allow that such a general Medicine, of that Latitude and
Comprehension; may be specificated, as pointing and aiming at, more directly
and specially.

When; how often; and in what Cases, Purgative Operation ought to be used.
There are two principal Occasions requiring Purgation: One is Preservative, or
Preventive; the other Curative.

Preservation from Diseases is very requisite: As when any Person finds some
unwonted Alteration, or Indisposition; it is a good Time then, to use preventing
means: For, it is much better, and safer to prevent Sickness; than to delay
until it seize you. Aegrius ejicitur, quam non admittitur hostis.

All that we receive into the Body, is not fit to be retained; but Part of our
Food, is transmuted, and assimilated as useful to maintain the Body: And Part
is rejected, separated, and cast forth, as excrementitious and useless; by
Stool, by urinary Ductures, by the Pores, and other Emunctories. When Nature
keeps this course duly; and being able to perform this daily Work steadily and
constantly; there will be no need of Purging: But from Intemperance; improper
and injurious Food; vicious or evil Customs; Debility of Nature, and
Casualties: The Order, and due Execution of Bodily Functions is thereby
subverted; from whence Relicts, or degenerate Matter, remains and infects
several Parts of the Body; which ought timely to be evacuated and discharged;
or else Sickness and Diseases will arise from thence variously; according to
the Nature of the humoral Matter tainting the Blood, and Condition of the Part,
where it infects, or affects; idiopathically, or sympathically. Venienti
occurrite Morbo.

But most commonly this Caution, and Advice of Prevention, is put off, and
neglected: The Prosecution of Pleasure, or Profit; will not give Time for this
necessary Work of preventive Purgation: But they suffer afterward for their
Folly. Sickness surprizeth; and then they are forced into Physic; but now
perhaps a great deal will not do; what a little might have done before.

All Bodies contract a Foulness within; some more, some less: Some are strong,
and bear it out longer; others weaker of Nature, and the sooner fall into
Sickness; or disposed thereto by the different Formation, and natural Condition
of Body: Therefore to purge and purify with a wholesome true Purgative
Medicine; is the best Preventive to keep off Diseases; to preserve the Body
sound, in a healthful and vigorous state. But if your Purges be of the common
Sort, virulent and unwholesom; that imitate and counterfeit the Office of
Purging, but performs it not: I cannot say, they are true Preservatives of
Health; nor may you expect the laudable Effects of purgative Operation, from
such feigned, deceitful Medicines.

For prevention, most People commonly choose the Spring, or Autumn, to purge and
cleanse their Bodies; and they do well, and wisely therein: But if any
Alteration should come, in the Intervals of those Seasons; you may safely purge
with a true purifying Medicine, at any Time of the Year; and with more safety
probably than to forbear, and deferr it until Spring, or Fall: For, though your
Indisposition be but small at first, and may pass off; yet you know not what it
may prove, and how it may increase: But let it prove how it will; you commit no
Error, in taking a wholesome cleanser, be it Frost, or Dog Days; only order
your self, as those different Times do require: In Winter a warm Room; in
Summer be moderate in motion, that may not cause Sweat; and then purgative
Operation, will be kindly and beneficial, at any Time of the Year.

The Caution that was given by the Ancients, to forbear purging in the
Dog Days; does not concern us in this Latitude we live in; much different from
the Heat of that Climate where they lived, Canis non mordet in Anglia.

For the Time of Day, most sit for Purging Medicines to be given; he Founders
of this Art, appointed the Morning, as most convenient: And considering what
rough sort of Purges they gave, that would not lie long in the Body, but fall
to working soon; that Time was most proper: But a Purgative, that lies eight or
ten Hours quiet, before it operates; the Morning is not convenient: Because the
Medicine will put you by the due Time for Sleep; and will be working, when you
should be at Rest the Night following: And therefore the Hour of the Day is to
be fixed, as best suting with the Nature of the Medicine.

The Catholic Medicine I appoint to be taken at Night going to Bed; because it
hinders not, but rather procures quiet Sleep; being wholesome and amicable to
Nature, placid and gentle in secret Operation: And makes no Evacuation, until
next Morning; perhaps near Noon, with some costive Bodies. But if your
pretended Purge be of the common virulent sort; the sooner it comes out, the
better; for such Purgatives ought not to lie in the Body all Night.

Having showed how proper and convenient Purging is, for prevention of
Diseases; making signs of their Approach by some Alteration or Indisposition of
Body: We are next to consider, and determine of Purgation, how it may be
advantageous, when Diseases are apparently seated, and actually molesting, or
threatening. And now you are to be directed by Indications, suggesting and
declaring when to Purge.

Ill Humors indicate and prompt Purgation; (nemine contradicente) so agreed of
all sides: And such depraved ill Humors, by a general Consent also; are
adjudged the Causes of most Diseases; and fomenting or aggravating all the
rest. But notwithstanding; the Rules of Art offers Contraindications, to bar
the use of Purgation, at certain Times, and under some disagreeing
Circumstances: So that Purgation comes in necessarily to all, as a Catholic and
General Remedy, only with this difference; That the Times convenient, for that
Operation in every Disease, may duly be distinguished.

And here I shall not need to speak particularly to every Disease by their
Names; but will take them in the gross; and consider them in their Nature, by
which they are allied to each other; as having their Rise, and Dependence upon
humoral Causes; and do therefore require Purgation. For, such as have Affinity
and Alliance in Causation; may have, and very fitly, the same Means for
Curation: Since Purgatives do not attract (elective) this or that Humor
particularly; (as before proved) but by Fermentation, which operates generally
and comprehensively, by separating all peccant Humors, in order for their
exclusion.

Names of Diseases are different and various from Parts affected, and Functions
impeded; when humoral Causes are the same; and therefore the purgative
Indication for Curing, will be the same also. Diseases being thus akin, by
their humoral Causes generating and continuing; their Cures will not lie so far
asunder; but may be yoaked together in their going off.

The People chatter as they are taught (by those who want teaching themselves)
and are wheedled into a Belief; that every Disease which has a particular
Name, must also have as necessarily requiring; peculiar and different Medicines
from all the rest: This Mistake, or Design; has filled the World, and
confounded the People, with Thousands of superfluous, dubious, and sometimes
dangerous Medicines. You are not therefore obliged to change your Medicines,
that perform the general and principal Operations, ( Purgative or Sudorific) so
often as Diseases change their Names, yet retain their humoral Nature; which
antecedent Cause, fixing here or there; infesting this, or that part of the
Body, gives occasion for a new Denomination, although arising from the old
perambulating peccant Matter.

I own that Diseases may so differ, as to require a different Method; but
notwithstanding they may have the same Medicines, properly and fitly, though
not in the same Order. Purgatives most commonly begins the Cure; Sudorifics
follow, if requisite to be used: But when Diseases are malignant, peracute, and
dangerous; then a Sudorific leads foremost.

Foulness of Body, and Obstructions; are the two general Indications, prompting
and pointing at Purgation: And therefore if you look through the Practice of
Physic; let the Disease be in any Part of the Body; Purging is appointed most
commonly, as one of the first and chiefest Remedies: And is oftener repeated,
and more relied on, than any other Operation.

Ill Humors beget Obstructions: Therefore absterse, and evacuate the depraved
Humors by Purgation; then you open Obstructions, and purify the Body with one
Operation.

Since degenerate humoral Matter, injurious and unserviceable, is brought forth
by purgative Fermentation; and most Diseases arise from, and have their
Dependence upon such Causes (by Consent and Judgment of the Learned.) Then it
follows necessarily; that a Medicine performing that Operation, well and truly;
is serviceable and helpful in all those Diseases, caused by such degenerate
Humors, and depraved Matter; let the Disease be called and distinguished, by
what Name soever.

But here I would not be so understood; as if I laid the whole Stress of Curing
in all Cases, upon Purgation; but to let you know the Efficacy, and Extensive
Power of this Operation; being seasonably and duly used in all Diseases; and
that in the most Cases, it is mostly, and advantagiously used, above any other
Operation: Yet there is a Time to forbear, and fit Times when to prosecute with
Purging.

And now we are to say something concerning Contraindications; that do forbid
Purgation at some unfit Times; which require another Operation to be then used
more properly: And this is called Method; whereby different Operations may come
in seasonably and duly, not praeposterously and interfering.

The grand Question herein to be determined, is this: Will the peccant Matter
conveniently go downwards by Purgation; or must it be sent away from all Parts
by Transpiration? Diseases that have Malignity; as Small Pox, Measles,
Malignant and Pestilential Fevers; when the Life is seized, and oppressed with
such venomous, suffocating Matter: Then sudorific Operation is the chiefest,
and most secure Help to rely on; for that disperseth the infectious Miasm, and
throws off (per poros) on every side: And when Nature (the Life) is
disentangled, and has prevailed by such means; then a true purgative and
purifying Medicine, comes seasonably afterward, to perform the rest: And this
is so necessary, to be well and sufficiently performed; else the Dregs and
Impurities remaining behind, will produce other Diseases of very ill
Consequence, as it has often proved so to many; by neglect of sufficient and
true Purgation, which is Purification: But when they have taken, two or three
Purges, of the contaminating reputed Purgatives; they think all is then done,
that ought to be; but that is a great Mistake, which will appear so, by the ill
Effects that follow, some time after.

How often Purgative Operation may be used: And how long to be continued.
For Satisfaction to these Demands; we are to make these two Inquiries: First,
What Ability and Strength the Person is of Secondly, What Disease the
Complaining labors under, or is inclined to, and endeavors prevention thereof.

If the Patient be weak, and worn down by Sickness; then give Intermission
accordingly; a Day or two; and the Dose less than for others; that Nature may
be refreshed by Respite; not impaired, but enabled to proceed in the Operation,
until the Body be sufficiently cleansed. Always supposing this to be done by a
wholesome purifying Medicine; not the common reputed Purgatives, that prey upon,
and deprave the Body: But People vainly think, every Evacuation to be
Purgation; which is a great Mistake.

Purgation is to be continued until the Symptoms complained of, do cease. (Si
qualia oportet purgentur, and facile ferant.) So long as the Patient bears the
Operation well; Nature alleviated and finds Benefit; continue on (with due
intermissions) to evacuate the humoral Cause, until the Body be cleansed and
freed from the morbific Matter; that there be no Remainder to breed, and cause
Relapse. Quae enim a Morbis relinquuntur, recidivas facere consueverunt. Aphor.

But many People, when they find themselves something eased, and the worst is
past; they desist from prosecuting; and leave Relicts behind, that procures a
Return of the Disease, or something else as bad. Thus to their Prejudice, the
most leave off the purgative Operation too soon; before they have finished the
Work of Cleansing and Purifying: Twice or thrice Purging, they think is
sufficient; and are then weary, and unwilling to do more.

The cause of this Aversness is from hence; they have been used to the common
virulent Purgatives, which are disgustful and irksome; and therefore Nature
has Reluctance against them, and People take them for mere necessity, and with
an Ill Will; accounting all purging Medicines to be much what alike, and
displeasing to Nature; but that is a great Mistake: For when they shall have the
use of a true Purgative, that is wholesome, and easily performing the Operation;
they will find so much difference then; that Purging will be no more offensive,
or troublesome, than natural Stools.

And then you can hardly err in repeating it too often, or prosecuting to long
with that Operation: For true Purging, which is Purifying; does not debilitate,
but roborate; and therefore Nature is well-pleased therewith, and receives such
a Medicine freely; because she finds Relief thereby.

I have heard some say; they are afraid to Purge, because they are too weak;
and Purging will make them weaker; and sometime it is the Opinion of their
Physician: But I say otherwise; that none but those, who are incapable of Help,
and not like to live, are unfit to Purge: Always provided, the Medicine be a
true Purgative. But Horse-Physick, such as is commonly used; I confess is too
rough and raking, for weak, tender Bodies; and that sort of Purging, makes them
more feeble and worse. Therefore in such Cases (and wanting true Purgatives)
Physicians endeavor to raise up their weak Patients by Restauratives; Jellies,
and nourishing Broths: Forgetting the Aphorism; Corpora impura quo plus
nutriveris, eo magis laeseris. Foul Bodies the more you feed them with high
Nourishment, the worse you make them.

According to the Greatness, and Obstinacy of a Disease; Purgation is to be
repeated and continued.

They that purge for prevention, and are in a seeming indifferent state of
Body; need not continue the Operation so long and so often; as others that are
actually diseased, and such as have foul Bodies.

Having gone through the several Stages of this Undertaking; if you look back
and review the whole Matter treated; you may plainly perceive the great
Mistakes, in the designing for, and managing of Purgation: Whereby much of the
Benefit was lost, to those that wanted that Help, and had great Expectations
from it. I was for some Years under the same Mistake; being led by Tradition,
and imposed upon by Authorities of the Men of great Name, and this Faculty;
until satisfied otherwise, in the Preparation of Medicines, and proving their
Operations: The only way to have a true Account of the Virtues, and vicious
Properties of the Materia Medica; and this gives the truest Light, into the
Secrets of Curing; and leads the safest, and nearest ways to arrive at those
desired Ends: For, without such Knowledge, all the rest is but a specious vain
Pretension to Ability; and venturing upon Dangers, with bold blind Confidence.

I hear a great noise of Learning, and Learned Men; but I had rather meet with
a true Learned Medicine, without exception; which as yet I have not; in all the
Books I have searched; and I have turned over as many Leaves as other Men have
done. Learning sounds great; and indeed true Learning is greatly to be
esteemed; for it is not so common, and easy to be found, as many do believe:
But Errors, and fallacious Appearances; are more often to be met with; both in
Men, and Books.

Twenty Years and upwards; I spent in wading through the vast extent of
Physick-Learning; comparing the Sentiments of Aauthors; examining their
Medicines, and proving the Practice: And twenty Years more, I have labored to
get out of that Labyrinth; because I do not like it; there is too much to be
good; and I should be loath to venture my Life with him that knows no better.
But if this great Bulk of Learning, were reformed, and reduced to a fourth
Part; the superfluous, and the false being cut off; it would be more readily
intelligible, and much more truly serviceable: But as it now is; it serves
Physicians and 'Pothecaries very well; the Hazards, and the Loss, falls upon
the Patients.

The Great, and the Rich, have their Fate by Physic; for they are served no
better than the meaner sort; but sometimes worse; (I forbear to Name) yet it is
commonly said; nothing more could be done, by Learning, and Learned Men: But if
such mortal Cases, were inquired into; the Methods and Medicines examined; I
wish there were not cause to say; that more dies by the Errors in Art, than by
the Defects of Nature.

I take my measures of Censure; not only from the Misakes, and ill Management
of Purgation; but also from the Deficiencies, and Falsities of other
considerable Parts of this Learning; of very ill consequence in Practice.

It Is much easier to blind and cheat the Work; than to do a Public Good: For,
when many Years have been spent, in elaborating a Medicine truly purgative and
purifying, to perform the great Work of Purgation, as it ought to be done,
(such as never came out of a Shop:) They boggle, are at a stand, and take time
to consider, (but not all) that others may try first; and make Report: And
herein they think themselves very wise and wary; though perhaps in the mean
time, they suffer by the delay, and want thereof.

But virulent deceitful Purgatives; such Stuff as they have been used to,
(Farriers Physic) that they can take with confidence, and swallow it down
freely; when advised and administered in the Recipe-fashion; being accounted (by
undiscerning mean Capacities) the Learned way of taking Physic: But I account,
and well know, that novel Mode of Practice to be; unlearned, unsafe, and an
unreasonable Innovation; for Reasons exhibited against it elsewhere, ( The
Practice of Physic Reformed, etc.) not yet answered; and probably never will;
there is too much Truth to be opposed; and will abide the Attacks, of all the
Learning, or Sophistry; that can be brought against the Validity of those
Arguments.

Much good may do you, with your Learned way of taking Physic. You may venture
so as many have done, to their loss; but I never shall, because I know the
Uncertainties, and Casualties therein.

And here I might justly upbraid and deride the Paeople; as desperately
self-willed, praepossessed, charmed, and Hag ridden by a Spectrum, the
Apparition of feigned Learning. Then let the Obstinate and Headstrong, dote on
in a dark, and dangerous Way; since Information is vilified, and nulled by
Incredulity, and the Vanity of their Imaginations.

But to wave the extravagant, and pernicious Mode of Practice, occurring in our
Discourse; and return to the evil Matter in Practice; our present Subject. It
seems very strange, and looks very ill; that the Operation of Purging; so
efficacious in Preventing, and also in Curing Diseases; so often repeated in
Methods; so necessarily required; so many hundred Years used; by Millions of
People; the Means designed, and appointed by the learned Heads in every Age:
And yet the Medicines for this Purpose, are not to the Purpose; do not truly
answer the Intention; but are fallacious and unfit to perform the Work.

The disgusting, contaminating, and tabifying Purges, that stand recorded, and
recommended in Books; filed in the Shops; advised, and purchased at a good
rate; appointed, and falsely appropriated to Constitutions, and Diseases: What Is
all this? but Shamming the World, and Shameing the Profession, when it is
rightly understood: And will then appear a Blot upon the Learning, and a
Blemish upon Learned Men: They have sought for Purgatives, amongst the Venoms,
where Purifying, and healing true Purgers are not to be found; deceiving
themselves and others.

But the People deserve no better; because they discern no better; they don't
distinguish Men nor Medicines. For virulent Stimulatives, is as acceptable to
them; as Balsamic true Purgatives: Any sudden Invention, devised upon a bit of
Paper (cut out for Shop-work) from the hands of a conjecturing Praescriber; is
as good to them, or better; than a Medicine of deliberate, and elaborate
Designment; established by various Probations, and Approbations, from many
Reforms and gradual Improvements, by Artists of great Industry. and Ingenuity
in Pharmacy.

This I do know, experimentally and successfully; that Purgative Operation, may
be effected (as ought to be) by Medicine, wholly consisting of what is
amicable, purely wholesome, and sanative: For such is the Catholic Medicine; and
like it in Design, and Model of Contrivance; or equivalent to it, in aperitive,
abstersive, purifying Virtues; or commodious Properties, for ready use,
portage, and duration: I never met with in all my reading, and search after
what is extraordinary and rare. The World was never blessed, with any thing so
good, for the Purposes intended; that I can be informed of: But this Help is
hid from their Eyes; or barred from their Belief; that they should wander after
mean and hurtful things.

I was dissatisfied with the common known Medicines extant in Pharmacopoeia's,
and advised in practical Authors; thinking much better might be designed, and
wrought: Wherein I gave my self more Trouble than Profit; which Labor and
Expense of Time, has not been recompensed, and perhaps never will in my Days:
But some Person, whom I know not as yet (such are my unhappy Circumstances) may
reap what I have sown; and probably to their great Advantage: For this Product
may endure, and be most acceptable to the Generations to come; and then
esteemed, the choicest Flower in the Physic- Garden.

The Stress of Curing lies mostly; and often wholly, upon the Excellency of
Medicine; and Failure most frequently, is in the want thereof. And were the
Professors so fortunately possessed with wholesome true Medicines; exquisitely
to perform the Operations, that Nature requires in order to Curing; (which are
not many) they need not then spend so much Time, about disputable, uncertain
Notions and Theorems; nor burden their Memory, with so great a System of
Learning. For, the greatest Difficulties in Practice; are not the want of
knowing what is to be done; as not having, and not truly knowing, wherewith to
perform those necessary Intentions that lie fair before them.

If the purging Medicines be not wholesome and purifying; but vitiating and
evacuating promiscuously; as before proved: Then they do but palliate and
mitigate; by taking away some of the old morbific Matter, and make new
succeeding Matter: This is deceitful Purging; and causes great suspicion upon
the rest, that are set forth to perform other Operations requisite in Curing.
But it is not my present Business, to examine the other Classes of the Materia
Medica; how properly and truly they are regimented and associated, to executed
the Offices designed for, as by their Titles importing: That, may require
another Undertaking, and is a Work needful; because the Errors in forming of
Medicines are not a few.

Some of this Matter, lay offensively upon my Thoughts; and now being
discharged thereof, I am at ease; so fare you well, in the way you like best.

Here Is Caution enough to the Wise and Considerate; and for those that are
otherwise, and undiscerning; if much more were said, it would be but Labor
lost.

FINIS.
London, 1696. in Grays-Inn-Lane, by Kings-Gate.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Mystery of Curing Comprehensively; explained and proved A^^^tatively and
Practically. Three Parts. Approved the most Useful, Commodious, and Efficacious
Expedient; against surprising painful Diseases, and secret Decays of Human
Nature.

Monarchia Microcosmi. The Origin, Vicissitudes, and Period of Vital Government
in Man.

Enquiries into the general Catalogue of Diseases: Showing the Errors, and
Contradictions thereof.

The Practice of Physic Reforme^ etc.

A Treatise of the Scurvy. Another of Consumptions.

The History and Mystery of the Venereal Lues, or Pox.

Ignota Febris. Fevers mistaken in Notion and Practice, etc.

The dangerous Transition of Pains, to Inflammations, Tumors, Apostems, Ulcers,
Cancers, Gangrens, and Mortifications, Internal.

The Ancient and Modern Practice of Physic, examined and compared.

The Complete Physician, etc.

The Method and Means, of enjoying Health, Vigor, and long Life.

All writ by the Author hereof.


