SOLOMON'S PRESCRIPTION For the Removal of the PESTILENCE: OR, The Discovery of
the PLAGUE of our Hearts, in order to the Healing of that in our Flesh.

By M. M.

LAMENT. 3. 39, 40, 41. Wherefore does a living man complain? A man for the
punishment of his sins?

Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.

Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the Heavens.

PSALM. 106. 29, 30. Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions: and
the Plague brake in upon them.

Then stood up Phinehas, and executed Judgment, and so the Plague was stayed.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, M. DC. LXV.

The Preface to the Reader.
Reader,
I Had more Objections in my own thoughts to the sending forth this Paper; and
can fore-think more faults like to be found with it when sent forth, then I
shall now stand to tell thee of, or make any answer for. But because amongst
all those Objections, I met not with this, That it was impossible it should do
any good, I thought the rest answerable; and because amongst all its faults,
thou can not (truly) find this, That it was not intended for any good, I
persuade my self all the rest are pardonable. What the design of it is, if thou
art in haste, the Title will tell thee; if thou art at leisure, and think it
worth thy while, thou may find it in the Book it self; so either way I might
be excused from saying ought of it here. But somewhat for thy satisfaction
know, when I considered the sore Judgment wherewith we have been visited, which
so evidentlie declares Wrath to be gone forth from the Lord against us, I
thought it might be an Essay very acceptable to God, and profitable to our
selves, to do the best I could to make the voice of the Rod Articulate; that in
the print of its lashes, not only Gods Wrath, but the sin he scourges us for,
and the duty he would drive us to, might be found in legible Characters, that
even he that runs may read them. When I looked on Affliction as a Medicine for a
distempered Nation, I thought it was exceeding necessary, in order to its
kindly working with us, to tell the nature, import and use of it; and to give
directions how it ought to be received. And though I acknowledge my self the
meanest of Ten thousand for so great a Work, yet when I saw or heard of nothing
so particular and distinct, as I thought the matter required, humbly depending
upon, and imploring Divine assistance, I made this attempt; wherein, whilst I
have guided my self by the Physicians own Rules, and an impartial consideration
of the nature of the Patient, I hope I have made no material (I am sure no
wilful) mistakes. This then was my great desire and hope, to be by this
undertaking, a worker together with Gods Providence for some good to the
Nation. And surely no man has cause to be angry with this intention, or with
any thing that flows sincerely from it. Had any man, though the meanest among
the People, in the time when Nineveh was threatened with destruction, given in a
Catalogue of those sins they were guilty of, the removal of which could only
prevent their Ruin; I am persuaded his endeavors would have been grateful to
the Prince, his Nobles, and the People, though he had spoke to them all with
more plainness and boldness, than I have done. And I dare confidentlie expect
the same, if our Fasting and Prayers be not only for fashion-sake, but in as
good earnest as theirs.

Two great miscarriages moreover I was prone to fear the most would be guilty
of, which I have especially consulted against. The first, of being swallowed
up so much with a sense of their Suffering, as to be indispose for all
profitable Reflections; and therefore fain would I turn men's eyes and thoughts
from off this, to the sin that brought it; and have them only to consider the
former, so much as to inform themselves more clearlie of the evil of the
latter. Oh what Outcries we may hear up and down, what doleful times these
are! So many Thousands dead this Week, so many another! The Plague got to
this Town, and then to that! All Trading, as well as Persons, dead and gone!
But were People formerly thus affected, whilst we were bringing this upon our
selves? Did they cry out then, Oh how many Thousand Oaths are sworn in a Week?
And how many Lies told? How many Thousands Drunk, and how many commit
Lewdness? Had we had Weeklie Bills of such Sins brought in, they would far have
exceeded the largest Sums that ever yet the Mortality made. But alas! these
with the most were light matters. Not half so many groans and tears for these,
nor any such complaints of them; nor did the consideration of them make any
sensible alteration amongst us. Now this I would fain obtain, to have those
days thought as much worse than these; and those actions as much worse than
these sufferings, as the Disease is worse than Physic; and a Child's
disobedience to his Parents, worse than his being Whip't: And he that should
weep out of pity to the Child, when he sees it lash't; and yet could be
content to hear him revile and abuse his father, I should think to be a person
of more Fondness, than Discretion; and for him to be more concerned for the
Child's Smart, than the Parents Honor, argues him to have no true love for
either.

And here by the way let me give a Caution, viz. That no man bewray so much
folly as to argue, That because in mercy God may abate and remove his heavy
Judgments, before many, or perhaps any of these sins I have mentioned are put
away from amongst us; and because we may have our former health and plenty
restored, whilst there is no such Reformation of disorders as I have exhorted
to, that therefore our Sufferings were not intended to chastise us for those
sins, nor to bring us to this Reformation. If thou be an Atheist or Infidel
that make this Argument, who believe not there is a God, or that he
concerns not himself with our Affairs, but that all things come by Nature or
Chance, or I know not what, I shall then leave thee to receive satisfaction (if
nothing sooner will give it) there, where all such as thou, by the feeling of
Divine Vengeance, are at once convinced what the sin is which has deserved it,
and that there is a God who inflicts it; but if thou be a Christian, then I
would wish thee well to examine the nature of the thing, (that I mean, which
thou think God has not punished us for, because it is yet continued) and
upon the issue of that examination, pass thy judgment. It Is much to be feared
thou will see Drunkards, and hear Swearers, after the Plague may be ceas't; and
will thou think therefore that these, and the like Wickednesses, did not
provoke God to afflict us? But rather stay, if thou art in doubt, till the
great reckoning day, till thou have heard all men's Accounts cast up, and those
Actions which are then approved confidentlie pronounce no sins; but not all
those that survive the heaviest Judgments here on earth, which may be sent to
punish and reform those that were guilty of them; since hardened sinners may
frustrate some ends of an Affliction, and all are not followed here, as Pharaoh
was. No, I say, do not justify all such Actions, though thou should hear
them openly defended, and applauded, and those men punished that dare to
oppose and contradict them, and that opposition made the only sin. This lower
World is full of such mad mistakes and confusions, but all will shortly be set
strait.

The other miscarriages that I feared men would be apt to run into, and which I
have labored to provide against, was, That though they might be convinced that
sin in the general, was the cause of all our miseries, yet hardly that it was
their sin, or their friends, but some bodies else that they don't love; and so
shift it off to this or that Party, whom they would have punished, had they
been in Gods stead. Such a strong self-love there is in every man, that his
fancy shapes God very much in a likeness to himself. Even the vilest sinners,
Psalm. 50. 21. thought God such an one as themselves. And consequently they
account themselves, and all their Concernments dear to God, and so would
interpret all his Providence in favor of them, to right their quarrel, and to
avenge them of their enemies; for thus would they prescribe God, might they be
call*d to his counsel. All would fain carry it, that God is of their Party,
and against those whom they are against; every man will be more inclined to
accuse others* than himself: Nay, and hence it often falls out, that they who
have espoused any sin, will be so far alone from thinking ill of it, that
they will rather accuse the contrary virtue; and so godliness it self may
sometimes bear the blame, or however the most godly and unblameable men. The
Pillars of a*Land sometimes are accounted the Pests of it, on which whilst some
men blind with rage, lay their hands to pluck them down, they are about to do
themselves, and the people with whom they are, the same courtesy that Sampson
did to the Philistine Lords. They who were the Salt to savor a corrupt World,
were accounted the filth and offscouring of all things. Ahab will sooner count
Elijah than himself, a troubler of Israel. And when any mischief befalls the
Empire, then the poor Christians must be thrown to the Lions. Thus I fear
amongst us, many bitter and undeserved censures will be past by one against
another; which great sin I have done my best to consult against, whilst I have
chiefly labored to bring every man to a reflection upon himself; whilst I
have studied faithfully to deal, both to this man and that, his share in
procuring our miseries; and whilst I have made the Divisions and Parties that
are amongst us which occasion this Censoriousness, one great cause of our
Sufferings. However one or otber may interpret what I have done, I am pretty
indifferent; only I hope I have said nothing, which need make any man
presently fall a confuting me, which, I*le promise you, it is an hard thing in
these days to escape; say what you will, it is against Sin only I have a
quarrel: If any guilty person (as the Pharisees when Christ preached) shall
think I mean him* let him once again know, That it is not against Small or
Great, but the Sins of All, that I am entered into the Lists; and I hope they will
rather see to forsake, than vindicate them. But if otherwise, if leave may be
granted, I dare undertake to evidence, That Sin is that which brings Suffering,
and that those things I have mentioned as the sins of our Nation, are indeed
such. Yea, and if it be not thought Immodestie to forestall the Readers
judgment, I dare add, That I have spoken very great Truth and Reason in the
matters most liable to Exception, notwithstanding all the weaknesses and
disadvantages in the representing, which I readily acknowledge to be many and
great. But I have already exceeded the due bounds of a Preface; wherefore to
conclude, Let all censure as they shall find meet; only let me make a solemn
Profession (which is the more credible from one, who has no great reason to
expect to outlive the General Desolation) that, so far as I know my own heart,
I have spoke nothing with a design to exasperate any, or to humor and gratify
one Faction, by disgracing or inveighing against another; but it has been my
care to speak the very truth, according to the infallible Word of God, and the
clearest apprehensions of my own Soul; with an unfeigned desire to discover
what indeed those sins are, which we especially smart for, that the
inconsiderate and ignorant may be informed, the guilty humbled, wickedness
rooted out, God appeased, and all our mercies, both spiritual and temporal,
restored and continued; and these designs shall be followed with my prayers:
(and I hope with thine too that read'st me) but how far the success may answer
either, I must leave to the Readers improvement of, and Gods blessing upon my
well-intended, though weak endeavors.

Thine in the Service of the Gospel, M. M.

I KINGS 8. 37, 38, 39. If there be in the Land a Famine, If there be
Pestilence, Blasting, Mildew, Locust, or if there be Caterpillar: if their
Enemy besiege them in the Land of their Cities, whatsoever Plague, whatsoever
sickness there be:

What Prayer and Supplication soever be made by any man, or by all thy People
Israel, which shall know every man the Plague of his own heart, and spread
forth his hands toward this House:

Then hear thou in Heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and do and give to
every man according to his ways, whose heart thou know, (for thou, even thou
only know the hearts of the children of men.)


THE good and gracious God, the Ruler and Governor of the world, and the
disposer of all events, does nothing rashly or in vain, and therefore has made
it the duty of the sons of men wisely to weigh and consider of his Providence,
and to learn Instructions thence, as well as from the Revelations of his mind
in his written Word, Micah 6. 9. We are bid to hear the Rod. And though in the
bounteous dispensations of his favors, we can assign no higher cause than his
own mere grace and good Will, which is accomplished in the doing good to his
Creatures; Yet in the inflicting of Judgment which is his strange work, we may
be sure to find something out of himself moving him to it. It cannot be well
conceived how man should ever be the subject of pain or sorrow, did not sin
render him passible, and open a way for the Sword to enter his bowels, and give
it that edge and force which causes it to pierce the deeper, and to wound more
sensibly. Now as a distemper which arises from a Surfeit, is to be looked at
only as an effect of Intemperance, and is not to be quarreled at, but the
cause of it to be blamed; and as the Chyrurgions searching into the festered
place is not a wound, but a discovery of the depth of the sore, in order to its
cure; so are the judgments which God sends on a People only to be regarded as
the Symptoms of, and means to cure that disorder, and distemperedness within
our selves, which does as it were naturally produce such sufferings. It is not
the breaking forth of some inward distemper, which is our sickness it self,
but it is rather the effect of it. The spots discernable upon the infected, are
not the Plague, but the Tokens. Thus are we to account the most grievous things
that light upon us, but as the manifestations and fruits of something worse
within us. Now look when men by outward signs find out those ill humors that
lodge within them, they labor not so much to repress the outside sore, as to
correct and remove the inward cause. He that when the Pox comes out upon a
child, would drive them in, shall but make sure and hasten his death; but
rather will the wise Physician prescribe means for their kindly coming forth
and ripening, that by them the corrupt humors may be vented and vanish. He
that is troubled with heats and flushings, arising from his Liver, would but
play the fool to lay plasters to himself, but will rather take Physic that
may inwardly purge him. Even thus also suffering having its birth and
nourishment from sin, the way for the redress of that is the removal of this.
And by no other means can a kindly cure be effected. Indeed sometimes an
affliction may be taken off in greater wrath, than it was laid on, when people
so revolt, that God will strike them no more, but because they are joined to
their Idols, will let them alone; but this is but the making way for sorer
judgments to follow. And thus will it be wheresoever we are taken from under
the Rod, before we are brought under the yoke. If outward sufferings turn to
hardness of heart* desperate is the case* of such a people or person, however
they may applaud themselves in their deliverance; this is but like a venom
which may seem to leave a finger or hand, but strikes up to the heart: this is
but a skinning over the sore which will wrankle beyond the possi billty of a
cure; It is but a kind of lightning before death, the surest forerunner and
saddest presage, that all our happiness is giving up the ghost and departing
from us. Now we must needs acknowledge it infinite mercy and goodness in our
God, when we have reduced our selves to such a dangerous estate by sin, any way
to discover it to us, though by sharp and smarting means, so that these prevent
our final ruin. Oh that I could inculcate this into my own, and the Readers
soul, that before we felt any pain, we lodged within us a greater evil, and
that what we now feel proceeds from the hand of love, if we are wise to improve
it. Poor man, thou criest out of poverty, loss of Relations, sickness and
pain, but did thou not know it? Thou carriedst these, yea, and worse than all
these about thee before, when yet thou could go up and down quietly enough
and never complain. Could thou not swear, be drunk, commit lewdness,
overreach, defraud, and oppress thy brother, profane the Lords day, neglect
the worship of God both in public and private, make a jest of Scripture, and
mock at holiness, and corn, and deride, hate, and persecute the most serious
Christians? These, these, oh senseless sinner, were thy sickness and misery;
these conceived and bore about in their bowels, all that sorrow which since
they have brought forth. Sin goes big with all the most dreadful Evils in the
world; even Hell it self is its natural offspring. But alas thou feltst no
hurt, no smart in all this. Thou could grieve the Spirit of God, and trample
under foot thy Redeemers Blood, and run fresh Spears into his side, and nails
into his hands and feet, and yet never once in any sober sadness reflect upon
thy self, and say, What have I done? Thy sin was thy pleasure, thy sport, thy
trade; so sweet, so profitable, that thou thoughtest it as dear to thee, as thy
life it self; and could never believe thou wa'st doing thy self so much
mischief, while thou was it pleasing thy flesh, or filling thy purse. How hard a
task had he undertook, that would have gone about then to have convinced thee
that thy most delightful gainful sins, were indeed thy wounds, thy losses, and
would be thy undoing? And yet thus it was. He that is swallowing down poison
because its sweet, or wrapped up in gilded pills, is then poisoning himself even
whilst the sweetness is in his mouth, and his palate is pleased with the
relish* though perhaps he may then laugh at him, that cries out it is poison,
and bids him therefore as he loves his life, spit it out: What, shall you
persuade him that can be hurtful, whose taste is so pleasant? But even he
himself when he feels it burn his heart, and gripe his bowels, and torture his
inward parts, will then cry out he is poisoned, and roar out in the anguish and
bitter torment which he feels, but all this his pain is but the working of that
poison, which then became mortal, whilst it went down so pleasantly. You may
hear people when in sufferings, make sad complaints and lamentations, that
would even melt ones heart to hear them: Then they can cry out, oh my my wife,
or husband, or child is dead! What shall I do? How can I bear it? Oh what
course shall I take to get bread, for my self and Family? cry the poor; what
must we starve for want of relief? Oh how doleful is our case! And they that
are under sickness, and struck with the visible hand of God, how do their
hearts sink within them like a stone? How pale and ghastly do their looks of a
sudden become? Now they are even at their wits end, oh any thing, any thing for
help? What piteous moans now they can make! oh their head, their heart, their
back! Now with what astonishments and horrors, do they every moment expect to
breath out their last? with what amazing fears, what dark and dismal
apprehensions of the state they are entering upon, are they now seized? what
passionate outcries may you hear from them? what must they dye? Is there no
remedy? no hope? Must they then leave the world they have loved so much, and
lived in so long? And bid farewell to their friends and companions, their
houses, and lands, their sports and merriments and gainful trading, and all for
ever! Oh that ever they should be born to see such a day! That their dwellings
should be within the reach of the Contagion! That this dreadful death of all
others should befall them! That they should be left thus desolate and forlorn,
forsaken of all, abandoned of their nearest relations, in this time of their
greatest extremity, when they most need succor and comfort! Thousands such
hearty groanings, and bitter wailings may you hear: but had you come in amongst
these people, a few days since, oh what quite other kind of men were they? How
jolly and secure, following their pleasures or business; and would it is like
have laughed at him that should have told them of a death so near, or of the
Judgment that follows after. How few, alas! how very few should you have then
found amongst them, who did at any time cry out, oh blind mind that is so
ignorant of God! Oh earnal heart that is so averse from his Laws! Oh how
unevenly do I walk! Base treacherous wretch that I am, thus to depart from God!
Vile and unthankful creature, that ever I should offend a God of such mercy and
love! Oh that I was delivered from the power of my lusts, the temptations of
Satan, and all the diseases of my soul! Alas! instead of such becoming language
as this, you might from the most have heard, swearing and cursing, idle songs,
filthy and ribbald speeches, or at the best, frothy, foolish, or worldly
unprofitable discourse. Poor stupid sinner, then thou wast stabbing and
destroying thy self, then thou wast seized with the most deadly Infection. Then
had it been no uncharitableness, nor absurdity to have set a Lord have Mercy
upon me, in Capital Letters on thy forehead; yea, wise and holy men saw it
there in that wickedness that broke out in thy life, and looked on thee as
fitter for a Pesthouse, than converse; as one not to be accompanied with,
except in order to thy Recovery. Now must we not all in general say, that it is
tender compassion in the great Benefactour to mankind, that he will so far
concern himself with us in our miserable estate, as by any means to awaken us
to a sense of it, whilst there is any possibility of a Cure: Sottish wretches,
that measure all events by their correspondency to flesh and blood, will not
believe there can be love in such sore Afflictions. They to whom Sin was sweet,
will hardly be brought to like well of those potions, which are administered on
purpose to make it bitter. How will they loath the Physic, who love their very
Sickness? But all whose eyes God shall open by his Providence, will see
abundant cause to bless, and praise him for his Love, in working them to a
timely apprehension of that, which otherwise had been their ruin. Tell me man,
Is it not a wonderful mercy to be awakened on this side Hell, let the means be
what they will? If thy present smart makes thee judge otherwise, could thou
but come to the speech of those undone souls whose hopes are perished for ever,
they would soon satisfy thee that every thing is tenderness, and very great
mercy that comes to discover Sin, and prevent everlasting misery. Oh lay this
to heart in time man, and stay not too long, till feeling give thee a too clear
and undeniable demonstration of this Truth. If now thou criest out thou art
undone, because thy Trading's gone, thy Friends dead, or thy Self in danger of
Death, and lookst not about thee to find out, and be affected with greater
Evils than all these, and so to escape much greater Sufferings than yet thou
have felt, it is but a little while before thou*shalt find Arguments reaching to
thy very soul, which will make thee acknowledge what I now say. Oh then, when
thou find thy self under the vials of divine vengeance, and have taken up
thy residence amongst the Devils and damned Ghosts in the midst of the burning
Lake, what slight inconsiderable things not worth the mentioning will all the
miseries thou underwentst in thy lifetime appear to thee? What desirable
things will the most pinching Poverty, the most grievous Pain then seem,
compared to what thou will endure? What very trifles, mere flea-bitings will thou then judge Famines, Plagues, and heaviest Judgments that can light upon
men whilst in the body? Oh what would thou then give to be where thou wast,
when thou thoughtest thy self at the worst? And would thou entertain such a
state with joy and thankfulness, which before thou thoughtest the most
miserable that a man could possibly be cast into? Then thou will confess, that
to be Shut up from the Society of Men, has nothing of dolefulness in it,
compared to thy being Shut up under the burning wrath of an unreconciled God.
Then at length, whether thou will or no, thou shall see sin, and cry out of
sin, and acknowledge it is thy sin that has ruined thee. Now thou can in thy
cold, faint manner by rote, say thou art a great Sinner, and perhaps may
cursorily cry God mercy; but then from the very inwards of thy soul shall thou
repent of sin, with such a kind of hellish repentance, as is proper to those
damned Spirits in the midst of their Tortures; Such an one as thy Predecessor
Judas felt the beginnings of, when he ran to the halter for comfort. Then thou
shall not only with those Rev. 16. 11. pour out thy blasphemies against God,
the breath of whose fury like a stream of brimstone kindles and keeps alive
those unquenchable flames: but thou shall also load thy self with heavier
accusations, than ever any of Gods Ministers did whilst thou wast upearth. Then
thou shall feelingly confess thy self stark mad and besotted, and wonder at thy
own stupendous folly, that ever thou should so wilfully and resolutely
plunge thy self into that place of woe. And this will be none of the least
aggravations of thy torment, to reflect upon those many ways which God used
with thee to have convinced thee of thy sin and danger before it had been too
late, of all which thou made light, and would not be taught by them; when
the hand of God here was lifted up, thou would not see; but then thou shall
see, thou shall know. Then thou will easily grant, that the sharpest suffering
that had so shown thee sin, as to have saved thee from this wrath, had been the
happiest providence that ever befell thee. Would any man that has not lost his
wits, as well as his gratitude, take it ill from his neighbor that should
waken him out of his sweet sleep, when the house is on fire over his ears, yea,
though he pinch and beat him black and blue that he may speedily rouse him? Now
from all I have said then, I would gather, That the heavy hand of God upon a
Nation, as it is laid on for sin, so for the most part not merely for
punishment and destruction, but to discover to us the evil of our doings, that
they may be repented of, and put away. And so there is much mercy in the midst
of these Judgments, if they be improved to those eads to which their nature is
fitted for, and which we are commanded to make of them. The greatest of these
Calamities to those that remain, are but like the sounding of a Trumpet, the
giving an Alarm, the shooting off a Warning-piece, the hanging forth of a white
Flag, and all speak to this purpose, That though the Sins of a Nation have been
exceeding great and provoking, whereby the Anger of the most holy God is justly
kindled against them, which he sends these his Judgments to testify, that yet
he is willing to put up all former affronts that have been offered, if now at
length they will become a reformed People, and with detestation of their sins
turn from them unto God and his holy Ways; but if not, that his anger shall not
be turned away, but his hand stretched out still, till he has made a full end
of them, and will follow them with judgment after judgment, till they are cast
into the lowest hell. So that you see plainly the Rod, has a voice, and is a
kind of Sermon, but comes nearer to the sense, and will force an observance
more than mere words could do. We could choose whether we would read a Bible or
good Book, or regard a Minister or godly Neighbor, giving us this very Lesson
as plainly, but in a more gentle manner. We could stop our ears, or turn our
backs, or harden our hearts against all the most awakening, startling Truths:
We could make a pish of the most dreadful threatenings in the Book of God,
denounc't against those very sins we committed; we could laugh at our Teachers
and Reprovers, and scorn at the offers of their love for our recovery. And when
we were sunk into such a deplorable estate, wanting nothing of falling
headlong into Hell, but the withdrawing of that miraculous patience which kept
us out every moment, then in infinite mercy did our God, who like a wise
Physician, suits his potions to the nature of the disease, and temper of his
Patients, make bare his Arm, and reveal himself and his pleasure to us, in a
way most likely to affect us, if we who yet survive, be not obstinately bent
upon our own destruction. Let us not then murmur or repine: for if our disease
be grown to such an height, that without stronger medicines it would be our
death, Is it not all the reason in the world that we should submit to those
prescriptions which are proportioned to it? Whoever thou art that suffer,
thou have reason to be content, for its thy own doing; thou might have
hearkened in time to the plain Word of God, and so have escaped this severer
discipline. Thou who wast wilfully deaf to the still voice, Is it not of thy
self that a Message is delivered to thee in such terrible thundrings? If thou
had not closed thy eyes against the gentle light, they had never been so
forcibly held open by the hand of God, to see those things which are as clear
as the Noondays Sun* If the Word of God had sunk into thy soul, thou had not
thus felt his arrows in thy flesh, nor been taught thus with briars and thorns,
like them, Judge. 8. 16. God delights not in the smarting and roaring of his
creatures; but yet he that has bidden Parents by the rod of correction to
drive out the folly that is bound up in the heart of a Child, so he loves the
sons of men, that he will not spare his rod when it may (and if it be not men's
own fault, will) conduce to their advantage. When there is no way but either
the gangrened member, or the life must go, who would not lose that, to save
this? Still then here is mercy: Afflictions, beside the frightful noise, have a
clear sense and meaning; beside the heat that scorcheth, they have an informing
light. God might in a moment have snatched thee from Earth to Hell, and there
have convinced thee in such a manner as leaves no room for thy Reformation,
when as now he has taken away thy Neighbor, and but threatened thee with
death, and afforded thee some breathing-time for thy preparation, and for the
prevention of the endless death. Thou who art reading these lines, might
have been the first at whom God had level*d his arrows; thou might have been
snatched out of the World suddenly, without any other warning than the Word had
given thee, as it may have happened to others. But since it has not thus befaln
thee, whatever thou may feel or fear further, thou can not but acknowledge
God treats thee very graciously. Whilst thou art on this side Hell, thou may
learn much by the severest Dispensations; and though this seem a cutting,
piercing way of teaching, yet is it (as I said before) best suited to thy
dullness and senslessness, and most likely to prevail with thee, as not needing
so much the pains of a particular Application to thy self, which thou would
not be brought to in the hearing of the most searching Sermons. 'Twas but
forgetting them, and there was an end of all; but now God speaks words which
may be felt, that shall stick longer by thee, and upon which he will keep thy
most serious thoughts whether thou will or no. It did require indeed deep and
frequent consideration to convince thy self of thy lost undone estate by reason
of sin, whilst thou wast swimming in plenty and prosperity, and could bid thy
soul take its ease: Alas! what was it to hear of the wrath of God, a
never-dying worm, an unquenchable fire, whilst men felt all well with
themselves; and looked upon those very sins as essential to their happiness,
which the Word represented as their misery? They were not then likely to think
very ill of them whilst they perceived no hurt they did them; but now when God
shall manifest his hatred (and consequently the evil) of sin by demonstrations
reaching to the very bone, he that groans under these loads, may very readily
infer, that surely sin is an exceeding great evil, which pulls down such
Judgments from a compassionate God: which yet at the highest, are but
forerunners of infinitely worse to follow, even everlasting destruction from
the presence of the Lord without timely Repentance. And when thou have so far
made advantage of thy afflictions, as thence to inform thy self of the evil of
sin in general, and of thy particular sin; to know that sin is a Plague, and to
know what is the Plague of thy own heart, then thou art in a very fair way
toward deliverance and healing. And this is made evident to us by the words of
Solomon which we propounded at the beginning, which I intend not particularly
to insist on, but to make them the foundation of a more general and laxe
Discourse.

The Import of them seems to be this, That any man under any Calamity whatever,
that should be sensible of the Sin that procured it, and betake himself to God,
by Prayer and true Repentance, for him the wise man Prays, that he may have
audience and Mercy. For such a man is fit to have the plaster taken off his
sore, on whom it has had a kindly influence, answerable to the end whereunto
God sent it; namely, to show his Sin, humble him for, and turn him from it.

Two things on the By only, I shall hint from these words,

1. That we may very well turn this Prayer of Solomon's into a Promise, and
conclude that what he begged of God, and that with a particular Reference to the
Children of Israel, shall be granted to every man, in any place performing the
Conditions here described.

2. Note, that under the work Know, is comprised the whole performance of all
that is required in other places of Scripture, in order to the obtaining of the
pardon of Sin, and the removal of those Judgments which it had procured. There
is nothing more common in holy Writ, than the making words of Knowledge,
inclusive of the affections and practice also. To know God, frequently
comprehends our whole duty to him; for our knowledge of him being the beginning
and groundwork of all other Duties, and producing them where it is in
clearness and power, may very well be put for all. According to this is our
English Phrase, I Will make you know your Superiors, that is, perform your duty
to them. So here to know the Plague of our own heart (by which is meant Sin,
the disease of the Soul) is as much as to be convinced of it, to see its
Odiousness, to be lively humbled for, and sincerely resolved to forsake it.
That it must be a working practical Knowledge, not resting in mere conviction,
is evident from the foregoing words, which mention the Prayer proceeding from
those who know the Plague of their own Hearts; the same also follows, and
spread forth their hands to this House; that is, make their addresses to God,
with some kind of particular Reference to the Temple, where he did in a more
special manner reside and manifest himself; and thus Daniel in captivity opened
his window toward Jerusalem, Dan. 6. 10. Now he that should thus come to God;
what is it for? Not only for deliverance, but also to confess sin, the cause
of his misery; and if so, then must he be truly grieved for his provocations of
the most holy God, and this could not be without promises, and purposes of a
Reformation.

Now I need not stand to prove what I before mentioned, that whoever is thus
affected shall, if not be freed from the temporal Affliction he lies under,
yet, be secured from the hurt of it, and have greater blessings bestowed; this,
I say, I need not stand to prove, the Scripture being everywhere so full of
Examples and Promises that demonstrate it. And indeed it is fully evidenc't in
the very tenor of the Covenant of Grace, which assures Pardon, and Salvation,
and all things truly good for us, upon the Condition of our coming to, and
receiving Christ; which none can do, but they who are sensible of their need of
him, who have seen the evil of sin, both as to its nature and effects, and are
desirous to be delivered from the guilt, and pollution; and this sense of sin,
and aversion from it in heart and life, is true Repentance, and upon condition
of this it was that Soloman prayed for, and God frequehtly Promises Mercy, and
particularly see his answer to this very Prayer, and the Promise he made to
grant it, 2 Chronicles. 7. 13, 14.

Wherever then the Judgments of God, are more Eminently Inflicted on a People,
it is a sign there are some heinous transgressions which have deserved them. If
the Plague, or any such Calamity, seize a Nation, it speaks this much, that
there is a Plague in the hearts of that People; some such wickedness which
provoked God, to pour out his Wrath upon them. Sin is as the body, suffering
usually as the shadow that attends it; the one is as fire, the other as smoke
that proceeds from it. Wherefore by the putting away of sin only, can we escape
the threatened wrath, or rescue our selves out of that we feel. This is very
plain, if the knowledge and removal of the Plague of our hearts, conduce to our
Recovery, then our being seized with it was our misery: and therefore the Cause
being removed, the Effect will follow. If the entertainment of Sheba into Abel,
bring Joab and an Army against it, then to deliver him to them is the only way
to procure their departure, 2 Samuel 20.

These several Truths then are plain, and the words we have taken notice of
naturally afford them.

1. That God is the Supreme efficient cause of all the Sufferings we lie under.
Is there Evil in a City, (of Affliction that is) and has not he done it?

2. It is for the Sin of a People, that God lays these sufferings upon them.

3. It is a most proper seasonable Duty, in times of such Calamity, to make
enquiry into our ways, that we may discover what is most likely to be the
Cause; What is that Achan that trouble us? This is the great thing whereof we
are called in the day of adversity to consider; and accordingly, the most of my
business in my following Discourse, shall be the practice of this Direction:
for I shall not particularly handle any of these Observations.

4. If we finding out oursin, bewail and abhor it, put it far from us, and
betake our selves to God for mercy and pardon, then will he hear in heaven, and
forgive; remove from us our Miseries, and restore his Loving Kindness.

I shall only answer one Objection by the way, and so pass on to what I chiefly
design. Some may say, they have been sensible of, and in some measure humbled
for sin, and yet notwithstanding, have been held under as sharp and as long
sufferings as others. Here we must distinguish (1) betwixt National and
Personal Judgments: (2) betwixt the Ends and Reasons why they are inflicted:
(3) betwixt the Cross and the Curse of it. And so I answer.

(1.) If the Judgment be National, as Sword, Famine, Captivity, some great
Mortality, and this sent for a National common Sin, it cannot here be expected,
that the Humiliation of some few particular Persons should always serve for the
averting such Calamities. Nay, the Righteous themselves may be involved in
them; as we find there were many good Men carried captive with the rest into
Babylon, amongst which, were Daniel, and the three Children. Indeed sometimes
we read of one or more standing in the gap, and preventing a deluge of wrath,
as Moses often did, but there was then also some kind of general Humiliation; for
of the people, its said, When God slew, then they sought him* Psalm. 78. 34. And
though Moses prevailed thus far, that they might not utterly be destroyed, yet
very sore Judgments were frequently laid upon them. Noah delivered himself and
Family only, not the old World. Lot himself and Children, but not Sodom and
Gomorrah; though then God graciously condescended to have spared them all for
the sake of Ten righteous Persons, could they have been found amongst them. But
at another time, so great and general were the Sins of the Jews, That God tells
this Prophet, Though Noah, Samuel, and Daniel were there, they should only
deliver their own souls, Ezekiel. 14. 14. Ordinarily, it is an Humiliation in some
competent measure proportioned to the sin which must appease the wrath of God
broke out upon a people. When all Nineveh had sinned, and was threatened, it
must be a general Repentance that could prevent the Execution of those
Threatenings.

(2.) Though particular Persons may not by their Reformation procure mercy to a
whole Land, nor yet free themselves from the outward stroke which lights upon
the Body of the Nation, yet shall not their labor be lost, but God will have a
special eye to them in the common Ruin; and what is in wrath to others, shall
be in love to them. They shall have either such preservation from, or
deliverance out of the temporal Calamity; or such support in, and advantage by
it, that they shall have abundant reason to acknowledge, that their Repentance
and Supplications were not in vain. Fear not, poor Christian, if thou be but a
mourner in Zion, one whose heart bleeds for thine own and others
transgressions; though thy Dwelling be in the midst of profane, rebellious
Sinners, yet thou shall not be lost in a crowd. It is not the Oaths, and
Blasphemies, and Crying Sins of those about thee, that shall drown thy Prayers:
but God will hear, and one way or other graciously answer them. If thy Soul,
thy everlasting Life be given thee for a prey (as a temporal Life was promised
to Ebedmelech, Jer. 39. 19. and to Baruch, Jer. 45. 5) thou have sure no reason
to complain. What though the same Disease, and Death seize thee, as does them?
It comes not for the same Reason, nor shall it have the same effect. What
though thou wast carried in the same Ship with Traitors into another Country,
where they are to be executed, and thou advanced to the highest Dignity, was
this any hurt to thee? If Death take thee from the pressures of all sorts,
under which thou may now groan, and from the Evil to come, and translate thee
into the glorious Presence and full Fruition of the Ever-blessed God, this is
sure a different thing from being snatched away from thy happiness into the
society and torments of the Devil and his Angels. Wherefore thou have good
reason to acknowledge Gods distinguishing mercy in those his dealings with
thee, which to sense may be the same with what others meet with. I might add
also the spiritual advantages which accrue to the Godly by Afflictions
sanctified, but the other contains this in it, and much more.

(3.) Thy Afflictions may perhaps be more for Trial, than Punishment; and so
may be continued, notwistanding thy endeavor to find out and forsake sin; but
when they have wrought that particular End for which God sent them, they shall
be removed. Or they may befall thee for the Cause of God, and a Testimony of a
good Conscience, and then thou have more cause to rejoice in them, than
impatiently to seek their removal. Whatever they be, see thou make this use of
them, to be more deeply humbled for, and set against sin, which is remotely at
least, the cause of all Suffering; and to demean thy self patiently and
submissively under the mighty hand of God, and in his due time he will exalt
thee.

It being then evident, That the knowledge of Sin is so necessary to the
removing the heavy hand of an offended God from off an afflicted Nation,
Surely, the great Work we are all called to in this day of our sore Visitation,
is to give all diligence to know why it is that God contendeth with us; and
wherein we have incenst him thus, to pour out his wrath upon us; that so we
turning from our particular sins, he may turn away his anger, and comfort us.
And in order to this, it is the duty of every one, who is an Inhabitant of the
Land, in the first place to call himself to a strict account, and impartially
to look into his heart, and review his life, and see what he has done toward
the hastening these Judgments upon us, and accordingly apply himself to God, to
do his utmost for their removal. Every man has brought a faggot to the
kindling of the Common flame, wherefore every man should bring his bucket to
quench it. And here let me warn every soul to beware of a most dangerous
temptation, wherewith its like they will be assaulted, to wit, to think but very
meanly, and slightly of their own particular sins, as if they had little or no
influence, to the bringing on us such grievous Calamities; and that partly out
of self-love, which makes us very tender how we accuse our selves, and ready to
extenuate all our own faults; partly, because we may yet be free from the
smart, and therefore take but a cold superficial view of our selves; and
partly, because when we look upon the evils in gross under which the Nation
lies, we can discern no proportion betwixt them, and our personal offenses, and
this comes much from our ignorance of the heinous nature of the least sin. Now
reflect on thy self, Reader, and tell me, Have thou not been very ready in the
general to cry out, That it is for the sins of the Nation we are now afflicted;
and to fly out very bitterly against this party, or that; this abuse, and the
other corruption in Church or State, but in the mean time, have been very
backward, to charge and accuse thy self, as thou ought, as if thou wast not
a member of this sinful and suffering Nation. Let thy Conscience answer whether
this has not been thy way, and judge whether this be a just performance of thy
duty. If every person thus shift it from himself, where will Repentance be
found, and what is like to become of us? If there were an Army to go forth
against the Enemy, and one person should draw back, and say, what can he do? He
cannot be mist in such a Multitude, nor can he do much against such a numerous
force, and therefore desires he may stay at home; and another come, and use the
same excuse, and so a third; and at length all that have the same reason,
(which indeed every man may pretend to) what is like to become of the War? And
yet alas! how does this senseless Objection, generally prevail in the World,
in a case somewhat different from this, viz: hindering that courageous Zeal, and
Industry, for the promoting of Religion, and for the destruction of the Devils
Kingdom, which beseems every Member of Christ hat is listed into his service,
by the Baptismal Covenant, wherein he was engaged to fight under the Banner of
Christ, and that without putting in this Condition, that he should have good
store of Company to join with, and back him: for without this he may come off a
Conqueror. But yet now cries one, What can I do against an overflowing torrent
of wickedness? what can I, a weak, and single person do, for the advancement of
Holiness, against a wicked raging multitude? what can thou do? why, thou
can strive and dye, can not? But what then, shall nobody do any thing,
because every man is but one, and has many difficulties to encounter? Or will thou therefore do nothing, because thou can not expect a success answerable
to thy desires? Or may we not join, and unite our strength, and all set to a
shoulder, for the carrying on of the work of the Lord? Be sure thou shall
always have difficulties to try thee: for it is thy heart God calls for, he
needs not thy hands. Why, Man, if thou wast alone in all the World, having such
a Leader and Captain as Christ, would thou not stick to his Cause, and keep
to his Colors, and die fighting? If not, thou deservest not the name of a
Christian. And if there be so few who seek the things of Christ, with how much
more vigor and resolution ought those few to bestir themselves; and not also
forsake their Lord, because the rest of the world do? but still they should
imagine they hear the awakening words of Christ to his Disciples, sounding in
their ears, What, will ye forsake me also? But this was a digression.

Let not then, I say, the consideration of thy being a single person, abate any
thing of the measures of thy Sorrow for Sin: for if all do thus, as all may
have the same ground, there will be none found to charge sin on themselves, and
acknowledge Gods Justice in all his sharp dispensations.

Wherefore, whoever thou art, into whose hands these lines may fall, my earnest
request to thee, yea, my strict Injunction, is this, that thou presently get
alone, and soberly sit down to the intent study of thy self: Beg of God, to
help thee in this work, and do thou endeavor with all faithfulness, as in his
sight, who will shortly Judge thee before all the world, to rip open to thy
self all the baseness that has been lodged in thy heart, all the lusts that
have been entertained there. And Consider well thy Life, what known Sins thou
have been guilty of, what Duties thou have omitted. And then with all speed and
seriousness, betake thy self to God, acknowledge thy own vileness, plainly
confess, that it is this or that thy sin, thy looseness, thy covetousness, thy
pride, idleness, or voluptuousness, that may have helped forward his anger.
And own it as a token of undeserved Grace, that all manner of woes have not
seized upon thee, in thy own person; that whilst so many are Afflicted, and
taken out of the world before thee, thou have warning and leave to prepare, for
what may befall thee. And see that thou labor to represent sin to thy self,
with all its heightning circumstances, and aggravations, that the review of it
may more deeply affect thee; help thy Meditations with those doleful miseries
so many now lie under, and that in part for thy sins, which yet are but the
beginning of woes to the impenitent; and then think, if these are no jesting
matters, what is the sin that procured them: Think of that matchless Love, that
continued Patience, that clear Light, those great Engagements, Purposes, and
frequent Promises, that thou have sinned against; till at length, these
Considerations work thee to such an apprehension of sin, that thou can not
conceive of any suffering suited to its demerit, but the everlasting wrath of
the most dreadful Majesty: and till thou acknowledge not only thy contributing
to the present calamity* but that if the rest of the Nation had been like thee,
it would surely have been all in flames before now.

Be sincere and through in this humiliation of soul, and take heed of neglecting
any such Consideration as may help on the same. Review thy Self, thy Place, and
Relations, and what in them was expected from thee, which thou failedst in
performing, and accordingly lay it to heart, and judge and condemn thy self and
behavior. If in any place of Honor and Service, thou have not improved thy
interest for the rooting out of Sin, and advancement of Holiness, account thy
negligence aggravated by the greatness of the Talents thou wast entrusted with.
Wast thou a man of Wealth, Wit, Power; a Magistrate, a Minister, a Master of a
Family? Take a strict account of, and humbly bewail thy unfaithfulness to thy
several Trusts, and thy carelessness of those duties which thy place did
peculiarly engage thee to.

And do not think when thou have discovered, and confessed sin, that then thy
work is over, as if* by thy formalities thou had purchased to thy self a
dispensation to continue in it; like many, that think they serve God
sufficiently by going to Church, and saying their Prayers, and in the mean
while make this their serving him, but a kind of indulgence for their sinning
against him.

But when thou have made this progress, thy next work in order to the obtaining
of a Pardon, is, seriously and deliberately to resolve upon the putting away
far from thee every known sin, upon mortifying thy dearest lusts, and upon a
faithful performance of those duties common to all Christians, and those thy
Talents or Relations call for. If thou have been a debauched, or covetous
Person; a careless Mispender of thy money or time; an Extortioner, or
Oppressor; a racking Landlord, or cheating Tradesman; a Sabbath-breaker, and
Neglecter of Duty to God, public or private; or have lived in any the like
sins, enter now into a solemn Covenant with God, that by the assistance of his
Almighty Grace, thou will never more allow thy self in such a course of
Impiety. If thou have abused thy Riches, and laid them out only in making
provisions for thy own or others lusts; If thou thoughtest thy Dignity above
others, did dispense thee a liberty of sinning without control, and
accordingly have misimprov'd it; If thou have been unfaithful in the execution
of Justice, with which thou wast entrusted, neither looking after sin to punish
it, nor punishing it when it was revealed to thee, but have rather been a
Terror to good works, than to evil; If as a Minister, thou have been
regardless of the souls of those committed to thy oversight, only striving to
enrich thy self, not better thy people, practicing those sins thou have
preached against; Or, if as Ruler of a Family, thou have been negligent, not
setting up the Worship of God in thy House, but gone from one day to another
without so much as a serious Prayer, nor have instructed thy Children, nor
Servants in the fear of the Lord; whatever, in a word, thy trust and
unfaithfulness to it has been, confess and lament the same, and resolve for
the future to do thy utmost to discharge thy duty, to answer and fill up thy
several Relations.

And here again, let not any insist on that silly Objection before mentioned;
What can my repentance do to the diverting of Judgments that flow in upon us
like a deluge! For if all, I say, use this, who is it must pacify Gods wrath
by their Reformation? But, if thou for thy part wilt practice what I have here
cursorily directed, thou know not but others may do so also; and so, if
every one would set to this Work, thy Cavil would be wholly silenced and
answered. But again, thou would grant it to some purpose for the whole body
of the people to join in hearty humiliation and amendment of their ways, and
know, that as to the greatest benefit that would accrue to a Nation by such a
general repentance, thou shall procure it to thy self by this personal
performance of thy Duty; that is, either the Affliction it self shall be kept,
or taken off thee, or laid on in so much mercy, that thou thy self shall,
either here, or in another World, bless God for the the same. And I hope this
advantage is not inconsiderable, when on the other hand thou remembrest, how
certainly thy impenitence will cause thy everlasting, as well as temporal
ruin. And take notice from the Text, That God will render to every particular
man according to his ways; but this I have before said something to.

Oh that now there were in us all such resolutions unfeignedly to search our
hearts, and reform our lives, and with our whole souls turn to the Lord our
God, from whom we have revolted! What blessed Effects should we find of this
wise and dutiful demeanor! Oh that I knew how to persuade poor souls to this
course, before their deadly enemy, who now does all he can to harden and
stupifie them, shall be fully seized of them, past all possibility of a
delivery; then scorning at all our endeavors, and challenging us to do our
best for the rescue of such undone souls, who must be tormented by him, by whom
they would be ruled. But if thou art so far persuaded of the reasonableness of
this duty I have been pressing upon thee, that thou art desirous to know thy
Self and Sins, would gladly find out, that thou might expel the plague of
thy own heart; that I may do something farther to help thee in thy
Self-examination, I shall briefly endeavor to discover what those sins in our
Nation are, for which especially we are now plagued by the visible hand of God:
And the Lord awaken us all seriously to lay to heart, and remove them far from
us, that so God having accomplished his own designs upon us, may lay by his
Rod, and show us his wonted favor. And let me beseech thee, Reader, to
accompany me with thy Conscience, and let thy eye still be turned off from the
Book upon thy self, and if thou see thy own actions described, cry out,
Guilty, guilty, I am the man; and so proceed in thy duty, as I have before
directed, and shall not again repeat, except on the By.

In the prosecution of this design, I shall say something, 1. Of those
notorious crying sins which are to be found amongst us; of which, I shall need
to say the less, because they are so visible upon us, and so readily
acknowledged to be what they are, and because so many Books are written to
shame and suppress them. 2. I shall proceed to lay open some such abuses and
corruptions amongst us, which are not only sinful in themselves, but also in
part, secret causes of the former, which yet perhaps may not be apparent to,
nor acknowledged as such by all.

And once again, let me desire every Reader to place himself, as at the Bar of
God, and so to pass a true judgment upon himself; and not to quarrel with the
Physician, instead of falling out with the disease; nor be more averse from
hearing the discoveries of the plague of his own heart, than he would be to
hear his Physician tell the Symptoms of the Plague, to convince him he was
struck with it, whilst all this was but in order to his recovery. Whoever thou
art that are guilty, it is thou have wounded thy self; I would willingly show
thee thy Sores, that they might in time be healed; if thy resolution not to
have searched into them, make them uncurable, though I may never have thy
thanks for the offer of my help, yet I know whom thou will accuse as the cause
of thy destruction, which I would fain have prevented, and shall do what I may
in order thereto.

1. In the Front of those Abominations under the Effects whereof we groan, we
may well place Adultery, Fornication and Lasciviousness, whether we consider
the provoking Nature, or the Commonness hereof amongst us. This is a sin we
often find attended with exemplary punishments in Scripture; for this, together
with their Idolatry, we read of a Plague inflicted upon the Israelites, Numb.
25. whereof dyed 24000. For David's commission of this but once, it was
threatened to him, That the Sword should never depart from his house, 2 Samuel 12.
10. And in the New Testament especially, how frequent are the prohibitions, and
how severe the threatenings denounced against it? Whoremongers and Adulterers,
in a peculiar manner, God will judge. And for these things sake especially, we
are told, comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. How strict
is our Saviors Exposition of the Seventh Commandment, making a lustful glance
the breach of it? And upon the mention of that, immediately follows the
threatening of the whole body being cast into Hell, without the cutting off the
right hand, and plucking out the right eye, the subduing the dearest lusts, and
renouncing the sweetest sins, Matthew. 5. 28, 29, 30. With what repetitions of
the same do we find it mentioned, where it is spoken against, inculcated again
and again, to take the deeper impression? And when the lusts of the flesh are
named, usually this is reckoned for the greater part of them in various
expressions, signifying much what the same thing, Coloss. 3. 5. Mortify
therefore, etc. Fornication, Uncleanness, Inordinate Affection, Evil
Concupiscence, Ephesians. 5. 3, 4. Gal. 5. 19. Now the works of the flesh are
manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness.
This sin we find much aggravated by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 13, 14. to the end;
as that which in a particular manner defiles a man, and renders him indisposed
for the in-dwellings of the Holy Spirit. This loathsome wickedness does
especially soften and brutifie men, and sinks them from God into the sensitive
life, and stupifies the higher parts of the Soul, and renders them unqualified
for a converse with that God, who commands all that will approach him, To be
Holy, as he is Holy. And this is a sin which upon many accounts, breeds as
much confusion and disorder in the world, as it does in particular men's Souls:
It must needs therefore incense the most High God, to see his creatures endued
with reason for the governance of themselves, to whom he has prescribed Rules
for their walking, to degenerate into such effeminate impotence, as to be
hurried away by their own lusts, to such bestial uncleanness.

But alas! How notoriously infamous is our Nation grown for filthiness and
lewdness! It cannot now be charged on the Pope alone, That Public Stews are
erected within his Jurisdiction; only yet here is this difference, Those are (if
History, and Common Report speak Truth) Licenc't: Ours are not demolish't. Nor
yet perhaps are ours so public, or certainly known, but yet too public they
are, to the disgrace of our Nation, and Holy Profession. Insomuch that one
would think Venice was lost from its foundation, and floated into England. It
is not the loathsomeness of that disease which in a just judgment attends it,
that will deter men from this more loathsome sin: Yea, so common is it grown,
that by many it is looked upon as a very light matter, no way so heinous as God
and his Preachers would make it. And they are ready to censure his Laws as
severe, for not allowing them the privileges of Bruits; so strangely does
frequency in sin, wear out the sense of it! And a sensual life does even blind
the understanding, and bribe the Conscience; till at length with much ado, men
almost persuade themselves, that they may do what they have often done, and are
resolved still to persist in. Whoredom, Wine, and new Wine take away the heart,
Hos. 4. 10, 11. Even in a Literal sense, the Spirit of Whoredoms cause men to
err. And can it seem strange, if at length God make use of Arguments, which
such brutish creatures themselves are capable of, to prove to them, That their
filthiness is highly provoking to his glorious Majesty, who is of purer eyes,
than to endure to behold the least iniquity. His Word condemned this before, as
plainly as it could speak; but vile Wretches, whose Senses are their Masters,
would not understand it; they acknowledged not his Commands, they either
believed not, or would not consider his threatenings; his promises of an
everlasting glory, were too thin and spiritual for them to relish, or be
allured by. What tell ye them of Rivers of pleasures at Gods right hand? They
must have their dirt to tumble and wallow in. Take those who will for them,
they must have their Chambering and Wantonness, and lustful dalliances.
Nothing must go for reason, with them which contradicted their sensual desires;
and is it not just, they should then be dealt with suitable to their Natures?
That since nothing else would do it, Sense and feeling may at length assure
them, their sweet and pleasant sins are a displeasure to God, and most
pernicious to themselves: And if neither seeing the beginning of Gods wrath
upon others, nor feeling it themselves will prevail with them, God has
judgments in store that shall extort from them, will they, or will they not,
most passionate and hearty acknowledgments, that whilst they were satisfying
their Lusts, they were most studiously contriving their own ruin, and
treasuring up wrath for themselves against the day of wrath. If neither
Poverty, nor Shame, Pox, nor Plague can bring them to such a confession, Hell
shall bring them to this, and much more.

But as if we were not content with those ordinary sins of Adultery and
Fornication, it is reported that we have amongst us, beside the effeminate,
abusers of themselves with mankind also. This in Italy had been no such
monstrous thing, but can it be accounted less in England? Both Heathen and
Popish Rome indeed, has still been infamous for this, amongst other
abominations; and thence it is most probable, we have derived Sodomy, as well as
Popery. And it is well, if (...) all other projects, for the promotion of Holy
Church, this be (...) to debauch our Gentry, the better to dispose them for the
embracing of that Religion, which can afford them Indulgences at so cheap a
Rate. Now let any man but seriously consider the Holiness of God, his Infinite
purity and justice, and withal reflect upon his Omnipresence, his
All-searching eye that is upon the most secret actions; think but how he has
been a Witness of all that Lewdness that has been committed in all places,
in the greatest privacies and retirements, not bars and bolts could keep him
out, not drawn curtains, nor the darkest night could hide impure sinners from
his view; consider we but these things, and shall we wonder if for these
wickednesses the Lord be wroth with us, and pour out the Vyals of his fury upon
us? How justly might God take up the complaint against us, which he did against
Israel, Jer. 5. 2, 8. When I had fed them to the full, they then committed
Adultery, and assembled themselves by Troops in the Harlots houses: They were
as Jed Horses in the morning, every one Neighed after his Neighbors wife. And
what follows, ver. 9. Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? and
shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? And oh now, that all
those, whose Consciences condemn them for these things, would presently arise,
and take shame to themselves, and do no more so wickedly, lest worse things yet
befall them. And the good Lord awaken those that are in Authority, to greater
vigilance and industry for the future, in searching after, punishing and
suppressing this Impiety wherewith we are so polluted; that the Visitation now
upon us, which has so much the same cause with that laid on the Israelites,
Number. 25. may also have the same speedy and effectual cure, which we may read,
Psalm. 106. 29, 30. Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions, and
the Plague brake in upon them. Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment,
and so the Plague was stayed.

The two next Sins I shall mention, may pass for Appendices to this first, as
having been too apparent promoters of it; which yet if they were not, may upon
other Accounts be deservedly reckoned amongst the provoking sins of the Land.

2. The former, is the Licentiousness of the Stage, where wickedness, and
amongst other sorts, wantonness is more effectually taught, than it is decryed
in the Pulpit. Let their Favorers talk what they will, of their advancing
Virtue, and shaming Vice, I should put it amongst one of the wonders of the
Times, to hear of any man Reformed by a Play. If to hear others, be the way to
make men leave them; if to hear the Sacred Name of God profaned, his Word
jested with, Religion it self derided, be the way to make men Devout; if to
hear Lascivious Discourse, and see Impudent Persons and Actions, be the way to
get Modesty, then let us all flock to the Playhouse. And next, from the same
Reason, let Youth be brought up in a Brothel-house, to learn Chastity; at a
Tavern, to avoid Drunkenness; at a Gaming-house, to keep them from Cursing and
Swearing. I have heard but few count it any great wisdom in that Nation, where
they were wont to make their Servants drunk, to show their Children the
odiousness of it; and surely there was less charity in it, to make some
commit wickedness, that they might prevent it in others. But when Vice shall
be represented, yea, and commendably too, it is very great odds; but that they
will soon turn Actors when they are gone away, who were even now Spectators of
it. What is to be learned at the Playhouse, let the Conversations of most that
plead for, and haunt them, evidence. And from the Lives, to the Consciences of
the greatest Admirers of a Play, do I appeal, Whether ever they got any real
good from them, and whether they have not often got evil. The precious time that
is misspent either in seeing, or afterward talking of them, is not to be looked
on as a thing of nothing; however it be slighted by those wretched Sotts, that
knowing neither God nor themselves, have more time than they know well what to
do with, and therefore are glad to run to their Plays and Sports, for nothing
else but to help them away with it; and let not such complain, if a Plague at
once ease them of all that trouble, and carry them into an Eternity, where they
shall never more have one of those precious moments which here they were weary
of, and knew not how to improve. And if they knew nothing they had to do here,
but please themselves, God will cast them into a world, where he will find them
employment enough, but of such a nature, that they shall wish a thousand and a
thousand times over, that they had spent all their days in the greatest
diligence and strictness to have prevented it. Let the giddy careless ones of
the world cry as long as they will, What hurt is there in this, or the other
Recreation or Merriments, that only wastes their time? If there was any hurt in
the fire and brimstone that fell upon Sodom, that which caused it, was no such
harmless thing; and amongst the sins of that City, abundance of Idleness is
named for one, Ezekiel. 16. 49.

Again, were it nothing else but that vanity and frothinesse of mind, and
unfitness for all Religious duties, which Plays naturally produce, I think
this was enough to make all Sober persons regard them as little better than
Pest-houses: And had our Gallants looked on them as such, and accordingly
shunned them, they might not have had occasion to avoid those which are more
dreadful, but less hurtful. Would our wanton Youth, and idle Dames have kept
out of these places of Infection, where Folly and Lightness tainted them both
by their eyes and ears, there might have been no such infected places, which
they are now so careful to avoid. For my own part, I must needs say, That I
took it for a dishonorable Reflection upon our English Prelacy, which a modern
Poet makes his observation, in a Preface to a Book of Comedies, put forth in
these late times, That Bishops and Plays went down together. And sure, if they
could have hindered it, it is as little for their Honor, that they have both
been restored together. I can scarce (but that I should prevent my self)
forbear crying out, when Preachers mouths are stopped; and Players opened, What
sad effects are like to follow! Surely the Primitive Christians, whose
moroseness in refusing to behold the Roman Spectacula (whatever difference
there may be betwixt them, and our Stage Plays) was one great crime objected
against them, would not have thought such lewd and immodest Shows agreeable
with their Profession. But what talk I of them, a company of sullen souls, much
what like the people, we are wont to laugh at for Puritans? It is not my
business now to argue, what a Play is in it self, or what it may possibly be
refind'd to; but I speak of them with all those corruptions with which they are
now attended. And I would hope the same policy, a little more improved, which
has shut up the Play Houses now, to prevent the spreading of the Infection,
will keep them so, to hinder its return: Whoever may be displeased with this
motion, I am very confident, God is not, and then I am indifferent who is.

3. The latter of the two Sins, which I mentioned, as related to the first
Particular, is Pride; and here amongst all the sorts of it, which might very
well deserve our notice, and with which no doubt God is provoked, here I mean
especially Pride of Apparel: a Sin grown either so impudent, or so universal,
that our Pulpits do of late days seldom meddle with it. I am sometimes ready to
think, Ministers are ashamed to concern themselves with such low and ridiculous
things; (though I wish they are not silent for fear of offending their fine
Hearers, which may chance to be of the best in the Parish.) But if people will
be so ridiculous and vain, and manifest such childishness and folly, surely
their Teachers must follow them, and condescend to discover to them all their
mistakes, and the subtle ways of the Deceiver of souls, who is very ready to
play at any game for the ruin of poor Creatures; and holds more in his slavery
by this very vanity we are now insisting on, than is ordinarily thought: we may
find the great Apostles not thinking it below them to give Precepts in this
matter, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5. Whose Adorning, let it not be that outward adorning
of plaiting the hair, or wearing of gold, or putting on of apparel, etc. so
also 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10. In like manner also, That women adorn themselves in
modest apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety, not with broidered hair, or
gold, or pearls* or costly array; but, which becomes women professing
godliness with good works. Which commands how they have been violated, it
concerns the guilty to lay to heart. As I would not be thought of their
Opinion, who place their Religion so much in Meats, Drinks, or Apparel, whether
Papists in the former, or Quakers in the latter; so I am as far from thinking,
that Religion extends not to these things: for though it be seated in the
heart, it gives Laws to the outward Man. I rememember, it is an Observation of
a most judicious and learned Divine, That few of those Errors or Sects that
have rose up amongst us, but have called upon us, to have regard to some
neglected truth or duty, as he instanceth in several; And to add one more, I
think the Quakers are risen up, keeping such a stir about Ribbonds, cuffs,
and lace, and such like things, to shame and condemn all, especially the more
strict professors of Religion, for that very great liberty they have assumed
to themselves in their bravery, gaudiness, and changeableness of Apparel. Had
the Professors of these latter times, made those of the former (who were yet
as careful of their hearts as any) their patterns in this matter, they had
spoiled the poor Quaker of half his Religion, and not given him an occasion to
bring up a Sect, that should go in plain and modest clothing. But wise are
they who shun both extremes.

Doubtless, this Pride in the outward man, is no such a slight matter as it is
commonly made. See Isa. 3. 16. Because the Daughters of Zion are haughty, and
walk with stretch'tforth necks, and wanton eyes -- Therefore will the Lord
smite with a scab the crown of the head of the Daughters of Zion. And have we
not had multitude, such walking in our streets? Read on that Chapter from the
16 verse to the end, and tell me then whither God take not notice of, and is
not displeased with this vanity, and curiosity in apparel. Is not this indeed
to be proud of our shame, since clothes themselves had not been used, but for
that shame which sin introduc't? And I may well annex this to the sin of
wantonness, both as discovering and promoting it: For what is the design of all
that art, cost, and pains that persons bestow upon attiring themselves, but to
appear handsome and well set out? And what is this for, but to couch others eyes
to be fixed on them? what are naked breasts, and painted, and spotted faces
designed for, but as trapans and snares for the wanton beholders? And the
dress it self by the lascivious is made but a more plausible kind of Pander.
It may be worth the noting, that the word rendered effeminate, (...), 1 Cor. 6.
9. is joined with (...), and signifies soft clothing, Matthew. 11. 8. which may
intimate to us, that there is some relation betwixt such clothing and
effeminency. And whereas by the Texts above mentioned, it seems that women only
were wont to be guilty of this folly; the delicate Youths of our time, will not
suffer that Sex to engrosse this sin, and shame to themselves, but are resolved
to go sharers. Oh the intolerable expense of money and time, for the
satisfaction of this base monstrous Pride! How many naked backs might be
clothed with half that cost, which is lavish't to put a man in a fools coat,
or to hang about them such baubles, as may serve people to stare at? and let
the guilty bethink themselves how to answer this their Liberality upon their
Lusts, in the day of severe account, when all Talents shall be reckoned for. By
that time at the farthest, if they be not convinced that persons of Honor and
Estates, had been better distinguished by their Examples of Charitableness,
than by gaudy Garments, or rich Jewels, let me pass for a false Prophet. Though
I spe^k not this of those Robes and Ornaments of the Magistrate, which are
necessary for distinction sake, and to acquire greater reverence to his place
and person. But let all those who are at so much charge in their Attire, to let
the World know they are Somebody, remember this, That God entrusted them not
with Estates for them thus to make show of, but to use for his Service. And I
think any body will say, that he is an unfaithful Steward with a witness, who
when his Lord has given him money to lay out in necessary uses, shall throw it
about streets, to let people know what store of money he has the keeping of:
Thou who can condemn such an one, see thou do nothing like him. Whoever thou
art that have been guilty of this fault, surely thou will acknowledge this is a
day that calls for the laying aside of thy braveries and ornaments, and rather
to cover thy self with Sackcloth and Ashes. But if yet thy Pride will not
suffer thee to part with them, bethink thy self what thy naked Soul shall wear
in that place whither God has expressly threatened to turn the proud. Dives
there must not have his Silk and fine Linen, but instead of them, the purple
flames are his unchangeable clothing.

Is it any wonder then, if as the Israelites were plagued for worshipping the
Idol which was made of their Earrings and Jewels, Exodus 32. 3, 35. We meet
with the same punishment for a sin not much different, even for making such
Toys themselves our Idols. Strange judgments may well follow strange apparel;
yea, such that wear it, God has plainly threatened, Zeph. 1. 8. And what
strange apparel for both men and women have the Devil, Pride, and France
helped us to? And they who caught this sin one of another, pleading Fashion for
their Justification, are they not justly afflicted with a Disease that is
Contagious too? The Spots which Pride and Wantonness, those plagues of the
heart, sent into the face before, are they not fitly punished with Spots of
another hue! Is it not exceeding just, that they who were so far fallen in love
with their comely Carcasses, that they were wholly devoted to deck and trim
them; should have such loathsome Botches, and noisome biles and Risings upon
them, as might convince them how little better than Carrion is that flesh they
so much pamper and adorn? And let them now think what pleasure or ease is to be
had from putting on their splendid finest Array, when the Plague-Sores shall be
running upon them; even much-what the same that Herod had from his Royal
Apparel, when he was eaten up of Worms, Acts 12. 21, 23. And if in such a case
they would have little mind to stand tricking and trimming them, let them know
that the Ulcers and Sores of their polluted Souls, and proud hearts, call for
as speedy, and earnest reg^rd, and deep humiliation; and were these once cured,
such vanities would be thrown aside. The Lord grant all those who survive, may
take warning in time, before their bodies are humbled to the Dust, and their
Souls to Hell, for their daring, impudent pride.

4. Another heinous sin which has overspread our Land, is Swinish Drunkenness
and Gluttony: This also may well be joined with those before mentioned, as
being the ground and incentive of all other Lewdness and wickedness. But
alas! How has the Commonnesse of this Vice, and men's custom in it, taken away
those odious apprehensions which Scripture helps us to, and all sober men have
of it? Oh, how are our Taverns and Alehouses, in all parts of the Kingdom,
frequented! How does our whole Nation seem even ready to Reel into its own
Ruins, being seized with the Vertigo of an Epidemical Drunkenness? How
Gentile, and fashionable a thing is it now grown, for men to be drunk, in
Civility to the Company they are engaged in? How many Tricks have they devised
for the maintaining of this sin, notwithstanding the most express Injunctions
and Proclamations to the contrary? Profane Custom has so overswayed, That
drinking of Healths, must be the Test of Men's Loyalty; and of their Respect to
those great Ones, to whom the beginner shall consecrate his Bowl; as if a
disorderlinesse, which scarce any Beast will be guilty of, must show good
Manners; and no man could be a good Subject to his King, which dare not Rebel
against his God. Those that dare, are valiant men indeed; but such, as when it
comes to trial, will do little more for their Prince, than they do for their
Maker. So general is this practice of excessive drinking grown, that both the
Gallant and the Clown, Rich and Poor, Young and Old, yea, Women as well as Men,
City and Country, are fadly infected with the same. In too many places, he is
scarce accounted a good Housekeeper, that let us his Neighbors go out of his
house sober. How can men entertain their Friends, or renew their Acquaintance,
or drive any Bargain, without betaking themselves to some Tipling-house? Yea,
how frequently are Drinking-matches appointed, for no other purpose, but to
pour down their Liquor? What multitudes are there, Who rise up to drink strong
drink, who tarry at Night till Wine inflame them? Yea, to such an height of
wickedness are we grown, that as if there was some excellency in sinning, men
strive for the Mastery in it; and to be able to drink down others, goes for a
very Manly Faculty. Such enemies have we got to the Cross of Christ, whose God
is their belly, whose glory is their shame.

And is there not the same Reason, that our Crown of Pride, and the Drunkards
of England should be trodden down, as well as of Ephraim, Isa. 28. 3. Is it not
just, that they whose Intemperance has often deprived them of their Reason,
should be taken with a Distemper that may strip them of the use of it? That in
those very streets where men have staggered and fallen down dead-drunk, they
should there fall down stark-dead?

The like might be said of Gluttony, and Luxurious Feastings, a sin more
confined to the greater Sort, who can make sufficient provisions for the flesh,
to fulfill the Lusts thereof* abundantly confirming what the Wise man has told
us, That the prosperity of Fools destroys them. And what a wiser than he has
expressly affirmed* though sure believed but by very few, That Rich men do
difficultly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. How much money is expended but
once, to furnish the Tables of these gluttonous Epicures? How do they Sacrifice
Gods Creatures merely to their Lusts, eating only for pleasure, and to keep
themselves alive from one Meal to another, without thinking of that Service
they owe to God for all. They have lived in pleasure, and been wanton,
nourishing their hearts, as in a day of slaughter, as St. James speaks, Chap.
5. 5. What has been the Life of too many of our Gentry, but to eat and drink,
and sleep, and rise up to play? Here Is the improvement of the many special
engagements God has laid on them to honor him, that they of all will do least
to his honor. What an exact description may we read of many of them, Amos 6.
3, 4, 5, 6. Ye that put away far the evil day, and cause the seat of violence
to come near: That lie upon the Beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon
their Couches, and eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the
midst of the stall: That chaunt to the sound of the Viel, and invent to
themselves instruments of music* like David: That drink Wine in bowls, and
anoint themselves with the chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the
affliction of Joseph. And there read on, you may find their doom: If men will
bid their souls take their ease, eat, drink, and be merry, well may they expect
quickly to hear, Your souls shall be taken from you. And when they are thus
provoking God to anger with their eating and drinking, what wonder if his wrath
fall upon them, whilst the meat is in their mouths? If they so far forget
their own natures, and the use of his creatures, as wholly to be devoted to the
satisfaction of their raging sensual desires, which they ought chiefly to have
denied; and if like unprofitable burdens of the earth, they fed themselves only
that they might live longer to taste the pleasure of their delicious meats and
drinks, how just is it that when like Swine they were fatted, they should there
be brought to the slaughter?

5. As the next provoking Sin which is rife amongst us, I shall reckon
Swearing, Cursing, and Profaning the most holy Name of the dreadful God. A sin
less excusable than Epicurism, because I know no sense gratified with it* but
though it be less bestial, yet is it more Diabolical. Oh the horrid Oaths that
have been daily belched out by the black-mouthed Sons of Belial! Who almost
could walk the streets of the City without stopping his ears? Or else he was
like to hear the Name of God abused; the Life, the Blood, the Wounds of our
dear and precious Lord tossed too and fro, by the mouths of wretched Swearers.
Who, that had heard all the Oaths and Curses that were vented but in one day,
in this one City of London, would not have admired, that their tongues, who
were thus set on fire on Hell, did not set our whole Nation in a flame? Oh well
is it for us* that our God, who is mercy it self, rules in the World? How
quickly would all created Patience, though meeting in one Person, be quite
tired out, and worn away? These hellish Exhalations streaming forth from the
hearts and mouths of corrupted men, whereby they have assaulted even Heaven it
self, might justly have been kindled by the wrath of God, and have been
returned upon our heads in showrs of Fire and Brimstone. And if the polluted
breath of these kind of wretches, have infected the very Air we breath in, it is
not to be thought strange in the least. Could those volleys of Blasphemies
which have been discharged against the glorious Majesty, do any other than turn
to a black cloud, which should light heavily upon us? Some think it impossible
for the soul of man so far to sink into the Devilish Nature, as to sin merely,
to sin without a regard to some carnal interest: but if any instance will
evidence it, I think it is Swearing and Cursing! It Is possible I know (though
this is far from excusing it) for Passion to transport men to an Oath; and
sometimes a desire to be believed, sometimes an ignorance that they do amiss,
may betray them into it; but for men to enterlard their ordinary discourse with
full-mouthed Oaths, priding themselves therein, as if Gentile and Graceful,
What Excuse can be invented for such horrible Practices? Nay, when men shall
set themselves purposely to swear, and devise new Oaths that shall be al a
mode, What possible pretense have they for this? And hither may I refer those
strange, unheard of Prodigies of Profaneness; Wickednesses too Transcendental
to be ranked under any ordinary Topic* Such as killing men in a bravado,
drinking Healths of their own blood, yea, Healthing it to the Devil himself:
for such -- I know not what to call them, as these are we reported to have had
amongst us, nay (can thou imagine it Reader?) far worse than these, which let
those mention who are Masters enough of our Language to render them in fit
terms: for I profess, I cannot. So unwilling are the daring Fellows of our days
to go to Hell in the old way! It cannot consist with the greatness of their
spirits, to be wicked at these low rates, that their silly Ancestors were. In
all they do, they would be taken notice of, and appear above the Vulgar. And
would proclaim to all men, that they are none of those melancholy,
weak-brain'd, or mean-spirited men, who are so aw*d with the apprehensions of a
God, that they dare not sin freely and boldly. No, but they have so far
conquered those prejudices they had conceived of virtue, and vice, sin, and
shame, that they dare in the open Sun commit those sins, which Cowards run into
the dark for. They are not ashamed to own themselves the Devils Vassals, but
dance in his fetters* whilst all men hear their cackling. What other design can
these swaggering Sinners have in such a carriage, but audaciously to affront
the great Majesty of Heaven and Earth, in the highest manner they are capable?
Ah besotted Wretches* Let me bespeak you in the language of the Prophet, Do you
know against whom you shoot out the lip, and make a wide mouth? What could your
wit find no other way to vent it self, nor your malice, any other Object? Had
you no cheaper way to undo your selves? Were you afraid lest you should have
miss't of Hell? What? Did you indeed mean by your Blasphemies to dare God to
his face? Would you force him to give a convincing evidence of his Being? If
so, I hope you are satisfied by this time, If not, you shall be shortly. Was
you resolved to try how far his Patience would extend? Did you fear he was so
merciful, that you should never feel his wrath? Or were you in such haste to be
with your everlasting Companions, the Devils and the Damned, that you thought
your Judgment lingered, and Damnation slumbred, and would therefore do your best
to hasten it? Or were you so fully bent on the satisfaction of your lusts, that
you were resolved to pursue them even to the burning lake, and therefore
thought you had even as good go to Hell for something, and would make to your
selves as good a bargain as you could, and do all that in you lay beforehand,
o revenge your selves of that God, who will there treat you so severely? or
were you now betimes inuring your selves to the language of Hell, that you
might not be to learn when you should be thrown thither? These are strange
Suppositions the Reader may think, but not so strange as the Sins I am speaking
of, and for which, I can scarce assign other reasons than such as these. And
shall we wonder, when such Rebels are risen up against the Lord, if he grow
jealous for his great Name, and arise, and vindicate his Glory and Power from
the contemptuous affronts of insolent Mortals. Moreover, how many times have
People in their Execrations wish*t, That the Pox and the Plague might take
Themselves, their Children, Servants, or Cattle? And can they find fault, if at
length, their desires are granted? Yea, how many Roaring Ruffians have we got,
who, as if they were already entered into the familiarity of Devils, make
nothing of it to curse themselves to the pit of hell in their common discourse;
who can scarce speak a sentence without their Dammee's and Sinkmee's? Whose
tongues, were they plucked out by the Roots, it was a punishment no way suited
to the heinousness of their crime. But let them, if they think fit, stay a
while longer in their contempt of God, and his threatenings, and their resolute
disobedience to his holy Laws, and if nothing else will serve their turn, they
shall too soon to their sorrow, find all their accursed prayers accomplished.
The Devil, whom they have so often wished to fetch them, shall very shortly have
that Commission which he eagerly waits for, and then let them say whether the
dreadful God be to be jested with, or abused: And then at length shall they
hear that terrible question thundered against them, Have you provoked me, says
the Lord, Have you not provoked your selves to the confusion of your own faces*

6. Amongst the rest of our commonsins we may account Covetousness, together
with all the discoveries, effects and branches of it; Such as Oppression,
Extortion, Bribery, Injustice, either in judgment or mutual traffic,
overreaching each other, Uncharitableness, and grinding the faces of the Poor.
I put all these together, as having some relation to each other, and being all
neglects of duty betwixt man and man. If Idolatry so often brought the Plague,
or other Sufferings upon the Israelites, why may not Covetousness which is
Idolatry, by the same reason bring it upon us: Is it not as displeasing to God
to have men adore an heap of Gold and Silver, or their Houses and Lands, as an
Image of Gold made up into humane shape? And is it not as great a sin, for the
heart to run a whoring after these things, as to bow the body to an Idol? And
how are men almost every where set with all their might and main to thrive, and
rise in the world, to lade themselves with thick clay, and here to lay up their
Treasures? Was it not time for us then to be told, and told to the quick what
we were doing? That we were not yet at home, and must not therefore think of
settling here? Single deaths of men when there died now one, then another, had
but little effect on us, to make us sensible of our own Mortality, and
therefore multitudes are swept away before our eyes, to see if that will have
any more influence upon us. With what unwearied, and uninterrupted pains and
diligence did the most drudg about their earthly affairs, from morning to
night, weeks end to weeks end, without any serious regard to the business they
came into the world for? but were so deeply fallen in love with present things,
that they dream not of a Removal? And withal were so plunged over head and ears
in their cares and businesses, that they could not find a time, for any serious
Consideration of the matters of their souls? How just is it then that God
should take them off by his hand, if they knew not how to disengage themselves?
And snatch them away from those Estates which they knew no better how to
improve, but were even nestling themselves in them, as their durable
possessions. And I hope all who are engaged in such affairs, will call
themselves to a strict account whether there have been no such unjust sentences
pronounced either in condemning the innocent, or acquitting the guilty, that
may have provoked the just God to anger against us. And let all merciless rich
men, cruel Extortioners, oppressive Landlords lay to heart their
unmercifulness, rigor or injustice to the Poor, to the Fatherless and Widow,
whose cries may have reached the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, Jam. 5. 4. and
caused him to rise and plead their cause, by sending his Judgments upon an
hard-hearted Generation. And doubtless that great want of Charity, and
Christian compassion which ought to be in us, toward our Brethren in their
necessities and miseries, may very justly have hardened God himself against us,
and caused him to be deaf, to our Cries and Prayers. How many have had their
money and precious things which they had hoarded, left to strangers, or rifled
by theevish hands, which they might in their lifetime so well employed for
Gods honor, and their own good? But alas, amongst the many that profess the
Faith, how few are there who will take a Promise from God as good security? And
amongst so many that say they love God, how few have manifested it by their
love to their Brother? And has the matter been mended, since we have been
under this sore Visitation? Nay, rather has it been worse? Oh how men shut up
their bowels against their poor, necessitous, Visited Brethren? And suffered
('it is sadly to be feared) thousands to starve for want of needful supplies,
whilst they have had enough for their Lusts, and to spare; and need not (which
yet in such a day especially is our duty) have pinch't their own back or belly
to have afforded them relief. And this cruelty have men been guilty of whilst
many of them had reason every day to expect their own Death; but they have
seemed resolved to hold, and grasp all as long as possibly they can, and to
cleave closer, if they knew how, to their dear Mammon, of which shortly they
must take their sad, and last farewell, Oh! who but Infidels would not have
sent their Treasures before them thither, where they expect shortly to be
themselves Translated. But the Sin I chiefly intended under this head, is the
common dishonesty in Buying and Selling, men's Defrauding and Overreaching each
other. A practice which I fear, London has been more guilty of than Corinth
which yet was charged with it, 1 Cor. 6. 8. And it concerns Citizens and
Tradesmen especially, to enquire into themselves upon this account, as being
most exposed to temptations to it. Thou who yet survivest, examine thy heart,
look back on thy former course of Life, in thy following the world. Does not
thy conscience accuse thee for having grown rich by Lying, Cheating, and
Deceitful ways? Has not thy Conscience many times flows in thy face, for thy
notorious Falsehoods, and crafty projects, and unlawful devices, to put off thy
wares, and enrich thy self? Alas men are ready to plead a kind of necessity for
their sin; and say, If they should always be upright, and plain, and true, they
should never know how to live. Is not the world then come to a brave pass?
What a matter of course is it with Tradesmen to tell multitudes of Lies to
every Customer almost, and never make matter of them, so they but help off
their Commodities? They can go their ways, and wipe their mouths, and there is
an end; But hold, God will not put it up so. So they can but now get a Pound or
a Shilling, how little do they regard the time of reckoning for all again? They
know not how to keep up such serious thoughts in the midst of their noise and
busle, in buying and selling. But if they cannot, God will take them off their
hot trading, and give them leisure enough to consider what they have been
doing. And has he not done thus? It Is well for those who so improve their
breathing space here, that they have not this work to do in the other world.
All that men could think of, was, that money was to be got, which way it
mattered not so much. And well had it been for them, if God had made no more
matter of it: But believe it he has taken a strict notice of all thy ways, and
records them with greater exactness, than thou wast wont to do thy debts in
thy Shop-book. See thy sin described and threatened. Micah 6. 10, 11, 12, 13.
After he had spoke of the Lords voice crying to the City by his Rod, ver. 9.
then follows, Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the
wicked, and the scant measure which is abominable? Shall I count them pure with
the wicked balances, and with the bag of deceitful weights? For the rich men
thereof are full of violence, and the Inhabitants have spoken lies, and their
tongue is deceitful in their mouths; Therefore also will I make thee sick in
smiting thee, in making thee desolate because of thy sin. Oh how many are there
that will be Religious, as far as coming to Church, and being devout there, and
making some outside Profession, who yet in their dealings are stark naught, and
will be dishonest for a small gain? In the Church, and perhaps a little in
their Closets, they can afford to do, that they call serving of God, but in
their Shops nothing at all. Oh by that time all is reckoned for, when the moneys
gone, but the sin in getting it must be answered for, how will men wish, and
wish again they had been clear from this guilt, though they had been the
meanest beggars in the Land? now how just is it man should be snatched from
those estates, to which theynever had a true title? And if indeed they cannot
drive a trade without so great miscarriages, Is it not time that their Houses
and Shops should be shut up?

7. The next Sin we shall take notice of, is Murder; which surely, if any, has
a crying voice. Abels blood soon wrought Heaven with its cry for vengeance. And
how many Murders have we daily heard of, committed amongst us? How common is it
grown for the Gallants of our times, to Sacrifice one another Lives to their
Lusts, to their Passion, or their Pride? And I wish that the impunity of some,
may not have encouraged others. Is it not time then for God to take the Sword
into his own hand, and let his audacious Creatures know, that their Lives they
are so prodigal of are his, and at his disposure? And if they value them at no
higher rates, they have no reason to complain if they are taken away, since
they knew no better what to do with them. If indeed they are so weary of the
world, they shall stay no longer in it.

And here especially, let me bring to remembrance that Heathenish practice of
Duelling; which of late is grown so much in fashion, that none must pass for a
Gentleman, but he who dare murder his brother; and to be an Hector, is more
commendable than a Christian. The Example and Precepts of that pattern, and
Master of Meekness the Holy Jesus, the very mention of them is little less
than ridiculous to our Brave Fellows. Alas, those Precepts seem suited to the
mean state of Christianity, when poor Fishermen and Tent-makers were the
Preachers, and tradesmen like them, were for the most part Retainers to it; but
we must have them calculated again for those of a more Elevated Meridian; viz.
for our Gentry who had the luck to be born of Parents that were called
Christian. The Jesuit must fit them with rules that shall allow for their
birth and breeding: for surely Christ never meant to have Gentlemen his
Disciples, when he tied them up to such strict commands, not practicable by men
of their blood and Spirits. Religion now adays is thought to emasculate men,
and render them tame and cowardly. Basely to submit themselves to their own
unruly passions, with these is Courage; To be Bears and Tigers, is accounted
Gentle and Manly. These are the Lordly creatures that are so tender of their
Honors, that they will rather violate the Laws of the great God, than the least
Punctilio of it. To humor or win a Fantastical Mistress ('it is well they are
not in hearing when I call her so) they durst venture upon the wrath of their
maker. For the wall, or the way, for a wry word, or a straw, they durst venture
their necks to the Halter, and their souls to the Devil. Are not these the true
Sons of Valor? Such that even in cold blood, and upon sober deliberation dare
damn themselves? And why? because forsooth they are afraid of being called
Cowards, and abused by every body else, should they have past by one injury.
They could tell what this was, but what the Hell they leapt into was, they knew
not till they found themselves there; and by that time poor wretches how was
their courage cooled? And now at length you valiant Fighters, wonder not if God
himself be stepped into the Field against you. What? do you think you have met
with your match yet? Nay, but he has not yet appeared with all his strength.
He has only sent one of his Warriors, Death sitting upon the Pale-Horse, but
see what a terrible Second there is, Hell followed after him. Rev. 6. 8. But
come try your Manhood upon this first. The hour he appoints is, when he
pleases; the Weapon he now chiefly fights with is the Plague, take you what
you will; the Place is London. What Cowards, do you turn your backs now? Are
you afraid to Dye, and yet are not afraid to be Damned? What will you laugh at
Hell, and now quake at Death, and fly from it? But think not your heels can
secure you, nor any place you can fly to, sooner or later be sure he will find
you out. What did you challenge God to the Combat and now do you run for it? Can
you deny it? What else meant all your open, impudent wickedness, but to bid
God do his worst? For to fin you were resolved, let him right himself how he
could. God threw down his Gauntlet, when he said, The Soul that sins shall dye.
You took it up, when y ou rush't upon those sins. What, you miserable Caitiffs,
you Children of the Devil, who is a Murderer, must you stand upon your terms,
and command observance from your Companny, and will draw at the least Affront,
and shall God be careless of his Honor? Was it not present death for a man to
throw a Glass of Liquor in your face? And have you done less against God one
day after another, by pouring down your superfluous Glasses? Did the Lie
deserve the stab, and shall you go Scot-free, who have so often given the Lie
to God himself, speaking to you by his Word and Ministers, his Spirit and your
own Consciences? Nay, what you count the most unsufferable Reproach, have you
not been ready to interpret Gods Patience for Cowardice? Well, you are wont to
call your selves Gentlemen: Know then, That for these, and a multitude of such
Affronts, God demands Satisfaction, and have it he will one way or other. Your
speedy Repentance, and believing recourse to the blood that speaks better
things than that of murdered Abel, may appease him; otherwise, when he makes
Inquisition for blood, he will take the proudest of you by the Throat, and cast
you to the Tormentors, and verily you shall not come thence, till you have paid
the utmost Farthing.

8. Another very heinous sin amongst us, is Profanation of the Lords Day, and
neglect of the Worship of God. How many are idling away their time at home, or
which is worse, sinning it away in Tipling-houses, whilst they should be
attending the Public Service of God? Or if they afford their bodily presence
there for an hour or two, how soon after do they betake themselves to their
pleasures, as if the rest of the day were their own? Or as if when they had
prayed to God, to keep them that day without sin, they might boldly commit it?
As if when they had begged of God, to teach them to keep (amongst the rest) the
Fourth Commandment, they might then take Liberty to break it? And by their
after-practice, one would judge their prayer had been, Lord have mercy upon us,
and give us leave to break this thy Law. Some go to their Drunken Companions,
some to their Sports; others to walk idly in the streets or fields; and the
most to their common, vain and worldly discourse: To any thing, rather than to
private meditation, or Family-repetition of what they have heard. How far are
men from spending this day, as beseems those who have Immortal Souls to care
for, and can spare but little time on week-dayes for such employments? Oh how
exceeding few are there that are willing rightly to inform themselves of the
nature, use and end of this day, and accordingly to improve it? As it is a day
set apart to commemorate not only the work of Creation, but chiefly of
Redemption by Christ our Lord, and especially his Resurrection, that being to
him as a kind of rest from his Labors: And moreover, as it may be to us a Type
and a Resemblance of the Eternal Sabbatism we shall enjoy in the Heavens: When
we shall rest from all sinful, troublesome, and bodily works, and be wholly
employed in the admiration, and praise of that Divine Love, which contriv^d and
wrought our Redemption and Salvation. To have leave thus to spend a day with
and for God, would be sufficient to engage holy and ingenious Souls, with all
alacrity and thankfulness to embrace the opportunity. Such would be ashamed to
stand reasoning and enquiring whether they might not halve it with God, and rob
him and themselves of a good part. What a strange tedious thing is it for poor
Creatures, that know not God, nor their own necessities, to be obliged to
consecrate One day in Seven to spiritual Services, for which, awakened and
experienced Souls think their whole Lifetime little enough? How many have we
had crying, like those, Amos 8. 5. When will the New Moon be gone, and the
Sabbath over? That they might again to their pleasures, or enjoyments! Nay, our
People have been in more haste than so, they could not stay till the Sabbath
was over, but must to their bargaining, their buying and selling. How frequent
is this with many Shopkeepers in the City, when no necessity requires it?
Well, if indeed you are so eagerly bent on your business, that you will not
keep a Sabbath which God commands you, he will force you to another kind of
Sabbath than this, which you shall have more reason to cry out, When will it be
over? You shall be made to rest from your works longer than this comes to, if
you cannot afford God that small space of time he affords you: And you that
were wont to be so weary of the Prayer and Sermon, and shift postures, first
up, and then down, peeping at the Glass, or your Watch; Is it not equal that
you should be held with those pains which shall make you weary for somewhat?
when you shall turn from side to side, but get no ease, and count all the
tedious hours of the night, expecting every moment to sink into that woeful
state, where are no more days, or nights, or hours, where you shall never have
a moments rest through a whole Eternity! And then say whether the Service of
God, or the Sufferings you feel from God, be the more tedious. If wicked
wretches thus loosely encroach upon the Lords own day, may we not well fear
lest God should depopulate our Land, that so at length it may enjoy its
Sabbaths? And is it not just they should be seized with a disease, which admits
not of a Minister to visit them, who in the time of life and health did so
little care for their Minister? How many who have been shut up from all
converse with men, were wont formerly to excommunicate themselves from the
Public Congregation? And if they would not stir over their Threshold to the
Church, it is just they should not stir out at all. And may we not see many
doors praying now, whose owners were not before wont to pray either in Public,
or with their Families, on the Lords Day, or any other time? Nay, perhaps,
might be deriders of all serious praying, and only use to take Gods Name in
vain with their Formalities: Is it not just then, that those who were utterly
unacquainted with, and it may be jeered at, praying by the Spirit, should be
taught by the feeling of their flesh, to groan out an hearty Lord have mercy
upon us.

9. Another very common sin, somewhat related to the former, is the contempt
and abuse of the Ordinances of Christ, especially the Lords Supper; whilst so
many partake of the Table of the Lord, and in some sense of the Table of
Devils; which, what is it but to provoke the Lord to jealousy, as if we were
stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10. 21, 22. Many there are indeed, whose Hypocrisy
and Treachery is only known to God, and though the Minister cannot, yet these
he will find out. To vow obedience to God, whilst we intend and perform
nothing less, this is such a wickedness, so solemnly to mock him, as he will
not bear at his creatures hands: And how many Thousands are guilty of such
falsehood and perjury? For the breach of these Oaths be sure the Land mourns.
When each member of the Church thus Covenants to Reform himself, and yet still
continues in wickedness. How is the receiving this Sacrament made a mere
matter of course? And if it be remembered for a day it is well, but the
engagement then made is presently forgot. But believe it, God will not forget
it so. How many have we, that are Celebrating the remembrance of Christ's death
to day, who are Crucifying him again to morrow? And such as these, I chiefly
intend, who whilst they customarily renew their obligations, to live to the
honor of their Lord, do what in them lies to put him to an open shame. And
where is the place where difference is put betwixt the precious and the vile,
and any scruple made of casting Pearls before Swine, Childrens bread to Dogs?
Whosoever's fault this is, that it is a fault, and a very heinous one too, can
hardly be denied by any that use to read, what Qualifications Scripture
requires of all that are admitted, not only to some more solemn Ordinances, but
into Church Communion. If covetous persons, Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremongers,
and all disorderly Walkers are to be noted, withdrawn from, and not to be eaten
with (take the word in what sense you will) then let the most impartial,
charitable person judge, what a vast and sad difference there is betwixt the
precept, and our practice. Si hoc sit Evangelium, non sumus Evangelici. Where
are they that walk after this Rule? And it is not likely that this very sin
which brought sicknesses and death upon the Corinthians, should have lost its
provoking nature by the tract of time, or any difference of circumstances
betwixt us and them. It cannot surely be thought that the Commonnesse of this
miscarriage, nor yet the difficulty and seeming impossibility which some are
apt to pretend of having it remedied, should render it less displeasing to
that Holy God, who is so jealous about his Sanctuary. If Vzzah was smitten for
his too bold officiousness in staying the tottering Ark, and 50070 men of the
Bethshemites for their curiosity in prying into it, how shall they be able to
stand before the Lord in the day of his vengeance, who have so profaned his
holy Ordinances! Interest sometimes restrains men from punishing a crime that
is universal, but believe it, this takes no place in God: No, to his mercy we
owe it only, that our punishment is not as extensive as our guilt. But surely
this his Besom of destruction with which he sweeps away multitudes, clearly
speaks it self sent to scourge a general sin, and I know none more than this we
are now upon. And it is not men's Laziness, or carnal interests; their
lothnesse to displease either the Vulgar, or Great Ones, by whom they live,
that shall here, or in the day of their appearance before the great Lawgiver
and Judge, excuse their disobedience to his so express and peremptory
Injunctions. To tell them then, that his Commands were inconsistent with their
ease, or the favor of men, which is the voice of their present negligence;
will hardly excuse them who have so often told others, That no man can be
Christ's Disciple (much less then a Minister) without very great measures of
Self-denial. If any of those, whom they now please by their cowardice and
compliance, will then bear them out, they are safe enough; but if that is not
to be expected, they had best bethink themselves in time, how to give a
comfortable account of their Stewardship. Though private members performing
their duty, may not justly pretend the Pastors negligence to justify a
Separation; yet how far others assuming a power to themselves, if they execute
it not, will excuse those who are deputed to dispense these mysteries, when
they shall deliver them to such whom they have good reason to think unworthy,
it behooves them who are concerned well to consider. The unworthy receiver
himself, it may be, has some pretense or other, to shift the blame from off
him, as that he was never admonished nor suspended; but all these evasions will
be too gross to pass for current with a just Judge. I hope it is no scandalous
thing to bewail the want of, and earnestly desire a Discipline amongst us, as
guilty as the word is grown: By whom, or with what circumstances managed, it
matters not so much, so we might have the thing; that the plain and
indispensable Laws of Christ may be executed; that those very Constitutions
which are fundamental to such a Society as Christ has appointed his Church to
be, may not be violated; that there may be discerned some difference betwixt
the Church and the World, beside what a bare Opinion, or verbal Profession
makes; that only the credible profession and discovery of that faith and
holiness, which makes a man a Member of Christ, may serve for his being
accepted as a Member of the Church. And I may very safely say, That all they
who have promised to God they would see to the removal of such like corruptions
as this I have been taxing, are indispensably obliged to perform it, since this
is no more than what was inclnded in their Baptismal Covenant, Whatever variety
of apprehensions there may be as to this point of Discipline, yet methinks so
much as is judged lawful and necessary, by those who have power enough in their
own hands, should not be neglected: but it would very well deserve their care,
to see their own Laws put in Execution.

10. And now we speak of the Execution of Laws, we may very well mention it as
a most s^d and shameful, and very provoking sin, that after there is so much
provision made for the restraint and punishment of Vice, by many good and
wholesome Laws, there should be no more fruit of them seen, for want of their
being Executed. How rare is it now adays to hear of a man punished for
Drunkenness, Swearing, Sabbath*breaking? And is it any other than natural to
see these and the like Impieties abound, whilst the multitude that are most
ruled by present things that reach their flesh, find no hurt come of their most
profane, and licentious courses? And if men neglect their duty, can it be
expected but that God should take the Sword of Justice into his own hands, and
punish the Rebellious? If it be demanded, what can be done more than to enact
Laws, and appoint men to put them in force, and by a Solemn Oath engage them
thereto? If it may n ot appear presumption, I would answer, that it is also of
as great consequence to see the Execution of Laws committed to them, who give
probable grounds to believe, that they will be faithful to their trust.
Scanderbegs Sword in a Cowards, or Child's hand, is like to do no great service.
The truth of it is, the most conscientious look upon the charge as so weighty,
that they dare scarce undertake it, much less do they ambitiously seek after
it; and if they should, it is a question whether their less deserving
competitors would not make a greater interest and prevent them. But were all
who are concerned so vigilant as they should be, no doubt but that there might
be a very great redress of this mischief. Was there a diligent inspection to
discover, and a willingness to embrace them, there might be found many, who
notwithstanding the great discouragements they might meet with, would for the
Honor of God, and service of their Country, engage themselves in this
burdensome, but honorable employment. But can they be zealous for God, and for
subjection to his Laws, who will not themselves be ruled thereby? Far be it
from me to speak evil of the Rulers of the People. I know it is the duty of all
to do what they can to preserve to their Persons that Honor, which may
contribute to the successeful discharge of their functions. And therefore it is
no way fit to charge them with crimes upon suspicion, or bare report; nor to
reprove them for secret sins publicly, nor to do it in that manner that may
procure them contempt from the People: But if the miscarriages of men in
authority are so notorious, that it is in vain to endeavor to conceal them; and
when the offenders are such and so many, that there is no way to deal with
them, but by an open publishing of their reprehension; and consequently of the
faults they are reproved for; it cannot in this case be justly censured for
irreverence or undutifulnesse, to mind them modestly of their duty, and their
neglects of it: especially whilst the discourse is general, meddling with no
man's person, nor reflecting on any but the guilty. Indeed it may very well
become those who are more especially concerned, and who have the advantages of
access to, intimacy with, and interest in Magistrates and great Ones, to deal
with them, though with that submission and meekness which beseems Inferiors,
yet with that freedom and plainness which beseems Friends, and Christians.
Such that have liberty to speak, without gratifying the corrupt humor of the
rabble, that oftentimes dearly love to hear their Governors talked against and
disgraced; and they whose own personal knowledge, furnishes them with matter
and ground for reproof, without taking up with the flaunders, and groundless
surmises of the malicious, or common rumors of idle, and impudent tatlers and
railers; those I say who have these advantages, are deeply engaged to improve
the same in doing their utmost to discover to them their particular sins, with
all the aggravations of them, and to press them upon those duties, which are
so necessary for their own and the Kingdoms welfare. If this be the effect of
greatness, to be secured from all faithful, and serious reproofs, and council,
and to be betrayed by base flatterers, and fordid low-spirited temporizers; it
is as great an unhappiness as can befall the Sons of men. To have leave to be
sick, and not told of it till its past remedy; to have leave to stab ones self,
and no one must dare to hold our hands, are no very desirable privileges: And
to be suffered to post on to everlasting burnings, without being told plainly
whither we are going, is I think, as little for our profit, as either of those.
If any be of another mind, as loath to be tormented before their time, I
earnestly pray God their experience give not them too full conviction.

That which I intend under this Head, is the negligence of those who are
entrusted with the administration of Justice. When I speak most softly, I
cannot but say what is very notorious, that they are sadly guilty of a
connivance at such gross profaneness, as is punishable by the Laws of the
Land. Alas, they have got their distinct capacities; they are Gentlemen as well
as Justices; and these it seems are inconsistent one with the other. That which
Religion, their Oath, their fidelity to God, their Prince, and Country engage
them to; is contradicted forsooth by the Gentility they bear about them, which
forbids all moroseness and severity, especially to their companions, who are as
deeply guilty of Debaucheries, as the vilest and poorest Wretches of the
Nation. And indeed can they with any Modesty, or pretense of Reason take notice
of, or be severe against those Vices, which their own Examples encourage even
Inferiors, much more their Gentlemen-good-fellows to? Whether this be a
Forgery or Slander, I appeal to the Experience of the respective Counties
where they reside. I intend not the Innocent in this accusation; wherefore none
but the Guilty have Reason to be angry, and they as little as any. Why should
an honest Citizen be displeased, to hear another say, There are many Knaves in
the City? But if it be grievous to them to hear of their faults, their
Drunkenness, Swearing, and such like Looseness, let them think what it is to
commit them. How loudly did God cry, Who will rise up for me against the evil
doers? Or, Who will stand up for me against the workers of Iniquity? And
because none would hearken, God himself has brought upon men their own
iniquity, and cut them off in their wickedness, Psalm. 94. 16, 23. Had our
Justices, and all Magistrates, been as careful to prevent the Contagion of Sin
in themselves, their Families and Jurisdictions, as they are to hinder the
spreading of the Infection, this latter Labor might happily have been spared
them.

And now I am speaking of Rulers, and Men of Place and Honor, here give me
leave sadly to lament it, That the Nobility and Gentry of our Land, the Major
part of them, are arrived to such an height of Profaneness, that they, as
being by their Advancements more Conspicuous than others, are most Infamous for
the several Vices we have mentioned. Oh where are the hoped for fruits of those
Sufferings many of them have past through? Do they not demean themselves, as if
they were delivered to do all these Abominations? Are they not too like that
King Ahaz, who being afflicted, grew worse and worse? Have they taken such a
prejudice against the Word, Reformation, that they hate the very thing too, and
the least appearance of it? What do they recoil with greater eagerness to their
vicious courses, as having been under a restraint for a while? Are they
resolved not to be behind hand in sin for all that? Or do they think to revenge
themselves of God for the afflictions they have lain under? Or did they think
themselves now so secure, that without all danger they might provoke the most
High God? Why, you poor impudent Worms, do you know whom you have reproached?
Against whom you have exalted your voice, and lift up your eyes on high? even
against the Holy One of Israel. Why, you Sotrish Sons of Belial, did you think
a title or place of Honor would dispense with you, for your Rebellions against
the Almighty Ruler of the World? Who has stood by you, and observed all your
contempt of Him, and his Laws, and has hitherto spared you out of Pity, not
Fear. What, because you could proudly insult and domineer over your
Fellow Creatures, did you think to Out-brave God himself? What, did you think a
Feather in your Caps, or a Ruffling Suit, for which Fools look at you with so
much Reverence, would procure his Respect? Did you think he would be more
tender of your Delicacies, than to Treat you so roughly, as he does inferior
Sinners? Did you imagine, when he sent his Messengers to seize you, when he
should Commission either Death or the Devil to lay hold on you, that you should
fright them away with Swearing and Banning, and Damming? Or with your Swords
and Pistols, as you were wont to serve the Sergeants that came to Arrest you?
Did you imagine you had made an agreement with Death and Hell, that they should
never swallow you up? Or that your Submissions to the Devil had made him so
much your Friend, that he would not hurt you? At length I beseech you, be
convinc*t of your mistakes, and humbled for your folly; and be persuaded to
believe, That the strictest Holiness is no dishonor to your Greatness, nor
think that your Interest, which contradicts it. Oh be not so monstrously vile,
to abuse Gods bounty, so as to make it but an help to your sinning against him
with more freedom and constancy. Make not your Estates snares to your Souls, by
mispending them only in gratifying your Lusts, Appetite and Pride; but improve
them for the Honor, and according to the intention of the Donor; that they may
not become such an accursed portion to you, that at length you should hear the
cutting answer, given to one of your Predecessors, In thy Lifetime thou did
receive thy good things.

Nor let any of our Great Ones please themselves with a conceit, That they are
not the Persons eminently instrumental in bringing down Judgments upon us,
because as yet they are freest from the same, as having the conveniences of
removing themselves from that stroke which lights most upon the Meaner Sort;
for we may frequently find in Scripture, That the sins of the Great Ones have
brought Sufferings upon the Commonalty, who also in their place and measure
have been as wicked as others. And withal, let them not be too confident, till
they are past all danger, till their Harness is put of; or rather, till God
has laid down his Sword. If these Judgments reach them not, God has yet more
in store for the obstinate; and if they escape all here, yet if at length they
are cast into the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, they will have little
cause for boasting. Since then our Great Men, like those, Jer. 5. 5. Though
they have known the way of the Lord* yet have altogether broken the Yoke, and
burst the Bonds: My prayer is, that they may not do as those, v. 3. Who when
they were stricken, did not grieve, but refused to receive correction, and made
their faces harder than a flint, and refused to return, lest God execute on
them those threatenings you may read at large, ver. 6. Oh that they may receive
instruction in time, before they feel that Iron Rod, which will dash in pieces
all it lights on, and comes too late to teach them any thing but what will
aggravate their torment.

11. I am verily persuaded, had this Plague befal'n us Three or Fourscore Years
ago, and had Popery been as rife then, as now it is with us, this would not
have been accounted one of the least procuring causes, by the most sober
Divines of the Nation; except this be grown a more innocent thing than
formerly, and the Idolatry of it distinguish*t away by latter wits* or else
Idolatry be grown less offensive to God, than heretofore; we may take the
boldness to say, That the License its Professors have had, or have taken to
exercise the same, is one of the Abominations of our Land, provoking to a God
jealous of his Worship. Reason of State, is an Abyss which it becomes not
short-sighted Subjects to pry into; but if the pretense of this induce any
thing contrary to the interest of Religion, he that has imbibed but the very
principles of Christianity, may confidently pronounce the deepest Politicians
that advise it, Stark Fools. The resolution and constancy of pious Prince
Edward, England's Josiah, in denying Liberty for Mass to his Sister Mary, was
in those times accounted singular Piety, even by those Bishops who came to
request it. It Is somewhat strange, methinks, to see even the poor Quakers
themselves, drag*d to Prisons, and banished the Land; whilst Conventicles more
expressly contrary to the Law of God, and equally, I think, to the Law of the
Land, are (at least) overlook't. Yea, let me add, this freedom they enjoy,
whilst half a dozen of private Christians, in all things so far as concerns
Laymen, conformable to the Church of England, cannot have Liberty to meet
together for the private Service of God; though it were but to join their
prayers on the behalf of our Land, that it would please God to remove from off
us *the heavy Judgments we now lie under. Could there be no provision made
against Seditious Meetings, without such Restraints as these? Nay, and if they
take this Liberty by stealth, how much more secure are twice as many Drunkards
in a Tavern, met at one of their Conventicles of Good-fellowship? So that the
more Politic, have found a Tavern the safest place for a Meeting. And does not
this abundantly evince, how much the humors and private inclinations of men*
oversway and prevail in their administrations by the same Laws? If therefore
the spirit of the times, and the inclination of inferior Magistrates lay as
much against Profaneness, as what they call Phanaticism; that would have no
more immunity than this. Let none be offended at my Liberty of speech, since
doubtless these are things that need a Reformation; I hope it is allowable to
say so, yea, and necessary too.

And as for Popery, though I involve not the Magistrate in the guilt of all
that Liberty they assume to themselves; yet I hope we may have free leave to
lay guilt upon It, and to charge a most intolerable impudence upon the
Professors, and numerous Abettors of it. How many, both openly and closely, are
hard at work for the propagation of that, which is much more hurtful, though
not so spreading as the Contagion now amongst us? And that it is not so
spreading, we owe not so much to their want of will, or pains; but to the
Goodness of God, the Illness of their Cause, and the better temper of our Clime
fortified with the Truth. But surely it would well deserve the care of those in
power, to do somewhat more, to keep the Healthful from the Sick, and to order
that there might not be so much License given for people to frequent those
places, where it is not impossible but some may be Infected; even such, whose
Sense chooses their Religion; who would have their Devotion, like their
Recreations; and a Chapel, like a Playhouse: And I wish too many of our
Gallants be not of this disposition; but as for others, I would have them go to
a Mass to be confirmed against Popery. It is very notorious, what freedom they
take for their meetings in many places in the Country, as well as City,
besides those that may be privileged: And certainly England is not like to
fare the better, for being the Stage whereon so much Pious Pageantry, and
Historical Worship is acted. Had Dagon been carried about amongst the
Israelites, with as much Reverence* as the Ark was amongst the Philistines with
Rudeness; it is likely, That had been attended with as great Plagues, as was
This. He that considers what Idolatry often brought upon the Jews; and shall
well contemplate the Popish Devotions, and our present miseries; may not more
clearly discern our punishment like to theirs, than a like probable cause of
it; and look upon us little more beholden to Rome, than they were to Baal Peor.
If these meek Innocents (who with much ado bring themselves to talk a little
humbly, when instead of Fire and Faggot, they are forced to argue with words)
should Retort, that we deal as unjustly with them, as the Heathens did with the
Primitive Christians, who imputed to them whatever mischiefs befell the Empire.
I shall be brought to think so too, if they can as easily evade the charge of
worshipping Angels, Saints, Bread, Altars, Crucifixes and Images; as those
first Christians could free themselves from the palpably false Objections made
against them: but in the mean time I cannot be persuaded, but that God is
highly provoked with all those mockeries of Worship which they have devised,
and in the midst of us, solemnized. And even for these Inventions, may the
Plague be broke in upon us.

12. We may well account amongst our provoking Sins, the sad and lamentable
Divisions that have been, and still are on foot amongst us: And whoever have
raised and kep't up these, have had not the least influence to procure wrath
upon us. Well may that People be divided from God, separated from his love, who
are so divided one amongst another. When one part of the Nation has suffered,
then still the other has rejoiced in their Brethrens Miseries, as contributing
to the advancement of their Cause. And successively, what the Sufferers call
Tyranny, Cruelty, and Persecution, those that inflict it, call it a just
punishment for their malignity or obstinacy. Oh how just is it then, That a
general Punishment should at length, work us into a more general Compassion?
That at least, we may pity each other, when we are all in the same Misery, that
appears to have nothing of a Party in it, but strikes down on all sides those
that stand before it? Many and great Factions in the Western Church, did
immediately precede its being overrun by the Goths and Vandals: and not only
in this, but all other Corruptions are we like to them, as may be learned from
the Writers of those days; God of his infinite mercy avert the further
Judgments which such Disorders presage. Such is, and long has been our Case,
That the loudest and most earnest entreaties for Peace, have been drowned with
the contrary noise and clamor of the Contentious. What comes from the weaker
and oppressed Party, is still rejected as murmuring and complaining; And those
that are in Prosperity, reject the offers which after they would gladly
condescend to. Still the Side that rules, when they find they can secure their
Interests without any compliance, partly, out of a jealousy of being
undermined, partly, out of a love to to have the pre-eminence, and partly, out
of a desire of revenge, are far from harkening to the most reasonable motions
for Unity and Peace. And he that mentions, or laments our Divisions with never
so Catholic and impartial a spirit and design, if he charge not all the blame
upon one Party, shall scarce receive any thanks from either. If he cries out of
nothing but Antichristianism, Idolatry, Superstition, and Tyranny, then he
shall be hugged by some; And if he inveigh bitterly against Schism, Sedition,
Faction, Hypocrisy, and charge this upon all that are not just of the humor
of the times they live in, then he shall please others. But if he say, some are
too imperious and imposing, and others too peevish, impatient, and quarrelsom;
and both too guilty of censoriousness and devotedness to their own customs or
opinions; he shall hardly be grateful to either; but only to the true Sons of
Peace amongst all, who are endued with the sweet and genuine temper of
Christianity.

Oh unhappy England! How long have thou been tossed to and fro by the hands of
Violence and Contention? How often have thou been bent this way, and that, into
contrary extremes? Oh when at length will thou be set strait, and obtain a
quiet rest? Oh that this might be the happy effect of Gods heavy hand now upon
us! We, and our Posterity then would have cause to say, Oh happy Plague that
befell us in 1665. which discovered to the Inhabitants of England this Plague
of their own hearts, their uncharitableness and animosities one against
another, and cured them hereof, and reconciled them into a blessed lasting
Peace. To this Wish of mine, Let every Reader say Amen, even So beit.

Oh what is become of that humble, patient, self-denying, loving Spirit, which
was once the Character of the Followers and Friends of our gracious,
tenderhearted, and compassionate Lord Jesus. Strange, that ever the Gospel of
Peace should furnish the Corruptions of men with matters for Strife! When one
great, yea, very great Design of it, is, to promote the truest, and most solid,
and universal Peace amongst the Sons of men: which is the natural Consequent of
their being at peace with God, through the great Reconciler. And yet what would
we have? There Is scarce a man but speaks for Peace, and vehemently declaims
against Dissentions. Few there are but wonder there should be any Differences
in the World, and that men are not all of one mind. But what mind must that be?
Even their own. And this, this is our mischief: the World is full of such
Magisterial Spirits, that they, forsooth, would be Dictatours in the Church.
And though themselves may be always wavering, and crookned by a Devotion for a
Party; yet would they be the Center where all various apprehensions should
meet, their Opinions and Wills must be the Rule and Standard of Truth and Duty.
Though men be never so much blinded by Prejudice or Self-conceit, yet they take
it ill, if others will not see with their eyes, blindfold themselves, and take
them for our Guides. Now in our Nation; One man wonders what is in the mind of
some, that they are fallen so much in love with some inconsiderable things, that
they rigorously exact from all others an observance of them; And these wonder
there should be any found to scruple at them: But its well, if either remember
their own ignorance, weakness, and liableness to mistake, which might move them
both to a more charitable construction of their Brethrens actions. The
Overtures for agreement, which come from the weaker, are sometimes disgraced by
those of their own way (the Zealots of them) as proceeding from Cowardice and
temporizing, and most frequently snufft at by the Party that has got the upper
hand, as saucy and impertinent; The condescensions of those that are in power,
are usually little more than to will and command, yes it may be, entreat all
that dissent from them to a through-compliance, and then they will account them
humble and peaceable; but scarce otherwise, be their demands never so large and
unreasonable. And if any true Lover of Charity, not of the name, but thing,
shall propose a way for the reconciling of differences, he is looked awry at,
especially by the higher side, and becomes less capable of Preferment (except
as a means to corrupt him) as being not thoroughly Baptized into their Party.

Thus have we got one for Paul, and another for Apollo, nay, worse
distinguishing names than these; and whilst both sides are too guilty of
inveighing against each other for not coming over wholly to them, how little is
done toward a Midway meeting? Who formerly have been, and who now especially
are too blame in the Land for keeping open our breaches, is not very difficult
impartially to discover: But still it so falls out, that they who are most in
fault, may least safely be told so; for this must needs be acknowledged, That
they who have opportunity and power of making a very fair and satisfactory
Accommodation betwixt those that differ, and yet do it not; so far as this
neglect comes to, are the persons guilty of continuing our divisions. They who
had formerly this opportunity, and neglected it, were in their time guilty; and
by consequence they who now enjoy the same advantages, and yet improve them
not, must needs fall under the same charge. I think that man undertakes a very
hard task, whose confined affections, and zeal for his particular Opinions,
shall engage him to defend all that is done, by the Retainers to the way which
he himself has embraced: For my part I should think it a piece of difficulty
to maintain, that even our first Reformers from the Romish Superstitions, were
none of them acted by private Aims, and Secular Interest, or miscarried in no
circumstance of managing Affairs, though the main cause was most just and
honorable. Let who list then for me, enter into a defense of this side or
that, not only for these Twenty, but Hundred and twenty Years; for so long a
date do some of our unhappy differences bear: And many will confidently aver,
That a Puritan is of as ancient standing, as an English Protestant, and was
once thought best worthy of that Name; and that a Nonconformist was found, as
soon as there appeared a Martyr for the Reformed Cause: Nor yet am I willing to
look so far back, as to give any impertinent rehearsal of all the disorders
that did precede or cause, accompany, or immediately follow upon the more open
and violent contentions which have been amongst us, which might tend rather to
exasperate all, than profit any; for doubtless such miscarriages have been of
all sides (let particular Historians, this way or that, say what they will)
that hearty Repentance, and mutual Forgiveness, is more becoming all, than
Self-justification, and spleenish Recriminations; if there be any yet guilty of
so much pride and uncharitableness. I heartily pray, that all who have so long
survived their Crimes, may be deeply humbled for their setting our Nation on
flame (which all the blood that was spilt has not yet quenched) for the
Scandal they have brought upon the Protestant Cause, for all their breach of
Oaths, Vows and Covenants, prostituting their Consciences, and pretending
Religion for carrying on their corrupt designs, and wilful letting slip the
opportunities they had, for the promoting the cause of Christ, and establishing
a settled Peace in the Churches; for the gaining of which, some excellent
Spirits did so earnestly (though too unsuccessfully) labor. But oh is it not
strange and sad, that after we have so long seen and smarted under the
deplorable effects of discord, we should yet be as far from embraci^ng the
necessary means of Reconciliation as ever! That after a Civil Peace has been
graciously restored, the Church should still be so much divided? And this after
diverse moderate persons of different persuasions, have so plainly laid down
the methods for such an agreement, as might have made us a Church glorious to
all the World; yea, for those things which are the true glory of a Church,
which would have made us also happy in the approbation and favor of the God of
Peace and Holiness. The Lord open the eyes, and soften the hearts of all, at
length to discern and accept of some such Proposals for Peace, that the
Progress of our Feuds make us not a Spectacle of Pity to our Friends, and
Laughter to our Adversaries, as they have already made us Objects of Gods
Indignation. It is not my business now to prescribe these ways, which if I
were to do, I should only take the boldness to present Transcriptions; and
something I may have occasion to say of this under another Head, to which I
hasten: Only in General let me add, This is a certain Truth, approved by the
joint Suffrages of the most Sober and Judicious Divines, That whilst our Peace
is laid upon the practice and approbation of things in their own Nature, to the
most Learned and Conscientious, doubtful and disputable, it is never like to be
firm and universal: And they who would build Unity upon an Uniformity in those
matters which will never bear the stresse of it, such as we before mentioned,
they are the persons that lay the surest grounds imaginable for the hatching of
Schisms, wherein, though they who take this occasion, may be also culpable, yet
will not this excuse those who administered it. Wherefore it is not by Names or
Numbers, or Power, you must make a judgment, when you seek for Schismatics, no
more than you would, if looking for Catholics, enquire only who called
themselves so. To evince my Assertions, who that has not lost his common
reason, or else is becom'n a Papist, but may discern, how impossible it is that
ever a stable Concord in the Christian world, should be founded upon the
acknowledgment of the Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome? And it is not
all their Councels and Fathers they can make such false brags of, nor the
diffusiveness of this gangrene of their persuasion, nor the favor of so many
Princes, nor the Harmony they would make us believe is amongst themselves, can
excuse them from the just imputation of being most notorious Schismatics, an d
Dividers of the Church, and a manifest Combination of Sectaries.

Once more let me add, All those who have espoused any private Interest or
Party, which they are resolved to prosecute and maintain at that rate, that no
man shall have liberty to promote Christianity it self, except he will jointly
contribute to the advancement of that their design and way; are like to
perpetuate our dissentions, so long as either there are other men of corrupt
minds, who have got a Faction contrary to theirs; or so long as there are to be
found men of truly Catholic Spirits and Principles, that will serve the humors
of no men, nor abet this or that Party, as distinct from all other pious,
sober, and peaceable Professors of the Christian Faith; but are resolved to be
of that Sect only, which in St. Paul's days was everywhere spoken against.

I know there are many that are earnest for Peace, oftentimes meaning no more
by it, than a stricter Combination of all of their own Party, or some a little
different, against one they account a Common Enemy: Thus no doubt the Romanist
may be grieved to consider the struglings in his Mothers own bowels, and may
passionately exhort the several Contenders to an Unity, for the more effectual
advancement of the Catholic Faction, and joint opposition of the Reformed
Churches. But alas, what narrow-spiritedness is this! The Peace therefore I am
exhorting to, and which it beseems all true Followers of the Prince of Peace to
endeavor after, should be built upon such foundations, as may make it extend
to, and be comprehensive of all that agree in the Essentials of Religion, the
belief and practice of those things that are revealed in Scripture, as
necessary to Salvation; and they ought to keep up no other difference betwixt
themselves, and any that own the Christian Name, and the Articles of its Faith,
Papists themselves not excepted, besides what the rejection of all Innovations
in Doctrine, Discipline or Worship will unavoidably produce. And therefore to
be so much of a Negative Religion, as Papists tell us we are, denying this or
that groundless opinion, refusing such and such needless practices, is a truer
sign of a Catholic, than imposing any one of those contraverted things. Our
best Disputants against the Church of Rome, tell us, That the foundations of
the Churches Essence agreed on, and consented to, are alone the immutable
grounds of its Unity. And I suppose it may be founded upon this reason, viz.
That when a man enters into any Society for some advantages there to be had, he
is like to be firmly engaged thereto, whilst the condition of his continuance
in it, is an acknowledgment and practice of those things only, that are
necessary for every particular Member to do, if he would partake of those
benefits that are attainable in Common in that Society; for every man's personal
interest engages him to an agreement thus far. But when any thing is
super-induct, that is, consulted only for the gratifying or advancing some few,
it cannot be expected that there should be a general compliance in these
things. Now the Church being an Aggregate of persons, believing and practicing
all things that God has proposed and enjoined, in order to their everlasting
Happiness; what more can be thought necessary for their Union, than their
Conjunction, in the acknowledgment and practice of these things? Good God! how
clear, methinks, is this Truth! And if this be the way for an Union in the
Catholic Church, why not in the particular Churches that are parts of it? For
when these narrow and limit the conditions of Church Membership, they so far
depart from Catholic Unity. But these things are fully spoke to by others. So
then, what miscarriages we are guilty of in this particular, is fully evident;
and what is to be done for their redress, is no way difficult to be found out
and accomplished, if at length we were agreed to make Christ's interest ours,
and wholly to lay out our selves, and improve our power, and enact Laws only to
promote that, and to enforce the Laws he has already made, and would but bring
our acknowledgments of Scripture-sufficiency into practice.

The Lord grant this may be the resolution and endeavor of all in this Church
and State, who, under God, are in a capacity of restoring Health and
Tranquillity to a people so sorely weakened, by their being crumbled into so many
Sects and Parties; that at length becoming one in Holiness and Love, and
turning as one man to the Lord, serving him in a pure Language with joint
consent, he may be one with us, and the unity of our prayers may help on to
their Success, even the removal of those Judgments, that were inflicted to
drive us to such an Unity.

That I may now, Lastly, Sum up much in one word, We have been a People guilty
of as wilful and malicious contempt of God, his Gospel, Ministers and People,
and neglect of all true Religion, as ever any Nation of the world was, that
has enjoyed the means and opportunities for, and lain under the engagements to
Reformation that we have done. How have we trampled our mercies in the dirt, or
thrown them in the face of the Giver? How soon have we forgot his Rod, when
when we have been but just from under the smart of it? How have we contemned
the Threatenings of further wrath denounc't against us by his Word and
Ministers? How has even professed Atheism abounded, that has made a scorn of,
not only the Duties, but Doctrines of Christianity? To renounce all Religion,
was to be taken for a Wit: And by their long impunity in wicked courses, were
men more confirmed in their Atheistical conceits. Was it not fit then that
Death should reduce them to their right mind, when they are so wilfully
distracted? But especially for practical Atheists, who whilst they profess to
know God, glorify him not as God, but in works deny and dishonor him, how do
they abound in our Land! Except but some Formalities of external Performance,
and public Worship, and a mere Opinion; How little appearance is there of a
Church, or Christianity amongst us? Seem we not rather a Cage of unclean Birds?
Look into the Court, and University, the City and Country, all sorts and
conditions of men; and say then, whether are we not overflowed with
profaneness, which its just should be followed with a deluge of wrath to wash
it away? to what a pass are we come? amongst whom nothing is so strange as
serious Holiness and strict Walking? To be a diligent Server of the most holy
God, is made a matter of reproach? To live up in the Principles of that
Religion, we all pretend to, is to expose ones self at the least, to scoffs and
jears? All that is past jesting in Religion, is accounted Fancy and Hypocrisy.
Serious Discourse is but fantastical Canting. To mention any word of Christ or
his Apostles, without making a jest of it, or the sacred Name of God, except in
an Oath, or to take it in vain, is an offense to many tender ears. To admonish
and reprove a Drunkard or a Swearer, is to become a Busie-body, and
self-conceited. To speak of God* or Christ, Death, Judgment, and Eternity, and
the great Matters of Religion, is the way to have some disgraceful Title or
other presently put upon you. Godliness it self is looked on but as a faction,
and as such despised and reviled; and the most unblameable Professors of it,
stigmatized with such names, as being designed for their disgrace, too plainly
show what is their fault, even Purity, and precise, circumspect Walking. Now
may we justly revive the complaints made by godly Bishops and Ministers in
former times, That let Men walk never so conformably to the Law of Church and
State, only endeavoring to avoid the Sins of the times, and in their Place and
Calling to bear witness against them, endeavoring to live convincing,
exemplary Lives, and to promote Godliness in their own Families, and amongst
their Neighbors, presently they shall be called Puritans (for that was, in
Bolton's phrase, the honorable Nickname of Christianity in those days) and
consequently, have less favor than ai Papist, or carnal Gospeller. The most
powerful and awakening Preaching, and serious, affectionate Praying, where it
is had to be had in public; are disgraced by the name of Popular things, and
such Ministers the less favored, because flocked after. And here is the Fruit
of the Afflictions that have so long lain on us, even for such Sins as these!

Oh how justly may God take up against us all, those Complaints that we find in
his Prophets, he does against the Jews. He has sent his Messengers early and
late, giving us Precept upon Precept, Line upon Line; calling to us, Oh do not
these abominable things; they will be bitterness in the end* and yet we have
turned the deaf ear. Nay, when we have pretended to enquire of the Lord our
Duty, yet when it has been revealed to us, we have at least in our Works,
said, We will not do all the Lord has spoken, but we will walk after the ways
of our own hearts; we will never live such strict and godly Lives; this is more
ado than needs; there is no such danger in following our Lusts; this is but the
device of Preachers to terrify us. It was well enough with us, when we lived
in those sins they keep such a stir against; and we had never good World, since
so much Preaching and Godliness came up. How have we mocked God by our
pretenses to serve him, when our hearts have been far from him? And those very
Persons, who in the Church were confessing their sins, and praying, that they
might live a godly and sober life; when their Devotions are ended, will do
little less than deride Godliness, and run into all excess of riot, and wonder
at them as precise fools, who run not with them. And all this must be solved by
crying, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord; The Church, The Church;
by being zealous of some Ceremony or Custom of little Concernment, and railing
at all that are not of their humor, as disobedient, factious, and phanatical.
How is the Service of God dwindled to a mere Formality, and many understand no
more by it, than a devout using some particular Form or Mode of Prayers, and by
this they think to purchase Heaven sure enough, and make amends for all their
neglect of Personal and Family Duties, for the Earthliness of their hearts, for
the Vitiousness and Disorder of their Lives? Oh how have Fools made a mock of
sin, and looked on it as a trifling thing, that men need to be so shy of. How
many pretty Pleas and Excuses have they got for Whoredom, Drunkenness, and the
most monstrous Pride? If the plainest Word of God contradict their Lusts, it
shall be of no value with them: some trick or other they will have to evade it;
or, if they have nothing to say, yet they will will set their wills against Gods
Commands, and statly disobey them. Have not we even wished there was never a
Bible in the World, no God in Heaven; and lived as if indeed there was not? And
alas, how small a Remnant is there that have escaped the common Pollutions? How
few that have been deeply affected with the dishonours done to their Heavenly
Father? Who have stood on the Lords side, and been faithful to the cause of
Holiness? These have been but as the gleaning of the Vintage, as after the
gathering of the Summer-fruits, here and there one in a Town; and these (even
as the Remnant of the Faithful amongst the Israelites) have been the wonder and
scorn of the rest. These have been the Song of Drunkards; and they, together
with that Word they walk by, have been the sport of those whose hearts have
been merry, as Sampson was to the Philistine Lords. They and their Scripture
serve the profane Gallant to show his Wit, and help the Poet to Matter for his
Play. These for the most part are looked at as the most pernicious to the
Places where they live. And upon them Malice has its narrowest eye. He that
departs from Evil, makes himself a Prey; they have hated, and put to silence
him that has reproved in the Gate; and abhorred him that spoke uprightly; and,
after all, wiped their mouths, and said, Let the Lord be glorified. Were not we
arrived to a most doleful state, when the most exact obedience to the Laws of
God, was accounted less disgraceful, than the most open violation of them; and
few durst plead for, and practice Holiness with that confidence, that others
durst commit, and own known Sins? How has God waited long, and made the Power
of his Long-suffering to appear, striving with us in the ways of Love, and
mingling Corrections with his Mercies, that he might prevail with us to pity
our selves, but all in vain? He punished us with the Sword, and kep't us long
in the Furnace, and we are com'n out less refined; Again, he tried us with
mercies, but we improved them not. He has threatened, when he might have
destroyed, and born with us long to prevent our ruin, and yet nothing would
work: But we have pressed him with our iniquities, and even made him to serve
with our sins; we have grieved his Spirit by our stubborness and rebellion; and
have began to think, because he kept silence, he was such one as we, and liked
well enough of our ways; and because his Judgments were not speedily executed,
our hearts have been fully set to do evil. And when we were come to this pass,
and God was even weary with withholding, and there were so few to stand in the
gap to turn away his wrath, and even of them, many in a great measure thrust
out of it; Were we not ripe for destruction? Was not our Ephah full? Is it then
any wonder, if at length, God be risen to plead with us, in a manner that shall
make us know and feel, that he rules in the World, who will by no means acquit
the impenitent? who, though he bear long, yet will not always bear wit h a
stiff-necked Generation? Could we expect any other, than that God should make
bare his Arm, and visit us for these things, and ease himself of his
Adversaries, and avenge himself of such obstinate Contemners of his Laws and
Authority? And what, Shall the Lion roar, and not the Beasts of the Forest
tremble! Is God angry, and shall not we fear? Does he shake his Rod over us,
nay, lay it upon us, so that Thousands feel it in their flesh, and all hear the
sound of its terrible lashes; and yet do we not tremble? Shall not our haughty
countenances change, and the joints of our loins be loosed, now there is an
Invisible hand come forth, writing such bitter things against us? Has God such
a sore Controversy with us? Has he done so much, and yet will he yet do these
and these things against us, and will thou not yet prepare to meet thy God, Oh
England? Oh the dreadful senslessnesse and stupidity of the hearts of our
People! How few are yet careful to learn Righteousness, by the Judgments that
are amongst us! Notwithstanding this day of Adversity, how few will be brought
to Consider? Is not this a direful presage of farther Wrath? And that it is
even an utter Destruction, that is coming upon us! Oh what a spirit of slumber
and sottishness has possessed the most! If it is not so with those about thee,
Reader, thou dwell in a happy place. Though people hear of Thousands Dying
about thee, and have daily reason to expect their turn should be next, yet how
regardlesse do they appear of all due preparations for it as ever? They flatter
themselves with a conceit that yet they may escape, and that Death shall not
come nigh their Dwellings, and so post off all thoughts of it, taken up with
the very same businesses, designs, and pleasures, they were always wont.

But what should we say, can Sword, or Famine, or Plague, or any outward
Affliction work on them, who have been nothing bettered, but rather hardened by
Commands, Promises and Threatings? Can the Rod plead with, and importune them,
so as the Word has done? Will Sickness inform, command, argue and beseech so
affectionately as the Minister was wont? Where Moses and the Prophets might not
be heard, what can prevail? If hewing them with the Prophets, and slaying them
with the words of his mouth, would not affect them, Hos. 6. 5. Shall the
Execution of his Judgments bring light? Why, yes no doubt, God has his
Chastisements which setting on, and enforcing his Word, do often humble and
reform Souls, and he has also those Punishments by which he Destroys. And if
men will will strive against his Spirit, and resist it is workings; shut their
eyes against the light, contemn Instruction, yea, harden themselves under
Correction; and rather hate the God who makes them smart, than the sins that
procure it, like those in Rev. 16. who blasphemed God when they were in
anguish; what can be expected but the final ruin of the People or Persons,
that are guilty of such Stubbornness and Impenitency? And oh that this were
not the case of multitudes amongst us! The Lord awaken those that are yet in a
capacity, to a timely prevention of such a doleful misery. And thus I have
given an account of those Crying Sins, that are to be found amongst us, which
belong to the first Branch, which comprehended under it those sins, that were
more evident and notorious. And by this we have made way for the Second; to
discover some such miscarriages, which may be less evident, but no less
heinous than these, as being indeed in a great measure productive of them; and
therefore I thought it methodical enough to proceed from the sensible effects,
to the somewhat more latent Cause.

All that I shall speak of the latter Branch, I shall reduce to this one Head*
namely, That it may very justly be presumed, to have a great Influence in the
procuring our Miseries that so many able Ministers of Christ, have of late been
silent, and in a manner useless, compared to what they might have been, had
they continued their Public Employments.

Thus far I hope none will be offended; For if it be granted de facto, that
there are many whom God had furnished with abilities to serve him in the
Ministry, which he had called them to, that have not exercised those
abilities, to the best advantage in that Function, (and I think he must have a
good stock of Impudence who shall deny that many of those, who have been of
late Unserviceable, were so accomplished) then I shall easily evidence, that
hereby God has been much dishonored and provoked, whosoever the fault has
been; which is that I shall briefly inquire into and discover, and then give in
full evidence of my assertion.

I know it may so happen, that what I write, may displease one and another, but
for that I am indifferent, as having resolved to give no allowance to my
passion or prejudice; but to use the same impartiality and faithfulfulnesse, to
the utmost of my power, that I should do, if, so soon as ever I had finished my
work, I was to receive my summons to appear before the just Judge of Heaven and
Earth. Nor would I willingly speak any thing, but what the undoubted Interest
of Christ and his Gospel engage me to, and will warrant me in: And whilst I
have the Lord engaged in the whole cause which I undertake, and plead; I value
not a straw at my foot, what the most enraged potent malice can do. Nay, I dare
then bespeak all in the words of the King of Egypt to Josiah, a little varied,
2 Chronicles. 35. 21. What have I to do with thee, Oh man, whoever thou art? I come
not against thee this day, but against Sin, wherewith I have war; for God
commanded me to this work. Forbear from meddling with God, who is with me, that
he Destroy thee not. And I think a man may with as much comfort be a Martyr for
the Unity and Peace of the Church, and advancement of Holiness, as ever any of
our Protestants were, for the defense of the Reformed Religion (and indeed this
was more their Cause than Christianity it self, if we consider it right) yea,
though he have a sheet of paper pinned to his back, that shall call him
Schismatical and Seditious, and as such he be punished; as they we know were
burnt for Heretics. But to the business in hand. As to the matter of Fact its
well enough known, what Conditions were required, of all that would continue in
the Ministry, and still are exacted, of all that will enter upon it, which
Multitudes not submitting to, were Suspended and Silenced, and others, who both
by their Parents, and themselves were designed for that Employment, and
accordingly Educated, were prevented of their intentions. The ill effects
hereof I shall speak something to anon.

Now that I may deal fairly and plainly, this I must needs say; That if there
have been any of these Dissenters, who were convinced in their Consciences,
that the things commanded were such, as all circumstances considered, they
might lawfully have submitted to; but yet out of faction, humor, obstinacy, a
desire to gratify, or promote a party, or any such carnal principle, did
refuse such submission; they cannot be excused from the guilt of deserting
their charges, and of the many ill consequences of that desertion. What can any
man in reason desire more? For it is as such they suffer, and not merely as
misinformed, much less sure as invincibly ignorant, or as men that would not
sin; and if they have indeed been guilty of the Crimes, for which their
Punishments are proportioned, I readily join with their most forward accusers;
but oh that the Punishment had stayed, till the Crime had been proved, and laid
on those only that were found guilty?

But on the other hand, if there were any, who did use all probable means for
their satisfaction, (being earnestly desirous to have continued in the work of
the Lord) and after all remained persuaded, that they could not comply with
what was enjoined them, without wilful sinning against God; then they who by
their Impositions did necessitate them to forsake their Ministry, are liable to
the former charge, viz. are guilty of their Ejection, and of the Effects
thereof; except they had sufficient reason for so doing. Would they have any
thing spoke more heartily and gently?

Now whether there be any of the former sort or not, I cannot, nor dare
expressly affirm; and I think, till they shall acknowledge, or some other way
discover it; (more than I for my part have known them yet do) it can be known
only to him from whom no secret thoughts are hid; but I desire them to deal
faithfully with their own hearts, and if they are conscious to themselves of
any such ill Principles, and grounds of their not Conforming to their Rulers
Laws, to be humbled for, and expel them.

That there are many such ejected, and prevented from the Ministry, as I
described in my latter Supposition, I cannot but believe, as having for my
self, the Testimony of my own Conscience, in the sight of God; and for others
such Professions from men that have done nothing, that I know, to forfeit their
credit; and such Reasons to make those Professions appear credible; that I am
little less confident of it, then I am that there is such a place as Rome or
Paris, which I know only by hearsay: I say, little less confident of this,
that there are many who yield not a Conformity to what was imposed, not out of
Hypocrisy or Humor* but out of a fear of displeasing God, and hurting their
own Souls.

If this then be acknowledged, I think those who have cast and kept such out,
have very great cause to be humbled for their severity toward them, according
to the measure they were Instrumental herein: Except (I added) they had
sufficient reason for their so doing. And that I shall grant they had, if they
manifest either of these two things; which are all the grounds I can imagine.

1. That there are as good effects of this their Ejection, as I can produce ill
ones.

2. Or that the nature of thethings imposed on them was such, that it had been
of as dreadful consequence to have dispenst with conformity to them, as thus to
deal with them for not rendering such a Conformity.

But till either of these be proved, or some other satisfactory reason assigned
(giving leave soberly to debatethe case) I shall for the conviction, and
humiliation of the guilty, mention a very few of the many sad effects of this
their exclusion.

1. The first is, the unreformednesse, and wickedness of multitudes that
through Gods blessing upon their endeavors, might have been converted and
reformed. And that this might have been in all probability accomplished, we may
very reasonably argue, from that eminent success which God gave to many of
their public labors, and by some fruits, since then, of their private
endeavors.

Let none here wilfully mistake and say, that by Converting men, I mean
nothing else but to turn them to a party, or an opinion: for I profess I
intend no such thing; but the very same that Christ does, when he tells us,
that except we be Converted, we cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and
that the Apostle does, when he speaks of our being turned from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to God: Even the turning the bent of men's
hearts and lives, from sin and the creature, to God by Jesus Christ, and to the
ways of Holiness, let them be of what opinion they will as to the several
forms and modes amongst us. Oh how many fewer Drunkards, Swearers,
Whoremongers, Oppressors and Cheaters might there have been amongst us; had
they had their liberty to have preached down these sins, whose only study and
business it was to decry and shame them, and bring men from the love and
practice of them? How many more might there have been, who as true mourners in
our Zion, would have been humbled for their own, and the Nations sins, and
labored by all means to have prevented Gods wrath; had they in all places
enjoyed those means for their Conversion, which they sometimes did, and might
yet have done. If then the multitudes of provoking sinners, and the scarcity of
humble, holy, praying Christians, have been any ground of our sufferings, can
it be doubted whether that which has been so much the cause of those, has
done any thing to the procuring of these.

Oh for the Lords sake bethink your selves, all you that are concerned; Was it
just and equal Dealing, when the Prince of Darkness was advanced with all his
might into the Field, then to Disband, and put out of Commission so many
experienced Leaders, that in their own Persons, and by encouraging and guiding
the several Companies, would have done their best to resist him? Did you herein
consult the pleasure of the great Captain of our Salvation, from whom you own
your selves to have received your Offices, only for the successful carrying on
of his Designs, and the fighting of his Battles.

Nay, and all this you have done, because they submitted not to some things,
which you your selves call Indifferent, and which they believed, were contrary
to the former Instructions they had received from their Lord and Master.

Judge in your Consciences, Do you think it is more acceptable to Christ, that
the Souls of men, whom he thought worth his precious Hearts-blood, should
perish, rather than some Ceremony or Injunction of yours be omitted? Did he
ever in his Actions or Doctrine manifest such a contempt of Souls, and such an
esteem for a Ceremony? Consider his Life and Death, and read his Discourses to
the Pharisees, and then judge. Are Salvation and Damnation Indifferent things?
And shall they be less regarded than such? Oh how will you compensate for the
Disservice you have already done to the Gospel? It is not all your Revenues can
do it, though your Repentance and Reformation of such miscarriages for the
future, may do much. Be not offended with my freedom of speech: for (God is my
Witness) I speak not out of passion, nor a desire to make you odious; but out
of a just zeal for the Cause of our dearest Lord, and the Concern of men's
Immortal souls. What amends will you ever be able to make to the poor
Creatures, who may now be tormented in Hell, for want of those means of
prevention, which you deprived them of? Though they may have had those other
advantages which may leave them inexcusable before God; yet how will you excuse
the denying them the best you might have afforded?

You may deride, storm at, on contemn these expoftulations of a poor Worm like
your selves: but consider, I beseech you, What answer you will make the great
Judge of Heaven and Earth, who will come shortly in Glory and Power to plead
his own and his Peoples Cause: when he will regard no man for the pompous
Titles he has had, or great Offices he has born in his Church (for then, well
fare the Pope and his Clergy) but they who have done and taught his Commands,
let them be of never such diminutive titles and esteem here, shall be accounted
Great in his Kingdom. And That, That Is our comfort, by his Word we shall be
judged at last, if here we may not be tried by it. Then we shall all stand on
equal terms, and the arbitrary determinations of frail men shall no more take
place, but there abide an Inquisition. To that Bar we appeal, by that judgment
let us stand or fall; thither we refer our selves, and if we may not be heard
here, we will patiently and cheerfully wait that final, just decision of our
Cause.

But now hear, for your own sakes at least, if neither our beseechings and
tears, nor the cry and blood of souls may be regarded. Do you think this is a
slight matter? And that you can easily shift it off, if they be required at
your hands* Did Christ die for souls, and shall they escape who murder them?
And do they do any less, who hinder those that would run to help and save them?
If the silent Watchman be so damnably guilty, what are they that silence the
Watchmen? To conclude, Whether it had not been more acceptable to God, more
correspondent to your Commission, more beseeming your Places and Profession,
more for the advancement of Religion, and the eternal Welfare of Souls; to have
continued and encouraged faithful Laborers in the Vineyard of the Lord, whose
only delight was, to be employed in his Service; rather than to have offered
them such terms, which Christ never bid you, and then exclude them for not
accepting those terms, I think, your own Consciences may easily determine now,
be sure the Lord of the Vineyard will, shortly.

2. Another Effect of their removal from the Ministry, is, that many Places are
left destitute, and many are supplied with negligent, insufficient, scandalous
men. Had their rooms been filled with others as learned, pious, and industrious
as they; yet could they, who cast them forth, hardly evade the former charge,
except they could manifest, that the Harvest was not great enough, to have
required all their utmost conjunct diligence. But it is beyond all
contradiction evident, That in many Places since their removal, there have been
no Ministers at all, in some as bad as none, in others worse than none. Let
none maliciously interpret my Accusation largelier than I design it, which is
not at all of the innocent. I censure no man as a Conformist; but reverence and
esteem all those, who by their Lives and Doctrines, have apparently endeavored
to advance Religion; of which number, I am confident, there are many
Conformable men. And I abhor that uncharitable, censorious Spirit, which
condemns all that are not just of their own Way. But on the other side, I think
all are engaged to be as far from palliating the notorious miscarriages of
others. Oh how many titular Ministers have we got, that are far from deserving
the name of Christians? That should rather be turned out of the Church, than
admitted into the Pulpit? This is so manifest, That Sober men, though of their
own way, acknowledge and lament it. How many are there, that more effectually
preach for the Devil all the Week, than for God upon his Day? whose lives do
more to set up Profaneness, than their Sermons to suppress it? Are there not
many openly guilty of that Drunkenness, Wantonness, Swearing, and such like
Looseness, which they are appointed to turn others from? And are these
wickednesses provoking in the People, and not in their Teachers, who can never
be guilty alone? Are any men capable of offering such an affront to God, and
doing so much hurt to men's Souls by their wickedness, as they, from whose Lives
should be learned what is acceptable to God, and necessary for us? It Is, I
remember, the phrase of an excellent Divine, A Profane Minister, is the Devil
in his Pontificalibus.

I list not here to blaze abroad all the disorders of our Clergy; I shall not
insist upon the ignorance and insufficiency of any; though in point of Honor,
they were concerned to have provided against such, who did lately with so much
earnestness declaim against making Priests of the lowest of the people. I will
not meddle with that Tribe that lives by the Cathedrals. I will not tell of
men's oblique Preaching, against that Holiness which they pretend to Preach up.
I shall not speak of the Pride and Covetousness, the Laziness and Negligence of
Pluralists, Non-residents, and of all those, who too apparently seek their own
Honor and Profit, from the places they enter upon, rather then the Salvation
of Souls. These things I shall not dilate upon, because I would not too much
swell my Paper, and lest I should be thought to Rail: Only let me beg the
Guilty to charge these Crimes home on their own Consciences, as men that value
their everlasting happiness; for doubtless God is much displeased with the sins
of those, whose Callings has so near a relation to him; and especially with
the most heinous sin, of making Religion only as a stirrup, by it to get up
into Dignities and Preferments; which they who could see and censure in others,
should be careful themselves to avoid. But those I mainly intend, are the
grossly vicious, and debauched, who are most unworthy to take Gods Name into
their mouths, to declare his Covenants or Statutes, who themselves hate to be
Reformed. Good Lord! That ever it should come to this in a Christian Church,
Reformed from the Corruptions that had overspread Christendom; that infamously
loose and dissolute men should be Ordained into, and continued in the Ministry;
when godly, sober men are excluded, and kept out! Oh how might the Romanist
insult for such an acknowledgment, if the Pope and his Cardinals, with the rest
of their Hierarchy, were not known all the world over? But with us, such doings
are capable of far greater aggravations, than with them: Oh that I could speak
so sharply, as might displease our Church Governors into a Reformation of this
Corruption. What, are Wolves fittest to be Shepherds of the flocks? Can the
Devils Vassals destroy his Kingdom? Must stark mad men be made Physicians, and
sent to recover other men to their wits? Must they that have the Plague-sores
running upon them, be sent amongst others to prevent their Infection? Is not a
Pesthouse a fitter place for such a man, than a Pulpit? Are Traitors and
Incendiaries, the fittest men to reclaim others from their Rebellion? Are they
likely to honor God, and the Gospel, and save men's Souls, who do as it were,
by their actions say, Come, Parishioners, follow me; whatever I jest to you in
the Church, about God and Christ, Heaven and Hell; these are but idle Dreams,
or such matters as you need not much regard, God is an hard Master, his Laws
are too strict; it is best to take our Pleasures, and satisfy our Lusts, come
on it what will; you entered into too strict a Covenant in Baptism, you had
better serve the Devil, than this Jesus Christ, who lays such hard things on
his Followers; what need you regard his blood, he shed it, that you might have
leave to live wickedly; or however, it is of no great worth; for you had better
be in an Alehouse, or Whore-house, than the Heaven he has purchas't. Are not
these, think you, sweet Preachers of the Gospel? And let them consider then how
well they have discharged their trust, who set them up, and maintain them,
whilst they shut forth those who would make it their whole business, to carry
on the very same design which Christ came into the world for. If any should
here object, and say, But these profane men are peaceable, whilst your Godly
ones are turbulent and disobedient? I shall wish him to stay till I come
presently to speak a word or two to that; only here let me answer, It seems
strange to me, that those men must pass for peaceable and obedient, who are
known Rebels against the Laws of Christ; when they must be accounted
disobedient, who had rather lose their lives, than wilfully break one of the
least of these his Commands, only because they submit not to Humane
Impositions; which yet they would do, did they not think themselves pre-obliged
by the Laws of Christ to the contrary. Is this fair dealing? I put it to thy
own Conscience, Reader, be thou who thou will, and as partial as thou will. And
if I went no farther, I suppose I have spoke enough to manifest, that there
have been such sad consequences of the ejection of all who Conformed not, that
doubtless God has hereby been dishonored* and displeased, and for this has a
controversy with our Land.

3. I might moreover add, the feuds and animosities which have hereby been
fomented and heightened, and are like to be still perpetuated; whereas, had
there been such an abatement of things required, as might well have been
granted, in order to the retaining them in their places; this might have been
an happy mean for the composure of our greatest differences; and people could
not have taken notice of such divisions amongst us, nor could Papists have had
so much reason to hit us in the teeth with them; nor could they whose spirits
were too much exasperated, or judgments corrupted, have had so much occasion to
make Factions and Parties, and so much sin had been prevented.

4. Nor yet think it nothing, that so many innocent men and their Families, are
exposed to such great necessities, that some of them have scarce had bread and
water to keep them alive; and some have been glad to betake themselves to hard
Labor, to procure them a Livelihood. Certainly, the very cries of their
Children for bread, sounding in the ears of a most just and merciful God, are
not disregarded: And whether they who have reduced them to these exigencies,
have observed the great Rule, not only of Christianity, but even Nature it
self, To do as they would be done to, I would wish them well to consider. If
any should Retort, That they themselves were once so dealt with. I answer, I
think they were used nothing near so harshly: But grant they were, the greater
was their Injustice which was the cause; and the more inexcusable they, who
inflict on others the hard measure, which they themselves lately groaned under;
and make them their pattern, whom they complain of and condemn. And had it been
(as it was not) those persons who injured them, whom now they cause to suffer,
I wonder where Revenge is made their duty; but this in a Churchman, must
sometimes pass for zeal for the Church.

It was easy to instance in more effects of this their Ejection, which have
been injurious to Religion, and the Souls of men. Hence it is come to pass, that
their endeavors in a private way, by personal discourses, or writings, to
reclaim sinners, are much frustrated; for they are looked upon as a kind of
distinct Party, and so let them be never so careful to insist only on the most
uncontroverted Truths of Religion, yet will many through prejudice
misunderstand all they say, as if they were pleading their own cause, and
endeavoring to gain Proselytes to themselves, whilst they are only striving
to win Souls to Christ. When they are pressing men upon holiness and diligence
for their Salvation, some are prone to flatter themselves with a conceit, That
this only is their strict and singular Opinion; and all that they say or do in
Religion, is put upon the score of a Party, as if in these things they differed
from others, and therefore are they disregarded. And thus it is also as to the
People, who are known to love and adhere to them; for their exact walking is
looked on but as the following a Sect, and which need not therefore be
imitated* And it can hardly be thought how many Souls miscarry through these
mistakes, which might have been much prevented, by that concord and mutual Love
which might have made all have been esteemed as Brethren. Moreover, hence it
is, that these being now counted disaffected and discontented persons, many who
bore them a Spleen (for their Love it is not impossible) meet with pretenses to
vent it; for they narrowly watch them in all their ways (and a little Love to
the Commonwealth, with a Dose of Revenge and Malice, how vigilant will it make
men?) and are still ready to accuse them of something or other, they know not
what, to bring them into trouble. And if they do but with all peaceableness
meet together with their Neighbors and Friends, to quicken, comfort, and build
up one another in their most holy Faith; yea, if they do but continue those
Meetings they were wont to have in times of greatest Liberty; presently they
are liable to disturbance and punishment, as men holding unlawful Assemblies;
whereas, had no such terms been put upon them, as necessarily put a difference
betwixt them and others; they might have been esteemed as Loyal Subjects, as
they indeed are, and their actions had not been so obnoxious to groundless
censures and accusations, nor they ever hurried to Prison, or forced some other
way to suffer, for nothing but the mere Surmises of the malicious. But I shall
not give in more particulars: And whether these things I have mentioned are
well-pleasing to God, or whether they may not rather have helped on his
Indignation against us, let all that are unbyas't determine.

As to the Truth of what I have spoke, I think it cannot be gain-sayed; and
what can be answered, I cannot devise, except what I before hinted, any should
say, That by their removal, the Peace of Church and State is secured, which
otherwise had been hazarded. To which I answer:

1. Might not this Peace have been procured better, by laying it upon those
things whereon Christ has laid the peace of his Church? And not to make new
Laws, to which whilst men in Conscience cannot give obedience, they must be
judged obstinate, as the Courtiers served Daniel: Surely this is hard measure,
when the things required are, in the judgment of the Imposers, not necessary
till they have commanded them, and so might have been left as indifferent, as
they are in their own natures, and then how little contention had there been
about them?

2. Might these persons be excused from those kind of Subscriptions and
Declarations which are commanded them, They are ready to give in all that
Security, that can in reason he demanded, That they will be careful to preserve
and promote the Public Peace. If their Oaths and Promises may not be thought
sufficient to oblige them to this, what hold could be taken of those other
Subscriptions and Professions? But if these were intended as a distinguishing
Shibboleth, that they might know whom to fall upon; as a partition wall, to
keep off those that may in some punctilio's differ from them; as a Test of a
Party, which serves to rank men under several divisions. If any in their
Impositions had such like designs as these, it is not all their Power and
Policy combined, that can make such actings pass for current, with that God who
is a Lover of Peace. And all at length shall be convinced, That they who break
the Peace of the Church, to promote the peace of a Party, are not those
Peacemakers upon whom a blessing is pronounced.

3. I would fain know what disturbance of the Peace there was, whilst the
Liberty granted by His MAJESTY'S Declaration was enjoyed; and upon what account
it was likely to have been more violated, had that Liberty been secured and
perpetuated.

4. I am yet to learn how this Restraint that is laid upon them, does any whit
the more incapacitate them for interruption of the Peace, if a sense of their
duty laid not a stronger obligation on them. It Is evident enough, that many of
them have that influence upon their people, that it was no way difficult for
them, to lead them into Sects and Separations, if they had a mind to it; and to
lay such provoking pressures upon them, was not the way to prevent such
miscarriages. But, blessed be God! their patience and moderation has prevailed
over the smarting sense of those Sufferings, which might have vex't them into
extremes. If any have discovered too much impatience and bitterness of spirit,
as I excuse it not, so neither are those proceedings which caused it, any more
justifiable: But for many, it has been their care, according to their
capacities, to heal the distempers of their peoples spirits, to remove the too
great prejudices many have conceived, and to reduce all whom they perceived
inclined to a Party: So that I dare confidently say, They have done more to
preserve the Peace of the Church, than those who Censure them, and cast them
out of the Ministry, as Factious, and Unpeaceable. And as for raising any
Seditions or Commotions in the State, not their most quick-sighted Adversaries
have, that I can hear or know, discovered them in the least guilty. And did His
MAJESTY but over-hear or know their daily privat'st prayers to God on His
behalf, I am confident He would easily be convinced, That His Kingdom holds not
more Loyal, Faithful Subjects, than they, however they may be misrepresented,
as deserving all that Severity with which they are Treated.

By this time, I hope, I may on good grounds conclude, That the laying such
Restraints on so many faithful Ministers, who might have been so eminently
serviceable to their Master, is one of those provocations of the Divine
Majesty, under the effects whereof we groan; and that therefore those who have
been the Procurers hereof, ought to lament their sin, and do their utmost to
redress this grievance, and restore that Liberty of which their Brethren have
been deprived. And if, when His MAJESTY, out of His Gracious Nature, was
inclined to have given that Indulgence, which truly tender Consciences did
strongly hope for, and which would have rejoyc't the hearts of so many
Thousands of His best Subjects; if then there were any who stood in the gap to
prevent the same, as we were publicly told (in those very words) there were;
let all such now soberly consider, what a breach they have helped to make upon
us, and by their intercession with His MAJESTY, for that Liberty He is so
willing to grant, as by one singular means, let them now stand in the gap, and
turn away God's overflowing wrath, that we be not utterly consumed.

And to you, Reverend Fathers, the Rulers and Guides of our Church, give me
leave to reinforce my earnest Request, in the Name of our Common Savior, That
as you value his blood, and the purchase of it, and the precious Souls for whom
it was shed, you would yield a gracious audience to those, who beg of you
nothing but a freedom to publish the glad tidings of Salvation by Christ our
Redeemer, to the lost Sons of men. Consider what a reasonable thing it is that
is begged of you, no Honors or Preferments, but a Liberty to serve your Lord
and ours in the work of the Ministry. Look over, I beseech you, your Commission
again and again, and see where you are commanded, yea, or allowed to cast out
those whom God has called to this work; or keep out those, whom he has in
some measure fitted for, and strongly inclined to it, upon such grounds, and
for such reasons, as we are thus dealt with. Will you thrust and keep such
Laborers out of the Harvest, whom our Lord has bid us pray might be sent
forth into it? Was your power given you to any other purpose, than Edification?
Oh Sirs, what is it you seek? Is it indeed to advance Christ's interest, to save
poor Souls from the devouring flames? to set up Holiness, and root out
Wickedness? Why then will you remain at distance from your Brethren, whose very
hearts are set upon these works; who had rather than all the Riches and Honors
in the world, be more in a capacity of employing themselves successfully
herein? Oh, why will you restrain them from speaking, whose very bowels yearn
over poor sinners that are just dropping into the burning Lake, and think not
where they are? When the faces of so many thousands gather blackness, and they
starve and swoon, and fall in the streets, why do you bind the hands of those
who would so fain reach them forth the bread of Life? When their miseries and
necessities cry aloud for help, why do you hinder those who would gladly afford
them a seasonable Supply? Who, though they may employ themselves according to
their opportunities with particular men's Souls, yet what is that to the having
their Congregations to speak to? Review your patterns, I beseech you, and see
whether you find any carriages of theirs, in their ruling of the Church, which
may justify yours. Our blessed Lord would not have those forbid to do Miracles
in his Name, who went not with him. Nor does Paul intimate any desire to have
silenc't those who preached Christ out of envy, much less such (had there been
any Pastors of that mind) who were for eating of Herbs only, not meat. He
speaks indeed of having the mouths of some stopped, Tit. 1. 10. viz. They of the
Circumcision, who would have obtrutruded their Mosaic Ceremonies upon the
Christians, and judge whether our cause be like theirs; and yet even their
mouths were to be stopped by sound doctrine, and evidence of argument, ver. 8.

Oh how confident should I be of obtaining that Liberty I am begging of you (if
Reasons of another sort hindered not) was Christ himself alive amongst us, or
any of his Apostles our Governors. Had I had the happiness to have lived in
St. Paul's days, and addressed my self to him with all humility and earnestness,
imploring a leave to preach the Gospel, professing I had no carnal aim in it,
but that my Soul longed to be disclosing those mysteries and treasures of Love
to poor senseless creatures, that were passing on to damnation, as not knowing
or considering what Christ had done to keep them thence, and that I would
endeavor faithfully to declare the whole Counsel of the Lord, without adding
to, or diminishing ought from it; had I made such an address, do you think in
your own Consciences, he would have turned me away without my Errand? I have
sometimes thought, that should I have put up such a Petition to the King, I
should have prevailed; but fears of becoming ridiculous, have detered me.

But let not this my Suit, I beseech you, be rejected; for what pretense of
Reason can be alleged against it. It is not I know the things themselves which
are required, that you so much stand upon, as if they were in their own Nature
necessary antecedently to your commands. And was ever yet any answer given to
those demands which have been made (amongst others) by a person of that
judgment and moderation, that you can neither suspect him of prejudice or
inclination to a Party, when he asks what Charter Christ has given the Church
to bind men up to more than himself has done? What grounds there are why
Christians should not stand upon the same terms now, which they did in the time
of Christ and his Apostles? and whether Christ will ever thank men at the great
day, for keeping such out from communion with his Church (we may well add from
their service of the Church) whom he will receive into Heaven, and vouchsafe
not only Crowns of Glory to, but Aureolae too, if there be any such things
there? He tells you there, that the Commission the Apostles were sent out with,
was only to teach what Christ had commanded, not the least intimation given of
a power to impose any thing else, except what they might be directed to by the
immediate guidance of the Spirit of God; and that they made an antecedent
necessity, either absolute, or for the present state, the only ground of
imposing their commands, and much more to the same purpose; which, however they
are regarded, may show thus much, That it is not only Humor and Singularity
which judges it most reasonable, that those things, which the Defenders of them
count Indifferencies, should not be rigorously imposed on others, nor the Peace
of the Church suspenaed upon them. But is it indeed the Public Peace that by
these things you consult for? Why will you then in the room of a Submission to
them, accept of any the most Solemn Engagements from those who will enter into
them, that they will not disturb the Peace either of Church or State? And if
you find any acting contrarily, proceed against them as you please. Let the
World judge what reasonable offers we make. Is it our obedience to Authority
you would have us manifest? Why let our Submission in all other things speak
for us. Or lay on us what commands you will in Civil things, or in any thing
that may be no snare to our Consciences, and by them prove whether we be
obstinate or not.

In a word, Will you accept our Promises, Bonds, Oaths, or what assurance can
be desired, That we will labor in all things to act most agreeably to the
Gospel of our Lord, which we all own as a sufficient Rule? And that we will not
allow our selves in any prejudice, humor or perverseness, but in all things,
(though we would not be made one a Rule to another, in matters that will well
allow diversity) will comply with you, so far as possibly we can, without
danger of displeasing God, and damning of our own Souls? And surely you have
more tenderness than to desire us to do such things. I am bold thus to speak in
others names (though not one be privy to my Work) because I am persuaded there
are few but will do thus much, and what can in reason be required more of any?

Let none usurp the Prerogative of searching hearts, and knowing men's meanings
better than themselves, and say, These are fine words, and specious pretenses,
but the design of all is, but to get more Liberty to strengthen a Party: For I
solemnly profess, and Thou God, who stand over me whilst I am writing these
words, know it, I abhor such a design. If to raise men to the knowledge and
love of God through the Spirit of his Son; if to bring them to a careful
observance of the precepts of our Lord, that they may be obedient to their
Governors Ecclesiastical and Civil; just and charitable to their Brethren;
that they may be holy, humble, heavenly, patient, meek, pure, chaste and
temperate; abounding in all the graces and fruits of the Spirit; If this be to
make men a Party; then let me be interpreted as earnestly desirous to promote
it; otherwise not. And shall those, who have no other aims than these, be kept
out of the Ministry, as turbulent, factious, and schismatical? Yea, some that
were not Born so soon as our Civil Confusions, and therefore Sided with none,
Offended none? If you indeed thought there were any thus innocent, and whose
intentions were so upright, would you have no regard to them, but reject all
their Petitions, even such as I have made? Surely you would not. Why be
assured, if there may any faith be given to men, and if it be possible for men
to know their own hearts, there are some, yea, I am confident, many Such. Well,
however after all we may be censured and slandered, yet, whilst we can daily
betake our selves to the All-knowing God, and profess before him; that it is
the grief of our souls, that we are deprived of those opportunities of serving
him, which we once had or hoped for, which we beg may be restored and
vouchsaf't rather than any outward advantages whatever; and that we had rather
serve him in the Ministry, than (for any interest of our own) be made Monarchs
of the World, only we dare not pretend his Glory to justify our lie; we dare
not (for to him we may speak plainly) say, we consent to those things we cannot
find warrant for from his Word; nor that those who have vowed to reform his
Church, are not obliged by those Vows, when corruptions are so many and great;
but we beseech him to lead us into all Truth, and discover to us our duty, for
that he knows we would do any thing but Sin against him, to purchase a liberty
publicly to Serve him; and therefore to his righteous judgment we wholly
commit our Cause; whilst I say in our daily prayers to God, we can make such
Professions as these (and that some can) we may possess our souls in patience,
and be comforted with the Conscience of our Integrity, whatever clamours there
are without us, and whatever calumnies men may labor to fasten upon us. And I
beseech you, who by your harshness, send such daily to God with tears and
groans under the heavy pressures; yea, and Thousands more of the best
Christians in the Land on their behalf, and on the behalf of their own souls,
in so great a measure deprived of the precious quickening means they once
enjoyed; bethink your selves how grateful those your proceedings are to God,
which thus occasion the just sorrows and complaints of his Ministers and
dearest People.

And let me further put it to your Conscience:, whether in your private
Addresses to God, you can say, that you are grieved in heart for your Brethren
deprived of their Liberties, and that you have condescended to them as far as
possibly you could without sinning, and that you would do all that in you lies
for their restoration, that might not provoke him, and be a burden to your
own Consciences; and that it is the interest of Christ, and the Edification and
Salvation of Souls which you aimed at, in your proceedings against them. Can
you make such Professions as these to God? Or to men, as you will answer it at
the great and dreadful day of accounts? I leave it to your calm and sober
Considerations.

I shall no longer stand to importune you; but (as hoping I have not been
speaking all this while to the wind) entreat you to take into your serious
review, the Petition for Peace, presented to you by the Divines appointed by
His Majesty, to treat with you about Church Affairs. There may you see what
their Requests are, and the pressing Reasons with which they enforce them:
Requests so reasonable, That, nothing but Experience could have convinced me,
they were deniable; Reasons so evident, that I am persuaded they are
unanswerable: And in this persuasion I am more confirmed from their being
railed at, and scribled against (which was all the answer I ever heard of) by a
Gentleman, from whom, if my present Paper can escape a suppressing, it fears
not an Answer: for his violence is much more to be dreaded than his Reason. Now
slight not, I beg you, these entreaties, because you can easily deny them: for
the cause I plead is just and equal, and of weighty moment, which I refer to
your impartial debates, and leave the event to the disposure of that God, for
whose Honor it was (if I know my self) that I undertook this plea. And him I
shall humbly follow with my Prayers, That this Supplication, which I am writing
August 24. may through his good Providence, and the favor of Authority, do
something to the reversing of the Act, whose being in force, took date from
This day three years since) This fatal Day that deserves to be wrote in Black
Letters in England's Calendar.

Grant this Oh my God, for thy Son Christ Jesus sake, I beseech thee, and let
all that seek thy Glory, and the Prosperity of thy Church, say, Amen.

If any upon the reading of this, should argue me, either of too great
confidence in making such an attempt, or want of judgment to conceive there was
any probability of the success, when much more likely endeavors have been
uneffectual; Let such know, That when I had designed to do my utmost toward a
discovery of those Sins, which have provoked Gods anger against us; I should
have thought my self unfaithful to the Cause I undertook, had any fear or
pretense of Reason prevailed with me, to pass silently over a miscarriage of
such a nature, as I have manifested this to be, so fruitful of, and complicate
with, many others. And if any thing unequal to be framed by a Law, I hope that
alters not the nature of it so far, as to make it above a Subject to call
things by their own names. Had an Act passed for the toleration of Drunkenness,
or any the like Sin, I should have taken the boldness to represent the ill
nature and consequences of it. And though it is not impossible but prejudice
may spy out very great faults, yet, I hope, both as to the matter and manner of
Discourse, I have not transgress't the bounds of sobriety, modesty, nor that
duty which I owe my Superiors.

Moreover, I conceived, That now God calls us all to search our hearts, and
review our ways; they who themselves put us upon this work, and exhort us to
Repentance and Prayer, will not be unwilling to reflect upon themselves and
their own actions, as remembering they are men subject to the same mistakes and
frailties that the rest of the sons of lapst Adam are. And if indeed it be made
evident, That amongst other Errands, one voice of the Rod now upon us, is, Let
my people go, that they may serve me; Let my faithful Ministers have liberty to
advance my Gospel. I hope, those, who are particularly called to from Heaven,
will not be disobedient.

Again, I was willing so far as was consistent with my main Design, to
represent to the World (if any yet be ignorant of it) the nature of the
difference betwixt us; however to manifest thus much, how willing, yea, how
earnestly desirous some (if not all) of those suspended from their Ministerial
Employments, are to be readmitted to the same; and what reasonable terms they
beg* and readily offer a submission to, if they might be heard, that so they,
who are so forward to condemn them all as obstinate and perverse, may be more
wary of their censures, and confine them to those only whom they know so guilty.

And I hoped I might do something to quicken all those, whose hearts are
affected with the Concernments of the Church, to more earnestness in their
Addresses to God, That he, in whose hands the heart of Kings and all men are,
would incline our Superious to hearken to the Requests, and graciously to
regard the Cause of so many of the Servants of Christ; who, when his Church so
much needs their labors, and they would so willingly spend themselves in the
service of souls, are to the sadning of their hearts, in a great measure
rendered unserviceable in their Generations.

And lastly, Thus much however I shall attain, viz* the satisfaction of my
Conscience in the discharge of my Duty; that I can herein approve my self to
God and my own soul, that I have done what in me lies, toward the procuring of
my own and others Liberty; that, if it shall still be denied, I may have
nothing to charge my self with in this respect: and may comfort my self in
this, that the improvement of such a Liberty, shall no more be required of me,
by the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, than the improvement of a great
Estate, or a place of Honor, or some such Talent, with which I was never
entrusted. And if I obtain but thus much (though I strongly hope for more) I
shall be far from repenting of my undertaken labor: for I must confess, that
seems not to me a small thing, which any way conduces to my having of boldness
before my Lord, at the day of his appearing.

A word or two more I shall take Liberty to add upon this Head, before I
relinquish it. If the removal of so many Laborers out of the Lords Harvest is
so grievous a Sin, both in its self, and the sad consequences of it, then all
others, and even they themselves, so far as they have contributed to this their
removal, or have not since endeavored to prevent those consequences have cause
to be greatly humbled.

And first, Even all the People who have sinned their Teachers into corners, by
their Pride, Wantonness, and Unfruitfulness under the Means of Grace. But
especially those private Persons, who by their malice either did, or at least
endeavored to contribute to their ejection, or to the hastening of it. What
Volumns might be composed (even another Book of Martyrs or Confessors rather)
of the Sufferings many of these Servants of Christ have met with, from the
Arbitrary violence of unreasonable men? For I speak not of what the Law has
imposed on them. How have some been toss't from place to place, their Houses
searched, and they confined, and all this either upon groundless suspicion, or
false accusations: for where was the man of them that has yet been proved
guilty of Treason or Sedition? Oh the notorious gross Lies and Perjuries, that
some of their People have been guilty of, both before, and since their ejection?

And yet how readily accepted by many? And what is the ground of all? Why, alas,
they had got many Hearers, the Great-ones especially, who were scandalized at
the strictness of their Doctrines and Lives, and angry that they might not go
to Hell quietly, who studied to be Revenged on them for the disturbance they
had received from them in their Sins. Thus I dare confidently say, it has been
with many. And though such may have thought they have been doing God good
service, whilst they have been persecuting his Ministers, yet believe it, they
shall have small thanks from him, that sent them upon that Errand, the delivery
whereof may have brought them so much trouble, and that they shall find to
their smart without true repentance, if many of them have not already. What,
could not men be content to reject the Embassy God sent them, but they must
injure and abuse his Ambassadors too? Shall not God proclaim war against that
people that have thus violated the Law of Nations? They would scarce have done
thus to an Ambassador sent from the Turk, to persuade us to exchange Christ
for Mahomet, and the Gospel for the Alcoran. But, Oh, let let them alone, they
are safe enough. It Is the Factious Nonconformist, not the Christian Minister
they have meddled with. Not the Holy Jesus, that came from Heaven to bring men
thither, was Crucified; but (if you will believe his Adversaries) an enemy to
Caesar, and a mover of Sedition; not Paul a Servant and Worshipper of the most
High God, but a certain pestilent Fellow, a Ringleader of a Sect, was accused.
The World has still some Policy and Modesty in the drawing up its Indictments,
and dare not directly make Holiness a Crime. Well, Sirs, it will be happy for
you, if you shall be found to have had so much wit in your anger, as that you
shall at last be able to distinguish your selves out of Gods displeasure: but
if there should be any thing found in Christianity, engaging to that you call
Nonconformity; or if you have made This* but a pretense for your Malignity
against That; I would not for a Thousand Worlds be in your case, for all your
distinctions, when God shall arise thoroughly to plead his Peoples cause: And
even now sure he is beginning to do it. And if under the Rod, you continue the
sin for which you are lash't, bethink you how to answer that startling
Question, Who ever hardened himself against God, and prosper'd! And justly has
God suited his Judgments to this sin of the people A Famine of the Word they
feared not, and therefore may God have sent upon Thousands what they account
more dreadful, a Famine of bread. It Is just that they who loathed the Manna,
and were weary of the bread of Life, should want bread to put into their
mouths. And they who could not endure these terrible Preachers, let them now
speak, whether the Threatening, or the Execution, be the more terrible? Now,
Sirs, what say you to sin? Is it such a harmless thing as you thought it, or
not? Does not God now speak against it, in something a louder and harsher
Language, than your Bawling Preachers were wont? Under them you could sleep,
but now sleep away this Sermon if you can; even this awakening Sermon, which
the Plague of God makes to you. And if you go on in your hardness, you shall
find to your cost, that the Hell and Damnation which their Pulpits did so
thunder against wickedness was but a painted fire, to that you shall eternally
feel.

But from others who have been the unjust causes of your Sufferings, to your
selves, I shall address my self: Honored Fathers, and Dear Brethren, with whom
my boldness will not, I am confident, be misconstrued. Since you will readily
acknowledge, that all that has befal'n you, is just, as from God you cannot
then but lay it on your sins; and these, I hope, it is your daily business to
reflect on, and beg pardon for. Though I am well assu'd, the holiness,
diligence and painfulness of many of you has been such, that to Men you may
well acquit your selves, and may be worthy patterns to others, and shame and
silence your Accnsers; yet to God you cannot so readily justify your selves, I
know you dare not. Oh might not you have done more to promote the Interest of
your Lord and Master, than you did? Some of you I mean; for I profess without
all partiality or flattery, I think some did strive to the very utmost of
their power, to improve all opportunities for the good of Souls, and now in
their Consciences they have the fruits of it; but of these there were few, too
few. Oh be humbled then for all your Negligence, Covetousness, and
Self-seeking; your Pride and Contentions; that you were more averse from the
offers of Peace and Union, than you ought; that you kept so much ado about your
own ways and opinions, and stood wrangling about this Trifle or that, whilst
greater Works were left undone: And daily make Solemn Engagements to God, that
if once more he will entrust you with forfeited privileges, you will be more
faithful and vigorous than ever yet you have been, in the work of the Gospel;
that you will no more take your ease, nor seek your selves, nor waste precious
time in needless Controversies; nor confine godliness to any without book
Niceties of your own; nor lay the Peace of the Church upon your particular
Opinions, but will readily join with all that are willing, in the owning and
pressing only the things that are necessary to Salvation; and will use all
means, both public and private, for the conversion of Souls. And if God grant
your prayers, as in his due time he may, See that you remember these promises.

But it is the second Branch I would have you chiefly to consider; and that is
your not endeavoring what you might, to prevent some of those sad consequences
of your Exclusion, which I before mentioned; in that you have not embraced all
the opportunies that were yet afforded you, for the doing good to the people,
to bring them from sin to God; and so your negligence may have hastened and
helped forward Gods indignation. Let me not be thought too saucy, Sirs, I
beseech you, for in the same plain dealing I have used hitherto, I am resolved
to conclude. I must needs say then, if they are not to be excused who have
deprived you of your public Liberty, no more are you, if you have not
improved that private Liberty they left you for doing your Masters work. I
must profess it has troubled me, to hear men pray so earnestly, and talk so
much for the Restoration of their Liberties, and to see them make so little
use of those the Law allowed them. And it might too much tempt men to fear,
that their Secular interests went nearest to their hearts; and that they
chiefly mean a Liberty, to receive their maintenance again, to live they and
their Families at their former Rates; or to be able to insult over, and give
Laws to those in the Church, who now trample upon and despise them. I know
Daily Bread may be prayed for, but the Coming of God's Kingdom must have the
prioritie, both in our prayers and endeavors.

The Case is weighty, Sirs, and deserves your serious consideration, To go and
preach the Gospel you entered into an Engagement, and received a Commission,
the validity whereof (though to some of you given, by the laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery only) I suppose you question not, nor I think scarce
any one else, till very lately. Well, it being thus, I would know how you
can shift off the necessity that lies upon you to preach this Gospel, and the
Woe in case of your negligence. You may reply, You have not leave given you,
nor yet any maintenance allowed. But pray you, Who give the Apostles and
Primitive Christians leave for Three hundred Years after Christ, and who
maintained them? Where was such a Clause inserted in your Commission, Always
provided that the Rulers of the World give you leave to perform your Duties?
This would agree with the Politics of that Gentleman, who being, I fear,
designed to take God out of the World, in courtesy to us, somewhat to prevent
our confusion, would set up Monarchs little less limited than He. But if our
Ancestors had gone by this Rule, where had the Gospel been? or where is it
excepted, That you must have such and such provisions, or else not to Preach?
For my own part I acknowledge my self a very mean Casuist, and ignorant of
Twenty subtle distinctions, which here might be needful. And I am very
confident, I am speaking to few, but are more knowing, and better studied in
this point, than my self; and great difficulties there are to me, concerning
the relation betwixt a Pastor, and a people, as matters now stand with us; how
far it holds, and how far men are engaged to perform all the duties of that
relation; wherefore to that I shall say little or nothing; only so far as
concerns my self, and very many more, yea, all in part, I use thus plainly
to resolve the case to my self; when my understanding is most helped, by a
powerful apprehension of death and judgment near at hand.

I take it for the indispensable duty of every man, to employ himself to the
utmost in his place and calling, in answering the ends of his Creation and
Redemption, the glorifying of God, in doing his best to save his own, and
others Souls. And if I have been Solemnly Consecrated to this work, to make it
my very particular Calling, no Command of the highest Emperor iu the World can
disoblige me from it: God must be honored, the Gospel proclaimed, Souls saved,
my Vows performed, storm and rage, forbid and hinder it, who will or can. But
if there happen such terms to be put upon me, as the condition of my more open
exercise of the Function I am devoted to, which terms, after the use of all due
means for Information, I judge I cannot lawfully submit to; but yet others
will, whose apprehensions vary from mine, who will in some competent measure
carry on the Public work I was employed in, which I am forbid to meddle with:
Then, in such a case, (which, if I mistake not, is ours) I will cast about
which way I may do most, for those ends I am obliged to carry on. And since
Christianity it self is not forbid to be Preached, only I must not do it, viz.
not Publicly; but yet others will, and in many places do: And I foresee that
by rushing upon the Public Preaching, more hurt would come of my disobedience,
than good; and I should be more out of a capacity for future Service, either by
Imprisonment, Banishment, or the like; (which are not so much to be shunned as
Sufferings, but as they hinder the attainment of my ends) I will then see what
private opportunities are afforded me for those ends, and these with all
readiness I will accept, and diligently improve; as in which, all circumstances
considered, I may do most for the advancement of the Gospel: And therefore is
not to be thought an effect of Cowardice, a baseness unworthy him that
remembers what it sounds to be a CHRISTIAN; but as my taking that way, which
most conduces to Gods glory, and the Interest of Religion* And this is no
other than the course Paul himself took, Gal. 2. 2. when he communicated the
Gospel privately, to them that were of Reputation (and why? for fear, or shame?
no, but) lest he should run in vain.

But if Circumstances should so alter the case, that I see, venturing upon
Public Preaching, be the most probable way for the accomplishment of my just
designs, then I will embrace that: Or if I should be forbid privately to
endeavor the Salvation of Souls, then I must, and will disobey, let what will
be the event; because such commands directly contradict those ends I must
promote, and leave me no way for the attaining of them: Yea, though I dye for
it, I must tell those within my reach, who gave us our Being, and keeps us
alive, and to what end; who shed his blood for us, and why; and what we must do
to be made partakers of the benefits he has purchased: I must tell them of the
evil and danger of sin, whither it leads, and what an Heaven holiness will end
in. These are matters that the World must know, though a thousand deaths attend
upon the Publishers: And I would no longer care for a tongue or hand, than
whilst I might speak or write of them* One word more, and I shall conclude
this: But it so happening since the loss of my Liberty, that my self, and those
that depend on me, may be reduced to such pressing necessities, that I must be
taken up much more than I was wont, some way or other for the procuring of a
Livelihood (the sad case at present of many precious, eminent Ministers) then I
will betake my self to such care and pains as is requisite hereto; in the mean
time not relinquishing my great Work, but regarding the World (as all ought to
do, and indeed the most of what I have said, is appliable to private
Christians) only with a subserriencie to it. And this again we may find
justified by Paul himself: whom, if you had found busy at work, in making his
Tents, yet you could not have charged him with neglect of the Gospel: for even
then he was contriving how to render it most acceptable.

And thus I have given in my brief thoughts of this Case, which, though it may
seem a digression from the matter in hand, yet is it not so from my main
design, if it may do the least to quicken any to a sense of their duty, and
the neglects of it, and to put them upon more carefulness for the future. And
hence many may see, how guilty they have been, in not laying out themselves for
the good of souls, so far as they might, without breaking any Law, or running
any hazard. Oh Sirs, you are men sure somewhat sensible of what worth a soul
is: and what weighty things Salvation and Damnation are, which careless
Wretches do but jest with, as words of course. Why have you not then labored
more in these matters! Let none misunderstand me, I speak to the negligent
only. Could we have done no more for God and men's souls, to inform the
ignorant, convince the obstinate, quicken the godly, than we have done? Might
there not have been, through the blessing of God even upon our private labors,
fewer to provoke, and more to please him, more to strive with him by their
prayers to turn away his wrath, than there are?

And upon the same account, I would beg all private Christians to lay to heart
their lamentable dullness, and uselessness in the Places and Towns where they
dwell. Oh how little are their Neighbors and Acquaintance, I wish, I might not
say their Families, better for many of them! So little do they make Religion
their business: but in all their converse are even like other men; only
plodding on in a life-less Profession, and track of Duties; and appearing a
little zealous for some By-opinions of their own. It was time for them to be
raised out of their heavy, lukewarm temper, and to be made to mind and relish
a little more the weighty Truths and Matters of Religion. Reader, Art thou an
Honourer of Christ, and a Lover of Mankind? Why tell me then, is it not a most
lamentable thing to consider, That almost all the World, yea, almost all the
Christian, and Reformed Christian World is drowned in wickedness: and that
there is so little Savoury Salt in it; so few that study and labor to make the
Gospel obtain amongst men in the life and power of it? How do the most seek
their own things, how few the things of Jesus Christ? Oh that men were once
thoroughly persuaded, that his things were theirs! Some are too busy about
Puppet-plays, the petty trifles of the World, which, yet to those, who are
swallowed upin them, seem weighty and important; to mind much what becomes of
men's immortal souls. Let the poor Curate, that must live by it, see to such low
affairs. Others have so much to do to keep up their own Parties, Opinions and
Customs, That Christ may look to his Gospel himself for them, except as it lies
in the way to the things they account most their Concern. But all you the
Ministers of Christ, if indeed you take his Work it self for your Honor,
Pleasure, and Wages, though many of you may want those encouragements which are
so requisite and desirable for your success; yet, be awakened to do all the
service you can to your Lord and Master? Let us not stand accusing any for the
removal of our opportunities, whilst we have so many before us, if we had the
hearts and skill to use them. How glad would the Primitive Christians, or our
Protestant Martyrs have been of those Privileges we enjoy, though they might
earnestly have desired more? What Sirs, are there no poor souls near you, that
cry aloud for your help, to save them from the burning lake, to rescue them out
of the jaws of Death, and snares of the Devil, by whom they are led captive at
his will? These, these are they, upon whom especially you ought to employ all
your skill and pains, and from him that died for them, you shall have your
reward. I know the Godly also call for strengthening direction, comfort, and
quickening; but surely your principal (much less your only) work is not with
them; the miserable creatures that are just at the Graves mouth, and yet know
not what they came into the World for, require speedy and seasonable help. Oh
how many Thousands may now be out of your reach, whom you once might have
spoken to, but did not! Who hinders you from going to such, and discoursing to
them the matters that concern their everlasting Peace? Cannot you watch
opportunities when they can best have while to hear you, and are most likely
to regard you? You that live amongst your former people, cannot you go to their
Houses, and take all occasion of converse with them, and be inculcating on them
the great Truths and Duties of the Gospel? If you never formerly took this
course of private dealing with your people, set upon it now, and you know not
but it may be more effectual than all your former labors were. Some that have
tried, have had good success. However, you will have comfort in doing your
duty. Oh go often, as you have time, amongst you poor Neighbors, and see in
what a state their souls are, and be not so uncharitable and hard-hearted, as
to see them dropping into Hell, and yet do nothing to prevent it. Though it is
amongst Strangers you are cast, yet acquaint your selves with them, and do them
all the good you can, as knowing every man's your Neighbor that needs your
help. Put then upon reading good Books, and take account of them, and learn
what their knowledge in Religion is, and accordingly instruct and advise them.
But far be it from me, to presume to give Directions for the Work, others have
done it fully; and you know it well enough if you would but set to it with all
your might: oh follow then the example of Paul, who went about from house to
house, night and day, warning and beseething every one with tears. What do you
think this is not preaching the Gospel? Do you think that is only, whilst you
stand on a high place in the midst of an Assemby? Did not Christ preach the
Gospel to a Woman alone, and Philip to the Eunuch? In some respects it is
evident personal discourse has much the advantage of public Preaching; and
why may we not expect Gods blessing hereupon, as well as on the other? Now
Sirs, we have an happy opportunity of discovering what pure love to the Gospel
will do with us, without any hopes of a Temporal Reward. What moved you to
Preach to your people before? I know you will not join with the Quakers in
accusing your selves, and say it was for your Tithes. What then, was it a
desire to save the Souls of your people? Why I hope their Salvation is as
precious in your eyes now, as then; and do not they as much need your
assistance? Why then do not you continue it? Say not, the people will not bear
it, for many will. Try them once again, and where any are obstinate, let your
love and courtesy do its utmost to overcome them. Oh let us but work out own
hearts into lively affectionate apprehensions of the great concernments of
Souls, and study more what God is, and why he made us; what the Death of Christ
imports, what it is for a Soul to be saved or damned for ever; and we shall
scarce be able to refrain speaking to all we can light upon; but we shall
rather ask every man we meet, whether he has yet done his best to make sure
his everlasting happiness? whether he is yet got from under the wrath of God,
and out of danger of Hell? These things will be ready to burst from us in the
very streets, or open Congregations. Oh had we but that zeal, and those
affections which these matters deserve, and will very well warrant, what work
might we make in the world, yet keeping in all due bounds of sobriety and
prudence? Though perhaps we might be counted madmen for our pains, as Christ
himself and the Apostle Paul were. But remember then, I would have you spend
your zeal upon the things that are worth it; proportion it to the weight of the
truths you insist on. I would not have you take this pains to make men of your
opinion, in controverted matters. Beware of that, designing a party will spoil
all your work. Labor you to make them Members of Christ, what need you care
then what particular Church they are members of, or wherein they differ from
you in matters, that concern not their Salvation? Do the best you can to heal
all breaches, make none, widen none. Let men censure us as long as they will
for Schismatical and Turbulent; and if all our professions to the contrary may
not be heard, yet let our practices witness to God, to the world, and to our
own Consciences, that we are true lovers of Piety and Peace. See that you have
no other aims but Gods glory, and he will own, and Crown you for your labor of
love. Say not now, this is a difficult work, but tell me whether it be not
needful? If the Devil and his Instruments sit still, then do you so to;
Remember what a Covenant you made in Baptism, beside all other Engagements
since.

Think what you live for, and where you expect to stand shortly, and tell me
whether a life thus laid out for God, will not then be your comfort? Oh for the
Lords sake then all you his Servants up and be doing, and fear not: For God
will be with you, what are you afraid of enemies? Do you think this will
procure you more hatred and sufferings? And awaken Powers to greater
jealousies, and cause them to abridge you of the liberty yet reserved? Never
fear it, Sirs, why don't you know what I am pressing you to? Is it to propagate
Christianity; and this is a work that must and shall be done: for God has said
it, and he will see to it; and for this the World is yet kept up. Oh Sirs, pure,
simple, and uncorrupted Christianity, deserves all our time and study, and
pains to advance it. And it has such Comforts and Crowns, for its resolved
Friends and Persecuted followers, that would make a man even long to be
suffering for it; and the more he suffers, the more he will still love, the
firmlier adhere to it. Christianity, It is a Religion of that force and
excellency, that it defies oppositions, and scorns all banks and bounds. It
awes its greatest Adversaries, and a Prisoner at the bar with it, may make his
Judge upon the Bench to tremble, and the sturdy Jaylour that even now whipped
him, come quaking to beg a Pardon. Fear not Prisons, for the Gospel can never
be bound. Let this alone be your rule, and value not what Law or will of man
shall contradict it. Kings and Emperors with all their Officers, and Armies,
Edicts and Authorities, are but Trophee's to its Power; like dams they will make
it rise the higher, and overbear all before it; experience confirms what I say.
This cake of barley bread will tumble down all the Tents of a Midianitish Host;
The noise of its Trumpets, the light of the Lamps (though the Pitchers that
bear them, these earthen vessels our bodies, be broken) and crying out; The
Word of the Lord, and his Son Christ Jesus, will discomfit Innumerable Armies,
and make them run, and cry, and flee. This is the Gospel, and let all that read
these lines say, Let it go on and Prosper, let it run and be Glorified, and
strike its healing Sword to the hearts of its Adversaries. Now this is it, and
this alone, which I would beseech all to spend themselves for, and fear not but
it will bear your charges. Let your work be purely Gods, and if he can bear you
out he will; and I hope you don't doubt that. But let me once again beg you, to
see that you make the cause you work for, the same that Christ and his Apostles
drove on in the world, and then how joyfully may you suffer for it, whatever
men call your actions and designs. It Is nothing strange to suffer for Christ
from nominal Christians; nor for Peace and Truth, from men that call themselves
Orthodox and Catholic; this has been often in the world! Let then the
weighty, but much neglected Doctrines and Commands of the Gospel be urged with
all earnestness, but lesser things less regarded. Talk less of the Times,
but more of Eternity. Stand not discoursing who should have Power in the Church
to men, that are yet under the Power of the Devil; nor of a Ceremony or Form of
Prayer, to those that know not God, nor their own souls. What strange things
would these be to Catechize an Heathen in; and are they much fitter for Carnal
ones? But oh labor to work men into the true temper, and Spirit of Religion,
which consists so much in love to God and our Brethren; and then the new nature
that is in them, the inward relish of their Souls, and renewed principles of
light, will enable them to judge of things that differ, and all matters of
moment God will reveal to them.

Again, I have need to request that I be not judged immodest, if the confused
haste I now write in, have carried me out to a more than seemly earnestness*
nor yet count me Pragmatical for venturing thus to advise, since I desire no
more regard then what the reasonableness, and weight of the things proposed
shall be found to deserve.

And thus at length, through Gods assistance, I am even com'n to the end of my
task. I have endeavored to show, wherein it is, we have from the highest to
the lowest done amiss, and provoked God against us; I have also mingled
Directions, so far as my intended brevity would permit; for the performance of
those duties, that may appease his wrath, and make us happy in his favor.

And oh that these weak endevaours might have an issue answerable to their
Design! then how confidently durst I say we should be an happy People, by
becoming holy, which is all I have aimed at. But what talk I of my endeavors?
What shall be now the issue of Gods Judgments that have been upon us? Shall we
be bettered by them or not? Oh one would think there should scarce an obstinate
Sinner be left in the Nation after this? But that we should all with one
consent return to the God who has smitten us, from whom we have back-slidden?
One would think we should now imitate the Children of Israel, whom after
Eminent Judgments we find entering into a Covenant, to seek and serve the Lord
their God, to which their Kings were wont to call them. And oh that God would
put it into the heart of his Majesty, to engage all his People even from one
end of the Land to the other, to enter into such a solemn vow; that we will in
all things be careful to walk in those ways God has enjoined us, and not in
any thing voluntarily break his holy Laws? Oh that some such an engagement was
made the bond of our Union; our entrance into and observance of it the
condition of our Church Communion? Of what a blessed consequence would even
this be? But this and all other such great wishes, let us reserve for our
prayers; and give me leave with some jealousy to demand, Whether all that God
has done shall be lost upon us? What shall our Nation still be drowned in sin?
So soon as ever the Rod's from off us, shall we to our old courses again? Shall
Profaneness abound, and Religion be despised again? Shall Taverns, and
Brothel-houses, and Play Houses be frequented, and Gods Worship slighted, and
neglected again? Will the abominable and filthy be so still? Shall Blasphemy,
and Swearing, and Cursing, be as loud as ever? Will men again to the World, and
their Pleasures, as busily as ever? And make as light of his Threatenings and
Promises, and laugh at the talk of death and judgment, as they were wont to do?
Shall God still be mocked with Formalities, and dishonored by men's Lives? Will
the Hater of Godliness still rise higher in his Rage? Will the execution of
Justice be as much neglected as ever? And will the Man of Violence swell his
Fingers into Loins, and exchange his Rods for Scorpions? Will men still close
their eyes against the clearest light, and reject the apparent and only means
for the reconciling our differences, and establishing our peace upon sure
foundations? Or will they yet strive to aggravate the bitterness of men's
spirits, and pursue their design of crushing them into the very dirt? Shall we
yet be rent and torn with animosities and divisions? And shall they that ought
to cure, keep up and increase them? Shall we still, instead of accusing our
selves and sin, dip our Pens and Tongues in Gall, and cry out, one side on the
Tyrannical, Cruel and Oppressive; the other, on the Murmurers, Malcontents,
and Fault-finders? Will these, and all other disorders be still continued? Oh
God forbid that it should be thus, that we should grow worse under the
Physicians hand, and that none of his strongest Medicines should work? Shall we
cause God to complain of us, that he would have healed us, but we would not be
healed? That in vain has he smitten us, for that we would not receive
Correction? Oh that such a poor Worm as I, could do any thing to prevent such a
sad conclusion; for Woe to us, if God depart from us, leaving us to our selves,
resolving to strike us no more, but letting us alone till he destroy us in our
sins. My words are like to spread but a little way, but oh that they might have
some effect where they light.

To thee, Reader, let me betake my self: What have the workings of thy Soul
been, whilst thou have been reading these Lines? and what influence have they
upon thee? What, has not they Conscience smote thee, speak the truth, and told
thee plainly, Thou have been a Troubler of the Land, and have helped to bring
the Plague upon us? In the sight of God, I demand of thee, Have thou not been
guilty of some of the sins here described, Covetousness or Pride, Luxury or
Oppression, or the like? And what now? do thou condemn thy self for thy
folly? Will thou make all speed to get a Peace confirmed betwixt God and thy
Soul, and a Separation made betwixt thy Soul and Sin? Or on the other hand, Art
thou not in a rage, that thy sin has been too plainly displayed, and too much
disgraced? Thy darling sin which thou art resolved to keep, though thou have
Hell with it? Art thou not framing excuses, and saying, Thou can not believe
that such and such things which thou have a mind to, are such heinous matters,
and so displeasing to God? Or else art thou remiss and stupid, never thinking
this or that, only tossing over the Book, and passing this censure on it, and
throwing it down without any more regard? Truly this is it I most fear; for
this is the general prevailing temper: Oh therefore that I could but rouse thee
to an apprehension of thy self, and thy own estate. Reader, Sure thou art one
that would not willingly be damned; Will thou then hearken to a most
reasonable request I shall make to thee, before I conclude? Thou have now been
awhile reading these Lines, which have been as a Bill of Indictment against our
Land, and have deciphered what our especial crying sins are. Will thou now when
thou shut'st the Book, get alone, and spend but as much time in reading thy own
heart and life, and search and see whether none of these sins be thine? It may
be this is a work thou never did in thy life yet, but will thou now bring thy
heart to it? 'Tisin vain to ask thee, whether thou will forsake thy sin, if
thou will not set upon examining thy self to find it out. What say thou then
in the Name of God to this my earnest Request? What, shall I be denied? Is it a
great matter I ask of thee, to withdraw thy self from the noise and busle of
the World, and of thy own vain thoughts, and to make a diligent search into the
state of thy own soul, that being sensible of thy sin and danger, thou may
yet get help? Will It thou do thus much, or tell me plainly, Will thou be damned
first? For I Will assure thee, thy Damnation is never like to be prevented
without serious Consideration, and that is it I would beg thee to: Which is it
thou will choose? To set upon thy Duty, or to venture upon Helf? Sure thy mind
cannot but answer one way or other. Reader, be awakened, take not these for
words of course; from God I speak to thee, it is God looks on thee; he knows the
thoughts and intentions of thy heart, upon thy reading these demands. And
whatever course thou take, whether thou will examine thy self, and forsake thy
sins, or not, yet thou can not say but God has given thee fair Warning. He
now stands over thee with his Rod in his hand, and asks thee, Whether yet thou will seek, and serve him? If thy Self-examinations shall have made way at all
for such a demand, I would know in the next place, Whether thou will strive to
put away sin, every sin from thee, or will thou not? Art thou yet willing to be
reconciled to God? Be it known to thee, Oh sinner, whoever thou art, yet there
is hopes; from the Lord thy Maker and Redeemer* I tell thee so: What would the
Damned give for such a word? If thou will but impartiallie consider thy ways,
bewail thy sin, and loath it; turn from it, and from the World, to the Lord thy
God, with all thy heart, resting on his mercy in and through his Son, setting
upon a course of serious holiness, and continuing therein to the end, doing
this, be assured thy Soul shall live. Something of this I spoke at the
beginning, and cannot stand to say more on it now: Here Is enough to inform thee
(if thou knew it not) what thy Duty is? But art thou willing to perform it?
One would think thou should soon be resolved what to do. The question is,
Whether thou will do thy utmost to change thy heart and life, that thou may
be saved? Or whether thou will go in sin, and be damned? I have told thee upon
what terms thou may yet escape thy Ruin: but withal know, This must be
done. speedily, or perhaps not at all. If thou delayest one hour, thou may
be in Hell the next. God nath born with thee long, now he is making shorter
work; he will not always wait for nothing. They heart quickly he demands,
this he will have, or thy hearts-blood.

Away with thy sin then with all possible speed; if thou retain it, it will be
thy death; for a Hue and Cry's gone out from Heaven against it, and the man in
whose hands it is found, shall surely dye: Then cast it away, if thou love thy
life, thy everlasting life.

But what art thou one of those senseless, brutish, blockish souls, that a man
had almost as good spend his breath upon a stone wall, as talk to thee! Art
thou nothing moved with all thou read or nearest, but take all for words
of course, which thou forgettest as soon as the noise is out of thy ears? Do
thou now lay aside the Book, and go about thy wonted business, as if thou had
not been reading for Life or Death? But a kind of Story, that no way concerns
thee? Will thou now rise up, and go to thy worldly cares, thy Company, or vain
Discourse, instead of getting alone to God with humble acknowledgments of thy
sin, and earnest cries for mercy? If thou wast infected with the Plague, and
had*st been reading what Medicines thou should use, would thou lay by the
Book, and never mind more, as if thou had done enough to read them, without
taking care to apply them? And will thou now be guilty of a madness as much
greater than this, as sin and Hell, are worse than the Plague and Death? Art
thou resolved though Christ himself should kneel to thee, and beseech thee (as
he does by me) to search they heart, and review thy ways, and detest thy sins,
that he might save thee, that yet thou would not grant his desire, nor ever
put thy self to so much Labor as Conversion will cost thee? If thou be such a
stupid `resolved sinner, that wilt remain in thy old ways, come on it what
will; yea, and believe all shall be well enough with thee for all that, what
can I say to thee more? God be Judge between thee and me; Thou art destroyed,
not because thou could have no help, nor because it was not offered thee,
but because thou did wilfully resuse it. But, poor Creature, my heart even
aches for thee, and loath I am to leave thee in this wretched* dull, distracted
temper; wherein if Death, that is now so busy abroad, should find thee, thou
art undone for ever. Oh that yet I could speak something that would make thee
feel and fear. Tell me then, thou who art now so bold and resolute, so sottish
and careless, Do thou not think thou shall dye? Why, what will thou do then?
Think on it, and think again, I befeech thee. Is it not great odds, but the
Contagion may shortly reach thee? What course will thou then take, when thou
shall see the Tokens of God upon thee? Which way will thou look, or what will thou do for help? Then go to the sins thou have loved so dearly, and see what
comfort they will afford. Now call for a Cup, or a Whore; Never be daunted man.
Shall one of thy courage quail, that could have mocked at the Threatenings of
the Almighty God! What so boon and jolly but now, and now down in the mouth?
Here Is a sudden change indeed! Where are thy Companions? All fled? Where are
thy darling pleasures? All forsaken thee! What will thy Bags, and Bills, and
Bonds, do thee no good? Why should thou be dejected? Thou art a man of
Worship, perhaps a Lord, or a Knight, or Gentleman; go cheer thy self, review
thy good Purchases, think of thy high Titles, and rich Revenues! Go Gallants,
get to your Galss; Powder and Curle, Paint and Spot, Deck and Adorn you, as you
were wont? 'What, do you take no pleasure to view your Pale faces? Do your
hearts sink within you like a stone? Why how now poor creature, what has the
world left thee? The world thou did so dearly love, that Heaven was but a
trifle to it! What, have thou misplac't thy heart on a treacherous Friend, that
fails thee in thy greatest need? Must thou now all in silence and sadness groan
forth thy wretched Soul into another world? Now, now wretch, what has thy sin
and carelessness brought thee to? Now where is thy life of mirth and sport?
What will thou do now, when thy own comforts have left thee, and God loathes
thee, and casts out thy Deathbed howlings with disdain? What do begin to
call upon him now? Do think a few good words shall serve thy turn? Read Jer.
2. 28. Go get thee to thy own gods, see whether they can help and deliver thee.
Say not I would drive thee to despair; no, I would fain prevent it; and so
may thou, if thou will but hearken in time; and that time's just now; for
Death is even at thy back, and perhaps will take thee up as soon as the Book's
laid down.

But perhaps thou art one that think thy self safe, and that this nothing
belongs to thee, because thou may be recovered from the sickness, or got out
of the reach of it; or it may be so abated, that thou do not fear it; and
therefore thou art ready foolishly to cry with Agag, The bitterness of death is
past; but oh be convinced of thy lamentable sottishness; for thou may yet be
hew'n in pieces for all that. Read Amos 9. 12, 3, 4. And tell me whether God
will not find thee out. Thou art run away from the City perhaps, but not from
thy sin; and therefore thou carriest the Plague along with thee, which sooner
or later will break out. But though escape the Plague, art thou then secure? If
thou can but outlive this Mortality, do thou think all is well then? All
danger over? No, hold there, Sinner; God has not done with thee so; believe
it, the worst is yet to come. Alas, man, Death, Judgment and Hell are behind
still. I, but coming they are apace, and overtake thee at last they will, even
all of them, if thou look not about thee in time. Patch and piece up thy
mouldring Carcass as long as thou can; and shift thee hither and thither,
from this disease or that; but after all be assured, Thou shall dye. And after
Death has done its work upon thee, and the Judgment past, and Sentence
executed, if thou then find all well with thee, boast, and spare not; but till
then be silent. But if yet thou art fully bent to keep thy sin, let me beg thee
to think a little what is that Hell thou art leaping into; Oh think what the
wrath, the flaming, unquenchable wrath of God is. Do thou make a pish at it?
It Is because thou art an Infidel, or have lost thy wits. I know thou can not
awhile to think of it now, thou have pleasanter things to take up thy thoughts,
than death and Hell; and therefore thou laughest and singest, and merrily
throwest away thy hours, as if no hurt was near thee, whilst thou stand
tottering on the very brink of the bottomless Pit! And all this while, how many
Devils whom thou see not, stand some gaping to receive thee, and some
laboring to make thee sure, and till thee on? And multitudes of Deaths are
waiting for a Commission, any one of them to thrust thee in, and then farewell
all hope for ever. Oh spend but one hour, or half an hour in a day, in the
sober thoughts of Eternity, and go on in sin if thou can. Good Reader, let me
entreat thee to this course; but if thou cryest, Thou have somewhat else to do:
Know, thou shall shortly have nothing else to do, but to feel that which now
thou will not be brought to think of, that thou might avoid it; and then
say, If thou had not good counsel given thee once, if thou had had the wit
and the grace to take it* One moments experience shall at length convince thee
more, than all thy hearing or reading would. Thou countest Plague, Famine and
Sword, Earthquakes, Thunder and Lightning, terrible things; oh then what is
Hell, the very dregs, the Ocean of that fury of which these are but small
drops? There it is that God will make the very power of his hottest
intolerable wrath to appear, and in those rivers of brimstone, those scorching
flames of his anger must thou lie down for ever: oh for ever, ever, man, think
but awhile how long is that. Might but the undone Souls return, to describe
this place of torments to their old companions, what a Language should we hear?
Might but Dives himself have been sent to his jovial Brethren, that little
thought where their departed Brother was, nor what they themselves were
hastening to, in what a passionate manner would he have begged them off from sin,
that led to all that endless Woe! How would he have disturbed them in the midst
of their merriments and feastings, and even have made their hearts to quake,
and their hair stand an end with his terrible expressions? But, Reader, if thou
art one, who wilt be frightened from Hell by no descriptions, but of those that
have seen it, thy feeling is like to prevent thy fear. What say thou then
after all? Art thou yet resolved to prepare for Death, and prevent Damnation,
or not? If thou art, happy man thou, that ever thou wast born; but if thou art
not, I can stay to say no more, but even take thy course, and when thou seelest
the event, then say, Whether sound Repentance, and an holy life, had not been a
cheap and easy, a gainful and happy way, to have prevented everlasting misery.
But the good Lord have mercy upon thee, and work these convictions with power
upon thy soul, whilst they may do thee any good.

I shall finish all with a word or two to all those that truly love and fear
the Lord: Oh Sirs, You that have known God, and are interessed in his favor,
and are well acquainted at the Throne of his Grace, to which you have often in
time of trouble and need made your recourse, and thence have received
seasonable comfort and supply; All you to whom Prayer is no strange work, Now
arise and betake your selves to God with all seriousness and speed; Cast your
selves down before him, bewailing your own sins, and the sins of the Land; and
lie in the gap to stop the farther proceedings of his wrath, that he may not
root us up from being a people; nor yet so far give us off, that we should
continue to be a wicked and rebellious People; for then Destruction from the
Lord will certainly be our Portion. Strive with him to remove his Rod, but
above all, to work those ends whereto it is appointed.

I have endeavored to show you, and your selves are sensible of it, what sins
we are suffering for: Oh pray that every abominable thing may be cast forth
from amongst us, and those blessed works accomplished, which would make us in
the eye of God and man a people glorious and happy. Beg earnestly that the
Gospel may be advanced, Holiness encouraged, Wickedness suppressed and punished,
our Divisions healed; that from the Prince upon the Throne, to the Beggar upon
the Dunghill, there may be an effectual Reformation of all we have done amiss;
that we may yet find favor in the sight of God, and enjoy his residence, and
gracious presence amongst us; that he may delight in us, and rejoice over us to
do us good. Both alone, and in Companies, as you have opportunity, besiege
Heaven with your humble and affectionate prayers. God will not be deaf to your
cry, he knows your voice, which comes from your very Soul; he will not reject
the Petitions you present with pure hands; your prayers are his delight, all
you that are his humble, upright ones: It Is you must now prevail, or we are
undone. Though you may be a people, hated, derided and undervalued by those
amongst whom you live, yet must your intercessions be accepted on their behalf,
through our great intercessor, or else they are like to perish. It Is you that
must run with your Censers, and stand betwixt the Living and the Dead, that so
the Plague may be stayed. It is the incense and perfume of your prayers, that
through Christ, must appease an angry God, and clear an infected Air. It is
not the Lip*service of the profane sinner, or the formal Hypocrite, that will
do us any good; let his prayers be by heart, or by rote, within-book, or
without, that makes no great matter; but if he be one whose heart is far from
God, and whose life is a provocation to him, who still goes on in his sin, let
him be never so devout in the Church, or on his knees, and roar and weep with
never so much passion and noise, the howling of a Dog is as acceptable to God,
as such hypocritical devotion. Shall the tongue that was just now Cursing and
Swearing, come presently and fall a praying, and think to be accepted? Does
God delight to hear his Name taken in vain, as these senseless sinners do in
their solemnest services? No, no, but it is the fervent prayer of you who are
indeed Righteous, that is like to be effectual and prevailing. You have the
spirit of supplication interceding within you, assisting you with unutterable
sighs and groans; whether with a Form, or without, makes not the difference;
and you have a powerful Advocate enforcing your Requests* wherefore to God
betake your selves, lie at his feet. Plead with him for Rulers and People, his
Church and Ministers, your Friends and Enemies, City and Country, your Towns
and Family; and for your own Souls: Follow him day and night, and give him no
rest, till he shall hear in Heaven, and have mercy, and establish his Zion a
praise both amongst us, and in the whole Earth.

And be exhorted also now to lay about you all you can, (...) and convincing of
the poor creatures that are near you, (...) may not find their Souls unready.
If you be in places where (...) on is, or is daily seared, improve such a time
with ignorant and (...) ones; many may be willing to hear you now, who would
have (...) at serious Discourse a few days since. When they begin to (...)
Death as a real thing, and not far off, the fears of it will a little cure
(...) of their distractions; and they will no longer take Heaven and Hell for
jes^ing matters. This is not a time, Sirs to be ashamed of Religion; now, if
ever, Holiness will be in request, and boldly show it self. Afford your
Neighbors then all the helps you can for their precious souls. Go to their
Houses, and lend them good Books, and discourse of those matters that you may
easily perceive do most concern Dying men: And let that be your direction for
the future in this work; which I would never have you cease, whilst your
selves, and those about you, are mortal men, whose Eternity either of happiness
or woe, depends upon their well or ill improvement of this uncertain moment.

And Lastly, All you Holy Souls, be encouraged cheerfully and confidentlie
to receive the Sentence of Death within your selves. Let your spirits revive
within you, when you shall see the Wagons that come to fetch you to your
Joseph, even your Lord, who is gone before to prepare a place for you. Let
those that have lived estranged from God, careless of his Service, mad of the
World, and running after their pleasures, let them be dejected at the News of
Dying; the sad News, that they must leave all their Treasures, and their Joys,
and be carried into a state they thought not of, nor prepared for, there to be
reckoned with for their worldly, loose, and jollie Life, and to bear the
effects of their folly for ever. But all you to whom Sin has been a burden,
and Religion your work and pleasure; whose hearts have been taken up with Gods
dealings with mankind, and deeply affected with his mysterious Love in Christ;
who have taken it for the business of your Lives, to work out your salvation:
In a word, who have chosen God for your portion, and loved him more than all
things here below, and closed with Christ as your only Savior, to deliver you
both from Sin and Hell, and have taken the Holy Spirit for your Sanctifier and
Guide; not allowing your selves in known sin, but laboring in all things to
approve your selves to God, Now lift up your heads, and comfort your hearts,
when you see the day of Death approach. Let not Carnal ones see you dismayed,
for this will make them suspect Religion to be a fancy; so much does it
contradict your Profession, and disgrace both it and you.

(...) kind of Death by which you may be sent for hence, be (...) ground of
your trouble and fear. Why should not God (...) Death for you, as well as all
other things? And let it be of (...) it will, you have very great reason
quietly to submit to it. Let (...) welcome and there is nothing in a Plague
that can hurt you, (...) daunt you. Be very sensible of Gods hand now stretched
out (...) us, and so far manifest a reverence and awe; and with a reliance ^n
him, use all due means for self-preservation. But for your selves, dread not a
Plague, nor any thing it can do upon you; it can but kill your Bodies, and help
your Souls out of their prisons, and is there any hurt in that? Let the Spots
when you see them, be regarded by you, as no other then Tokens of your Fathers
love, which he has sent to show he is mindful of you, and has now sent to
fetch you nearer to himself: What though it be a rough Messenger, as Jaylours
use to be, yet the Message may well make you entertain him with smiles. If it
came to lead you forth to Execution indeed, you might well tremble; though not
so much for its self, as the errand it came on. Oh the stark madness of those
blind and miserable ones, that are afraid of a Plague, and not of Hell; that
run away from the Sickness, and run on in Sin? But talk not you of loathsome
Sores? Why Sirs, do they go any deeper than your flesh? Let those that have
made their Carcasses their care, be troubled for this? Why what have you any
thing more for your bodies to do? Any service for which you shall need them?
And need you care, how the old clothes are rent and torn, so long as you shall
never wear, nor need them more? Part willingly with your rags, you have clothes
a making, which shall soon silence your complaints. Swell, and break, and stink
flesh if thou will, I shall not be troubled with thee long? When thou
prosperest most, then I was at the worst; thou have been so much my enemy, that
I cannot but rejoice in thy ruins? If my tongue must needs complain, and my
sight, and smell be offended with my self, all this shall not reach my heart?
What care I for thy Sores and Pains, so long as my Souls in health: Go make
have, and get thee to thy Grave, and there turn to Rottenness and Filth? I pity
thee not, nor will ever sympathize with thee more.

Nor yet complain of the Suddenness of this Death. Leave this to them that
would serve God, when they had nothing else to do, that put off all to a Lord
have Mercy upon me; and a few good Prayers at their last gasp. But what Death
can be sudden to you, who are not unprepared for Death; but have made it the
business of your lives, to fit your selves for it?

Nor let this be your trouble that your Friends forsake you, and are all afraid
to come nigh you. Why what would you have them do, they cannot rebuke your
Disease, or delay your Death, or doing any thing for you in the world you are
going to; nor do you need they should. Council I hope you have given them in
time of Health, and therefore it may the less trouble you, that you cannot
speak to them now. To take a solemn leave of them, is a poor formality, to
trouble the thoughts of a dying man. Whatever help they could afford, you will
quickly be past all need of it, or them. Bear the want of their company or
assistance a day or two, and you will never desire, or want it more. Wherefore
cheer up your Spirits, and be not cast down, but to the Rock of Ages betake
your selves, who never failed you, nor any that placed their confidence in
him; he is a present help in time of trouble; he will come in to you when your
doors are shut up, he will stand by your beds-side, when no other friend dare.
Now Sirs, what is your God, your Savior worth? A God to support you, when the
world fails you; A Savior to relieve you, when you leave the world. Now is not
an holy life comfortable to your review? Do you now repent of the cost and
pains you have been at, or the sufferings you have under-gone for God? Was it
not worth while to be laughed and wondered at for your holy diligence, which
laid in store for such a day as this, and brings you support, when the hearts
of others sink for fear? Now Sirs, you are come to the end of your Pilgrimage;
the long-long-lookt for day is come. Sin and Satan, the world and the flesh,
shall never trouble you more for ever. Now shall your Prayers at length be all
heard, your Complainings ended, your Expectations and Longings satisfied, and
accomplished. Cheer up, cheer up, brave Souls, but one step more, and then you
are at your Fathers house. Methinks I see the Arms of Christ stretched out to
receive you, and Angels waiting to conduct you to his Arms. Fear not, nor be
dismayed, confidentlie resign your Souls to him, who laid down his life for you.
The darkness lasts but a little while, and presently you will come into the
open light; oh the difference you will in a moment find, betwixt your dark and
silent room, and the mansion that shall be assigned you in your Fathers house!
To which the stateliest Palace is a loathsome dungeon. Oh what Acclamations and
Hallelujahs, what crying, Holy, Holy, Holy! what Glorious Praises, and loud
noises! What Crowns and Scepters, what Riches and Beauties, will your ears and
eyes be presently stricken with! So that you will be amazed, and wonder
whether you are come, and where you have been all this while, that you never
heard, nor saw these things before. So infinitely will they exceed your
highest thoughts, when Faith helped you to the clearest views. But all your
strangeness and amazement will soon be over, Surprisals of joy will dissipate
and succeed them! This is the Glory, the hopes whereof upheld you all your
days, and the glimmerings and fore-tasts did so often revive you. Now you shall
at length see the Lord who loved you, and gave himself for you, and whom your
Souls have loved. Oh is there not life in his smiles? And if he smiles upon
you, all the Angels and Saints will bid you welcome: For his beck and pleasure
it is that rules all. There you shall be entered into that throng of Blessed
Spirits, yours shall their Employments be, their Privileges shall be yours.
Then shall your understandings be enlightened, your affections raised, and all
your capacities widened, and all be filled with suitable truth and goodness,
the latent powers of your souls, shall then be awakened into that high
Celestial Life. Then shall you be nearer to your Savior, than John, when he
leaned on his Bosom; and shall taste the full fruits of his dear and costly
love. Then, then blessed Soul thou shall know, and see, and feel, and enjoy thy
God, and be brought as near to him as thy Soul can desire, and receive as much
from him as thy nature is capable. The Lord thy Redeemer having by his Blood
and Spirit, accomplished his whole design upon thee, and fitted thee for, will
lead thee into the Fathers presence, and so thou shall enter upon the state of
constant and full communion with him. And shall be always spending an Eternity
in Contemplating, and Admiring his Excellencies and Glories, and singing his
Praises* in the warm-breathings and outgoings of thy heart after him, and in
the ravishments of highest mutual Love, and dearest Complacency, betwixt thy
enlarged Soul, and infinite essential goodness, even the God of Loves. This
thou shall have, but what this is, though I had leisure and skill, to say ten
thousand times more then I have done, thou could not know the thousandth
part, till thou do enjoy it. Wherefore with an holy impatience, and eager
joy enter upon the possession of all the Treasures of Love, which Death comes
to Translate thee to. Bid it heartily welcome, open thy breast, and let it
strike; It Is but the prick of a Pin, the smarts ceast as soon as its in, the
Pangs of it are gone in a trice. See they are over already, all pain was
expired with that last groan, and now thou art entered upon thy Joy. Farewell
Blessed Souls, whom I hope shortly to follow, and with you to celebrate an
Everlasting Communion, in the Presence, Praise and Love of the Great Jehovah,
and his Son Christ Jesus, to whom in the Unity of the Spirit, be rendered all
Honor, Power, and Glory, now and Eternally.

Amen.
FINIS.

