THE Catholic Medicine, AND Soverain Healer. Rectifying and Assisting the
Depraved Functions, of Infirm and Diseased Bodies; for Reducing and Curing, in
all Cases. Enabling thereby to Digest, Expectorate, Transpire, Open, Dissolve,
Discuss, Evacuate, Cleanse, Purify, Allay, Ease, Heal, Strengthen, and
Restore; the Decayed Parts, of Unsound and Distempered Bodies. Confirmed by
Demonstrations of Fact; in Eminent Cures performed. Communicated to the World,
as the most Happy, Comprehensive Expedient; Preventive and Curative; against
the Diseases of Humane Nature.

By a Strrict EXAMINER of MEDICAL ART.

Deus Omnipotens Creavit, Dictavit, and Benedixit; Medicus fecit; idem ac suo
Corpore, aliisque perituris, feliciter probavit: Cujus effecta mirabilia,
notatu maxim digna; in landem Creatoris; nec non creaturae salutem; e tenebris
Mundo afful^erunt. LONDON, Printed by J. Gain; for R. Horn at the South
Entrance of the Royal Exchange: T. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street: and
C. Blount at Charing Cross: Booksellers. 1684.

THE CATHOLIC MEDICINE. AND Soverain Healer, etc.
IT IS Proverbially said, That a Fool's Bolt is soon shot: And it is as certain
a Character of the Wise and Discreet; to suspend their Judgment or Censure upon
any thing; until deliberate Examination, and Inquiry into the Matter: lest
afterward they should recant, and correct their Mistake, with a Non putaram --

There are Wonders in Nature; and sometimes, wonderful Things produced by Art
or Accident; that scarce any Age passes, without some insignal Discovery; as
the Records of History sufficiently testify. Gunpowder, that stupendous
thundering Destroyer was the Wonder of that Age which produced it; and few
believed the Report, but such as heard and saw: and a Universal Preservative,
or Catholic Curing Medicine, may happily be the Prodigy of our present Time;
and perhaps alike Incredible to the World; except only to Such, as have
experimented, or seen the various great Effects of its previaling Power;
against humane Infirmities, and dangerous contumacious Diseases.

In the Writings of some Philosophers and Physicians, Men esteemed and famed in
their Times, for Learning; I find a Universal Medicine mentioned by them, and
strongly affirmed for a real Truth; where also both the Matter and Process of
Preparation are darkly hinted; to put Learned Ingenuity upon the Search, and
diligent Trials to purchase it. If such a rare Medicine were attainable in
those days; there is a greater probability for the gaining of it now; Knowledge
generally since, arriving to a higher pitch; accumulating by daily Experience,
and study for Improvements by Industrious Wits. If such a Jewel was found, and
since lost again; or concealed, as not to appear in the World for public Use;
I Judge it might be so in favor to the Medical Art, and the Professors
thereof; least the stately Fabric of this Learned Science be ruined thereby,
and the Professors become almost Useless, or of little Worth: for such a
general Comprehensive Medicine, applying fitly to the most, if not all Cases;
is easily managed without the help of a Physician. If so, it may be, as not
irrational to suppose (and Interest governs the World) we may the less wonder,
that a Catholic or Universal Medicine is now a Stranger in the World: and the
Wonder is not so great, if such a thing do appear in the World again; since it
is the Purchase of Learned Labor; or the Fortunate Free Gift of some Casual
Experiment; both which has furnished Mankind with great Discoveries, and
wonderful Rarities that are now grown Common.

Touching the possibility and probability of a Catholic Medicine: Nature is
endowed or furnished, with Catholic or Universal Food; why not with Catholic
Physic? Water was the Universal Drink of the World, so given, and so used, in
the Primitive Age; for all Constitutions, Ages, and both Sexes: and Bread is
Catholic Food, agreeable to humane Nature, and used by People of all sorts. If
Nature can convert one simple Meat to diverse Uses, in different parts of the
Body; why can she not be Helped and Cured in those various Parts, by one single
supreme Medicine? Can Nature frame such a curious Contrivance as Man's Body, of
Bread and Water; and if we allow a piece of Flesh too, cannot she as easily
mend this Machine, when out of Order, with an exquisite single Medicine,
composed of a few choice Ingredients, well Prepared, congruously associated and
fitted for her Use?

But Diseases, you will say, are various, and sometimes contrary to each other.
Some Bodies require Binding, others Loosning; some Heating, others Cooling,
etc. And one Medicine cannot work contrary Effects. I answer in short; The same
Hand and Hammer that can draw a Nail out, can drive a Nail in; and say no more.

If Nature be so curious an Architect, or Worker, as we said before; (far
beyond all Artists, who are but her Apes) she can probably with one chosen
Instrument, or well contrived Medicine, perform several Works therewith; using
it as she pleases, to effect what she stands in need of: Nature is a dextrous
Agent, and can do wonderfully for her Help, with the Assistance of a Soverain
Remedy. Can Humane Nature, of Bread and Water, make Chyle, Blood, Nervous
Juice, Sperme, and Milk; various Liquors for diver Uses, of the same Alimental
Matter? Can this Nature make Blood here, Flesh there, and Bones in an other
place of the same Food? Can she distribute this Nutrimental Matter, into all
parts of the Body, and so transmute or alter, as to be a fit and convenient
Supply and Support of the several Members, differing in Office, Form, and
Temperature: Brain, Heart, Lungs, Liver, Spleen, Reins, etc. Working thus
variously and wonderfully upon the same Substance or Matter, and converting it
how she pleases, for her necessary Uses? Then (a majore) if she can do the
greater, probably, and more easily the lesser: Can she not relieve her self,
Diseased (impeded and disturbed in her proper usual Course) by the help of a
generous brave Medicine, well designed and composed for her general Use? Can
she not convey this Medical Instrument into all Parts, to set them right?
Probably, as well by a single Medicine, as by many; and perhaps better: If this
Medicine be complete and commodious for her Management; such an one as is
pliable and obedient to her Command, yielding like Wax, to any Impression, and
serving to any Purpose she shall employ it: If she can work so variously with a
simple nourishing Juice, as Chyle; why not then as variously with a single
Curing Medicine? If Nature can maintain and feed all parts of the Body with one
sort of Food; then probably, and very reasonably, she may Mend or Cure all
those Parts with one Medicine; provided it be so formed and fitted, of that
Latitude as will answer all her Operations.

I perceive now, that Wonders are wrought in Man's Body every day; and being in
Health: but we cannot so easily believe Wonders to be wrought by a Medicine in
Sickness. If Nature can do Wonders with Aliment, as likely it is, she can do
Wonders with Medicament. Why should we then, be so hard to believe the Curing
Wonder, and doubt not at all in the Feeding or Nourishing Wonder? But you will
say, That Aliment is flexible, and obedient to the power of Nature, who easily
converts it to diverse Uses. And I say, if you can make a Medicine thus pliable,
and yielding to the power of Nature; it is possible then, you may make it thus
generally useful for Curing.

I understand now the possibility to be very fair and reasonable on Nature's
side; that she can manage a Catholic Medicine very well, to serve all her
Designs and Purposes for Curing, if she had but such an Instrument to act with:
but the possibility of designing, forming, and making this Catholic Instrument,
lies not so easy and probable on the Physitian's side: it is like to fail on
his part, he knows not how, nor which way to go about it; SUPERAT CAPTUM.
Nature is willing to receive ready to operate with such an Expedient, as a
Catholic Medicine, if you had it to give her.

Huc usque deventum est: So far, so good: we are now got half way through this
hard knotty Business, we only want a Physician to go through the other half, to
perform the Medicine: but now I remember, making of Medicines is the
Apothecaries Business, and the Doctor only prescribes what, and how it must be
made: But the Catholic Medicine will not be made after that manner, the
Apothecary-Doctor is not like to do the Business, so long as he makes Medicines
by guess, with Pen and Ink upon a piece of Paper only: he must take a little
more pains than in reading and writing: this is no Book Medicine; he must
operate in the Laboratory too, if ever he will gain the Catholic Medicine. We
must find out another, that is long experienced in the Preparation of
Medicines, a diligent Operator, striving earnestly to purchase something
Excellent, by various Trials and Experiments beyond. Book Reading; such a Man
may happily find out this great Arcanum.

Perhaps you will say, there have been such Seeking Men, that have not found
what they sought and labored after: can you tell us how, or which way they
must go about it, that they may not seek longer in vain?

I Will tell you as I was told, and will put you into the same Path, that led the
Author hereof to this hidden Treasure. Nature Corroborate est morborum
medicatrix. This is the way that leads to the Catholic Medicine, follow the
Track, be guided by this Dictate, and God speed you -- This golden Saying,
Nature Corrchorata -- were the words of Helmont; and Hypocrates hinted the same
many hundred years before him. Nature strengthened and assisted, is the Curer
of Diseases.

Nature is Medicatrix, and Medicine is Instrumentum: it is Nature that heals
primario and immediate Medicine Cures reinote and instrumentaliter; as an
Instrument that Nature uses to work by: for except Nature does take hold of,
and close with this Instrument, to exercise it for her Help, performing some
Operation therewith, in order to Curing; else Medicine is given in vain, and
effects nothing: and this we may believe, that no Medicine directs it self here
or there in the Body; but Nature (which is the Life) disposes of it to this
part, or that, as she stands in need, conveying both Nutriment and Medicament
at her pleasure; at least, to her power; and there is nopower else.

If Nature be Medicatrix, and Medicine is only Assistant; then, invita Natura.
Nature refusing ot act with the Medicine, no good can be done: nor can the best
Food give Nourishment to the Body, if Nature does not convert it to the proper
Use and Intention. If so, then Medicine ought to be such as must not disgust,
not disturb her, that she may readily receive and act therewith cheerfully.

If Nature be Medicatrix, the Curer of all Diseases, then doubtless she knows
best where the Disease lies, and which way she must be helped: and no Physician
is so sharp sighted, to see where; nor so discerning, to know what, is most
expedient and proper for Relief; but many times, instead of Helping, he does
Hurt, mistaking the Case; rather troubling, than assisting or relieving, by
forcing a wrong Operation, or promoting the Right with a Bad Medicine: and
better it is to do nothing, than such injurious meddling: Experience tells us,
that many a sick Person has been made worse by Medicines; Naeture more
perplexed, and Diseases exasperated thereby. Now here lies the Excellency of
the Catholic Medicine, that it does not constrain, or force Nature to any
particular Operation, but is fit for any, and promotes that which Nature elects
ror her Relief. By this you may perceive the difference between a Common
Medicine, and a Catholic: Other Medicines constrains Nature to such, or such a
particular Operation; which if the Case does not require it, but Nature would
act another way, more advantageous, you then contend with, and thwart Nature,
and instead of Helping, you offer Violence and Injure her; that Medicine is as
another Disease, added to what she complained of before; and Nature struggles
with this Cross Medicine, and does not comply with the Operation, to effect any
Good: and this is easy to be discerned oftentimes upon a Medicine given;
instead of an Allay and Mitigation, the Diseased Person complains more, Nature
being unwilling to go that way as the Medicine compells; the Consequents then
must needs be ill, and the Physitian's Designment frustrated.

Natura Corroborata -- Is that the way to the Catholic Medicine? And is that
the way to effect Cures? Then you must be very careful and wary, that you do
not debilitate Nature by irksome, nauseous, exhausting, painful Medicines: and
if so, then a great many are much out of the way, whose Medicines and Methods
enfeeble Nature by large Exhaustions, and tyering-Medicines, that overload,
fret, and grieve Nature, not contributing to her strengthening and assistance,
but the contrary.

There are three sorts of Unlucky Medicines? the one ill composed, or
associated, and incongruous of Composition, not agreeing within it self. The
second, are such, whose Ingredients, or the Preparation of them, are disgustful
to Nature, and not fit to be exhibited to any Body. There is a third sort;
which although tolerably good in themselves, and innocent; yet being given
unduly and unseasonably, when Nature requires a Medicine of another Operation:
this is an Unlucky and unfortunate Medicine also, and strains Nature the wrong
way: neither of these three do Corroborate Nature, but debilitate and deject.
No wonder then, that so many pale Faces and thin Chaps appear after Physicking,
since there are so many Unlucky Medicines abroad in the World, or unluckily
appointed and given. Truly, if Nature be fretted, galled, or oppressed with such
unwelcome, disgusting Medicines, she will make signs of her ill Usage: but if
you give good Medicines, such as do corroborate, help and assist, her Smiles
and good Looks will declare it.

I might proceed far in Discourse, touching the great difference between the
comprehensive Catholic Medicine, and the narrow, strait-lac'd Medicines, tied
up to some particular Operation and Punpose; as also concerning the
reasonableness and fair probability in Art, to design and effect a Medicine of
Catholic Latitude: but I shall not spend more time now in Reasoning, but come
to the Practical part of our Business, and prove by Fact, what you are not
convineed of by Reason. If you cannot trace it in the Causes, such sufficient
it is if I show it plain in the Effects: Experiment is above all Argunments,
and Reason is silenced, when Fact determines without it, or against it. Il
know, your chief Desire is to see what Extraordinary, this Medicine has, and
can do; and I shall satisfy you therein; for it were a Crime to conceal what
this Medicine has effected, and what Help it affords to Nature, distressed and
languishing, above the power of any orlier Medicine; which I shall show you, as
follows.

The Author or Inventer of this Medicine, was the Maker of it; and also the
first Patient that tried it upon his own Body. The occasion was rather urgent,
than of curiosity to be satisfied: which in plain Dealing, and as short as I
can (avoiding terms of Art as much as may be) was thus.

Being uport a Journey, the third days Riding caused a Bloody Urine, or rather
perfoot Blood, issuing that way, about half a pint at once, being newly
alighted at my Inn. This much surprised me, being about fifty miles from Home,
and such a distance from my own Medicines, it troubled me: for I was very
unwilling to make use of Country Help, knowing well enough how the
Medicine-Trade is managed. The first Expedient I pitch upon for Remedy, was
Rhenish-Wine and Spring Water, sweetened with a little Loaf-Sugar.; of which
having drunk about a Pint, I made pale Urine, and very clear, no sign of Blood
appearing; at which I was well pleased, and drank the same at Meals also. This
Haemorrhage thus ceasing, and having a hundred Miles to ride further (after a
days rest) I wont on the Journey: but afterward, Riding brought it upon me
again; and I had recourse to the aforesaid Remedy, which stopped it several times.

Coming to London, I found my self much disabled by this Accident in the
Journey, and afflicted with Pain and Heaviness at the Region of the Back,
chiefly the Left Kidney, and sometimes a Bloody Urine. But as many People use
to do, I prosecuted my other Occasions (being then urgent upon my Return) and
neglected my Preservation; until I was forced to betake my self to Medicines;
which I did at vacant days, but not so strictly as I ought, by Retirement from
all Business, so that the Desease abated little, or nothing, saving some Ease
and Intermissions at times: but upon much walking, or shaking by Coach, those
Symtoms returned again, and sometimes strains of Blood by Stools. I then began
to observe strickly the Urine, which was strong scented, with a foul Sediment
in the Vrinal, after five or six hours standing. This gave me Information of an
Ulcer placed in the Kidney; and I was then sufficiently alaram'd of the danger,
and drew off from all Business, applying earnestly to means, by Dyet-Drink,
Pills, and other Medicines.

But the Disense having gained such advantage by former delay, that what I had
used did not check it, but proceeded higher and more formidable. The extravased
Blood not sufficiently discharged by the Vrinary Ducture, nor by Stool; but
being collected from the Left Kidney, to the Left Hypogaster; formed a Tumor
there, between the Flan^, and Navel, like a weighty Lump, which was very
troublesome, lying on the Right Side, but more easy on the Left; to stretch,
caused pain there; or to turn in Bed, except very gently. This Tumor pressing
upon the Intestines, or Guts, stopped the passage, that I had no Stool for
three or four days together, unless procured by Physic, and that with
difficulty; also something else remarkable, which I forbear to mention. The
Tumor thus continuing for a Fortnight, or three Weeks, and not discussing, but
locked up, inclined to Suppuration; during which time, for about a Weeks space,
a rushing noise, like Wind and Waters, much molested my Head; and fearing the
dangerous Consequents of the Apostemation, that might destroy the Formation and
Communication of Parts, rendering them incapable of their Office: I seriously
considered with my self what to do in this hazardous Juncture, as finding the
Method and Medicines I had taken, to be ineffectual; the Disease increasing
more terrible, and probably, mortal, unless some other Means were used.

Thus anxiously considering, I bethought my self of a Medicine, which long
before I had begun to form the Designment; and had noted it in my Papers,
intending at some leisure times to review and perfect the Design thereof. This
Medicine continued in my thoughts a day and a night, adding and altering in my
mind variously (as having but this Cast for my Life) but coming to a result,
and determing at last, both the Matter and Process, I prepared for it, and was
earnest to finish, that I might come to the trial; (time was then precious) and
being much persuaded in my mind, that this was as hopeful means, as Art could
procure; and having some Preparations by me, serving to this purpose, I sooner
finished the Work.

The Medicine being made, next morning after early, I took a Dose thereof, a
Dram in weight, and perceived no manifest Operation, until Afternoon; then a
gentle motion downwards, and at night another; I felt no disturbance by the
Medicine, all the day, but Easy in Body. This pleased me much, that the
Medicine was so agreeable and gentle, and the Operation so pleasant, in my weak
and sore Condition; I was encouraged to expect great and good EFFECTS from it.
The morning following I took another Dose, which operated much like the first,
but sooner in the day; I took the third day, the fourth and the fifth in like
manner; during which time I was not at all sick at Stomach, nor molested any
way by the Medicin^. but as if I had taken no Physic, save only two or three
Stools in the day, and Urine more freely, and paler than before, sent forth
also with more strength. Thus my hopes began to spring, and I was wonderfully
pleased with the Medicine for its Operation, and the Effects, and began to be
Lighter in Body, and turn with less pain in Bed.

Then I intermitted one day, forbearing the Medicine; but the day following I
begun again, and took four days more together, observing daily the Stools and
Urine; in which was much purulent Matter coming both ways, by Stools and Urine.
Upon this the Tumor began to fall, and lessen daily: the Apostemated Matter
being thus constantly evacuated by the help of the Medicine; which brought it
away with so much case, as if it had been but the healing of a Cut Finger; it
made me Eat, Drink, and Sleep well; but observed convenient Diet; and was
sensible of any Irregularity committed, by some Indisposition afterward; for,
going abroad once too soon, and drinking the quantity but of a Pint of Ale: at
return home about five of the Clock, I began to be in pain at the part affected
(declaring a disgust to the Liquor) which increased to that degree in an hours
time, that I was tortured in that part, so as I never felt the like, causing me
to Vomit, Purge, Sweat, and Faint; which continued thus almost three hours, and
then ceased suddenly, without the help of any thing; not being able to suffer a
Spoonful of any Cordial to come within my Lips: this Fit being over, I was
cheerful as before, and slept well that Night.

The next morning, and the morning following, I took the Medicine again, which
operated as usually before, with benefit and pleasantness; then I omitted a
day, and took two days more together; and after another days Intermission, two
days again the Medicine.

Still Purulent Matter, but little; and sometimes Bloody Matter came away at
every days Operation; but much easier in Body: the Tumyfied part now flat, and
not sore, that I could lay my hand upon it without pain, and the Reins pretty
firm, that I could stoop or walk with ease; but still engaged to continue the
use of the Medicine, and then I took it every other day, for almost a
Fortnight; but changed the times, and took it only at Nights, going to bed; and
rested very well with it until the time of rising, and then a motion downwards.

Observing constantly both Stools and Urine, I was satisfied the Cure came on
very hopefully: and finding that the days of taking were better than when I
forbore, and perceiving some small prickling pains at times in the Flank, and
under the Os pubis especially at times of making Water, with some small
appearance of corrupt Matter; I durst not yet leave off the Medicine, but kept
the Passages open, for a full draining out of all the Corruption, least any
Relict lurking behind (though pretty quiet at present) might beget a fresh
disturbance.

And now I began to take the Medicine with the intermission of two days; and
continued so for about a Fortnight, and went abroad the intermitting days.
Afterward I used it twice in a Week only, and went abroad those days I took
the Medicine, the Weather being moderate, and my self being much more able in
Body than before.

And now by the good Providence of God, directing me to this Soverain means
(far beyond all that ever I knew) I am healed of that Ulcer and Apostem; which
I must wholly ascribe to the Virtues of this Medicine. And thus much I thought
my self engaged to declare to the World, in testimony of Thankfulness to the
Almighty, and Charity to others, whose Lives may be in as great Jeopardy, and
know not where to find such easy and secure Help; that as it was the sole
Instrument of saving my Life, so it may be also of many others, though in
different Cases.

And having thus briefly given you the true and bare Narrative of this Cure,
and the Matters of Fact; give me leave to comment a little upon the whole
Story, and remark what may be considerable. Miser eram, ut fortunatus essem:
Probably I had never known this good and great Medicine, had not Necessity
urged me so carnestly upon the Invention, and full trial thereof upon my self;
whereby I am the more assured of the excellent Properties and Worth thereof.
Had I used this Medicine sooner, I had prevented the Tumor gathering; at least,
the Apostemation, by dissolving and discussing the coagulate Matter, before
Suppuration; but being fixed so long before, and inclinable to Suppurate, I
must undergo the hazard of an Apostem spreading and breaking within the Belly
(which might have proved Cancerous) and the danger of ^roding the Vessels of
those Parts, and rotting some part of the Mesentery: but plying this Medicine
diligently, and undisturbedly from any other, broke the Apostem timely,
discharged the Corruption freely, safely, and with much ease. Had this Apostem
been prevented by the timely use of this Medicine, I had not then so certainly
known its prevailing, healing power in such dangerous Cases: but the Author was
made the first Experimentor of his new Medical Engine, and that in a deplorable
and extreme Case. Some purchase Knowledge by Study; others by Travel, and I by
my own Sickness; and that not a small one; for it almost cost me my Life;
Quanti, quanti, been emitur, non me poenitet.

This Extract performed all the requisite Offices belonging to this great Cure:
It acted alone the various Operations of diverse Medicines, which successively
and methodically are used in such Cases. This single Medicine, but once in
twenty four hours taken, and sometimes but once in forty eight hours, performed
the whole Work, and suppl'yd the place of a numerous train of Medicines: no
Fomentations, Cataplasms, Unguents, or Liniments externally applied; as usually
in like Cases: no Purging Pills, Potions, or Clysters: No Vulnerary Decoctions,
or Cooling Juleps: no Sarcotick Electuaries, or Epulotic Bolus, internally
used; as method requires in such Diseases.

This Medicine alone, acted every Scene; this was the Traumatick, the
Digestive, the Abstersive, the Purgative, the Anodyne, the Cordial, the Julep,
that allayed Fermenting Matter, and Febrile Heats; the Opening Clyster, the
Discussing Fomentation, the mollifying Unguent and Suppurating Cataplasm. This
was, instar omnium, omnibusque praestantius. Had I been to run the Gantlope
through so many various particular Chance Medicines (as the necessity of so
great a Disease, and long of Course would require) with Paper Recipes, and
unknown Casual Shop-Medicines; I had been fairly brought to Bed; my head had
layn low enough by this time, I do not doubt: but this Medicine alone did
sufficiently and fully answer all Indications, that Medical Art does require in
that, or like Cases; and the Operations were as I could wish: what more could
be desired? Had I procured half a dozen Physicians and Surgeons, they could
not have done more, or better, than what this single Medicine performed; and
perhaps, not so well: varyous Opinions, and differing Conjectures, arising from
many Heads, frequently disturbs; and sometimes, frustrates a Cure; especially,
when Conjectural New-formed Medicines, pro re nata, must be put upon the Work;
which most commonly are the result of Consultations; every man must have a Oar
in the Boat; some pulls one way, and some another.

I committed the whole Cure to this Medicine; not at a venture; but as
satisfied (after a few days trial) nothing in Medical Art could do more
securely and effectually; it kept my Body Open, at Ease, and in good Temper,
free from any Fever, the whole Course: it discharged the Apostemated and
Vlcerous Matter daily, by Stools and (...): it never failed me a day, but
performed steddily and constantly, with so much ease and pleasantness, that I
could Eat and Drink, Sleep and Study, as if little ailed me; when dangerously
seized with an Ulcer in the Kidney, and a Tumor Apostemating in the Belly. All
this while I was double concerned: First, for my Life, as being at Hazard: and
secondly, for the Reputation of the Medicine; which would have troubled me, had
it not performed so clearly and manifestly excellent, althouuh I had escaped:
for I was much pleased in the hopes of this Medicine; that it would be the
Instrument of saving many Lives; and that it might prove the Nonesuch; perinde
accidit; quod mihi maxim optatum fuit.

But if I had dyed by some accidental miscarriage in this dangerous Sickness
(as before mentioned by my adventure) notwithstanding I must needs have
extolled the Medicine, offering so fairly for a Cure, and performing its
Operations so admirably; that if the inevitable time of dying was come, the
Medicine could not be charged with Insufficiency, since nothing can be expected
more from a Medicine, than due Operations; and all the Medicines of this Art
could do no more than this did, and I question, whether so much, and so well;
for where there is variety designed methodically, and by turns to act several
parts, some do it well, and some ill; that after much struggling through hopes
and Fears, by better and worse days; if the Sick do at last recover, it is hard
to say what effected, or conduced toward the Cure; so dubious commonly are the
Methods of Physic, by various Medicines, even where the most and seeming
greatest means are used.

But notwithstanding all this great Performance upon my self in various
Operations, and much Experience by repeated Use in my own Cure: I was desirous
of seeing trials upon Others in different Cases, to confirm the Opinion I had
of this Medicine; and therefore I waved the Use of other proper and good
Medicines, for peculiar Operations and Purposes, in the Cure of several
Infirmities and Diseases, in diverse Persons, and prosecuted only with this
Catholic Extract; from which successful Experiments and Proceedings therein, I
am further informed, and fully satisfied of the Worth and Usefulness of this
Medicine, both in Young and Old, and of both Sexes, variously diseased: the
Particulars whereof to relate of each Person, would be too tedious, and swell
this Narrative to inconvenient Bigness and Price: I shall therefore
compendiously sum up the special Properties and Virtues wherewith this
Medicine is endowed, and by what Operations it does perform the same.

I have found this Medicine to be most effectual, for Cleansing and Purifying
foul or corrupt decaying Bodies; gently and gradually searching all parts and
places, where such Matter settles and lodges; and that you will find by what
comes from you both ways; for your Stools and Urine will be stronger scented
than at other times; and you will see such filthy Stuff brought away, as you
did not thivk remained within you: it makes the Body wholesome, clean, and
sweet, drawing out all Imputity, and stinking corrupt Humors, without the help
of Issues: for by the use of this sometimes; you may be discharged safely from
the troublesome daily dressing of stinking Issues; and at best, they are but
Remedia a posteriori; to abate the Effects and product Matter of Diseases: but
this Medicine is Remedium a priori; applying to the Fountain and Spring from
whence such issuing Humor flows, and where it is bred: this (...) only
evacuates what is generated, but also prevents the generating of such noxious
degenerate matter. It Is a good Invention, and useful sometimes to Embalm and
secure the Dead from Putrefaction, and sending forth noisome Scent: but this
has a more excellent Art, that preserves living Bodies from putrid humors,
which annoy and decay the Life. It is Customary with many to take a Purge, or
two, now and then; and it is well thought on, for cleaning the Body, to prevent
Diseases breeding, or growing and spreading; but if then also they were careful
and knowing in the choice of their Medicine to do it with, this also is
necessary: all Purging is not Purifying; but that which is performed by a
wholesome, balsamic, purifying Medicine. If you rub the dust, or dirt from
Iron with a wet Cloth, it soon after contracts a Rust, and your cleaning was to
little purpose: and if you cleanse Man's Body with the common virulent
Stimulators, falsely denominated Purgatives; it will soon want cleaning again:
they taint also, stamping ill Impressions upon the Parts, and lay a Foundation
for a future Work; it is therefore very considerable, with what Medicine you
cleanse the Body; especially, Crasy and Weak: for this not only cleans and
purifies, but also leaves a strengthening power behind, whereby the Parts
perform their Functions more vigorously, and continue longer in their Duties.

A grand Complaint, and most frequent amongst the Infirm and Diseased, is
Obstructions; herewith thousands are grieved and complain; some in this Part,
and some in that: the Lungs, the Liver, the Spleen, Mesentery, Pancreas,
Matrix, Kidneys, Guts, Gall, etc. and from Obstructions in these parts, a
multitude of Diseases take their rise, are continued, or aggravated thereby;
else Physicians are very wrong in their Judgments and Determinations. Now here
is a Medicine fit for the purpose, for Yours, and Yours: this is the best
Picklock Instrument for opening of Obstructions or Stoppages that can be: it
unbars and unlocks all Passages that are closed, clogged, or stopped up: removing
and carrying away all the condensed or coagulate, viscous and slimy obstructing
matter; lubrefying and dilating the Passages for a free transition thereof: and
herein this Medicine has given ample testimony of its Ability and Performance.

Now from this and the former Operation, Viz. Cleansing, so performed; a
numerous train of Diseases are carried off, and subdued; as, Scurvey, Dropsies,
Hypochondriac Melancholy, Jaundies, Spleen, Cholick, Green Sickness, Flatulent
Fumes, Hysterical Fits, Fevers, Quinsies, Plurisies, etc. There being no
Morbific matter left to breed on, or to feed on.

How many Fevers depend upon Obstructions, by morbous, depraved matter lodged,
or locked up? Very many, and very often, this is the generating Cause, and this
is the continuing Cause; you may then give Julep upon Julep, and play the fool
till Death's day, and never cure the Fever. These Obstructions cause Pain,
this Pain raises a Fever; and oftentimes, an Inflammation to the Bargain;
this Inflammation, a Tumor, internal and seldom perceived: this Tumor sometimes
Apostemates, or becomes Scirrhous and Indurate; or Gangrens, and kills the
Patient, never coming to any Suppuration; and then the Patient is said to dye
of a Fever; they could not quench this Fever: no, I believe not, it was not
like to be done by Juleping and Clystering, and blustering to no purpose. And
after this manner so many thousands have dyed of a Fever; thanks to the
Ignorance of the pretending Curers. And such Cases internal as these, come
oftener into the Physicians Practice, than taken notice of; and thousands have
dyed upon this account, when the true state of the Case was not discerned; but
the Patient dyed of a Fever; that was apparent, and aimed at; the rest was
latent, and therefore proved Mortal: this Medicine can find out a Disease, when
the Physician sees it not, and knows not what to aim at.

But here is an Engine to quench a Fever, surer and safer than with Buckets
full of Juleps. But will this Medicine remove Obstructions? Then it will cure
many a Disease: yes, if it were a heap of Gravel in the Kidneys or Bladder, it
will carry it away, and sweep the place. I perceive now, Dame Nature,
Medicatrix, with the help of this Instrument, will cure a multitude of
Diseases, if there were never a Doctor and Pothecary to be found. This is a far
better Medicine, than any Paper Medicine; the Recipes and Decipes, the Pot-guns
and Crackers, that make a noise, and do no execution; yes, sometimes they do;
mortal Execution.

For Pains of the Head or Limbs, Stitches, or Gripes in the Body, Reumatism, or
Gout; this Medicine is most proper means, and very prevailing, to free all
parts of the Body from acrid, sharp, punging and corroding Humors; the Causes
of such restless, painful assaults that molest you. And for such as have the
Gout, or incline thereto, this is both Preventive, to keep off, and a Curative
Remedy in the Paroxism, or Fit; and is the safest allaying, easing means, in
those extreme tormenting Cases, when Physicians dare not give a Medicine for
fear of the danger, and of making them worse: but this comfort they will
administer; when the Fit is off, they will then prescribe a Course of Physic:
Thank you for nothing; truly Doctor, if you cannot help me when I am tormented
with pain, you shall not meddle with me when I am at ease; for you are not
likely to do me any good.

To assist the Genital Function, and remove the Impediments of those Organs,
belonging to that Faculty, for the better and due Performance of their Offices;
this Medicine is singular good: it enables feeble insufficient Persons by
cleansing and giving strength to those Parts, and is probable good means
against Barrenness. It Is the best Remedy for weak Backs, Loins, or Genitalls;
for Strains or Over Reaches; for Spermatick Wasting, and Seminal Issuing; to
stay the Whites safely, by cleansing and purifying; to digest a crude, thin,
watery Seed, and reduce it to better Consistence; by cleansing the Spermatick
Vessels, and elaborating the Seed; it knits and roborates the Spine and
Genitals of both Sexes.

For Diseases appearing outward, declaring an ill habit of Body, and foulness
of Blood; as when Spots, Pimples, Itch, Scabs, Pustuls, Swellings, etc. this
Extract is very proper, for a more free Perspiration; and to send forth by the
Pores, for a purification of the Blood, and nutricious Juices of the Body.

For the Venereal Lues or Pox, and that long Train of Symptoms, which attend,
and gradually follow this grand Disease, as Gonorrhaeas, sharp Urine, Buboes,
Pains, Scabs, Pustuls, Ulcers, etc. This Catholic Medicine is incomparable for
power, and most convenient for Privacy: being a Remedy so easily managed, and
giving the most Liberty, that can be allowed, if the Weather be not very bad to
go abroad in: for its Operations are so gentle, and this to be taken at Nights;
that whilst you sleep, it is doing the Work that you desire to be effected:
and although other dogged, ill contrived Medicines, do make the Diseased look
thin and suspiciously; this enables them in body, and also puts a good face
upon it, and you will not be worn down and enfeebled by this Medicine, as
commonly by the untoward methods now practiced.

To promote and set forward all Chirurgical Cures, that appear outward, and may
be managed by the hand; this Medicine is most excellent and useful: for Wounds,
Tumors, Contusions, Apostems, Ulcers, Cancers, Fistula's; and Gangreens, if not
too far gone to a Mortification, nothing is more available and conducing
toward a Cure; and put it forward when you are at a stand, by drawing off and
evacuating all Humoral Feeding Causes, which continues, and keeps Sores from
healing. But for the like Cases internal; this Medicine does all the Work, and
acts a dexterous Surgeons part in those places, where neither his eye can
discern, nor his hand come to help you: then this Medicine is more helpful, and
more to be depended on, than all the Practisers in this Art: this alone will do
the Work, if possible to be done. This Medicine will help you, to throw away
your Crutches: and for a decayed rotten CARCASS, if possible to be restored,
this is the Remedy.

Surgery is a very fine Art; but I do not like the Craft, nor the Ignorance
that some of those Professors are plentifully endowed with: they can dress and
plaster up the Patient, but know little of the true Design and Mystery of
Curing: but he that is truly Knowing, Skilful in Healing, and Honest, is a man
much to be esteemed: such are but few: else, what makes the Surgeon so long
about Healing, in Cases not so difficult? Because he wants the right
designment, and good internal Medicine to promote the Work. Healing arises
(primario) from Nature within; not from Plaster and Unguent without: External
Applications will not do, without good Internal Medicine, disposing and
inabling Nature for Healing, thereby to effect the Cure: after six Months, and
twelve Months tormenting, you shall have this comfortable News; your Leg, or
your Arm must be chopped off, if you will save your Life: This is an After-Game
to be played.

Natura Corroborata -- Is that the Quid agendum? That Is easily said; but,
quibue auxiliis? What Medicines have you to do it with? Additu difficilia; they
are not so soon found out: for want of these the Gangrens and Mortifications,
too often put a period to the Surgeon's Labor; and the Patient's Life. I have
seen the woeful Experience of this; and I have seen the joyful Experience of the
other. Ab infortunio, fortunium: This Ulcer and Apostem taught me to be a
Surgeon; and this two Months Cure informed me more; than seven years Hospital
Practice could teach me: true, I might learn there the Art of Dismembring, how
to cut off Arms and Legs cleverly: but I learned a better Art than that;
namely, how to save Arms and Legs, and Bodies from mangling. Amputation would
not so frequently be the mode of Curing; nor the extreme Remedy of saving the
Life; if the true Art of 01 Healing was rightly known. I might learn there to
Cut and Carbonado: but here I learned the Art of sleeping in a whole Skin;
that is better. I saved both Belly and Back from ripping up, with the help of
this Medicine only: and for these good Deeds, I must never forget this good
Medicine.

For inward Bruises, to prevent or dissolve coagulate Blood; to discuss and
dissipate collected Humors, resorting thither, and fixing; to defend and
strengthen the grieved part; nothing more availeable. And as for Fractures and
Disloctations,; which necessarily require a skilful Surgeon's hand, and outward
Applications: yet for inward Medicine, to keep the Body in due temper, and to
promote such Cures, this is most helpful and assisting to Nature, for a safe
and more speedy performance thereof. Upon a review therefore of what has been
truly said, this Medicine does appear the most commodious Medicinal Provision
(as ready, durable, and portable) for Armies, Navies, and Hospitals: completed
for all emergent Occasions, and the most effieacious means that can be used;
for Wounded, Contused, Apostemated, Vlcerated, Maimed Persons, and sick People;
nothing Superior, nor equal to it now in Practice.

It evacuates by Stool, cleanses by Urine, evaporates by the Pores,
expectorates and clears the Breast.

Promotes the Digestions, removes Obstructions, expells Wind, Fumes, and
Vapors.

Roborates and strengthens the Nerves, Tendons, Ligaments, Membranes and
Fibers; enabling them for Extension, Retension, Expulsion and Transmission.

Prevents and checks Febrile Heats, and Turgid Fermentations.

Allays Pain, procures Rest, Heals admirably.

A Restorative, to retrive a Consumptive, Wasting Body: and excellent for such
as are Phthisical, Astmatic, or have a stinking Breath; opening the Pipes of
the Lungs, cleansing away Phlegm, or putrid Matter by Expectoration; helps
Coughing, Wheesing, and and Shortness of Breath; and for tabefyed, decayed,
weak Lungs; nothing likt it. A Perfume to sweeten a rank, corrupt Carcass. A
Catholic Instrument, serving Nature's Convenience and Necessity, applying fitly
to all Cases.

This is a Composition, ex tribus: Aliment, Condiment, and Medicament; here is
Food, and Sauce to it; and Medicine in the Rere, for Digestion (extra Jocum).
This is a strange Compound indeed, as ever was; but it is a true one; and the
best (if I may be Judge) that ever was yet; at least, the best that I ever saw,
or can hear of; and I have had the view of thousands, upon Inquiry and Search
for many years, in Print and Manuscripts: besides my own Experiments and
Trials, not a few, for satisfaction. It carries the best face, and makes the
most hopeful and innocent Appearance, upon review of the Materials, and the
Designment of Preparation: but that is not all; it answers in Practice, and
proves as good, or better than it promises: for in all the dangerous and
difficult Cases that this Medicine has been used, I know not of any
Miscarriage, or ill Operation happening in the weakest and tenderest Bodies;
but much to the satisfaction of all: Intaminatis fulget honoribus.

This is a Jewel sir for the Cabinet of Princes; and I do believe, (not without
reason, but without Vanity or Boasting) that they have not such help as this,
when they stand in need.

The Learned Professors of this Art, perhaps may be angry, to see a single
Medicine vieing with all their Skill and Practice: but who can help it? Truth
must be spoke; this Medicine fears no Frowns, and begs no Favor; because it is
able to stand a Trial, and abide the Test; this is no Cheat nor Brag (we scorn
those Tricks) it will do that which sometimes they cannot do with a whole Shop
of Medicines: There is no such Method recorded upon the Files; nor no such
Medicine in the Shops.

For Infants or Children that are troubled with Worms, or have hard and big
Bellyes; this Medicine is excellent; either given inwardly, or applied outward,
as a Plaster upon the Navel, the breadth of your Palm.

It Is a necessary Vade mecum, and a secure Companion for a Traveller; being
both Physician, and Pothecary; and Surgeon in many Cases; as in all your
Travels you shall not find the like, nor such help to be purchased for your
Gold. How sadly are some exposed, that fall sick in strange Places? What
inconsiderable, (if not pernicious) assistance in most places, as Physic is
now managed? and in the best places it is specious, but not what it seems to
promise. This will Sail with you to East India; and if there be no Occasion in
the Voyage (as ten to one there will) you may take it, or give it when you come
home, and it will be then in full Power and Virtue. Ships and Shops, they are
bravely provided! Ah! I know how; and I know both the Ship-Doctors; and the
Shop-Doctors, that give out Bills, Recipes; what do you call them; the Paper
Medicines they practice with; that imprudent late Invention, and pernicious
Innovation. I have searched the Medical Art, and Medicine Trade; from one end to
the other: I have sounded the Shallons, and the Deep: I know the Intrigues, the
Blindes, and the Shams; (as well as the Excellency, and what is praiseworthy)
and it is two to one, but you may know them ere long: but we are now upon
another business, the Catholic Medicine. But all this while, you know not how
to use it, if you had it: I Will tell you; and I can inform you as well as any
body; for I have taken it thirty times at least, my self; and I know how many,
others have taken it; and the Effects.

The Dose, or Quantity to be taken at once: the Manner how: and Times when; are
thus.

A Man, or Woman may begin with half a Dram, for the first Dose; which is about
the quantity of a Hasel Nut-shell: next time a Dram weight: which is about the
bigness of a large Nutmeg: and this is the most usual Dose for continuance
afterward: except some very strong Bodies, that may proceed to a Dram and a
half: a Child often years old, may take the Quantity of a Hasel Nut.

Take it upon a Knifes Point: but you may divide it into two or three parts,
for the more easy swallowing; and a Spoonful of warm Drink with each, to
carry it down: (this was my way) or you may dissolve the whole Dose, in two
Spoonfuls of hot Drink; and take a Spoonful or two after, to wash your mouth:
or else you may put it in the pap of an Apple, Stew'd-prune, or such like, and
swallow it: either way will serve, as every one likes best. The Drink you take
with it, may be White Wind, and Spring Water, equal Quantities mixed: I have
taken it with Ale; with Small Beer; and with Milk; for Trials: but Wine and
Water together, I commend generally, as the best Vehicle.

The Times of taking this Medicine, most usually, and best; is at Night, going
to bed: for it does not hinder Sleep; but rather procures quiet Rest: and those
Nights you must eat but little; and not after seven of the Clock: but if any
Person shall find any Inconvenience, by taking over Night; it may be taken
early in the Morning, at four or five of the Clock, and sleep after: about
eight or nine of the Clock, you may drink a Draught of warm Ale, or Beer; but
not Stale, or Whey in Summer. If the the Weather be not very bad; or the
Weakness and Condition of Body, does not forbid; you may go abroad without
danger. And if occasion requires; you may safely take this Medicine in Frosty
Weather or Dog Days. I took it three or four times in a Week, the last great
Frost; but kept within. The Use of this Medicine, is to be continued a longer,
or shorter time, according to the greatness of the Disease 01 or Cause. Take at
first, three Nights together; intermit one Night, and take three Nights more:
and in many Cases this is enough: but if the Occasion be greater, requiring a
further Prosecution; you may then proceed on, and take two Nights together, and
intermit the third; afterward you may take but every other day.

This is no rough, boisterous Medicine; it makes no busse, nor gives any
Disturbance; but it works gently, cunningly, and privately, like a Mole under
Ground: and you must give it due time to complete the full Effects; but every
days Operation will encourage you to go on, by the present daily advantages:
therefore be not too hasty in your Expectation; if there be a difficult piece
of Work to be done; and leave not off the Medicine too soon; but give the full
trial of its Efficacy and Virtue: your Disease came on by degrees; and it must
go gradually off: and impute not your Miscarriages, your improper,
unseasonable, or insufficient Use of this means, to the deficiency of the
Medicine; which cannot Cure, unless prudently used; and be careful to avoid
irregular Living, during the use hereof.

But all this is to little purpose; at least, not to your advantage; if you
know not where to have this good Medicine: to conceal it, were a Crime; and to
confine this most useful Medicine to a private Practice only; were against the
Rule of Charity: how acceptable would this be to such, as are in desperate
Cases; who commonly are exposed to desperate Medicines, and ill contrived
Methods? Therefore this Medicine is made thus public, for their help: and for
Convenience to such persons; either of the Booksellers, for whom this is
printed; named in the Title Page: they will procure the Medicine for such as
desire it; without their further trouble. And although this Magnal might
reasonable be valued at the price of Gold, weight for weight: but then the
meaner sort would be barred from the use of so helpful a Remedy; therefore it
is so appointed, to be purchased for a little; that they may share in the
benefit hereof, which will save both Lives and Pounds; and to this I can write
probatum est: in relation to my self and others: for what do you think my great
Cure cost me with this Medicine? Not above thirty Shillings, I may truly say:
which had it been managed by the common method of Physic, as now practiced; I
could not expect the Charge of to be less than 30 or 40 pounds: then I am
beholden to this Medieine, as the Instrument that saved both my Life and my
Purse.

I fared much better with this single Medicine, than a Gentleman did (that I
know) with all his Method of various Medicines; who for the Cure of his Ague
consulted three able Physicians in and about London; who had of him sevenscore
Guineys for their good Advice, during his Course of Physic: besides the
Pothecary's Bills, which came upwards of thirty pounds: and after all this
Charge and all these Medicines; (you may imagine he had good store, or great
store of them for his Money:) the Patient went into the Country uncured;
carrying his Ague along with him.

There is much more to be said concerning this Medicine; having been proved,
and approved by many: the great Performances and admirable Effects whereof, you
will have a particular Account the next Opportunity.

It is time now to end our Discourse; I have been something longer than
intended; but the Importance of the Matter being no small thing; I could not
pass it over slightly: it was that which nearly concerned my Life; and here is
enough to concern Yours; and you know not how soon it may come to the Trial:
probably some part of it will, sooner, or later; except sudden Death prevents
the Use of means: but few think of the Means, until Extremity urges; and then
sorry help they procure; which commonly makes but a sorrowful Conclusion of the
Work.

I have not put my Name to this Narrative: (not that I am ashamed to own any
thing here delivered) but for some Reasons best known to my self: and desire to
be excused therein; at least for the present: but if any Person has ought to
object, against any thing here asserted, either as Argument, or Matter of Fact;
let him produce; and the Author hereof promises a Reply, and a further Account
of this Grand REMEDY.

FINIS.

