Licensed,

February 22th. 1675. Henry Oldenburg.

THE MEMOIRES OF THE DUCHESS Mazarine.

Written in French by her Own Hand, AND Done into English by P. Porter Esquire

Together with the Reasons of her Coming into England.

Likewise, A Letter containing a True Character of her Person and Conversation.

The Second Impression.

LONDON Printed, and are to be Sold by William Cademan, at the Pope's Head in
the New-Exchange, and Middle-Exchange in the Strande, 1676.

THE MEMOIRES OF THE Duchess Mazarin.
SInce the Obligations I owe you are of that Nature, that I ought to conceal
nothing from you, wherein I may testify my Acknowledgements of them, I am
willing to gratify you with the true Relation of my Life, being you desire it:
Not that I am ignorant, how hard it is to speak discreetly of ones self. And
you know how averse I am in my Nature from explaining to the World, matters
wherein I am so nearly concerned; yet it is very Natural to defend one's self
from Calumny; and to make appear, to those, of whom we have received
considerable Services, that we are not so unworthy of their Favors, as the
traducing World would make us appear to be: Nor can I spend the time of my
Solitary Retreat, with more Innocence. But if what I am going to acquaint you
with, seem to favor much of the Romance, impute it rather to my Destiny, than
to my Inclination.

I know the chief Glory of a Woman ought to consist, in not making her self to
be publicly talked of. And those that know me, know like-wise, that I never
took much pleasure in things that make too much Noise. But it is not always in
our choice to live our own way: And there is a kind of Fatality, even in those
things that seem to depend upon the wisest Conduct. I would not trouble you
with the account of my Birth, if those that envied my Uncles Glory, had not
endeavored to tarnish the Luster thereof: But since their Fury spared nothing
that was his, It is lawful for me, to let you know, that I am descended from
one of the most illustrious Families of Rome; and that my Ancestors these three
hundred years have held a Rank so eminent and considerable, that I might pass
my days happily, though I had never been Heiresse to a first Minister of
France.

The Accademy of Good Wits which began in that Country, at the Nuptials of one
of our Family, made it appear in what esteem that House was in, at that time:
And as a farther addition of Happiness, I had the advantage to be descended
from a Father, that was one of the most accomplished and best qualified of our
Family. I was but six years old when I was brought into France; and a few years
after Monsieur M. rejected the Marriage of my Sister, ( afterward married to
the Constable of Collonna) and conceived such a violent Passion for me, that
upon a time he told Madam D Eguillon, that if he could but have the happiness
to be married to me, it would not grieve him to dye three Months after. The
success surpassed his desire, he has married me: and yet God be thanked, he is
alive still. Upon the first report of his refusing my Sister, the Cardinal was
much offended; and would often say, He had rather marry me to a Serving-man.
But he was not the only man I had the ill Fortune to please. An Italian Eunuch,
Musician to the Cardinal, was accused, for having a Kindness for me: But the
truth is, That it was as much for my Sisters as for me. He was also jeered for
being in love with the beautiful Statues that were in the Palace M. This man's
Love certainly was unlucky, since those poor Statues were so cruelly punished
for it, as well as I, though they were as little in fault. It was no fault of
my Sisters, that I was not in love with something, as well as I was beloved, As
she had a sincere Inclination for the King, she would have been glad to see me
engaged with some such Folly. But, being extreme young and childish, I could
fix to nothing. All that she could obtain from me, to oblige her, was to show
some Complasance to those of my Age, that diverted me most, in our little
Playgames, which then took up all my time and thoughts; though they were often
interrupted by the Kings Presence, who seldom stirred from our House; though he
conversed amongst us with wonderful goodness. He had so much of Serious and
solid, (not to say of Majesty) in all his ways, that be could not keep himself
from striking through us, a most a weful Respect, even beyond his intentions.
My Sister was no way disturbed at his Presence, who ever else was; And you may
easily conceive that his Assiduity had Charms for those who were, cause he had
none for others. As the things which Passion makes us do, seem ridiculous to
those that have never known what that passion is. My Sisters, exposed her very
often to our Rallery. One time amongst the rest, we Jeered her, because (he,
seeing at a a distance, a Gentleman of the House, who was about the King's
Stature, with his back to her, ran to him with open arms, crying, Ha my poor
Sire! An other thing that made us Sport about that time, was a Pleasantry of
the Cardinals, with Madam de Bouillon, which was about six years old. The Court
was then at Lafere. One day as he made sport with her about some Gallant that
he said she had: at last he began to chide her for being with Child. The
Resentment which she showed, diverted all so, that it was agreed she should be
still told of it. They streightened her Clothes from time to time; and they
made her believe that she was growing very big.

This continued as long as it was thought necessary, to persuade her, to the
likelihood of her being with Child. Yet she would never believe any thing of
it, and denied it with a great deal of heat, until the time of her Lying-in
came, she found betwixt her Sheets, in the morning, a Child new born. You
cannot imagine the Astonishment and Grief she was in, at this sight. Such a
thing, said she, never happened to any, but to the Virgin Mary and my self; for
I never felt any kind of Pain. The Queen came to condole with her, and offered
to be God-mother; many came to Gossip with her, as newly brought to bed: And
that which at first was but a Past-time, within doors, came to be the public
Divertisment of all the Court. They pressed her hard to tell who was the
Father; but all they could get from her, was only, That it could h none but the
King, or the Count of Guich, because no other man hut those mo had ever kissed
Her.

For my part, being three years elder than her, I was infinitely proud that I
knew the truth of the matter; and I could never be weary of laughing, to make
people take notice that I knew it. You will hardly believe, that at those
years, when there is nothing less thought of, than of reasoning upon things, I
should make as serious Reflections, as I ever did of any thing of this Life. It
is true, notwithstanding, that my greatest Delight was at that time, to shut my
self up alone, to write whatever came into my head. It is not long since, some
of those Papers fell into my hands: And I do assure you, I was strangely
surprised to find things so far surpassing the Capacity of a little Girl. They
were Doubts and Questions which I proposed to my self, upon all things, which
gave me trouble to comprehend. I could never sufficiently satisfy my Fancy in
deciding them: But still I sought with Obstinacy, what I could not dive into,
nor find. And if in my Conduct since, I have not showed much, I have at least
this Consolation, that I had a very great desire to attain to good Judgment. I
Remember about that time, writing to a young Lady, for whom I had a great
kindness; I began to grow weary of writing so often, I love you, in one and the
same Letter; and gave her to understand, that here-after I would only make a
Cross to signify these three Words. Following this new invention, it happned
some times that I writ to this Lady, letters wherein there was nothing else to
be seen but whole lines of Crosses, one after another. One of these Letters
fell afterward into the hands of some, whom it concerned to find out the
Mystery; but could never find fault with so Godly a Cipher. My Enfancy being
passed amongst these innocent Amusements, or Past-times, they began to talk of
a Match for me. Fortune, that intended to make me the unhappiest Woman living,
began to flatter me, at first, with the hopes of a Crown; and had like to have
rendered the man, she destined for me, most odious to me, by the comparison of
those, wherewith she first did cajole my Imagination. Yet I can truly say for
my self, that those Illustrious Matches never dazzled my Fancy. And Monsieur M.
dares not say, that he ever found me guilty of any Vainglory, above my
condition. All the World knows how many repeated Treaties were on foot, to
Match me with a great Potentate. As for the Duke of Savoy, you know what has
been said in the Journey to Lions, and that that affair was broken off, upon
the Cardinal's obstinate refusal, to abandon Geneva, in consideration of that
Marriage. We lodged at Bell-Court; and our Chamber Windows, which opened
toward the Market place, were low enough for one to get in with ease. Madam De
Venel our Governess, was so used to her trade of over-looking us, that she rose
even in her sleep, to see what we were doing. One Night as my Sister lay a
sleep with her mouth open, Madam De Venel, after her accustomed manner, coming
asleep as she was, to grope in the dark, happened to thurst her finger into her
mouth, so far, that my Sister starting out of her sleep, made her Teeth almost
meet in her Finger. Judge you the Amazement they both were in to find themselves
in this Posture, when they were thoroughly awake. My Sister was in a grievous
fret. The Story was told the King the next Day, and the Court had the
Divertisment of Laughing at it.

The Cardinal, whether it were through Modesty or Dissimulation showed himself
as averse, as the Queen to the Kings Pursuit of my Sister.

As soon as the Marriage with Spain was concluded, nothing was so much in his
thoughts as how handsomely to send her further off, fearing lest she might be a
hinderance to it; a little after our return from Lions he sent us to stay for
him at Fountain-Bleau; from thence he carried us to Poitiers, where he left it
to her Choice, to retire, to what Place she pleased; she Chose Rochelle: The
Cardinal willing to wean her a little more, made Monsieur Frejus at Brouage, to
propose to her the Marriage of the Constable Collonna, but she rejected it; her
inclinations being not yet drawn into Italy by what drew her thither since. He
had resolved to carry Madam De Bouillon and me to the Marriage; But my Sister
obstinately refusing to let us go, when he sent for us, unless she might go
too; he chose rather to deprive himself of the Pleasure of seeing us there,
than to let her come with us. At their return from the Frontiers, we were sent
for to Fountain-Bleau, where the Court then was. The King looked but coldly
upon my Sister; and his Change began to make her resolve to marry into Italy.
She would often pray me to tell her as many ill things of the King as I could.
But besides; that it was hard to speak ill of such a Prince as he, who lived
amongst us with that Familiarity and charming Sweetness; I being but ten years
old then, I could not well comprehend what it was she would have: all I could
do for her, Loving her tenderly, and seeing her all in Tears, was to weep for
her Misfortunes with her, until she might, at my turn, bear me Company to weep
mine. The Aversion the Cardinal had for lier fondness to the King, made him
conceive a great unkindness for her; and as this intrigue began with her first
coming into the World, it may be said, that he hardly ever loved her; My
Brother's Humor was nothing more pleasing so him, and his Conduct muchless;
especially since he was accused to have been of the Debauch of Roissi. One of
the things which most displeased him in us, was the want of Devotion; you
cannot imagine how much he was discontented at it. He left no Arguments untried,
to induce us to have more. On a time complaining that we did not frequent the
Church every Day; he said, We had neither Piety nor Honor: At least, (said he)
If you will not do it for God's sake, do it for the Worlds sake.

Though I was as much concerned in his Remonstrances, as the rest; yet either
because I was the youngest, and so the less faulty; or that he saw something in
my humor that pleased him better, He had for a long time as much tenderness
for me, as he had aversion for them; which made him to choose me, to leave his
estate and Name, to the man he should wed me to; which likewise made him more
Circumspect in the care of my Education, than of the rest, and at last also
more displeased when he believed I had given him cause. He was very
apprehensive of my ingageing my Affections to any one; Madam de Vennel, who had
directions to pry into all my Actions, would be continually speaking to me of
every one that came to visit me, or were likely to engage my love, to discover
by my Discourse my Thoughts of every Body; but I having no tie more to one than
to another, she could never make any Discovery, and she had been in Ignorance
to this hour, had not the indiscretion of my Sister made ler believe what was
not. I told you that she would always press me to love something. She
importuned me for some Years, to tell her if none of the Court pleased me more
than another; at last being overcome with her entreaties, I told her, I saw a
Youth in the house that I liked above the rest, but that I should be very sorry
he should be half so pleasing in my Eye as the King was in hers. Overjoyed to
have drawn this Confession from me, she asked me his Name, but I knew it not.
And though she took all the pains imaginable to make me describe him, she was
above two months vexing of me before she could find him our. She understood at
last that it was an Italian Gentleman newly come from being Page of the great
Chamber who was then but one of the sub Lieutenants in the Guards, but has been
since Killed in a higher employment in Flanders. She told me his Name, and
likewise made her self merry with the King about my pretended inclinations,
from whom she could conceal nothing. The Cardinal knew it a litte after, and
believing it quite another thing than really it was, spoke to me of it in very
harsh terms. It was the right way to make something of nothing; and if I were
capable of ingageing my self for spite, his Reproaches might incline me to
deserve them. As this Gentleman was familiar in the House, the Noise the
Cardinal made about it, reached his Ear, and raised in him Thoughts which he
perhaps never had before; at length he found means to make them known to me,
and by my Sisters good will I should have answered his Passion, instead of
despising and rejecting it. In the mean time the Cardinals Distemper grew every
day worse and worse, the desire he had to Eternize his Name, carried him above
the indignation he had conceived against me. He broke his mind to the Bishop of
Frejus, and desired to know his Opinion of several Persons, and which of them
he thought properest for me. This Bishop won before by Monsieur M. upon promise
of fifty thousand Crowns, forgot nothing that might deserve them; but he never
had them: For he returned the Bond which was given him, intimating, He had a
greater mind to the Bishopric of Eureux, if it could be gotten for him. But
the King having disposed of it to another, notwithstanding Monsieur M. his
soliciting for the space of two months. Monsieur Frejus demanded the fifty
thousand Crowns, but Monsieur M. was no longer in the mind to pay them. As soon
as the Marriage was concluded, he sent me a great Cabinet, wherein, amongst
other Rich things, there was ten thousand Pistols in Gold. I gave great part of
this Gold to my Brother and Sisters, to lessen their hatred of my Opulencies,
which they could not see without Envy, whatever mien they made. I never put
them to the trouble of asking me, for the Key was always in the Cabinet, and
who would, might take, for me. One day wanting other divertisement, we threw
above three hundred Pistols out at the Windows of the Palace Mazarine; to have
the pleasure of seeing a Company of Servants that were in the Court to scramble
and fight for them. This Prodigality being told the Cardinal, it caused so much
Displeasure in him, that it is believed it hastened his end; but whether it were
so or no, he died within eight days after, and left me the Richest Heiress, but
the unhappiest Woman, in all Christendom. Upon the first Tidings of his Death,
my Brother and my Sister, instead of being sorry, Cried to one another, God be
thanked he is gone. And to tell you the Truth, I was not much more afflicted;
and it is a remarkable thing, that a man of that merit, that all his Life had
labored to raise and enrich his Family, should never receive other Thanks from
them, than apparent signs of hatred and aversion even after his Death.

But if you knew with what severity he treated us, you would be less surprised
at this. Never man had so sweet a behavior abroad and in public, and so harsh
and severe at home, all our humors and inclinations were point blank opposite
to his. Add to this the Tyrannical Subjection we were kept in. The tenderness
of our years, and the insensibility and carelessness we had for all things, to
which too much plenty, and prosperity reduces most Persons of this Age, in
spite of all their good Nature.

For my own particular, Fortune has taken Care to punish my Ingratitude by
those misfortunes, which have continually followed me, one in the Neck of
another, ever since his Death, I know not what foreknowledge my Sister had of
them; but upon the first Discontents which I fell into after my Marriage, she
told me by way of Consolation, Go, go, you will be more unhappy than I.
Monsieur de Lorraine, who for a long time was passionately in Love with her,
made use of all his Rethorick to persuade her to marry Him, and continued his
pursuit even after the Cardinals Death. The Queen Mother, who would by no means
have her stay in France, charged Madam de Vennel to break off this Intreague at
any rate. But all their Endeavors had been fruitless, had they not been
seconded by certain Reasons unknown to all the world.

And though the King had the Generosity to give her, her Choice of any man else
in France, if she could not fancy Monsieur de Lorraine, and that he seemed to
be sensibly displeased at her resolution to go out of France, her evil Star
Drew her into Italy against all Reason.

The Constable who at first believed that the Amors of Kings could pot be
innocent, was so much transported with joy to find the contrary in the person
of my Sister, that he made little account of not being the first that had
gained her heart; he left his bad Opinion that he had, which all Italians have,
of the liberty which Ladies have in France, and made her live with the same
freedom in Rome, since he found she used it so discreetly. In the mean time the
Eunuch her Confident, who now by her absence, and the Cardinals Death, Lived
without Credit, undertook to make himself necessary about me; but besides that,
my own Nature made me a stranger to all sorts of intregues, Monsieur M. Kept
too strict an Eye over all my Actions. He enraged at this Obstacle, took a
Resolution to be Revenged of Monsieur M. himself.

This man kept his access to the King with the same freedom he enjoyed when he
was my Sisters Confident. He makes a great Complaint to him of the Severity
Monsieur M. used toward me, That he was obliged to take my part as having been
the Cardinals Creature, and my particular Servant. That Monsieur Mazarine was
jealous of all the World, And above all, of his Majesty; and he caused me to be
watched very narrowly in all places where the King (who had no thoughts of me)
might see me; and that besides, be took upon Him, as if he were a great
Minister, and that he Threatened to banish all the Italians out of Paris.

To all this, the King only Answered, That if what he said was true, the Duke
of Mazarine was a Fool, and that though He had inherited Cardinal Mazarines
Wealth, he had not his Power; All that was true of this Report, was only that
Monsieur Mazarine, being informed of this Eunuques intregues, threatened to put
him out of the Palace of Mazarine, where he had Lodgings. Not content with
what he had done, he was so unwise as to boast of it before a Lady of Quality
of Province called Madam de Ruz, who was, I know not how, acquainted with
Monsieur Mazarine, she tells him of the ill Office that had been done him. He
had a mind to place about me some Lady, who without the Name of Governant,
might perform the function; and finding this Madam de Ruz very proper to act
this Part, he made Choice of her, as an acknowledgment for the Intelligence she
gave him; He prays her to find out some means to get her self presented to me
without letting me know that he was acquainted with her; Monsieur de Frejus
spoke to me of her as from himself sometime afterward; and brought her to me
up a pair of back Stairs, one day when Monsieur Mazarine was a Hunting. I was
much taken with her, and as I knew, that if it were perceived that I liked her,
I should not be permitted to have her; I was not willing any of the house
should see her before she were received into my Family. One day, as I was alone
with her, Madam de Vennel came suddenly into the Room, and broke a busk we had
set to bar the Door, and shut our selves in. Of a sudden Madam de Ruz, with a
wonderful Presence of Wit, began to roll her Eyes in her head, to Weep and Cry
with the Tone or a Beggar, that she was a poor Gentlewoman of Loraine, and
prayed me to take Compassion of her misery. As she had the Air of her Face
extreme brisk and lively, as mod of the Provincials have, her Grimasse
succeeded so well, and so disguised her, that I my self could hardly know her
again. Madam de Vennel was so terribly affrighted at her, that she run as far
off from her as she could, and told all about since, that she found the Devil
in my Chamber. Monsieur Mazarine's Cunning Artifice in the Choice of this
Woman, in a season wherein he could not yet have any Subject to Complain of any
of my Actions, may suffice to instruct you with his natural Diffidence, and in
what disposition of mind he Married me. As he apprehended my abode in Paris, he
continually marched me about to his Lord ships, and Governments; during the
first three or four years of our Marriage, I made three Journeys into Alsatia,
and as many into Brittany, besides several others to Nevers, Maine, Bourbon,
Sedan, and other places. Having no greater delight in Paris, but the pleasure
of seeing him, it was not so irksome to me, as it might be to a Person of my
Age to be deprived of the divertisements of the Court. And perhaps I should
never have been tired with this wandering kind of Life, if he had not too much
abused my Complacency. He has often made me travel two hundred Leagues when I
was big with Child, and very near my time; ray Relations and Friends were
apprehensive of the Dangers to which he Exposed my Health, and endeavored to
make me sensible of them, but it was along time in vain: What would they say,
If they had known that I could not once speak to any of my Domestics, but they
were turned away the next day? That I could not receive two Visits successively
from any one man, but he was presently forbid the House; and if I showed more
kindness for any of my Maids more than for the rest, she was immediately taken
away from me. If I called for my Coach, and he thought it not convenient to let
me go abroad, he would laughing forbid the Coach to be made ready, and then
would Droll upon it so long, till the hour was past to go where I designed. He
would be content that I should see none in the world but himself. Above all, he
could not endure that I should see his Kindred, nor mine own; mine, because
they begun to take ray part; his own, because they did no more approve of his
Conduct than mine did.

I was a long rhyme Lodged at the Arsenal with Madam de Oradous his Cousin,
without ever being permitted to see her. The Innocence of my Recreations, which
were capable to put any man else of his Humor out of doubt, who had reserved
any Regard for my Age, gave him as much disquiet as if they had been very
Criminal. Sometimes he said, It was a sin to play with my Servants at Cock-all.
At other times he said, It was a heinous Crime to go to Bed Late. Once when
Monsieur Colbert, desired to know all his Grievances, and causes of Complaint
against me, he could never allege any other than these two; He often said, One
could not in Conscience go to Court, and much less to Plays; sometimes my
Devotions were too short: In fine, his Peevishness upon my account was such,
that I verily believe, if any one would seriously ask him how, and after what
sort he would have me live, that he could not agree with himself about the
manner. He ought indeed to have said, That knowing of what value I was, he
could not be too solicitous of me: That the Conversation of the World being so
Contagious, what ever Sport or Ralleries was made of him, he would endeavor to
hinder my being spoiled, because he loved me more than his own proper
Reputation. But if it was his love for me, that made him Treat me after this
fantastical Fashion, it were to be wished for, for both our quiets, that he
had honored me with a little more of his indifference. No sooner did he
perceive that I took delight in any place, but I was immediately hurried from
thence, though there were never so great a reason for my stay there. We were
at Maine when the Nevvs was brought of the Journey to Marsal; be had Order to
be there and sent me into Britain to keep Company with his Father, who was
at the meeting of the States there, while he was preparing himself at Paris
for his Journey; he had intelligence from some of his Spies, (by whom I was
continually beset and vvatched) that I passed my time there very pleasantly; he
fell sick upon it, and sent for me away with all speed. His Father
understanding that his Physicians advised him to go to the Waters of Bourbon,
would not let me go, alleging, That a man while he drank those waters must
abstain from Women. Upon this News he fell into a Swoun for vexation, and after
several Couriers sent for me; his Father at l st let me go; I went with him to
Bourbon, where I remained a month shut up with him in a Chamber, to see him
spue up his Waters, without so much as visiting Madam the Princess, who was
there, and to whom he had the Honor to be Related. He could not presently be
induced to believe that it was his Father that kept me from departing out of
Britany; and notwithstanding all the assurance he received of it since, he
maintained always, that I had been better pleased to pass my time there, than
come and solace him in his sickness. It had not been hard for me to justify my
self, if he would but hear me. But that he avoided still the most he could,
because all the blame would be found of his side in the clearing of the matter,
and he would never acknowledge himself in an Error: nothing afflicted me more
than his aversion to be Informed or Convinced of a mistake, because he rook
upon him the jurisdiction of treating me continually as guilty. Some time
afterward being obliged for the Kings Service to go into Britain, he took
such an obstinate Resolution to have me with him, and writ such strange things
upon this occasion to the Abbot de Effiat his near kinsman, that I was forced
to go from Paris three weeks after I was brought to Bed. Few Women of my
quality would have done the like; but what would not one do for the enjoying of
so great a good as Peace? And to mend the matter, he made me lodge in one of
the wretchedest Villages in all that Country, and in so miserable a Cottage,
that we were constrained to be out of doors all day. He always made choice of
such places, because I should see no Company, also far from seeing any of the
people of those Villages: those whose civility or business brought thither to
see him, were forced to lie in the Fields for want of Inns; and if they
displeased him never so little, he sent them of Errands, about several
businesses which depended upon him in this Province. Yet we spent six months in
this pleasant place, in the year 1666. Another time being alone, at Bourbon,
having sent me into Britain, he understood by his Spies that I diverted my self
very pleasantly with Madam de Coaquin, and that few days passed but we
appointed to take the Air either at Land or by Sea: His wonted disquiet
seizing him, he sends for me to meet him at Nevers, where, as he said, there
were very good Comedians amongst other divertisements. I began to be weary of
making so many idle Journeys, I writ to Monsieur Colbert to complain; but being
advised by him to go, I was much surprised to find Monsieur Mazarine upon the
Road ten Leagues from Nevers, coming to Paris with my Brother, who was
returning out of Italy. He would never give me any Reason why he dealt so
strangely with me; we went without any farther clearing of this doubt, to
confine our selves at our Cassine, near Sedan, whither my Brother, out of
Complaisance, seeing me very melancholy, accompanied us. It was there first
that Monsieur Mazarine made show as if he were Jealous of him, not knowing
otherwise how to be rid of him; and being unwilling to have such a Witness of
his Domestic proceedings, you may judge of my resentment for so base and
wicked a suspicion; but if all these outrages, by hearing them related, seem
hard to be endured, the manner with which he did them, was yet something more
cruel and barbarous. I will give you one scantling, by which you shall judge of
the rest: Being one Night with the Queen, I saw him coming toward me very
pleasant, and with a constrained and affected Smile publicly made me this
Complement. Madam, I have good News to tell you, the King has just now
Commanded me to go into Alsatia. Monsieur De Roquelaure who was then present,
moved, as well as the rest of the Company, with this silly Affection, but more
frank than the rest, could not refrain telling him, That this was fine News
indeed to be told with so much Joy to a woman of my Condition. But Monsieur
Mazarine disdaining to reply, went quietly out of the Room very proud of his
Gallantry. The King hearing of it, was moved to pity. He took the pains to
tell me himself, that my stay there should be only for three months, and kept
his word with me, as he always did.

If I did not apprehend to tire your Patience, I could tell you a thousand such
little malicious tricks which he played me, without any manner of necessity,
out of the mere pleasure he took to torment me. Fancy then to your self,
continual oppositions to my most innocent desires; and an Implacable hatred
against all those I loved, or loved me; an undefatigable care to bring into my
presence all those I hated mortally, and to corrupt those of my Servants whom I
most trusted, to betray my Secrets if I had any; a studious Application to cry
me down every where, and make my Actions odious to all people. In fine, all
that the Malignity of the by-got Cabal could invent or practice, in a house
where it had absolute Tyranny, against a simple young Woman, careless, and
whose want of circumspection in her actions, gave every day new matter to her
Enemies to insult over her. I boldly make use of this expression. By-got Cabal,
because I cannot think that I err against: the most strict: Rules of
Christianity, when I presume that those Devotes by whose directions Monsieur
Mazarine does Regulate his Actions, are not truly so, having promoted the
Dissipation of so many Millions.

And this is the fatal Article that has made me lose all patience, and that has
been the true beginning of all my misfortunes. If Monsieur Mazarine had only
taken delight in overwhelming me with sadness and grief, and in exposing my
Health, and my Life to his most unreasonable caprice, and in making me pass my
best days in an unparalled slavery, since Heaven has been pleased to make him
my Master, I should have endeavored to allay and qualify my misfortunes by my
Sighs and Tears, and my complaints to my particular Friends. But when I saw,
that by his incredible Dilapidations, and profuseness, my son, who, might have
been the Richest Gentleman in France, was in danger of being the poorest; there
was no resisting the force of Nature, and motherly Love carried it over all
other Considerations of Duty, or the moderation I proposed to my self. I saw
every day vast sums go away; movables of inestimable price, Offices,
Governments; and all the Rich remains of my Unkles Fortune, the Fruits of his
Labors, and the Rewards of his Services; I saw as much sold as came to three
Millions, before I took any public notice of it. And I had hardly any thing
left me of Value, but my Jewels; when Monsieur Mazarine took an occasion to
seize upon them, He took his opportunity to lay hold of them, one Night as I
came late home from the City. Desiring to know the Reason of this Proceeding,
before I went to bed, he told me, That I being of a free and liberal Nature, he
was afraid I should give away some of them, and that he had not taken them from
me, but with intention to return them again with the addition of others. I
answered him, that it were to be wished his liberality had been as regular as
mine, that I was satisfied with them I had already, and that I would not go to
bed until I had them again. And seeing that to what ever I could say, he only
replied with unpleasant Ralleries, expressed with a malicious Laugh, or a
scorning calmness of Voice, but in reallity most tart and bitter, I went out
of the Room all in Despair, and passed to my Brothers Palace, extremely
perplexed, not knowing what course to take.

Madam De Bouillon whom we Presently sent for, having heard this my new
occasion of complaint, told me I was well enough served, since I had suffered
so much already without saying a Word. I resolved to have gone away with her in
that very instant, if Madam De Belinzani whom we likewise sent for, had not
hindered me, entreating me to stay until she had spoken to Monsieur Mazarine.
But he had given order that none should be admitted; yet Madam De Belinzani
through much obstinate pressing was suffered to come unto him, but would not
give her leave to speak, nor could she get any other Answer, but that her
business, could not be so urgent with him, as to oblige her to come at so
unreasonable an hour; but that if she had any thing to say to him, he was
going next morning to St. Germain, and he would give her a meeting at the Cross
of Nanterre. Madam De Belinzani being returned as ill satisfied, as we, at so
unreasonable a Rallary; it was concluded I should go to lie at Madam De
Bouvillions; the next day all my Relations being come thither about my concern,
Madam the Countess was desired to acquaint the King with it. He received her
very graciously. And Madam the Princess of Carignan was Commanded to come and
carry me with her to the Hotel of Soisson; after staying there about two months
I was obliged to return with Monsieur Manarine, even without having my Jewels
restored to me, or with any other satisfaction, but to be allowed to discharge
some Women which he placed about me whom I did not like, that was the only
Favor I could obtain. When I pressed to have my Jewels restored, Madam the
Countess was the first that told me I did very ill. The Court was always
against me ever since that time. It is well known of what Consesequence that is
in all manner of business. I told the King in these Terms, That I should
Comfort my self to see Monsieur Mazarin so much favored against me, if he were
so in all other things, and if the little help he found in his other affairs did
not make it appear that he had no other friends, but my Enemies. As this accord
was rather a Triumph for him than a real accommodation, it made him too haughty,
to let it be of any long continuance. An hour before my going to the Palace
Mazarine I sent thither a Groom of the Chamber, whom Madam the Countess had
preferred to me since my coming thither, with some of my things. Monsieur
Mazarin, that knew him as well as I did, having asked him what he would have,
or who he belonged to; bad him be gone about his business, without letting him
stay until I came.

This poor fellow met me about two hundred paces from my House, and told me
what happened; and though Madam the Countess, who came to conduct me,
perceived that this was a Just Cause of a new breach; she persuaded me to pass
forward, and when she had brought me to the staire-foot, she took her leave of
me, being unwilling to see Monsieur Mazarine, because he had used all his
endeavors to have me removed to the Palace of Conty, as if the Hotel of
Soisson where she lived, had not been as convenient, and as safe a place for
me. I begun immediately to beg that this Servant might be received again into
my Retinue, but all in vain, although the necessity I saw my self reduced to,
by the Authority of the Powers, made me show submissions beyond my natural
inclination: But I had a man to deal with, that knew how to make use of the
conjuncture. Seeing then that he paid me with bald Excuses, and as bad Jests,
Iresolved to leave him the second time, and to withdraw my self to my Brothers
House. But Monsieur Mazarine (as you shall perceive by the sequel) had taken a
course that I should not go out when I pleased, meaning to make me a Prisoner
in my own house; seeing me offer to go, he threw himself in my way, and pushed
me very rudely to stop my passage. But my Grief and Vexation supplying me with
more than ordinary strength, I thrust by him in spite of all he could do; and
though he called out to the Servants to shut all the Doors, and the Court-Gate
especially; they seeing me all in Tears, none durst obey: I was fain to go
round by the Street, (wherein there was a great throng of People) in this sad
condition; alone, a foot, and at noon day, to get to my accustomed Sanctuary.

This was the Effect of that Providence, that made him wall up the door, by
which there was a Communication betwixt my Brother's Palace and mine; and
through which I made my escape the time before. But this pre-caution gave
occasion to all men that knew of it, to judge that he never intended me any
better usage for the future, (if I returned again to him) than I had before
received at his hands; having ken such care to secure me for the time to-come.

As soon as I came to my Brothers, I writ to the King, to give him an account
of my proceeding: And Madam the Countess carried me with her to the Palace of
Soissons. But after five or six days Monsieur De Louvoy came to me from the
King, to propose to me to retire into some Nunnery; but Madam the Countess
would not consent to that; but brought it about, that Monsieur Mazarine should
be obliged to come and agree, and carry me home with him, upon condition that
she would be friends with him.

Presently after this, my Brother went away for Italy; partly to make it
appear, that he did not contribute any thing to a misunderstanding betwixt
Monsieur Mazarin and me; and that it should not be his fault, if we did not
live peaceably together. But I enjoyed but an outside appearance of that
Quietness which I hoped to have: For, notwithstanding all my Resolutions of
Patience, there passed not one day for three Months, that we continued
together, without some jarring and causes of disgust.

At the end of this time, he took a fancy to go into Alsatia; and instead of
gratifying me, and obliging me with his Kindness to go (as I had resolved to
do) along with him: He was so ill advised, as to force me to entertain a Woman
that I could no way approve of.

This his Quarrel about a trifle, made me open my Eyes, and to think better of
what course I was to take.

My Friends had the goodness to represent to me, the little Security I must
hope for, from a man of that Caprice, in a place so Remote, and where his Power
was so absolute. That after what had passed betwixt us, I was a Fool to imagine
I should ever be suffered to return from thence: That he had sent my Jewels
before, for no other reason, but to confine himself for ever to that his
Government, where he should not be obliged to give any account of his Conduct,
as at Paris; and if ever I should have need of my Friends, I should be so far
from them, that they could do me no other good, but unprofitably, to wish my
Condition were better.

These Considerations, that were but too apparent, and too well grounded, made
me take Sanctuary once more at Madam the Countesses, the night before Monsieur
Mazarine was to begin his Journey, fearing lest he would have used Violence to
have forced me along with him.

I was so full of Perplexity and Distraction, to see my self anew reduced to
this Necessity, that I forgot to bring away my small Jewels, which were left
me, for my daily use; and might be worth about fifty thousand Crowns; as they
were the only Treasure I had left; Madam the Countess was so provident as to
ask me for them, as soon as she saw me: by that means I had time enough to send
for them away. He came the next day to know what I meant: Answer was made him
that I meant two things; the one, Not to go into Alsatia; the other, That he
should restore me my great Jewels, which he sent before unto Alsatia, and which
were the first cause of our Breach. For Alsatia he would have been contented to
excuse me, since he saw no great likelihood of being able to persuade me to
it. But for my Jewels, he would make no peremptory answer; therefore as soon as
he left us, Madam the Princess of Baden carried me to Mons. Colberts, to
beseech him to seize them into his own hands. He believed I ought not to be
refused that Favor: They were forced to be brought back; and they have
remained ever since in his hands.

Now the Question was, What should become of me? Monsieur Mazarine left me my
Choice of going to live at the Hotel de Conty, or at the Abbey of Chelles, the
only two places in the World, he knew I hated mortally, and that for very just
Reasons. The Oppression of Spirit under which I lay, would not give me leave to
determine which I should choose of those two places, equally odious to me: I was
fain so let others choose for me; and the reasons I had against the Palace of
Conty being more prevalent, the Abbey of Chelles was preferred before that of
Conty.

Here it was in this Solitude, that I had time to make Reflections upon the
Duty, which my Friends told me was incumbent upon me, to desire a Separation of
Goods, in favor of my poor Children, before Monsieur Mazarine had spent all;
which at last I resolved to do. Though I was convinced in my own Sense, I ought
to solicit it; yet the particular Reasons I had to refer all this to
Monsieur Colbert's Judgment, whom I caused to be sounded upon this matter; and
finding him averse to it, put a stop to all.

Some six months afterward Monsieur Mazarine coming out of Alsatia, made me a
Visit as he passed that way, to oblige me to discharge two young women, which
Madam the Countess had given me since his departure for Alsatia. I did not
believe my self bound to satisfy his Desires in this particular, being I knew
it was for no other reason he desired it, but out of his Animosity against her.
His Resentment of this Denial put him upon petitioning the King to have me
removed from thence, to some other Monastery, upon I know not what pretexts.
But the real Truth was, because the Abbess of Chelles, who was his Aunt,
treated me civilly; and that I was well enough satisfied with my abode there.
He prevailed; and though that Abbess was, as she had cause, much offended; and
gave as favorable an account of my behavior there, as could be desired, Yet
Monsieur Le Premier came to tell me, That I should oblige the King in going to
the Nunnery of St. Mary's of the Bastile: And Madam De Toussi came with six
Guards to conduct me.

Some time after Monsieur Mazarine going into Britany, came thither to see me;
but was presently out of all Patience, because I wore Patches, (for I had some
on by chance that day) and told me he would not speak to me until I had taken
them off.

No man ever made his Demands with such unreasonable haughtiness, as deserved
rather to be refused than granted; and chiefly, when he believed that
Conscience was concerned; and that also was the reason I would not put off my
Patches; to show him it was neither of my Belief nor Intention to offend God
with this kind of Dress.

After Contesting a whole hour about this in vain, he at last began to tell me
his mind, notwithstanding my patches, and pressed me with as little success to
go with him into Brittany. I was then more inclinable to go to Law with him
than to follow him. I obtained leave of his Majesty to commence my Suit, having
been Conducted to Him by the Princess of Baden. But Monsieur Colbert, who was
very unwilling to consent to it, for Reasons that admitted of no Answer, in any
other Conjuncture, put along delay to it; until at last Madam De Coursel being
put into the same Monastery with me, I obtained, by the favor of some Friends
that she had at Court, leave to Commence my Suit.

As she was a very beautiful person, and of a very pleasant humor, I had
Complaisance enough for her, to join with her in playing some Tricks to the
Nunns.

The King has been told a hundred ridiculous Stories about it: That we used to
put Ink into the Holy-Water-Pot to smut the good old Nuns: That we used to run
through their Dormitory, at the time of their first Sleep, with a great many
little Dogs, yelling and yellowing; and twenty other such Fooleries, either
altogether invented, or much exaggarated. As for example, having desired them
to let us have some water to wash our Feet, The Nuns consulted amongst
themselves to refuse us what was necessary, and to find fault, as if we had
been put in there to observe their Rule. It is true, that we filled two great
Chests that were over the Dormitory, with Water, and not taking notice, that
the floor was ill joynted, the water run through, and wet all the poor Nunns
beds. If you were at that time at Court, you will easily remember that this
accident was represented there as a mere Horse-boyes prank. It is also true,
that under Color of keeping us Company they would never suffer us to go out of
their Sights. The eldest amongst the Religious women were chosen for this
purpose, as being the hardest to be suborned; but we having nothing else to do
but to run about, we soon tired them out one after another, and one or two of
them sprained their Legs, striving to run after us. should not tell you these
little odd Follies, if Monsieur Mazarine partisans had not published them
before; and since they represented them as so many Crimes, I am glad you know
all the enormities of them. After we had been three months in this Covent, we
had Leave to to go Chelles; where I knew we should be more Civilly treated,
though we could not have so many Visits; and Monsieur Mazarine Arrived the same
day from Brittany, that we were removed thither. Some few days after, Monsieur
Mazarine comes with a Guard of threescore Horse, with pretention from Monsieur
de Paris to enter the Monastery, and carry me away by force. But the Abbess not
only refused him entrance, but put all the Keys of the House into my hands, to
free me even from the suspicion of the evil she might have done me. With this
Condition only, that I would speak to Monsieur Mazarine. I asked him what he
would have? But he still replied, I was not the Abbess. I answered him, I was
the Abbess for him that Day, since all the Keys of the House were in my Power,
and there was no getting in for him but by my Favor. He turned his Back, and
went his way. A Gentleman that Madam the Countess sent, to know how I did,
Carried the News to Paris, and said, that it was reported at Chelles, that
Monsieur Mazarine went off, only with design to return again in the Night.
You have heard without doubt how Madam De Bovillon, Monsieur the Count,
Monsieur De Bovillon, and a number of the greatest Persons about the Court got
on Horseback upon this Report, to come to my Resque.

At this Noise, they made, Madam Courcelles, and I took them for my Enemies;
but our Fears was not so great but that we thought upon an expedient to hide
our selves; there was a hole in the Grate of our Parleour bigg enough for a
great Dish to pass; and we never till then thought one could Creep through it:
Yet we both got in at that Hole, but it was with so much difficulty, that if
Monsieur Mazarin himself had been in that Parlour he would never suspect that
place, and would have looked for us any where else, than there. But when we
found our Error, the shame and confusion we were in, made us resolve to shoot
that Gulf once more without Calling any body to our Aid. Madam De Courcelle
got easily through, but I was above a quarter of an Hour betwixt two bars of
Iron, and almost squeezed to Death without being able to get in or out. But
though I was horribly pinched, I would not consent any should be Called to help
us; and Madam Courcel never left tugging until she had me out. I went to thank
them all, and after they had Joked a while upon Monsieur Mazarines attempt to
Catch nothing, they all returned back. In the mean time I had such a Decree, as
I desired in the the Court of Enquests: this Court consisted most of young men
of great Wit and Eloquence, and they all strove who should be most forward to
serve me. The scope of the Decretal Order was, That I should be allowed twenty
thousand Livers a year. That I should live at the Palace Mazarine, and
Monsieur Mazarine at the Arsenal. And what was more important? That Monsieur
Mazarine should be Obliged to produ^e the goods or their value, which I
declared he dissipated. Madam the Princess of Carignan came to put me into
possession. There I found all the Servants that I had need of, already Chosen
by Monsieur Mazarine; but I thanked them all for their good will. Madam the
Countess who always unseasonally put me in mind of my Generosity, would fain
persuade me that it was below me to exact the allowance the Parliament had
Assigned me. But Monsieur Mazarine was not a man that would give me any thing
without being Compelled; and I must have whereby to subsist. It is true, she
asked me if I had need of money; but she could not be Ignorant of that, and
were it not for my small Jewels, and the helps I had from my Brother, my
Affairs had been in a very ill posture. He returned out of Italy ten days after
my Decree; and although he was very angry at my Law-sute, for those very
Reasons that made Mons. Colvert to disapprove of it, and that he always
foretold me that madam the Countess would forsake me as soon as she had engaged
me in this business; yet I found every morning upon my Toylet more money than I
needed, without ever being able truly to discover from whence it came.

In the Intrim Monsieur Mazarine removed the Suit unto the Great Chamber, for a
new Trial; it was so ordered, that the King interposed in our affair to make a
final accommodation betwixt us. We both Signed a VVriting to the King to this
effect, That Monsieur Mazarine should return to Lodge at the Palace Mazrine,
but that I should have the liberty to Chose all my Servants, excepting my
Gentleman of the Horse, who was to be recommended to me by Monsieur Colbert;
that we should live each in their own Apartments, that I should not be obliged
to follow him in any of his Journeys: And as for the separation if Goods, I
desired the Ministers of State should be Arbitrator, thereof, and that we
should inviolably observe serve and obey their Award. Upon the same day that I
signed this Writing, I meeting Madam de Brisack at the Fair, who told me
Laughing, Madam, you are plastred up again for the third time. Nor were we
truly friends, for Monsieur Mazarine made it his business to thwart me in all
things, of which I could instance many particularities; but one shall serve
that made noise enough; I had ordered a Stage to be Erected in my own
appartment, to have a Comedy Acted for some Persons of the Court. But Monsieur
Mazarine caused it to be pulled down two hours before it was to be made use
of, because it was a Holy Day, and a Comedy was a profane Divertisement. But
all this did not hinder, but that we saw one another very Civilly every after
Noon; for we neither eat, nor lay together, though Monsieur Mazarine would have
it otherwise understood; but our award mentioned nothing of it.

Nor could I see any likely hood, that our Affairs should remain long in this
posture: and if happily our Affairs must be referred again to the Parliarment I
was loath to expose my self to the drudgery of Soliciting, being great with
Child.

Nor was my Apprehensions vain; For, Monsieur Mazarine was soon weary of what
he had done; and there upon begged of His Majesty to teat the Writings, and to
Release us of our Engagements. Neither would I consent to it, but upon
condition that his Majesty would never more interpose into our Business,
neither one way nor other: His Majesty was Graciously pleased to pass His Word,
that he w uld not, and has ever since kept His Promise. This brought us again
into parliament; and our Suit was followed with more Bitternesson both sides
than ever.

Monsieur Mazarine, and his Adherents, forgot nothing since that time, that
might Sully my Reputation to the World: and above all, make me hateful to His
Majesty.

The Extravagancies of Monsieur Courcelles, amongst other things, furnished
them with an Admirable Invention. I had forgotten to tell you, that when I left
Chelles, I prevailed so far, that I got leave for his Wife to come and live
with me. She was no sooner there, but those that formerly had been instrumental
to draw her away from her Husband, being glad to put her again into his
Possession, found means, I know not how, to let him into the Palace Mazarine,
whilst I was abroad; and managed her so, that her Husband and she went away
together as good friends as ever. One day as I came to give her a Visit, she
was so foolish as to deny her self, though Mr. Cavoy's Coach stood at the Door.
In the first transports of my Pession, for this her Rudeness, her Husband came
unluckily in the way, to whom I could not forbear saying no something of it.

This foolish Fellow of late hankered after an occasion to fight Cavoy: and was
loath it should be thought that he was Jealous of the best of his Friends, but
that it was upon some other account. The most Plausible he could find, was to
pretend himself every where in love with me; giving out, That his Wife had in
her keeping some Letters of mine that were of Consequence, and which I had
written to some Gentleman of the Court; That she put them into Cavoye's hands;
and that Cavoy, like a Rascal, showed them about; but that he would force him
with his Sword to restore them, as he had promised me so to do.

Although this Story was Ridiculous enough, and as ill contrived as might be,
yet it found Belief; and some were so foolish as to report it for a Truth.

He did worse than all this; he had the Impudence to tell me to my Face of it,
in the Courtyard of the Palace Mazarine. I told him, that knowing better than
any other, that all he had said was not true; I could not imagine he could have
any other Design in it, but to make himself merry: and that, if I knew that he
had the least intention of Fighting upon this Ridiculous Pretense, I would
immediately acquaint Monsieur the Count with it, who was just by, and heard
some part of our Discourse.

Coursel perceiving, by the manner and tone of my Voice, that I would not
understand Rallery, made sign with a nod of his head, that it was only in
jest; not daring to speak it out, because of Monsieur the Count, who joined us
at the same time.

If is easy to guess how great my amazement was, when I understood the next
day that they had not only fought, but that likewise in the Accord they made
amongst themselves in the Field. He had the Impudence to maintain this Fiction
to the end; and to except a Woman from the Secret they had mutually promised to
keep. He was so well pleased with himself, that he could not contain himself,
but Braggs of this Exception to all people without Exception; which made the
matter public, and was the occasion that they both were sent to the
Conciergery, to do Penance for one man's Folly. They were not wanting at Court
in their Censures of me, upon this occasion, treating me with the Attributes of
Incendary, makebate and Brutal: That I should be the occasion of cutting many
other Throats, if I could.

One of my Grooms of the Chamber being dangerously wounded about that time by
some of his drunken Comrades, they had the Charity to inform the King, That
this fellow was privy to all my Secrets, and that having found that he betrayed
his Trust, I took course to have him assassinated. The insolent Liberty, people
took to charge me with these Calumnies, obliged me to speak to the King about
it. Madam the Duchess, in whose Company I went to him, told him as she entered
the Room, That she brought him that Criminal, that Wicked Woman, of whom so
many evil things had been told him. The King was pleased to tell me, That he
never gave Credit to any of those Reports: But his manner of delivering this,
was so succinct, and so far from the accustomed Civility with which he used to
hear me, that all others but my self, would have doubted of the Truth of what
he said; you know the Court is a land of much contradiction. The Compassion
which perhaps people took of me, when they saw me shut up in a Convent, was
changed into Envy, to see me appear in the Queens withdrawing Room, and to
make a much better appearance there than I had a mind to. Yet I had no other
pretention, but to endeavor to make some tolerable Agreement with Monsieur
Mazarine; but those by whose Counsels I regulated my Actions and Affairs,
having other ends, ruined my business, by endeavoring to make their own
succeed; and so abusing my simplicity, and the blind Obedience I gave to all
their Advices, made me run up and down to this place, and that man, without
understanding the Reason or consequence of it.

Amidst all these Troubles and Vexations, our Suit went forward, and Monsieur
Mazarine found the same Favor amongst the Old men, which I had obtained of the
Young. After three months time, I had Intelligence, That he had gained the
Hearts of the great Chamber, that his Cabal carried all before them there, that
he was like to have such a Decree as he desired; that although they did grant
me the separation of Goods, they would not leave me that of my Bed, which I
then enjoyed, and therefore was no part of my Request to them; and lastly, that
the Judges could not Dispense wit^ themselves from ordering me to go to Cohabit
with my Husband, though they had been as favorable as they were then averss to
me. If this account had been given me by people of less Credit than they from
whom I had it, I might have had the liberty of publishing the Names of my
Authors. But as they run a hazard in telling it, so they were cautious in
exacting my Secrecy, which I will eternally keep inviolable to them. You may
judge what usage I was like to have of Monsieur Mazarine, if I should be forced
by Act of Parliament to return to him, after the causes of Resentments which he
pretended to have against me, and have both Court and Parliament, contrary to
me.

These were the Motives that produced that strange and so much blamed
Resolution, which I took, of retiring into Italy, to my Friends and Relations,
seeing now no longer Refuge or Security for me in France.

My Brother, who was at once, the nearest, the dearest, and the discreetest of
my Relations, was also of the first that approved of my Resolution, and offered
me all he could do to favor it. The Chevalier of Rohan, his intimate Friend,
and mine, having, I know not how heard of it, spoke to us so knowingly of it,
that we could not without Impudence conceal it from him, nor without some kind
of Ingratitude refuse his assistance.

My Desine was not to go directly then to Rome, but only to Millan, to see my
Sister the Constable of Colonna, whither I writ to her to come, and stay for
me, that she might bear me Company to Bruxelles; that from thence, as being
nearer, we might with more ease, negotiate some more durable and advantageous
Agreement with Monsieur Mazarine than the former had proved.

Monsieur De Rohan begged that he might come to us thither along with my
Brother, when we should be arrived there; nor could we in Civility refuse it
him. I had some reasons to believe, that Monsieur Mazarine would be more easily
wrought to a better accommodation, when he should once see me out of France. And
the terrible rible Apprehensions I marked in him every time I threatened to be
gone, would not suffer me to doubt of it.

The Despair to which he did often reduce me, made me many times tell him,
That if I were once out of of his reach, I would make him run far enough,
before he should over-take me.

But to my misfortune, he never believed I had so much courage, until he saw
it. After I had taken this Resolution, I so much neglected my suit, that I have
a hundred times since wondered, that those, who were concerned in it, did not
perceive it. Madam the Countess, of whom I was most afraid, was the only
person that had some suspicion of it, but she gave it no Credit; She came
almost every day to my Brothers, where she found us always very merry in
appearance, to deceive the World; she cried out upon me, because I did not
solicit my business, that it was a great shame for me to let my suit be lost
for want of looking after it. Some eight days before I parted, She was there
when one of my Brothers Gentlemen, called Parmillac^, came to take his leave of
us, He pretended to go to see his Father who (as be said) had some command in
Lorraine among the Horse. But in Truth, it was to order Post Horses to be ready
for me upon that Road, which I chose because it was the unlikeliest to be
suspected. The sight of this man that was to begin my enterprise, put me into
such disorder, that I have since wondered how the Countess did not take notice
of it; she was taken up with glossing upon my Negligence in the midst of so
many important Concerns. That it was not the time to stay all day in my Chamber
undressed, playing upon my Guittare, and that this kind of Carelessness made her
almost believe what was reported, that I intended to fly into Italy. These
unprofitable Remonstrances ended in an Exhortation to me, to go with her to St.
German to make my Court at least. But I prayed her excuse; having other
business that concerned me nearer. It was absolutely necessary for my concerns
that she should be at St. German when I parted; for if she were at Paris; in
the distrust she had had of my Conduct, it had been almost impossible, but she
would have suspected something of my intention.

In fine, Wednesday the thirteenth of June in the year one thousand six Hundred
and sixty eight, being the day appointed for my Departure, whilst I was
putting my little Affairs in order against Night, she sent for me to go dine
with at Saint German; I was about to send her word I could not go, but the,
messenger was ordered to take no denial, but that I must go; which made me
apprehend my Plot was discovered; but as we must allways in such kind of
matters presume we are not discovered, though we see never so great appearances
to the Contrary, I thought it expedient to Promise, I would meet her there lest
she should come her self to fetch me.

When dinner time was over, and I did not appear, she sent to conjure me not to
fail to come thither before Night. I excused my self as well as I could for
breaking my Word, and bid them assure her that I would not fail to be there at
Night; but ten of the Clock being passed, and no news of me, she took her Coach
and came straight toward Paris. She was come above half way when she met my
Brother, who left Paris at the same time I did, to impart my Design to Monsieur
De Louvoy. She asked him abruptly, Where I was? But he asked her, If she had
not met me? she said No: He replied coldly, That sure then I had taken the
other Road; for, that he saw me come away before he took Coach.

Monsieur Mazarine came to awake the King at three of the Clock in the morning,
to beseech him that he would give order. That I should be pursued. But His
Majesty had the Generosity to answer him: That he would not break the Promise
he had made when he tore our Award, never to meddle with any of our Concerns,
one way nor another; neither was it likely to over-take me now, being so long
gone; and having taken my Measures at leisure as I had done.

But this Answer was otherwise rendered to the world; and you have surely heard
of the Verses which were made of this Subject which begins thus:

Sad Mazarine, pale and full of grief. And ended with this Joke upon the
Revelations he had, during the Queens great sickness, touching the King and
Madam La Val^ers.

Alas, what is become of my poor Wife?
Know you not (quoth the King?) sure you cannot miss.
The Angel that tells you all, has told you this.
Monsieur Mazarine, seeing he could obtain nothing to his purpose of the King,
went to Monsieur Colbert, who advised him to send some Person of Credit after
me, to offer me my own Terms so I would come back. It was one Monsieur Louvier,
one of the Lieutenants of the Ordinance who was sent; and you may judge from
the place where he over-took me, that the King had reason to say, It was then
too late to follow me.

Whilst things passed thus at Court, I ran a strange Carreir: And I do assure
you, that if I had foreseen all the Inconveniences that attends such a
Journey, I should rather have chosen to end my days betwixt four Walls, or
make my self away with Steel or Poison, than to expose my Reputation, to those
Calumnies that are inevitable to all Women of my Age and Quality, that are
separated from their Husbands.

Though I had not Experience enough, nor those that were of my Counsel,
forecast enough; yet I was not without many Conflicts with my self before I
could absolutely come to a settled Determination: And my Irresolutions were so
troublesome to me, that if you could but see them, you would more easily
comprehend, that nothing but the necessity I saw my self reduced to, could
hurry me to so pernicious an Enterprise.

I can with great Truth assure you, that all my Divertisments, were but feigned
since I had formed this design; And that Madam the Countess was much in the
wrong in reproaching me with my tranquillity of mind; I scarce took any rest,
nor eat, nor drunk much for above eight days before; and I was so much troubled
when I parted, that I was fain to send back from the Gate of St. Anthony, to
fetch the Box in which was my money and my Jewels which I had forgotten. It is
a great Truth that I never dreamed that I should ever want money, but
experience has taught me it is commonly the first thing, that is wanting,
especially to those, that having always lived in great plenty of it, never know
the necessity and importance of discreetly managed it.

Nevertheless, I left the Keys of my Apartment with my Brother, that he might
seize upon my Plate, Furniture and others things of Value, But he was so
Careless as to let Monsieur Mazarine prevent him, upon the same token that
sometime afterward he sold some of my things to Madam La Valier for a hundred
thousand Franks. My Train Consisted of a maid I had but six months, called
Nannon, dressed in man's apparel, as I was, a man of my Brothers called
Narcissus, with whom I had no acquaintance, and a Gentleman belonging to
Monsieur Rohan called Courbevil, whom I had never seen before. My Brother
prayed Monsieur Rohan not to leave me until he had seen me out of Town, I
parted with him without the Gate of St. Anthony, and drove on in a Goach with
six Horses, to a house belonging to the Princess of Guimene his mother, ten
Leagues from Paris. From thence I went six or seven Leagues in a Caleche; but
these kind of Carriages were too slow for my Fears, therefore I took Horse, and
Arrived at Bar, the Friday following about Noon; from thence (seeing my self
out of France) I went no further than Nancy that Night. The Duke of Lorraine
hearing of my Arrival, and desireing to see me, was so Civil as not to press
it, when he understood I was unwilling. The Resident of France was very earnest
to have me stopped there, but in vain; and the Duke, to Complete his
Generosity, gave me a Lieutenant and twenty of his Guards to Conduct me into
Swiszerland. We were almost every where known to be Women; and Nanon still
through forgetfulness called me Madam; whether for this Reason, or that my Face
gave some Cause of suspicion; the People watched us through the Keyhole, when
we had shut our selves in, and saw our long Tresses, which as soon as we were
at liberty we untied, because they were very troublesome to us under our
Perriwigs.

Nanon was extreme low of stature, and so unfit to be Clothed in men's Apparel,
that I could never look upon her without Laughing. The Night that I lay at
Nancy, where we reassumed our Women's Apparel, I was so overjoyed to see my self
out of danger, that I gave my self the liberty of diverting me a little at my
ordinary Sports, and as I ran after her to Laugh at her, I fell on my Knee so
that I hurt it, but I did not feel it then; some days after I caused a Bed to
be made in a pitiful Village of the French County, to rest my self while
Dinner was a preparing, but of a sudden such a grievous pain took me in that
Knee, that I was not able to rise; but on I must go, therefore having been let
blood by a woman for want of another Surgeon, I followed my Journey in a
Litter till I came to Newcastle, where the people persuaded themselves, that I
was Madam de Longeville; you cannot Imagine the Joy, the people expressed to
see me, being not used to see Women of Quallity of France, pass through their
Country; nor could they comprehend that any other then the Duchess of
Longeville could have business that way. I know some would have laid hold of
this occasion, and made use of their kindness, to taste of the sweetness of
Sovereignty, however the mistake was advantageous to me; and what I wanted in
Age, I gained in quallity. But this Authority seemed to me too great and too
good for a Fugitive; I was also so unskilfully handled, that my pain grew
worse, in so much that I had once thoughts of returning to Paris; and were it
not that Millain was nearer, and that I hoped to be sooner and safer there, I
had pursued my first Thoughts

Some few days after, as I passed through a little Town of Swiszerland, where we
were all like to be knocked on the Head, by our Ignorance of their Language:
and to complete our happiness, we understood when we came to Altauph, that we
must pass our Quarantaine there, before we should be suffered to enter the
Territories of Millan. There it was my stock of Patience was quite spent. For I
saw my self in a Barbarous Country, most desperately Sick, full of grievous
Pain; and for Help, you shall Judge by what happened to Natcissus, whether there
was much to be hoped for in that place. For he ayling something, sent for a
Surgeon to let him Blood, they brought him a Farrier, who going to let him
Blood with his Flemmes missed the Vain, and Narcissus threatening to kill him,
the Fellow still answered Coldly, that he had not hurt the Artery.

But what consummated and thoroughly carried my Condition, even beyond Despair,
was the Division that I found in my Family, and their continual Jarring.
Narcissus took it Ill, that Courbevil who had been in my Family but seven or
eight Days, should take upon him to meddle with any thing without his leave;
and the same reason made Nanon quarrel with them both; but while Narcissus and
she Jarred in this manner, they were wholly useless to me, and did nothing but
out of spite to thwart one another.

On the other side Courbevil was very diligent to help me; and I am still
persuaded, had it not been for him, I had been forced to have had my Legs cut
off. And as my distressed Condition made me very thankful, and acknowledging
for every little service; and commending his particular Care of me, put them
two quite out of Humor; and thereupon abandoned me wholly to his Care.

It was at the time of this Quarantine, that La Louvier over-took me; but I
remitted the Deliberation of what he proposed to me, to our Arrival at Millan,
whither I came some few days after, by the favor and means of the Duke of
Sest, Brother in Law to the Constable, and Governor of that Country; He
understood how I was detained at Altauph, and he remitted eighteen days of my
Quarantine. My Sister and the Constable came to meet me at a House of theirs
four days Journey from Millan, where we stayed some days, and thence we went
to Millan, where in six weeks that we stayed there, we received nine Couriers
from Paris.

I understood that presently after my flight, the Judges had declared
themselves in my favor against Monsieur Mazarine; and that the Resolution I
had taken, gave at the same time both Admiration, and Pity to all reasonable
people; and that Monsieur Turren himself had spoken to the King in my behalf.
But things quickly changed their face by my friends joining with Monsieur
Mazarine, in an Appeal against my Brother and Monsieur Rohan, who alleged in
his Bill, that they had stole me away.

I know that Monsieur Mazarine sent one after me with power to take
Information, from place to place, all the Road that I passed, of all my Actions
and Demeanure.

And this perhaps is the greatest and only Obligation I owe him, since this
man's Depositions which are Recorded in Parliament, are undeniable Testimonies
of the Innocence of my carriage, and conduct throughout this Journey, against
all the Allegations and Aspersions of my Enemies. But this was not the best
Story in his Bugget: I had written to my Brother, and to Monsieur Rohan before
I left New Castle; to my Brother to let him know where, and how I was; and to
Monsieur Rohan, to thank him for the Service he did me at my coming away, in
facilitating my Departure. I had commanded Narcissus to send away these Letters
by the Post, but whether it was that his hatred to Courbevill reached as far as
his Master that gave him me, or that it was mere negligence, he confessed at
Millan that he forgot Monsieur Rohan's Letter upon the Mantle-Tree in the
Post-master's House at New Castle, to whom he had given it in charge. La
Louvier finding it as he came that way, carried it with him, and gave it to
Monsieur Mazarine, who made wonderful use of it, and with such success, that it
set all the World against me: And it was upon this Letter that he grounded his
Request, sometime after, that I ought to forfeit all my Rights, which is never
practiced but against Women, convinced of the highest Infamy and Lewedness.

I told you that Monsieur Rohan had obtained my Brothers consent to come to us
to Brussels, when we should be arrived there. The Need we had of him, having
made us conclude the matter so; it was natural enough to mention this to him,
in a Letter that was designed principally to show him my Acknowledgements and
Gratitude. This was Evidence enough for Monsieur Mazarine to prove a
Confederacy betwixt us, and that the Chevalier was in love with me. But
besides, that his Affections were known to the whole Court to be engaged
elsewhere then, and to a Person of that Eminent Quality, that he was Banished
for it: His manner of proceeding did no way show any such thing. It was truly
the part of a good Friend to furnish me with means to convey my self far off,
and to put me into the hands of trusty Servants; But it was no way that of a
true Lover; there are very few that being favored with a Confidence of this
Nature, would be persuaded to lose fight of their Mistress in so Extrarodinary
an Occasion as this.

Notwithstanding all this, the world gave Credit to what Monsieur Mazarine
would have pass for a Truth: As for my Brother, he had, as you have seen by the
Story, took up a Jealousy of him, to render him suspected in all my Concerns;
that by this means he might deprive me of so considerable a Support: there is
nothing so innocent, but is poisoned, to maintain and carry on so detestable a
Calumny; they produced Letters in verse, for want of other Evidences.

Posterity (if happily any thing of our Business does reach it) will hardly
believe that a man of my Brothers Gravity should be examined upon
Interrogatories about such Trifles; and that they should be seriously discussed
before so grave a Bench: That they should make such a Detestable use of so
innocent a Commerce of Wit and Fancy, betwixt persons so nearly Related: To
conclude, That the Esteem and Friendship I had for a Brother of a Desert and
Merit so well known, and so justly due to him, and who loved me entirely well,
should be made use of, as an injust Pretense, and Color for so Black and so
Cruel a Defamation.

It will be hard to find stranger Examples of the Misfortunes of a Person of my
Quality, Sex, and Age.

The most sacred Ties of Nature and Reason, become the most horrible Crimes
when Jealousy and Envy comes to descant upon them: and there is nothing
impossible to a man that makes Profession of Piety and Devotion, rather than he
shall be thought in the wrong; the most Innocent and Upright Persons in the
World, shall be thought the most Infamous, and the most Abominable. I may
perhaps be thought in Passion; but the Remembrance of so Barbarous a Wrong, and
so Cruel Usage, has run me into a Superfluous Digression. For, it is very
difficult to keep an even Temper in Relating such Sad and Lamentable Things.

Nor is it easy to leave wondering that People should be so malicious as to tax
me with a Business so known to the World as the Friendship and Union that was
betwixt my Sister the Constable, my Brother, and my Self.

The whole Court of France have seen a Letter, which he writ from Rome sometime
after our Marriages, wherein he represents to one of his Friends, his Happiness
in having two Sisters whom he loved so well, living in two of the Greatest and
most Famous Cities of the World, Rome and Paris. He ended his Letter with these
two Verses.

And thus I pass my days in great Delight,
With Wise Mary, and Hortensia Bright.
It is not unlikely, but that Monsieur Mazarine would have made use of these
Verses, in his Suit, if my Sister (whom he endeavored to gain, and set against
me) had not been concerned in them as well as I: For, they are, at least, as
Criminal and Faulty as the other Letter, of which he made use. My Brother writ
me that other Letter to St. Germain, where I was some days, after Monsieur
Mazarine had caused the Stage to be thrown down, which I told you I had ordered
to be set up in my Appartment. It begun thus:

Thou art in thy kind without Compare,
Chaster than Lucrece, than Venus more Fair.
He continues it with returning me thanks for writing to him, and giving me an
account of his Health; and after he goes on thus:

Know then your kind Duke makes a damnable Rout,
He frets, and he fumes, and he wanders about,
And all to enquire hit Dear Mazarine out.
He came the other Night in a Lunatic Rage,
And told me the Tragical Fate of your Stage.
The Duke of Navaille, that withered sad Drivel,
Whose Gashly wild Looks would half fright the Devil,
To assist your Good Man comes Thundering Pell-mell,
And with Noise, and with Nonsense upon me he fell.
They both joined in the Chorus, and opening their Throats,
As loud as they could, with their damned Screetch-Owle Notes,
They tried me and teiz'd for a whole Hour long;
And his dear Mazarine was the Burden of the Song.
Your Hectoring Spouse, like a Saracen, stares,
Looks big, and all that, -- and by 's Maker he Swears,
He Will seize you by Force, when ever he meets you.
And when in his Clutches but once more he gets you,
For all your Brisk Champions he will care not a Rope;
He Will keep you in Spite of King, Emperor, or Pope.
His Servant Polastron has offered his Aid,
To join in the Plot, to have you betrayed.
Has Sworn his Allegiance the better to warrant,
Himself a true Squire to your new-made Knight Errant.
In this extreme Danger, till the Tempest is over,
The Protection of Lewis, I advise you implore.
In all this Distress of his Friendship make trial;
And shielded by his great Authority Royal,
You need fear no Ill. You Will be safely secured.
Against an Ungrateful and Barbarous Lord.
The rest is nothing. As I was showing this Letter to some of my Friends at
Court, the Count of Grammon came and snatched it out of my hands, and carried
it to the King; it was read publicly before Him, and there was none of all the
Court that was any way scandalized at it, but one of the King's Chyrurgions,
named Eliam: This man, who in Appearance was zealous for his Patients, hearing
these Words, The Duke of Navaille, that withered sad Drivel, could not contain
himself from interrupting them, and saying. That was nothing; for he was
shortly to be Purged. And yet it was upon such Convincing Proofs as these, That
Mons. Mazarine obtained an Order of Parliament, to Arrest me in any place where
he should find me.

All my Friends, at the same time, Signed a Paper to him, jointly praying
Monsieur the Constable not to receive me into his House; but he laughed at
their Folly. And they had likewise sent with them these other scandulous
Letters. There came to me at the same time a particular Courier from the
Countess, to excuse her self to me about this; but by word of mouth only.

I confess my Constancy was not of strength enough to receive so great a Shock
of so many Afflictions together. I fell into a deep Melancholy, and these kind
of proceedings leaving me no hope of an Accommodation, I left off the Thoughts
of going to Bruxelles. Hereupon my Brother arrives; and instead of Comforting
me, he began another Persecution against me, so much the more Cruel, because it
had such a Specious Foundation.

It was agreed, that Courbevil should be sent back as soon as I came to
Millain. But he having understood the Criminal Process that was begun at Paris,
in which he was made a party; he threw himself at my Feet, and represented to
me, That he could not return to his Master, without carrying his Head to a
Scaffold; and that having not whereby to subsist any where else, he should be
utterly ruined if I discharged him my Service. This Gentleman had been so
serviceable to me in my greatest Necessities, that I believed I could not
abandon him without extreme Ingratitude; therefore I passed my word to him that
I would not put him away, as long as he would please to stay with me. And the
cruel Displeasures which I received for having kept him, have not yet persuaded
me that I ought not to have given him my word to continue him in my Service.

Narcissus and Nanon enraged because I kept him, told my Brother that he talked
insolently of him; what they alleged he had said was likely enough; my Brother
believed them, and would have me turn him away: But as I knew who it was that
had done him this ill Office, I could neither believe it, nor discharge him.
But my Resolution to keep him drove Narcissus and Nanon into despair; at last
the best Expedient they could find to force me to satisfy their desire, was to
give out that Courbevil was in love with me.

My Brother, who would seem ignorant of these services, and of the Promise I
gave him, and the Obligations I owed to this man, because he believed himself
affronted by him, and being accustomed to receive no Denial from me, was afraid
there was something extraordinary in my Obstinacy not to dismiss him: and was
confirmed in this Opinion, when after highly representing to me the Report that
was spread abroad, he saw I would not yield to part with him. This ridiculous
Calumny instead of convincing, did rather exasperate me: And I was so nearly
touched to find he gave Credit to it, that I could no longer endure him. The
Constable and my Sister were first of my side, against him; but they too turned
to his side at last. Then there was nothing but sending and proving betwixt us
four, and I was still in the fault; and they justified themselves at my Cost.

This kind of Life, full of Vexations and Resentments, against a Brother and a
Sister whom I loved so dearly, and whose Society alone I thought sufficient to
make me happy, made me at last, though late, to comprehend that we must set our
Hearts upon nothing in this World.

In the midst of these Disquiets we came to Venis, where the Constable was not
well at his ease, because perhaps he saw my Sister was too well pleased to be
there. He promised me great matters to induce me to go to Rome; That he would
engage his Holiness should protect me; and that he would omit nothing to divert
me from the deep Melancholy he saw me inclined to. Seeing my self so cruelly
persecuted by my Brother, I thought it convenient, by my Complaisance, to
manage the Constable's Kindness. We went all to Sienne, to Cardinal Chigies;
from whence, after three Weeks stay there, my Brother having fallen out with
us, returned to Venis without taking leave of us, and we steered our course
toward Rome; where the heats were so Excessive, that we were forced to retire
for six weeks to Marine, a house of Pleasure, belonging to my Brother-in-Law,
the Constable.

About the time we returned to Rome, my Brother came thither with a Gentleman
belonging to Monsieur de Rohan, to cause (as I have been told) Courbevil to be
Assassinated. I have been informed that Courbevil finding himself extreme ill
at Venise, he believed himself Poisoned; and in this Belief he writ terrible
Letters to Paris against my Brother: and Monsieur De Rohan, whom he believed of
Intelligence with my Brother to have him turned out of my Service; that these
Letters falling into Monsieur De Rohan's hands, he sent them back to my
Brother, desiring him to Chastise Courbevil according to his Deserts. The
indiscretion of this Courbevil, and the unpleasing Noise this Business made in
the World, together with the desire I had to be at quiet, made me resolve at
last to discharge Courbevil; not doubting but he would willingly acquit me of
my Promise which I had given him.

My Request to the President of Champlastreux his Son, who did negotiate
betwixt my Brother and me, was, That he should not press me with so much
Imperiousness to this Deferrence; and that I might be allowed to go and
sojourne with my Aunt Martinozzi. An Hour before Courbevil was to leave my
House, my Aunt being already come to carry me with her, my Sister was in such a
rage because I would no longer stay at her house, that she begun to play upon
him before me, and to ask him, If he would not once more move me, and persuade
me to let him stay yet this time? The man being in despair for his going away,
answered her fiercely, That if I did not command him to go he would not, and
that he cared for none there but me. She bad him to get him gone, and that he
should understand what it was to speak to her in her own Palace with so little
Respect. He went out in a great Fury, and I had reason to believe that there
was some mischief intended against him; and therefore thinking my self bound to
save his Life, I had him along with me to my Uncles House, the Cardinal
Mancini, from thence I went to my Aunt's House, where I staid some time shut
close up as in a Prison.

As Melancholy as I was, I could not hold Laughing at a request she made me, to
dance the Mattassin Dance, to the Sound of my Guitar to divert me from Sadness,
I know not whether it was this my Refuse that did exasperate her against me;
but one day as I was at the Window, she commanded me very roughly to get me
from thence, That it was not the custom at Rome to stand looking out at
Windows. Another time as I stood at it, she sent me her Ghostly Father to tell
me That she would cause me to be haled from it be force. This Monk was so
insolent in the delivery of his message, that the Tears gushed out of my Eyes.
Cardinal Chigies Gentleman of the Horse, who was managing of Horses before the
House, hearing me complain, came up to offer me his Service, but when I saw
him, I had no power to say any more. For all that, he went and told his Lord,
That I had neither eat nor drank in two days. Cardinal Chigie was troubled at
it, and pitied my condition; and Cardinal Mancini telling him, that Monsieur
Mazarine desired I would Retire for fifteen Days into a Monastery, wherein
there was a Sister of Cardinal Mazarins; I took him at his Word. My Brother
and Sister seeing the Deplorable State in which I was, began to reflect upon
their passed usage to me, and could not be quiet until I had pardoned them.

But I would not consent that my Brother should see me, yet at last they
overcome me in this too; and though I saw that their Repentance could not
redress the Injuries they had done my Reputation, the easiness of my Nature
carried me to yield even this time, notwithstanding the just cause of
Indignation which I had against them. I confess my Heart hardens at the
Relation. I know nothing so Cruel in ones Life, as to see those People come
boldly to us that have done us unpardonable Injuries. It is enough to be
mortally affronted by them, without being persecuted with their Repentance too.

This Reflection with many others, which I had occasion to make in my recess
made me resolve to return into France, and to throw my self at Monsieur
Mazarines Feet, and rather trust to his Mercy without Capitulating, than to
remain still exposed to as many more irksome, and heart breaking adventures, as
I had already run through. I made my Aunt Martinozzi to write to the Princess
of Conty her Daughter about it, and I was preparing to be gone as soon as the
Answer was come, some few Days after Courbevil found means to let me
understand, That after he had been some Days kept close at Cardina Mancinies,
he was conveyed to Civita Vetchia, where he had been a Prisoner for six Weeks:
and where he was like to remain (as he sent me word, long enough) unless I
would please to have the goodness to solicit for him. Though I had reason
never more to concern my self with him; yet because I would not leave my Work
imperfect, I begged his Liberty of Francisco Vincenzo Rospigliosi, the Popes
Nephew, who thereupon commanded his Inlargment.

In the intrim, the time which I was to stay in the Convent being elapsed,
Cardinal Mancini made answer to the instances; my Sister, unknown to me, had
used to get me out of the Monastery, That he advised me to stay there a little
longer, because it would be advantageous for me, that the Answer which was
expected out of France should find me there; And this Answer was, That after I
had remained two years in that Monastery, Mons. Mazarine would consider what he
should do with me

Cardinal Mancini by all means would have me submit to this Condidition; and
truly in the great affliction of mind into which Mons. Mazarine's Harshness had
cast me, I might have been persuaded to any thing: But my Sister would not let
me stay there by no means; she caused the Queen of Sweden to be solicited to
that end, who gave me her promise to receive me into her house; all the
difficulty was, how I should make my Escape.

My Sister came to see me that Afternoon I intended it; and as we were packing
up to begone, and that Nanon was grown as broad as she was long, with the
Fardles, that she had put round about her, every where under her clothes; we
had Intelligence that the Queen of Sweden, by the Advice of her Counsel, had
retracted the Promise she had given me. How unwelcome soever this News was, it
was resolved I should make my Escape.

My Sister begun to take her leave to be gone, and I making as if I would wait
upon her down Stairs; my Aunt Mazarine used all the Arguments she had to oblige
me to stay in my Chamber, because I had been Ill along time; but I was not to
commit such an Error.

My Sisters Children, not having the Liberty of coming within the Cloister, as
she had, and were brought that day on purpose to amuse my Aunt in the Parlour;
that we might not be pestred with her, stayed for her at the Door, which as
soon as the Abbess came to open, Nanon threw her self out of it, as it were
with Joy, to make much of them, and I after her. As they had no suspicion of
our Design, the Lady Abbess durst not stay me by force; nor had she much time
to consider of it, for I was immediately got into my Sisters Coach, and so
drive away.

My Sister had the privilege, of carring a certain number of Women with her
into the Cloister, as often as she came thither; my Aunt through vexation and
anger stopped two of them, that came in with her that day, though they were no
way privy to our Plot: my poor old Aunt took the matter so much to heart, that
she dyed within few Days after, of the Displeasure she had taken for my Escape.

We caused the Coach to drive straight to Cardinal Chigies, to implore his
Protection, but we found him not; he came a little after to my Sisters, and
seemed very cold in the matter, fearing the Pope's Displeasure; but his
Holiness made this Answer to Cardinal Mancinies complaint, That if he had known
that I was kept against my Will in the Convent, he would have come himself to
fetch me out.

Not being able yet to resolve to live in my Sisters house, I went to lodge in
the street called du Course in our paternal House, where the Roman Accadamy was
ever kept. Cardinal Mancini was so angry at it, that he turned one of his
Sisters out of the House, who would have incommoded me if she had staid: But he
soon after took the Opportunity of my absence, being gone to Marrine, (to my
brother-in-laws) to seize, and take possession of the House: So that, I was
forced at my return to take another.

I was at length reduced to pawn my Jewels for my Subsistence: I had borrowed
but three thousand Crowns upon them, when I was informed the man that lent it
me was in danger of breaking. But when I went to Redeem them, I found that
Madam Martinozzi had prevented me, and paid the money, but would not return the
Jewels. Whereupon the Constable of Collonna taking no notice of her having
them, prevailed so by his Authority and Threats to this man, that he was forced
to get them back from her; since he was not to let any Body have them, but
those that put them into his hands.

Monsieur Mazarine was writ to, to redeem them; but he made answer, That there
they should stay for him, that I might he deprived of all ways to subsist, the
better to reduce me to my Duty.

I was necessitated to let one Grillon, a great Friend to my Brother, and the
Constable, lay down the money they lay in for, which I repayed in some small
time after.

The trouble of seeing my self reduced to the Exigency of receiving Obligations
from people that might abuse me in my need, and the strait I was in, made me a
little after resolve to take a journey into France, to try to get a Pension of
Monsieur Mazarine.

I went with my Brother, who was going to be married to Madamoisel De Tiange:
And it is to this Alliance that I owe the good Success of my Voyage. We were
near six months upon the Road; when we were come to the Frontiers, we concluded
that he should go before, and that I should stay behind, until he had taken the
care that was necessary for my Securty in France. But our Friends havinig given
us an account of the Disaster of the poor Statues that were in the Palace
Mazarine, and that the Conjuncture seemed favorable, we went together as far
as Nevers, where he left me, and went on toward the Court in company with
Grillon who overtook us at Millain.

As soon as Monsieur Mazarine understood that we were upon the Road coming into
France, he sent Polastron, Captain of his Guards to inform himself exactly of
the Course of Life we lead, who raised all the Sheriffs and Provosts about
Nevers, to be aiding and assisting to the Commissary, who came to put the Order
of Parliament in Execution; whereby they were Authorized to Seize and Arrest
me. My Brother having complained to the King of this proceeding, his Majesty
was in the mind to have sent for me by his Authority; but Monsieur Colbert
judging it more for my Advantage to manage Monsieur Mazarine as much as was
possible. The King sent him Command to sign an Order of Appointment that I
might come quietly to my Agreement; which he did with Tears in his Eyes;
perceiving that if he did not do it, the King would proceed further in my
behalf.

This Order came luckily to Nevers the same day that Monsieur Palluan,
Counselor of the Great Chamber, came thither to Arrest me. I received likewise
at the same time Command to come to the Lys: my Brother was married the same
day that I arrived. Whilst I was there, Monsieur Mazarine sent to make several
Overtures of Agreement with me; but it was by the mediation of a wretched sort
of People, in whom I could place no Confidence, or without giving me any
Assurance, that he would stand to any thing that should be agreed upon. He told
the King, That my Brother kept me off from coming to any Accord, and that he
governed me with a Tyrannical Authority; and that if I did not stand so much in
Awe of him, I should be much more Tractable. The King to clear this Doubt, sent
for me three months after, by Madam Bellinzani, with an Officer, and some of
his Guards, in Madam Colbert's Coach; for, my Brother had begged of the King
that I should lodge at Madam Colbert's House, as a place where none should be
permitted to force me to dissemble my Thoughts. Two or three days after, he
commanded I should wait upon him at Madam De Mont Espan's House.

I shall never forget his Goodness toward me; He prayed me to consider, That
if he had not done better for me hitherto, it was my own Conduct that hindered
him, and took from him the means; That I should truly tell him what I would
have done; That if I was absolutely resolved to return again into Italy, he
would cause a Pension of four and twenty thousand livers to be settled upon me:
But that he advised me to stay; That he would make my Agreement as advantageous
for me as I could desire; That I should not be obliged to follow Monsieur
Mazarine in any of his Journeys; That he should have nothing to do with my
Domestics; And that if his Caresses were odious to me, I should not be
compelled to suffer them presently; That he gave me until the next day to
consider of it, and give him my Answer.

I could, easily have given him then the same Answer I made to him the next
day; which was, That I could not consent to return to Monsieur Mazarine, after
having endeavored to ruin my Reputation, as he had done; and after refusing
to receive me, when I sent him offers from Rome to throw my self into his Arms,
without any Capitulation or bartering for Conditions, at a time when he knew me
reduced to the last Extremities of Want, and necessity: That in despite of
all the Precautions that should be taken against the Capriciousness of his
Humor, I should be put to suffer a hundred little Injuries, with which, it
would be very unfit to importune His Majesty upon all Occasions. That I
accepted of the Pension with an humble and hearty Acknowledgment of His
Majesty's great Favor therein.

After such just and lawful Reasons, you will be surprised to hear that the
World condemned my Resolution Extremely; but the Descants of Courtiers are very
different from other men's Judgments. Amongst others, Madam De Montespan, and
Madam Colbert, used all their best Arguments to persuade me to stay; and
Monsieur De Lauzun asked me, What I intended to do with my two thousand four
hundred Livers? That I should squander them away at the first Inn I came to,
and that I should be compelled to come afterward with Shame and Confusion to
ask for more, which would not be granted me. But he did not know, that my Wants
had taught me how to husband my Money. Not but that I perceived it was a thing
almost impossible, long to subsist handsomely upon this inconsiderable Allowance.

But besides that, I could get no more; and that Monsieur Mazarine would not
let me live at Paris without his being with me; I thought I might, with this
help, gain time to take other measures.

Monsieur Mazarine wanting other matter to bespatter my Carriage, told the
King, That I was making me a Casack to go dressed in man's Apparel. But his
Majesty was pleased to tell him, That he durst pass his Word, that I intended
no such thing.

Madam Belinzany, had order with an Exempt of his Guards to conduct me to Rome,
and to have two of His Guards to attend us to the Frontier.

I received so many Civilities from the Duke of Savoy in my passage through
Turin, that I even then took a Resolution, if ever I came to leave Rome, to
come and take up my Recess in his Territories. I arrived at Rome three months
after, and some time afterward Grillon came thither to plunge me, in spite of
all I could do, into new Troubles.

I had made a Resolution to receive no Visits from any, during my abode in
France: Grillon pretending he ought to be excepted, because of the Service he
had done me at Rome, in the Redeeming my Jewels; presently after my Arrival
there, came once to the Lys, in the Countesses company, to visit me. But I
never would see him after. His Resentment for this Refusal transported him
beyond Belief.

While I stayed for the Commissary at Nevers, my Brother's Steward, for my
better Security, got me Lodgings in one of the Towers, of a Convent that was
joining to the Castle; and having but few Servants left me, he preferred to me
one of my Brother's Guards, who had been turned out for some slight Fault.

This man was very diligent in his place, to induce me to beg his pardon, in
hope of which, I let him follow me to the Lys. A Raskal, a Cook of mine, to
please Grillon, who had bribed him, goes and tells him, That this Wretch was
very Officious, and endeavored to render himself necessary about me; and that
he had sometimes ingresse into the Convent. Grillon, without further
Examination, reports this Story all about, to that height, that when I came to
Paris, Madam Colbert would not let this man stay in my Service within her Doors.

Judge you in what amazement I was in, when I understood this Story, and with
what Promptness I discharged my new Officer, and what my Resentments, and just
indignation against this wicked Grillons villainy was; and whether I was not
surprised, as I passed through Lions to see him have the impudence to offer to
come again into my sight, under the pretense of bringing me a Letter from my
Brother, to beg I would forget all. The indifference and neglect I showed him
then, enraged him more than ever.

When he came to Rome, he understood that Monsieur de Marsan came sometimes to
see me; and after a thousand ridiculous Extravagancies that passed betwixt
them, they had at last that idle Quarrel which you have heard of, wherein
without much hurt to one another, they had the pleasure once more to make me
the subject of peoples talk. Sometime after this, my Sister determined to
retire into France, pretending several Causes of Complaint against the
Constable; it would be too tedious to relate the Arguments I used to dissuade
her from this Journey, the displeasures the like resolution had drawn me into,
made me more eloquent, but to no purpose; for the same Stars, or their
influences, that drove me into Italy, drew her into France.

As she was always sure of me, she made no difficulty, to draw me in to be of
the party; and because I had no tie at Rome when she was not there, and that I
believed I should lessen the dangers she was to run through, by partaking and
sharing them with her, I did not stick to follow her. I only represented to
her, how I should be forced to leave her as soon as we were Arrived in France.
Nothing was so grievous to her, as this inavoidable necessity, and nothing
persuaded me more to yield to the force of her Reasons, than to see that they
brought her to consent to our separation.

The Chevalier of Lorrain owed her greater Obligations than to fail to serve
her in this occasion; for she quarreled with all Rome, upon his and his
brothers account; they were welcome in no house in Rome but at hers; and she had
declared her self for them in very nice points against Cardinal Chigi and the
Constable himself. Yet for all this she received no other Service from them,
but huge and mighty promises of what they would do for her by their Credit in
France; nor did they perform in that neither: as for her design the Chevalier
thought it sufficient to tell her; That if she had no bodies Advice to guide
her but her own, he should be much concerned for her, but that since Madam
Mazarine was of her Counsel, she might rest upon her Conduct, since she had
more Wit and more Courage than was needful for a much more hazardous
Enterprise.

He little thought then that he should be called back into France so soon as he
was; if he had done what he ought, we should have been there long before him;
and people would not have had occasion to say, that we followed him: but my
Sister who relied wholly upon him, was forced to put off her Journey when she
saw her self left in the Lurch by him. After his departure for France, she
broke her mind to another person of Eminent Quality, whom she believed her
friend, because she had by her kindness and Favors Obliged him to be so. But he
only told her, That the Chevalier of Lorraine ought to have helped her upon
this occasion. He asked me what I intended to do with my self, and whether I
had persuaded my Sister to this Voyage? He can yet justify, that I made him
this Answer. That I did not; that I knew I could not stay in France, neither
was my intention at all to come there but under the Protection of a passport
which the King of France sent my Sister for her self and her Retinue; and that
my design was to retire into Savoy, as soon as I left her in a place of
safety. In fine, having taken all the precaution that humane prudence could
think of, against any hazard that might befall us in France, we ordered a Barque
to attend us at Civita-vetchia. And upon a very fine Day in May, the Constable
having told us at dinner, that he was to go twelve miles from Rome, to see his
Stud, and that if he did not come home before it was late, we should not look
for him that Night. My Sister would needs lay hold upon this occasion, though
we had nothing in readiness to be gone. We left word that we were going to
Frescati: and so took only one of her Maids, and Nanon dressed in man's
Apparel, as we were under our own Clothes in my Coach: We came to
Civita-Vetchia, about two of the Clock in the morning, when all the Gates were
shut; so that, we were forced to drive into the middle of a thick Wood, there
to wait until our Bark were found.

My Groom of the Chambers, who took upon him to guide us, having run up and
down a great while without finding it, was fain to hire another, which he found
there, for a Thousand Crowns.

While he was thus employed, my Postilion impatient of hearing no Tidings one
way or other, took one of the Coach Horses, and had the Luck to meet with our
own Bark. But it was late when he came back: We were fain to walk five Mile
afoot to come to it; and so got on board about three of the Clock, without
having eaten or drunk since we left Rome.

Our chiefest happiness was, that we fell into the hands of a very honest and
understanding Master; any other but him, would have thrown us overboard after
taking what we had, from us; for, he perceived as soon as he saw us, that we
were no Beggars; and told us as much. His Crew asked us, If we had not killed
the Pope? To show you how skillful he was, he managed his Way so well, that we
came in eight days to Ciouta in Province, where we landed at Eleven a Clock at
Night: From thence, we arrived at Marseiles, about five in the morning, a
Horseback; where we found the King's Orders, and the Past-ports, at the
President's House.

The Constable most luckily stayed three Days away from Rome, and therefore it
was late before he suspected the Truth. There was not a Fable so horrible to be
invented by the wickedness of man, but was reported of us; to that Degree that
they gave it out, that we were fled into Turkey, insomuch that the Constable
was fain to beg of the Pope to Excommunicate all those that should intermedle
with, or talk of us. He dispatched fourteen Courriers so many several ways
after us; and one of them made such have, that he got to Marseiles before us.
There came likewise thither a little after one belonging to him, of those kind
of men, whom they call Brauos in Italy.

My Groom of the Chambers being gone I knew not whither, to get Necessaries for
his Journey to Paris, whither my Sister was to send him. And we four Women were
by our selves without other Company, in that very Inn to which this man came to
lodge. Nanon saw him first, and knew him presently; she quickly gave us the
Alarm; we sent immediately to the Intendent, to pray him to send us some
Guards, which he instantly did. My Groom of the Chamber coming back from the
Town, was desired by this man to let him speak to us, which he did, very
civilly exhorting us to return back to Rome: But was glad to be gone thither
himself, with the only Satisfaction of having a Letter from my Sister to his
Master.

This Adventure made us go to lodge at the Intendant's house, and from thence,
some few days afterward, to Aix, where we stayed a month, and whither Madam
de Grignan was so Charitable, as to send us some Shifts, adding, That we
traveled like True Roman Heroines, with abundance of Jewels, but no clean
Linen. From thence, we went to Mirabeau; thence to Montpellier; Whence my
Sister went to Visit Monsieur de Vardes; and from Montpellier to Monfrein,
where I learnt that Polastron was hard by coming from Paris under pretense of
being sent by Monsieur Mazarine to Complement my Sister; But in truth, to cause
me to be arrested by Virtue of his damnable Order.

When I heard of his coming, I walked alone, away into the Garden, among the
Fish Ponds, to let him pass by; but when he found I was not with my Sister, he
would not stay, but pretends have to go on, thinking I was gone back, and so to
overtake me; but he was mistaken; for instead of following me, he went further
from me.

Thence I parted for Arles, by Water upon the Rhone; from thence I went by Land
to Martigues; and after by Sea to Ni^e, and from Nice to Turim, and so on to
Mommeillan.

My Sister having taken the necessary Orders for my Security, from Monsieur L'
Esdignieres, sent for me from Mommeillan to Grenoble: To which place my Brother
came to us, and staid there with us seven or eight Days: and some eight Days
after we directed our Journey to Lions: And my Sister taking the Road to Paris,
I took that of Chambery; where at last I found that Quiet, which I so long in
vain had sought for: and where I have remained ever since, with much more
Calmnesse and Tranquillity of mind, than a Woman as wretched, and as unhappy as
my self should hope to enjoy.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
Reader,
BEing desirous to make this History complete, I have ind^avoured to inform my
self of the Reasons that induced the Duchess of Mazarine to come for England
(the French Edition having given no further account of her Affairs, then till
her coming to reside at Chambery): The Motives, as I am informed, are these:
That during the Life of the late Duke of Savoy (in whose Territories she then
lived with so much satisfaction, safety, and respect) She had no thoughts of
removing from thence; but he being dead, she did not judge her self so secure;
but that she ought in prudence to find out some other place wherein she might
be at Covert from all the machinations of her Enemi^s: She therefore wisely
cast her eyes toward England, and considering the situation of that Country
so near France, that from thence she might very Commodiously solicit her
business in all peace and security; reflecting likewise upon the generosity of
our King, who is renderd by all those that do him justice, to be a most
obliging and compassionate Prince to all that put themselves under his
Protection: And moreover, being sufficiently informed of the temper of the
English Nation, whose nature it is, not only to be civil and humain to all
Strange rs in general, but also to Love, Venerate, and pay all imaginable
honors to persons of worth and quality.

Upon these considerations, she rosolved upon her Voyage hither, where she
safely arrived in December last, and has been received by the Court of England
with all the demonstrations of Honor and Civility due to her Virtues and
Quality.

THE LETTER.
I Return you again the Memoires you were pleased to send me, by a Messenger
express; fearing, lest if I should send them by the Post, they might run the
same hazard, and fall into the like Inconveniences, which at first brought
them to your hands. If things so curious and well worth the intercepting, were
to be found every time the Ministers of State should think fit to open the
Pacquets, I should not much pity the Commissaries trouble in executing their
Orders. You had reason to believe, that after the manner I had spoken to you of
Madam Mazarine, I should be extremely glad to see her History. It speaks her
own Genious, and is like her self all over. I have particularly observed twenty
things in this Relation, that none but her self could think, or express in the
manner they are penned.

Since you say you never saw her, I will satisfy your Curiosity by
endeavoring to give you a rough Draught of her Face, and Sh^pe of Body.

She is one of those lofty Roman Beauties, no way like our Baby Visaged, and
Puppet-like Faces of France; in whose Composition Nature alone triumphs over
all those Artificies and Helps, which our painted Ladies make use of, to
recommend themselves, and their borrowed Graces to the doting World, and to the
silly Adulations of their Conceited Adorers.

The Color of her Eyes has no name; it is neither Blew, nor Gray, nor
altogether Black; but a mixture of all three, which participates of all the
Excellence that is found in them; they have the sweetness of the Blew, the
Briskness of the Gray, and above all, the Fire of the Black; and what is more
wonderful, you never saw more Lovely, and generally more Pleasant, and more apt
to inflame, and yet nothing more serious, more severe and steady, when her
Thoughts are taken up with any Grave Subject. They are so lively, and so quick,
that when she looks steadfastly upon any one, which she rarely does, they think
she pierces their very Souls, and sees into the very bottom of their Hearts.
They are large, well slit, and decently rolling; full of sprightly Life and
Fire; and yet, with all these Beauties, they have nothing of Languishing nor
Passionate; as if Nature maliciously had contrived them, only to give Love and
Veneration, and be susceptible of none.

Her Mouth is neither wide, nor very little; but the motion of her Lips are
very Graceful, and Charming; and the strangest Mouths and Grimasses
wonderfully becomes her, when she imitates those that make them. Her Smiles
would soften the hardest Hearts, and ease the heaviest Sadness of mind: They do
almost quite change the Air of her Face, which Naturally is Sublime and Grave,
and spreads over it a certain Tincture of Sweetness, and Mildness, that
re-assures those Hearts, which her Charms had Alarmed, and inspires them with
that kind of unquiet Gladness, which is next of kin to a tender Inclination.

So much for her Mouth and Eyes, which are the two chief Parts of her Face,
most expressive, and principally important, to kindle a Flame and create Love;
But the rest are nothing less to be admired and adored.

Her Nose, which without doubt, is Incomparably well turned, and of a just
Bigness, gives the rest of her Countenance, a Curious, Noble, and Lofty Air,
which is infinitely taking. The Tone of her Voice is so Harmonious and
agreeable, that none can hear her speak, without being sensibly moved. The Hue
or Color of her Skin, is Naturally most lively, and so delicately clear, that
I cannot believe, any man that views it with Curiosity, can justly deny it to
be whiter than the Driven Snow. The Color of her Hair is shineing Black, but
has nothing of Harsh; to see how Naturally they Curle, and into what fine
Buckles they twine themselves, as soon as they are let loose, would make us
think without much help of Poetry, that they swelled with Pride; and, as it
were, took a Glory in the Honor they have to shade so lovely a Head: She has
the finest turned Face, that ever Limner fancied, or drew with Pencill.

The proportion of her Body, though straight a d well framed, is nothing
comparable to what it has been in delicacy of shape, before her cares made her
neglect it, and wear loose Garments. And for all that, many would fancy
themselves slender enough that were no grosser than she still is. This makes
her appear lower than she is, though in Truth she is of as becoming a height,
as any Woman can well be without being Ridiculous.

You shall see her for fifteen days together, in as many several Head-dresses,
without being able to distinguish which of them suits with her Face the best;
and those Dresses, which would make other Women look, like Witches, wonderfully
become her; so that no k^^d of C^iffing, or Head-geere, is unbecoming when she
wears it: the same thing is remarkable in her Clothes, and Attire, you must see
her lapped in a Night-Goun to Judge with more exactness of her. And it is in
this person alone that one truly may say, that Art, though never so cunningly
used, and skilfully laid, can never equal Nature.

Though she loves Perfumes, Essences, and Aromatic Scents, she never carries
any about her, which shows undeniably, that that sweetness is natural to her,
which costs other Ladies so much pains and Charges.

I had almost forgot to speak of her Neck, her Arms and Hands; but let it
suffice, that they appear to have been made and fitted for the Face. And if we
may Judge by what we see, of what we do not see, we may certainly conclude that
her Husband after having been the happiest man, is now the unhappiest in the
World. Thus she is made as to her Body; and of the Mind, you may Judge, by what
I am going to say.

Being some time since at Rome, it was my chance to be speaking of her after
the manner I heard her talked of at Paris, that she was a fine young Lady,
extreme handsome, but guiddy, inconsiderate, and extravagantly Headstrong, and
good-natured even to Folly. An Italian that knew her, hearing me give her such
a Charracter, Laughed in my Face after such a manner that I was much surprised
at it; but would never let me know why, though I had very earnestly urged him
to tell me his Reason. As these people dive further into men's Natures to find
their true and proper Character than we do in France, so this adventure gave me
a great Curiosity to see her as I passed in my return from Rome by Chambery;
though I had never much spoken to her in Paris, yet she knew me by sight, and
by name.

I was at first surprised, not to perceive in her at my coming, that eagerness
and excessive Desire to hear News, which is ordinary to those that live at a
distance from Court, when they see any that comes from thence. She received me
as unconcerned, as the most indifferent Woman of the Country could do. And
instead of breaking my Head with Questions about the People and Affairs, which
concerned her self, she entertained me only upon the account of my Journey, and
other like things, wherein none but my self was concerned: I thought my self
bound in Civility, to put her upon the Discourse of her Friends and Relations,
in Rome and Paris, since she of her self would not start the Question. I found
that Subject was not unpleasing, by the Attention she gave to what I said up n
it; she spoke civilly of all People, and with a great deal of Respect of her
Husband; but this Discourse held no longer than I continued it. She rarely
asked any Questions, and those only which civility seemed to oblige her to.

Neither could I mark in her either Curiosity or Inquisitiveness. Wondering at
her cold Indifference, I had a mind to put her upon the Discourse of the things
I thought most sensible to her, but with the Respect that was convenient,
touching her Fame, and her Fortune: But I could never hear from her the least
Complaint. Me thought I read something of Sadness in her Countenance, when her
Reputation was in Debate. But for all other Matters, she seemed to think that
blind Goddess, Fortune, a fitter Object of her Contempt, than Anger. Several
Persons of Quality, of both Sexes came in while I was there; and among others,
two or three Gentlemen that were of good Wit and ^arts.

The Ladies began to talk of the News of the Town; though the Duchess took
neither sides part, she discoursed with the same Heat as others did; the
Subject of their Conversation was a Dispute that was betwixt two eminent men,
whose Interest was equally Great, and who shared most part of that Country
betwixt them: She entered upon the Particularities, which were told her of the
Causes of their Division, weighed every little Circumstance with such nicety
and insight, as if she had not had two Millions for her Portion.

The Gentlemen, whom I before mentioned, altered the Discourse, and turned her,
whether she would or no, to talk of State Affairs, as most worthy of her
Attention and Contemplation. After every Body had passed their Verdict, she was
obliged in Complaisance to speak hers: those that differed in Opinion from her,
Vigorously urged their Reasons: the Dispute grew hot. She never defended her
Opinion, but with Reasons, of which she made those, that had not declared
themselves against her, her Judges. And I assure you I never heard any speak so
well, and with so much Submission. This is what I remarked in this my first
Visit; and what I have observed since is as follows.

It is not to be discerned of what Humor she is; and to speak properly, she
has none at all; for every individual Person that converses with her, has cause
to believe she is of his. She is not Obstinately bent upon any thing; and it is
astonishing to see her quit even those Divertisements, she seems the most
pleased with, as freely as if she were weary of them; Whence it clearly
appears, that she is impetuously carried to no one thing, and shows that this
easiness of her Temper, and Manners, does not proceed from Levity or
Fickleness, but rather from a profound Indifference for all those various
Fancies, which troubles and disquiets the minds of most People.

Her sweetness and Humanity, which above all, adorn and grace her Sex, appear
even in her most Robust Pass-times: she is as much Mistress of her Temper upon
the Road, or a Hunting. as in her Closet. The Calmness and Equality of her
Soul, is proof against all those Occasions which do unsettle and transports all
others. She laughs at all those Fidlefaddle fooling Amusements to which others
abandon themselves. Some other Women have don the same things that she she
does: But she does them another way.

All People converse in her House with a familiarity, full of Zeal and Respect;
the which nevertheless would be to her very incommode, and troublesome, if she
were less good, or less obliging. Though she be naturally very reserved, and
loves to be retired, yet generally all the Hours of the Day, are public hours
with her. The most private Recesses of her House are as open to those that come
into it, as the most common, and therefore it often happens that people come
even to her very Closet Door when she least expects any. Her Domestics, that
see none come that are not as much devoted to her as themselves, have
insensibly used themselves to let all come in, and go out, with this kind of
frankness and Liberty.

It is credible she would have it so since they permit it; for she is the Life
and the Soul of her Family, and her Understanding, her Civility, and her
obliging ways are infused, unto those that compose it, proportionably as each
ones Capacity is fitted to imitate them. There is no Convent where they lead a
more regular Life then in her Women's Apartment, whither a Page dares not
approach upon pain of my Ladies Displeasures, which is something more Terrible
than the Rod. And for the Men, they live together with that Peace and Union so
much the more Commendable, as it is most rare, and seldom to be found in great
Men's Houses.

She alone of all Women, can play with her Servants without lessening her self,
Her Presence does banish their presumption without taking away their freedom,
and it is not to be Comprehended how she can give them so much Awe, using them
with so much Familiarity, unless it be because she has so much of Grandeur in
her Carriage and all her ways. There are they, that think it strange, that she
should delight in these kind of pastimes; but who ever will take the pains to
look a little nearer, he will soon find that they are not the delight of Heart,
and that those she uses, are but so many several ways of dispelling those
afflicting Thoughts which the present state of Her Fortune Croud's upon her.

There is no private Gentleman's house more orderly, and regular than hers* and
as her pensions is very inconsiderable to make her subsist with that honor she
does, she must needs be admirably skilled in economy, and her Acts of
liberality, and Magnificence, show that her good management proceeds (from an
extraordinary strength of Reason. She neither much admires nor despises any
thing. She never showed the least disgust against the Country, nor any thing
that is in it; she loves the Recreations, Customs, and Ceremonies that are
there in use, as much as if she had been born and bred there; others would
assist at them, with marks of Complaisance, Constraint, and Destraction, which
would easily distinguish them from the rest of the Company; but she comes to
them with that Familiarity, with that Presence, and freedom of mind so
unconstrained, so constant, and so agreeable, that a stranger that should
chance to see her there, without knowing who she was, would esteem Savoy most
happy in the product of so charming a Creature. She avoids speaking of her own
Greatness and Riches, with the same care and industry, as others seek out
occasions to make people sensible of theirs.

It depends not of her way of living, amongst them; but that the Women of that
Country, that see her, may think themselves as great Ladies as she; and may
think Chambery as Noble and as Pleasant to live in as Rome or Paris: and her
Conversation there, as edifying, and as agreeable, as ever she enjoyed
elsewhere.

Never did great Lady take less care to make her Inferiors see the Difference
that is betwixt her and them; and if they do not forget it, she is the more
beholding to their Discretion, and Respect: for she takes little pains to put
them in mind of it.

She judges of her self, according to the Idea, or Opinion, she has conceived
of her own Merit, even in the most rious Applications of those that speak to
her, and she as often takes just and due Commendations, for gross Flatteri s,
as other Women take Apparent and Hypocritical Adulations, for true and
deserved Praises.

It is a great sign, that her Moderation is sincere, because she is Obstinate
in nothing; and being urged, will acknowledge truly whats^ev^r is good, or fair
in her. She is in nothing more unjust, than in not allowing what she has of
Admirable and Excellent, to be more than passable and ordinary. Though by sad
Experience she has found, that there is very little Truth, Honesty, or Probity
in the World; and that she has just cause to think ill of all mankind, yet such
is her Natural goodness, that she never applies this her bad Opinion to any
one in particular; she first excepts from the General Rule, all those in whom
she perceives any Appearance of Virtue; but is much surprised when she has
reason to believe, they did not deserve that Exception.

When she is obliged to say something she thinks may displease, a little to
sweeten and take away the sharpness of the Sense, she speaks it so, as if she
had let it fall by chance; but she thinks her self no way wronged, to believe
that she says nothing, but what she would say; it is more natural to her to be
secret, than to other Women not to be so. Moreover she is equally skilled both
in well speaking, and holding her Tongue. Though it be a great Truth, that
those that know how to speak well, know not how to hold their Tongues; and
those that can be silent, can seldom speak very well.

A Gentleman of very good parts and understanding, that had seen her, and known
her a great while, assured me that she is very much altered from what she has
been formerly, in so much that you would hardly know her again; but it is not
to be comprehended, that she should be so much changed, without allowing that
she must always have had a prodigious stock, of the Choicest, richest, and most
lasting Natural Beauty that ever Woman had. If her misfortunes have contributed
any thing to her Merit, never bad Cause produced so good an Effect.

I am Sir, etc.

FINIS.

