AN APPENDIX TO SOLOMON'S Prescription For the Removal of the PESTILENCE.

Enforcing the same from a Consideration of the late Dreadful Judgment by FIRE.

Together with some Persuasions to all, especially Suffering Christians, to
exercise and maintain Faith and Patience, Courage and Comfort, in this Dark and
Cloudy Day.

By M. M.

Printed in the Year, MDCLXVII.

The Stationer to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THis Discourse being designed as an Appendix to Solomon's Prescription, ought
indeed to be joined with it (as many of them are) the sense hereof in the
beginning having a dependence upon, and connection with the conclusion of that:
But yet for the ease of those who had bought of the former (whereof some have
been heretofore dispersed) I was willing to Print some of these single. And this
Advertisement was thought fit to be given, partly that none might wonder at the
^^bsence of a Prefatory Epistle, but chiefly to take off from the seeming
abruptness of the beginning, and of some other passages herein, which have a
reference to that forementioned Treatise, as they who have it in their hands
may easily discern.

AN APPENDIX TO SOLOMON'S PRESCRIPTION For the Removal of the PESTILENCE.
THus indeed have the Pains and Miseries of blessed Saints that have left this
life, expired together with their dying groans, whilst we poor Sinners that
are left behind, have remained to be the subjects of those farther
Calamities, which the Justice of God brings upon those that contemn^^ and
slight such expressions of it, as were designed for their Instruction and
Reformation: And that most signal expression of contemned and incensed Justice,
which has lately put us into an astonishment, out of which we are scarce yet
recovered; does methinks strongly invite me to attempt some kind of
improvement of it, in prosecution of the design which I aimed at in the
foregoing Discourse: The occasion whereof was the consideration of the heavy
Judgment of the Plague then upon us and an hearty desire that it might attain
some good effe^^ am^ngst us; and the business of it is, to represent the Sin we
have been Plagued for, and to persuade a reformation from them, which the hand
of God the^ stretched out against us did so loudly call for. And fine it has
pleased the Divine Majesty to follow that stroa^ even whilst it was yet upon
our Loins, with this second little less terrible, it will not I presume be
impertinence by way of Appendix to this latter Edition, at least (...) make so
much use of this sad providence as them farther to evidence, That Sins, even
such as I have (...) forementioned, are the true causes of our Miseries, (...)
thence to enforce my Exhortation to put away from among (...) those Sins; for
the performance of which Duty, we (...) furnished with another so strong but sad
an Argument And thoug I may be almost in despair of doing any g^^ hereby, which
shall be public and visible, yet if I might but prevent the final ruin of any
single Soul, I sh^^ be far from reckoning my labor lost: Withal I wo^^ hope
to do something toward the vindication of Div^^ Justice, in these seemingly
severe dispensations, and the quickening and comforting the hearts of his suff^^
people.

I take it for granted that the Reader is not so destin^^ of both Reason and
Religion, as to question whe^^ there be a God that rules in the World, or
whether he be Omniscient and Almighty, without whose cogni^ance and
concurrence no Creatures can move, without whose foresight and permission no
event can befall: And therefore I hope there is no need that I should concern my
self with the original of these flames, and endeavor to manifest that they
were kindled by no humane means, before the finger of God shall be acknowledged
therein. Since we know that God ordinarily makes use of second causes for the
execution of his pleasure; which whilst they execute, there is no necessity
that they should distinctly understand what they are doing, and frame designs
correspondent to those, which by his overruling power they accomplish: Though
Jehu was most intent upon his own advancement, to which the ^uine of Ahab's
family was subservient; yet God by him fulfilled the threatings denounc't
against that Family. Whilst the Assyrian King was glutting his cruelty, and
enlarging his Dominions by the conquest of the Israelites, he was a Sword in
Gods hand to accomplish his pleasure on Mount Zion. And the difference of their
intention from Gods, does no more hinder their being instruments for the
performance of his righteous Will, than his turning their actions to his own
ends, lessens the wickedness of their intentions. Even Judas and the Jews
fulfilled the determinate counsel of God. Moreover that he who has all
Creatures at his beck, even the most brutish and inanimate, which depend upon
him for their Being, Motion, and several activities, did not either prevent, or
check what he saw without his interposure would produce such and such sad
effects, does plainly speak that it was his pleasure they should be produced.
As the watchman wakes but in vain, except the Lord keep the City; so, if he do
keep it, all attempts made against it shall be in vain. How often have we had
experience of a watchful Providence (...) serving us from, or soon stopping the
mischiefs of the nature, which either Treachery or Carelessness (...) bringing
upon us. Those designs which have been contrived with as malicious a subtlety
as Hell and the Co^^clave in conjunction were Masters of, have been discovered
and frustrated; witness that our deliverance from the Popish Powder Plot, which
we yearly Commemorate, and shall never surely forget whilst the Reformation
keeps footing in England. And how often have (...) been Alarmed with the cry
of Fire, which has b^^ extinguished before we could well know where it was But
when once we have sinned our selves out of Gods ^^tion, how open do we lie to
all assaults? Being exposed to that wrath, whereof all creatures are ready
(...) obedient instruments, and which none may or can re^^ And alas! how
plainly did God appear against us in the dreadful instance of his displeasure?
Though he did not indeed immediately rain Fire from Heaven upon us, (...) there
was such a concurrence of circumstances to ma^^ it so long unquenchable and
raging, as may abund^^ convince us, that it was under the command, and ^^dance
of an higher, even an uncontroleable power May we not be allowed to say, that
it was blown (...) and kept in vigor even by the breath of the Lord, if the
winds may be so styled: upon the wings whereof the Flames being mounted, rode
as in a Chariot, trin^phing along the Streets, laughing at Engines, bas^^ Art
and Industry, mastring and overcoming all oppositions that were made against
them; in three or four (...) space destroying the Works of many hundred Years,
(...) the Wealth and Labors of many thousand Inhabitabita^^ and yet that it
should stop where and when it did, is almost as much a wonder as that it should
be stopped no sooner and both are so strange, arguing a more than ord^^
providence, that we may reasonably infer, that he who said to the proud flame,
You shall come no farther, did also say to them, Hither to shall you come. So
that we may fuly allude to that of the Prophet, Isa. 66.15. The Lord is come
with Fire, and with his Chariots like a whirlewind, to render his anger with
fary, and his rebukes with st^mes of Fire.

And if be granted that it was the Lord who brought this evil upon the City, it
will not then I hope be questioned but he has justly done it; with none I am
sure but with Atheists will it be questioned: For he who denies Gods Justice,
does in effect deny him to be God; that is, a Being infinitely perfect.
Moreover, such is Gods gracious and merciful nature, that we may be assured he
is not delighted in his Creatures sufferings, which he never inflicts but for
some just and weighty cause; yea, I may say, which they scarce ever undergo,
but when they foolishly and wilfully pluck them upon their own heads. Strange
it is that Man, to whom Self-love is a natural and inseparable property, should
contrive his own ruin: or if you say it is not ruin that he purposely
contrives, yet as strange it seems, that he who is endowed with Reason,
whereby he is capable of knowing the nature, and attending to the consequences
of things, should so greedily embrace the cause, and will not be driven from
it, whilst he hates the effect, and would fain avoid it. But as strange as
this seems, and as great a blemish as it lays upon humane nature, yet most
true it is, and too strongly confirmed by daily sad experience. Fain would men
separate what the unalterable Law of the Creator has joined together, Sin and
Misery: and though they know, or may know that they cannot have one without
(...) other, yet will they venture upon what they love, the (...) certainly
attended with that which they cannot end (...) and so most justly, They eat the
fruit of their own (...) are filled with their own devices. Thus it is in the
present case; with eagerness and delight have we procured (...) our selves
those evils which we bitterly lament. We^ that ran so earnestly to quench our
burning houses, with our own hands set them on fire. We that are now in so
perplexed and destitute a condition, have even wilfully plunged our selves into
these difficulties: for in the settled course of Gods government of the world,
there is as great a connection betwixt sin unrepented of, and sore judgments,
either in this life or the next, as betwixt throwing Granado's into an house,
and its being thereby burned to the ground. Yet mistake me not, as if I thought
that they who suffer most are the greatest sinners, and that the City was so
much more wicked than the Country, as its sufferings are greater: But only this
I dare safely say, that Sin is the great Incendiary of our Land, the Traitor
and Destroyer that has done us so much mischief, even the sins of all, and
therefore has a Judgment besaln us, wherein there are few but are concerned,
either for themselves or relations, or at leastwise, as members of that
Commonalty which suffers so greatly: and those particular persons upon whom it
has fallen heaviest, though there may be many that have deserved as ill, who
perhaps fare better than they, yet have they no reason to think that they have
fared worse than they deserved. God himself directs us in our enquiries after
the cause of such calamities, Deuteronomy. 39.21, 23, 24, 25. When any should ask why
the Land was made like Sc^^me and Gomorrah, Brimstone, Salt and Burning, the
answer was to be returned, because they had forsook the Covenant of the Lord
God of their Fathers. This Apostasy from God, is the usual cause of the
destruction of Kingdoms. So Isa. 42.24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel
to the robbers? Did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned? for they
would (...) walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his Law:
wherefore we may well say, This evil is of our selves, our own drings have
procured all these things to us.

If now you ask me, What doings? what sins those are which have provokt God
thus speedily to repeat his ^ashes? I answer, They are even such as I have
before made a rehearsal of, and which I shall not now particularly enlarge
upon; but especially our continuance in, and revolting to these sins, as it
were in despite of those remarkable Judgments, which have been employed to
turn us from them. The Pride and Covetousness, the Whoredoms and Drunkenness,
which have abounded amongst us; our cruel Animosities and Divisions,
Uncharitableness and Oppression, Contempt of God and Godliness, profanation of
Lords-daies, and neglect of his Ordinances and Worship; such as these are the
doings which have brought our miseries upon us. But which is the grand
aggravation of all; After we had been ^^ricken for these sins, were we grieved
and reformed? Nay, rather have we not revolted more and more? Did we in our
affliction acknowledge our offense, and seek the face of God? Did we return to
him that had torn, that he might real us; to him that had smitten, that he
might bind us up? Dr rather, were we not like Jerusalem of whom God complains,
Zeph. 3. That being filthy, polluted, and an oppressing City, she obeyed not
the voice, nor received correction; being ^njust, they knew no shame; and
therefore he made their Streets waste that none post by, their Cities were
destroyed there was no Inhabitant.

Were not the fears we before mentioned of a return of all kind of impiety,
too prophetical? Where alas! ^ould there be any thing seen amongst us, after
the heavy stroke of the Plague was somewhat lightened, that deserved to be
called a Reformation? How few were put to a stand thereby, and brought to
consider and (...) their ways? Though they saw their neighbor (...) friends
cut off before them, yet did they not still (...) on in their former careless
and profane course? W^^^ considerable notice was there taken of the hand of
God* Did not the most who outlived the Plague, show (...) their sins outlived
it too? did they not fall in ag^^^ with the very same violence and
unconscionable eag^^ness they were wont, to the pursuing of their world^^
designs? As if their greatest trouble was, that they (...) been so long
interrupted in their gainful trading: and well if the trade of sinning was even
that while intem^^ted. Or if there were some, who by the apprehension
approaching death, were frighted out of some gros^ sins, and into good
purposes; yet did they not soon turn to their old bent, like streams, whose
course (...) been for a while damm'd up? Many, it is to be feared who in their
trouble sought God, presently forgate (...) when that was removed; and forgot
the promises the made to him, of newness of life and better obedience in case
they should be recovered and preserved. But because generals affect not so
much; let me put it to thy (...) Confcience, Reader, for thy particular, what
influence the late Visitation had upon thee, for the changing (...) bettering
thy heart and life? Did it bring thee to re^^ upon thy self, and search out
what was the plague of (...) heart? what lust thou had harbored? what duty
th^^ had neglected? whereby thou had contributed to increasing and hastening
of Gods indignation. And (...) thou thereupon proceed to the humbling of thy
soul ^^fore God for thy transgression, and to the reforming thy life? If indeed
thou have done thus, and shall (...) on so doing, its happy for thee: but
examine well (...) there thou art not still the same man that ever thou w^^ as
proud and worldly, as slothful and sensual as (...) and as much a stranger to
God, and Christ, and heavenly things as ever. Whether it be thus with thee or
not, I cannot say, I leave that to God and thy own Conscience to judge: But I
think without breach of charity, I may say, it is thus with the most. The Rod
has left them as bad as it found them, and therefore indeed worse: Now do but
consider it impartially, whether this be not matter of high provocation to the
Divine Majesty, to see himself and his providence thus slighted by heedless
resolute sinners. For sure we must needs think that it is for some end, that he
who is wise and good lays sufferings upon a people; and he expects they should
improve them to this end; and takes exact notice whether they do so or not. No
doubt therefore but ^e expected an improvement of our late heavy Visitation,
and did observe our behavior in and after that time. He that looks down from
his heavenly Throne upon all (...) wellers on earth, has beheld our
senslesness and ^lupicity, how light we have made of the Tokens of his
displeasure; our hypocrisy and impudence, how we have kept our Fasts, and our
Sins together; he has seen ^ow regardless we have been of the design of this
Dispensation, as if it was no Call to the Inhabitants of the Land, to return to
God from whom they had backslidden, but rather that it came by chance, or
however, was no more considerable than other Diseases are; and accordingly we
have been little more concerned, except in studying how to keep our selves out
of danger; little thinking of betaking our selves to God, to get our peace made
with him, nor well conceiving of any great advantage to be had thereby. Is this
indeed a true Character of our demeanor, and could we think the Great God
would brook such insufferable contempt? When Fathers have taken the Rod in
hand, do they use to lay it down before the Childs stubbornness be conquered?
Often may we find in the story of Princes, that they will ^ther connive at
some affronts from their Subjects, or Neighbors, than attempt a redress or
punishment which they fear themselves unable to accomplish; but once this
attempt be made, they look upon themselves engaged in honor and policy to
prosecure it, least by the falour their weakness be discovered, their authority
empair'd, and the offenders more confirmed in their insolences. How would
Pharaoh have triumphed, if after a judgment or two, Moses had ceast his suit,
and left the Israelites in his hand: he wonsd even have taken himself too hard
for that God who demanded them thence, (...) then the Almighty has purpost to
reform this Nation or root it up, do we think he will give us off before this
purpose be accomplished? As he has before given precept upon precept, and with
great patience waited for the fruit thereof, so he may now justly send
Judgment after Judgment, and if one be slighted, follow it w^^ another, till
his ends are brought to pass. This is no more than what he has often threatened
to the Obstinue. Leviticus 26. Jer. 30.23, 24. Behold the whirle wind the Lord
goes forth with fury, a continuing whirlewind, it shall fall with pain upon
the head of the wicked. The fierce anger of the Lord shall not return until he
has done it and till he has performed the intents of his heart, in the later
days ye shall consider it.

But before I conclude the discovery of the probable causes of this our late
suffering, I cannot but point at the continuance of that miscarriage which I
formerly mentioned, and manifested to have so great an influence in procuring
our miseries, namely, The disabling (...) restraining so many faithful
Ministers of Christ fr^^ doing what they might, toward the preventing and
lessening of prov^king Sins, and the advancement of that Godliness which is
the welfare and establishment of a Kingdom. The ground I go upon in asserting
this to be a principal cause of our Calamities, are with me unquestionable;
and will be I think with any one else, who will first but grant, that the
overflowing of wickedness brings ruin upon a Nation; and then will soberly
confult his own reason, whether the restraint of many such who would make it
their very business to oppose the growth and spreading of sin, is not the ready
way to cause it overflow? and lastly, will but attend to his own experience,
whether this has not been (and is therefore like to be still) the effect of
the removal of the late Ministers from their employments, and of denying
admission to all other, who cannot accept of the hard conditions which are
tendered them. This, as I yet conceive, I have made beyond all contradiction
evident in the former discourse, page 80. and forward. Nor can I devise what
can be alleged to weaken that evidence. Is it not most certain that there are
many such mean places in the Countries, as are altogether destitute of
Preachers, which they, who with all their Souls would accept them, are
absolutely forbidden to supply? And is it not almost impossible but they should
be ignorant, who have no Teacher, and ungodly, who are ignorant? Again, is
there any thing of a slander in what I have there said, That there are many
places furnished only with men utterly insufficient and unfit for the Ministry,
being either intollerably negligent or ignorant, or of loose and villous Lives?
To hear of this may be unpleasant to those that cause it, but if it be true,
is it not likely to be much more displeasing to God to behold it? Have there
not been multitudes restored to the Ministry, who were once cast forth for the
notorious scanflalousnesse of their Conversation? And though they pretend, it is
like, that Loyalty was their only Crime, yet does not the continuance of their
looseness, as much justify their former ejection, as condemn their
restitution? Amongst the many hundred that have been excluded for
Nonconformity, wh^^ are there ten, may I not say one, thus proceeded against
for Profaneness? It Is lawful I hope to mention these things which almost every
body sees and talks of! E^^ those who are not at all desirous to spy blemishes
in the Church of England, as they love to speak, nor (...) corruption in her
Administrations; cannot but come this to be a most grievous one, loudly
calling for Reformation. And is it a fault to speak the sense such who are
freest from partiality and prejudice (...) then so many Shepherds are set over
the Flocks, who (...) either careless of them, or are themselves dangerous fick
of those Diseases they ought to cure, what is like (...) become of the Sheep?
and what is the ground of all (...) mischief, but the seclusion of so many Pious
and Conscientious men from the Ministry, which has made kind of necessity of
admitting such unfit persons the^^ into to supply their rooms, or of leaving
such (...) cancies as might too much shame the Authors. This am consident, is
the chief ground, together with th^^ zeal in those who preside over these
affairs for (...) strengthening of their own cause, which makes them (...) pense
very much to such as are qualified with a full Conformity, which is seldom
wanting in them who (...) little else to recommend them. Now what course co^^
be taken that was like to do more to the increase wickedness than this,
namely, to thrust into cornersful (...) who improved their urmost abilities to
counter-work (...) and instead of them, to admid such into the Polpit, wh^
practices at least were Patrons and Promoters of it (...) me not be thought
guilty of so much immodesty or prejudice, as to say they are all such, I have
before provented that mistake; but I think he may justly be arg^^ ^f both, who
denies that there are any such. But suppose here were not (which with all my
Soul I wish was more han a supposition) yet I am still of opinion, that the
lencing of so many Ministers, at least as eminent for Piety, Learning, and
Diligence in their employments, as those who succeed them; and preventing so
many others, has been as great a check and hindrance to true religion and
Godliness, and of as fatal consequence (...) the souls of thousands, as any
thing that ever befell ^s since the Reformation. Could there be a readier ^ay
to expose men to death, than in time of some great ^ortality, in a City where
the one half of the Physi^ans are Galenists, the other Chimists, to issue out
an order, that none should practice except they who would approve the method of
Gallen; or the contrary: whereby he half must needs be rendered useless, in a
season where here would be work for all, though a thousand more? and was it
less dangerous to the Souls of men to have (...) many Physicians removed, when
neither the Patients or their Diseases were few or inconsiderable? It was ^^t
then I hope either for want of consideration or cha^^y, that I before took the
boldness to suggest, that the reformation of this disorder, was one lesson,
which the ^od then laid on us, ought to teach us.

And since that time has the case been altered, have atters been mended
amongst us? Need I tell the ^orld that they have not? Is there any man such a
ranger in England, that he knows not what has been one since then? How new
ambiguous Oaths, as likely (...) be resused as the former, have been framed and
im^^s'd, so that they who were before cast forth of their employments, and
stripped of their maintenance depending thereupon, must now be driven from
Cities, Towns corporate, and the places where they have been formerly ^mploy'd,
except they would embrace these. And yet what new crimes, to deserve such
punishments, (...) were guilty of, we are yet to learn, except this was (...)
That, through the providence of God, and the charity his people, they were not
starved to death, or into compliance something worse. I am almost afraid (...)
being offensive, whilst I do but nakedly relate this ^^tible dealing with
such, for many of whom I dare confidently say, their Innocence is as great as
their Sufferings; the very rehearsal thereof seems so strange, especially if we
consider that doleful circumstance of time wherein it was set on foot. Whilst
we were all smaning, amongst other sins, for our unchristian division even then
instead of healing our Breaches, and the L^^ at once, were some preparing
lashes for their Breth^^ who should survive; that if they were left on earth,
the might not have a comfortable and quiet habitation it, so far as they could
hinder it. Did they, whom (...) may reasonably suppose the chief promoters of
this design, imagine, that they had offended by too great gentleness, and
therefore must expiate that fault by th^^ severity? Alas, they need not have
feared it! Or d^^ they indeed take these their Brethren to be the Pe^^ and
Plague-sores of the Nation, by purging of wh^^ from Towns and Cities, they
thought to atone Heave and purge the Land? They should not methinks be^^
uncharitable. But yet we find the best of men have been as heavily censured.
The Apostles themselves were taken to be the (...), I Cor. ^.13. such kind of
vile persons as were commonly pit^^ upon for the lustration of their Cities, in
times of gre^^ Calamity, And as their censure, so their conditi^^ was not much
unlike; for we find, v. 11. They ha^^ certain dwelling place.

May we not by the way, lawfully take notice of the mercifulness and wisdom of
that Providence, whi^^ ^urn'd what was meant for his servants harm; into their
good, even their temporal good; by something an harsh, but it seems a friendly
voice, calling to them to go to Pella before Jerusalem was destroyed. It might
seem a ^eice of violence which the Angels offered to lingering Lot, when they
laid hands on him to bring him away, Genesis 19.16. But if he had at first thought
so, it was but (...) very little while before he had sufficient ground to
acknowledge, what we read in the same verse, That the Lord being merciful to
him, brought him forth, and set him without the City. Who would not in such a
dark and mumble world as this, give up himself without repining to he conduct
of that Providence, which intends our good ^y those very ways which seems most
to coutradict it, and which will safely lead us through all the various ^loomy
turns of Life, and at length accomplish the ^ast desires of all those who
sincerely serve, and entirely ^esign up themselves to it. When as they who are
en^ag'd in any work, which is contrary to his Will who ^ules the World, will
find themselves basled and o^^ercome even when they think they succeed and
prevail. Oh how miserably do we often find the Wise men of the ^orld infatuated
in their policies, whilst they pull down he Walls to secure the City. When the
Pharisees ^onceiv'd or pretended a fear, that if Christ should be ^et alone
and gather so many followers after him, the ^omans (as imagining, it is like,
that they designed a re^ellion) would come upon them and take away their
^ation; the course they took to prevent this danger, ^^y conspiring against the
life of our blessed Lord, proved a means of bringing upon them those Romans
which they feared, and by them destruction to their City and Nation. The
Sodomites, to whom the precise life and galling reproofs of Lot were as much a
vexation, as their wickedness was to his righteous Soul, who were extremely
impatient that an Upstart and Stranger should take so much upon him, fared
never the better for having this thorn plucked out of their side; and had at
leng^^ reason to be convinced, that not his Neighborhood, b^^ their contempt
of it, with their other impieties, we^^ most prejudicial to them. Never yet did
Town or C^^ fare worse for an holy praying people: Swearing, and Cu^^sing, and
Conventicles of Good-fellowship, and Profaneness, are like enough to bring
mischief upon the places where they are practiced, but humble ferve^^ prayer,
be it in public, or in private, in a Synagogue, in an Upper Room, never did
nor will do; but rather (...) restraining of prayer before God may probably do
it. Aaron and Hur should have laid stones upon Moses hands, to weigh them down,
instead of supporting them no wonder if the hands of their Warriors had been
weakened, and Amalek had prevailed: Or if, when (...) stood in the Gap to
intercede for the Israelites, the should have plucked him out of it, no wonder
if (...) had soon overwhelmed them. Had they gone about (...) prohibit, or any
way restrain the offering up the Ince^^ of prayer to God, it had been but just
and natural (...) he should have made the smoke of his fury and their ^^ments
to ascend.

Need I mention it to any knowing Englishman was a kind of Mourning Garb our
Nation has lately wo^^ and in what a disconsolate posture she has sat?
Nation so gladded by the Restoration of her Right Magistrate, our dread
Sovereign, and equally sadned the removal of a faithful Ministry; than which
sc^^ any thing could have been devised more to the grie^^ and even breaking the
hearts of such, to whom their terests of their souls are dearer than all
worldly thing And such, though they may not be the richest nor (...) greatest,
yet without question they are the best part any Kingdom where they dwell. But
yet I must confess, have met with very few comparatively, of what spirit
inclination soever, that have seemed pleased with these ^ansactions, but
acknowledge that gentleness and bro^^erly forbearance had been more suitable to
the nature (...) that Christian Profession which we all own, and more
advantageous to its interest, which we all pretend to de^^gn. Undoubtedly then
the blessed God, who has a ^uicker and more tender sense of his own glory and
the concerns of his servants, than the most holy and compassionate man on earth
can have, is not well pleased to ^^hold the violence and harshness with which
they are ^llow'd, though it may be under pretense of doing him ^rvice. Though
they that hate their Brethren, and cast ^em forth, may say, Let the Lord be
glorified, yet they shall be nevertheless ashamed of this hatred, this
expresson of it, and the pretenses wherewith they varnish it, ^hen the Lord
himself shall appear for the vindication and joy of those who for his Names
sake were contemn^d and abused. And although that great day of discovering
truth and doing Justice be yet to come, when all Vi^ors shall be plucked off
from persons and things, such that ^ow render Vices Honorable, and Virtues
Criminous, is the prosperous please to vote them, and when all being manifested
to be what they are, shall be treated as they deserve; yet even before that
day, there are now many times such strokes in that Providence which orders
humane affairs, as to a careful beholder may somewhat discover what those rules
are by which God is pleased ordinarily to proceed in his Administrations. And
such Essays and expressions of Justice there are mingled with Mercy, as may
serve to bring the ignorant and secure to consider their ways, and to reclaim
the considerate. And have not Gods Dispensations toward us been such as speak
him to have a Controversy with us? Have we not found that it is an easier
thing to silence his Missters than his Judgments? Every man's own sense is best
able to inform him what our flourishing and prosperity has been since that
time. Scarce a sensible Christian but to his grief observes how lamentably the
intere^^ of Religion has declined, and scarce any carnal man ^sensless but
complains that our worldly prosperity had done so. Certainly that all-seeing
God, who is a love of Holiness, will not be mocked with appearances and glorious
pretenses. It Is not the flourishes of Order, Decency and Uniformity, that will
be accepted instead (...) downright Godliness, and true Charity and Unity. T^
reform a Church, and raise it out of its ruins, impli^^ something more than
either to repair and beautify stately Edifices, though Consecrated ones; or to
give a little splendour to external service, and seduce some petty circumstances
of worship which had been disused: It Is (...) much sense to say, that he
recovered a man to life, wh^^^ instead of a plain Coat put him on a gaudy one,
which perhaps may not be so serviceable neither. Nor is the welfare and glory
of a Church to be measured by the wealth, pomp and power of its Governors (for
(...) we know who would carry it from all Competitors) (...) by its attainment
of those ends for which it was insti^^ted: We use not to count that the best
Flock which (...) diseased and scabbed, though the Shepherds may be (...) and
at ease; nor is that Hospital in the best order, which Governors and
Physicians have the greatest Revenue and liberty to do what they list, whilst
the sick (...) wounded are neglected, and perish, but that where^ these are
most carefully looked to, and best healed: A^^ that is the best School where the
Masters are most (...) and painful, and the Scholars make the best progress
(...) earning and good manners, not that where the Maste^ re best paid, and do
least, though such as these are (...) likeliest to get their silly Scholars
love. Plainly then, the blessed Redeemer of Mankind, the Founder and Lawgiver
of the Christian Church, has appointed it to be as a School, wherein Believers
by the teachings of his Spirit, Word and Ministers, are to be trained up into
(...) fitness for the high and heavenly glory; as an Hospital wherein lapst
souls are to be healed of the diseases contracted by the fall, that they may be
made meet for the present service and future enjoyment of God: wherefore we
must needs conclude, that is the happiest and most glorious Church, where these
designs are most faithfully regarded and successfully carried on, even where
sin and wickedness is most vigorously set against, discouraged and suppressed,
and all real goodness is most promoted and farthest spread; where the several
members are diligently instructed, and carefully looked after, so that they grow
in sound knowledge, faith, humility, zeal, and every other grace, and live
together in mutual peace, love and righteousness, adorning the Gospel, and
glorifying their heavenly Father by such fruitful, beautiful conversations. But
wherever these things are less regarded, ^et there be never so much empty
noise of Order and Settlement upon sure and ancient foundations, of a
flourishing Clergy, and excellent Constitutions, because perhaps they all read
over the same prayer, or wear their Coats all of a color; yet whilst I believe
the Gospel, which tells us the nature and ends of this holy Society, I shall
never believe that to be the best ordered Church which falls so vastly short
thereof, even that where the Life and Power of Religion apparently decays, and
ignorance, Inkewarmness, and profaneness live, thrive, and overrun the
members. I think its far better to see the Physicians in times of great
sickness busily running to rescue the diseased from the jaws of death, though
perhaps not with so much formality and orderliness as might at another time
seem requisite, than to have the^ take state upon them, and busy themselves in
devis^^ and prescribing Orders about their Administrations the make more for
their own interest, or at least for the h^mor of some of them, than for the
good of their Patients; especially if they should proceed to make it (...)
Crime for those that may be as skilful and faithful (...) themselves, to
endeavor the saving of their Neighbo^^ lives, except in every punctilio they
comply with their humors. But to do thus in matters that concern the
everlasting life and death of immortal souls, is such a piece of bold
selfishness and uncharitableness, as will scarce be well taken by him who died
for them. And whether there have not been such limitations and restraints (...)
upon many whose business and office it was to overti^^ souls, and thereby such
injury done to their precious charge, let any unbyast Reader, who knows how
affair stand amongst us, determine; as also, if it be so, whether such actions
must not needs tend much to the provocation and dishonor of God, being
publicly owned and justified, and the whole Nation involved in the Guilt,
(...) far as it can concur to a single action; and whether therefore the
redress of this may not reasonably be thought one grand Admonition of the
several calami^^^ which have of late like waves com'n riding one upon (...)
neck of another.

And now at length, what as to this particular shall (...) the fruit of these
flames that have burnt up the Glory^ our Land? Shall they not burn up the
dishonor of (...) too? Shall not our animosities and contentions, (...)
earthly carnal zeal which has fed upon our spirits, (...) almost consumed our
vitals, with all our passionate (...) flammations and heart-burnings, be thrown
into this (...) never to revive and live more? Oh would to God (...) they
might, I should not then stick to call it a Blessed Fire, which should consume
and carry away so much of a worse, even of Hell it self, from amongst us. Oh
happy were we, if our Dross and Tin were but thus burnt off, that we might come
out of the fire so well refined I That all our stubborn Spirits were but melted
and softened into such mutual compliances as beseems Christian Brethren. But
alas! what mortal power can produce such blessed effects? What earthly
instrument can bring about such an heavenly work? No, this is left for
Omnipotence to accomplish. Good Lord, then let the power of thy Grace set in
with thy Providence, and let thy Spirit do that, which neither Plague, Fire
nor Sword, Mercies nor any Means by themselves can: Even to work the Spirits of
all those who call themselves thy Servants and Children, into a gentle, loving
temper, becoming that Profession and the nearness of their Relation; that they
may with faithfulness and resolution, join hands in that work, to which they
are all engaged, and give each other what assistance and encouragement they are
able, for the subversion of Satan's Kingdom, and the carrying on those designs
of mercy to Mankind, for which thou did create, and do uphold this world,
and sent'st thy Son into it, and keep'st thy Gospel and Ministers in it.

Is there any thing in this request, to which all true Christians may not
readily give their Amen? Why then should not all who own that Name, contribute
their endeavors to the obtaining of that, which they profess to desire? How
lamentable and strange a thing is this, that when we are all agreed, or seem
to be so, about the chief end which we ought to pursue, and the principal
means conducing thereto, that yet we should stand at so hot and hurtful a
difference about matters, wherein one would think it impossible for rational
Men to differ. Are we not all agreed, that the honor of God, and salvation of
Souls, ought to be the principal end of our endeavors? And that the bringing
of men to know, believe, and obey the Gospel, is the only (...) for the
attaining of this end? And that the delivering explaining, and inculcating upon
them, the truths and duties of this Gospel, by a Ministry fitted for that work,
is the ordinary means for the begetting of Faith and Obedience? And after all
this, shall it be (...) controversy, whether many of those who are th^^
fitted, and acknowledged to be so, shall be kept off from this, so needful,
so important a work, rather than to be dispenst with, as to some such
Subscriptions and practices, which they that refuse, dare not comply with, for
fear of sinning; and which they that impose, know they may lawfully dispense
with, being matter of that nature, that the most zealous Assertors of them,
will not affirm they are of absolute necessity, nor that they will countervail
the loss of Souls, which, it is (...) too evident, the rigid imposition of them
does and will occasion. Will nothing that has yet befaln us, help to clear our
Judgments and settle our affections, so far as to end this controversy? Are
not our suffering yer great enough to meeken and bow our spirits, and drive us
together? Shall they not now at last, work the same happy effect upon us, in
reference to these differences, that Persecution and Imprisonment did upon
those famous Martyrs, Ridley and Hooper, in a business (...) the like nature.
The good man, who was before so bo^ in pressings Conformity, soon put off his
harshness, as appeared by his loving Letter, when he saw his Brother a Prisoner
for the same common truth with himself. They who may quarrel in the Palace, are
made friends in a Prison, and embrace each other at a Stake. And they who
cannot agree, so much as about wearing the same clothes, are soon reconciled
when they wear the same chain. And should we be reduced to the like case with
them, I am very apt to believe we should then be of the same relenting temper.
They who have been guilty of so much rigor, would then, I hope, be ashamed and
grieved to remember how they had formerly made those to suffer, who are now
become their Brethren in suffering. May we not say, Oh wholesome Persecution,
whose fetters often prove bonds of peace, whose pressures always that pride, and
heal those breaches, that would not by any other means be healed? But what
shall neither Reason, Interest nor Conscience persuade that, which a more
smarting Rod would whip us to? Will nothing ^ut ravenous Wolves drive Christ's
Flock together? Will ^o other Fire but that of Martyrdom, devour our unnatural
heats? Oh why should we provoke God to use ^arsher means for the accomplishment
of that, which ^ee sees his more favorable dispensations will not produce?

That it is nothing sinful or unreasonable that is requested, I appeal to the
Petition for Peace, to which I before referred, as containing the sum of their
desires, whose cause I plead. Will it be a sin to grant that Indulgence, which
for some time his Majesty by his Declaration did; and which he was pleased
also to give assurance, he should consent to have it by Act of Parliament
confirmed, when any Bill to that purpose should be proposed; and which
moreover, it was publicly reported, he was graciously inclined since to have
given, had not they, whom (...) least beseem'd to be enemies of tenderness and
charity, prevented it. In a word, can any thing be more reasonable, than that
they who profess themselves Officers (...) the Church of Christ, to govern it
according to his Orders, and to carry on his Ends, should so far provide or his
honor, and the necessities of Souls, as to give way (...) such to Preach his
Gospel, who are competently qualitied for, and earnestly desirous of that
Employment; and that upon such conditions as Christ has in his Laws appointed,
and the Apostles in their times required (...) those whom they admitted to this
Function? Let (...) that are Lovers of truth and peace, determine whether (...)
be not a modest and just proposal; and whether it (...) not be something else
than Conscience and a Zeal for Religion, that can cause any to reject it; this
God will (...) his time determine. I mention Church Officers, be cause, by
their mediation, this Liberty is most likely to be obtained, as by their
interposure, principally it ha^ been taken away and hindered: which
consideration, be side the nature of their Office and Trust, methin^ should
engage them to do what they may toward it is recovery.

And was there now but this much granted, though (...) dare not say it would
bring us all that outward prosperity which is desired, yet I am confident, it
would very made change this sad face of things that nowappears amongst us, and
would revive a languishing spiritless Nation, and (...) much expel those
ominous fears, and mis-givings of mind, wherewith we are so generally seized;
For I (...) well assured it would rejoice the hearts of thousands of (...)
Majesty's most faithful Subjects, who though they sho^^ be sed with the bread
of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet would more cheerfully bear it,
were their Teachers (...) removed out of the corners, whereinto they have been
diven, so that they might freely see and hear them. And (...) may reasonably
suppose, that an action which tend^^^ much to the honor and service of
Religion, even to (...) curing of our divisions, the easing of the burdened,
(...) not only to the pleasing of sober and good people, but (...) the
profiting of the bad, will be very acceptable to God and the most likely way to
procure that favor, which will secure a Person or Kingdom from being
miserable whatever befall them.

And what is it, can we imagine, that should preve^^ that Grant, which is in
self so highly reasonable, and attended with so many desirable consequences? I
know not what can be objected, but that common pretense, That this is the way
to cast us all into confusions and disorders: To which I have before
sufficiently answered. Why, I beseech you, should acts of Clemency breed
Confusion, where those of rigor have been received with patience? Why should
they be thought so foolish and disingenuous, as to become disorderly by the
favor of their superiors, who have had so much Conscience, as to be peaceable
in the want of it? Especially since this favor is of that nature, that it
makes them little more capable of doing mischief, if they were inclined to it,
but might do much to prevent or take away such inclinations, if there was any
danger. And how can that breed Confusion, which will do so much to the
satisfying of minds, the uniting of hearts, and so to the strengthening of our
hands. But to secure all, what can be desired more than is before intimated?
viz. That they who share in this Liberty, bind themselves by the most plain
and sacred Oaths, not to endeavor the disturbance of either Church or State,
but the peace of both. And if any be indeed found guilty of acting to the
contrary, let them bear the punishments due to Sedition and Perjury.

Fain now would I hope that there are none so fully bent on their own Wills,
that they are absolutely resolved, no offered Reasons nor Entreaties shall
prevail with them, to depart an inch from their undertaken course. Let us leave
that as a property of the most singular Church, amongst the many other
Prerogatives which makes her stand by her self, to justify and maintain all
her Errors, least she should be thought once to have erred; Proclaiming her
Obstinacy, instead of disproving her Fallibility. But they who make none of
that ridiculous and proud claim, may well enough avoid those intanglements,
which are the pernicious but necessary consequences thereof. As the frailty of
M^^ exposes him to mistakes, so it is the honor of a Christian to acknowledge
and retract them. Nor will any (...) hope, conceit themselves pen't up in such
unhappy circumstances, that they have occasion to complain, (...) Adrian the
sixth did, That being Pope, he could do link good though he really desired it,
because he could attempt (...) considerable piece of Reformation, but he found
it would ^^^ther disoblige the Grandees of his own Court, empair his Revenue,
or some way or other weaken the Papal interest. A^ that I am pleading for, is
but a Liberty for able, godly, peaceable men, to Preach the plain and pure
Gospel^^ Christ, which it is his command should be made known to every
Creature: And wherein this can prejudice any person or party, that maintain not
designs contrary to (...) or advanced above this Gospel, I am utterly to seek.
(...) there be any whose endeavors shall be found more (...) the upholding
and propagating of a Faction, than (...) Godliness; I am far from wishing them
any such favor as might capacitate them the more successfully to (...)
themselves. But yet since unhappily there are so many petty differences, and
notes of distinction amongst us, let every man have so much Justice, as not to
be presently condemned as Factious, because he is angerly called is by another,
from whom in some small things he may dissent: For if such censures may be on
all hands admitted as current proofs, I fear we shall find few i^ nocent
through the whole Land. Of contrary opinion its impossible to hold both, and in
matters of practice which are under debate, we must either do them (...) leave
them undone. And thus we cannot avoid the appearance of being on one side,
which, be it what it will the contrary part (the most rigid of them at least)
will be apt to style it a Sect, and those Sectaries which adhere to it, because
not thoroughly siding with them: And how the most Catholick-spirited Christian
can well please both, is not easy to conceive, displease them he may far
easier. It is not my business now to enquire into the nature of those things
wherein we differ, so to attempt a dicision, who is in the right, and who is in
the wrong; and thence to infer the equitableness of Liberty to any sort of men,
upon supposition of their being in the right: But it is enough for my design to
suppose (what methinks should not, by any that are sober and charitable, be
denied me, to wit.)

(1) That at present the conditions of access to the Ministry, are of that
nature, that it is possible for good Men Conscientiously to dissent from them;
And

(2) That there may lawfully be such abatements made as these Dissenters will
comply with.

(3) That notwithstanding the differences that may after this remain in
opinion, we may live together in love, and jointly promote the Great ends of
the Gospel: From which premises, I presume it is a very fair and natural
inference, That such who will sincerely apply themselves to the advancing of
these Ends, and will engage not to break the Peace about any inferior points
wherein they differ, ought not to be looked upon as Factious and Schismatical;
nor as such to be hindered from employing themselves to the best advantage, for
the honor of their Lord, and the benefit of his People. Let him then only be
accounted Schismatically inclined, who, for the propagating of his own
by-opinions, and the advancement of his Party, will neglect and contradict the
weightier duties of Religion; not looking so much to the saving of souls, as
getting himself Proselites; undervaluing, censuring, and abusing all that are
not (...) his own way; for such as these, be they who they will and let them
pretend what they will: I open not (...) mouth in their vindication, but will
rather heartily join with our Letany, in praying that from all such Schism in
Opinion, affection or practice, the Lord would deliver (...) and from those who
are incurably tainted therewith, the Good Lord deliver both this and all other
Churches through the Christian World.

If it should be demanded by what farther note we shall know the Factious from
those that are not so, since fine words and fair pretenses are a very fallible
and insufficient Criterion? To such I answer, That Justice and Common Reason
will tell us, that the professions, promises and oaths of men, must be taken
for the (...) discovery of their hearts and intentions, till they shall have
utterly forfeited their credit; and when it shall be evident, not by general
charges of whole parties, (...) by particular proof, that any have done so, let
them never more be trusted, till their Penitence and Reformation may have
redeemed that forfeiture; yet let not the Innocent suffer for their sakes, nor
let them be thought to agree with them in all their miscarriages, who may agree
with them in a particular Opinion, which is the (...) uncharitable censure that
can be, except it may be proved that those miscarriages are inseparable from
th^^ Opinion. If any man should attempt to murder (...) Pope, upon pretense
that he is not Head of the Church the Guilt of his Fact is not chargeable upon
all that (...) of the same Opinion, since this attempt was not the necessary
consequence of that Opinion, but of the weakness of his discourse, or some
carnal Motive: Why the^ should the peaceable bear the blame of other men's
disorders, which they could not help, nor did contribute (...)

But if there should be any, who whilst they zealous ^^veigh against all
parties, shall yet be found so sollici^us for their own, that they will admit
of nothing as a ^est of peaceableness and Piety, but the profession of
compliance with them, even in those things which are ^he grounds of difference:
I fear this their course will ^^e so far from being serviceable to the recovery
of the Churches Peace, that it will prove one of the greatest ^^structions of
it that could be thought of. And if such shall be jealous of all that refuse
the conditions they offer them, as if they went about to set up for themselves,
and will accept of no protestations to the contrary, but ^ill endeavor as far
as they well can, to keep them out ^f a capacity of doing God service, least
they should undermine some interest of theirs, they do too plainly ^^ll the
world, that they have got something which they ^alue at an higher rate than the
propagating of the Gospel, and saving men's souls; since by their good will
nothing shall be done in this work, but by those who will ^arry on those other
ends of theirs. This is such a Demonstration, as mere pretenses to the contrary
are too weak to confute: But happy will it prove for us all, if ^nce we become
so wise as to believe, that there is no greater nor truer self-interest, than
to be faithful to the Cause of our Common Lord, and diligent in his service,
according to our several capacities: So that all ^hey who own themselves in
Commission under him, may desire and employ their power to no other end than
(...) procure obedience to his Laws, for which purpose alone his Servants are
Authorized, as the King Deputes Officers to see his Laws executed. This is
their Office and their Honor, to be the happy Instruments of bringing many
souls to know and accept of Jesus Christ as their Lord and Savior; as it is
the business and the honor of (...) Ambassador to accomplish those designs of
his Prince for which he received his Commission and instructions, whereas to
neglect these for some private ends of (...) own, would speak him rather a
Factor for himself, (...) a Minister of his Prince. And when Christ's Ministers
do heartily believe this, they will never have a jealous of knowledge and
godliness (by whomsoever they (...) furthered and spread) as if they could
receive prejudice thereby, since then it will be their only desire (...)
greatest delight that these may thrive, and they (...) will join their industry
with them in this blessed wor^^ cannot but be dear to them, notwithstanding any
lesser differences betwixt them. Holy Paul rejoiced in that Christ was preached,
even when it was done by some (...) of no good principle; and why was this, but
because (...) that he proposed to himself was that Christ might be preached. It
was not his Reputation in the World, (...) any advancement that he sought for,
but that the Kingdom of his Master might be enlarged, and so this went forward
nothing could displease or hurt him. Oh how (...) then may we imagine that he
was from forbidding (...) that named themselves Followers of Cephas or Apoll^,
(...) opposition to him, to preach this Gospel. Happy (...) shall we be, if
this true Christian spirit of meekne^, self-denial, and untainted zeal for Gods
honor, (...) and prevail amongst us: But if Religion be made an instrument of
State, or a means for the attaining of some carnal ends, and the Church be
governed by such Quirks (...) Policy as Statesmen use in Civil Administrations,
the^ indeed its likely that what, according to the plain R^^ of the Gospel,
would be very serviceable, shall yet (...) rejected, because it agrees not with
Politics. (...) sometimes even ignorance and ungodliness shall rather be
suffered to grow and increase, than those means premitted for their extirpation
which have not a tendence to such private ends, or suit not with the Methods
which men too profoundly wise have proposed to themselves (...) pray God
preserve all amongst us from being guilty of so much selfishness, so little
true policy. And to draw to (...) end, must profess I cannot see how they can
absolve themselves of this guilt, who being entrusted with the management of
Church affairs, shall not improve their power to redress this grievance whereof
I have been complaining, and to obtain that just liberty for the Ministers of
Christ, for which I have been petitioning; which its probable might be attained
with ease, were they but barely willing that it should be granted.

But if they prove deaf to all the most humble and importunate entreaties, and
continue the restraint of whose who are conscious to themselves of no other
designs (in the main) but such as Christ and his Apostles had when they were
upon earth, even to instruct and concert careless sinners, and build up
believers; still pro^uring sufferings to such, who by their good will would
^isplease no man, if it be possible to please God and them too, (and some such
there are) I shall then look upon these strange proceedings as boding yet more
and ^reater mischief to this torn and bleeding Nation: Will God have mercy upon
that people who will show ^o more mercy to one another? From the day of our
^eace-making and hearty Reconciliation, if ever such (...) desired day shall
come, I shall reckon the beginning of Englands Restoration to her happiness
and glory; ^ut before then I shall have little hopes of either. I am not so
vain as to make pretense to any Prophetic Spirit; but when I consider the
reason of the thing, the Nature of God manifested in his Word, and the course
^f his Providence, I can hardly think that Nation will ^e very prosperous,
which shall do so much to dis-ingage themselves from his favor, by
discouraging so many whom he has fitted for, and sent out into his service;
giving such a stop to the course of his Gospel, whereby the Inhabitants should
be brought to that obedience (...) his Commands, which has the blessings of
this (...) and that to come, entailed upon it. Moreover, (...) evident to any
considerative beholder, that Pope^^ (...) phaneness, and Infidelity, are
combined against us, (...) chiefs near akin, and being united under one Common
Head, go about seeking whom they may devour: and (...) instead of joining
strength against them, we continue those divisions which weaken it, reason and
experience will tell us, we shall hereby lie much more open (...) their fury.
And to little purpose will it be for men (...) declaim earnestly against these
growing evils, (...) they nourish the certain causes of them; and to (...) tend
themselves desirous to have contentions cease, (...) wickedness reformed from
amongst us, whilst they ^^dustriously keep off the most effectual means for
(...) Concord and Reformation. And if they persist in the resolutions, how
little reason have we to expect (...) our fasting and praying should prevail
for mercy, (...) in order thereto, God shall be so far entreated by (...) as to
abate that obstinacy, and remove that Veil of partiality and self-love which
prevent it, wherever (...) are to be found upon us. He himself assures us,
Isa. (...) that it is not the formality of Sackcloth and Ashes, (...) hanging
down the head like a Bull-rush, that will be accepted of those who continue to
find their pleasures, (...) exact their labors; or (as the Margent has it)
(...) things wherewith they grieve others. But the Fast (...) he has chosen
is, to loose the Bands of wickedness, to und^^^ heavy burdens, to let the
oppressed go free, and to break ^^ry yoke, ver. 6. To the same purpose he
speaks, Zech (...) when they enquired concerning their Fasts, whether (...)
should still keep them or not; his answer was, That (...) had not fasted to him
that while; but rather they should (...) ^earkned to the former Prophets, which
cried to them (...) ^^^rusalem was inhabited, and in prosperity, and should
have ^^^^^ted true Judgment, and shown mercy and compassion ^^rry man to his
Brother, and not have been guilty of oppression, nor of imagining evil in their
hearts against their brother. And when, upon Jonah's preaching, the Ninevites
^^pt such a very strict and solemn Fast, which being ^^yned with Reformation,
was doubtless acceptable to ^^od; yet its observeable how he seems not to take
no^^e of this in comparison of their turning from sin, ^^n. 3.10. And God saw
their works, that they turned from their evil way, and God repented of the evil
that he had said that he would do unto them, and he did it not.

And when at length we shall be persuaded to celebrate such a Fast as is before
described, we may the ^etter hope for those blessed fruits of the same, which
are promised in the 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12. verses of that 58. (...) Isaiah; the
last whereof is so exceeding seasonable, both in the literal and spiritual
sense, to our present sad condition; viz. That they should build the old waste
places, and raise up the foundations of many generations, and should (...)
called the Repairer of the Breach, the Restorer of paths to ^^ell in. And I
pray God grant that the pious and successful endeavors of those who are in a
capacity amongst us, may procure them these truly Honorable Titles.

After all that I have said, I know it is easy for those who conceive
themselves accused, to wipe off all by asserting, That it is not any severity of
theirs which gives just ground of complaint, but rather the complainers may
thank their own stubbornness and self-will for whatever smart they feel; and
that they themselves are guilty of whatever mischiefs have com'n by their
Deprivation, who would rather forsake their employments than their humors. But
to this, I conceive, I have said enough for the satisfaction of those who are
willing to take any. And if I had said no more than this (which is all I shall
(...) it might seem sufficient, to wit, that I have been pleasing only for
their liberty who are willing to take (...) most solemn oath, lawfully tendered
them, that (...) a fear of displeasing God, and damning their souls, which
hinders their continuance in, or entrance upon the Ministry, on the conditions
now required; and moreover will as strictly bind themselves, if more favoural
terms may be allowed them, not to abuse this favor, (...) the fomenting either
of Sedition or Schism; but (...) faithfully devote themselves to that work
which is on (...) sides acknowledged to be their duty, and will study (...)
preserve and promote the peace and prosperity both (...) Church and State. I
leave it then to the judgment (...) any charitable man, whether such as these
are to be condemned of obstinacy; and where the guilt is like to (...) if upon
this pretense, their requested freedom of serving God in his Church shall
still be denied them. (...) moreover, I could wish (as I have said formerly)
that the^ who oppose their Brethren in this request, would put (...) to their
own consciences, whether they durst make (...) same solemn professions, that
they thus deal with the^ for fear of displeasing God, and wounding their
Conferences?

I may perhaps be thought guilty of very great ^a^^^ness and petulancy for
speaking at this rate; and (would you believe it?) even of Faction and
Sedition, for arguing too plainly for peace and equity: but for that (...) am
at a pass; for be it known to thee, Reader, I consider who is present with me
whilst I am writing, and before whom I must shortly give account of these and
all other my words; according to which Christ tells (...) we must either be
justified or condemned; and even (...) consideration prompts me to write what I
do; so that (...) is not the fear of displeasing men which can deter (...) from
it; since also I can cheerfully fore-think of that (...) wherein this very
controversy shall be equally and ^^^ly decided, at the Bar of an Omniscient
Holy God. Wherefore to this God, I absolutely refer my endeavors, and the
cause on whose behalf they are, as knowing if it be just and pious, it is his
concern infinitely ^^ore than man's; and he will in his own time (which ^e ought
quietly to wait) so far own and advance it as (...) sees best. Upon which
supposition, I dare boldly conclude, in the name of all those worthies, who are
conscienciously engaged in it, with that of the Prophet, The Lord is our Judge,
the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is (...) King, he will save us.

And now methinks, the sad countenances of impover^^nt Citizens, especially of
sincere Christians, whom ^^^losses can make poor, nor should make sad; call for
something to be offered by way of consolation. But I (...) for a while
interrupted in this design by a far sadder ^^^ht, even the merry looks of
careless unreformed sinners, who seem so little affected with present miseries,
(...) apprehensive of any farther danger, as if they had no relation to God,
nor the rest of the world; as if they were neither concerned with his
Providence, nor with other men's Calamities: Men so impatient of an
intermission in the enjoyment, or pursuit of their brutish sensualities, that
they can reckon no time seasonable for ^^^iousness and sobriety; but absolutely
conclude against them, let the premises be what they will. If they dream of a
long and prosperous life, they bid their ^^uls take their ease, eat, drink, and
be merry, having goods ^^d up for many years; or if they fear their days may
be ^^or^ned, and their mirth spoiled, yet they resolve to ^^ve it whilst they
may, and cry, Let us eat and drink, (...) to morrow we shall dye: Those are
such that account ^^litariness and Consideration, the greatest miseries that
^^n befall them, and whilst they are not reduced to a necessity of these, they
escape well enough, what (...) betides the world. There Is nothing they seem to
(...) more than being brought into their wits, and there (...) they strive with
all their might against the means of the (...) recovery out of this voluntary
madness. They have (...) far unmann'd themselves, that they are even ashamed to
show that they are owners of humane nature, by (...) ber reflections upon their
own actions and Gods dispensations: As if they were so far engaged in their
designs (...) courses, that in point of honor they could not now upon any
terms retreat, but must confidently proceed (...) act the Bruits on this
Stage, though they turn Devils (...) it in the next. These indeed are a sort of
men, rather fit to be Charactered to move others to compassion ((...) far as
they deserve it) than to be spoke to in order to th^^ Reformation. Who can cure
his deafness, that (...) his ears? Or make him hear that is so wilfully (...)
How can he understand, that has made himself (...) with a stupifying Potion,
which has very much depri^^ him of reason and foresight, and makes him go
laugh^^ down to destruction, in despite of the fairest warnings (...) loudest
calls to prevent it? To attempt by instruction to reduce such as these, seems
an undertaking (...) less improbable, than by a formal discourse to per^^^^ a
Bedlam into his right mind. But yet some different there is amongst these
prophaner ones: thy are not all (...) sotted into the same degree of stupidity,
nor all equity resolved against any amendment, nor equally prejudice against
the means which tend to it. Wherefore thou^^ I have little expectation of such
kind of Readers, (...) less of doing them good, yet if this Paper should
change into any of their hands, if they have the patience (...) read any thing
beside Drollery, let me crave the attrition of their minds, whilst I soberly
advise with the^^^ a few words.

Tell me then, I beseech you, Sirs, such of you that have yet so much Reason
and Conscience left you, as to acknowledge a Being above your selves, who made
you and all the world, and governs all with infinite wisdom and Justice; Tell
me, I say, whether these providence that have lately befaln our Nation, be not
of an extraordinary nature, and therefore in all reason sent upon some great
design? If one Ambassador after another be dispatched from a Prince, to any of
his Neighbors, with a more than usual solemnity, do we not presently guess
that there are some great affairs in agitation? And is it for nothing, or upon
any trivial errand, that the Sovereign Majesty of the World, Commissions his
most astonishing and magnificent Judgments to march one at the heels of
another, to any particular people? Are not their Instructions, think we, as
important as their Appearance is terrible? And if it be so, does it not then
concern the Inhabitants of the Land, to whom this Message is directed,
diligently to attend to, and faithfully and speedily to obey the same? How high
in affront will it be, when Ambassadors are dispatched from heaven, for us not
to vouchsafe them Audience? But methinks, scarce any can be so wilfully deaf,
as not ^o understand this much, which they utter in a voice full ^f power and
Majesty, That the great God is very sorely displeased with the ways of this
people, being such, that he will (...) longer bear with them as formerly. And
shall not the hearing of this awaken us all, to a strict and serious enquiry
into our particular ways, whether they be not such is draw out Gods
displeasure against us? If we had forgot the noise of Trumpets and Drums, which
a few ^ears since read us this Lesson; or if we are deaf to the ^^rill Cannon
which inculcates the same; or heeded not the sweeping Plague, which did not
steal more silently upon thousands, than it loudly warned all that survived;
yet let us attend to the voice of these roaring Flame^ which once more call out
to us, with such a fierce^^^ as one would think, should neither be
dis-regarded, (...) in haste forgotten. Shall God speak thus once, and against
and shall not we hearken? Does he manifest his wrat^^ and shall not we be
seized with an Holy fear? Are (...) troubles so great, and shall we not
diligently search (...) is the Achan, what is the accursed thing that occasion
all? Do the storms rise, and the Seas swell, threatening us with a shipwreck,
and shall we not examine ((...) by casting lots, but turning our eyes inward)
whether we are not the Jonah's that cause it? What, does it see^ a small matter
whether God be pleased with us or (...) Is there any in the whole World whose
favor we mo^ need, and whom we are more bound to regard? Is it not (...) from
whom we received our lives and all our mercies^ and on whose good pleasure we
depend for all? Is it (...) into his hands that we must shortly fall, when we
lea^^ the world, by him to be disposed of to our everlasting state? Yea, even
now, are not we and all our affairs absolutely in his hands, and at his
ordering, to do with (...) as seems good in his sight? And can any be so so^^^
then, as to imagine that it is not worth while to examin^ how matters stand
betwixt God and their Souls? A^^ whether their behavior has been such as is
accept^^ to him, that accordingly they may proceed with bo^^ness, or retreat
whilst there is Liberty, and carefull^ reform themselves. This is the sum of
all, that I would advise careless sinners to, even faithfully to conside^ their
ways, every man by himself, what he has do^^ toward the kindling of Gods
anger, and what he may (...) to appease it; to think what it is in him
particularly God aims at, and speedily to set against it.

And besides, the wrath revealed against us in the dispensations, which may
drive us to this work, do^^ ^en not appear so much mercy in them, as may
quicken and encourage us to it? All that has hitherto befaln (...), has but
the nature of a warning to us that are left; and how great soever the terror
of these warnings has ^em'd, yet that was but necessary the deeplier to affect
(...) rocky hearts. And it can hardly be conceived what ^urse could be taken,
more likely to reclaim a people, to whom all the alluring invitations, and
severe threat^ings of the Word, are grown in a manner contempti^e, as I have
formerly observed; These are like the ^st remedies which Physicians use to
dying persons, which ^^e wont either to preserve life, or hasten death. So ^at
God does not only acquaint us by these his dealings ^at he is displeased with
us, but in the next place, that he is exceeding desirous to reform us, and will
upon our ^^urn to him, have mercy upon us, and pardon us. What ^eason else can
be assigned why he should not immediately have destroyed us, without affording
any space ^or Repentance or capacity of mercy? Might not God ^^s easily, had it
pleased him, have sent such flames upon us, as should not so much have tended
to enlighten, ^s utterly to consume us? That should have devoured ^he
Inhabitants as well as the Houses? If the Husbandman lop and prune his Tree,
dig about and dung it, one ^ear after another, waiting on, and trying it; is
not this (...) sign that he much desires some such fruit, as may pre^erve it
from being cut down as a cumberer of the ground? And what shall we go on to
frustrate these merciful designs of the God of Love, who tries all ways with
us to ^waken and reduce us? Has he not as it were hedged ^n our way, and
beset us round with such startling Providence, that one would thing nothing
but a wilful re^olution to damn our selves, in despite of all opposition, ^ould
carry us over them to farther wickedness and destruction? Has he not placed
before us thousands of carcasses pil'd up on heaps? And set his Angels with
^^^ming Sword to stop us in our course? And is sin (...) lovely thing in our
eyes, that we will venture upon (...) Sword, break through these flames,
trample over (...) and bones to obtain it? Yea, shall we still remain (...)
bewitched by it, when God has purposely represented to us in such ghastly
shapes, as might serve most effe^^ally to undeceive us, and deliver us from its
perni^^^ charms? There is nothing in the whole World inde^^ either base or
hurtful enough to discover all the lo^^^someness and mischief of sin, yet when
it has fa^^^^ bus'd and besotted the sinner, that he can see no (...) in it
notwithstanding all the bad names that are given (...) the most likely way to
make it truly known to him, i^ to show some such effects of it, as the
faculties yet (...) him acknowledge most dreadful, and the cause of the^
therefore by all means to be avoided. Thus if the silly child cannot be kept
from poison, by hearing (...) the mischief of it, because it looks and tastes
so like S^gar: Let him be soundly whipped for touching it, and (...) will do most
to make him hate it. If he will needs (...) playing with a glittering Knife,
let him once feel it draw blood upon him, and that will soonest prevail (...)
him to throw it away. And shall not we, who h^^^ been worse than childish in
our greedy pursuits of see^ingly pleasing sins, shall we not run from them as
f^^^ when we see what we have overtaken? He that has^^^^ takes up an hot Iron,
because he saw not the redness, (...) soon rid his hands of it, when he feels
it stick to his fingers and burn his flesh.

Though drunkenness, gluttony, whoredoms, gain^ cozenage, oppression and
pride, once seemed very ami^ble and alluring to degenerate unreasonable sinner^
whilst they strongly imagined they felt the sweetnes^ and profit of them; yet
shall they seem so still, when ^hey have seen what sad work they have lately
made a^^o^gst us? how they have laid thousands in their graves, and made our
flourishing City to fall on heaps, as if it would become a kind of common Tomb
to its dead In^abitants; to serve as a Monument to Posterity, who should find
written upon it, Here lie the fruits of sin. Shall we dote upon a painted
poisoned Harlot, and that after the Varnish is fallen off, and the poison
revealed? Shall we still stroke and play with the Serpent, after we have heard
his hissings, and felt some effects of his envenomed sting? God forbid that we
should be so wilful and foolish, to embrace the dart that has murdered our
friends, to court the flames that have burnt our houses, and will do worse than
all this?

As then our calamities tell us to the quick, that God has observed and
altogether dislik't our ways, so we see there is Mercy manifested in these
Judgments, whilst they tend to rouse us out of our security, to convince us of
the mischievous nature of sin before we feel the worst of it, and afford us
ground of hope, that upon our con^iction and reformation there is yet mercy to
be obtained for us. If then we have any regard to our Makers pleasure, or our
own interest; if we have any ingenuity or love to our selves, let us he arken
to these earnest calls of a compassionate God, and speedily accept of motions
for peace upon reasonable terms, least our continued stubbornness should
provoke him to resolve concerning us; that since we accepted not, nor improved
the space he allotted us to repent in, henceforward all signs and professions
of Repentance shall come too late to prevent our ruin: And that seems to be
another Lesson which these Judgments teach us, That is we contemn them, and
disregard God speaking to n^by them, there is great hazard that this our
incorrigibleness, and strange (...) pidity, will procure our final overthrow.
If we reject the Scepter of Grace which has been held forth to us, (...) can
we expect but that it should be withdrawn, and frightful Sword set up in its
place? If we are as resolve to hold fast our sins, as Pharaoh was to keep the
Isra^li^^ our resolutions may cost us as dear as his did him^ Though our God be
long-suffering, yet will he alway^ bear? Will he never do more than gently lash
us, (...) then wait to see what good his strokes do upon us? (...) we shall
still make void his expectations of our amendment, will he not at length take
another course with (...) Has not God been as it were laying siege to the
hea^^ of this people, and summoned us again and again (...) make a surrender of
our selves to him, using those se^ral Engines that might serve to batter our
hardness, and prevail with us? And if we still hold out against hi^, rejecting
the gracious messages he sends us, slighting the Warning-pieces he has shot
off, what have we to look for next, but that his Murdering Canons should be
planted against us? That as by his last act of ho^^thty he burnt one of our
chief Forts, so he should proceed to level all to the ground. If God has smote
some of us with the Sword, others with the Pestilence, and ^^verthrown some of
us as he overthrew Sodom and Go^^rah, and yet we will not return to him; may we
not fear that our desolation is as near as theirs was who we^^ thus guilty, and
of whom God thus complains? Amos (...) The continuance and growth of sin under
a smarting Rod, adds an high degree of hainousness thereto, which is usually
followed with a vengeance proportionably heavy. When a Nation shall solemnly
bid defiance (...) the most High, and engage in a War with the Lord of Hosts,
fighting against him by renewed Rebellions, (...) he against them by reinfoc't
Judgments, we may easily know who is like to come by the worst: He has A^rows
in his Quiver against which the rockiest stup^^ heart is but a weak defense,
which can shatter into pieces those who will not be foftned: And he has
frequently expressed his unalterable will to conquer unre^enting sinners, and
that he will even take pleasure in ^ubduing such stout spirits whom nothing
before would work upon, or bring to take notice of his hand stretch^ ^ut
against them. Of those who profanely cried, that ^is word was but wind, and
that they should never see evil; he ^h^eatens that this Word of his, which they
scoffed at, should ^e fire in the mouth of his Prophets, and the people should
be ^ood, Jer. 5.13, 14. And Ezekiel. 5.13. Having before spo^en of all the sad
things he would bring upon a stubborn people, he adds; Thus shall mine anger be
accomplished; and ^^y fury rest upon them, and I will be comforted, and they
shall ^now that I the Lord have spoken it in my zeal, when I have ^ccomplished
my fury in them. Who can in reason expect that God should always maintain his
creatures in being, and continue their comforts, whilst they employ ^^eir life
and all their mercies against him who gave them ^oth? Would not a Prince rather
impoverish and de^roy any part of his Dominions, than let it serve only ^^r an
harbor and supply to his mortal enemies? Oh ^^at England may not hear that
doleful word pronounced ^oncerning her, which Israel once did, Ezekiel. 7.6. An
end (...) come, the end is come, it watches for thee, behold it is ^^me. Let
us not go on to provoke the God of heaven (...) pour out upon us all the
plagues that are threatened (...) those whom no former means will reclaim, to
de^ee a Consumption by Sword or Famine, or any the ^^e destroyers. You that
have no regard to your souls, ^ethinks should be more concerned for your
temporal ^elfare, your lives, your friends, your estates, than da^ngly to
hazard all for the service of some base lust, which will but repay you with
damnation at last, besides ^^l the hurt it does in the mean time to your
selves, and those about you. Oh be persuaded at length, to (...) pity on the
Land of your Nativity; yea, to take pity (...) your selves, your children, and
the Wives of your (...) some? How could you bear it to have these ravished from
your sides, and murdered before your faces; or wor^^ than murdered by ghastly
famine? when you should see them, and feel your selves, as it were, killed by
piecemeal; yea, when your raging hunger should make yo^ wish for, and hasten
one another death, and cause yo^ to take away life from them to whom you gave
it, (...) your bellies to become the Tombs of those who ca^^ from your loins?
Ah Sirs, what reflections would (...) Have in such a doleful day as this, on
your former delic^cies and riotous excesses? Would not the memory (...) your
past fullness, and the abuse of it, help to tear yo^ hearts, as much as present
want would do your bowels* And know, that plenty of Gods creatures which we
(...) enjoy, is not so much an argument that this evil sh^^ never betide us, as
our sinful lavishing of them in glu^tony and drunkenness, is, that it may. Sin
has bro^^^ these, and worse than all these things upon diverse Ki^^domes: God
grant it may not upon ours. And therefore do I mention them, not to increase
the unprofit^^ fears of any, but to stir us up all to that repent^^^ which is
most likely to prevent them, or will be sure (...) secure us from any
considerable hurt by them. But if (...) cry only, God forbid that ever such
things should (...) pen, and yet take the direct way to procure them, (...)
your selves only must bear the blame, as well as feel (...). Fair warning has
been given us by what we (...) already felt, and we may now conceive God saying
to (...) Go your ways, sin no more, least worse things come unto (...) And if
such admonitions as these, so loudly and so s^^^ly uttered, shall be
disregarded, what greater senseless can be imagined? Or what more presaging and
(...) ^ing ruin, than such a senslesness and affected stupidity? and let none
be so weak or inconsiderate, as to imagine, ^od ^ims not at them, nor has any
controversy with ^em, because they have hitherto felt litte or nothing (...)
those Judgments that have been abroad in the Land; ^or let any profligate
Atheists add this to the rest of their ^rational arguings against a Providence,
that they themselves who contemn it, live securely and at ease, whilst ^any
that believed and reverenc't it, suffer under the ^veriey of its Dispensations:
Nor let them hence con^^m themselves in practices as brutish as these Opini^^s
(which were principally minted for their sakes) out ^f a conceit, that all
danger is far from them, or at least, ^at they are no more obnoxious than
others. For, to take ^^f these dangerous mistakes, it is to be considered, that
^e design of these sad Providence is by no means to be sonfined to those
particular persons upon whom they ^ave fallen heaviest; but their Errand is to
warn all, shilst they strike some, which is no way difficult to be ^^prehended.
A Warning-Piece shot off by an Enemy ^ho has besieged a Town, though it might
happily hurt ^^me single Townsman, is nevertheless directed to all: (...)
Beacon when it is fired, gives warning as much to the ^hole Country, as to him
on whose ground it stands, (...) whose wood may be employed for that fire. And
may ^^e not look upon our burning City, as a kind of Beacon ^^ndled to give
notice to the whole Island, that an E^emy is coming against us? Such an Enemy
as may en^age us all, not to take Arms, but suddenly to lay them own, and meet
him with such humble submissions, and ^arnest supplications, as are wont to
gain the cheapest and most honorable Victory: That God, in his deal^^gs with a
Nation, whose ways are generally corrupt^d, lays his strokes upon some, is
but Justice even to them; that he treats not all thus, is mere mercy; that he
takes these and spares others, some better, (...) worse, is purely from his
Sovereignty, and ough (...) referred to his own good pleasure; and therefore
(...) we have no other reason for it, readily to be acqui^^ in. Both Charity,
and (frequently) great Reason, (...) bid us to censure their crimes the
greatest, whose su^ings are so: For many times we find that God (...) singled
out his faithfullest servants as marks for his (...) est arrows; of which sort
of Dispensations, even (...) men sometimes, but wicked men always, are very
competent Judges. But if any upon this att^^ should grow more indifferent to
Godliness, when (...) sees it will not secure its followers; nay, that an
e^nency of it does often as much expose its owners, as he^ does Towers and Cedars
to Storms and Lightning; he therefore think it rather to be shunned than sought
^ter, his arguing will be found as unreasonable as (...) dangerous. Alas, poor
blinded Sensualists! you that (...) strangers to the life and livelihood, and
the great (...) cerns of Immortal Souls, little know the secret, h^^^
transactions betwixt them and their God, in that (...) time when you may judge
them forsaken of him. I^^ do you know how this Godliness helps to bear up (...)
hearts under the weightiest pressures, and like a s^^ Amulet, in time of
Infection, secures them from (...) mischief of those evils with which you may
appre^^ them overborn: Wherefore leave them to God and Judgment, and look you
rather to your selves, (...) you are to learn by, and how you ought to
improve^^^ kind of dealings; even the mercy that you are sp^^^ when so many
others are visited one way or other, (...) the greater engagement upon you to
return to him (...) deals so favorably with you; and you may be supp^^ the
fitter for this great and solemn work of Repent^^ in that Judgments are
brought so near, as may serve^ quicken and affect you, but yet stand at such a
distance ^at they may not overwhelm you.

And lastly, You may perceive, that if good Men ^^emselves undergo so much,
it is time for you to look ^^out you. If Judgment begin at the house of God,
what ^all the end be of those who obey not the Gospel? You may ^ence learn,
that it is not because you are better, or more (...) Gods favor than others
who suffer, that you seem to ^^re better than they; and it may therefore cast
you into (...) fear, least your punishment be reserved a while, be^^use it
shall be laid on for ever, Job 21.30. If the ^hildren be now corrected,
Bastards shall not always (...) unpunisht. You cannot then conclude, that they
^ho have drank deepest of this Cup, were sinners above ^^l that dwelt in
England; but this you may conclude, that ^^cept you Repent, you shall all
likewise perish.

Even temporal destruction, as I have said, you have ^^ason to expect; but if
you take such comminations as ^ords of course, which Preachers are still
filling the ears (...) their people withal, no more to be regarded, than ^^e
filly Predictions of Astrologers, and do hereupon ^rden your selves in sin, as
if no danger was near, know (...) for certain, that such miseries are coming
upon you, (...) you shall neither know how to prevent, nor ever re^ove from off
you. And that is the last thing I shall men^on, which these Calamities suggest
to us, That they who are ^^t bettered by them, nor any other means that in this
life time ^^e used with them, shall at length be covered with confusion, ^^d
lie down in those sorrows which will admit of no relief, ^^d whence there shall
be no release. I cannot certainly ^^y, but you may stretch your selves upon
your beds of ^sse, and continue your pleasant dreams, yet a while ^^nger.
Perhaps you may laugh and play away the re^^inder of your days, as you have
done all that went before; you may yet have a few more merry meetings and
pleasing entertainments; you may be loaded (...) riches, crowned with
rose-buds, glutted with fleshly (...) lights, and may keep up your wonted
height of pride (...) bravery, inso much that in your own esteem, and in (...)
theirs, who judge of persons and things by the sa^^ false rules, you may pass
for the only happy men in (...) World: But yet I can and dare say, that though
you^ Lives and your Pleasures should be thus prolonged (...) hundred years, you
are but miserable men, whose w^^^ are now accursed, as your end shall be. Even
all (...) while the vengeance of God hangs over your heads, li^^ a Sword by a
Twine-thred, and will shortly fall upon the Scalp of such as go on in their
trespasses; It purs^^ you at the heels, and though it seem to tarry, will
certainly overtake you. However you may mis-call (...) Patience, you shall
find that God is no more sl^^^ concerning his Threatenings, than his Promises.
In the hand of the Lord there is a Cup, and the Wine is red: it is full of
mixture, and he pours out of the same; and though they should escape when it
is poured out, Yet the Dr^^^ thereof, all the wicked of the earth shall wring
them out, (...) drink them, Psalm. 75.8. These are the distinguishing judgments
which shall light upon the ungodly, and none b^^ them. Then at length shall men
discern between t^^ righteous and the wicked; between him that serves God,
(...) him that serves him not: when that day comes that st^^ burn as an Oven,
and all the proud, yea, all that do wi^^^lyshall be as stubble.

Whatever false consequences wanton Sinners dr^^^ from Gods forbearance of them
in this day of his p^^ence, or from his promiscuous dealing with good (...) bad
in this state of trial, they shall soon be freed from their mistakes, when they
shall find and feel, in (...) a different manner they are treated in the other
si^^ This will make them acknowledge, that verily there (...) God, a Righteous
God, who judges in the earth. Here ^ndeed they were Neighbors, and had bodies
alike, and might therefore dye by the same Diseases: Their ^ouses were joined,
and might therefore burn together; ^ut their souls were not alike, nor shall
they fare alike, or ^ive together any longer, but betwixt them will be a great
Gulf fixed, over which there will be no passing for the persons, nor any
translation of their conditions one ^o another. Though you might remove your
dwellings and escape the Infection, or have estates of that nature that Fire did
not consume them, yet all your refuges will fail, when these last woes shall
be brought upon you. Then shall the scorners who made light of threat^ings,
that hid themselves under falsehood, and made lies their refuge, find, that
their Covenant with death shall be disannulled, their agreement with hell shall
not stand: When this overflowing scourge shall pass through the ungodly World,
they shall all be trodden down by it. Though they might escape Sword and
Plague, Fire and Famine, yet Hell they shall never escape. And are there any
that own the name of Men, and desire the reputation of Christians, of such a
desperate insensibleness of their own concerns, that the known certainty of
infinite everlasting torments, in case they hold on their present course, will
give them neither check nor diversion? Such indeed who can thoroughly persuade
themselves to be Infidels, may possibly live in a stupid peace, till they are
brought with the Devils, to believe and tremble. But for them who take on them
to believe all that is in the Gospel, and yet walk in those very ways, to
which this Gospel threatens everlasting destruction, may we not admire what
strange devices they have got, to keep themselves peaceable and steady in this
their furious march to Damnation? What, Sirs, have you a belief for what
Scripture tells you of the weightiest and most concerning matters in the World,
and yet can you always drive th^^ out of your thoughts? Do you think it of no
consequen^^ to consider where the way will end, in which you (...) walking with
so much confidence? Do you not (...) well enough, that if you never turn, you
are certain^^ undone? And that wil'st you delay it, you run such (...) hazard
as every man in's right wits would beware of? Every step you tread being upon
such a dangerous precipice, that nothing but the mercy which you daily abuse,
an^^ which will not always bear such usage, keeps you fro^^ falling headlong?
And when once it is withdrawn, do^^ you go, and are lost for ever. Is this your
case, and (...) you not spare time to think how to get out of it? (...) Sirs,
sad and serious thoughts will be good cheap in (...) other World: As much as
you fear and shun them no^ then you shall be sufficiently haunted with them;
b^^ as serviceable as now they might be, then they shall nothing avail you. To
think in time which way to avoid perdition, should not, methinks be so tedious
and unpleasant to those to whom it is so necessary, and may (...) as
advantageous: but if this be neglected, to think wh^ you have brought your
selves to, and how strangely and wilfully you have done it, shall fill you with
a sadness that will break your hearts, but nothing better your estates. What
then are those dreams wherewith you delude your selves into a quiet continuance
in an ungodly state, which is like to prove so bitter in the end? What do you
think it is best to go on a while longer, that you have yet time enough before
you? But do you well consider, how dear this little while longer may cost you?
Have you any ground to expect to be waited on much longer? Does not the time
of patience seem expiring! Are not the years wherein God resolved to try you,
what fruit you would bring forth, near to an end? And is th^^ a time to dally
with the Almighty, when he is coming forth so severely to reckon with you? Is
your Sun seting, and yet do you loyter? Is the Ship sinking, and are you ^et
unresolved whether you had best shift for you selves? Certainly they who take
not this as a fit season for Re^entance, would by their good will never Repent,
and ^is to be feared never will till it is too late.

But further, you are not I hope, so vain as to conceit, ^at there is any other
way beside sound Repentance; and (...) through Conversion, to secure your selves
from that ^rath which is denounc't against, and will certainly ^ome upon the
Children of Disobedience. If you believe ^e Scripture, which I now suppose you
do, you cannot ^arbour such a conceit, which is there so often and so sainly
contradicted: And as far, methinks, you should ^e from imagining, if this wrath
be not thus prevented, ^at ever it can with any patience be endured, or by any
^eans removed. Do you indeed take hell for a tollera^e evil? even more
tolerable than an holy heart and ^fe, by which it might be avoided? In how
dark and ^ind a state are they who run from their felicity as an ^urtful thing?
And in how sad a case, whom nothing ^it woeful experience will convince of this
mistake? But that, do you ever hope to be able to contend with the Most High,
to grapple with Omnipotence it self? Do ^ou think you can as easily resist his
Power, as you could ^sobey his Commands? If this should once become ^e only
refuge that is left you, woe to you that ever you ^ere born. Did you ever yet
hear of any that entered ^e Lists with God and prevailed? that overcame him ^y
strong hand? Should all the Infernal Hosts join ^^rces with rebellious sinners,
how utterly unable would ^^ey be for one minute to withstand the conquering Arm
^f the Almighty? And can thou a single man, an im^otent worm, do any thing
against it? Why, do thou ^ot know that a frown of his countenance is enough
to dash all created courage? the breath of his mouth sufficient to destroy the
world? If thou be such a courageous man as to venture upon the Divine
displeasure, thou should have gone and placed thy self in the midst of one of
Londons burning streets, and have tried how thou could encounter the fury of
those flames, and how much they would have valued thy opposition; and thence
thou might learn what Man can do against his Maker, or against any of his
creatures that go forth to destroy with Commission from him. Do but imagine thy
self hurled into the midst of those burnings, and there to have been kept alive
whilst they lasted, (which is no difficulty to him that made the world of
nothing) how could thou have born such a lodging, even but for three days
space? But what if it had been for so many thousand years? Bethink thee then
how thou can dwell with everlasting burnings, which will be the undoubted
portion of all unpardoned, unconverted ones. Do you not indeed believe, that
Christ will come in flaming fire to take vengeance on them that would not obey
the Gospel? And whither will you then betake your selves? or to whom will you
fly? When not only a City or Kingdom, but all this lower world shall be of a
flame; when the Heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements shall
melt with fervent heat; when an unquenchable fire shall be kindled above, and
below, and on every side you, where do you hope for shelter? To cry out to
Rocks and Mountains to fall on and cover you, will then little avail you. Ob
who can stand before the Lord when he is angry? who knows the power of his
wrath? But shall not the demonstrations and appearances of it, which you have
already beheld, prevent the farther bold exposure of your selves thereto? Have
you not had a kind of glimpse of hell flashing before your faces, and will it
nothing daunt you? Will you like those Ezekiel. 15.7. Go out of one fire, to be
devoured by another? Will you go on like an Ox to the slaughter, when you are
told whither you are going, and the instruments of death are laid before you?
Will you still believe that the stolen waters which folly affords are sweet?
That her bread eaten in secret places is pleasant? When it is revealed to you,
that her provisions are baits, and their pleasure mortal; that the dead are
there, and her (former) guests in the depths of hell. Will you go on to carry
fuel to that pile wherein you your selves must be consumed? Will you still
embrace and cherish those lusts that will, like an unnatural Monster, gnaw out
the bowels of those that nourish them, and feed upon the slaughter and ruin of
their dearest lovers? Will nothing allay the Adulterers heats, till they turn
to the fire that never goes out? Will the Drunkard swallow down his immoderate
draughts, till at length he be seized with Dives his thirst, never to be
quenched? Will the fond adorers of the riches and Gallantry of the world
continue their dotage, till they see their Gold and Silver melted, and not only
their stately houses, but their fruitful Lands in flames about their ears, and
all that wherein they gloried vanishing into smoke and ashes; and shall find
themselves inwardly tormented by their inordinate love to these Idols, more
than by any fire whereinto they may be plunged? The good Lord open the eyes and
change the hearts of these secure and senseless ones, and show them the hell
that is in sin it self, that they may never feel that which it procures; that
they may discern the misery and destruction that is in their ways, before
their wickedness burn as the fire, and devours them like briars and thorns,
Isa. 9.18.

But besides the loose and grossly profane, there are multitudes to be seen who
seem far more serious, and better affected with Gods Judgments abroad in the
Land, especially they upon whom they have fallen heavily. But alas! how many of
these are there more apprehensive of their outward losses, than of the sins
that brought them? Such who would have thought themselves well enough had they
but kept their goods, though their sins also had been kept with them? How happy
would these men be, if their fitness for comfort was as great as their need of
it is? But how sad a case is it to have the world frown upon us, and God frown
too? to be deprived of temporal enjoyments, and destitute of spiritual
blessings? to have our Idols snatched away, and to be unacquainted with the true
and living God? But that I may not seem to aggravate your grief, and bring you
nothing but sad tidings, know, though I cannot speak a word of comfort to you
whilst you continue in your present carnal state, yet would you but make haste
out of the same, there is great Mercy before you, and a way open for your
access to that Grace whence you may receive an abundant supply for all your
wants, and true joy in the midst of your troubles. And methinks this should
revive you, to hear that your condition is not yet miserable, past all remedy:
What though you should never recover to your former height and fullness in the
world, yet if your pride and covetousness be abated, and your hearts by Grace
raised nearer to God, as a pledge of your being shortly raised to Glory, you
will have no reason to complain of that abasement which was the beginning and
occasion of this happy exaltation. Happy indeed are they that thus rise by
their falls, and being thrown to the earth, thereby rebound the higher toward
heaven: And this happiness, I say, you are yet in a capacity of attaining to;
which privilege, was it rightly apprehended, might well take off from the
sense of any other ill circumstances you are plunged into; and was it carefully
improved, would make a full amends for whatever losses you have sustained. And
now to set in good earnest about this work of gaining heaven ^^stead of earth,
will be found the quickest and the ^^rest course to make you so rich, and
to-set you in such a ^hriving way, as will not only recompense your losses, ^ut
keep you from ever being greatly impoverisht any more. This to the worldly
wise, I know, will seem very ^trange, and far from any appearance of truth:
They who knew nothing better for man than to be rich, and ^ive high in the
world, cannot imagine which way he ^an make advantage of being brought into a
poor and ^ow condition; and as little can they imagine, what that ^s in all the
world which can make amends for such mis^ortunes, (as they call them) except
they may be repaid ^n kind. If by losing an hundred they could gain a thou^ind,
or missing one Trade could light upon another, with quicker and better returns,
they could well enough understand this to be a gaining by their losses; and he
that could teach them this not able art should be a welcome man, a Comforter
indeed: But if you send them so look after great matters in another world, to
repair their damages in this, and to get their souls enricht, when they feel
their bodies pincht, this is but cold comfort, dry and unsavory discourse to
the poor worldling, whose feeling is all his faith, who seeming to himself a
^eer lump of flesh, minds and relishes only earthly things. And accordingly
their behavior too plainly dis^^vers these their unbelieving and carnal
apprehensions and affections. For since the hand of God was upon them, ^ath not
this been in a manner all the trouble they have ^elt, to think what a breach is
made upon their estates, and what fair hopes are blasted, many likely projects
^om'n to just nothing, and the fruits of their long la^our and care suddenly
vanished; so that they who thought their Nests well feathered (as they use to
speak) and themselves warm and securely placed therein, are now unroosted, and
many of them put to begin the world^ new? And has not this been the very sum
of all ^^ments contrivances and endeavors, how they might (...) again to their
best advantage, and soonest get up (...) they have lost, and most successfully
pursue their for^^ designs of growing rich? Reflect upon thy self, Read^^
whether this has not been thy very course and frame; thou art one whom the
fire has unsettled.

If you ask me, whether then I condemn your care^^ make provision for your
selves and families, and wh^^ther I would have you rather fit still and starve,
th^^ look out for needful and seasonable supplies? I answer^ Though I am far
from saying this ought not to be do^^ yet I must needs say, there is something
which ough^ far less to be left undone, and both may very well st^^^ together.
For I hope your souls are of as much val^ as your bodies, and their happiness
ought to be as dis^ gently and speedily looked after: Now methinks th^^ costly
experience you have had of the vanity and instability of these outward things,
should give you very fu^ conviction that your happiness is not placed in them,
an^ that he is very unwise who puts confidence in such de^ceitful riches that
make to themselves wings, and flee away Shall not this then put you upon a
careful search, whether there is nothing to be found out that is more solid,
durable, and satisfying? And if you follow on this search as you ought, you
will conclude with Solomon, after all his s^^licitous enquiries after Good, and
his clear discover^^ of the vanity of the creature, That to fear God, and (...)
his Commandments, is the whole duty of man, Eccles. 12.1^. And not his duty
only, but his greatest interest, even (...) this life, but especially in that
which is to come, whi^^ seems coucht in the following words of the Wise M^^ver.
14. For God shall bring every work into Judgment, (...) every seeret thing,
whether it be good, or whether it be e^^ And if he do so, we may be sure he will
treat men ac^ardingly, and will, as he has promised, make those ^^at have
served him everlastingly happy, when the ^^icked shall be adjudged to their
threatened misery. Why ^^ill you not then turn about, and change your desires
and ^endeavours, and be as industrious for holiness and the ^^^ppiness that
ever attends it, as you have been for the world, wherein, through your own
foolish forbidden ^^pectations, and inordinate love, you have met with so much
vexation and dissatisfaction? You see how it has served you after you have
labored for it so long, and im^rac't it with so much affection and dearness;
its fled from you in a trice, and has left you desolate. Why therefore should
you trust it any more, to expose your selves at every turn to the ill effects
of its treachery; which is indeed but Justice to those whose hearts are first
^reacherously departed from God? If you be false to your Maker, never expect
the creature should be true to you: No, assure your selves, it will break from
you when you think you have it fast, and forsake you when you need it most; and
will no more hearken to you, when you call, and roar, and mourn after it, than
Baal did ^o his Worshippers: Torment your selves never so much for its absence;
as they, we read, slasht themselves with Knives and Lancers, yet it will
neither pity nor regard you. And though it should remain with you as long as
you live, yet at death it will leave you, with your heart broken at the
parting, and will afford you no relief in that hour of your extremity, much
less in that stare whereinto you must then depart. And what will you still
labor for the wind, and set your heart upon that which is not? Surely you
have felt though to make you more wary and wi^e; wherefore come rather and
once make experiment, whether God will leave you as the world has done, and is
like to do; whether his promises are no truer than its flatteries; whether
Grace be as frail and perishing a thing, a^ the goods you have lost; whether
your hearts will not (...) this Treasure safer, than your Chests can do any
other My advice to you is the same with that of Paul's to Timithy, 1 Ep. 6.9,
10, 11, 12. That avoiding that resolution to be rich, which brings temptations
and snares, that love of money, which is the root of all evil, you would now
follow ofter righteousness, go lliness, faith, love, patience, meeknesss, fight
the good fight of faith, and lay hold on eternal life. And if you will be
persuaded hereto, set about the work in good earnest, ply it hard, and never
give off till you have made something of it. Remember you are laboring for an
Estate that will never be lost; and rest not till you have got those affections
on God, and the things above, which you were wont to lavish upon things below.
And when you have done this, your work is in ^ manner finished: For the way to
have God and Christ, Grace and Glory to be yours, is to desire after, and love
them more than all things else. When once you have got your hearts in heaven,
you have got a treasure there: Whatever other duties are required of you, will
be found natural and easy, when you are but principled with a prevailing,
deep-rooted love of heavenly things. And one would think it no hard thing to
attain such holy affections, if first you will but well and duly consider the
worthlesuess of all things else, till you are cured of your excessive and
undeserved admiration of them; and then will be as much in meditation of the
excellency, the suitableness, the sufficiency of those things that are
invisible and eternal; and how great reason you have, and what engagements you
lie under to fix and settle your hearts upon them. Consider well what you owe
to the giver and preserver of your life, and all the comforts of it, and how
you ought to stand affected toward him who thought not his own unvaluable Blood
too good to be shed for such finners as we. Think, if you have such a thing
within you, as an immortal Soul, whether the bealth, and safety, and felicity
thereof, be not of far greater moment and worth, than the prosperity of the
body: and whether an unexpressible fullness of all blessedness and joy for ever,
deserve not more esteem, than any of the short uncertain advantages and
delights which his world affords you? Continue such kind of considerations as
these, till you feel they have an influence upon your souls, to change the bent
and stream of your affections and inclinations. And be diligent in be use of
all other means appointed by God, for the befirming and carrying on a work of
grace in the heart of ^an; and above all, be very importunate suitors at be
Throne of Grace, that God would bestow upon ^ou his holy spirit, which he has
promised to those that (...) him; that by the power hereof. Your minds may ^e
enlightened to a right apprehension of things, and our affections strongly
carried out to that which best deewes them, that you may be brought, with the
Apostle, ^or so much to look at, or be concerned for, those things which are
seen, which are temporal, as for those which are not ^in, which are eternal.
And for the future, let this be our chiefest project, how to gain heaven, and
to this after all your labors and cares. Though it be not the only, yet if it
be the principal trade you drive on, to ^rive and grow in Grace, till at
length it shall be imrov'd into such a stock of Glory, as will never be spent;
manage all your Talents to the best advantage, as ^ay redound most to your
Masters honor, and bring on in the richest inerease; daily reaching forth unto
those ^ings which are before, pressing toward the mark, for the price the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. Thus set your hearts and faces Zion-ward,
looking upon your passage through ^is lower World, only as a journey to, and
preparation ^s the higher. And having so rightly fixed your end and your work,
taking your selves here but for Pilgrims (...) Strangers, then set about your
worldly affairs, and take care for the accommodations of life, regarding and
^^siring them under this notion, as they are convenience for a Traveller. And
let this true notion of them, moderate and guide all your designs and
undertakings; (...) the utmost of your ambition be to maintain your selves and
those that depend upon you, so as you may be ^^test to do the service God has
set you, and walk o^ comfortably in the way he has appointed you. What ever
you aim at more, let it be purely and sincerely (...) the good of others, and
the honor of God. So (...) you fulfill the commands, 1 Timothy 5.8. Ephesians. 4.28.
(...) by this means you will most easily escape the temptations which ruin
thousands, who wrong their Conscience to increase their Estates; for will he
sin against Godget riches, who desires them only that he may there with serve
and glorify God. Nor can I think that here by you will have ever the less of
the World, but I (...) sure you will have a great deal more contentment in and
more security of what you shall have; and when length you come to leave it, you
shall neither desire (...) need it, but shall be supplied with that which is
in^^nitely better: when as those who were bewitched into (...) unreasonable
fondness of their present enjoyments, s^^ at last irrecoverably lose both them
and their souls top^ther.

Again, Methinks, your very worldy wisdom a^ self-love may teach you, that if
you have been, and a^ still like to be, so great losers by Gods displeasure,
y^^ only way is speedily to use means for the obtrining his favor; that so you
may either secure your tempore possessions, or something of more worth in their
roe^^ whenever they may be taken from you. Believe (...) Sirs, there is
nothing of all that which you grasp with (...) greatest closeness, that you can
keep with you, whether ^od will or no: If he command it away, it will soon ^ey
his call. You may think of reducing your estates (...) be of that nature, that
they shall be exposed to no casualties, but all your art will fail you whilst
God is your enemy. What foolish merchants then are those, who take him so by
their dishonest ways of gaining? Who will (...) found at length to have put
the most not orious cheat ^^on themselves, purchasing the curse of God with
their ^^just gains, laying themselves open to that wrath from which neither
their wit nor their wealth can secure them: (...) where ever you are, and
whatever you have, you are ^^waies alike naked to his stroke. Though you should
^^g deep as Hell to hide your selves and your treasure, ^ can easily fetch you
thence and pluck you asunder. then you have been so foolish, as by any way of
wickedness what ever to engage God against you, does it not now concern you to
seek after and make suit of his friend-ship? Without his leave none of your
designs ^all take effect, without his blessing nothing can truly ^^osper that
you take in hand. Except the Lord build the ^^ty, they labor in vain that
build it, Psalm. 127.1. What ^^cess they are like to have, whose undertakings
God ^ill not favor, the Builders of Balel can inform you: at how much his
blessing speeds a work, you may learn ^om Nehemiah and his fellow-builders,
Neh. 6. To the ^en of Ephraim and Samariah, that said in the pride and ^utness
of their heart, that the bricks were fallen down, but ^^ey would build with
hewn stones, and have Cedars instead Sycamores: God threatens to raise up
adversaries that ^ould join together against them, the Syrians before, and the
^^ilistines behind, that should devour Israel with open mouth. ^. 9.9, 10,
etc. As perhaps when you consider the ^uines of the City, you look no higher
than second causes, it is like you look no higher for its restoration, very
little minding what hand God had in the one, and (...) have in the other,
before it be accomplished: And what you are thus forgetful of God, and take not
his bless^^ along with you, let your preparations be never so great and your
hopes never so high, your attempts will either be blasted in the beginning, or
cursed in the end. Rea^^ your doom, Psalm. 28.5. Because they regard not the word
of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, he shall destrive them and not
build them up. But would you give all diligence to cleanse your hands and
purify your hearts from (...) as well as to clear your streets from the
rubbish, laying the foundation in true Repentance and a through amendment of
your ways? then might you say with Nehemid The God of heaven he will prosper
us, therefore we his Servants will arise and build, Neh. 2.20. This is the way,
the surest and only way to make a desolate City Phaenix-like to rise out of
it is funeral Ashes with a new life, and Glory greater than it had before its
fall. Wherefore let me use the words of Eliphaz, Job 22.21, 23. Atquaint now
thy self with God, and be at peace; thereby good shall come unto thee. If thou
return to the Almighty, thou shall (...) built up. And when once you have well
done this great work, when you have got your peace made with God and have made
sure of his especial love and all the mercies contained therein, you may
cheerfully go about your lawful employments, depending upon his Prontdence, and
submitting your selves to his will, who never is unmindful of those that do so.

And now at length, to those that are in this happy case, my discourse directs
it self, even to you that an the cordial Lovers and faithful Servants of the
great God; such of you that have born your share in the cilamities that have
lately befaln us, especially that have suffered much by the fury of those
flames, which, without making any difference or showing any pity, consul all
that came before them, so far as their commission went: To you, my great
request is, that you would remember your selves, raise up, but yet calm your
spirits, not harboring any impatience inconsistent with the dutifulness of
Gods children, nor giving way to any dejection, unbeseeming the dignity of that
Relation. It Is a pleasant work which I would put you upon, and which ^e who
loves your happiness has by an express command made your duty, even to possess
your souls in patience, and to be cheerful in the midst of all your
afflictions. Who then, that has cause for it (and to such I speak) would not
rather live at ease, and enjoy himself in peace and ^^^^fort, than vex and
torture his own soul by fretting and grieving?

Before I prosecute this exhortation, let me desire ^ou not to mistake me, as
if I was taking you off from all ^erious and sober consideration, for which
Adversity is so ^roper a season; nor from that moderate and profitable ^orrow
which shall flow from this consideration. No, ^ather I would have you improve
this time for a through ^earch into your own souls, wherein it is like your
Consciences will be more than ordinarily awakened, and will deal truly and
plainly with you. And whatever mis^^iages these impartial reflections shall
discover, which before you discerned not, or made less matter of, represent
them now as heinous and odious to your selves as you well now how, till you
find your hearts wrought to such a neasure of godly sorrow, as may stir up in
you an unreoncileable hatred of the sin, and engage you vigoously to fet
against it. You may also make advantage of your sufferings to promote this
Repentance, whilst they shall help you to clearer and more sensible
apprehensions of the contrariety of fin to God, and of its per^iciousness to
man, whereby you may be brought to a ^ricter enquiry into, and a greater
watchfulness over our ways, as you would avoid the grieving of Gods Spirit,
the wounding of your Consciences, and the sm^^ of your flesh. And even now let
the remembrance (...) any thing you have done to displease a loving Father be
matter of greater shame and grief than any affliction which you lie under:
Though neither do I go about to persuade you to a Stoical Apathie, an utter
insens^ bleness of your outward losses and troubles; whilst you have bodies,
it is not to be expected, but you should (...) concerned for them, and feel some
kind of resentment agreeable to what befalls them: but yet these motion and
passions ought to be under the Command of a higher faculty, even sanctified
Reason, whose office it to moderate and subdue them so far as her power
^^tends. Wherefore that which I am advising you (...) this, that you would not
let the sense of your pressure overwhelm you, as to render you unfit for any
duti^ y^ owe to God, or so as may speak you forgetful of those greater grounds
of contentedness and joy which Religion suggests, and all sincere Christians
bea^^ about them. And that this advice may take th^^ better effect, I shall
particularly show what s^^ of those grounds are, I mean, what reason you br^^
quietly and comfortablie to entertain the sharpest (...) pensations; and the
serious consideration of these, (...) the like reasons, may by Gods blessing,
prove an effect al means for the attaining this frame of Spirit, the being both
engagements and helps thereto. It may see perhaps a needless labor to spend
words upon th^^ Theme, which is so frequentlie and largely handled i^ many
excellent Treatises wrote thereupon; upon which account indeed I shall be the
briefer, though having this opportunity, something I was willing to say that
might suit particularly to the present occasion. It may (...) appear
unseasonable and superfluous to administer co^^fort at this distance of time
from the suffering: but y^ we know the effects of it are still present, perhaps
d^ ^e increasing; and I wish that the sorrows of those who ^eel them, do not
answerablie continue and increase, which is that I would prevent, or however do
something ^o confirm and fortify their minds who are already ar^ived to any
measure of peace and settlement; that they may see how reasonable and becoming
this their carriage is, and may now retain, and on all other the like
occasions, show forth the same.

1. And to this purpose first, let me suggest what is most usuallie insisted on
by all that speak of this Subject; namely, that you would consider who is the
Author surmissively at least) of all the troubles that have com'n upon (...)
even God himself. And let not the commonness of ^^ttuth make it of ever the
less esteem with you, but ^^^ber the more it is inculcated, the deeper let it
be impressed upon your minds. Why should it be of less efficacy now than in
David's days, who when he was consumed by the blow of Gods hand, yet opened not
his mouth lecause be did it? Or in Eli's days, who when he heard the
^hreatnings de nounc't against his Family, answered, It the Lord, let him do
what seems him good? Or in Job's, no when he had lost all, yet could calmlie
say, The Lord ^^e, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the Name of the
Lord. How effectually then may this allay all the disturbances and tumults of
your breast to remember, God had an hand in what has befaln you? and dare your
hearts rise against the operations of his hand? Whether you consider your
selves more generally related to God as his creatures, or more nearlie, as his
people in Covenant with him through Christ, you will find your selves under
strong and forcible obligations to this duty of submission upon many accounts.

Is not God your Maker, he who gave you a being, and has preserved thitherto?
Is he not then the most proper and absolute owner both of you and all that you
have? And shall he not then do with you what he please without your murmuring
or contradiction? We that are now walking upon this earth who a few days since
were nothing; that were brought upon this Stage of life and action, by the will
and power of a Being infinitely above us, without any contrivance of our own;
had we any liberty or capacity of indenting with our Maker, that we would not
come into the world except on certain terms, and on condition of such and such
usage there? The pot when it is turning on the wheel, might as well compound
with the Potter of what form, and for what use it should be made. Fit then it
is that we should be a his finding and ordering, whose workmanship we are that
we should as entirely render up our selves to (...) will, as we proceeded from
it; not thinking we are wronged if God dispose of us or ours without asking
out consent, any more than when he made us. Can he wrong us who owes us
nothing? who may without injustice turn us into the Grave, or sentence us into
our Primitive nothingness? If he may thus take away life it self at his
pleasure, may he not do the same by all the comforter it? That he lent them for
any time was mere bounties and is it injustice to withdraw them, or some part
(...) them, when he sees good? As the giving of life lays to obligation upon
him to continue it, no more does his bestowing of any outward mercies. If you
had once relieved a man in want, that does not bind you to do so always: Or
if you had freely lent your friend an hundred pound for one year, you are not
thereby engaged to let him have it for ten or twenty, or to give it hi^
outright. And do you think to plead prescription for any of these enjoyments
which were graciously lent you by their owner, for so long as he should think
fit. Rather methinks, you should dismiss them with thankfulness for having had
them so long, and that any thing is yet reserved you. We use not to account
them either honest or good-natured, who are as angry with their friends when
they call for what was lent, as if they came to rob them. You cannot think
sure, that when God put his gists into your hands, he made them so absolutely
yours, that he past away his own right thereto, or his power to recall them.
God charges it indeed upon the Jews, Hos. 2.8. That they knew not that he gave
them their corn, wine and oil, and multiplied their silver and gold; which they
manifested by serving idols therewith, as they are there accused. And I wish
this wilful ignorance was not still common in the world, and the same evidence
given of it, by ^^ens serving their pride and luxury with those good ^^ings
which were allowed to other purposes. Such, I ^^nfess, whose dependence is very
little upon God for any thing they expect or need, who are not wont to look to
heaven for earthly things, (though for fashion sake they may use to say, Give
us this day our daily bread) but placed their chief confidence in their own
subtle projects and undertakings; such as these do little apprehend ^ow their
Estates are the Gift of God, but regard them other as the mere fruits of their
own wit or industry; and therefore think their propriety in them so absolute,
that they are ready to accuse God himself if he take them away, as if he dealt
injuriouslie with them. But you who believe that it is in vain to rise early
and sit up late, without God give a blessing to your diligence, and have
accordingly had a chief respet to his Providence in all your ways, and
received all your mercies as from his hand, will be far enough, I hope, from
such gross mistakes. If you should send your Son or Servant as Fact or beyond
Sea, and maintain him there, and furnish him with money for Trading, you would
claim a right to the increase he should make of your Stock, and would take it
for a sorry argument, if he should keep it back, and tell you, it had now been
so long in his hands, that it was not lawful for you to take it out. By this
Rule the Steward might detain his Lords money, if possession conferred a right.
And much less reason have you to imagine, that what you may for some while
possess, is thereby alienated from him whose is the earth and the fullness
thereof. 'Twas he who made that earth, and all those creatures, by the having
of which men reckon themselves rich, and whilst they past from the hands of one
to another, they are nevertheless his; and therefore are men entrusted with
what measure of them, and for what time he pleases, that they may improve them
to his glory, and when he pleas^^^ he calls them in. And thus in the nineth
verse of (...) Chapter God threatens those inconsiderate, unthank^^ ones, to
strip them of those his mercies which they (...) bus'd. Therefore (says he)
will I return and take away (...) corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the
season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax, given to cover her
^^kedness. And shall not God have liberty to do what (...) will with his own?
You that are Tenants at will, your Landlord had warned you out of his house,
wo^^ have prepared to be gone without contending? Or if (...) some reasons
which he might not tell you of, he should have plucked it down, you would scarce
have thought your selves concerned to quarrel with him for so doing; since it
was his own, who could hinder him? And will you not be as submissive to God
whilst he executes his righteous pleasure? Your money, goods and houses were
all his, more than yours who owned them, or rather who had the keeping of them.
Men indeed might no violate the right you had to them, but in opposition to God
you had none; why then might he not burn then up, or dispose of them, as
pleased him best? Even th^^ earth, which for a while he has given to the Sons
(...) Men, to travel over it to Eternity, he will ere long cast into flames,
without doing any injury, I hope, to the then Inhabitants of it: though one
may perhaps cry out for his house, another for his Land, or his Plate and
Jewels; which outcries, be they never so loud, are like to have no more regard
than they have reason? And why may not God now deal with any part of this
earth, as shortly he will with the whole? And why may not we he as contented
that he should? The same reason will also hold for our submission to Gods
Providence, when he shall remove our Relations, our health, life, liberty, or
any the like comfort, over all which his Dominion is ^^solute, and therefore
his disposal ought to be acceptable. I might also farther show how the wisdom,
^oodness, and other Attributes of God, engage us to the same duty, but I am
afraid of being tedious, and may have occasion to mention them hereafter.

But beside these reasons drawn from your common relation to God as your
Creator and Sovereign Lord, you that are his peculiar people, to whom he is
become a re^^ciled Father in his Son, may easily discern many ^^ther
engagements you lie under, patiently to bear all ^e allotments of his
Providence; but chieslie let me bring to your remembrance the tenor of that
Covenant whereinto you were entered with God, when you solemnlie gave up your
selves to him, and engaged to take him for your God. Did you herein capitulate
with him for your usage on earth in any absolute way, that he should maintain
you in health, wealth, and worldly prosperity? Did you list your selves into
his service on^^ie on condition of being paid such and such wages, and living
at such an easy delicate rate? Surely a Christian at his New Birth durst no
more do thus, than man at his Creation was able to do it. Nay, did you not
engage to the quite contrary, that you would not in any thing be your own
chusers, but leave your selves and all your concernments to Gods disposing? how
else could you take him for God, and your God? which, beside other things,
implies your acknowledgement of that Authority he has over man in general,
and your resolution for your own part to submit to it. And do you not
contradict this when you would be your own Masters, and find fault with any of
his proceedings? For you have not only bound your selves to a sincere
endeavor to do what is enjoined you, but also to be content with whatever
shall be done with you. All the instances of the Divine Will, whether erprest
in his Commands, or in his Providence, you are therefore to embrace and
acquiesce in. And when you covenanted to do thus, I question not but you were
(...) possessed with the apprehensions of Gods Soveraigntie all sufficiency, and
gracious merciful nature, that you believed you could no better way consult for
your selver and the safety of your affairs, than by putting all into his
hands: And have you any reason to repent of your course, and change these
apprehensions? May it not fill administer full ground of security to consider
those glorious Attributes of God, and the nearness of his Relation to you?
Shall not this even endear and make well come what in self seems rough and
harsh, that it comes from the hand of a loving and good God? We find how our
blessed Lord made use of this consideration, The Cup which my Father has given
me, shall I not drink it ^ Shall Children take any thing amiss from their
render and indulgent Parents? Have they the least reason to fear that they will
contrive their mischief? Earthly Parents indeed may through their indiscretion
and excessive fondness bring ruin upon their Children, whilst they are
ftudying how to do them good, or through their weakness may nor be able to keep
it off them: But how vain and unreasonable are these fears in you, that have
the infinitely wife and Almighty God for your Father? Can you imagine that
ever his Providence should do you hurt? Certainly if you harbor any such
false and unworthie conceit, it proceeds from some gross mistake of your own
interest, and the nature of things. And this leads me to a second
consideration, which I desire you to weigh seriously and impartiallie, and not
let sense, and carnal reason, and the common Opinions of an inconfiderate
maltitude, sway with you against the greatest and most apparent truth.

2. Namely, That if we speak distinctlie and properly, You have received
little or no hurt by all those seemingly ^ad things that have befallen you: By
your sufferings in hemselves you are not worsted, nor are the poorer for he
losses that you have sustained. It Is probable, this may at the first sight seem
a very great Paradox, and a flourish of Rhetoric, too weak to persuade or
satisfy those who can fetch demonstrations from their sight and feeling to the
contrary: For them that a while since had houses, and shops well furnished,
quick trading, good ^^edit and money at command, now to have empty pur^^,
little respect, and perhaps scarce a place to put their leads in: Is there no
hurt in all this? This is hard to be apprehended by those that have met with
such a change. But if, notwithstanding the strangeness of this Assertion, I
shall evinee it to be undoubtedlie true, I hope you will, laying aside all
prejudice, entertain and improve it according to its usefulness and importance.
Why should it not be as welcome ridings to you to hear, that you have received
no damage (or none that is considerable) if it prove true, as it would be to
hear how you might recover what is lost, in a way that would satisfy sense it
self? And if you be once convinced that no hurt is done you by the hand of God,
I hope you will easily be persuaded not to complain of it: And I must confess,
except you are in some measure convinced of this, I cannot well see what it is
should keep you from complaining, (...) a disposition to it. All that is said
of Gods Dominion o^^ver his creatures, and his right and power to do with them
what he please, may make men understand that it is to no purpose to resist a
will and strength so much above their own, but will not be sufficient to beget
in them an hearty submission to it, nor will bring them to think well of God,
and take any complacencie in him whenever he shall make them smart, whilst
they have a conceit that hereby he ruins and undoes them: Nay, perhaps it may
increase both their rage and torment, to consider how impossible it is for them
to help themselves But such, as upon right apprehensions of the true happen
ness of Man, see plainly that no asslictive Dispensations do prejudice or
impair it, they and they only wi^^ be enabled to receive them without
quarrelling and ^epining at the Author: And that upon this account you may be
possessed of so good a temper, (which is that I am now persuading you to) it will
be needful to represent what those right apprehensions are which are here of
(...) great necessity and use. For when we call to mind what it is that is the
chief and only good of man, we shall th^^ better understand what is hurtful to
him. Now in one word, man's happiness consists in his conformity to God, or in
his Communion with him; (which seems the same thing, or a necessary
consequence of it) that is to say, in his being made as like to God in all
imitable perfections as his Nature is capable; in framing all his motions, and
guiding his actions by those rules which God has prescribed; and in reaching
to that knowledge, love and enjoyment of God, for which his reasonable
faculties were given him, and are suited. This is the proper formal happiness
of Humane Nature, which is begun on earth, perfected and completed in heaven:
Here is in the bud, and is called Grace; hereafter it is in the lower and
fruit, and is called Glory. I speak to Chritians who believe they have immortal
Souls, and that all is true which Scripture speaks concerning them, and
therefore the supposition of your Faith, may well excuse me from any laborious
proof of a Truth so fundamental to Religion, and so plainly revealed in Gods
^olie Word.

If God be the most perfect Being, then to resemble him is our greatest
Perfection: If his wisdom, power, and benignity be such, that he created man
in an happy state, set him upon, and designed him for a blessed em^^iment and
end; then to comply with his will, living (...) that manner, and to that
purpose for which we were reated, is our greatest interest: And if God be the
best (...) Beings, then to have our souls fitted for, and raised to the
fruition of him, is our highest felicity. From this it was we fell by sin, and
to this it is the Office and de^ig^ of Christ the Redeemer, and the work of his
Spirit, (...) recover and restore us. The intent of his undertaing, was not to
purchase for us riches, ease, or honors, (...) to repair our decayed natures,
and renew us after the ^^age of God, which we had defaced, and so to qualify
us for, and bring us into his service and favor. Only it is to be considered,
that whilst man is in this earthly state, emploid in the service of his maker,
and getting fitter for the higher glory, he has a body that stands in need of
outward support and comforts; as food and raiment, house and lodging, and such
like conveniences: but yet his happiness, which is that I before mentioned,
depends not upon his continuance in this body, nor upon its prosperity whilst
he is in it: Let what will befall the body, our case is good whilst the soul
prospers, and is constant and regular in those duties that are proper to the
present state. Nay further, riches, health, and all manner of bodily
accommodations, are no farther to be reckoned good for a man, than as they help
on his higher spiritual good, as by them we are supported whilst we are
serving God, and as we emploie them to his Glory, by putting them to those
several good uses which he has appointed us. By this time, I hope, you
apprehend what it is I drive at, namely, to manifest how inconsiderable your
losses are, that you may value them accordingly. You see of what nature, and
in what rank those things are which you have parted with, at what a great
distance they stand from your happiness, and how little reference they have
thereto: And that whether you consider your happiness as now begun, or as you
are in the way to it hereafter to be enjoied. If even here on earth, the good
man who lives in the fear and love of his Maker, be the only happy man, what
then are you the unhappier for having lost some, yet, suppose it were all of
those worldly things you possessed? And what reason have you to complain or
grieve? what, I hope, you have lost nothing of God, nor the Graces of his
Spirit, wherewith you were inricht; nothing of y^^ Spiritual wisdom and
affections, of your faith, and love, and zeal for his Glory: These Goods, I
hope, are ^^burnt. It was not sure in the power of the flames, as raging as
they were, to reach to your souls, and burn up their furniture: That which was
Gods building within you is not consumed, nor his image upon you defaced. And
if your choicest treasures, the having of which can alone enrich you, be saved,
may you not with much ease let go your lumber, of a far less value? Are you not
still as holy, humble, and heavenly as ever you were? And if so, I dare
affirm it, you are never the worse for all your losses. What a wretched
creature else would you make man, if his happiness hung as loose about him, as
he riches and all external things do? This would seem to blemish the Divine
Providence, as if he had put the affairs of man, the noblest of all inferior
Beings, into no better a state than of a Bruit, nay, worse by far: For as his
earthly enjoiments are of a much greater extent, so would he be more obnoxious
to hurts and dangers. It Is peculiar to him to be concerned for an estate, for
reputation, for Wives and Children, etc. and if to be deprived of these would
undo him, then the waves might swallow up his happiness, and Thieves rob him of
it, fire, and many other accidents consume it. The slanderer might blast it,
sickness prey upon it, and the grave bury it; and which seems worse than all
the rest, our lives would be a continual torment, upon apprehension of the
uncer^intie of these things, and through the fore-thoughts and ^^ars of being
stripped of them, when as a Bruit is free from these fears, and from most of the
evils that occasion them: Moreover, men would hence be drawn to think, that
the blessed God has dealt enviouslie and sparingly with his creatures, in
that neither all, nor the most are capable of rising to be happy, if it
consist in wealth, honors and the like: Wherefore, they to whom they were never
given, or from whom they are at any time taken, will be en^^n'd to hard and evil
thoughts of God, whose Providence ^^us orders the course of things. But blessed
be our heaven^ie Father, he has dealt more bounteouslie with us than so, and
has not cast us into any such necessity of being miserable, through
discontentedness with our portion and reluctancie against his will; but has
made our happiness of that nature, that whoever is truly willing may reach to
it, and none can he deprived of it against his will; which is a privilege
wherein no creature on earth, beside man, is a sharer. It Is nothing else but
wickedness, which is always a wilful thing, that can possibly hurt us. All
afflictions be they never so sharp, do but race our skin, not pierce our souls.
They do but at the most break the Cabinet, the Jewel is safe and whole? When as
the effects of sin are like those of lightning, secret, but most certainly
pernicious, melting the Sword, whilst the Scabbard's untoucht, breaking the
bone, whilst the flesh is unchanged, thus does it destroy the soul, whilst the
body seems to remain in good plight. Every creature has some such perfections
proper to its own nature, that the having thereof causes them to be reputed
good, as being agreeable to their own kind, and fit for that use they are
designed to. Thus the Horse that has strength or swiftness, fitting him for
the service he is put to, is a good Horse; and though sometimes he may be set
out with a fine Saddle, and gaudy Trappings, (...) he is never the worse, if
considered as an Horse, w^^ these are taken off him: And no more is a man for
(...) loss of any external things which belong to him, sinc^^ is not in these
that his excellency, as he is a man, consists, nor was that the end of his
Creation, that he might enjoy them. What, does it add any thing to his real
proper worth, to be clothed in gorgeous and costly array, or to have store of
money lying in his chests, or to live (...) brave house, with a deal of pomp
and attendance, faith deliciouslie every day, having high titles and hon^^
conferred upon him? What Is all this to the worth of (...) man? These tell what
he has, not what he is. His clothes and his house, and money may be good,
whilst he himself is stark naught. Such things as these, which are here to
day, and gone to morrow, and are of so little reference to him whilst they
stay, can they better or advance him? without question they cannot. For shall
we not find those who abounded with them, having nothing else to commend
them, termed no better, in the language of Scripture, than Dogs and Swine, such
to who^ the society and portion of Devils is threatened and allotted? When as
holy men, though destitute of all the ornaments, by the sentence of God
himself, who best knows the worth of his creatures, are styled happy,
honorable, blessed, and the only excellent ones upon earth. And if Holiness be
the peculiar excellency of the reasonable creature, then the loss of this only
is his ruin; as your horse or any other beast, is then spoiled when he has
lost his ability for service; and as the loss of limbs or life is the
destruction of the body: Even thus does sin, where it has its full force and
operation, wound and murder the soul so far as it is capable of dying: For the
death of the Soul, is its final departure from God, and it is en^^itie against
him, which is far worse than any other death or annihilation that can befall
it, as we may un^^rstand even by the body it self, for which to draw out life
upon the wrack, or in any such like torments, is worse than to be slain
outright; and that miserable life may most properly be called a lingering
death, according to the saying, vita non est vivere sed valere. But it is no
crosses nor losses, nor any thing that lights upon what is without the soul
that can inflict this misery upon it; nothing, I say, but its voluntary
declining from that holy state, wherein God would have it live, to the sordid
^^uitish ways of wickedness. May we not fitly allude to be words of Christ,
concerning that which defiles the man. Mark 7.15. There is nothing from without
a man, that enring into him, can defile him: but the things which come out of
him, those are they which defile the man. And most demonstrative is the reason
there given, verse. 19. Because what he receives from without, enters not into
his heart, but into the belly, and goes out into the draught, purging all
meats. So neither can affliction endamage the soul, since it enters not into
it, but falls upon some external thing, and so slides away. But those evil
things which come from within, such as are instanc't in verse 21, 22. Evil
thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, these defile
the man: And these are the thing which destroy him; for the defilement of the
soul is (...) destruction. Take it, Sirs, for a most unquestionable truth, that
to have an excessive love for worldly things, (...) much more hurtful than not
to have the things themselves; to burn in such inordinate affections to them is
worse for you by far, than to have them all burnt up^ for this latter is but
like the firing of some poor Cottage^ and out-buildings, which in time of war
is often done, o^ purpose for the defense and safety of the fortified City, when
as the former is like a fire which the Enemy has kindled in the very he art of
the City it self.

Since then your chief happiness, as you are men (...) Christians, is placed so
far out of the Sphere and hun^^ influence of all external accidents, that the
worst (...) them can do no more to lessen or interrupt it, how (...) reasonable
is it to be much dejected for but a little grievance? Of what a sordid spirit
is that man who should lament the loss of his dung, or some sorry trifle, while
his house is well filled with goods, and his Coffers with money? And no more
reason has he to be cast down for having his hands emptied of all his earthly
substance, whose heart is filled with the more substantial heavealie^ Treasure
of Grace and Goodness.

Yet after all, I am afraid least most of my Reader should take what I have
said for mere Notions, not (...) to be framed into Principles, to guide them in
their practice, and in their judgments of things. Hardly will me^ be
persuaded that riches, the Diana whom not any particular Country only, but the
whole world worshippe^^ who may number more Votaries and Martyrs than the true
God; that these are of so little consequence, and so little conducing to make a
man happy. But yet I may well hope for better entertainment from you that haw
been enlightened to behold such a beauty and glory i^ spiritual things, as
has in some good measure abated your esteem of all things else. And the better
yet to clear and settle your apprehensions, I would desire you but attentlie to
consider your own Nature, whether you bear not something about you better than
flesh and blood, and whether the gratifying and advancing of this Noblest part
be not most your interest; and how far earthly things, which are of a nature
so distant from it, can be serviceable to this end? Confider moreover, what
that is which you must live upon for ever, and then think whether such kind of
seize as make the nearest approach thereto, and are the very beginning of
it, ought ^ot rather to be styled your happiness, than such as are quite of
another kind, and will then be wholly useless. Consider also what kind of men
they are to whom ordinarily the largest share of these things is allotted; how
Infidels, Idolaters, and the profanest wretches abound therewith; and remember
how little of them Christ himself, and his most Noblest Followers enjoyed; and
yet bear what Paul in the name of the rest tells us, That whilst they were as
poor, they made many rich; whilst they seemed to have nothing, they possessed all
things, 2 Cor. 6.10. Think what were the riches they conferred, and what were
the all things they possessed, and see whether they confirm not what I have said.
Furthermore, observe what language Scripture gives to these things, as they
would be any part of man's felicity, and how little regard it commands us to
have for them. Call to mind also what you use to call them your selves in your
prayers and serious discourse, shadows, trash, bubbles, and vanity; and I would
hope you think of them as you speak, and will be affected toward them but as
such things deserve. And lastly, take notice what their greatest lovers think
and say of them, when they have had the best they could get, and are about to
leave them. Lay but all these considerations together, which for brevitie sake
I only mention, and argue thence how little of true happiness consists in the
having of them, and how little hurt is done, and therefore how little cause of
mourning given by their removal.

And let me farther add, as very Notions as these may seem, whoever he be that
is not so thorowlie persuaded of their truth as to frame his apprehensions, and
regulate his affections conformablie thereto, is never ordinarily like to live
any other than an unquiet, discontented, and therefore miserable life, be it
little or much that be has. It Is a most true saying of an excellent Heather.
Moralist, that there are punishments, as it were, by an irreversible Law,
appointed for those, who in a conuidiction to the Divine Order and
establishment of things, conceive too great an Opinion and love for any worldly
matters, which punishments arise out of the very bowels of their vicious
affections. For such (says he) shall be envious, covetous flatterers; they
shall be cast into inward, disturbances, and break out into womanish
lamentarions. And was it needful, I might show by many instances out of some of
the most rational and sober Heathens, that they by the very light of Nature and
strength of reason, discovered as much as I have asserted, that Humane Felicity
depends not upon things external: Though I confess few of them (so far as I can
learn) could tell much of our future perfect happiness, and therefore wanted
sufficient Motives to recommend a contempt of the world, and the like difficult
duties to their hearers: This they left for Christianity to do, which has
fully done it, revealing to us a state of Eternal Bliss purchased by Jesus
Christ for all his faithful servants whence I may afterward particularly fetch
ground (...) comfort.

But you may remember I told you, that if you considered your selves as in the
way to this glory, your affairs are in never the worse posture; taking your
present happiness to consist in working out your salvation, in getting meet
for, and making sure of the Heavenly Inheritance (as indeed it does) it is no
whit prejudiced by the troubles you have undergone. And this plainly appears
from what has been said before: If you have lost nothing of your Grace, you
are never the farther from Glory: If that be but secure, as small a stock as
you ^ye left you of other goods, you may drive on as quick Trade for Heaven as
ever. You have lost nothing of all that whereby you might purchase the favor
of God, or ^n entrance into the Kingdom he has prepared: for it was not for
the rich, and honorable, and prosperous, (as such) but for those that love him
that he has prepared it. We read, Psa. 147.10. That God delights not in the
strength of an horse, nor takes pleasure in the legs of a man. No more does he
in any other external accomplishment; ^e regards you never the more for your
wit or beauty, your wealth or dignity; but Ver. 11. He takes pleasure in them
that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy. You may still come as freely
and boldly to him as ever, and may find as hearty welcome. Some that once
seemed your friends, perhaps may now grow strange, and make shie of you, for
fear you should trouble them; but be of good cheer, your God will not deal with
you thus, whom he loves, he loves to the end. He that chose you, not because
you were rich, will not reject you for being poor. The Lord of Glory, your dear
Savior and Husband, will not repent nor be ashamed of your Alliance, for any
meanness that you may be reduced to; he judges not as man does; nay, it is the
mean and despised ones of the world for whom ordinarily he has the most tender
regard; Not many Mighty, not many Noble are called; but he has chose the poor
of this world rich in faith, heirs of the Kingdom. Neither Grace nor Glory are
set to sale for such things as the poor cannot bring as well as the rich. The
Romish Usurper, with his gaping Officers, may de it, but Christ never will, nor
has he warranted them thereto, or promised to stand to their bargains: He
invites all without money or price to fetch his milk and wine. You know what a
terrible rebuke Simon Mag^^ had for thinking the gift of God might be purchased
with money: It was something more precious than silver and gold that purchased
the incorruptible and never-fading inheritance; be sure then a part in it is
not to be bought with any such base things. A willing, thankful acceptance of
it, as the greatest blessing that can be bestowed, is the great condition on
your part required; this is your selling all for that Pearl of Price: And it is
long of something worse than poverty, if any man have not this. Need I bid you
remember that your money is no current Coin in the other world, nor would
beslead you any thing there. The Judicature erected in the Heavens admits
neither of bribes nor fees. Get a good Cause and you are well enough, but
without that all the Gold in the Indies can neither purchase a Pardon, nor a
Reprieve; there will then be no distinction betwixt the rich and the poor, the
Honorable and the mean; all the difference that is made will be betwixt the
godly and the ungodly, who shall accordingly be disposed to the right hand or
the left, to blessedness or woe. And if all this be so (as there is nothing
more certain) how little reason have you to judge your selves in a worse state
than formerly, or to grieve as if you were so? What, Sirs, is this nothing is
your esteem, that you may have access to God as readily, and hear from him as
frequently, and converse with him as intimately and lovingly as ever you did,
and have the same liberty for transacting with him the great affairs of your
Immortal Souls? Is this nothing, did I say; nay, is not this in a manner all?
Does not this privilege which is yet continued, contain in it all others that
are any whit considerable? In that you may still pursue the great business of
your lives as advantageously as ever, and carry on all your designs upon the
Celestial Kingdom with as good success. If indeed you had been sent into the
world to gather wealth, and leave it to your Children; that you might raise
great families which should flourish when you were dead and gone, you had now
been sadly cast back, and little better than quite broke; and it is no wonder if
they take themselves to be so who made this their chief end. But if your
business here be, to glorify and please him that created and redeemed you, by
an holy fruitful conversation, and to get your souls prepared for an higher
bliss, (which I hope you question not but it is) then, I say, you may follow it
on with as much courage, and to as good purpose, as ever formerly you did,
without check or hindrance by this or any the like disaster. Now what a
ridiculous thing would it be accounted, for a General to be daunted for the
loss of a few straggling Soldiers, whilst the Main Body of his Army, and all
things necessary to carry on the War, are still secure? Or for a Mariner to
stand weeping for having his Ship somewhat weather-beaten and defaced, as to
its painting and fineness, whilst it is still as sufficient and well-fitted for
his Voyage as before? Or for a rich Merchant to lament some such trivial loss
as is scarce mist out of his stock, nor is any hindrance to his great Trading?
Why then should the sincere Christian be so deeply affected with those
occurrences which need be no let to him in his journey, and which leave him
never the less capable of mannaging his chiefest Trade for invisible durable
riches? So that, I hope, I have cleared the truth of my Position, past all
denial or doubting, and have made it to appear, that you have received no
considerable disadvantage by any effects of the Fire; and therefore it is a
very reasonable exhortation, that your sorrow should bear proportion to the
ground of it, and not be excessive, when you have no cause, nor can show any
reason, why it should be so.

But it is probable there may arise some such Objections in your breast, as may
somewhat delay your firmer asse^t to what is said; two or three of which I
shall mention, and endeavor to take out of your way, and so hasten (...) the
next.

Obj. 1. Some may think with themselves, If this be^ indeed so, that the loss
of an estate is a matter of so small importance, how comes it to pass then,
that men bear it so heavily? Surely all are not Children and Fools, to mourn
for the losing of Pins or Counters, wherefore, how can we but think the things
they lose of more worth than so, except we will accuse the generality of men of
extreme Childishness and F^lly?

If this stick any thing with you, for your satisfaction, I would in one word
advise you, soberly to consider all that has been said, to evince how very
little, or just nothing, a great estate contributes to the happiness of man;
and if you can indeed make it out to your own impartial thoughts, that this
assertion is false, and the arguments brought to prove it fallacious, and can
manifest the contrary by stronger reasons, you shall have my free consent to
reject it: But if you are not able to do thus, not can rationally contradict
the former discourse, judge your selves, whether the example even of the most,
of the greatest, or of those whom the world count the wisest, ought to weaken
your assent to a plain, undeniable truth. I affirm nothing but what the Word
(...) God himself, the Professions of all Christians, the strictest Reason, and
the Writings of wisest Heathens will very well warrant, and the convictions of
almost all, one time or other, yield a suffrage to: What then have we to do
with the examples of frail men, under the power of their passions, how many
soever they be? May I not with as much reason demand, If it be true what
Solomon says of the vanity of all the worldlings Idols; and what David says,
that men disquiet themselves in vain, whilst they are heaping up riches; and
what a greater than either, even our Lord himself, tells us, That our life
consists not in the abundance of those things which we possess; how then it
comes to pass, that the most are so eager and insatiable in their desires after
them, so constant and unwearied in their labors to attain them? Is this
because God and good men speak worse of the world than it deserves? Or because
the most are careless and inconsiderate, and think better of it than it is,
pursuing the common course, without examining the reason, or foreseeing the end
of it? and so in a blind zeal, making that their Idol which they see so many
adore; they follow it with the same care and love, as if it was indeed their
God and happiness: which I know you will grant to be a very gross mistake; And
yet, as bad as it is, from this very same mistake, proceeds that unseemly and
excessive sorrow, which you behold in those from whom the things of the world
are withdrawn. Whilst they kept them, they let out their hearts upon, and
rejoyc't in them, and even blessed themselves in their enjoyment of them, as if
they would abide with them, and make them happy for ever: How then can it
otherwise be, but that when they are removed, they should wring their hands
and tear their hearts with grief, as being deprived of that in the fruition,
whereof they took all the satisfaction and joy they had, and from which they
had expectations of something better than ever yet they had found? Who, that is
of these carnal principles, can possibly bear up under the interruption of this
comfort, the frustration of these hopes? Yet this weak carriage of theirs,
tells us not what the worth of the world was, but what kind of false
apprehensions they had of it, and how great a dependence they had upon it.
Though it be but an Idol that is carried away, yet if Micah have taken it for
his God, what wonder if he follow after the men who spoil him of it, with a
deal of lamentation and noise, from which he would never cease, but that he
perceives they are too strong for him, Judge 18.24, 26. Even these are some of
those sorrows with which, the Apostle tells us, they that covet after money, do
pierce themselves thorough.

But perhaps you will tell me, that not only the covetous who are Idolaters, but
even good men themselves seem very unable to bear the losing or lessening of
their estates, and are more concerned for them, than if they were of no greater
value than I speak of, and therefore hence you conclude, that it is warrantable,
or however unavoidable, to have a deeper sense of their departure than I seem
to allow.

To which I answer,

(1) It is not the example of men, what ever they be, but the Word of God, that
must be your direction and rule to guide you in all your apprehensions and
behavior: And you know well enough what this tells you of the World, and how
you ought to stand affected to it, whether it smile or frown; that you should
not, when riches increase, set your hearts upon them, least when they waste,
your comfort should do so too. And

(2) Since you insist on example, how many instances does Scripture afford of
good men, who arrived to such a constancy of mind, and indifferency to all
worldly concerns, that no variety of estate, no crosser therein could shake or
much disturb them? David when in a far worse condition, in all appearance, than
you are reduced to, even when Ziklag, the City where he dwelt, was burnt, his
Goods and his Wives taken by the Enemy; and more than all this, the people
spoke of ^toning him, yet when he was thus greatly distressed, ha ^couraged
himself in the Lord his God. So Job when he was not only deprived of his
possessions, but his Children too; yet from a consideration, that the same God
who had taken away, first gave him all, and that he ^ust return naked to the
Grave, as he came out of the Womb, calmlie concludes with Blessed be the name
of the lord. And if he afterward discovered any touch of impatience, it was
when many other afflictions besides ^s poverty lay hard upon him, and
embittered his spi^t. Does not Paul also tell us, that he had learnt to ^^nt
as well as to abound, and in what ever state he was, therewith to be content?
And that we might not only admire his excellent frame in him, but rise up to
it our selves; ^e tells us how he came by it, through Christ strengthening ^im,
it was, that he could do all these things. Others we ^ead of, that took
joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, counting all things but dross and dung so
they might win Christ. And Church History makes mention of multitudes of
gallant Spirits, both in the Primitive and latter times, that manifested the
same low esteem of the World. And ^f they could take it joyfully, to have their
Goods spoiled ^or Gods sake, may not you take it patiently to have them spoiled
by his hand? For may not their examples, who were (...) famous for their
holiness and wisdom, best inform ^ou of what value the world is, and convince
you, that this patience and indifferency of mind, which I am ^ressing upon
you, is no impossible thing. Lastly, Granting that you see some, who may yet
be good men ^r the main, that by their carriage contradict these examples yet
may I not take liberty to say, that this is ^ut a defect of their goodness, and
therefore no way fit for your imitation. If David himself begin to (...) hard
thoughts of God, as if he had forgotten him, he (...) quickly correct himself,
and acknowledge, This was (...) Infirmity, Psalm. 77.10. The plain truth is, the
best (...) too prone to by influenc't upon, by the common (...) of the
multitude about them, and being but a few, (...) hardly bear up against the
mighty stream of popular opinions, and corrupt practices that flow from them;
(...) are ready to be born down, as men that are overpower (...) by a far
greater number of contrary voices. So (...) partly from examples without, and
partly from the (...) inclinations of a carnal principle within, not wholly
subdued, many even of the better sort, walk like men, to^^ the Apostles phrase,
and hastily take up some of the rules whereby the common sort are guided,
without the strict examination which in such matters is requisite. (...)
therefore having too much the same conceits of rich^^ ease, and reputation in
the world, that their ca^^^ Neighbors have, when they meet with any cross in
the things, they show their weakness in grieving much-w^^ as others do. Though,
blessed be God, these very times, (...) bad as they are, yield us, I hope, many
instances of (...) who are arrived to a more exalted and Christian-^^^^ Spirit.
But what if there were fewer, yea, none such what ground have you to plead
against your duty? wh^^ you are persuaded to nothing but what is possible, wh^
is reasonable and highly advantageous, as I may show non. Wherefore labor with
all your might, to de^ your selves of all those false opinions, which your lo^
and daily converse with a multitude of ignorant, worldly men may have possessed
you with, and too deeply ro^^ed you in. Especially beware of esteeming Good
(...) Evil, according to their reckoning: for mistakes he will produce a world
of inconveniences, and unavoidably cast you into great perplexities and
disorders, (...) ^nce you think every thing to be Good for you, which ^easeth
the flesh, and that to be Evil, which makes it ^mart, or any way crosses its
interest (which is the ^^dgement of the most) it is next to impossible that you
should pass your lives with any true peace and quiet. and truly, they that will
be foolish and miserable, because they see the most are so, as they are very
little ca^able of Counsel, so they do as little deserve pity.

Object. 2. But again some may say, That they are now ^duc't to such straits,
that of necessity they must follow their ^^llings more closely than they were
wont, and so have not the ^^e leisure for the Service of God, nor are so
capable of do^^g works of charity as formerly, and therefore they cannot but
^ink themselves in a much worse condition by this Calamity?

To which I answer, Your greatect business and inter^t, is to comport with the
Providence of God, in that estate and condition wherein he sees fit to place
you, and to perform the duty proper to that estate. And therefore as to your
necessity of diligent labor, you ^^eed not be grieved at it: For

(1) So far as God has made it necessary, and so ^r as you are taken up
therewith, to that end, and in that ^anner which he has appointed, even these
your ^abours shall be an acceptable Service to him. ^or

(2) Does he require of you any such Attendance upon the duties of Religion, as
is ordinarily inconsistent ^ith your lawful and necessary callings. It is no
more ^^e duty of a poor man to spend so much time in hearing, reading, or
praying, as would hinder him for providing for his Family, than it is of a sick
man to be so much exercised therein, as would endanger his life.

(3) May not the diligence you are put upon in your employments, prove an
advantage to you, in securing ^ou from idleness, and the temptations and
mischiefs that ^^e begotten by it?

4. However you are not hereby disabled for the greatest and most substantial
vital duties of Religion: Though you should not have time to hear or read so
much (...) formerly, yet, I hope, you may love God and your Brother as much as
ever; and be as much in the exercise (...) faith, patience, humility, and all
other graces of the Spirit; and in these it is, the Life of Religion most of
^^lies.

And lastly, see that you do but keep up your heart and affections for external
duties, and you will find y^^ selves not so straightened of time, be your
employment what they will; but you will have leisure for the performance of
them so far as God has engaged you then to; nor shall you find this
performance any such his drance to your business in the world, as carnal men
(...) wont to imagine. Keep your hearts heavenly, and earthly employments will
be no prejudice to you; spend no^^ idly, and you may redeem time for Gods
service, with out any prejudice to your employments.

And as for your incapacity of relieving the necessicous, the same answer in a
manner may show, that neither upon this account have you much ground of trouble.

For 1. So far as God by his Providence has disabled you for works of Charity,
he requires them not at your hands, nor will blame you for not doing them, no
mo^^ than a lame man shall be blamed for not walking.

2. Every condition has its proper duty, and you contentedness in a low estate
will be as acceptable (...) God, as your liberality when in an higher, and more
pleatiful.

3. You may, notwithstanding your poverty, maintain a charitable spirit: your
heart may be as large, though your estate is not; and if it be so, you shall be
never theless regarded nor rewarded by God. What we (...) in the Gospel of the
Widows Mite, may inform us, that they who do what they are able, and earnestly
desire to do more, shall be reckoned amongst the greatest Benefactors, and
dealt with as such; otherwise it would go ^ll with the best of men, since a
Peter himself may sometimes truly say, Silver and Gold have I none.

3. You had need to look well to your hearts that they deceive you not in this
case; for so much of discontent ^s you find in the absence of riches, so much
selfishness ^here is in the desire of them, since that proceeds rather from a
love to the things themselves, than from any ^ind to glorify God with them.
For if this be that you ^im at, why do you not glorify him by acquiescing in
his Providence that has removed them? You may best discover this, by
reflecting upon your carriage in the days ^f your prosperity; for they who did
not then improve their Estates for God, desire them back again, its to be
^ear'd, for their own ends rather than his glory; but if ^ou were so wise as to
honor God with your sulstance ^hilst you enjoyed it, this may be abundant
ground of satisfaction to you in the want of it.

For 4. You are to consider that you are but Stewards ^f the gifts of God,
whose business it is to keep a faithful account, and make a diligent
improvement of whatever Talents you receive; and therefore you must wholly
leave it to your Lords pleasure what you shall have, and how long it shall
remain in your hands: Why should ^^e servant be concerned how much stock his
Master allows him to Trade with? Be it little or much, what is the difference to
him, so he be but careful and faithful in that he is entrusted with? Nay,
lastly, if in good earnest ^^u regard your selves but as Stewards of all you
pos^^st, that must be accountable for the same, methinks it should be but
little trouble to you to have your charge ^^d burden lessened. Certainly its
easier to give an account of a small Estate than a great one, whatever (...)
may think of the matter. And though we should refuse no pains for our Masters
service, yet so far as he thinks (...) to ease us, we have no reason to be
displeased at it.

Object. 3. Some again may tell me (which is the la^^ Objection I shall here
take notice of) That the affliction they have met with, have occasioned their
repining and discontent, and cast them into great despondencies and distrusts,
(...) therefore (according to my own arguing) have been exceeding hurtful to
them, and given them very great cause (...) sadness.

In answer whereto: 1. I grant, that sin indeed do^ hurt to any soul where its
entertained, and brings al^^ with it just ground of sorrow: and so far as (...)
have given way to sinful passions, you have cause for (...) miliation, which
you are chiefly to manifest, by ender vouring to repel and banish them from
your breast, and not go on overwhelming your selves with one grief (...)ter
another, upon pretense of repenting for the former.

2. But pray you fee that you pass your Censure (...) right, and then you will
easily find, that it is not of God^ dealings with you, but of your own
unsuitable carriage under them, that you have ground to complain. Whatever
distempers of mind you have been cast into, the have not so much proceeded from
any outward cause, (...) from your own weakness and misapprehensions, otherwise
the same cause would produce the same effect in (...) but you know there are
many instances of such who h^^ undergone more than ever you did, without any
such (...) sturbances in their breasts, or irregularity in their behavior.

Yea, lastly, So far have Gods Providence been fr^^ causing the distempers
which may now appear, that the have rather tended to their removal, by
discovering the which were bred before, but lay more secret and undiscerned
till this occasion. You will not say, that the touchstone makes the Gold bad,
whilst it shows that is (...): Nor do wars and dangers make men Cowards, but
manifest some to be such. In time of prosperity the heart ^^ten secretly
cleaves to the Creature, and yet is scarce ^spected to do so, but when
adversity comes and be^aves it of its Darlings, then does this immoderate ^^e
break out into immoderate grief; as change of ^r sometimes stirs up those
humors which before lay (...) in the body. Whilst the world was flowing in upon
(...), those spiritual distempers were hatched and nou^^t, which may most of all
show themselves upon its ^ing out. The excess of Creature-love (which posses^^h
us soonest when the World smiles most upon us) is ^^t corrupt Fountain whence
those many bitter streams (...) unruly passions flow, as love to God is the
Source ^^d Spring of all other holy affections. Fitly may it (...) said of you
that stand mourning over the Funerals of ^^ward comforts, what the Jews said of
Christ when he ^^pt over Lazarus's Grave, Behold how they loved them. and
indeed the love we bear to children or friends, is ^dome so much felt or
expressed as at their Funerals.

The bitter and passionate lamentations which David ^^kes for Absalom, 2 Samuel
18.33. do very plainly re^al what kind of affections he had for him. But now
was not Absaloms death, nor Joabs hand that slew him, ^^ch less the Providence
that permitted both, which was ^^^e accused as the cause of all this sorrow,
but his own ^^dness which he had formerly contracted for this beau^^l Son; for
when this was away, he could bear the ^ath of a Child with another kind of
manliness: It ^^s not then, Oh my Son, my Son, would God I had died for ^^e,
etc. But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I ^^ng him back again? I
shall go to him, but he shall not return to me, 2 Samuel 12.23. Since then this
breaking (...) of the corruptions you complain of, does but show (...) was
before in your hearts, may you not look upon it an advantage to have such an
insight into your selves ((...) shall show anon) and so entertain the
Providence wh^^ has helped you to it, rather with thankfulness than (...)
muring, making so good an improvement thereof as (...) fitted and designed for.

3. But this brings me to a third Consideration, wh^^ may work you to a very
willing submission to what (...) has laid upon you, in that, if you are not
wanting your selves, your afflictions may be so far from doing you (...) that
they may very much conduce to your good. And if (...) be so, it will be found
most unreasonable for you to be them with heaviness and discontent. What would
(...) think of that man who should entertain courtesies (...) repining at his
Benefactor? Now that afflictions in gearal are capable of being beneficial to
those that are exercised with them, is most commonly inculcated (...)
acknowledged, and may appear very plain to any (...) do but consider the
express promise of God, The (...) things shall work together for good to those
that love (...) And the experience of Saints in former times, who h^^ left it
upon Record, that it was good for them to be ^^^^ed. Moreover, they are
pronounced blessed whom the L^^ chasteneth, and teaches out of his Law. We are
told (...) he chastises every Son whom he loves, and that for their (...)
fit, Heb. 12.6.10. Yea, had we nothing else to guide (...) but our knowledge of
the infinite wisdom and good^^ of God, we might hence certainly and safely
concl^^ that in all his dealings with his people he intends (...) advantage.
Has any thing happened to you but w^^^ came from his will who is goodness it
self, and wh^^ ever doing good to such as are in Covenant with hi^^ You may be
sure, he envies you not your enjoyments^ took them away as being too good for
you, but as having something better to bestow in their room: Wherefore,
although you could not at present discern what those benefits are which God
intends you by this sharp Visitation; yet you may rest satisfied in this, that
there is so much reason in all his actings, and so much good designed to his
people thereby, that if you were fully acquainted therewith, and had all things
at your own ordering, you would dispose of them just as he has done. Did you
see and know what God does, and had the same intentions for the honor of his
Name, and the good of your own and others souls, you would, had it been at your
choice, have chose all that is come to pass, as terrible as it may now appear;
and would freely have consented to a raging pestilence, though your friends or
families might be laid hold on thereby; and to the burning of London, though
your own dwellings were within the reach of the flames? And shall not this
reconcile you ^o whatever God has done amongst us? I know not what more you
should require for your satisfaction, except this be a trouble to you, that you
are not made acquainted with the secret and unsearchable designs of the
Almighty in all his works of wonder, which are manifested in his Government of
the world; that is, that you ^re men, and not Gods.

But yet as to your own concern, you need not go far ^o find out what benefit
you may make of the present Providence, which I shall hint in a few
particulars: ^nly by the way, let me first desire you to call to mind what is
before said of the happiness of man, that it consists in his being made like to
God, in his loving, pleasing, and enjoying of him, partly here, perfectly and
eternally hereafter: Wherefore whatever promotes this his ^hief good, must
needs be accounted so far good for him, however it may appear in other
respects, since the means must be judged of, and denominated only from their
(...) spect to the end. To lance a sore till we smart, if make for its
healing, is good for the body. It seen harsh usage for poor creatures that are
distracted, to be confined to dark rooms, and sometimes bound to the beds,
whipped, and stripped short of food, yet if all this be^ on their recovery, is it
not to be looked on as good (...) them? And as easily may you apprehend, that
whatever tends to the weakening of Corruptions, and strength (...) of your
Graces, enables you to glorify God, and be^^ you on in the way to Glory, is so
much for your intere^^ that nothing else in the whole world could advance (...)
which conduces not to make you truly, and in Gods account, Better men, to
which end, your present suffering may greatly conduce.

(1) As may first appear by what I formerly mea^oned, of the advantage they
give you, for a through discovery of the frame and temper of your own Souls.
Neither Grace nor Corruption are ever so well known, as under trials. May you
not now find, that the world was g^^ nearer to your hearts than you imagined,
by the (...) you feel at its departure; that you leaned harder upon (...) than
you thought of, by the shaking you have met wi^^ when it slipped from you? May
you not perceive that (...) much of the comfort of your lives did depend upon
uncertain, carnal things, and so was it self but vain an^ carnal? May you not
find more earthliness, impatience, and unbelief, than you before suspected to
lo^^ in your breasts? Now though to have these Corruption be matter of trouble,
yet to discover them, in order (...) their cure, is a mercy. To have a Disease
is a grief, (...) to know it, we say, is the first step to health. One (...) or
other they must be known so as to be repented of and mortified, or else you
were like to fare the worse for it certainly then, the sooner the better: for
the long they should lie concealed, the greater would be their strength and
mischief, and the difficulter their conquest. For this the Psalmist prays,
Psalm. 139.23, 24. and for this, I believe, you have praid many a time that God
would search and know your hearts, that is, make them known to you, and now he
has answered your prayer. This, Elihu tells us, is meet to be said unto God,
by a man under chastisement, That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have
done iniquity, I will do no more. Job 34.31, 32. and to the same purpose Job
36.9, 10. But on the other hand, if these trying Providence manifest your
Souls, through the Grace of God, to be in a more sound and healthful temper, so
that you can cheerfully let go whatever he has called for, and find that there
is nothing you so vehemently desire, as to comply with the whole will of God,
and to be rendered up thereto; that none of his dealings move you to question
his truth or goodness, to think hardly of himself, or meanly of his promises;
but that still your love to him is as great as ever, and in his favor alone you
can rest abundantly satisfied, if it be thus with you, the very discovery of so
blessed a frame, may be matter of greater satisfaction, than the loss of all
things else, need be of trouble; yea, if this be your frame, you cannot be
overmuch troubled with any such losses. So that what ever your temper and
behavior is, there will be found great equity in this dispensation. If you
bear it heavily and impatiently, the greater it seems was your need of it,
since this proceeds from such an affection to the creature, as was the very
disease of your Souls, to which this Physic is suited. But if you bear it
quietly, then it appears you were fitted for it, and so I know, will be far
from an inclination to complain of him, that has so well fitted your back for
your burden, and gave you not a blow, before he had furnished you with an
Helmet. And in that these afflictions serve not only to discover your
Corruptions, but to remove them; not only to manifest your Graces, but (...)
exercise and promote them; upon both these account they will farther appear to
be for your advantage, at shall proceed to show.

(2) Wherefore in the next place, Hereby you (...) a very great help to take a
true estimate of the world, that s^^ you may be affected toward it, according
to its worth and ^^^therwise: Now if ever, you may discern, how vain, how
fleeting and uncertain it is. That which even now wi^^ in your houses and
hands, and seemed to make so good a show there, in a few hours after, with
those house themselves, was not at all to be seen, except as expiring into
smoke, or turned into ashes. And shall not the very dust and smoke, though at
first it might wring water from your eyes, help so far to clear your sight,
that the splendid appearances of a glittering world, may never more impose upon
you? May you not now see into it, and through it, and behold what a very nothing
it is? To your own sense, does it not appear that the usual titles which Holy
Writ bestows upon it, and all the felicity thereof, are no worse than it
deserves? Calling it a Bubble, a Dream, very Vanity, even that which is not.
For have you not seen stately Fabrics, with all their rich furniture, flash
out and disappear as aerie bubbles are wont? have you not seen fair and
flourishing estates, which made the owners conceit themselves in a secure and
happy condition, able to afford no more comfort than a Dream when one awaketh,
being vanished into nothing whilst they promised all things? Now may not such
notable sights as these, do very much toward the rectifying of your judgments
about all worldly things, if before they were erroneous? and toward the
moderating of your affections to them, if before they were excessive? He that
doted upon a beautiful outside, will soon coo^ his affections, when he sees
the object of them turned into a loathsome carcass. Where Is that man's wisdom,
who eagerly catches at the money, which he is certainly told, will turn to
coals or dirt in his hand? And where is his understanding, I may say his senses,
who has not learnt, from what he lately saw, that all that a man has may do
so?

There are indeed (to digress a little) many such excellent lessons taught by
this dispensation, that to him who soberly and attentively observes the same,
it may prove a most profitable Sermon. How fully does it inform us, what
miserable kind of people they be, who have nothing better nor surer to trust
to, than such a perishing world as this? and how foolish they are, who
needlessly hurry and toil all their days, and make it the very business of
their life, to get that which can be held no faster; especially, how stark mad
they are, whilst they sell away their precious souls, and an eternal kingdom
that might be made sure, for such trifles as these. It acquaints us also with
the great weakness of the generallity of men, who take so much upon them, and
carry it so high above their neighbors, if they can but scrape together a
little more wealth than they, as presently taking themselves to be much the
better men for it: When alas! if this be all they build upon, they may within a
few days come to be as bad or worse, than those they before despised; and so,
they do not only discover their own emptiness of true worth, by valuing
themselves by such mean and mutable things, but also stand exposed to contempt,
in their own, as well as other men's judgments: for if they account themselves
wise and honorable to day, because they are rich, by the same reckoning, they
must pass for worthless fools to morrow, when they shall become poor: and yet
what is more common in the world, than to prize and rate men after this strange,
ridiculous manner, so that he shall be thought ridiculous who contradicts it?
Again, this sudden and unavoidable waste that was made of such riches as were
in your hands may inform you, how great wisdom it is to dispose of them so as
may exempt them from the power of the eves, or fire, or any such dangerous
accidents. He that, according to his capacity, lays out his estate for God (or
keeps it principally to trade with for him) is that wise Merchant, who puts it
into such hands, where not only the principal is secured, but an interest of
another value, than blind earth worms are acquainted with, is certain to be
gained.

What one says of Job, may be partly applied to your case, that he had lost
all but what he had given away. That which has fed and clothed the poor
Members of Christ, or any other way been employed for his service, is still
your own, and to be reckoned as good as ready money, and better too; if there
be any truth in the Gospel, which, I presume, you question not. And for your
own gain and comfort, I heartily wish, that your expenses for Christ, amounted
to a greater sum, than an Inventory of your losses by the Fire does; then,
though you had nothing to show but the very clothes upon your backs, I durst
confidently affirm, you have more than you have lost. And hence, for the
future, you may take direction how to improve and secure what wealth God shall
entrust you with, and may be taught the discretion, still to take the first
opportunity to that end. The words of our Savior to Judas, which the other
Apostles thought had a reference to his giving something to the poor, may very
well be applied to that purpose, That thou did, do it quick'y. In good works,
you may without danger, make heste to be rich. Nay here, if in any thing,
delay is dangerous. Not without reason does the Wise man exhort us to do good,
whilst it is in the power of our hand, and not bid our Neighbor come again to
morrow, when we have it by us. Prove. 3.27, 28. That which is to day in your
hands, and may be profitable to your self and brother, may to morrow be
snatched out of them, and neither of you be the better for it. Wherefore learn
wisdom by what you have seen: You especially that have but seen, not at all,
or but little felt the effects of this Fire, let your bounty to your
impoverisht brethren, be your thank-offering to God for your preservation. And
let all take notice, that if they are so backward to render God his own, in
that way that it may be most theirs, he can send for it in such ways as will
be little for their advantage. Is it not better, think you, to send up your
treasures to Heaven voluntarily, where you may finde-them hereafter, than to
have them go up thither wards in clouds of smoke, never more to bestead you?
And it will make but little to your commendation or comfort, to have your
estates fetched away in this manner by hundreds and thousands, which before were
wont to be squeezed from you for good uses, only by sixpences and shillings.

But to return, the great lesson which is pressed upon you hence, and which
indeed is understood in all these, is what I before intimated, namely, how
very unfit any thing which the whole affords, is, to be your felicity and
portion; and how unreasonable it is that you should have the least regard to it
as such. And by the palpable discovery of its vanity, which the Providence of
God has made before your eyes, you may, through his Grace working with your
serious consideration, be brought off from all such inordinate regard to it,
which the best are too subject to. Now without question to have this so common
and dangerous a disease weakened and removed, is a far greater mercy than to
have had all that is gone from you reserved. Nay, this might have proved a
furtherance of your misery, to have retained that which gave strength to your
disease. For examine it well, and tell me, whether your very enjoyments have
not been a clog and hindrance to you, and made you remiss and sluggish in the
way to heaven, by the flatteries and diversions wherewith they were wont to
entertain and amuse you?

Have they not spoiled many a Duty, and rendered many an Ordinance useless,
through their too great prepossession of your hearts? Have they not been apt to
fill you with false and carnal joys, with a vain confidence and self-conceit?
Has not the World been a bait and snare to your corrupt natures, and drawn you
to unseemly compliances with the guize of this luxurious, fantastical age? in
the needless cost and braverie of your attire, houses and furniture; in the
excess of your feastings and entertainments, in a tenderness and delicacie that
becomes not the good Soldiers of Jesus Christ? These are the common effects of
wealth, and the temptations wherewith it is attended; and though the power of
Grace might secure you from the more deadly, damning hurt of its charms, yet
its too too probable some force they had upon you. What a mercy then may you
well account it, if this fire have burnt up so much of your Estate as was
hurtful to you, and so refined the rest, that it may no more hurt you. Though
it will not indeed prove you humble and mortified, because you live at a meaner
rate than you were wont, being necessitated thereto; yet this necessity may
prove a notable means to that end, and becoming at length the matter of your
choice, is capable of being improved into a virtue: A great deal of unnecessary
expense and stir to gratify the flesh will be saved, when there remains no
such plenty to be lavisht away; and hereby may the man in time voluntarily
become much more temperate, sober, and selfdenying: Poverty may prick the
Bladder of Pride which riches were so apt to blow up; and instead thereof bring
in not a forced, but true humility; yea, the very loss of one great estate, may
make the owners resolve never to cover after another, not out of despair, but
prudence, as seeing what their designs are all come to, and may do again, if
they should follow them as before; and so they may meet with contentedness in a
low estate, who went without it in an higher, and may serve God better in want
than in their former abundance.

Surely thus to take Knives or Ratsbane out of Childrens hands is a friendly
office, and when they come to understand what was done for them, they will so
esteem it, though at first they may take on as if they were hurt. Your
friendship to the world is enmity to your selves as well as to God; and in
compassion of your case he is arisen (...) your assistance, against those lusts
which warred against your souls: and will you not readily accept his aid, and
set in with him against them? Are you not willing to smart a little, so these
may die for it? Who would be much troubled for a slight wound, if in receiving
it he gave a mortal one to his deadly Enemy? Sampson was willing to have the
house fall upon his own head, that be might thereby revenge himself upon the
Philistine Lords, who had put out his eyes, and were making sport with him: And
why should not you as well consent to the fall of your houses and estates too,
if therewith that creature-love, delight and confidence, which have done so
much to befool and blind you, may be crushed to death? The Physician is not
only submitted to, but paid for his Physic, though his bitter Pills and
Potions might make us sick before they helped us to our health? And shall we
behave our selves worse toward God, who delights not in our smart and sorrow,
only if need be, will let his dearest servants meet with manifold temptations
and trials? If then the Fire which has taken away much of the world from you,
has taken your worldliness too, and by the influence of the Divine Spirit
(that Co^lestial Fire) has made for the purifying of your souls, so that you
come out of it, as the three Children out of the Furnace, not only unhurt, but
unbound; having those snares and fetters of carnal affections, whereby you were
straightened and enthralled, burnt from off you, instead of repining at this
Providence, you have reason rather to indite Songs of praise to him that has
redeemed and advanced you into the truest Liberty, the Noblest Freedom
whereof you are capable.

(3.) Another great advantage of this Dispensation is, That now you have a most
proper season for the exercise of faith, patience, and self-resignation, with
such like graces, which are especially requisite in, and peculiar to a
suffering state. In prosperity these are as it were obscured, (like Stars in
the day time) and through disuse weakened, to the great disadvantage of the
soul; but adversity excites and polishes them, puts them upon action, and so
displaies their use and excellency, to the honor of the Author, and the great
benefit and comfort of the owners. This we find one end of the tribulations of
Christians, That the trial of their faith might be found unto praise, honor
and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.7 And why should not all
the Spiritual Powers and Faculties wherewith God has furnished his servants be
brought into exercise? To what other purpose is Grace bestowed? Why do Generals
furnish their Soldiers with Armout and Weapons, but for the fight? And what a
shame would it be for any of these to murmr because he is placed in the front,
or set to guard any Pass which requires watchfulness and valor? How would
Valor be actuated and discovered, if there were no difficulties and dangers
for it to encounter? The veriest Coward that while might pass for a valiant
man. To get so much ^ook-skill in Military matters, as to be able to discourse
^ow an Army should be Governed and Marshalled, how Onsets and Retreats should
be made, and what should ^e done in this case and the other, is a matter of no
great ^ifficultie; but to be able actuallie to lead an Army, and ^o order it
aright in all the varieties of Battle, requires another kind of courage,
conduct, and presence of mind; and accordingly yields another kind of glory
to him ^at is possessed of, and shows forth the same. Whilst you ^ere in a full
condition, and all things went according to ^our own desires, you might speak,
and hear, and read ^f living by faith, and depending upon God, and resign^g our
selves and all we have to his will, whilst you had ^ttle trial for these
Graces. But now, Sirs, show what ^ou can do, being brought upon the Stage,
whether you ^ave been so diligent in learning your part, that you can ^ow act
it readily and becominglie. What comfort can ^ou now take in a promise, who
have little else left to ^ust to? Can you bear up manfully under all your
^ressures, resting singly on the truth, goodness, and ^ll-sufficiencie of God?
Can you follow him confident^ie, though he lead you in the dark? Can you submit
to and embrace his will, when it contradicts your senses? This is a season for
discovering how you have improved your time, and the means you have had to get
well fitted for what you might afterward be called to; would you be content to
spend your time and pains in training up a servant to his work, and after that
let him lie idle, and show no fruit of all? Or if your negligence has been
such, that so long prosperity, and so great advantages as you therein enjoyed,
have been lost upon you, it is but fit that adversity it self should teach
you, what it seems you will learn no other way. And indeed we are commonly too
remiss in times of ease and peace, to make provision for the troubles that may
be coming upon us; like foolish Travelers, that because the Sun shine when
they set out, think not of preparing for a Storm; for such men to be well
weather-beaten, is the best way to make them more provident for the future: As
in fencing, to hit a man a sound blow, will do more to make him stand upon his
Guard, than a bare direction would; or, if you will, as Wars themselves do more
to make men expert Soldiers, than any Fencing-School or Training exercises
can. Thus the Apostle tells us, that tribulation works patience, and patience
experience, Romans 5.3. Now a Christian comes more to see the want of his
spiritual armor than before he did, and therefore labors and prays for it
with greater diligence and earnestness. But if any man should ask, whether it
was not better never to have need of this, by being freed from those
afflictions that make it necessary? I may take leave to tell him, it savours of
an impudence, unbeseeming so filly a Creature as man, to call in question the
proceedings of his Maker, and demand whether he might not have ordered things
better than he has. Who should prescribe the way to heaven, but he that owns
both it and us, and may bestow it upon what conditions he will? And though (if
need were) it might be evident that there is great wisdom and equity in that
order which God has established, yet its enough for us, that we are told it is
his pleasure, that through many tribulations we must enter into his Kingdom,
and must fight before we triumph, overcome before we are crowned. And if this
be his settled will, we may easily apprehend how needful faith and patience are
for this present state; and how much for our advantage that condition is, which
does not only put us upon the exercise, but tends to the advancement of them.

(4.) All these your losses may prove very gainful to you, as, hereby your
hearts may be drawn nearer to God, carried out more after him, and caused to
adhere to him with the greater firmness, resolution and affection; as upon
several accounts may appear. This will indeed necessarily follow from what went
before, what interest the world loses in your hearts, God will gain: so much
as your affections are taken off from things below, so much will they be placed
the more upon things above. Moreover, so disingenuous and inconsiderate we are,
as often to be drawn away into a forgetfulness of God, by those very mercies
and comforts which should have made us mindful of him, and engaged us closer to
him, and in such a case (which happens too frequently) by the removal of those
we may better learn what a kind of dependence that is we have always upon him,
and how much we have been beholden to his bounty, when we were little affected
to it. It is also very profitable for us t obe sometimes cast into such a
plunge, whence we plainly perceive God only can deliver us; for this will put
us upon more sollicitous enquiries after him, make us rely upon him, and that
with all our weight and stress, and will help us to a clearer sense of his
loving kindness and Almightiness, in affording us relief when all other refuges
failed us. A friends hand put out to a drowning man is graspt with another kind
of fastness, and regarded with another kind of welcome and dearness, than when
they walked together upon the Land. Furthermore, when that which was wont to
stand in competition with God, and to divide our hearts betwixt it self and
him, shall be taken out of the way, there is great hopes that we shall with more
ease and steadiness center upon him alone. He that is at a stand which of two
friends (that are of contrary parties) he should adhere to, may quickly be
resolved, when he finds one of them forsaking him, the other sticking to him at
his greatest need: when we have found there was a bye in our right hand, it may
drive us most effectually to the true and everliving God Nothing but wilful
sottishness could any longer make i^ a question, whether God or Baal was to be
followed, when they saw to what disgrace the Idol had exposed hi^ Priests, whom
he could neither hear nor help, and how palpably he was witnest against by fire
from heaven. And if it was possible for any of you to be so weak, as in the
least to halt betwixt two Opinions, whether God or the World was to be followed
with greatest earnestness, embraced with most affection, I hope the
controversy is now fully at an end. You see what a God the World is that
cannot defend its self, much less its followers: but the Lord Jehovah is still
as good, and powerful, and sufficient, as ever he was, and will so remain for
ever. Shall not then all the love and confidence you had scattered away and
misplac't upon the Creature, be recollected thence, and fixed upon him, who (as
you may now plainly see) only deserves it, and who only can require it? How can
you now choose but say within your selves. Well, since the World has thus taken
its farewell, and fled away, why should we follow it with sighs and tears, and
refuse to be comforted because it is not? Why should we mourn for the which
has profited us so little, and been no more kind nor faithful to us? No,
rather let us sit down and bewail our folly in over-loving such trifles, than
be guilty of worse in languisting after them, when we have found that they are
such; and with these tears in our eyes let us betake our selves to our loving
and good God, from whom our hearts have too much ^^dred, and beseech him to
take them wholly to himself, and never more suffer them to dote upon so
unworthy, unsuitable objects. And indeed what way have you left, if you a^ all
consult for your own interest, but thus to retire to God? If you should yet
rather cleave to the Remnant of your Estates, or fortify your selves with
hopes of recovering them, and from these grounds fetch your chie^ support, as
carnal ones do, you do but more hazard the loss of all, and the utter blasting
of these hopes.

If you indeed belong to God, he will throw down all your fortresses, and drive
you out of all your holds, but he will recover you to himself. If ingenuity will
not bring you, necessity shall. And is it not Fatherly love that thus concerns
it self with you, and brings you under the happy discipline of his family, and
will leave no means untryed, rather than suffer you to remain at such an
hurtful distance from him. And how great is his goodness, that ^e will so
readily receive and welcome us, upon our return to him after all our
strayings; yea, although we are thus fetched back again by a kind of necessity?
Might he not justly upbraid us with our former unthankful and unkind
behavior? that we were so strange to him in the day of our prosperity, and
lived as if we had no great need of him, that we came not to him till all our
other lovers had forsaken us; might he not therefore bid ^s, now go to them in
the day of our extremity, and see what they can do for us? But so gracious is
his Nature, that he treats us not after this rate, as in Justice he might; but
is ready to give us the same loving entertainment, that the Father in the
Gospel did to his Prodigal Son.

To conclude then, Will not this prove a singular mercy, to have your Husks
removed, that so you may be brought into your Fathers arms, and live more upon
the substantial satisfying bread that is in his house? Will you not acknowledge
it to proceed from love, that when you attended not as you ought to more gentle
calls, God has dealt with you much like as Absalom with Joab, who when he had
twice sent for him in vain, set fire on his Field to bring him away? And be
sure, God calls you not thus earnestly to him upon any trivial business;
wisdom and goodness shine forth in all his actings: And will you not soon own
them in this, when you shall hereby be put upon making up your losses out of
God himself, upon searching more diligently than ever you did, what there is
to be found in him that will support and satisfy a man that has nothing else
to trust to^ Will it, do you think, make nothing for your interest, by these
searches to attain clearer apprehensions of the bottomless treasures of
goodness to be had in God, and o^ his most perfect adequate suitableness to the
humane soul? When moreover, you shall be brought to live more singly upon him,
to converse more feelinglie with him, and shall better relish those surest
pleasures of his presence and service, and shall be more sollicitous than ever
to make sure that he is yours, and to walk so, that you may keep your Evidences
clear? Is he worthy the name of a Christian, that if these privileges were to
be bought, would not willingly part with all he had to obtain them? Why then
should not you as willingly part with what God sees fit to remove, in order to
his giving in the same? Estate's sweet, but Life's sweeter, says the Mariner,
when he throws his goods overboard to preserve his temporal life; and will not
you cheerfully bear as much for the advancement of a Spiritual and Divine
Life? And if these prove indeed the fruits of God^ present dealings with you,
will you not be found as much beholden to this Fire he sent (excepting only a
local translation) as Elias was to his Fiery Chariot, whilst it thu^ refines
you from your earthliness, and carries your soul^ so much nearer to God?

5. But lastly, The benefit of this Providence may hereafter more fully appear,
in that it may prove an happy means of preparing you for some further trials
that God shall call you to, or for death it self, whenever it shall befall you.
Though you should not now so well know what God i^ doing with you, yet you may
know hereafter: He only in whose hands our times are, can tell what days you
may be reserved for, and what it may cost you faithfully to follow the Lamb in
the way that he has led and prescribed you. And perhaps he saw you more
entangled in the affairs of this life, than is fit for those that have your
warfare to accomplish, and more than would suffer you to please him whose
Soldiers you are. The way that is yet behind for you to walk over, may be so
rough and untrod, that whilst you were laden with thick clay, you could not
have been able to make progress therein, and therefore may you be rendered more
light and fit for travel; the weight which pressed you down being taken away,
even an earthly load without you, and the greater load of carnal affections
from within. In times of suffering for the truth, there is nothing ordinarily
proves a more dangerous snare than a great estate. It had been happy, for ought
I know, for the young man in the Gospel, if all his possessions had been burnt
before he came to Christ; he had then, at least, wanted that temptation which
made him go away sorrowful. And as happy had it been for many another, if their
riches had been sent the same way, before they were called to lose them for
Christ: for then we may probably suppose, they had not forsaken him for love of
this present world, which none are so apt to do, as they who have most in it to
cleave to. In St. James his time, it was the rich men that were oppressors and
persecutors, whilst the poor only were Confessors and Martyrs, Jam. 2.5, 6, 7.
And so in all times it is usual. How know you then but God has taken the world
from you, least in a day of trial it should have drawn you away from him. Thus
may the burning of your houses enable you the better to burn at a stake, if
ever you should be called to'r; and so one Fiery Trial would fit you for
another. But though you escape this, yet death you cannot escape; and to behold
in this manner the Funeral of worldly wealth and glory, may very much prepare
you for your own. The greater troubles you meet with in your journey, will they
not make you long the more for your journeys end? When the Traveller finds his
money fall short, or himself tired out with the length and badness of his way,
then he falls more heartily to wishing himself at home: Not that you ought in
one of Jonah's Pets to take on, and desire by all means to die presently,
because your Gourds are withered, your flourishing estates faded away. None
ordinarily are more unfit, and if the truth was known, more unwilling to die,
than they who in a discontented mood are wishing themselves dead; for it must
be love to heaven, more than weariness of the earth, that can confer this
fitness, and this willingness. But yet without question, you may make this
improvement of all the smart and weariness you feel, thereby to be set a
longing after the promised ease and rest. Those desires after death, which
proceed from a serious apprehension of the Worlds vanity, and its unfitness to
be your resting place, and are bounded with a submission to Gods Will, are not
only lawful, but commendable; and you may esteem it a mercy to have them
quickened: Perhaps whilst your present stare was pleasant and desirable, you
found it something difficult to get heartily willing to leave it, or to
represent to your self any other condition so much better, as might make you
desirous to part with this: But now, I hope, this difficulty is much abated,
if not wholly removed. If you found such plentiful and pleasing entertainment
in your Inn, that you began to think of abiding there, and to grow forgetful
of your own home, will you not be of another mind when you have met with
rougher usage? It is not Lazarus his hard fare, but Dives his daily dainties,
and such like Bands of love, which chain poor creatures to the World. Moreover,
it is to be considered, that at Death you must have undergone the same, and a
greater trial than now you have done, in leaving that which has now left you;
and then to have found your heart sticking to the creature, and unwilling to
be torn from it, would have been much more grievous to you. Far safer it is
that our Bladders slip from under us in the shallow water, where we may try
our skill with lest hazard, than in the deep, where we must either swim or
drown. By this experience you have had of your selves, how you can bear the
departure of the world, if you have found out your weakness, you are yet in a
capacity of looking out for help, and getting better provided for your last
great encounter; or if you have discovered strength, you may the more
cheerfully expect, and boldly address your selves thereunto. Thus you see,
this affliction, which at present seems not joyous but grievous, may afterward
yield the peaceable fruits of righteousness, to those that are exercised
therewith: And therefore it seems no way absurd to apply the exhortation to
you, which we find, Jam. 1.10. Let the brother of high degree (not only be
content, but) rejoice that he is (thus to his advantage) made low.

And besides what may accrue to the sufferers themselves, I might (the more to
engage their submission) mention the good that may hereby be done to others; as
this signal Providence may tend to awaken our Land, and put us upon Repentance
and Reformation; or at least may quicken all that are serious, to do what in
them lies for the promoting of this work; and may also be a means of terrifying
some careless sinners from their ways of wickedness, and of bringing them home
to God. If any such work as this was to be done, or a warning given to the
Nation, and God saw fit to do it by the burning of our Metropolis, why should
you not freely consent that your houses should go in with others, for the
accomplishment of his Will? If their destruction may be any means of preventing
the overthrow of the Kingdom; yea, or keep any poor soul out of eternal
burning; You have no cause to find fault with their being laid out so well.
And if any one should think it might have conduc't more to these ends, to have
singled out the dwellings of the prophanest sinners, and made them warnings to
the rest, sparing all such as feared God: They may do well to remember, that it
becomes not them to prescribe to infinite wisdom, what ways to take for the
bringing about his own designs; which designs we are far from knowing
perfectly, and less perfectly can we tell, what means are best suited for the
compassing of them. But, I suppose, I have said so much of the benefits, that
may hereby be given in to true Christians, as may sufficiently demonstrate,
that this cloud, as dark as it is, has a bright side shining upon Gods people,
which may, in its kind, do them as much service, as the Pillar of Fire did to
the Israelites in their March: Whilst they, that Aegyptian-like, are clouded
with the mists of wickedness and error, neither perceive the benefit they
enjoy, nor partake of it. And though such blind Atheists, or inconsiderate
ones, may to their own hurt, mis-construe the methods of Providence, in lashing
the good and sparing the bad, or dealing alike with both; yea, though upright
men themselves may be somewhat astonished at this, yet shall the innocent stir up
himself against the Hypocrite; the righteous also shall hold on his ways, and
he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger, Job 17.8, 9. And thus,
I hope, should I say no more, I have showed you abundant ground for patience
and quietness under the hand of God. Since

(1) It is the hand of God, who cannot wrong you, and therefore gives you no
cause to murmur.

(2) This hand of God has not hurt you, and therefore gives you no cause to
complain.

(3) It may greatly profit you, and so rather gives you cause to be thankful.
Two or three Considerations more I have to suggest, which I shall with more
brevity dispatch, having stood so long on these.

4. Though your suffering themselves cannot, yet your impatience under them may
very much hurt you, whilst on the other side, your patience will equally turn
to your advantage. And this may sufficiently instruct you, if you have any
respect to your own interest, outward or inward, which to choose. To pursue
this in a particular instance or two.

(1) By quarrelling with Gods Will in his proceedings, you add sin to your
afflictions, and thereby put a sting into them, that may do you that mischief,
which otherwise they never could. What think you is a sin, if this be not, to
be discontent with any thing which God shall do with you? Do you not seem so
far to accuse him of want, either of wisdom, faithfulness, or goodness, and so
of want of fitness and right to be your Governor? And what is this, but to
desire that your affairs were in your own hands, as if then you could order
them better? And have you not reason to suppress the very first motions which
have so much wickedness, rebellion, and little less than blasphemy in them?
You may remember here, what I have formerly said, to demonstrate that sin is
the greatest mischief that can light upon the soul of man. If to comply with
the Divine Will, in all expressions of it, be his only interest, then to resist
this Will, must needs be his greatest misery? Verily, there is no such a
deformed monstrous sight in the whole world, as to behold a creature rising up
against his Maker, and entering into a solemn war with Heaven it self; whether
it be in violating his gracious precepts, or repining at his wise providence.
And the very howling of Wolves, or croaking of Toads, is a thousand times more
acceptable noise, than to hear men complain and speak ill of the blessed and
good God, or any of his ways: For their noise, be it never so harsh, is
natural to them; but this harsher voice of murmuring, is most unnatural, and a
very breaking of the harmony of the Creation, which consists in a sweet and
cheerful obedience of all creatures to him, from whom they received their
beings, faculties, conditions, and employments; and in their constant
celebrations of his bounty, according to their several capacities. Is not the
dumb meekness of a Lamb more grateful to all men, than the roarings and
strivings of a Swine? Especially when kindness, rather than violence, is
offered to us, however our false opinions represent it. Want of reason may
excuse the struglings of a Bruit, when you go to pluck a Thorn out of his foot,
or do him any the like courtesy; but such bruitishness in a Reasonable
Creature, is inexcusable! Believe it, Sirs, such unseemly carriage as this, is
infinitely worse in the thing it self, and more disgraceful to you in the eyes
of God and good men, than your losing all the money and goods you had in the
world: This meanness of spirit, is another kind of unhappiness and dishonor,
than any other poverty. But on the contrary, to bear up under Gods hand with
patience and courage, is a greater commendation and privilege, than to abound
in all riches. Whatever the world may think, it is undoubtedly true, that to
comply with the will of God under any suffering, is a greater blessing, than to
have been secured from that suffering. To be content with sickness as it comes
from God, is a greater mercy than to be in health; and so patience under all
your losses, is a greater happiness than to have lost nothing: For the worst of
men may partake of these temporal favors; but good men only are enricht with
so excellent a spirit. This tried and approved Faith and Patience, are much
more precious than the Gold that is tried (or than all that you have lost) by
the fire. How worthy and commendable a thing is it, for a Christian in the
lowest, poorest, and most afflicted state, still to think and speak as well and
honorably of God, who has brought him into it, as ever before he was wont?
To Apologize for that Providence which he smarts under, and to let Spectators
know, that he discerns so much equity and mercy in it, that he cannot choose
but submit thereto? Might you not hereby do more to vindicate God before the
world, than any other, by bare discoursing can? And by your practice might
condemn and shame all those unmanlie ones that act contrarily; and may
convince themselves and others, that it is from the weakness of their Faith,
the falseness of their opinions, and the unruliness of their passions, that
they keep such a complaining, and not from any real cause that God has given
them. This you may teach them more effectually than another out of your
condition can: For they are presently apt to reply to such a one, If you was in
my case, you would be as bad your self; but when they see one in the like case,
whose carriage is so unlike theirs, they will the sooner be put to silence,
and set upon imitation of it. And would not this, do you think, very much
endear you to God, to behold in you such a love for himself, such a liking of
his actions, and such a zeal for his honor? How do we find him, as it were,
glorying of the perseverance of his Champion Job, to Satan his Accuser, in that
he held fast his integrity, although his estate was destroyed, Job 2.3. And
does not both God and Satan now look upon you, to observe how you will behave
your selves? and will it not please and glorify God, vex and confound Satan,
to behold your carriage, like that holy man's? How acceptable, also, will it be
to the Lord Jesus, to see you transcribe the copy he set you, to walk as he
walk^, when upon earth, and to carry your selves as he wont, under all the
sufferings he met with in it? And if the eye of the Prince, or General, will
infuse valor into the soul of the veriest Coward, shall it not animate and
raise your spirits, to remember what Spectators you have, besides the
Inhabitants of this lower world? Even God himself, and Christ, and all the holy
Angels. You need not sure be told, how much you are concerned to gain the good
liking of these, and how much weight there is in their approbation; nor on the
other side, how fad and shameful it would be for you, to have all these
ashamed of you, for your Cowardice and fainting.

(2) Beside the hurt that comes to your inward man, you will find no benefit
to your outward concerns, by frowardness and impatience. He that tumbles and
strives, like a wild Bull in a net, will never the sooner dis-entangle
himself. There Is nothing to be gotten of God by this course. He that spared
not his Rod, though he knew it might displease you, will not take it off
merely because you are not pleased with it. Wise Parents, though never so
tender, use not to have regard to all the foolish passions and desires of their
Children: and as little reason is there, that God should give heed to yours:
For are they any better than childish, whilst the great ground of them (to
give no other proof) is, that worldly things are perishing and transitory; or,
that according to their nature, they are past away from you. Now what weakness
would you account it, for any man to sit weeping for a beautiful Flower,
because it withers in his hand, and because the winter-cold will not permit him
to have his fair Tulips and sweet Roses? Or to afflict himself, because the
Moon waxes and wanes, and will not always abide in the Full? What relief would
you have given to this fond mourner? Should the seasons of the year, or the
course of nature be altered to gratify his humor? And do you not know that
there are changes in Sublunary things, as well as in the Moon? Seasons and
Vicissitudes in our condition, as well as in the year? And both proceed from
the same wisdom, though they appear not alike regular and constant. There is a
Day and Night, a Winter and Summer, of prosperity and adversity (I speak of
things without us.) And of these we may say, as the Plasmist of the other,
speaking to God; The day is thine, the night also is thine: Thou host made
summer and winter, Psalm. 74.16, 17. And is there any reason that he should
alter the seasons, and change the nature of things, or the course of his
providence, for the satisfaction of every man that is not pleased with it? Or
if this should seem too notional, you may easily apprehend, that peevishness
and stubborness, may provoke God rather to continue, than cease from lashing
you. It Is no discretion in a Patent, to spare the Rod always when the Child
cries, (the Wise man advises the contrary) much less to dismiss him whilst he
is stomachful: And why should you think the Father of Spirits will leave you,
till he has brought you into better subjection to him? It seems by your
carriage, there is much corruption left in the Soul to be drawn out: and the
same mercy that applied a Corrasive because it was needful, is like to hold it
on whilst it is so. But when the cure is wrought, when patience has had its
perfect work within you, you are nearer to a freedom from that, which has
been the exercise of your patience. When the Child is brought to kiss the Rod,
the Father is wont to lay it down. When you can heartily say to God, Thy Will
be done, you are likliest to hear from him, Be it to thee as thou will. For
they hold creature comforts fastest, who sit loosest from them; they deserve
them best, and are in the least danger of being hurt by them. To humble our
selves under the mighty hand of God, is a sure way, in his due time to be
exalted, 1 Pet. 5.6. You have heard of the patience of Job, and seen the end of
the Lord, that he is very pitiful and of tender mercy. James 5.11. And none
taste sooner, o^ more plenteously of this pity and mercy, than they w^^^ are
most perfectly subdued to his pleasure.

(3) They that give way to impatience, if they will but have while to look into
themselves, may easily discern what harm there is in it, if it were for nothing
else, but that continual disquiet and inward torment wherewith it is attended.
The passionate man, as well as the cruel, tradableth his own flesh. The most
factious Soldier in an Army, or seditious Citizen in a Commonwealth, cannot
raise half those stirs and tumults there, as unruly passions do in a Soul. What
mire and dirt do they continually cast up? And how do they unfit us for duty
to, and converse with, both God and our Brother, and embitter all the comforts
we enjoy? There is no Nero nor Phalaris in the world, so ingeniously cruel, as
man when he becomes his own Tormentor. He does worse by far, than the Queen we
are told of, who held an Asp to her breast: for he maintains a gnawing Worm
continually within him, which is near a kin to that we read of, which never
dies. Though affliction might make his flesh smart, yet it could not so pierce
his soul, did not he himself drive it in; putting vexation into the creature,
which is vanity. A Sword, which he finds sticking in his Clothes, he madly
thrusts forward, and therewith stabs himself to the heart. A Spider, which was
fallen into his Cup, whence it might have been gently taken without any hurt, he
squeezes and swallows down, to poison himself, if possible, therewith. How else
could it be, that men's losing of their estates, should make them lose their
wits too? Sure there is no such connection betwixt their money and their reason,
that they must stand and fall together. But the business is, they fit poring
upon their troubles, and representing them to themselves so dreadfully, till
their spirits are overwhelmed, and their brains weakened thereby: Like a foolish
man, who should get a Glass, that presents Spectators with hideous sights and
shapes, of Monsters and Devils, and then stand gazing in it, till with the very
horror, he goes besides himself. Now though I hope none that fear God, are
capable of such exorbitancies of passion, yet let them beware of the first
risings and bublings up thereof in the soul, least they should swell to a
boisterous Sea, whose waves they will difficultly repress and calm. Thus you
see the inordinate sorrow of the world, works death, whilst by subjection to
him that corrects us, we live, Heb. 12.9. And live indeed we do, at another
rate than discontented, sickly minds are wont. By patience we do truly
possess our souls, and enjoy our selves, and may feel little alteration within,
whatever is done without us. Though I will not say it is an easier thing, to
rise up to this quiet, humble frame, than to fall into the contrary, yet I may
well say, it is much more for the ease of the Soul, when attained to; so much
more as will abundantly recompense all the pains taken in the getting of it,
and may well set men upon diligence to that purpose: Especially if we consider
what was said before, that this is the nearest and surest way to deliverance.
And if it be so, an easy way I am sure it is: What Is this, but stand still and
see the salvation of the Lord? Or as the Prophet to the Jews, In returning and
rest shall ye be saved, in quietness and confidence shall be your strength.
Isa. 30.15. Or if the outward afflictions should still remain upon you, yet
there is in some sense, a way made to escape, whilst you are thus made able to
bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13.

Lastly, Consider how by your unseemly dejection under the hand of God, you may
do very much to the prejudice of the Christian Religion, which you profess
heartily to believe and love. What will the Atheist, or what will the profane
scoffer say, when they shall see this? So sottish and malicious they are, that
if they do but see you in affliction, they are straightway scornfully
demanding, Where is now their God? But what will they say, if they should hear
you your selves unbelievingly cry out, Where is our God? Will they not be ready
to cry, This is the Religion they make such boast of, which you see how little
it does for them in a day of extremity: They talked of promiser, rich and
precious promises, but where are they now? Or t^^ what purpose do they serve?
They said they had a treasure in Heaven, what ails them mourn so then, if their
riches be there? And carnal worldlings will be drawn to think, that whatever
fine talk you might have about God and Heaven, your hearts were most upon the
same things that theirs were, since your grief for their removal, is as great
as theirs. They know by experience, what a stay it is to the heart, to have an
able, faithful friend to depend upon, or to have hopes of a great estate
shortly to fall to them; and they will never be persuaded, you have any such
ground of comfort, if they see you as much cast down, as those that pretend to
no such matter. By this means, the precepts of Christ to constancy and
contentment in all estates, will come to be looked upon (like those of the
Stoics) only as Magnifica verba, Brave words, but such as are impossible to
be practiced; and the whole of the Gospel will be taken for an Aerie notion,
since they that profess greatest regard to it, are no more helped thereby. Oh
what a shame is it; that Religion should in this case make no more difference
betwixt man and man! That it should not, do I say? Yes surely it will, where
ever it is in truth and power. For does not the essence of it, lie in the souls
being brought off from the world, and self-will, to the love of God and
subjection to him? Wherefore so much submission to his will, so much holiness
and religion there is in the soul. Oh Sirs, these (though they make not such a
noise and show in the world) are better differences of a godly man from a
wicked, than any outward profession and performances; (though these also may
have their use and excellence.) Wherefore show to the world (what ever their
common censures are) that it is not so much your care to differ from them in
some by-opinions and little strictnesses, as in humility, meekness, contempt of
the World, and heavenly-mindedness. And now let these graces display
themselves, by your cheerful, patient deportment under all your grievances. And
labor you to cheer up your poor Neighbors, and let them know what an unit and
foolish thing it is, to be so much concernd for these things, whilst there are
ten thousand times greater offered to their choice: and above all, see that
your counsels are backed by your examples. This will force an adoration from
beholders, and make them take knowledge (...) you, that you have been with
Jesus. Your belief and confidence in the promises of the Gospel, being thus
^^de manifest, will honor them and him that made them; and may put others upon
enquiry, what it is in Religion that produces such notable effects: As the
brave ^^d undaunted behavior of Primitive Christians under (...) hardships and
cruelties, drew many Heathens first (...) admire, after to search into, and
embrace Christiani^^. If these things be well weighed, you cannot but
knowledge, that the patience and calmness, I am ^swading you to, is much more
for your interest both Soul and body, than the contrary temper: And if this
granted, need I say any more to men of common son, to direct, or exhort them,
which to pursue and brace. And so much for the fourth particular.

5. Farther reason for, and help to this holy frame; (...) may find, If you
will but take an impartial view of ^^se many mercies, which are still vouchsaft
you; the consignation whereof may instruct you, how unreasonable and
dis-ingenuous it is, to have your eyes so filled with tears for, and your minds
so possessed with, the thought of what you have lost, that you should overlook
and forget what you have left. Especially when the mercy yet left, are so very
considerable as yours are, both Temporal and Spiritual. Is it nothing, do you
think, that your lives are preserved, though your livelihood be lessened? This
was promised to Ebedmelech as a great favor, that his life should be given him
for a prey, Jer. 39.18. And doubtless Lot took it for such, when the Angel
rescued him from the flames that consumed his City. When he was bid to escape
for his Life, we read not o^^ any Goods that he carried along with him. And
thought this preservation was more signal to him (as Noah's also was) in that
the rest of the Inhabitants were destroyed yet is the mercy never the less to
you, for having ma^^ more to partake thereof: but you have cause administr^^ to
bless God, not only for your selves, but also on th^^ behalf of your
neighbors, friends, and relations; where^^ as Lot himself did not altogether
enjoy this privilege his Sons in Law perishing in the fire, and his Wife ^o
looking back upon it: Her fault, it is probable, being that which I am wishing
you to avoid, viz. That she had longing mind after her House and Goods,
instead of thankful heart for her Life, wherefore remember I^^ Wife. But yet
you know, some there were (though, bless be God, but a few) that lost their
lives in the late Conflagration, and that neither you nor yours were of th^^
few, you owe it to free mercy, and owe for it the heartiest thankfulness. If
then it be true (what Truth hi^^ self has told us) that the life is more than
meat, and (...) body than raiment, have you any reason to repine, which the
better is preserved, though the worse should no^^ But, farther, I suppose,
there are very few, if any of y^^ stripped so bare, as not to have food and
raiment, wh^^ whilst you have, you are commanded to be content, and have reason
to be so; you may see both, 1 Timothy 6.8. J^^b's ambition went no higher, than
for Bread to eat, and Clothes to put on, Genesis 28.20. and have not you ^ese
still? What though they be plain and homely, if they supply the necessities of
nature, and keep you fit for the works you have to do in the world, what do you
^eed from them more? Reason and Religion will tell you, this is enough,
whatever a fleshly disposition may whine after. Moreover, have you not health
and strength, your reason and senses? besides all other particular mercies to
your selves or yours, whereof your own thoughts ^ay present you with a larger
Catalogue than I can rehearse.

And let me put it to your Conscience, whether it is more seemly for you that
are encompast with so many mercies, to own and admire the goodness of the
Donour, ^^r sadly to lament the removing of somewhat you enjoyed, and peevishly
to quarrel with him that did it. How could you cry shame upon such carriage
among men? so see any one repine at his friend for calling in an hundred pound,
whilst yet he left him twice as much in his ^and: Or for a Child to murmur at
his Father, from whom he has all his maintenance, for withdrawing from (...)
something that he may well enough be without. and how just your thankfulness
is upon account of what (...) enjoy, will yet plainlier appear, if you
consider, that (...) you have proceeds purely from the kindness of your
benefactor; and that he can as easily remove all, as any (...); yea, and may
justly do it, and you have rather derv'd that he should so. Look abroad also
into the ^orld, and observe what multitudes there are in a worse ^^dition than
you; and look back upon former times, ^^d see what straits many of Gods dearest
servants have ^^en brought to. Such of whom the World was not worthy, found no
better entertainment in it, than in Sheepskins and Goatskins, to wander up and
down in wilderness^^ and mountains, dens and caves of the earth; and have not
you better raiment and lodging than so? Paul tells us of himself, that he was
in hungrings and watchings, and maintained himself by the work of his hands.
Yea, the Lord Jesus himself, when on earth, underwent hunger and thirst,
watching and weariness, and had not so much as where to lay his head. And is
the Servant greater than his Master? Or shall he complain whilst he has the
same, or better usage than he? It Is recorded (as I remember) of Alexander, that
when a dish of water was brought him, in a time when all his Army was sore
afflicted with thirst, he threw it away, on purpose to teach them patience by
his own example. And shall not the example of Jesus, the Captain of our
Salvation, do much more to make all his Soldiers willing to endure hardship,
which he has born before them? and has showed that it is tolerable, and
promised to make it so to them.

But besides the many temporal mercies that are reserved you, which bespeak
contentment with your present estate, you have such spiritual privileges, as
may be strong engagements to this duty. At what rate is it to be valued, that
you were born and brought up where the Gospel is purely dispensed: not in
India, or Turky^ where it is not known not embraced; not in Spain or Italy,
where it is so much locked up from the people: but in England, where it has
been so industriously published and inculcated. And tell me what you think, if
these glad tidings of salvation were now newly come to your ears, discovering
the true God, and the way to happiness, with him through the Messiah, and you
were but just com'^ out of Heathenish darkness to the beholding of this
glorious light; would it not so swallow up and delight your souls, that you
would searce mind any thing without you; nor ever once more think of your lost
estate, with any kind of trouble? It Is very probable it might have such
effects upon you, if received in the power of it: for we find it had no less
upon those first Christians, who so willingly sold all they had, and laid it at
the Apostles feet. And why should the Gospel be the less regarded, because you
have been long acquainted with it? Its own worth, and the mercy to you is
never the less, and therefore ought your esteem of it, and its force upon you
to be as great: Especially, since it has pleased God to make it effectual to
your souls, and has thereby brought you to the knowledge and love of himself,
through Jesus Christ. And is not this such a peculiar important favor, that it
may make you bear any thing comfortably, which is no prejudice to it? To have
God enrich and adorn you with the graces of his Spirit, to give his Son to be
your Husband and Head, and himself, through him to become your loving Father
and satisfying portion, what would you desire, or what can you have more than
this? Or what can come amiss to you whilst you have it? There was some reason,
though mixed with harshness, in Joab's speech to David, when he took him up so
roundly for his unseasonable, excessive lamentations of Absaloms death, after a
rebellion had been suppressed by the gaining of a victory, telling him (with many
other words) that he perceived if Absalom had lived, and all the peopl died, it
had pleased him well, 2 Samuel 19.6. And may not you, whose sorrows are excessive
for worldly losses, be justly charged with as great fondness and folly? For
does not your carriage seem to speak, that if the world had lived and flourisht
with you, though all your other comforts had died, it had pleased you well? And
does not his show (as David is there charged) that you love your enemies, and
have but little regard for your friends? For tell me, if you account the
mercies that are left you of more worth than those that are fled away, why do
you not rejoice more in those which you have, than grieve for the want of
these? And may not God justly say to you (to continue the allusion) that if you
will not arise and be comforted, all the kindness he has hitherto shown you,
shall be withdrawn? And that would indeed be worse for you, than any evil that
has befaln you, from your youth until now. Must it not needs be highly
displeasing to God, to see his people not to be content with him alone, except
they may have their part in the creature as others have? will not even carnal
men in this respect condemn you? For they can make a kind of miserable shift
without God in the world, and cannot you find enough in God for your
satisfaction without the world? How, I beseech you, can this consist with your
profession to take him for your God? By which we mean a Being in whom all
perfections and excellencies, all that is needful or desirable for the soul, is
to be plenteously found. And can that be really taken for your God, in the
having of which, you reckon not your selves abundantly provided for in every
regard? Do you think indeed, there is not enough in God to make those that love
him, at all times, perfectly and compleatlie happy, though they had no
creature in the world to rest upon? May not they, to whom the Lord is the
portion of their cup and their inheritance, well say, that their cup runs
over, and that they have a goodly heritage, though they should not have one
foot of Land, nor scarce a bit of Bread to put in their mouths? Certainly God
is all and more than all, and they that enjoy his favor, can want no good
thing, but may always glory in that sufficiency and redundancie of felicity
laid up for them in him. Even here on earth, in the absence of all other
comforts, God has ways of conveying more suitable substantial comfort, than
the whole world can afford, to believing Souls that have their whole recourse
to, and affectionately hang upon him. You that have tasted that the Lord is
Gracious, cannot but acknowledge this. Wherefore, call to mind your own
experiences of his goodness, and what many of his dear servants have left upon
record, that they have found from him in the day of their distress; and hereby
set your souls a longing after him: Press hard after the most close and
intimate communion with him, and rest not till you feel your selves reriv'd and
cheered with those communications of himself, which he is wont to bestow upon
such necessitous, hungry souls, as being not only emptied of the creature,
but of love to it, breathe after nothing so much, as more of God. And when you
are thus rejoicing in him, more than in all riches, what is it that can sadden
you? when you are satisfied in him as with marrow and fatness, what want can
you feel? But moreover, how may it yet even farther advance you above the
troublesome sense of all your pressures, to remember, that your present
sweetest and most delicious tastes of Divine favor, are but the overflowings
of that cup, which will afford you full draughts to all eternity; some
rivulets streaming from that immense ocean of goodness and joy, which will
never be exhausted. But of this (as I promised) I now come to speak by it
self, and shall mention nothing more.

6. Wherefore, Lastly, for your support and chearing under all the troubles
that are com'n upon you, Remember, There is a rest remains for all you that are
the people of God; an everlasting happiness to be enjoied with him, when the
world and all its works shall be vanished and gone. Do you not know there is a
time coming, and apace it comes, when you shall know God (in some measure) as
you are known by him, clearlie; when you shall please him, and be pleased in
him perfectly; when you shall love him, and be loved by him feelinglie; wh^^
you shall enjoy this blisful, ravishing communion with him eternally? Is there
such an inexpressible glory as this purchas't for you, and revealed to you by
the Lord Jesus, and can you come into that condition wherein you may not
rejoice in hope of it? Why did he tell you of this, but that his joy might
remain in you, and your joy might be full? That your belief of this future
advancement, might keep you from sinking and fainting in the lowest estate? Is
it comely for a Prince, the Heir of the Crown, to lament the loss of a
farthing? And are your losses any greater (though the sum of them should
amount to thousands and millions) if compared to your inheritance, who are
heirs of God, coheirs with Christ? What though a temporal estate be lost, since
it is no less than an eternal Kingdom which you have in reversion? Imagine you
heard Christ saying to you, Though your Houses be burnt, yet let not your
hearts be troubled, in my Fathers house are many mansions; though now you are
tossed up and down, yet shortly I Will take you to the place I have prepared,
whence you shall never remove more. And does he not speak to this purpose in
his Gospel, John 14.1, 2, 3. Though this you lived in be no continuing City,
yet there is one to come, which you are now seeking after. When you stand
gazing upon the heaps that once were houses, and are ready to mingle your tears
with their dust; lift up your eyes and your minds, and think of those streets
of the new Jerusalem, which have another kind of beauty than London in all
its glory, and this joined with a stabilitie that will never suffer them to
be turned into Rubbish. What a privilege is it now accounted, to have an
estate in Land for a reserve, when that in Houses o^ Wares is gone? But what is
it to have that better conntrey, which the Patriarchs sought, even the
Caelestial Canaan, for an heritage? which is subject to none of those
casualties, that all kind of earthly possessions are? what though you have it
not in hand, yet if you be the Children of God, it is as sure as if you had;
and when you are com'n to age, grown up into a fitness for it, you shall
certainly possess it. Though your Bills and Bonds may be burned, yet so are
not the Promises which convey this inheritance: though your Bibles themselves
should be burnt, yet the Covenant of Grace remains firm; Heaven and Earth shall
sooner pass away, than one tittle of Gods Word fail. And you have already the
first fruits of this your future portion, viz. the indwellings of the Holy
Spirit, which may assure you the fullness of glory remains for you in the
heavens. And both these it was that made the Christians, I before mentioned, to
take joyfully the spoiling of their goods; as knowing they had in themselves
(for so plainly the words lie in the Original) a better substance (the Graces
of the Spirit) and enduring in the Heavens, (Glory it self) Heb. 10.34.
Wherefore instead of making such a matter of your petty losses, pray for your
selves, as Paul for his Ephesians. That God would give you the Spirit of
wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him; the eyes of your understanding
being enlightened, that you may know what is the hope of his calling, and what
the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. For
did you clearlier know this, you would judge it more reasonable for the
wealthiest Citizen to be dejected for his losses than you, whose very earnest
is of more value than all his wealth. It Is you, Sirs, and you only, who know no
end of your riches, neither as to their greatness, or duration, whereas all
others may be fathomed and exhausted: If God be infinite and everlasting, so is
your portion; when you are reflecting upon your losses, consider your selves as
upon the borders of the other world, and see how they dwindle into a matter of
nothing: A man that is now going to be for ever perfectly blessed in the full
enjoyment of God, has lost a little money by the way. Oh heavy chance! If you
were to die within this month or year, how little would this affect you? For
you know how these things are needed and valued on the other side the grave,
how Angels and Saints care for heaps of gold: How short a while then would you
have been better for all that is gone from you? And can you not overlook that
inch of time betwixt you and approaching death? Forethink, moreover, how less
than nothing these now so terrible things will appear, when you are got safe
into heaven, what is it to Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, that once he lay at.
Dives his gate? And will it be any thing to you what a loss you had in 1666.
when you are lodged in Eternity? Why then should that be so much to you now,
which will shortly be as if it had never been? To conclude, when all you are
placed so advantageouslie in that higher state, whence you may take a view of
the whole Series of Providence, and the several means whereby the good of the
Church and your own particular Salvation were carried on, and shall see what a
tendencie those Dispensations had to this end, which here seemed most dark and
amazing, how will you be raised to the admiration of his Wisdom and Power who
sat at the Stern, and by all these strange transactions fulfilled the counsel
of his own most blessed will? And the fore-thoughts of this, should now beget
in you the like frame, whilst you believe that which yet you cannot see.

From all that has been said is farther manifest, what a vast difference there
is betwixt your condition, who are Gods peculiar people, and theirs who are
strangers to him, whilst to outward appearance your sufferings are the same;
and therefore how fit is it that your demeanor should be accordingly better
than theirs? It becomes not you to think or speak at the rates they do. For a
man to have his worldly interest, and all hopes of recovering it quite broken,
is with them to be utterlie undone; so they plainly speak, and such are their
very thoughts: But will you judge your selves undone, whilst you have God
dwelling within you, and an heaven where you shall ever dwell with God? Undone
indeed you would be, if your God was gone as theirs is; and therefore blame not
the poor men if they take on, for what have they more? But all you the
Favorites and Heirs of Heaven, Children of the Most High, to whom you profess
to have wholly given up your selves, to you I conclude my Exhortation as I
began it, that you would not discover any such sorrow or impatience, under this
Providence, as suits not with your Honorable Relation and Profession; or as
speaks you both unmindful of the many great reasons you have for contentedness
and joy, and careless of improving them when they are suggested to you.

Two more Objections which may here probably be started, I would willingly
remove.

Object. 1. Some may say, yes indeed, if we had assurance of the love of God,
that we are his children, and should for ever live with him in glory, we could
comfortably bear all that he has laid upon us, as proceeding from love: But
how can we, when we have reason to fear the contrary, and to regard his
judgments as tokens of his displeasure against us for our sins? To the several
things in this Objection, I shall frame an answer in two or three particulars,
very brieslie.

1. If indeed you want assurance of Gods love (whereby I mean such
well-grounded hopes and comfortable apprehensions thereof, as ordinarily
prevail over your doubts and fears, and enable you cheerfully to expect death
and judgment.) If, I say, you have not this, is it not your wisest course
diligently to set your selves to attain it, in the use of those means that are
prescribed to that purpose, rather than to si^ still and faintlie give way to
your despondencies, and thereby aggravate all other troubles into an
intolerable weight? Would this assurance be so profitable (as you your selves
acknowledge) and so fortify your spirits against all assaults whatever, and
will you not be quickened to look after it? Since, in that measure I have
mentioned, it may be got and kept by diligent, humble, watchful Christians. The
method you can hardly be ignorant of, it being so plain and so frequentlie
pressed upon you, viz. That you should study well the terms of the Covenant of
Grace, and examine whether you are willing to come up to those terms; that you
should search the Scripture, what manner of persons it tells you shall be
saved; and then search your own hearts whether you be such, and if you are not,
without any more delay, to do what in you lies to become such. And not to
digress now to the laying down of marks and signs, let me only wish you to
consider what I have before intimated, That your patient bearing of Gods hand
is a singular evidence of your sincerity: For since the principal effect of
true Religion is, to subject the soul to the Will of God, then a subjection to
such instances of it as are so cross to our carnal inclinations, is a good
discovery of a truly Religious man. He that keeps himself so unspotted from the
world, that he is neither polluted with inordinate love to it, whilst in his
hands, nor muddied with foul and turbulent passions when its taken out of them,
his Religion is pure and undefiled before God. To bridle these motions of the
heart, as well as of the tongue, show our Religion not to be vain. But take
heed of perverting this to your farther trouble, crying out, that you then
perceive your condition worse than ever, since you are so far from this temper
of mind: but rather be engaged to greater industry with your hearts now at
length to bring them thereto, since when you have done this, from this patience
and meekness may flow that assurance which hitherto you have sought in vain;
for by the exercise of Grace, the being and truth of it is best discovered.

2. If you judge that it is for your sins you now suffer, and Conscience tells
you plainly and truly, what those sins are, your only way is humbly to
acknowledge them before God, to repent of and speedily set against them, that
hereby you may get a pardon, and the sense of it, and so may attain to
satisfaction and comfort.

3. And know farther, this sincere and ingenuous repentance which God requires
at your hands, is no way inconsistent with that quiet frame of spirit which I
advise you to: He calls for no unprofitable, perplexing grief, but for that
alone which may be for your good, which may bring you more thorowlie from the
love of sin, and so be a means to joy it self. And easily may you conceive,
that this godly sorrow for sin may well consist with patience under suffering:
for cannot a man, whose excess has brought him into a Surfeit, at the same
time be grieved for that folly which procured his sickness, and yet content
with the bitter Physic which may cure him of it?

4. Furthermore, Need I tell you what an unsound argument it is, to conclude
from your afflictions, that you are not in favor with God? Do you think it
reasonable or safe, to argue from our prospering in the World, that we are
beloved of him, and our ways well pleasing to him? And is there any more
reason to judge the contrary from cur adversity? Were the Apostles, when
exercised, as upon a Theater, with sufferings of all sorts, disesteemed by God?
Or when he brought forth Job, to combat with those evils which Satan had
liberty to bring against him, did he do it because he was angry with him, or
did not love him? Though his friends indeed would needs have had it so, yet
that good man was so just both to God and himself, that he would not believe
them. And though you for the same reason should meet (...) the same charge of
hypocrisy, or any other crimes, de^ but faithfully with your selves, and if
your Conscience beat witness to your integrity before God, be not moved from
the belief and comfort of it, either by your sufferings, or the censures that
for their sakes may be fastened upon you: Both may serve as trials of your
Grace, but neither are sufficient proofs of any such guilt.

Yea, lastly, Grant that for some particular sins you are afflicted, yet have I
not shown, that even this may be an evidence of Gods love, and so far a ground
of comfort to you? Is it not love to reduce you to himself from those ways
that might be your ruin? He that should pluck you back, when in an humor you
was running to drown your self, though he might tear your clothes in
struggling, yet should have your hearty thanks, when you were com'n to a better
mind. Pray tell me, cannot you hate your sin, and yet love your selves? Yea, do
you not then love your selves best, when you do most against it? And may not
God do so too? Your sin he hates, and wills the death of it, and sends
afflictions to that end; but all this while he loves your souls, and therefore
takes this course with their Enemies. What reason then have you but to
acknowledge this love, and submit to all its methods for your recoverie? And by
this your compliance with, and improvement of his dealings, you may best make
it out that they came from love, and therefore are to be born comfortablie,
according to your own confession.

Object. 2. Some again perhaps will reply, You h^x^ said much to comfort us
under all our losses, and the poverty they have brought us to: But is it
possible for them to take comfort, that have nothing for themselves nor
families to live (...) on, but may, for ought we know, within a while be
brought ^ven to starve to death: Can any man living hold up in such a condition
as this? Or can any ground of support be administyed?

Answ. Yes, blessed be God very much; since he has so well consulted for us,
that there is no poison in nature without its attending antidote; no trouble
common to man, for which there is not suitable provision made.

1. I would have you call to mind how much is said in Scripture to secure Gods
servants from these fears. You know that godliness has the promise of this
life, and that which is to come: You are bid not to perplex your selves with
thoughts what you shall eat and wear, since your heavenly Father knows what
you need, and will take care for you accordingly. When the young Lions suffer
hunger, they that fear the Lord shall want no good thing: Their bread shall be
given them, and their water shall be sure; and their souls shall be kept alive
in famine. David in his time had not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his Seed
begging bread. And though these, with a multitude the like, are not to be taken
altogether absolutely, yet I suppose its seldom known but they are in some
measure made good to all the godly. It is but a very few in the hardest times
(if we except extraordinary famines) that perish for lack of food; but when
did you know a good man do so? And why should you think that will happen to you
which so seldom does to any?

2. You cannot, I believe say, that this is yet your condition, that your wants
are so pinching that you have no way of relief left you any longer. Did your
Children ever yet ask bread when you had it not to give them? Have you not
still one way or other found succor at your greatest need? And yet have not
your straits been as great as ever they are like to be? And have you not the
same God to depend upon? How exceedingly displeased was he with the
unbelieving murmurings of the Israelites, who had often beheld his power employed
for their seasonable relief? And why should not your experience engage you to
trust in him? Especially since this is the best way to have his promises
fulfilled to you; I mean, by your relying upon him for whatever you want, with
this persuasion, that if it be good for you, it shall be given in; and that it
proceeds not from lack of power, truth or mercy in God, if you go without it.
Is it not against all reason, and your own ease, by unbelief and carnal fears
to anticipate your troubles, and by frightful imagination; to put your selves
to greater pain than ever your condition is like to do? Are we not told, that
sufficient for the day is the evil thereof; and taught to pray for daily bread?
Perhaps you have not another day to live, and then you are provided for; or if
you have, this days bread is a good pledge that it shall be given to morrow.
And remember, there may be a greater distance betwin you and starving than you
imagine, only perhaps you take it for a grievous matter to live at lower rates
than you were heretofore wont.

But lastly, Suppose the thing you fear should come upon you, even that you
and yours should come to die for want of bread, yet is there no such
intolerable evil herein, that either the fore-thoughts, or the feeling of it,
should overwhelm your spirits, and leave you destitute of all comfort. It is
not this, as dreadful as it seems, that can make a good man miserable, why then
should it affright you so much? Lay aside, I entreat you, all passion and
prejudice, and calmlie consider the very truth of the case: Can starving bring
any thing worse than death? And may not the Command of Christ here be of force;
That we should not fear that which can kili the body only, and then has
nothing more to do? What will it be to you, when once its over, what death you
died on? Will the joys of heaven be the less for the pains of that death that
brought you thither? Nay, and as to matter of pain, questionless many a rich
man, who has long lain tortured with the Gout, or Stone, has felt more pain
than ever poor man did, though famisht to death. And as to the disgrace, (which
is reckoned one of the worst miseries of poverty) it is but matter of Opinion,
which a wise man ought to live above. And if it may the more convince you, hear
what a very Heathen speaks to this purpose: Thou art afraid (says he) least
thou should want necessaries; art thou so blind that thou can not foresee
whither this want will bring thee? even thither, that a Fever or any mortal
wound does, namely, to death. And have thou not often gloried of thy
willingness to die? True, but my Children will famish also; what then? Will
this carry them any whither else? Is not the passage the same, and the state
after death the same? Will thou not therefore, with a mind fortified against
all fears of hunger and want, look thitherward, whether Emperors and Kings,
and the richest upon earth must at length descend? Only thou perhaps may be
killed with penury, they with drunkenness and gluttony. What a shame is it then
for a Christian to be daunted with those things which an Heathen could perceive
so harmless? Though he could tell so little of any state after death that
should make amends for the troublesome passage into it. Know then for certain,
that whilst God has any work for you to do on earth, he will maintain you in it:
Rather will he rain Manna from heaven, or turn the stones into bread, than let
his servants want, whilst he sees fit to have their days lengthened out. But
when he is pleased to cut off the thread of life, you may well enough bear it,
to have the staff of life withdrawn. When your journey's at an end, what need
you take care for provision for the way? And needs must your provision last as
long as your journey; for when it all fails, your journey's at an end. As the
good woman valiantly, when the Popish Persecutors threatened to take away her
food; Why then, faith she^ God will take away my stomach. So when you are out
of a capacity of having maintenance, you shall soon be past needing it. And in
the mean time question not, but God will bring you through whatever he brings
you to! Wherefore let the confidence and resolution of Habakkuk, be yours also,
that though there should neither be fruit in the field, nor meat in the
shambles, yet you will rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of your
Salvation, Hak 3.17, 18. Now though the fears of this calamity are for the most
part very groundless, yet I was willing to suppose a case as bad almost as is
possible to fall out, that you might be convinced, there is no such condition
whereinto you can be brought, that does necessit ate, or will justify your
dejection and distrust.

And if indeed the people are in so happy a case whose God is the Lord, that no
calamities need affright nor can undo them; then let me hence take rise for an
exhortation (wherewith I shall conclude) to all the serious and true hearted
Christians in the Land, into whose hands these lines may fall, that in the
midst of all the miseries and dangers wherewith we seem surrounded and
threatened, they would be of good cheer, summon up their fainting spirits, and
fortify themselves to a resolute, undaunted expectation of the worst that may
befall us.

Let the Sinners in England be afraid, and let fearfulness surprise the
hipocrite, but let him that walks righteously be bold as a Lion, since his
dwelling is on high, and his place of defense the munition of rocks. Fear not
you their fear, neither be afraid, but sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself,
let him be your fear, let him be your dread: for he is your Light, and your
Salvation; whom should you fear? He is the strength of your hearts of whom
should you be afraid? Let your minds be st^^ on him, who will keep them in
perfect peace, even on the Lord Jehovan, in whom there is everlasting strength;
and they that trust in him shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed:
for as the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his
people, benceforth even for ever. Wherefore though you walk even through the
valley of the shadow of death, yet fear none ill, since God is with you, who is
a very present help in trouble, whose name is a strong tower, whereto the
Righteous run and are safe. When Saul the Commander of an Army, and Ruler of a
Kingdom may, in the anguish of his mind, run to a witch for relief; and
Achitophel the great Politician may have recourse to an halter, yet are they
never in any case destitute of a refuge, who are acquainted with the Almighty,
and dwell under the shadow of his wings. Does God, even your God, reign in the
earth, and will you fear any thing that can betide you whilst you are in it?
Are you not always in his hands, and where else can you be safer than there?
Must you not trust your souls with him, when you go hence to that other world,
to which you are yet so strange? And be wholly at his disposing, what
emploiment, society, and condition you shall be in for ever. Can you then
trust him for eternity, and not for a year or two till you come thither? As
confused as the affairs of this world may seem, he has not cast them out of
his hands, but governs all in perfect order, according to the nature and
capacity of the subject. When storms arise that seem to threaten the ship you
are in, you may apprehend him saying to you, Be of good cheer, it is I; I that
raise (or at least permit) and I who will lay their troublesome tempest. It
would not indeed (as the principal Philosopher says) be worth while, to live
in a world destitute of Providence: but this is not so. No events can befall,
without the permission of that will, which you daily pray may be done, and is
in some sense done, on earth as it is in heaven; so that I may say, the whole
world is ruled according to your prayers. And need you fear any thing from the
will of God, since it is his eternal and unchangeable decree, that nothing
shall make those men miserable, who love him, and submit themselves to his
righteous administrations? Whilst therefore you live under his government, as
you always do, and can meet with nothing but what he is pleased should come to
pass (as you never can) how boldly may you hold on your course, though
encountered with all those terrors which dismay the fainthearted, and cause
them to run hither and thither, trembling and lamenting? Fire and Sword,
Pestilence and Famine, though they may well terrify those that converse with
creatures only (having no better a portion, and no greater strength, than what
they afford) yet the man that is armed with a self-resignation to, and
confidence in God, may with an unbroken mind, march through the thickest
troops of these deaths and dangers: as having God for his felicity, from whom
they cannot force him; and for his continual help, and therefore they cannot
vanquish him. Yea, may I not add, he beholds all these as fighting under the
Banner of the Lord of Hosts, whose servant he is, and whose cause he has
espoused: Why then should he be more afraid to go through them, than some known
friend of the Generals, is to walk through the midst of his armed men? Though
he may go by the mouths of Cannons ready fixed, and the points of drawn Swords,
yet he dreads them not, since these instruments of death are prepared for their
enemies, not their friends. When any of these overflowing scourges pass over a
Nation, and seem to take all before them, yet then have the Righteous the same
security and privilege, that Noah and his company in the Ark had, in the time
of the Deluge; what if I should say, the same that the fishes then had above
all other Creatures left out? For whilst they continue in compliance with that
will which orders all things for them, they are never out of their proper
element; whilst they follow this Providence, and keep out of the bypath of
wickedness, they are still in their way. Not but that their bodies are as weak
as other men's, and their outward enjoiments subject to the same casualties: but
their souls are of another temper, and their happiness of another nature, and
cannot be destroyed or lost. Boldly may they defy all the Hasts of hell or
earth that rise up against them, since none of these can keep them from God
whilst they live, and do but translate them to him when they die. Well
therefore may you, whose interests are so securely placed, out of the reach of
all violence and malice; sing aloud with the blessed Apostle, whilst in the
midst of his battles; he justly triumphs like a Conqueror; Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation or distress, persecution or
famine, nakedness, peril or sword? Nay, in all these things we are more than
conquerours, through him that loved us: For I am persuaded that neither death
nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans 8.35,
37, 38, 39. And what can be more comely, than all you upright ones, to return
thanks and praise to that God, who has dealt so graciously with you? And to
rejoice in your felicity, which he has made so secure and inviolable? Instead
of continual complainings of this misery, and the other which is upon us, or
fearful prophesyings of worse yet to come, wherewith many are overmuch taken
up. Let the high praises of God be in your mouths, who has done so much for
you, to make you at all times safe, and therefore comfortable. Bless him with
all your Souls, for his inestimable love to mankind, which he has revealed by
Jesus Christ, in whom he is reconciling the world to himself, and has
actually done that work upon you, whereby it comes to pass, that being
reconciled to the Creator, the whole Creation is so far at peace with you, that
all the Creatures which stand on his side will not hurt you, and they that are
his enemies cannot. Praise your Redeemer, who by his death has slain your
foes, spoiled principallities and powers, disabled Satan, overcom'n the world,
and taken the sting out of all affliction and death it self; that you might
walk securely through this vale of tears, and depart out of it cheerfully. Oh
praise his name, that he has kept you from being destroyers of your selves,
and will keep all other things from destroying you. Be thankful to him for the
glorious light of his Gospel, and for enlightening your minds therewith,
whereby you are made acquainted with the true nature of all things that
concerns you; that so you might neither be startled with those Bugbears, which
the fears and fancies of weak and guilty men, in the dark apprehend so
terrible, nor fall into those real mischiefs, which ignorant benighted sinners
run upon to their own destruction. God has already done much for you, and has
given you promises of very much more; praise him therefore for what you have,
and for what you hope for: Especially for the dawnings of Heaven in your souls,
and for the promises of a fuller glory hereafter, to be revealed in you. And
through the hopes of this, be you ever filled with peace and joy in beleiving.
And with the frequent meditation of all his loving kindness, be still making
melody in your hearts to the Lord, giving thanks always for all things unto
God and our Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

I have before endeavored to take off those hindrances to this frame which
might arise from worldly crosses: for if they so little deserve our sorrow,
when they befall us (as I have fully manifested) how much less do they deserve
our sorrow and fear, least they should? And indeed it was my design, not only
to comfort those that have met with troubles, but to prepare others for
whatever they may meet with. But there is yet another Objection behind, that
may appear of more weight than any of the former, which I cannot altogether
pass over in silence, since fain I would do something for the removal of all
shelters and pretenses for carnal fears and faintings, which do so much pinch
and wrong Christian souls, hinder the pleasantness and benefit of their
Society, and eclipse the glory of their profession.

Object. Perhaps then some may tell me, That this is an unseasonable time to
call men to joy and cheerfulness, when such heavy judgments lie upon us, and
such a black cloud hangs over us, (and God is angry with those who takes no
notice of, nor lay to heart his hand) when we consider also the low estate of
Gods Church, both at home and abroad. When the Church in former times was in
such a condition, we find what bitter lamentations holy men were wont to make:
The loss of the Ark cost Eli's life, and Nehemiahs serrow of heart, when
Jerusalem lay waste, was so great, that the King took notice of it by the
change of his countenance, Neh. 2.2. Why then should it not be so with us?

Answ. 1. In answer whereto, First let me repeat the Caution I have before laid
down, that you should not think I am persuading you to be regardless of Gods
hand stretched out against us; neither think, I beseech you, that I persuade you
to any such mirth and jollitie which might manifest this regardlesness. This is
indeed provoking to God, when he calls to Fasting, Humiliation, and girding
with Sackcloth, to behold killing of Sheep, and slaying of Oxen, Banquets and
Revellings, with all kind of excess and brave^^e^ It Is to none of this that I
call you, not to haunt Taverns and Playhouses, feastings and dancings, to sing
and drink away your reason and fears together; rather do you pity their
distraction who take this course, whilst they may deride your seriousness. So
far am I from this, that on the other hand, I do earnestly desire you to
labor for the most awakened apprehensions of Gods dealings with us, and the
design of them, that you may be suitablie affected therewith, and meet him in
the way of his judgments, rightly behaving your selves under the same: But
all this may be done without slavish dejections and terrors, which only I
plead against.

2. Yea furthermore, as to what evils may be yet hanging over us, my counsel
also is, that you would so far apprehend and expect them, as may put you upon
the use of those means which are likeliest to prevent them, or as may tend to
prepare you for them, whilst your fears have no worse effects than to quicken
you to daily earnest strivings with God on the behalf of this poor Nation, and
to a careful Reformation of your selves and families, and a serious endeavor
(according to your place and capacity) that others should do the like, in
order to the removal of what judgments we feel, and the prevention of those we
fear; this while I condemn them not. Moreover, whilst you are so representing
to your selves the worst that can in all likelihood happen, that you may not be
surpised thereby, but may get furnished with suitable strength and comfort, you
act wisely: But this is a different thing from entertaining such misgiving,
ghastly fore-thoughts thereof, as only weaken and torment you. Has not
Christ bid his servants when they hear of wars, and rumors of wars, to see they
be not troubled? And in all the calamities that came upon the Jews, God would
still have the Remnant that was faithful, spoke comfortablie to. In those great
and astonishing changes which God makes in the world, rooting up Kingdoms for
the wickedness of the Inhabitants, translating the Gospel from one Nation to
another; we performing our duty, must lay our hands on our mouths, stand on
the Lords side, and acknowledge he is righteous in all his ways; as
remembering, it is not our work to govern the world, but to submit to him that
does.

3. The same again may be said as to those disorders which you complain of, at
home or abroad, so far as your trouble has a tendencie toward their removal,
or any other good end, it is a duty, but no farther. I Will join with you a
little in complaining and acknowledge, that its sad to think how great a part
of the world lies buried in Heathenish darkness, idolatry and infidelity, and
how little is done by Christians toward their relief; especially that the
Princes of Christendom do no more employ their interests to that purpose, as
if the petty temporal concerns of their Crown and Kingdom were of greater
moment. Sad also it is to see Christendom it self so woefully divided and
crumbled into Parties and Factions, through the carnal designs of ambitious
covetous men, under the gilded pretenses of Catholic peace and unity; and how
great a part of it by this means is overspread with ignorance, impiety and
idolatry? to the disgrace of our profession, and hindrance of the Conversion
of Jews and Heathens. Its sad to observe what a cruel raging thirst there is in
these false Christians, after the utter ruin and destruction of all that
crouch not to them, but value the Gospel above their rotten Traditions, and
senseless sapless Superstitions. And sad it is, that in our own and other
Reformed Churches, the divisions should be so great about matters of little
moment, whilst the Common Enemy threatens to swallow them up; that the power
of Godliness, and all such means as may promote it, are no more set up and
encouraged, that profaneness, lukewarmness, mutual heart-burnings and
discontents, should so universallie possess us. These are all very sad
considerations. But what then? Must we therefore sit down, over-weigh'd with
the burdensome sense of all these evils, and spend our days in weeping and
wailing, because the World we live in is so much out of order? By this means
Christians should all turn Disciples of Heraclitus his School. But certainly
the Precepts of Jesus Christ put us upon no such course, who would have us live
free from all anxious corroding cares, and the very office of whose Spirit it
is, to be the Comforter of his people. Mourners in Zion we may be, but
disconsolate self-tormentors we must not. The same Paul that took care of all
the Churches, rejoyc't in hope of the glory of God, and did always triumph in
Christ. All those evils which I have mentioned may in one word be reduced to
this, that there is so much wickedness in the world, and so little true
Religion and fear of God. And this I grant, must needs be matter of lamentation
to all good men, that love their Maker and their Fellow Creatures, and I wish
that all our hearts were more kindly affected herewith. But how is it we
should manifest our selves thus well-affected? Truly most of all by
endeavoring all that in us lies, that the world may be amended; and so far as
our prayers, examples, or instructions, may do any thing to that end, let us
faithfully apply our selves thereto. But such a grief as hurts our selves, and
offers nothing to the good of others, ought to be avoided: We should not in
such an unprofitable manner, mourn for our own sins; surely then not for other
men's. It would go but hardly with us, if the comfort of our lives depended upon
such things as are no way in our power to accomplish. It is indeed
well-beseeming a dutiful Son to be grieved for the disobedience of his
Brethren, but yet not so far as to hinder the pleasure he ought to take in his
Fathers love, and the performance of his own duty to him. But this pure and
unfeigned sorrow for the wickedness of the world, and the dishonors done to God
therein, speaks so much ingenuity of soul, and is so very rare, that I need say
little to dehort you from the excess of it; rather I may exhort you to it, to
be yet more possessed with a bitter hatred of sin and pity to poor sinners; but
not in the least, I beseech you, with hatred or envy of the most prosperous
and flourishing of them; and be very watchful over your selves, that no
worldly trouble, not your losses, nor straits, your want of trading, nor heavy
payments, lie nearer to your heart, than the Interest of Christ.

4. But if by the low estate of the Church you mean chiefly the Persecution
which it is any where under; or which you feel your selves, or apprehend to be
coming upon us, I may well say, there is far less cause of sadness upon this
account than the former. If God see it good to have his Church purified and
refined, by bringing it through the fire, who are we that we should contradict
it? Need I mention to you the many benefits that are hereby wont to accrue to
Christians, to whom it is appointed as their common Road to heaven? Do you not
know that Christ has bid you then especially to rejoice and be exceeding glad,
when men say and do all manner of evil against you for his sake? Does not the
Apostle reckon it as a gift and privilege to the Philippians, that they did
not only believe in, but suffer for Christ? Phil. 1.29.

And to these same suffering Philippians it was, that he gives that earnest
Exhortation, Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice, Chap. 4.4.
And how many more Texts of this sort might I mention, as those also which show,
that such was the joyful spirit of the Apostles and Primitive Christians under
their perfecutions for the truth. So far ought we to be from sorrow or shame
for suffering as Christians, that we are commanded to glorify God on this
behalf, 1 Pet. 4.16. But here then let me desire you, as you value the true
peace and comfort of your souls, to see that you indeed suffer as Christians;
both as to what you suffer for, that it be no other than the Cause of Christ;
and as to your design in embracing it, that it be purelie for his honor, and
then you are likely to suffer in that manner that becomes Christians. Beware, I
beseech you, of adhering, with a carnal zeal, to any Sect or Party, for the
advancement and flourishing whereof you are wholly concerned, as depending
thereupon for your estate and ease; and chiefly for your Reputation, by the
success of your Opinion and way. If this selfishness possess you, it will even
then when you seem to suffer for Conscience sake, bewray it self by much-what
the same effects, that are to be seen in the men of this world, when they
contend with, and oppress one another. It will set you a vexing and repining,
and fill your mouths with reviling, and your minds with spleen against those
that make you smart: And this while you are like to be far from the comfort of
a suffering state; and no wonder, for tell me truly, Is it not for Self, rather
than Christ that you are thus affected? Does Christ, do you think, need or
desire that you should have such boisterous passions for his sake? Does the
wrath of man work the righteousness of God? Wherefore see that you are but
sincerely concerned for Gods Glory and your own Salvation, and then you will
perceive that in these respects men cannot hurt or overcome you; and so you will
see no reason to be angry with them, or hate them for any thing they do to you.
For by doing the duties, and exercising the Graces that are called for, and may
yet be done, you may glorify God, and save your souls, let men and devils
rage, and reign, and do their worst. Let the times be what they will, you have
still liberty to serve and please God, though not always in the same works, or
after the same manner. Sometimes Paul may be glorifying God by preaching boldly
in a Synagogue, or in his own hired house; sometimes by lying with his feet in
the Stocks, sometimes by pleading at a Bar, and sometimes by preaching in a
Prison, though but to the Jailer and his Family; and all this while by courage
and patience, love to Christ, and zeal for the Gospel and the good of souls,
which, according to the variety of occasions and circumstances, still exerted
it self one way or other. Religion, as it is an inward living Principle, lies
far out of the reach of all created force, and can no more be interrupted or
destroyed thereby (whilst the soul is faithful to its self) than the influences
of the Stars, or course of the Orbs, can be bound and stopped. It is indeed in
the power of man to hinder some external duties, to discountenance and
impoverish good men, but what is this to the heart and life of Religion? Though
they may disturb the Communion of Christians, yet not that betwixt God and the
Soul; it is not a stone wall can intercept that: They may put chains on the
feet, but not on the affections, nor hinder their outgoings to God, any more
than Xerxes his Chain (which in a silly rage he threw into a rough Sea) could
restrain the swelling of its waves: Though some kind of outward splendor and
flourishing of Religion may be eclipit, yet the fruits of the Spirit cannot, by
the nipping Frosts of Persecution, be blasted. Such as the Apostle mentions,
Gal. 5.22, 23. Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance; of these I may say as he does (though in another sense)
against such there is no Law: Or though there should be a Law, yet there is no
power against them. Though Enemies persecute you, yet you may love and pity
them, whether they will or no: Though they should stop your mouths, yea, pluck
out your tongues, yet you may pray for them, and forgive them; you may be
humble, patient, holy, and heavenly in despite of all opposition, and were but
all Professors such, Religion would flourish at another rate, than merely by
having the favor of great ones, and the riches and honors of the world
entailed upon their profession. I wonder whether Religion flourisht more for
the first three hundred year after Christ, or after that it became the Religion
of the Empire: Whether when men lost estates by embracing it, or when they got
them by professing it?

Was it Fire and Faggot, or Ease and Honors, that were the poison of the
Church! And was it the blood of Martyrs, or the wealth of the Professors, that
was the seed of the Church? Wherefore let us not so much complain of any thing
in the Times, as of our own sloathfulness and dullness, of the earthliness and
unbelief of our hearts, and the unsuitableness of our lives, for obscuring the
luster of Religion: And if Adversity may scour off all the rust and filth
which ease and prosperity contracted, we shall have cause to praise him, who
sat as our refiner.

And here by the way, let me suggest; that there is much difference betwixt
the state of the Jewish and the Christian Church: That was under a lower and
more carnal dispensation, both as to the frame of their mind, their service
and promises. They had not (generally) so great a measurre of the spirit as was
afterward to be poured forth, nor so clear revelations of the future glory,
neither therefore was it so pressed upon them, that the way thereto was, through
many tribulations, which made them so extremely scandalized at that strange
doctrine of Christ, that they must leave friends, lands, life, and all for his
sake, if they would be his Disciples, and have a treasure in Heaven. But
especially take notice, what a dependence their Worship had upon external
things, being confined so much to the Temple in Jerusalem, and confisting in
such Sacrifices and Ceremonies which could not other-where be performed; and
therefore they might well be much concerned for the continuance and
restoration of that place, whereto Gods peculiar presence was limited; and
upon this account they were more obnoxious to enemies, and stood greatly in
need of their favor, when conquered by them. But now in all these respects the
case is different. The Apostles did not stay for Caesar's leave, nor depend upon
his aid for building the Christian Church, the new Jerusalem, as the Jews did
upon Cyrus for the Old: (Though I grant the countenance of the Civil
Magistrate, to be a great mercy, neither ought Christians, whether Pastors or
People, upon any pretense whatever, to disobey his commands, whilst they do not
interfere with Christ:) Nor is it in Temples made with hands (though in such we
are to worship him in public communion) that God now dwells, but in every holy
Soul, who at any time, in any place, may worship him acceptably in spirit and
in truth; And this Ark of his presence, the inhabitation of his Spirit, no
Philistine force can take out of the heart of man. Now by Jesus Christ, has
God so far saved us from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us,
that (though we are more assaulted by them than ever, yet) we may serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our life, as
Zachariah sings. Luke 1.71, 74, 75. Though Christ told his Disciples, he came
to send n Sword upon earth, yet he tells them also, that his peace should
abide in their hearts, Joh. 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto
you, not as the world gives, give I unto you: For the world indeed gives peace,
by removing outward troubles, but my peace shall possess and secure you in the
midst of them (as a learned Commentator glosses upon the words) and therefore
he adds that injunction, which I have been so long inculcating, Let not your
heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.

And to finish my answer, let me, in the last place, wish you to remember
seriously and believingly, that what ever pressures the Church of God, now
militant upon the whole earth, or any part of it, may lie under; it shall,
besides its present victory, at length rise up from under them into the most
flourishing and triumphant state: And all those that are embark't therein,
being faithful to her cause and quarrel, and sharing in all her afflictions,
shall also partake of her glory. Even now, I say, all sincere Christians by
their faith overcome the world, yea, when they seem most overcome by it; like
their Master, they conquer, when upon the cross: For it is not with him as with
temporal Monarchs, whose interest is ruined, when their Subjects are destroyed,
or impoverisht; But his Kingdom is often promoted by the sufferings and
slaughters of his followers. Nor therefore should we serve him with such kind
of apprehensions as common subjects are wont to have, in their quarrels for
their King and Country, who are beforehand doubtful of the event, and being
vanquished, bewail themselves, and pity their Prince. But he whose battle we
fight, does not so need our lives or fortunes, that his strength should be
weakened by their loss. Nor does he let his enemies so far prevail over his
Church, because through their power and policy they are too hard for him:
Though there was not a man upon earth that would stand on his side, he would
know well enough how to deal with the greatest Potentates and Politicians of
them all, as they will, ere long, know to their cost: But he bears thus with
them (beside other ends which will hereafter be better known) that the Graces
which he has given to his Servants may be exercised, and that they may have
opportunities of demonstrating, that they love him to the death. And this is
all he cares for or requires, and whilst we do thus, whatever becomes of us, we
win the field, and are sure of the crown: for our Lords Kingdom, and therefore
ours, is not of this world; nor would he therefore have any upon pretense of
advancing it, to disturb the world by Massacres and Powder-plots, seditions and
tumuls, murdering of Princes, and burning of people. These are fit means indeed
to erect some Babel of carnal interest, but not for the building up of Christ's
Church: He knows how to defend and exalt it, without any such officious
wickedness, as some men by all means would bring to his assistance. And as it
is not for want of power or love, that Christ suffers his Spouse for a while to
be trampled upon, by the feet of pride and cruelty; so he will at length
discover both, in delivering her thence, and placing her with himself in glory.
He that purchased his Church with his own blood, will not be fully satisfied
till she partakes of the highest benefits of his costly undertaking. As in his
own person he has combated and overcome all the Powers of Hell and Death, so
he will go on conquering and to conquer, till he has finished the same work
for, and in his body. Now he is purifying it from all spots and wrinckles, and
will hereafter present it to himself beautiful and glorious. Why then should
not all the followers of this victorious Leader, march on, with courage in
their hearts, sereneness in their looks, and songs of praise in their mouths,
as traveling to Zion? where everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, and
all remnants of sorrow and mourning shall flee away.

Wherefore stir up your selves, I beseech you Christians, sit not always
poring upon miseries, and overlooking mercies, making things worse than they
are, and vexing your selves with needless fears. Remember still, that a Child
of God in the way to his Fathers house, has always more cause of joy and
thank fullness, than of sadness and complaining: Let it appear that you believe
so by your deportment. And that you may rise up to this truly excellent
spirit, let me beseech you, in one word, To see that you live up to the
principles of the Christian Religion. Be affected toward the world, and all its
pomps and vanities, as you are engaged by your Baptism: Ever sit loose from it,
and regard it not as any piece of your happiness. It Is this fills men's minds
with anguish and care, even the fears of being deprived of their estates and
friends, their fleshly ease, their lives and liberties. But consider you, that
it is impossible to have a sure hold of these things, and therefore the way
never to be troubled for them, is, not to let them have hold of your hearts.
You have lived to see in two years more men taken from their estates, and more
estates taken from the owners, than in so short a time has almost been ever
known: Let both teach you what regard to have, either to life it self, or the
appurtenances of it. Let your comfort in prosperity, be derived from God and
Christ, the first fruits and promises of heaven, then may it be constant and
unchangeable, as the grounds of it are. Ever be inculcating it upon your
selves, that God is your felicity, and labor to make and keep it clear, that
he is your God. Therefore, as you love your lives, and the comforts of them,
take heed of sin, of all sin, which will blot your Evidences, and make you of
abject, cowardly spirits; so that instead of fetching comfort from approaching
to God, this will fill you with horror, and make you run from him as an enemy,
and then nothing in the whole creation can relieve you. But yet, believingly
live upon the Mediator, by him to have all breaches healed betwixt God and your
Souls, and by his Spirit to have your souls healed of all their distempers.
Rest in nothing as an evidence of your interest in him, below an earnest
desire, and sincere endeavor to grow up in him, to be like to him, and to
fulfill all the gracious precepts of his Gospel: And having this evidence, let
no temptations or doubtings rob you of the comfort it may afford. Remember,
that as your happiness consists in communion with God, so this is not perfectly
to be enjoyed till after Death and Judgment. Wherefore live always
cheerfully, apprehensive of the certainty and nearness, of approaching death;
let your great business be to get fitted for it, and let all your main designs
be so laid, that they may not be blasted, but accomplished by it. When once you
have done this, you have little more to fear at one time than another, and
nothing at any time: For to Death, you are in a manner always alike liable,
and this is the worst that any mortal power can bring upon you, only they may
make it more gainful and honorable than otherwise it would. What matter is it,
whether we dye amongst our enemies, or our friends, since we then take our
leave of both? Whether upon a bed, or on the ground, since our body will so
soon be in the earth? What matter is it, whether the fire of a Fever, or of a
Faggot consume us, whether our souls fly out at our mouths or our throats,
since either way they will be alike soon with God.

But Scripture is most of all wont to press our looking and earnest waiting for
the coming of Christ: Perhaps, as having less terror in it to a Believer than
death, and as being the time when our fullest glory shall be accomplished, the
whole Body of Christ being then brought together into the presence of their
glorified Head, and to a participation of his Glory. And I Will shut up all with
an earnest request, that you would comfort and encourage your selves with the
fore-thoughts of, and ardent longings after, this day of the appearance of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. When ever it is with you, whilst you
are sailing over this Ocean, as it was with Paul's company, Act. 27.20. that
neither Sun nor Stars in many days appear, and no small Tempest lies on you,
then cast forth the Anchor of Hope, and wish for this day. And fix not your
hopes with steadiness on any day short of this, or your dying day. The
experience we have had of the long-talkt of, and (by some) much hop't-for 66.
(beside other warnings of this kind) may tell us, that they who build their
faith upon fancy, do but increase their own troubles, provoke others laughter,
and dangerously tempt themselves to Infidelity. Expect this coming of Christ,
not to the same purpose that the Jews did, and still do their Messiah; to make
you rich, and high, and prosperous in the world, to throw down great men, that
you may enter upon their places and estates, a poor preferment to a true Saint;
but expect him to advance you above sin and Satan, the world and flesh, and to
raise you to the clearest, blessed Vision, and fruition of your God. Upon this
promise of his coming build all your hopes, lay all your stress, and venture
all you have: If this prove false, we are all undone, but never till then, nor
then neither any worse than the rest of the world that believed it not; for
there is nothing else to hold by but what we are sure will fail us, and if this
fail too, Mankind was made to no more purpose than Boys blow up a feather. But
never fear it; though the Worldling tells you by his practice he believes its
false; though the profane Swaggerer say so downright, and prove it by a jeer,
as the more sullen Atheist by his unreasonable cavils and wranglings, yet
believe none of them till you have tried; they neither are, nor possibly can
be, sure of the contrary, whilst they are in this life; and if there be no
other life than this, they will never be able to upbraid you with your weakness
and error: But if there be (as nothing more sure) let them look to themselves:
Then let it be seen whether the money of scraping Earthworms, the mirth and
music, the childish sports and brutish delights of sensual Gallants, the
Drollerie and Sophistry of self-conceited Infidel^, will be as good security
to them, as your faith and holiness, even that which they were wont to deride
as folly, proceeding from prejudice, melancholy, or superstition. That will
be the trying time, when it shall be known who were wise men, and who were
fools, when a righteous and all-knowing Judge shall justly decide the
controversy. Oh Sirs, do you look for such a day as this, such an amazing
confounding day, when the whole world shall be turned upside down, the earth
become fuel for raging flames, and all its Inhabitants brought to account for
their actions, and receive their doom to endless joy or woe? And have you any
hopes of standing in such a day as this, of beholding our Lord with confidence,
when he shall appear in all his Majesty, with thousands of Angels for his
Honorable Attendants, when the Heavens above shall ring with the joyful
acclamations of these glorious Spirits, and the Saints their Companions, and
the Air below shall be filled with the yellings and roarings of Devils and
damned Ghosts: Do you look, I say, ere long to see such sights as these, and to
partake of the glory and joy of that great day? And will you now be much
concerned for the burning of an house or City, or for the busles and confusions
of this dreaming world, that will not till then be awakened? Oh unreasonable!
that the Saints, who shall shortly meet their Redeemer with comfort, and before
all the world be acquitted and applauded, crowned and received into eternal
joys, should now pass their time in so much solitariness, and live no more
upon the hopes of such a day. And oh monstrous! that sinners, who must shortly
be judged and shamed before all, and sentenc't to the sad Society of Devils
for ever, can yet spend their days in ease and pleasure, in pampering and
adorning their dirty flesh, overwhelmed with gluttony and drunkenness, and the
cares of this life, as if they were resolved never to think of their misery
till they feel it, and judged it better to feel it, than to think of it so as
to prevent it. But let them take their course, and see where it will end: But
all you the unfeigned friends and followers of the blessed Jesus, who shall be
your Judge, let it be your work to fetch comfort from that which is other men's
terror. When their hearts fall for fear, you must lift up your heads, as
knowing your Redemption draws nigh. Or in S. James his words, Be patient,
stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. And nearer it is
drawn by sixteen hundred years since these words were wrote; How near then may
we now think it? Though how near we cannot say, yet for certain it is not far
off. The eyes of them shall not fail that wait for him; he will not frustrate
your expectations, as Sisera did his Mothers, you who look forth from the
prison windows of the flesh, and with her cry out, Why is his Chariot so long
in coming? Why tarry the wheels of his Chariot? Confidently dare I answer you,
yea, you may make answer to your selves, Our Lord is coming to gather together
and comfort all his dispersed, distressed ones, from the several corners of the
world; he is coming to give them final and full release from the heavy yoke of
Turkish, Popish, and all other bondage and cruelty that remains till that day;
he is coming to trample down and overthrow all oppositions to his Government
and Scepter, and uterly to destroy the works of the Devil, and all his
Adherents; he is coming to plead the cause of his righteous servants, to
vindicate them and the honor of Religion from all the disgraceful scandals,
slanders, and calumnies, which the wickedness of pretended Friends, or the
wilful malice of envenomed Enemies, has cast upon them. He Is coming to make
all faces and actions bare, to reveal the secrets of all hearts, and discover
truth from falsehood. He is coming to the confusion and sorrow of all careless
and ungodly ones, rich or poor, Princes or People, that thought not on, nor
prepared for this time; but he comes to the perfect, full, and everlasting
Consolation of all believing souls, that are praying and waiting, looking and
longing for this blessed day of his appearing. Even so, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly; and let him that reads say Amen.

FINIS.

